THREE words have defined Tony Renis's life.
Actually, one word has defined it, but that word must be said three times, like a mantra, at which point just about anyone who has listened to a wide range of music or Muzak over the last four decades is likely to nod, hum and, without knowing it, pay homage to Mr. Renis.
In 1962, he wrote the song ''Quando, Quando, Quando.''
From then on, he has lived in its glow and its shadow.
Even close friends took to calling him Tony ''Quando, Quando, Quando'' Renis.
''It changed my life completely,'' said Mr. Renis, 65, over a recent lunch in this central Italian town. He sounded proud.
A few beats later, his tone changed.
''A great success is like a stamp,'' he said, and then went on -- and on -- to insist that there was so much more to his career as an Italian singer, songwriter and music producer than that eternal, infernal title, which means ''When, when, when.''
When, oh when, he seemed to be asking himself behind tinted eyeglasses (while inside on a cloudy day), would he be able to stop making that case?
Self-consciously smooth and yet rough around the edges, Mr. Renis is a throwback to an era when a certain ardent Italian sensibility governed a part of the pop universe and a cast of stars with Italian blood inhabited it. He mingled with many of them, including Dean Martin and Frank Sinatra.
Now, strangely, he finds himself back at center stage in Italy, entrusted with one of this country's most transcendently cheesy, tenaciously enduring rituals, the San Remo Festival of Italian Song.
FOR Italians, the annual San Remo festival, set to begin on March 2, is like the Miss America pageant, the Oscars and the Super Bowl halftime show rolled into one gaudy, kitschy television extravaganza that almost everybody likes to disparage and almost nobody really wants to miss.
It is technically a simple performance competition, but it is really a cultural touchstone, spanning five nights, that draws Italian celebrities to a small town on the Italian Riviera and attracts millions of television viewers, although the number has dwindled in recent years.
Mr. Renis, the artistic director this year, is supposed to reverse that trend, in part by presenting less archaic, more up-to-the-minute fare. But plenty of Italians have their doubts about whether someone so firmly rooted in the past can do that. Much of the recent attention to him has focused on the question of how and why he was given the job.
Italian news reports have pointedly noted his friendship with Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, whose influence is legendary and who considers himself somewhat of a crooner as well. Mr. Renis denied that their relationship was a factor, dismissing that idea with a string of unprintable expletives.
He said musical consultants to RAI, the state broadcaster, which televises the festival, simply recognized that he was the kind of man ''who had the courage to turn it around.''
''When they called, I was in Sardinia with a close friend of mine, Lionel Richie, and my wife, Elettra, a former prima ballerina,'' Mr. Renis remembered, dropping certain details as if they were integral to the narrative.
He said he initially refused the job, which sounded like a headache. But they came back to him again and again, he said, telling him, ''You have to save San Remo. Only you can do it.''
Sardinia happens to be where Mr. Renis hangs out with Mr. Berlusconi, who owns a villa there. Mr. Renis strums guitar or plays piano while the prime minister sings, an arrangement that allows Mr. Berlusconi to reconnect with his distant past as a cruise ship entertainer.
MR. RENIS said one of the musical projects he would most like to start is ''a disc on which Silvio Berlusconi sings duets with great Italian and international artists.''
He mentioned the Italian opera star Andrea Bocelli as one possible partner and the American bellower Michael Bolton as another.
''Silvio Berlusconi was born an artist,'' Mr. Renis said.
So was Mr. Renis, at least by his own account, although he had a different name then. He was Elio Cesari, the son of a painter and a clothes designer, and he grew up and studied accounting in Milan.
From his late teens, he also worked as an entertainer, sometimes singing, sometimes telling jokes, always stalking charity events around Milan and tiny clubs on the summer vacation island of Elba. ''I was a prodigy,'' he said.
He also wrote songs, including a jaunty ditty about a giddy crush that he performed at the San Remo Festival in 1962, when he was 23, and the event had been around for just a decade.
''Quando, Quando, Quando'' did not win. But it went on to become a hit single for Mr. Renis in Italy and for Pat Boone in the United States, and it evolved into a ubiquitous, durable favorite of lounge lizards and wedding singers on many continents.
Its lyrics were translated into English, except for the trio of words that were also the title. They wrapped too neatly around the melody as they were, and that melody worked so well that nothing Mr. Renis went on to do would ever eclipse or erase it.
He wrote other Italian hits, some of which traveled in translation across the Atlantic. He acted in Italian movies and tried to break into Hollywood, setting his sights on the role of the mob-backed singer in ''The Godfather.''
Mr. Renis, in fact, was quoted in Italian newspapers as saying he approached the New York mob boss Joe Adonis for help. Mr. Renis was also quoted as describing the New York mobster John Gambino as a friend.
But in the recent interview, Mr. Renis said he was not close to any mob figures and declared the subject closed. ''Is that clear?'' he said.
He wanted to talk about other topics, like his production work over recent decades for the likes of Mr. Bocelli, Mr. Bolton and Celine Dion.
His orbit may not be the hippest one, but he keeps coming around and popping into view, a self-promoter with enough connections and gumption to remain in the game, even if he played his best hand long ago.
He shuttles between his main residence in Rome and an apartment in Los Angeles, with digressions to wherever he is needed.
He was in Avigliano Umbro, about two hours' drive northeast of Rome, because festival rehearsals were taking place here, from early morning until well into the night.
''My fame is already consolidated, for all that I have done in my life,'' Mr. Renis said. ''But the tests are never over.''
THE SATURDAY PROFILE
