An emeritus professor rolling naked in the snow at minus-20 degrees Fahrenheit and yelling like a banshee is either exhibiting an amazing remission from seasonal affected disorder or he is performing a slight (O.K., a not-so-slight) act of braggadocio. In any case, I jumped right back into the sauna after 20 seconds, having briefly experienced an altered state of mind.
This was during my annual week-long session on ''Winter Ecology'' with a dozen biology students at my log cabin in the woods of western Maine. The idea is to stop reading about nature and start experiencing it; it is impossible to teach even the brightest scholars how coffee tastes unless you let them drink it. We had chosen mid-January for our winter-tasting. We picked a good time: there was snow aplenty and temperatures were appropriate. And by the way, everyone survived -- every single one.
The differences between just barely surviving the cold for a half-minute and living through the whole winter outdoors are, of course, not trivial. Animals can show us how they manage, and their ways are stunningly diverse. From the personal experience of an average guy, I can vouch for the main ingredients needed for human survival: insulation, granola bars and coffee. (More on that later.) Most people in this environment do not suffer from a calorie or beverage deficit; we're seldom totally out of reach of a store.
But I'm not so sanguine about that first ingredient, insulation. The key is multiple layers or a thick layer of tightly sealed air. My L. L. Bean gear is usually adequate, but, as I learned empirically, that depends on where you are. Some years ago I was up north in Inuit country, in a little village full of dogs and 40-pound ''sausages'' of walrus blubber buried under the tundra to ferment. I saw some men loading up a sled with enough fuel canisters for their Yamaha snowmobiles to drive at least once around the North Pole; I asked to get on. ''No way,'' was the answer, ''unless you get rid of those white man's clothes.''
I purchased a pair of sealskin gloves that reached up to my elbows, and a beautiful handmade parka of raw caribou hides, trimmed with wolf fur, that hung down to my knees. The fellows lent me sealskin boots and caribou pants, and I was set. I looked like the Yeti. And felt like a king. I stayed warm as we rode some 60 miles on a minus-40-degree night; by daylight we arrived at char-fishing and wolf- and caribou-hunting camp, where the char were piled up like pulpwood and skinned animal carcasses were strewn all around. The lesson: In the far north, if you want to be up and about with the warm-blooded animals, you've got to dress like them. I still keep my Inuit duds, but so far I have never had a call to use them in balmy New England.
Most of the mammals in the north change into a denser and deeper winter coat by late fall. Their signal for coat change is the ''photoperiod'' -- the relative hours of daylight and dark. Man, a primate adapted from the tropics, survives by taking his coat from them. Our recently invented substitutes are a serviceable but pale imitation.
Birds' insulation is, per weight, even better. The chickadees get up on even the coldest morning at first dawn to search for food. Their body core temperatures are slightly higher than ours, and the insulating layer of feathers is less than an inch thick. Heat loss through the feathers is reduced by raising them, which is why many small birds look rounder and fatter as the winter drags on.
Fluffing out to retard heat loss serves little purpose without constant heat production. That takes fueling with food, and the fuel costs rise sharply in winter, often just as the fuel supplies start to dwindle. That is why, like us, many other winter animals reduce their fuel costs by at times turning down their thermostat, huddling and seeking shelter.
Northern flying squirrels bivouac in snug nests made of shredded cedar and birch bark, and may huddle together in same-sex groups of 10 or more. In contrast, chipmunks gather food stores by fall and feed on them in their subterranean dens; then they enter light torpor when the nuts run out. Woodchucks store their energy in fat and hibernate deeply all winter. Those without energy-saving tricks or access to enough food are forced to migrate.
In looking at what different animals do to survive in the winter, one sees different but consistent patterns to solve the same problem. The fascinating part is to see how all of these solutions are fine-tuned to very specific circumstances.
My Winter Ecology students prepared themselves for the week by bringing a large supply of food. With pleasure, I surveyed a mound of cheese from Vermont, fruit from Florida, raisins and nuts from California, flour and oats from the Midwest, chocolate made of cocoa, sugar and milk all from I know not where. On any walk into the woods we were laden with munchies, because we never found anything to eat along the way. Otherwise, we would not have survived even if we had spears and bows to procure lunch.
As a teenager I had the romantic notion of staying in these woods for a year and ''living off the land'' like an aboriginal hunter. But I've sat up in a tree for hours, for days, hoping for a glimpse of a deer -- long enough to realize that this activity, subsidized by imported calories, would cost more energy than it could bring back. I could feel that my shivering was similarly burning off the calories of my candy bars, dissipating them into the icy void.
I could not but help contemplate the strategy that the Ice-Age Neanderthals might have used in the forests of central Europe, where they did not have access to the plenitude of the seacoast. Might they have hibernated, like bears? Bears have the ability to gorge and fatten up when food is abundant and then remain inactive for long periods -- and some of us seem almost pre-adapted along those lines.
In the winter I usually feel myself getting drowsy near 4:30 p.m. when it starts to get dark. An artificial light keeps me up a little longer, but not much. I'm able to get by with remarkably few hours of waking time, and I'm certain they would be much shorter still if they were not extended by light at one end, and the promise of a cup of coffee at the other.
So perhaps I am a victim of seasonal affected disorder, with its slowness and melancholy. It is considered a pathological condition, but I wonder. I'm now inclined to think it's not a disease, but a vestigial remnant of an adaptive hibernation response. If you live in the woods, where the lights stay dim and the cabin cold, a naked romp in the snow after a hot sauna may be just the right winter survival trick to shock you back to life.
Op-Ed Contributor Bernd Heinrich, emeritus professor at the University of Vermont, is the author of ''Winter World: The Ingenuity of Animal Survival.''
