Israel's ambassador to the United Nations issued rare criticism of Secretary General Kofi Annan on Friday, saying he had shown bias in his response to a suicide bombing in Jerusalem on Thursday.
''Vague references to 'those who resort to violence and terror that have claimed innocent lives in the region' are not sufficient,'' the envoy, Dan Gillerman, said of Mr. Annan's comments, made Thursday in Brussels.
In the bombing on Thursday, a Palestinian police officer killed himself and 10 others and wounded 50 on a bus in central Jerusalem.
Israel has complained repeatedly of what it says is unfair treatment at the United Nations, where the military actions that it argues are necessary for its own defense are regularly condemned.
But observers could not recall Israel making such a direct attack on the secretary general himself or calling a high-profile news conference to do it.
Mr. Gillerman said that the secretary general's failure to make a specific reference to the bombing was ''in distinct contrast to the tendency of the office of the secretary general to issue statements of reprimand, with clear and specific detail, when Israel engages in defensive measures against terrorist operatives.''
Mr. Gillerman said he had noted a troubling trend in Mr. Annan's office recently, claiming it had given scant support to efforts to obtain General Assembly condemnation of anti-Semitism last fall and had shown bias ''that borders on the absurd'' in papers filed Friday with the International Court of Justice in The Hague in connection with a General Assembly request for a legal ruling on the barrier being built by Israel.
Friday was the deadline for sending papers to the court, and Britain and the United States joined Israel in submitting arguments that the tribunal had no jurisdiction.
Signaling a more aggressive stance in airing its grievances at the United Nations, Israel denounced as ''outrageous'' a Security Council refusal on Thursday to agree on a United States-sponsored statement condemning the bombing. Algeria, the panel's Arab representative, succeeded in blocking the motion.
Alerted to Mr. Gillerman's plans to hold the news conference at United Nations headquarters, Mr. Annan stressed Friday morning in news conference in Brussels that ''I have always condemned without reservation suicide bombings that take innocent lives.''
In New York, Marie Okabe, a United Nations spokeswoman, said, ''One statement does not make a policy.''
