Count Basie was a wily pragmatist. At all costs, he kept his band going, playing for dancers and honoring simple but effective musical devices. But how driven he must have been to keep it that way. Hundreds of musicians passed through his bands, which are basically grouped into Basie Version I (1935-1950) and Version II (1952 to his death in 1984, and still going, now under the direction of Bill Hughes). As with a few of jazz's other long-running big bands, it created something like a subculture unto itself. And at the basis of the subculture, underneath all the running jokes and play-acted rivalries, were grooves and tight ensemble playing.
Those were there in abundance during the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra's Basie program on Thursday night, occasioned by his centennial year. (He was born in 1904.) I never saw the Basie band under the leader himself and certainly not during its best periods; I can't proclaim, ''It is as it was.'' How could it be? In any case, when it comes to presenting programs of old jazz, the point of good jazz repertory bands isn't replication so much as illumination. The best a band can do, playing this music under these circumstances, is to make you think, ''Aha! That's what the fuss was all about.'' And so I did.
The Lincoln Center band, which will repeat the concert tonight, gravitated toward Basie's extreme areas: very slow, very fast, very swinging. And the exercises in dynamics and tension-and-release, Basie trademarks, were actualized like a sock in the head. ''Li'l Darlin,' possibly the slowest jazz song recorded, retained its original tempo, pointing up how hard it is to swing at that tempo. And ''Moten Swing,'' an early Basie number done in later Basie style, began like a whisper from stage left, with drums, bass, and guitar delivering the gingerly, deliberate four-four; suddenly the entire orchestra blasted two notes together, knocking the wind out of the audience. You can get the idea from hearing the tune on an early 1960's record called ''Atomic Swing,'' but this is a music of spatial accuracy and physical impact; hearing it live, with a crisp, powerful brass section, reveals new colors.
As for the older music, leaner and less brassy (including ''Tickle Toe,'' with Walter Blanding playing a modern gloss on Lester Young's phrasing, and the fast ''Prince of Wails,'') the rhythm section did it justice. Eric Lewis, the Lincoln Center band's new pianist, hits hard and percussively, and was watchfully spare as well, spanking a few cluster-chords just to get a rise out of the music. The drummer Herlin Riley and bassist Carlos Henriquez were the efficacious bedrock, cutting a groove that was thick and strong as a matter of course, but clean, too -- something that's hard for modern players to replicate.
A few guests represented the ranks of the Basie bands. The 82-year-old Frank Wess was his usual sophisticated self, playing forthright but airy tenor saxophone improvisations centering in the middle and high registers, as well as flute on ''Flute Juice'' and ''The Midgets.'' The vocalist Carmen Bradford, from the 1980's band, belted out ''Teach Me Tonight'' and a few other tunes with impressive R&amp;B and gospel devices. But they were cloves in the ham: the concert scored on the strengths of the Lincoln Center band itself.
JAZZ REVIEW
