It came to pass that three princes from Ceylon were journeying in a strange land, and they came upon a man seeking a lost camel. The princes had never seen the animal. But they asked the owner: was this camel blind in one eye? Was it missing a tooth? Was it lame? Astoundingly, yes, all this was true. The princes also surmised that the missing camel was laden with butter on one side and honey on the other, that it was being ridden by a woman and that, moreover, the woman was pregnant.
Possessing such astonishingly precise knowledge, the princes were accused of having stolen the creature, but they pointed out that they had merely observed the road, noticing the uneven eating of the grass on either side, the places where chewed food seemed to emerge from a gap in the animal's mouth, the uneven patterns of footprints, the signs of awkward mounting and dismounting, the differing accumulations of ants and flies.
From this folk tale, as this remarkable book demonstrates, a mighty concept has grown. For Ceylon's ancient name was Serendip, and the tale itself -- ''The Three Princes of Serendip'' -- made its way on a wave of Orientalist fashion into the hands of the British man of letters Horace Walpole. In 1754 Walpole, after reading this ''silly fairy tale,'' as he called it , wrote to a friend that it had caused him to invent a ''very expressive word'': serendipity.
Walpole used the word to refer to the way the princes accidentally made discoveries of things they had not been seeking. But what did this invented word refer to? The tale celebrates the Sherlockian cleverness of the princes, but Walpole focused on something incidental, almost irrelevant: for him serendipity referred to the way the princes accidentally made discoveries of things they had not been seeking; serendipity was, he wrote, ''accidental sagacity.''
And so serendipity began its life -- a saga of misunderstandings, neglect, resurrection, distortion, celebration and controversy, all of which is chronicled with heroic enterprise and humble wit in ''The Travels and Adventures of Serendipity.'' The book's academic subtitle, ''A Study in Sociological Semantics and the Sociology of Science,'' warns that this is no casual romp. In fact its primary author, Robert K. Merton, who died last year, was a central figure in American sociology. His classic 1965 book, ''On the Shoulders of Giants,'' traced the history of Newton's famous phrase just as this one traces the fate of serendipity. Elinor Barber, who died in 1999, was a historian and research associate at Columbia University.
This book has also had a history as haphazard as serendipity's. Merton claimed that his very enterprise was an example of serendipity: he stumbled on the word while browsing in the Oxford English Dictionary. He introduced it into social science through his examination of the ''unintended consequences'' of social planning. But this book was completed in 1958, put aside ''for a while,'' according to Merton, and never published.
It finally appeared in Italian in 2002. And now it has returned to its original form. In an afterword written just before his death, Merton calls it a ''time capsule.''
As time capsules go, though, its currency is considerable. The history remains intact, and the intellectual trajectory outlined by Merton has, if anything, continued with even greater force.
For 79 years after its coinage the word lay dormant. Then in the early 19th century serendipity shared Walpole's reputation. Hazlitt wrote of Walpole, ''The smaller the object and the less its importance, the higher did his estimation and his praise of it ascend.'' Serendipity, with its suggestion of inadvertence, was simply another Walpolean oddity.
But by the end of the 19th century it found a home in what Merton calls ''the often rather precious atmosphere of pedantry and literary erudition.'' What better word could define the collector's triumphs, in which accidentally found objects are discovered to have extraordinary value?
Then during the 20th century serendipity came into its own in discussions about science. Accidental discovery came to be seen not as incidental to science but as essential. Roentgen accidentally discovered X-rays by seeing their effects on photographic plates. Alexander Fleming accidentally discovered penicillin by noticing the effects of a mold on bacterial cultures.
By the 1950's research labs and pharmaceutical companies were exploring how to leave room for serendipitous discovery. Merton suggests that the concept became knit into controversies about how science advances, about how it should be organized and even about its social status. James L. Shulman, in a new introduction, argues that this book actually anticipated the kinds of debates that later raged, about whether science is a systematic quest for truth or a socially constructed practice driven by fashion and finance.
Now serendipity reigns triumphant, at least in the popular imagination. Mr. Shulman points out that the word is now found in the names of ''cruise lines, software companies, scholarships, bookstores, marketing firms, a ranch in Australia and a nudist camp outside of Atlanta, Ga.'' Merton, in his afterword, notes that in a recent London poll asking for favorite words in English, serendipity came in first (Jesus and money tied for 10th place). Merton points out that dictionaries have begun to treat serendipity as a ''personal disposition of the discoverer,'' as a gift, a talent. Serendipity becomes a talent for bigging lucky -- the psychological trump card of a democratic public suspicious of higher, more elite claims.
This is probably not what Merton was expecting when he began. But the notion may be put back on track by returning to its origins. The princes make their deductions by noticing anomalies, things that require explanation: the oddly eaten grass or awkward tracks in the dirt. Accident spurs insight. But in exploring strange terrain, aren't all sensations accidents awaiting examination? This is how knowledge itself is gained. So perhaps serendipity is not the exception, but the process itself. With understanding, over time, the accidental -- like the word serendipity itself -- is transformed into the essential. Luck has nothing to do with it.
THE TRAVELS AND ADVENTURES OF SERENDIPITY  A Study in Sociological Semantics and the Sociology of Science  By Robert K. Merton and Elinor Barber  Princeton University Press. 313 pp. $29.95
SHELF LIFE
