Peter Martins's streamlined staging of ''Swan Lake'' for New York City Ballet is a feast for the eye. It has stunning abstract décor by the Danish painter Per Kirkeby, vivid dancing and vibrant colors in the costumes.
Still, every ''Swan Lake'' needs a swan queen (Odette) and her evil double (Odile). When injuries and illness this week among City Ballet ballerinas reduced the number of Odette-Odiles to one, Maria Kowroski, who danced on Wednesday night, Mr. Martins invited Caroline Cavallo of the Royal Danish Ballet to appear in ''Swan Lake'' as a guest on Thursday night and tomorrow afternoon at the New York State Theater.
An American who grew up in Atlanta, Ms. Cavallo has been with the Royal Danish Ballet since 1989 and became a principal in 1997. In Copenhagen she dances Odette-Odile in the ''Swan Lake'' that Mr. Martins staged there in 1996 and later transferred, with a few changes, to City Ballet.
Ms. Cavallo, a slim, polished dancer with beautiful tapered line in her arabesques, has drawn something from the Danish ballet tradition of dance acting. Here she was perfectly matched by her Prince Siegfried, Nilas Martins, who is Danish-born and an alumnus of the Royal Danish Ballet school.
Given that Mr. Kirkeby is a star on the international art scene and that Nilas Martins's half-brother, Ask la Cour, led the Hungarian Dance in the ballroom scene, and that Peter Martins, Nilas's father and City Ballet's artistic director, is also Danish, it was something of a Danish evening.
In 1999 this production aroused debate, with its contemporary accent on pure dance rather than on literal storytelling. The drama is still there, but the old storybook tone is not.
On Wednesday Ms. Kowroski was a mesmerizing Odette, largely through the pure form of her dancing, especially in her long-legged extreme silhouette. Her Odile dazzles in the same way, but only intermittently. Unfortunately her Siegfried, Charles Askegard, seemed to be suffering from emotional lockjaw.
The surprise on Thursday was that, when applied, emotional expression has a place in this formal staging. That is what Ms. Cavallo brought to her performance. Her technique is excellent but not powerfully projected. Yet she made her Odette more sorrowful than is usual in this production, and her Odile was vivacious. Nilas Martins was in good form and replied with the same warmth.
In supporting roles on Thursday, Daniel Ulbricht's Jester had exceptionally high spring and astounding bravura. Jenifer Ringer, Lindy Mandradjieff, Carrie Lee Riggins and Philip Nealcq were perfect in the difficult pas de quatre, while Stephen Hanna stood out in the pas de trois. On Wednesday Adam Hendrickson was a vibrant Jester, a leader of the cast's charming children.
BALLET REVIEW
