The hard-line Guardian Council reversed itself on fewer than a third of the 3,600 candidates it had banned from parliamentary elections scheduled for February, prompting reformist lawmakers to vow to resign and pushing the country a step closer to political chaos.
The council unleashed one of the worst political crises of the last 25 years earlier this month when it banned the 3,600 from a list of 8,200 candidates for elections to be held on Feb. 20, then reinstated 700.
It was the council's most drastic intervention in Iran's parliamentary history. The council, a panel of six clerics appointed by the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and six Islamic lawyers appointed through the judiciary, is charged with reviewing electoral candidates and reviewing laws. It gave no public explanation for barring the candidates, but many were known to oppose the religious leadership.
Iran's theocracy, established after the Islamic revolution of 1979, imbues the supreme leader with vast power over the military, the judiciary and broadcasting and, through the Guardian Council, profound influence on Parliament. But the president and Parliament are elected by the people, and in recent years as popular demand for social and economic freedoms has grown, that part of the government has taken on a strong reformist cast.
On Friday the council announced the reinstatement of 1,160 candidates to the Interior Ministry, which is responsible for holding the elections.
Their names were not made public, but an earlier list of about 500 approved candidates did not include the names of 83 current members of Parliament, all supporters of the reformist president, Mohammad Khatami. Among them are two prominent feminists, two deputy speakers, six leaders of important parliamentary commissions and six representatives of Iran's Kurdish areas.
The interior minister, Abdolvahed Moussavi Lari, asked the council on Thursday to delay the elections and take more time to review candidates. But after reversing some of the bans on Friday, the council said elections would go on as scheduled.
About 70 members of the 290-seat Parliament, who held a sit-in protest for nearly three weeks, are expected to resign on Sunday.
''We are determined to go ahead with our decision to resign and will not participate in a show election,'' said Ali Mazroui. ''Not even a third of those who were rejected have been approved. This cannot be free and competitive elections.''
The crisis may deepen if President Khatami accepts the resignations submitted two weeks ago by cabinet ministers and provincial governors, who help run any elections.
The conflict may revitalize calls for reform from outside the government. Reform from within has been so slow that many students, a main source of calls for freedom, became disillusioned. The sit-in has largely been seen as a bid for popular support. Independent social movements, including the pro-democracy student movement, approved of the protest but did not join it.
''The university does not want to get involved in political games and is waiting to see if the deputies are serious in their resistance, even if some of them are approved,'' said Behrouz Nematdoost, a student activist, The Shargh daily reported.
But the president's brother, Mohammad Reza Khatami, said at a meeting in the northeastern city of Mashhad on Friday that all pro-reform factions had finally reached an agreement to act unanimously.
''If we do not adopt a clear and firm stance now, we may never reach the republicanism, democracy and freedom that we have been seeking,'' the official Islamic Republic News Agency quoted him as saying.
He said that if his reform movement failed to secure free elections it would continue its activities from within society.
''This is a very important event,'' said Hamidreza Jalaipour, a professor of sociology at Tehran University. ''The reform movement was determined until now to move its reform agenda through peaceful and civil channels. Now, by pushing them to resign, their opponents are pushing them more toward people who were frustrated with such slow methods.''
