When Daniel Wallace set out to write his novel ''Big Fish,'' the basis for the movie of the same name, he did not realize how much he was writing about his own father. The main character in the novel and the film, which is directed by Tim Burton, is Edward Bloom, larger than life, charismatic, a weaver of tall tales, a liar, an adulterer. And as he lies dying, his son struggles to understand and to forgive him.
''I didn't think it was autobiographical,'' Mr. Wallace said, sitting in the living room of his house on a quiet street in this university town. ''Only now am I figuring it out.''
Like Edward Bloom, Mr. Wallace's father, E. D. Wallace, as he was known, seemed to suck in all the air around him. ''When he came into the room, you knew it -- and he wanted you to know it,'' said Mr. Wallace, 45.
The elder Mr. Wallace was tall and skinny, like his son. . ''He had a great smile,'' Mr. Wallace said, a tinge of affection in his voice. ''He could sell you anything. Even if you didn't want it.''
He added: ''He could be so charming. Then he would turn.'' And his dark side would be revealed: the lies, the bullying, the alcoholism.
In the movie, the son is played by Billy Crudup. Albert Finney portrays the father as an older man; Ewan McGregor is his younger self.
Like the film character, E. D. Wallace was born poor. His family moved around a great deal. ''He would say that every time he went to a new town, he would pick someone and beat them up,'' Mr. Wallace said. He recalled his father's saying, '' 'If I beat them up the first day, they would leave me alone.' ''
E. D. eventually settled in Birmingham, Ala. He founded an import-export business, Wallace International, and became a rich man. Daniel was his only son; he also had three daughters. When the Wallace children were growing up, E. D., like the fictional Bloom, was frequently absent. When he was home he would stave off intimacy, answering every question with a tall tale or a joke, Daniel Wallace said.
''To help me in school, he told me he made straight A's,'' Mr. Wallace said. ''It couldn't have been further from the truth. It was, 'If I can do it, you can do it.' ''
''He told me he went to Yale,'' Mr. Wallace continued. ''Of course! Why not? Except he went to Yale Cooking School. He left off the 'cooking' part.''
Daniel was bookish, and as a teenager he wore his hair long. His father mocked him. ''He would pretend he didn't recognize me,'' Mr. Wallace said. ''He would call me by my sisters' names.'' Mr. Wallace attended Emory University in Atlanta and the University of North Carolina here. But he left college before graduating and went to work for his father in Japan. After two years, E. D. demanded that his son make a commitment to the business.
''I said, 'I can't commit,' '' Mr. Wallace said. ''He fired me then and there.''
E. D. cut him off, and just as in the film, father and son became estranged. ''It took a long time for us to start talking again,'' Mr. Wallace said. ''It was like breaking up. His heart was broken. I had to insert myself back into his life, to tell him I loved him.''
As Daniel remembers it, when he told E. D. that he had decided to become a writer, his father said, '' 'You'll never make enough money to buy a cup of coffee.' ''
For a while it looked as if his father was right. Mr. Wallace moved back to Chapel Hill and wrote four or five novels (he says he doesn't remember how many), but all were rejected. He sent short stories to literary magazines. Usually they came back.
But in 1985 the literary journal Triquarterly accepted one. A few more acceptances followed, but payment was usually made only in copies of the magazine. To support himself he worked in bookstores and as assistant director of the local literacy council. '' 'You're not setting the world on fire,' '' he remembered his father saying.
One day his older sister, Rangeley, told him that her novel, ''No Defense,'' had been accepted for publication. He responded by throwing out everything he had ever written. But then, after a change of heart, he retrieved the work from the trash at the last moment.
In 1993 Mr. Wallace married Karen Floyd, an artist, who had two daughters by two fathers. They had a son, Henry, now 10, and divorced. In 2001 he married Laura Kellison, a social worker.
Mr. Wallace began writing ''Big Fish'' in 1996. In it, the father's tall tales take on a mythic dimension. Like Hercules and his 12 labors, the hero is forced to undertake certain tasks. In one scene he is dragged by a big fish through a watery underworld of dead souls. In another he is attacked by a Cerberus-like dog.
Only one of his father's actual stories made it into the novel, the one about how E. D. had to fight another man to win the heart of Daniel's mother, Joan. But their marriage was not a happy one. When E. D. told one of his tall tales, his mother was ''quietly disdainful,'' Mr. Wallace said. After their children were grown, the couple divorced.
Mr. Wallace had just finished writing ''Big Fish'' in 1997 when his father phoned to tell him he was going into the hospital for an operation the next day. ''I said, 'O.K., what are you going in for?' '' Mr. Wallace recalled. His father replied: '' 'Quadruple bypass. Just a little thing these days. People do it all the time.' ''
And by the way, his father said, he had been married to his longtime girlfriend for a year but hadn't told anyone. Mr. Wallace tried to explain his father's actions: ''Knowledge is a form of power. He liked to know things other people didn't.''
A few days after his surgery, he died, at age 66. The novel was published by Algonquin Books in 1998.
When the novel was sold to the movies, Mr. Wallace said, he made ''in the mid-six figures.'' The money enabled him to buy a house and pay off some debts. He doesn't have a day job.
Watching the film made him uncomfortable at first, he said. ''It was as if you had a relationship with someone always by phone and you have no idea what they looked like. It was so different, it was shocking.''
After the fourth viewing, however, he said, ''I liked it.'' (The composer Danny Elfman has received an Academy Award nomination for best original score.)
''People ask me, 'Wouldn't he be thrilled at your novel's success?' '' Mr. Wallace said. ''If someone could arrange it so he would be responsible, the center of attention, he would be.''
Two other novels followed: ''Ray in Reverse'' (Algonquin, 2000) and ''The Watermelon King'' (Houghton Mifflin, 2003). For the most part they were well received.
A photo of Mr. Wallace and his father hangs in Mr. Wallace's living room. It was taken at a birthday party in the early 1980's. Daniel's hair is longish; E. D. is wearing a party hat and sticking his tongue out at the camera. The two men have their arms around each other's shoulders.
''Did I adore my father?'' Mr. Wallace said, repeating a question. ''That's very difficult. I don't think that would be the first word I would pick.''
Correction:  February 6, 2004, Friday  An article on Saturday about Daniel Wallace, author of the novel ''Big Fish,'' which was the basis of the film of that name, referred incorrectly to the main character, Edward Bloom. While he is an adulterer in the novel, he is not one in the film.
