The set for the Classic Stage Company production of ''The Mysteries'' is intriguing. Six tables are arranged in a rectangle, each with books lying open on them displaying celestial maps. Two glasses stand side by side on each, one completely empty and the other half full (or half empty, depending on one's state of mind). Sawdust covers the floor. An old-fashioned chamber pot and pitcher are placed under one table; at the end is a washtub filled with bright red apples. A flat-bottomed boat hangs suspended from the flies. Curiouser and curiouser. It presents a promising puzzle for arriving theatergoers. Then the show itself begins, and it all goes downhill from there.
''The Mysteries,'' a pastiche of playlets put together by Brian Kulick, purports to expound on the eternal unknowns contained in the Bible, and its sources range from medieval religious pageants to 20th-century writings by Mikhail Bulgakov, Borislav Pekic and Dario Fo. The outcome is more like a syllabus of Sunday school lessons for the SpongeBob set.
The first half of the show is given to the Old Testament, and it includes five stories from the book of Genesis -- Creation, Adam and Eve, Cain and Abel, the Flood and Abraham and Isaac. The texts are taken from the York Mystery Cycle and another cycle written by the playwright Wakefield Master. Both are from the late 15th century and have been adapted here, often in rhymed couplets, by Tony Harrison, a British poet and translator.
At the outset, God gives his own account of the creation while archangels hold up the pictures of the heavenly maps that were sitting on the tables. That's one mystery solved. There is a quick segue into the Garden of Eden where first Adam, then Eve, both as naked as God made them, stride onstage. Now we know why the washtub of apples is there. No sooner are Adam and Eve chased out of Eden by a band of archangels than Cain and Abel appear, quarreling. Fast forward 600 years to Noah and Mrs. Noah, also quarreling, but with one eye on gathering rainclouds. The boat in the flies is explained. The Old Testament lessons end with an account of Abraham and Isaac that embroiders considerably on that of the Bible by having God prophesy the birth of Jesus to Abraham.
The second act is given to the New Testament, and the show moves from the simplistic to the surreal to stage two episodes from the life of Jesus -- the raising of Lazarus and the Crucifixion -- as seen from the 20th century in four works by three writers: Bulgakov, the Russian satirist; Fo, the Italian iconoclast and Nobel laureate; and Pekic, a Montenegrin author who died in 1992 and whose novel ''How to Quiet a Vampire'' is about to be published by Northwestern University Press.
The miracle is depicted in two scenes, the first in a play by Mr. Fo in which tickets are being sold to the townspeople of Bethany to watch Jesus raise Lazarus from the dead. It is a slight, irreverent satire that retells a biblical story from an all-too-human perspective, a ploy used to more humorous effect by Monty Python in ''The Life of Brian.'' The second is from Pekic's ''Time of Miracles'' and depicts a resurrected Lazarus being interrogated by the Sanhedrin elders who convince him he should die again and stay dead. He agrees, but then Jesus raises him yet again, setting off a cycle of death and resurrection that poor Lazarus fears may go on forever.
The first of the two scenes of the Crucifixion is Bulgakov's alternative version of Pilate's interrogation of Jesus in which the hung-over Roman governor questions the young rabble-rouser while getting a massage. Pilate is about to let the prisoner go on mental grounds when he learns that Jesus confided some subversive thoughts on Caesar to Judas.
The last exercise is a segment from Mr. Fo's ''Mistero Buffo,'' a freewheeling diatribe against the Roman Catholic Church in general and the Bishop of Rome in particular, that the Italian playwright has been revising throughout his career. The scene performed here, and by far the most interesting of the evening, is titled ''The Fool Beneath the Cross'' and concerns a man who wins the dice game with the Roman centurions carrying out the crucifixion and makes a deal with them to exchange Jesus for Judas on the cross.
Mr. Kulick, the artistic director of the C.S.C., seems unsure whether to play these skits for laughs or drama. Except for the full frontal nudity of Adam and Eve, the entire evening is G-rated and politically correct. But the tone shifts from slapstick comedic, as in the Flood, in which a henpecked Noah and his domineering wife get soaked by buckets of water thrown in their face, to prophetic, as when the Fool at the Cross warns against the horrors that will be visited on the world in the name of religion.
A game cast of nine actors sheds little enlightenment. Michael Stuhlbarg is a standout in all of his roles, ranging from Lucifer to Jesus. Some individual performances hit the mark, especially Bill Buell as the Fool in Fo's scene at the Crucifixion. But playing at two and a half hours, ''The Mysteries'' becomes a very long sermon indeed. And the only mystery is how it came to be staged in the first place.
THE MYSTERIES
From the York and Wakefield Cycles, with texts by Mikhail Bulgakov, Dario Fo, Tony Harrison and Borislav Pekic. Directed by Brian Kulick; sets by Mark Wendland; costumes by Mattie Ullrich; lighting by Kevin Adams; sound by Darron L. West; production stage manager, Gillian Duncan; assistant stage manager, Betsy Ayer; production manager, B. D. White; general manager, Lisa Barnes. Presented by the Classic Stage Company, Mr. Kulick, artistic director; Anne Tanaka, producing director. At 136 East 13th Street, East Village.
WITH: Bill Buell, Mario Campanaro, Michael Potts, Carmen Roman, Jennifer Roszell, John Rothman, Michael Stuhlbarg, Sam Tsoutsouvas and Chandler Williams.
THEATER REVIEW
