The Nuclear Regulatory Commission has told a company that runs three nuclear reactors in southern New Jersey to determine whether its employees are willing to raise safety concerns or make decisions that put safety foremost, because the commission's interviews with current and former employees indicate that they might not be.
It ordered the company to come up with a plan within 30 days to assess and correct the problem.
The commission sent a letter on Wednesday to the Public Service Enterprise Group, which operates Salem 1 and 2 and Hope Creek, which are adjacent, in Lower Alloways Creek Township, giving the company 30 days to come up with a plan to assess and correct the problem. The letter said that ''we have not identified any serious safety violations,'' but it added that commission interviews raised questions about the plants' ''work environment.'' Some of the information from the employees calls into question ''the openness of management to concerns and alternative views,'' the letter said.
Disagreements between workers licensed by the federal government to run the reactors and the corporation's senior managers, particularly on problems that might force a plant to shut down, may have discouraged plant personnel from raising concerns, the letter said.
Hubert J. Miller, the regional administrator for the Nuclear Regulatory Commission's region covering the Northeast, said in a telephone interview that his staff had not drawn any conclusion yet but that ''we've got enough information here that calls for the licensee to look hard themselves at this.''
''We're not saying in this case it's crossed any significant line,'' he said. ''We're trying not to get to the point where it turns into a situation that's unacceptable.'' He would not detail what the disagreements were.
A. Christopher Bakken 3rd, a company senior vice president for plant operations at Salem and Hope Creek, said that Public Service knew that it might have a problem in the area and had commissioned an outside contractor six weeks ago to survey its employees. The company brought in new managers last year to address the issue, he said.
