When I was in Cambodia recently, writing about two teenage prostitutes whose freedom I had purchased, Srey Neth and Srey Mom, readers started sending me frantic e-mail along the lines of: I'll wire you some money if you'll free one for me, too.
But buying sex slaves and freeing them is not a long-term solution. It helps individuals but risks creating incentives for other girls to be kidnapped into servitude. As my experience showed, the underworld these women inhabit is complex and layered, and rescuing them involves more than just opening a door.
Yet even if perfect solutions are elusive, progress is possible. I felt that on this trip.
I traveled to Cambodia because I had been shocked by what I had seen there in the 1990's. I've covered wars, but nothing shook me more than interviews with 13-year-old girls who had been sold by their parents or kidnapped by neighbors.
These days the girls are 17 rather than 13, fewer are beaten or physically imprisoned, and Cambodia's success in fighting AIDS with condoms means that sexual slavery is not necessarily a death sentence.
The progress in Cambodia is mirrored by strides elsewhere, from South Korea to Romania and the Dominican Republic. And most of the credit goes to the Bush administration, particularly its State Department's trafficking office, which is shaming and threatening countries into confronting traffickers.
President Bush's policies toward women have often been callous -- cutting off, for example, funds for safe childbirth programs in Africa because of ideological disputes with sponsoring groups. But on trafficking, this administration has led the way.
Sex trafficking has become a hot issue among conservative evangelical Christians, and they have successfully pushed Mr. Bush to embrace the issue. He gave a landmark speech to the U.N. in September, and Colin Powell is moving the issue forward in a commendably bipartisan way. The new director of the trafficking office, John Miller, has bludgeoned foreign governments, telling them to curb trafficking or face sanctions.
When I was in Cambodia, that pressure translated into a brothel owner's being sent to prison for 20 years for peddling girls aged 10 and 12. Other brothel owners decided that it wasn't worth the risk and cleared out their youngest girls.
Conservative Christian leaders have called on Mr. Bush to do more, and to appoint Mr. Miller as an ambassador. But the real mystery is why most Democrats, liberals and feminist groups have been complacent on trafficking.
Senator Paul Wellstone helped direct the fight against trafficking, but since his death, leadership on the issue has passed overwhelmingly into Republican hands. Likewise, most mainstream women's groups, like the National Organization for Women and the Feminist Majority Foundation, have been shamefully lackadaisical about an issue that should be near the top of any feminist agenda.
''I'm critical of my sister feminists,'' says Donna Hughes, a professor of women's studies at the University of Rhode Island and an expert on trafficking. ''To me, the two biggest threats to women today are Islamic fundamentalism and the trafficking and normalization of prostitution. Mainstream feminists really have not been responding to these issues or active on them the way they should be.''
With bipartisan support, child prostitution can be addressed through a combination of tactics: (1) pressure on foreign governments to crack down on brothels with underage girls or those held against their will, (2) promotion of condoms to keep prostitutes alive and (3) above all, literacy and job programs to raise the status of girls and women.
In addition, we could cripple the economics of sex trafficking in Asia by focusing on the men who buy the virginity of girls. The $500 or $1,000 payments these men make for young virgins are central to the profitability of the brothels and are responsible for bringing in the youngest girls.
In Cambodia, there was one teenager, Jen, a shy, sweet farm girl, whose freedom I had intended to purchase. But later, I couldn't find Jen, so she's presumably still in Poipet, slowly dying. To Americans, Cambodian sex slaves must seem like aliens on another planet, but talk to them and you realize that girls like Jen are people just like us. They are not a hopeless cause, and it's worth trying harder to save them.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com
