The Q train rattles to the end of the line above Brighton Beach Avenue outside Juliana Flores's apartment, but inside the orange painted rooms it is hardly heard because her four children are laughing and having what they call a fiesta.
Wendy, 6, and Evelyn, 8, wear long lavender party dresses and giggle as they make paper name tags for everyone. Their brothers, Francisco, 11, and Eric, 5 huddle and play a game. The four are having so much fun that their smiles are what are most apparent, not their sizes. Then Francisco stands next to Eric and it is clear the younger boy is taller, and Wendy is as tall as her older sister, even though Evelyn's platform-heeled shoes peek out from under her dress.
Francisco and Evelyn were born with a genetic disease that affects four in every one million people, spondyloepiphyseal dysplasia congenita, or SEDC. From birth their spines and the ends of their bones did not grow properly, resulting in dwarfism, curvature of the spine and lifelong orthopedic problems.
Ms. Flores, 29, came to the United States from Mexico in 1991 and speaks little English, so she has trouble understanding doctors' diagnoses. Only since connecting with New Alternatives for Children, a member of the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies, has she begun to feel she has the support to care for her children's special needs. The federation is one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, which is ending its annual fund-raising campaign today. Donations that are sent by midnight tonight will count toward the total contributions for the 2003-4 campaign. Later ones will go toward the next campaign.
Speaking through Ms. Flores's social worker at New Alternatives, Vanessa Acevedo, who translated, she said she realized Francisco might have a health problem when he was 9 months old. ''He wouldn't sit up like a normal child,'' she said. ''He would sit up and fall forward.'' She took him to the Hospital for Joint Diseases in Manhattan, where doctors placed three different casts on Francisco's torso before he was 5 to keep it from curving forward.
Francisco was found to have SEDC, but because of the language barrier, Ms. Flores did not understand that it was genetic. She said she began to suspect the cause after Evelyn was born, explaining that the girl's legs were turned inward so that the knees faced each other. After that, Wendy and Eric were born without any health problems. ''I don't understand how the first two were born with this condition and the second two were born normal,'' she said.
Ms. Flores said the doctors have told her that the children will grow a little, but slowly. The main concern is their necks. ''They have to be careful not to be hit in the head or move their heads in a certain way because it could cause vertebrae damage,'' she said, and such damage would, in turn, hurt the spinal cord and result in paralysis.
Ms. Flores has flexible work selling Mary Kay beauty products so that she can take the children to school and to their many medical appointments; her trophies for high sales are on shelves just inside the door. Since her take-home pay depends on her sales, some months are better than others; she now averages about $100 a month, she said.
Ms. Flores separated from her husband a year and a half ago and receives no financial support from him. Her monthly resources include $575 each in Supplemental Security Income for Evelyn and Francisco, $218 in public assistance for Wendy and Eric and $149 in food stamps. Her $850 rent is subsidized by welfare, and her portion is $567 a month.
Last summer, the hospital referred Ms. Flores to New Alternatives for Children, which helps families with children who have medical problems and disabilities. Since then, Ms. Acevedo, the social worker, has helped her understand both the medical issues and the social ones.
The first issue Ms. Acevedo addressed was Evelyn's education. ''When the family had come to work with us at N.A.C., she had been left in first grade for the third time,'' Ms. Acevedo said. ''The school had not put remedial services in place for her.'' The agency helped place Evelyn in a first-grade class in which half the pupils are general education and half are special education, with two teachers, at Public School 225 in Brooklyn.
Ms. Flores is already seeing an improvement. And so is Evelyn. ''I can do my work,'' the 8-year-old said. ''I do ABC order. We can read books. I like my school.''
Another issue was the family's cramped apartment, with two beds for the four children. Intent on ensuring that the children had adequate places to sleep, Ms. Acevedo secured $1,175.74 from the Neediest Cases Fund for two sets of bunk beds and mattresses and linens.
Reflecting on how the agency has helped her, Ms. Flores began to cry. ''Before, I didn't have anyone to help me,'' she said. ''Here, whenever anyone does a favor, you have to pay them. Now, when I have a problem, I can call Vanessa.''
Wendy touched her mother's face, whispering, ''Are you laughing or crying?''
Ms. Flores wiped her cheek, hugged her daughter, and said, ''Laughing.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,780,657.39  Recorded Thursday: 6,044.00  Total: $7,786,701.39
Last year to date: $8,272,822.54
