The nation's economy grew at an annual rate of 4 percent in the final quarter of last year, much slower than the torrid pace of last summer though still rapid by historical standards, the government estimated on Friday.
Though the growth remained strong, it was weaker than many economists had been predicting. The pace also raised doubts about whether job creation will increase rapidly enough to reduce the numbers of unemployed significantly by the time President Bush faces re-election in November.
Economists had already expected growth to slow mightily in comparison with the stunning rate of 8.2 percent in the third quarter of last year. But many forecasters had been predicting that growth would hit an annual rate of 5 percent in the fourth quarter and remain well above 4 percent for the rest of this year.
After scrutinizing the latest data, many analysts predicted that the most important indicators of future growth still pointed to a strong year. Consumer spending and business investment continued to grow -- though not as fast as in the previous three months -- and exports soared by 19.1 percent.
But they were much less certain about the outlook on unemployment, with some predicting that job growth will remain modest this year and fall well short of replacing the 2.5 million jobs that disappeared during the last three years.
''We are still growing about twice as fast as Japan and almost three times as fast as Europe,'' said Nariman Behravesh, chief economist at DRI/Global Insight, a forecasting company in Lexington, Mass. ''Nevertheless, 4 percent is probably not strong enough to have a huge impact on the jobs market. We are likely to see some gains in employment growth, but they will be modest.''
President Bush, after meeting with private economists, said the latest numbers showed that the economy was vibrant and vindicated his case for last year's tax cuts.
''Today, we received news that indicates the economy is strong and getting stronger,'' Mr. Bush said. ''These economists are optimistic about our future, and so am I.'' Administration officials described the growth as good, and they said they remained confident about the year ahead.
Mr. Bush's Democratic opponents seized on the new numbers to criticize Mr. Bush and his campaign to make his tax cuts of the last three years permanent.
''People looking for work are saying, 'Show me the jobs,' and those lucky enough to have work are saying, 'Show me the money,''' said Representative Pete Stark of California, the senior Democrat on the Joint Economic Committee.
The new report came just two days after the Federal Reserve hinted that it might start to raise short-term interest rates earlier than expected, from the current level of 1 percent. Minutes from the Fed's policy meeting in December, released on Thursday, made it clear that many Fed officials became much more confident about the prospects for strong growth by early December and were already beginning to contemplate a tighter monetary policy.
Economists said the new growth data was unlikely to change that view because the biggest drag on growth was not in consumer spending or business investment but in the more technical issue of how fast companies are restocking their depleted inventories.
Because inventories are at low levels in comparison with sales, economists expect this component of the gross domestic product to be revised upward in the weeks ahead or to climb much more sharply in the near future.
Economists said the more important indicators of growth suggested that the economy would keep expanding rapidly. Consumer spending climbed by 2.6 percent, and business spending on equipment and software rose by 10 percent.
Exports surged 19.1 percent, propelled by stronger growth elsewhere in the world -- and even more by the sharp drop in the value of the dollar. A weaker dollar makes American products cheaper in foreign markets, and the dollar has plunged against the euro and other major currencies.
''There has been a slowdown, but look at what the number was in the third quarter,'' said Joel L. Prakken, president of Macroeconomic Advisers, a forecasting company in St. Louis. ''The numbers really look quite decent.''
One question raised by the latest data was whether the explosive growth of the third quarter was simply a temporary surge fueled by last summer's wave of tax refunds, which came after Congress passed a $350 billion package of tax cuts.
Although the tax cuts will remain in force well beyond this year, their effect on pushing up short-term growth rates is limited to the immediate jolt caused when taxpayers suddenly have more money in their pockets.
Thus, the government reported that disposable personal income surged by $160 billion in the third quarter but then inched up only an additional $1.7 billion in the fourth quarter.
But economists said spending and investment had not simply bounced back to earlier levels and were still stronger than this time a year ago.
''I look at the numbers and I see them as very positive,'' said Ian C. Shepherdson, who analyzes the United States economy for High Frequency Economics, a consulting firm in Valhalla, N.Y. ''Over all, this is good performance.''
But even extremely optimistic forecasters like Mr. Shepherdson said the key to sustained growth was a strong acceleration in job creation.
The biggest restraint on job creation has been an almost unprecedented surge in productivity, the amount of output that companies can squeeze from the same number of workers. Productivity has risen at an annual rate of about 5 percent for the last two years, and shot up 9.2 percent in the third quarter of last year.
If productivity continues to climb at even 5 percent, something that most economists consider improbable, the economy would have to grow by more than 4 percent a year to generate a drop in unemployment. The jobless rate was 5.7 percent in December.
White House economists, fixated on the issue of job creation for both political and economic reasons, contend that the picture is already better than it appears.
Though government data on payrolls showed almost no job growth in December, government surveys of households have suggested that hundreds of thousands of jobs have been created. The contradictory evidence remains a puzzle, but one theory is that many people who no longer work at companies are now self-employed as consultants and service providers who work out of their own homes.
In addition, new claims for unemployment have declined substantially in the last two months and are now at levels that have traditionally signaled an upturn in job creation.
But businesses remain cautious about hiring and even about rebuilding their inventories.
Brunswick, a maker of boats and boat engines, found that its dealers were keeping their inventories at record low levels even though demand was improving.
Boat dealers sold 32 percent more Brunswick boats in the fourth quarter than they did a year earlier, but they increased their wholesale orders from Brunswick by 14 percent.
''When people go through bad times, people want to see proof positive of a recovery before they increase their inventories,'' said George W. Buckley, Brunswick's chief executive.
