Pick a neighborhood in any town in this country, and you may find a guy like Steve Smith. Someone loud, built low to the ground, with cinder blocks for legs.
Smith, a Carolina Panthers receiver, has listened to people attempt to characterize him for an entire week leading up to Super Bowl XXXVIII on Sunday against the New England Patriots. But he believes he does it better than anyone else.
''I don't need you to define me,'' Smith said Wednesday, waving off a questioner who asked how it felt to play so well in Carolina's recent games. ''What are you talking about the last few games? I'm a baller, either way. You just haven't seen me yet. That is your fault, not my fault.''
It can be grating, the endless staccato and edgy confidence that comes out of Smith, who is 5 feet 9 inches and 185 pounds.
But it is also the attitude of a man in a dangerous profession, someone who needs fire in his belly just to make it through three hours on Sundays. Get too close to Smith, and his jaws will snap like a shark. Look at him the wrong way, and he will stare daggers that leave scars.
He is a player who last season dared to have a shouting match with Tampa Bay defensive tackle Warren Sapp, who is a head taller than Smith and outweighs him by 118 pounds.
''I am not going to be intimidated,'' Smith said. ''They hit me, I'll get up, hurt or not. You have to get up and walk off the field. You can't give them that feeling that they got you.''
Smith, who grew up in a tough neighborhood in South Central Los Angeles, is no simple read. He can be incredibly funny, as he was when he described getting caught in a toll booth in Houston, short on change.
''There were five or six cars honking and they were a little mad, and that Southern hospitality went out the window,'' Smith said.
''I had to go to a few cars before I got some change.''
But Smith, Carolina's leading receiver with 88 catches, also runs hot sometimes.
Last season, he attacked his fellow receiver Anthony Bright during a film session and was arrested and suspended for a game by Coach John Fox. Bright spent three days in the hospital. Smith, who is married with two children, had to attend anger-management classes. Smith was brief when asked what he learned from the incident.
''I keep that to myself,'' he said.
The offensive coordinator, Dan Henning, defended Smith's character Wednesday. He said there was more to Smith than his mouth and his reputation. Look deeper and you see a gem, Henning said.
''Steve Smith is one of the finest fathers and husbands and sons that you will ever be around,'' Henning said. ''Steve Smith, like a lot of players in this league, came up from nowhere, from an environment where 75 percent of the guys he grew up with are down and out, maybe in jail, and not able to do what Steve Smith has been able to do.
''He is not hard to relate to,'' Henning added. ''He is very emotional and very paranoid over certain things because of the way he grew up. He has had to fight his way through everything to get where he is.''
PRO FOOTBALL
