The Mars rover Opportunity appears to have located the iron oxide -- the second hint of water in the ancient past at the site -- that was the motivation for sending it to a broad plain near the planet's equator, some scientists involved in the project said Friday.
From orbit, the Mars Odyssey spacecraft had picked up signs of a deposit of iron oxide the size of Oklahoma in the plain, known as Meridiani Planum. But scientists did not know whether it was in the soil, in the rocks or elsewhere.
After the Opportunity landed, the scientists saw the layer of dark pebbles and gravel on the surface, and suspected that it contained the iron oxide, also known as gray hematite. Early analysis supports that belief.
''We see it in the dark coarse grains on the surface,'' said Dr. Wendy M. Calvin, a professor of geology at the University of Nevada at Reno, as she reviewed the data with other team members early Friday. ''It's the gray, cobbly stuff.''
On Earth, hematite usually forms in the presence of liquid water, either in hot springs or on the bottom of a lake or sea, although it can also form without water from oxygen-rich lava.
The instrument that was used to take the data -- called the mini-thermal emission spectrometer, or mini-TES -- looks at infrared light radiated from the rocks and soil. The mix of infrared wavelengths identifies certain minerals.
The leaders of the project stopped short of confirming that hematite had been found.
At a news conference here at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory later in the morning, Dr. Raymond E. Arvidson, the project's deputy principal investigator, said it was too early for an announcement.
The mini-TES team, led by Dr. Philip Christensen, a professor of geological sciences at Arizona State University, has not yet completed calibrating and checking the data, Dr. Arvidson said.
''But,'' he added, ''if you look at any of the mini-TES members, they have huge smiles on their faces.''
Hematite has the same composition as rust -- two parts iron, three parts oxygen -- but when the atoms are stacked into crystals the size of sand grains or larger, the mineral is gray, not red. Still, the fine reddish soil beneath the gravel did not show any signs of hematite, nor did the exposed bedrock, Dr. Calvin said. This raises a new hematite question.
''This is what is in the back of my mind: Where did it come from?'' Dr. Calvin said.
In places where the rover had bounced on landing, the pebbles vanished, leaving sharp imprints of the air bags in the reddish soil. The hematite appeared to disappear, too, Dr. Calvin said.
''We don't see it in smushed areas,'' she said. ''I don't know what happened to it.''
If the gravel had just been pushed under the surface, as some of the scientists believe, then the hematite should still be evident from its thermal emissions, she said.
The alternate hypothesis is that the impacts pulverized the particles into tiny dust particles too small to radiate the hematite signature.
When the Opportunity rolls off the lander, it will stick instruments at the end of a mechanical arm into the soil and should be better able to identify the minerals there.
Also curious, Dr. Calvin said, was their inability to identify hematite or any other minerals in the exposed bedrock. It is possible that a thin layer of dust on the rocks is obscuring the readings.
On Thursday, controllers recovered data from two instruments on the Spirit that had been stranded since it malfunctioned on Jan. 21 while examining a rock nicknamed Adirondack. One instrument identifies iron-bearing minerals by looking at the scattering of gamma rays -- a high-energy form of light -- off the rock.
At the Friday news conference, Dr. Bodo Bernhardt of the University of Mainz in Germany, a science team member, said the data showed that Adirondack was basalt, rich in the mineral olivine. Basalt is the most common type of rock on Earth, and, as it is produced out of volcanoes, it does not indicate the presence of water.
On Friday afternoon, controllers deleted 1,700 files from Spirit's memory, and for the first time since it started experiencing problems, the rover's computer started up in its normal mode without crashing. ''It appears to be working just fine,'' said Glenn E. Reeves, the chief flight software engineer. ''At least, we've alleviated the problem.''
The Spirit will probably return to full operation on Sunday, Mr. Reeves said.
The Opportunity's deployment, on the other hand, continues so smoothly that for the second consecutive day, mission controllers moved up by a day the time when it would drive off its landing platform. On Friday, controllers said they expected to give Opportunity the command to move at 3:12 a.m. Saturday. Confirmation of the move is expected three hours later when they are to receive a photograph of the empty lander taken by the rover.
