At the Five-Star Basketball Camp, which calls itself the cradle of coaches, Jeff Van Gundy is remembered as a blue-chip camper, lecturer and clinician.
Lawrence Frank is known as the kid who worked in the canteen.
When the Nets face the Houston Rockets on Saturday, and Van Gundy glances down the sideline, he will see an opposing coach who is younger, shorter and has less basketball ability and experience than he did.
Since Frank replaced Byron Scott on Monday, he has been compared to Van Gundy for obvious reasons. They are about a foot shorter than their starting power forwards, they swallow Diet Cokes the way their players guzzle Gatorade and they look as if they haven't seen sunlight since high school graduation.
They make self-deprecating jokes about their pasty-face complexions, their receding hairlines and the unlikely occurrence that Armani will offer them endorsement deals. Van Gundy and Frank are proof that geek chic has even pervaded the N.B.A., that lasting vestige of cool.
But Frank is more Van Gundy than Van Gundy. When the Knicks promoted their wunderkind coach in 1996, he was 34; Frank is 33. Van Gundy did not play basketball past Division III; Frank did not play past middle school. Van Gundy, at the time of his ascent, had never been a head coach except at a Catholic high school; Frank had only coached a youth team.
''It's a remarkable story,'' Van Gundy said in a telephone interview this week. ''The difference between us is that I had every benefit you could possibly imagine. I was around coaching. I learned from people who were in it. I had advantages. Lawrence scrapped and fought.''
While Van Gundy was born into this profession -- his father was a community college coach and his older brother is now the coach of the Miami Heat -- Frank never had basketball in his bloodlines, even though his father was somewhat friendly with David Stern, the N.B.A. commissioner, who is also from Teaneck, N.J.
Because Frank did not play competitively, he could not gain admission to the camp where Van Gundy had been a prize pupil. At age 16, Frank wrote a letter to the co-director of the Five-Star Basketball Camp, Howard Garfinkel, asking to join in whatever capacity was available.
Garfinkel found a job for Frank in the canteen selling candy and soda. Frank held on to it for four years. Five-Star has produced nearly 300 college and N.B.A. coaches, but Frank is one of the only ones who never coached at the camp. When he wasn't in the canteen, Frank frantically walked around the courts, furiously jotting notes.
Garfinkel did not know anything about Frank's coaching ability, but he became enamored of his work ethic and recommended him as a student manager to Indiana Coach Bob Knight, who recommended him for a job as an administrative assistant to Kevin O'Neill. When Frank worked under O'Neill at Marquette and Tennessee, the team held clinics in the summer. One of the guest coaches was one of Frank's blossoming role models.
''We met one summer and I was immediately impressed with him,'' Van Gundy said. ''He seemed very bright. It was just a general feeling I got from him right away.''
Van Gundy does not want to be known as a trailblazer, but he has paved a path for another coach who is under 5 feet 10 inches, under age 35 and overachieving. Given Frank's pedigree, it was more likely that he would have become a gym teacher than an N.B.A. coach. But Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, saw the way Frank, as an assistant coach, spent hours dissecting videotape, screamed himself hoarse on a daily basis and drove his Honda to practice with bags under his eyes. He was easily reminded of Van Gundy.
''I can see it,'' said Nets guard Hubert Davis, who has now played for Frank and Van Gundy. ''Coach Frank is extremely knowledgeable, works hard, is prepared and is confident. Those are all characteristics of Jeff Van Gundy. I know Coach Frank is going to do a great job. He already has.''
The day after he was promoted, Frank held individual meetings with every player in a hotel room. The first time he addressed the team before a game, he saw some of the Nets stretching in the locker room, and demanded their eye contact and attention. He has even handed out reading material to motivate players. Although Frank continues to play down the comparisons to Van Gundy -- ''they are unfair to him,'' Frank said -- he does not avoid them, either.
When Van Gundy became the coach of the Knicks, many fans probably thought the players would shove him upside down in the nearest locker. But he gained respect from Patrick Ewing, and the rest of team followed. Frank is fighting a similar perception that he will not be able to control his stars, particularly Jason Kidd.
''The novice fan has no idea how you earn respect in the N.B.A.,'' Van Gundy said. ''Players don't care if you played, if you're short, tall, heavy, thin. They only care if you're competitive, sincere and work hard.''
Back at Five-Star, no one is surprised that Van Gundy has the Rockets in contention. But when Garfinkel received a call that Frank was taking over the Nets, he thought someone was playing a prank on him.
''What a story,'' Garfinkel said. ''It's unbelievable. It's one of the most unlikely things I could think of, but this kid has an outstanding reputation. It's a brilliant move on the part of the Nets.''
Three years ago, when Garfinkel was trying to fill a lecture spot at his camp, he approached the Nets because he wanted to bring in Scott. When Scott could not do it, the Nets offered to send their youngest assistant instead. Garfinkel already had enough up-and-comers on the slate and did not want Frank.
''That doesn't make us look too good,'' Garfinkel said. ''But next summer, I'd love to have him back.''
PRO BASKETBALL
