For many Americans, the last couple of years have been a prolonged borrowing spree. Families piled on debt to buy homes. They put new computers on credit cards. They bought cars on dealer credit and refurbished their houses with home equity loans.
This consumer spending has been the main pillar of the economy, which expanded at a 4 percent annual rate in the final quarter of 2003 after powering ahead at an 8.2 percent rate in the third quarter. But it has exacted a cost, too. Since 1999, household debt has risen from 70 percent, to nearly 83 percent of the gross domestic product, the total value of the goods and services produced in the nation.
The proportion of household income that went toward servicing that debt hit 13.3 percent in the third quarter, only slightly under the record high of 13.6 percent reached in late 2001. Family finances are being stretched.
So when the Federal Reserve Board unnerved financial markets on Wednesday and sent stocks and bonds tumbling by suggesting that it might start increasing interest rates sooner than most investors had expected, one concern was: Could the Fed puncture the lending bubble, stall consumer spending and cut off the only reliable leg of the nation's growth?
Despite market jitters, most economists are quite sanguine that rising rates would not pose a significant danger to the recovery. For even if consumer spending tails off, they say, businesses are in a position to pick up much of the slack.
Indeed, the Fed's strategy of keeping short-term rates at historic lows has served its purpose -- supporting the economy with cheap money that allowed consumers to spend freely, and allowing corporations to emerge from under the burden of excess capacity and big debt overhangs.
''The Fed did the economy a lot of good by resorting to a very low federal funds rate,'' said John Lonski, chief economist at Moody's Investors Service. ''It gave financial life to a number of companies that otherwise might not have survived.''
To be sure, vulnerable companies that will be hurt by rising rates still remain. Builders will suffer if mortgage rates go up. Real estate agents, mortgage brokers and title companies will lose business if people stop buying and refinancing homes at the recent sizzling pace.
Carmakers like Ford and General Motors, which propped up their sales through the downturn by providing customers with subsidized financing at a cost of several thousand dollars a car, will suffer as the cost of money rises. ''It will dampen the rebound in demand,'' said Scott Sprinzen, the automotive analyst at Standard &amp; Poor's Corporate Ratings. Indeed, the stocks and bonds of Ford and G.M. have fallen sharply since the Fed's announcement.
But economists point to several factors that will soften the impact of higher rates as the economic upturn takes hold. First, despite rising rates, consumer spending is likely to be supported by rising payrolls. And consumers' finances are somewhat insulated because mortgages, the biggest chunk of their debt, are mostly at fixed rates. On the corporate front, as business investment and payrolls rise, the positive effect of the expansion on corporate balance sheets will be more powerful than the drag from moderately higher interest rates.
''The general economy has improved dramatically over the past few months,'' said Sean Egan, managing director of Egan-Jones Ratings. He added that though higher rates could dampen growth, ''it is unlikely there will be a huge reversal in fortunes.''
Finally, companies are in much better shape than just a couple of years ago, after two years of extremely cheap money that helped them patch up their balance sheets. ''There has been tremendous profit growth,'' said William Cunningham, head of strategy and research at FTN Financial Securities. Companies ''have not overextended themselves to make themselves vulnerable; corporate America is fine.''
Indeed, companies' finances have improved sharply, according to Moody's. In the first 11 months of 2003, the rating agency downgraded $552 billion worth of debt of nonfinancial corporations, about half of the amount downgraded in 2002. And the amount of debt upgraded last year roughly doubled from the year before.
In the last two years, companies have been cautious about borrowing after being burned by the investment binge of the late 1990's, which left them saddled with debt and excess capacity. According to data from the Fed, nonfinancial corporate debt grew by a little more than 1 percent in the third quarter of last year.
Companies have also rejiggered their debt to make themselves less vulnerable to interest rate fluctuations. By the third quarter, more than 70 percent of the debt of nonfinancial corporations outside the farm sector was long term, mostly at fixed rates. This was up from 60 percent in 1998.
This will protect even highly leveraged companies from the effect of rising rates in the next few months. ''Airlines have a lot of debt, but an overwhelming majority of it is fixed rate,'' said Philip Baggaley, S&amp;P's airline analyst. A rise in interest rates ''wouldn't be expected to have a negative effect.''
There is a potential doomsday chain of events. If inflation rebounds strongly and interest rates shoot up, spending would probably come crashing down, companies would freeze hiring and capital spending would be curtailed. Bankruptcies would surge, and the recovery would probably come to a halt.
But even as it put a scare into financial markets on Wednesday, the Fed is not anticipating anything close to that scene. Indeed, it noted that inflation is ''quite low'' and ''resource use slack.'' If it pointed to a slightly faster pace of rate rises than it had previously contemplated, it was in response to perkier signs of growth.
In short, the Fed's message was: interest rates tend to rise when economies accelerate.
