A jury declared on Friday that it was deadlocked in the trial of a former police officer who was videotaped slamming a teenager wearing handcuffs onto the trunk of a patrol car and punching him in the face. A previous trial last summer had the same result.
Sandi Gibbons, a spokeswoman for the district attorney's office, said it had not been determined whether a third trial would be sought against the former officer, Jeremy Morse, who was fired from the Inglewood police force after the incident on July 6, 2002.
''From the very beginning of this case and through the first trial and this trial, our theory has been that it is an unlawful and unreasonable use of force when the handcuffs are on and the resistance has stopped,'' Ms. Gibbons said. ''It is unfortunate that two juries have not been able to reach a verdict in this case.''
The jury in the latest trial was split 6 to 6 as to whether Officer Morse used excessive force against Donovan Jackson, who was 16 at the time of the incident in Inglewood, a suburb east of Los Angeles International Airport.
The previous trial resulted in a 7-to-5 split in favor of conviction of Officer Morse. His former partner, Bijan Darvish, was acquitted on a charge of filing a false police report in the incident.
The Morse case, which involved a white officer and a black suspect, inflamed old wounds in Inglewood's predominantly African-American population. On Friday morning, volunteer members of an organization called Stop the Violence -- Increase the Peace fanned out here to distribute yellow fliers that said, ''Thanks for peace no matter what the verdict.''
By midafternoon, the volunteers were gone and downtown Inglewood appeared calm. But there was some simmering resentment that Judge William Hollingsworth of Superior Court had been forced to declare a mistrial again.
''People are mad now,'' said Darien Jackson, 36, who works in a clothing store on Market Street and said he was not related to Donovan Jackson.
''The police have been beating people so long,'' continued Mr. Jackson, who described himself as a former gang member. ''They have no discipline.''
In his closing arguments this week, Officer Morse's lawyer, John Barnett, said a conviction would mean that all police officers could be subject to ''groundless prosecution.''
In his summation, an assistant district attorney, Max Huntsman, urged jurors to convict the 26-year-old former officer because otherwise, he said, ''police officers are nothing more than gang members.''
Mr. Jackson testified last week that he had not fought with the officers, who had been questioning his father about an expired license tag. Defense lawyers said Mr. Jackson had grabbed Officer Morse's groin during a scuffle.
