This postcard-perfect New England town seems an odd place for a showdown over casinos, Indian sovereignty and other issues swirling around the long-disputed status of the tiny Schaghticoke Tribal Nation.
But when the federal Bureau of Indian Affairs formally recognized the existence of the tribe on Thursday, it set off a wave of anger, fear and confusion on the part of many residents and a good deal of resentment on the part of the 10 American Indians who live on a reservation that sits behind the exclusive Kent School here.
In truth, if the designation of the Schaghticokes (pronounced SKAT-a-cokes) as the fourth Connecticut tribe to receive federal recognition leads to the state's third casino, it is unlikely to come near this small town, which is quite distant from any major highway.
Richard L. Velky, the chief of the tribe, said on Friday that Bridgeport, Waterbury and Torrington had expressed interest in having a casino built by the tribe.
Mayor John M. Fabrizi of Bridgeport said he had been contacted many times by the tribe about a casino. ''Bridgeport will not close it doors to any discussions if it is something good for the city,'' he said.
Torrington's mayor, Owen J. Quinn, said he had not been contacted by the tribe. ''If you're asking me if I would openly embrace a casino in Torrington, I'd say I'm not predisposed to that type of industry coming here,'' he said. Calls to the mayor of Waterbury were not returned.
Mr. Velky said that 80 families that belong to the Schaghticoke Tribal Nation planned to move back to Kent. Many are now scattered throughout Fairfield County, with headquarters in Derby. There are 300 tribe members in all.
''They want to move back to the 2,000 acres we believe belong to the Schaghticokes,'' Mr. Velky said. The tribe owns a 400-acre reservation in Kent but is pursuing a legal claim to 2,000 additional acres.
Many local residents are not sure what to expect, but most are adamantly opposed to a casino.
''The whole thing,'' said Patsy Stroble, the owner of Stroble's Baking and Catering, ''can range from zero to total change.''
The prospect of a sovereign nation inside a small New England town will be a managerial nightmare, said Dolores R. Schiesel, Kent's first selectwoman. Without being obligated to adhere to local laws and ordinances, the 400 acres the tribe has in Kent can turn any which way on a number of fronts, Ms. Schiesel said.
If past dealings are any indication, Ms. Schiesel is uncertain as to the course of the relationship between Kent and the tribes. ''The pattern is that they have been very secretive and withheld information,'' she said.
The tribe's new status is also causing consternation on the usually staid campus of the Kent School. The tribe has laid claim to some of the school's land in a fight that has already spanned two decades.
On the reservation itself, June Moser-Hatstat, 57, also known as Princess Chikara, acknowledged that many in Kent were upset but pointed to how she said the town had encroached upon the tribe's land when she was a child growing up on the reservation. The town condemned and bulldozed buildings whenever they could, she said.
Ms. Moser-Hatstat described herself as a traditionalist who thinks casinos are nothing better than glorified penny arcades. And she said she did not want one on the reservation.
Not all non-Indians are critical of the ruling. Sara Cousins, 39, a psychotherapist who lives in neighboring Sharon, counts herself as a strong supporter of the federal ruling and calls the local panic over the ruling unfounded and the product of racism. ''They fought this in the courts,'' she said of the tribe. ''And it appears they have history behind them.''
Others, like Louis Greco, 73, think the decision to grant the tribe sovereignty is just, although she does not want it to lead to the construction of casinos. But Ms. Stroble of the bakery is eyeing the future warily: ''We understand what they are after. Big money is behind them and at stake. And we don't fault them. We'd all like to be rich, wouldn't we?''
After the federal announcement on Thursday, state officials immediately vowed to file an appeal of the Schaghticokes' newfound status within the next 90 days.
''Connecticut has two of the largest casinos in the world,'' Gov. John G. Rowland said. ''We don't need any more revenue.''
The Schaghticokes have considered more than two dozen parcels of land for an economic development plan that could include a casino, Mr. Velky said, including a 455-acre site in Danbury, once headquarters to Union Carbide.
The mayor of Danbury, Mark Boughton, said the tribe ''has been making overtures'' to his office for several years.
The state tried to stem the creation of casinos last January, when the Connecticut General Assembly repealed a law allowing Las Vegas Nights. The law had allowed gambling as fund-raisers in religious institutions, community centers and other nonprofit institutions, and according to federal law, once a state allowed that kind of gambling, it could not deny Indian tribes the right to a casino.
Connecticut's attorney general, Richard Blumenthal, said he expected Indian tribes to challenge the state law's repeal, claiming it is unconstitutional.
Meanwhile Mr. Velky, his voice hoarse with emotion, expressed sorrow and anger that the formal recognition of his tribe had been denounced as merely a step toward casino building.
''The Schaghticokes have been on that land since the late 1600's, but no one wants to hear about our history,'' he said. ''The reaction has been nothing but sour grapes. Well, we're a sovereign people now. We've been recognized. They'll see they have to recognize us, too.''
