THE modest call for help appeared in the gray roster of classified advertisements in The New York Post, tucked between an ad for a 1992 Nissan Maxima -- ''runs great, sunroof'' -- and a foreclosure notice. Perhaps because it was set all in capital letters, the plea smacked ever so faintly of desperation:
REWARD! LOST GOLD X-SHAPED EARRING. TUESDAY, JANUARY 20TH, PM. IN A TAXI BETWEEN 1049 PARK &amp; 65TH ST. AND PARK.
Rising above that hint of panic, though, was the suggestion of an unshakeable hope against impossible odds: that on an island of 22.6 square miles and 1.5 million people, an object no larger than a half-dollar would not only be found but returned to its rightful owner, all through a newspaper advertisement that was even smaller than the object in question.
''All the old clichés apply,'' said Mary McLain Carter, who placed the ad. ''Hope springs eternal. There's always luck involved. Things like this.''
The other day Ms. Carter paused from packing for another Mexican vacation to discuss the missing earring, and why it matters so. Viola, her powder puff of a Pomeranian, dashed about the peach-and-gold décor of her Upper East Side apartment, which is more a kind of Manhattan base than it is a year-round residence.
She summers in Newport, R.I., and considers home to be her place in Dallas, where people are more apt to recognize the significance of her middle name, Milam -- as in Benjamin Milam, hero of the Texas Revolution. ''He's my ancestor, yes,'' said Ms. Carter, with the slightest and most refined of drawls. ''On my mother's side.''
Anyway, the earring. During a vacation in Acapulco about 15 years ago, her husband, Rudulph Ellis Carter -- Foxy, for short -- presented her with a pair of 18-carat gold earrings designed by Paloma Picasso. They were a birthday gift, and they came wrapped in a breakfast tortilla.
Which birthday? ''Let's say, 15 years ago, when I was 25,'' said Ms. Carter, who is quite eligible for AARP membership.
A friend in another room began to laugh. Ms. Carter called out, ''Oh, hush!'' And the Pomeranian darted here and there.
The clip-on earrings were not identical; one was a fairly standard X, while the other one -- now missing -- had sort of a distinctive swirl. They were expensive, but not that expensive; in the hundreds of dollars, not the thousands.
Their true distinction and value came from the fact that they were a gift from Foxy, who had won a certain woman's heart during a cocktail party in his East Side townhouse a quarter-century ago now. He had been an officer with the Foreign Service for many years, and had served as a political adviser in the United States Mission to the United Nations.
''He was very, very attractive,'' said Ms. Carter, now wearing oversized dark-blue glasses that matched her dark-blue top, and a tan scarf thrown almost carelessly over her shoulder. ''And very bright.''
The earrings became her preferred accessory as she traipsed the world beside her restless husband. ''We lived like assassins,'' she said.
THEY traveled a lot because Foxy had taken up croquet in retirement. To say that he had ''taken up'' the sport might be an understatement, though, since he eventually became president of the United States Croquet Association.
New York, Mexico, Newport, Dallas and New York again, so it went -- ''I carried his mallet,'' she said dryly -- until dear Foxy died at the age of 68, in 1994. Those X-shaped earrings rocketed in value. She wore them everywhere, always sporting the one with the slight swirl on her left lobe -- not that the earrings were ear-specific.
''It depends on which is more comfortable for the individual,'' she said, ''as ears are different.''
She had them on, as usual, during that East Side bridge party several evenings ago. But as soon as she got home, she noticed that her left earring was missing. She hurried back to 65th and Park, where the taxi had dropped her off, and began rooting about the snow, searching for a speck of gold in mounds of city white.
Telephone calls to her dinner hostess and to the Taxi and Limousine Commission were just as fruitless. She placed her small, hopeful advertisement in The Post, and called Tiffany's to inquire about replacing the lost earring. It can be done, she said. ''But it won't come in a tortilla.''
As the conversation drew to a close, she was asked about the animal-shaped gold knocker that adorns her front door. Was that the face of a Pomeranian?
''No,'' said the woman with one earring. ''It's a fox.''
About New York
