The deadly avian influenza continued to spread on Friday as China confirmed outbreaks in two interior provinces and announced suspected outbreaks in two more provinces, as well as in Shanghai, the country's largest city.
The World Health Organization's top official in Beijing warned that China must quickly improve its surveillance network of animal diseases or face increased risks that the lethal H5N1 strain of the bird flu could jump to humans here. As yet, China has no reported human cases.
''We have a concern that the surveillance system is very weak on the animal side,'' said Henk Bekedam, the W.H.O. representative in Beijing.
Mr. Bekedam said tracking poultry in order to gauge the full spread of the disease would be enormously difficult in China. Unlike in Europe or the United States, where most poultry production is concentrated in large operations, China has hundreds of millions of peasant farmers, most of whom raise poultry. In all, experts estimate that there are at least nine billion commercially raised chickens and ducks in China.
The bird flu has already touched every corner of Asia, particularly Vietnam and Thailand, which are enduring widespread outbreaks and have reported the only cases of human infection so far.
In all, 11 people have been infected, and 8 have died. The infected humans became sick after being exposed to chickens or ducks stricken with the virus.
The greatest concern is that the disease could mutate in a way that would allow it to be transmitted from human to human. Health experts say the chances of such a mutation are relatively remote, but they have warned that affected countries must cull poultry to ensure that the disease remains in check.
So far, millions of chickens have been slaughtered throughout the region, including China. On Friday, Chinese officials confirmed bird flu in two rural interior provinces, Hunan and Hubei. They also said suspected cases had been reported in three locations in central Anhui Province; in one location in Guangdong Province in southern China; and in one location in Shanghai.
To contain any further spread, officials in those places have essentially drawn circles around each outbreak. Poultry within a three-kilometer, or about 1.8-mile, radius of each outbreak is killed, while birds within a slightly larger circle are vaccinated. State news outlets have run photographs of masked workers injecting vaccine into chickens.
''Containment is the key word,'' said Robert M. Brown, an official with the Food and Agriculture Organization. ''That's our main concern right now.''
But experts with the W.H.O. and the F.A.O. are also trying to determine whether the current outbreak in Asia originated in China. In particular, experts are examining whether government-sponsored bird vaccinations in southern China may have inadvertently caused the outbreak.
Earlier this week, a British scientific weekly, New Scientist, reported that Chinese farmers used a vaccine that might have caused genetic flaws allowing the birds to replicate the disease without it being detected.
Dr. Jeffrey Gilbert, an animal expert at the W.H.O. office in Beijing, is one of the experts hoping to meet with Ministry of Agriculture officials next week. He said he hoped to learn what vaccines had been used and when they were used. He said using a vaccine with an inactive strain of the H5N1 flu could have served to disguise the presence of the disease.
On Thursday, a government spokeswoman said there was no evidence that the outbreak of avian flu had originated in China. Mr. Bekedam was less dismissive.
''The hypothesis is quite strong,'' he said. ''It's extremely plausible. But to make any judgment, it's too early to say.''
Mr. Bekedam noted that Chinese officials had moved swiftly to stop the spread of the disease, including setting up a nationwide center to coordinate the containment effort.
