More than four months after the first Snapple vending machines were placed in public schools in New York City as part of a citywide agreement, the schools have received their first commission checks, ranging from $12,085.90 for Tottenville High School on Staten Island to $10.68 for Middle School 224 in the Bronx.
While school officials said they were relieved to finally receive some money, several said they got far less than they did last year, when each school brokered its own agreements with vendors. Now, it is starting to seem as if the city's Department of Education, which promised schools they would not lose money on the Snapple arrangement, might have to siphon money from the additional $3 million for sports programs that Snapple promised as part of the arrangement.
''Chancellor Klein promised schools that they would be guaranteed at least as much revenue as they made from beverage sales last year,'' the Department of Education, referring to Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein, wrote in a message to principals. ''This reconciliation will be made at the end of the year.''
Some large high schools say it will be difficult to wait until June, the end of the school year, to get the extra money, which often helps pay for sports and extracurricular programs. ''We need it monthly,'' said Diane M. Hamilton, the athletic director of Herbert H. Lehman High School in the Bronx, where nine broken stair climbers and stationary bicycles will remain out of commission until the final check arrives. ''I'm putting a lot of things off.''
Last year, Lehman made about $5,000 a month from beverage vending machine sales, Ms. Hamilton said. This month, it received $6,265.34, for sales from September through December.
Ms. Hamilton has coached at Lehman for 21 years, and she has relationships with athletic companies that have agreed to wait for payment on items like T-shirts and helmets. But someone brought in to repair the cardiovascular and weight room, used by eight classes a day with 50 students each, in addition to numerous sports teams, would need to be paid within a month, she said. So exercise equipment cables continue to fray and the stuffing that has started to show on the weight benches has been covered with duct tape.
Last year, John F. Kennedy High School in the Bronx received at least $5,000 a month in profits from its soda machines, the principal, Anthony Rotunno, said. This month, it got $7,514.98 for four months.
''We're making due right now,'' Mr. Rotunno said. ''A lot of the vendors are taking my word that they will get paid. I don't know how much longer they are going to hold off. They don't want to lose the future business, so they're holding on.''
Marty Oestreicher, the Department of Education's chief executive for school support services, said it was not clear how much the department would have to give to schools that made more from drink sales last year. He said he hoped Snapple sales would rise in the second semester.
''We have to determine where that money will come from,'' Mr. Oestreicher said.
He added that even if the Department of Education was left reimbursing some schools in June, he believed the deal would benefit the system over all. Mr. Oestreicher cited the $3 million Snapple has promised for sports programs, saying the first recipients would be named soon. Some money, he said, could possibly be given to principals to spend on sports programs at their discretion.
Mr. Oestreicher also said that he believed sales would increase next semester, as schools that need more machines request them. Sales may have been low in some schools, he said, because machines were not placed there until several months after school started.
Education officials say the Snapple deal is part of a plan to ensure that nothing but 100 percent juice and water is sold in city schools.
''The overriding principle that drove us here was not the money per se, it was the nutritional guidelines,'' Mr. Oestreicher said.
Steven Jarmon, the vice president for partner marketing at Snapple, said the company had kept all of its agreements on payment and would make further commission payments to the Department of Education each month. He said Snapple was getting ''very positive feedback'' about its juices, adding that he hoped sales would increase this semester, as students got used to the juices.
Mr. Jarmon said that when the programs to receive the $3 million in sponsorships are announced, ''I think everyone is going to really see the true benefit of what this partnership is.''
The Department of Education will collect information from schools on how much money they made from drink sales last year, so the figures can be compared. But some schools said they received other perks that were never documented.
At Tottenville High School, last year's private vendor supplied cases of drinks for events like the college and career fair and the alternative high school fair, which drew hundreds; it also bought ads in programs for school plays. ''I sort of knew in the end I'd get the same amount, but it's the other little things, that's where we will feel it,'' said the principal, John Tuminaro.
Tottenville received the fattest Snapple check of all schools in the city: $12,085.90. Last year, the school made about $15,000 for the same period, Mr. Tuminaro said.
''Some of the smaller things I've had to cut back on, like after-school clubs,'' he said. Still, Mr. Tuminaro said, Snapple promised an extra $5,000 in honor of a student declared most valuable player during the latest football championship.
One of the smallest Snapple checks in the city was for $10.68, made out to the tiny Middle School 224, which shares a building (and vending machines) with three other schools.
The principal, Marselle Heywood, said she appreciated the money. ''I'm sure there will be more later as we move on,'' she said. ''I didn't even expect anything.''
