Andrew Gilligan, the reporter at the center of the bitter dispute between the British Broadcasting Corporation and the British government over whether the government had exaggerated the case for war against Iraq, resigned from the BBC on Friday.
Mr. Gilligan follows the BBC's top two officials, who left their posts after a scathing official report that accused him of sloppy reporting and his employers of a host of journalistic and management failures.
In a statement, Mr. Gilligan, 35, admitted that he had made mistakes in the initial radio broadcast that touched off the furor. But he maintained that ''most of my story was right'' and said that the report had ''imposed on the BBC a punishment far out of proportion to its own or my mistakes, which were honest ones.''
The BBC, Mr. Gilligan said, ''collectively has been the victim of a grave injustice.''
In the broadcast, last May 29, Mr. Gilligan said that the government of Prime Minister Tony Blair ''probably knew'' that information it included in an intelligence dossier released in September 2002 was false, and that it had ''sexed up'' the report to bolster its case for invading Iraq.
The broadcast infuriated the government, which complained bitterly to Mr. Gilligan's superiors, who in turn defended their reporter without, they later admitted, properly examining his broadcast.
The feud grew more heated, and last July, David Kelly, an experienced government weapons inspector, committed suicide after he was revealed as the source of Mr. Gilligan's allegations.
A report on Wednesday by a senior British judge, Lord Hutton, absolved the government of any wrongdoing in the matter, both in its preparation of the dossier and in the events leading to Dr. Kelly's death. But it excoriated the BBC in such strong terms that the company's chairman, Gavyn Davies, and its director general, Greg Dyke, both resigned.
Mr. Davies said Friday that he did not agree with Lord Hutton's conclusions. In his statement, Mr. Gilligan said the report ''casts a chill over all journalism, not just the BBC's.''
The incident has been a huge political triumph for Mr. Blair's government, which has long accused the BBC of antigovernment bias, particularly in its coverage of the Iraq war. At the same time, it has put the BBC in a singularly vulnerable state as it begins discussions to renew its government-issued charter in 2006, and its many enemies, including the powerful Murdoch-controlled newspaper and television empire, begin circling around it.
But the report has been met with skepticism by a cynical British public, who in poll after poll on Friday said that they thought Lord Hutton had been too hard on the BBC and not hard enough on the government.
