Lucille Tucker, an American Indian from Montana, wanted answers about health care. Her grandson committed suicide, she said, because insurance would not cover medication for his bi-polar disorder.
James Holloway, a black retired textile worker from South Carolina, wanted to know how people in his small town could survive with so many manufacturing jobs moving overseas.
Rosa Arevalo, a Hispanic woman who runs a child care center for poor families in Los Angeles, asked for a public education policy that would keep children in her neighborhood from falling through the cracks.
From different cultural backgrounds and life experiences, close to 3,000 citizens were bused in from around the country and filled a downtown auditorium here to press six of the seven Democratic presidential candidates to discuss issues from a perspective they said is too often ignored on the campaign trail: that of low-income voters.
As the political energy has shifted to the seven states that will hold primaries and caucuses on Tuesday, much attention has been placed on South Carolina as the first Southern contest and the first with a sizable number of black voters. But organizers of the town-hall-style forum said their intent was to broaden the focus from its concentration on geographic and racial lines to include a discussion of the nation's class divisions.
''We want to make low-income families the soccer moms of the 2004 race and beyond,'' said Deepak Bhargava, executive director of the Center for Community Change, a Washington umbrella agency for grass-roots groups and chief organizer of the dialogue, which was the first major event in a $15 million voter education and registration project aimed at low-income voters.
The 90-minute forum was moderated by David Stanton, a television news anchor here, and Tom Joyner, a nationally syndicated morning radio show host.
For all the energy and angst displayed, participants acknowledged that translating the forum into political capital will take considerable effort. Low-income voters -- those at the bottom third of the wage scale -- have a voter turnout rate of under 50 percent, according to the Census Bureau. Those living under the poverty line voted at a rate of only 38 percent in 2000, Census reports indicate. Middle-  and upper-income voters had a turnout above 60 percent.
The multi-racial representation on display for the national forum, some grass-roots organizers said, is not so easy to generate at the local level.
In sharp contrast to the nationally televised debate from Greenville, S.C., on Thursday night in which the candidates played off one another in a staid repeat of past encounters, the local forum -- in which the candidates took the stage one at a time -- shined its spotlight on people struggling daily with the issues rattled off in stump speeches.
When Ms. Tucker dissolved into tears as she talked about her grandson's death and Gen. Wesley K. Clark grasped her hand in sympathy, Deana Knutsen, a white Seattle woman who said her sister also died because she could not afford health care, jumped in to make sure the candidate offered not just consolation but answers.
''We don't have time to wait for a grand plan,'' said Ms. Knutsen, 49, who then pressed General Clark for more specifics about his stance on private versus public insurance.
''This is the wealthiest country in the world and we've got plenty of money to take care of every person in this country and keep them healthy,'' General Clark said. ''We just have to have some leadership to do it.''
Other questioners tried to push the candidates out of their well-rehearsed comfort zones.
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, in his opening remarks, seemed ready to address the plight of poor blacks in South Carolina. Instead, his first question concerned American Indian issues, and when he finally got a question from a black man, it was to urge him to better answer a Hispanic woman who had asked about Mr. Kerry's plan to improve access to citizenship for immigrants.
Mr. Kerry said he supported a guest worker program for illegal immigrants and used the opening to get to a more practiced retort: criticizing President Bush's proposal as ''exploitive.''
Over all, the candidates stuck to their finely honed campaign personas. Senator John Edwards of North Carolina played to his Southern roots and working-class background.
Howard Dean criticized President Bush, saying he was trying to create a permanent class system in the United States. Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio tried to strike a populist chord, and the Rev. Al Sharpton got rousing applause when he answered a question on trade by saying, ''I got here as an African because of bad trade policy.''
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut was the only one of the Democratic candidates who did not attend. Organizers said he was scheduled to take part but pulled out the evening before the forum to campaign in Delaware.
The event took place in a state that, according to the Labor Department, lost more than 41,000 jobs last year and had a poverty rate of 14.7 percent, among the highest in the country.
Yet Mr. Holloway, a school board member from Saluda, S.C., a rural county in the central western part of the state, said that political participation in his town was lackluster and that blacks and whites rarely came together on common issues.
''When I see whites and blacks and all other groups coming to the cause it keeps me from giving up,'' he said after the event. ''I haven't felt this kind of high since I went to the Million Man March.''
Not all attendees had reached a decision on whom to support as they filed out of the auditorium. Elaine Johnson, of Cordova, S.C., a black woman whose son was killed in Iraq last November, came to find out about the candidates' plans for getting the troops out of Iraq, and how they would create jobs so poor youth wouldn't feel pressured to enter the military simply to escape poverty.
''I was pleased with the answers I got,'' she said. ''But I'm still undecided.''
Buck Jared, 50, a white disabled logger from Idaho, said that the event was as much about the opportunity to pose questions as to listen to candidates' answers.
''People like us have really not had all that much say in who gets elected in the past,'' Mr. Jared said. ''But here we're all playing a part. Just to hear low-income, elderly and disabled people from all over speaking up for themselves. It's awesome.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CAMPAIGN
