Federal investigators are questioning current and former employees of the Coca-Cola Company about accusations that the company inflated its sales figures by selling surplus beverage concentrate in several big international markets including Japan, people close to the investigations said.
The United States attorney's office in Atlanta, the Securities and Exchange Commission and the F.B.I. have been investigating Coke since May, when a former Coke employee filed a lawsuit contending that the company committed accounting fraud and increased revenue by shipping excessive concentrate -- a practice known as ''channel stuffing'' -- to bottlers in Japan and elsewhere.
According to two former employees who have been interviewed as part of the investigation, the federal investigators are particularly interested in the role of the company's chairman and chief executive, Douglas N. Daft. He ran the company's Middle East and Far East businesses in 1999, when the two employees say the channel stuffing took place.
''They were really interested in Daft,'' said one former Coke employee of his recent interview with federal investigators. The former employee said investigators asked questions about the culture of Coke, how the company changed under Mr. Daft's leadership and about his demeanor when he was in charge of the company's Asian operations.
''They're serious about this one,'' the former employee said. ''They're gathering as much info as they can, and they're going to turn it over to the U.S. attorney.''
Officials at Coke, which is based in Atlanta, dismissed questions regarding Mr. Daft and said the company stood by its assertion that the claims raised in the lawsuit ''lack merit.''
''The government has not yet informed us about the specific issues it is interested in investigating, but when it does so, we will continue to offer our full cooperation on its areas of interest,'' the company said in a statement.
Federal investigators have been closely scrutinizing Coke since last summer after Matthew Whitley, a former finance director, filed a lawsuit against the company contending that he was fired after alerting senior management to illegal business practices in Coke's food service division. Mr. Whitley settled his lawsuit against Coke in October for $540,000. But some embarrassing revelations came out of the process, including Coke's admission that it had rigged a marketing test for Frozen Coke in Burger King restaurants. Federal prosecutors are said to be looking at the breadth of the accusations raised against Coke in recent lawsuits.
A separate lawsuit filed in October 2000 accused the company of channel stuffing in several international markets, including Japan, where Coke records about 20 percent of its profits. An amended version of the lawsuit was filed this summer; Coke has filed a motion to dismiss it.
This month, Coke said it was being formally investigated by the Securities and Exchange Commission, but it has declined to provide details about the focus of the investigation. The specifics of the case were first reported in The Wall Street Journal, which said yesterday that three former Coke finance officers had told federal officials that they witnessed channel stuffing in the Japanese business.
According to the lawsuit, Coca-Cola pressured bottlers to accept beverage concentrate that they did not need. This would result in an increase in Coke's volume, which is the measure used by Coke to calculate its revenue. The lawsuit also contends that Mr. Daft angrily rebuffed a subordinate's attempt to tell him about illegal business practices in Japan. Sonya Soutus, a Coke spokeswoman, called that assertion ''ridiculous and fabricated.''
In 1999, Coke was experiencing some of its most significant business challenges, including an employee discrimination lawsuit and a product contamination scare in Belgium that resulted in the company's recalling large shipments of its products. That year, Coke shipped more than $600 million of excess concentrate to bottlers, the lawsuit said. It also contends that bottlers were given cash incentives to buy the product and, in instances where they could not sell it, were allowed to return it to concentrate manufacturing plants or receive credit for it.
The lawsuit says that Coke used channel stuffing to falsify its revenue, net income and earnings forecasts and to hide the true state of its business. While Coke's sales rose 2.9 percent in 1999, its operating profit fell 19.8 percent. It declined again in 2000.
In Japan, Coke enticed bottlers to take additional concentrate by offering them cash incentives of up to $25 million, the lawsuit said. Coke executives, the lawsuit said, used the possibility of computer problems related to the arrival of the year 2000 as the stated reason for sending large amounts of concentrate to bottlers, and it sometimes listed the payments under ''marketing funds.'' The lawsuit also says that Coke employees overrode computer systems to make it seem as if concentrate that had not actually been shipped had been sold.
In its motion to dismiss, Coke said that there was nothing wrong with aggressively pursuing concentrate sales and offering marketing discounts and other incentives to customers. The actions, the motion says, are well within securities laws.
''These sales at the end of 1999 are valid and legitimate,'' Ms. Soutus said. ''And the terms offered were modest extensions from 8 to 30 days.''
Analysts said the developments in the investigation would probably cause temporary swings in Coke's stock. Shares of Coke fell 35 cents or, 0.7 percent, to $49.24 yesterday.
In a separate announcement, the Lancer Corporation, a Texas company that makes fountain drink machines, said the results of an independent investigation of the company and its dealings with Coke showed no misconduct by the company or its management.
