Allan Houston was at home in front of his television Friday night, watching the team he guaranteed would make the playoffs first sputter, then spark and finally explode without him for a 92-74 victory over the Boston Celtics.
The Celtics, another team in the middle of a shake-up, are in chaos and being booed by their own fans. That gave the Knicks a sense of how they had distanced themselves from similar jeers in the last month and where they can go once Houston returns from knee problems.
Houston, the franchise's $100 million guard, began an indefinite period of rest and rehabilitation that could last as long as seven games. But the Knicks showed that they do not have to tread water while waiting for him.
Stephon Marbury scored 17 points, all in the first half, and lifted the Knicks from a 4-point deficit to an 8-point halftime lead. Keith Van Horn, nursing a sprained left shoulder, took over in the third quarter, scoring 14 of the Knicks' first 18 points and giving them the springboard to rout the Celtics at the Fleet Center.
Shandon Anderson, who had been in the doghouse and nearly on the injured list, started in place of Houston and had the same success he had the last time the Knicks were in Boston without Houston. Anderson blanketed a frustrated Paul Pierce, steering him into help defense and holding him to 12 points and 3-of-16 shooting. He also scored 12 of his 16 points in the second half.
''We have guys in his place who are very confident and can help us win,'' Van Horn said of Houston. ''If we can hold the ship down and get this team in playoff position and get everyone healthy, including Allan, we're going to be in great shape.''
The Knicks (21-27) remained in eighth place in the Eastern Conference, one game ahead of Philadelphia and Miami and one game behind the Celtics (22-26) for second place in the hapless Atlantic Division.
The Knicks improved to 7-6 with Marbury and Penny Hardaway; they will play the team that traded them, the Phoenix Suns, at Madison Square Garden on Saturday night. The Celtics, meanwhile, gave their interim coach, John Carroll, his second straight defeat.
''They didn't play the same way they normally play; they usually play with a lot more intensity,'' Marbury said of the Celtics. ''They never ever quit, they didn't look like they were out there familiar with each other. They looked like they were out there just playing.''
Pierce muffed an open windmill dunk as the Celtics hit the nadir of an awkward week in which Coach Jim O'Brien resigned over philosophical differences with Danny Ainge, the Celtics' executive director of basketball operations. That led to Carroll, an assistant coach, taking over the team.
By the third quarter Friday night, the fans had stopped booing and started cheering the one team with a better chance to win, chanting, ''Let's go, Patriots!''
Pierce was despondent. ''Today we deserved to be booed,'' he said. ''It seemed like when things went bad, they went really bad.''
The Celtics looked in disarray, and the Knicks started to put their new offensive sets to use by the second half. They overcame 16 first-half turnovers; Anderson had 4.
''You can't go complain about playing time and go out and blow it away,'' he said. ''After the first half I had to get my second wind.''
So did Van Horn. After scoring 2 points in the first half, he sat on the bench with his head in his hands minutes before the second half began. Whatever he said to himself or whatever he meditated on, it worked.
''I was tentative in the first half, worrying about my shoulder; I didn't want to reinjure it,'' he said. ''I just tried to forget about it and play my game. If you get hit or injure it, I can't control it.''
Coach Lenny Wilkens told Van Horn to be more aggressive in the post. By the time he hit his second consecutive 3-pointer, with 5 minutes 56 seconds left in the third quarter, the Knicks led by 68-51.
Anderson continued to shut down Pierce, and Wilkens said he played tremendously.
But many Knicks contributed. Dikembe Mutombo had 10 points and 10 rebounds, and Michael Doleac scored 15 points off the bench.
The Celtics had little energy or chemistry to fight for a comeback. Mark Blount was their leading scorer with 22 points.
Four days earlier, O'Brien resigned, to the disappointment of many of his players. O'Brien favored a defensive style, and Ainge was reconstructing the team around offense, specifically trading for Ricky Davis.
O'Brien may have had a point. The Celtics lost in the final minute to Detroit in Carroll's debut Wednesday, allowing 106 points, and looked lost on defense and on offense Friday night.
''This is the real test,'' Carroll said before the game. ''I view tonight as key to the playoffs because this is the team that's right behind us.''
REBOUNDS
PENNY HARDAWAY seems to want to beat his former employer more than STEPHON MARBURY does. The Phoenix Suns visit the Knicks on Saturday night. ''Any time you play against your old team, even though it's a business, they had to give up on you somewhere,'' Hardaway said. ''With them giving up on myself and Steph, it gives us more incentive to go out and play.'' But Marbury said, ''I understand why they made the trade,'' then said of the Suns' president, BRYAN COLANGELO, ''I pretty much thanked him already.'' . . . The Knicks will not re-sign center BRUNO SUNDOV to a second 10-day contract. He played in four games and scored 9 points.
PRO BASKETBALL
