Gen. Pervez Musharraf, Pakistan's military ruler, has a history of strong declarations, followed by weak and contradictory actions. Washington cannot settle for a repetition of this pattern in the Pakistani investigation into whether its nuclear scientists passed bomb technology to North Korea, Iran and Libya. All the links in this reckless supply chain -- commercial, military or political -- must be uncovered and severed.
Pakistan now appears to be one of the world's leading suppliers of illicit nuclear technology. In 2002, American satellites detected a Pakistani plane picking up missile components in North Korea, apparently as part of a barter deal for nuclear weapons technology. Last November, Iran told nuclear inspectors that its uranium enrichment programs had gotten crucial help from people in various nations who were probably linked to Pakistanis. And in recent weeks, Libya has indicated that its nuclear programs benefited from intermediaries in Dubai who may have been working with Pakistanis.
The picture now emerging points to an intricate underground network of traders in nuclear contraband. Filling in all the details depends on thoroughly questioning all those likely to have been involved and aggressively following up the leads provided by the new Iranian and Libyan disclosures.
It is not yet clear that General Musharraf is willing to do this. He has backed off from insisting that Pakistan was never involved in nuclear technology exports. He now claims that whatever problems existed came from rogue scientists, acting in pursuit of financial gain. The investigation he began under American pressure has so far centered on close associates of Abdul Qadeer Khan, the nuclear scientist who helped Pakistan illicitly obtain its own nuclear weapons secrets in the 1970's. Pakistani investigators must also probe whatever role senior military and political leaders may have played.
Such a wide-ranging investigation will not be easy for General Musharraf to undertake. The military high command is his most important power base. He is currently under attack from several directions and barely escaped two recent assassination attempts. Even so, Washington must insist that he not flinch from his responsibility to see that the nuclear technology pipeline from Pakistan is finally closed down. The world cannot afford a repetition of what seems to have happened in Iran, Libya and North Korea.
