After what he referred to as a scare regarding a urological ailment, Rick Pitino, the University of Louisville basketball coach, returned from two days of tests at the Cleveland Clinic and said Friday that he was relieved by the results.
''It's not a definite diagnosis, and I don't want to get overly personal,'' he said at a news conference on campus, ''but I can assure you that I'll be around coaching for 8, 9, 10 years from now.''
Pitino, who missed Louisville's game on Wednesday night against Houston, said he would be on the bench Saturday afternoon when the fourth-ranked Cardinals are host to Marquette in Freedom Hall.
Pitino, 51, refused to be specific about his problem, saying it was a ''personal matter, something someone my age has to be aware of and concerned with, and it's important to catch things early and get checked up.''
Pitino said nothing in the tests indicated that there was anything cancerous or life-threatening. He added that the doctors had ruled out prostate and bladder problems.
''It was a difficult 36 hours,'' Pitino said of the tests, ''and I was fatigued. But I'm excited to be back with the team.'' After 48 hours away from coaching, he said, he realized that ''I missed it so much.''
Pitino said the problem was not related to the stresses of coaching at a high level of competition.
''There's a difference between pressure and stress,'' he said. ''Pressure is good, and it's motivating, you're involved, you're passionate. And that's what I have as a basketball coach. Stress comes from outside the basketball court. And stress wasn't my problem.''
Pitino said he had been experiencing severe abdominal pain in his left side for the last three months. ''But you know how it is when you're wrapped up in what you do; you think certain things will go away,'' he said. ''I didn't want to take time away. But when the pains got more severe, I had to rethink that.''
He first went to Jewish Hospital in Louisville, but he said he went to the Cleveland Clinic for two reasons: because he had made friends with its physicians after having once made a speech there, and he believed he would get more privacy away from the spotlight in Louisville, where he is a popular figure and the basketball team is a center of attention.
Louisville is 16-1 over all and 6-0 in Conference USA. Marquette is 12-5 over all and 3-3 in the conference.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
