In a rare public proceeding, an upstate judge accused of mistreating defendants in his courtroom -- by, for example, setting bail at $25,000 for someone accused of stealing cigarettes from a convenience store -- said yesterday that he should not be removed from the bench.
Henry R. Bauer, a city court judge in Troy, appeared in Manhattan before the members of the New York State Commission on Judicial Conduct, which investigates misconduct complaints. The commission is not expected to make a decision until March, and its actions can be appealed to the State Court of Appeals.
Commission investigations and hearings like the one yesterday are usually secret unless and until a judge is sanctioned, but Judge Bauer took the unusual step of asking to have the proceedings opened to the public -- and of speaking in his own defense.
He said he had set up the first local court outside New York City to deal with domestic violence, calling it ''the professional accomplishment of which I am most proud.''
''I am a good and competent judge,'' he continued. ''I do not deserve to be removed.''
Judge Bauer is only the eighth judge to request an open hearing in 25 years, said Robert H. Tembeckjian, counsel to the commission. The last open hearing was in 1997 in the case of Lorin Duckman, a New York City judge who released a man charged with domestic violence; the man soon killed his former girlfriend and himself. The judge was eventually removed from the bench.
Robert P. Roche, Judge Bauer's lawyer, said his client wanted the proceeding to be open because he is a firm believer in conducting business in his own courtroom on the record, and because as an elected judge, ''he is ultimately and always responsible to the people.''
The commission staff accuses the judge of violating defendants' rights by setting extremely high bails, failing to advise them of their right to be represented by a lawyer, and coercing them into pleading guilty.
In some of instances, according to a referee's report, defendants who could not make bail remained in jail, even though they would not have been imprisoned if convicted of the charges they faced.
These were not isolated instances, but part of a pattern, Mr. Tembeckjian told the 10 members of the commission, noting that there were 49 charges against the judge. In the judge's courtroom, the failure to observe ''fundamental constitutional protections became routine,'' he said.
Judge Bauer's lawyer, Mr. Roche, told the commission that he did not believe it should be reviewing the bail decisions. He contended that ''other exigent circumstances,'' like being arrested in the company of known felons, justified high bails in certain cases.
He said Judge Bauer's superiors said they had never received complaints about him.
Members of the commission, some judges themselves, vigorously questioned both Mr. Tembeckjian and Mr. Roche.
For example, Justice Karen K. Peters, who serves in the Appellate Division of New York State Supreme Court, asked Mr. Roche about Judge Bauer's argument that he did not have to tell some defendants that they had the right to counsel because he had assigned public defenders to them in previous cases.
Would it be acceptable for police officers not to read suspects Miranda warnings ''because they heard about their Miranda rights the last time they were busted?'' she asked.
And she raised an eyebrow over the bails Judge Bauer set in misdemeanor cases, noting that she had recently read of $25,000 bail set for criminally negligent homicide charges in Queens.
Raoul L. Felder, the lawyer and a member of the commission, suggested that ''the idea was to put them in jail, it wasn't to make sure they return'' for future court dates, the rationale for imposing bail.
Christina Hernandez, a social worker who serves on the commission, asked if the judge has now changed the way he handles setting bail and arranging for lawyers for poor defendants.
''His mother didn't raise any fools,'' Mr. Roche said. ''He got the message.''
Correction:  February 7, 2004, Saturday  A picture last Saturday showing Judge Henry R. Bauer of city court in Troy testifying before the New York State Commission on Judicial Conduct in a hearing to remove him from the bench carried an erroneous credit. It was by Andrea Mohin of The Times, not Aaron Lee Fineman for The Times.
