Aaron Boone's left knee is critical to his game. Boone's speed on the bases and range to his left are two reasons the Yankees traded for him last July and two things they will miss now that Boone, their third baseman, is seriously injured.
But Boone said yesterday that he would return as the same player he was before the injury, which was sustained Jan. 16 while he was playing basketball near his home in Newport Beach, Calif. He knows this, he said, because he tore his anterior cruciate ligament before.
Boone had the same injury in 2000, when he played for the Cincinnati Reds, and he said that he would soon have the same surgery he had then. Boone had surgery in August 2000 and returned to play in spring training games seven months later. He is confident that before the end of this season, he will move as freely as ever. Last season, with the Reds and the Yankees, he hit .267 with 24 home runs, 96 runs batted in and 23 stolen bases.
''I don't worry about that at all, because I had this before and came back even better,'' Boone said in a telephone interview. ''The truth is, I could probably rehab it. But a lot of my game is athleticism, so I don't want to be limited in any way. That's why I'm in the frame of mind of, 'Let's get this thing fixed.' ''
Boone said it typically takes four to six months to recover from the kind of surgery he will have, a schedule that points to an August comeback. By then, though, he may not be with the Yankees. Because Boone voided the guarantee on his contract by injuring himself playing basketball, the Yankees can release him and owe less than $1 million of his $5.75 million salary.
Boone said he wanted to return under some kind of contract. ''That's for them to work out,'' he said, referring to the Yankees and his agent, ''and hopefully we can.''
Before the injury, Boone said, he gave only passing thought to the contract clause he violated.
''If you'd have asked me, I'd probably have said, 'Yeah, it might be in there,' '' he said. ''But it's the craziest thing, because this is the only time I've played basketball in a couple of years. It was a Friday night, and my wife and I weren't doing anything. I said I was going to go get some cardio in.
''I went to the gym, and I wasn't even in there banging. I was just floating around and this happened. It was unfortunate. I've beaten myself up a lot over it. But at the same time, I'm fine.''
Boone said that the injury happened when another player cut in front of him and that he had ''relived it a ton.'' He said he never considered hiding the circumstances from the Yankees, despite how much it could cost him.
''Hopefully I live my life one way,'' Boone said. ''I just wanted to get on the same page with everyone and own up to things.''
INSIDE PITCH
The Yankees have invited JOE GIRARDI to spring training as insurance against an injury to the backup catcher JOHN FLAHERTY. If Girardi does not make the team, he will broadcast games for the YES Network. Girardi, who caught for the Yankees from 1996 to '99, played for St. Louis last season.
BASEBALL
