After an evening practice late last season, Providence Coach Tim Welsh expected his players to be watching their customary television fare in the locker room -- music videos on Black Entertainment Television. Instead, they were tuned to ESPN's Big Monday, sizing up a future Big East opponent.
That sense of responsibility has carried over to this season. Welsh hears his players using his clichés -- ''It's winning time'' and ''Guard your yard'' -- in team huddles. Before practices, players voluntarily watch film of opponents and stop by Welsh's office with scouting reports.
Providence (14-3, 5-1 Big East Conference) is ranked 23rd in the Associated Press poll, and with victories over Alabama, Illinois, Connecticut and Virginia, it is showing how a team with unheralded players can win with stability and experience.
In his sixth season at Providence, Welsh has nurtured the program into a Big East contender and a strong candidate for its first N.C.A.A. tournament berth since 2001. Welsh's team includes five seniors, three juniors and a starting lineup that, when healthy, has four players 21 or older.
''It just doesn't happen; you don't get old anymore,'' Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim said. ''I keep saying we're young, but we're probably always going to be young. If a guy is good, he leaves early, and he leaves if he's not playing. That's where we are in college basketball.''
Providence, a program known as a springboard for coaches, has become a haven of stability. Welsh, who arrived here after a successful stint at Iona, said he was drawing better talent because of the length of his tenure and because a contract signed through the 2007-8 season showed he was not using the team to scurry up the coaching ladder.
Rick Pitino used Providence's run to the Final Four in 1987 as a springboard to the N.B.A., and Rick Barnes (Clemson to Texas) and Pete Gillen (Virginia) went to bigger programs in the 1990's.
''The first couple years I was here I got those questions -- not because I was looking to leave, but that was the norm,'' Welsh said. ''Sometimes that reputation or stigma or whatever, it's not really clarified until you stay.''
Stability has allowed Welsh's players to blend together and improve. Some of that improvement has been spectacular; the junior forward Ryan Gomes leads the Friars by averaging 19.6 points and 9.8 rebounds a game, ranking him among the top five in the Big East in both categories.
With polished footwork, an assortment of post moves and a knack for getting fouled, Gomes is the prototypical Providence player: he exhibits more skill than flash.
Welsh said he was most proud of the improvement of his players after their arrival at Providence.
Gomes illustrates the point; he added a 3-point shot to his repertory in the off-season. After not hitting a single 3-pointer last season, he is shooting 34 percent from 3-point range, including a 5-for-6 shooting performance against Villanova last week.
Gomes also epitomizes the selflessness that often comes with a veteran team. The Providence coaches began this season pleading with Gomes to shoot more and not to pass out of double teams immediately.
''He's a very efficient player,'' Richmond Coach Jerry Wainwright said. ''The way he moves, it's like a surgeon.''
Providence, a college of 3,666 undergraduates, lacks the size and high profile of Big East teams like Connecticut, Syracuse and Notre Dame.
The Friars have excelled because of players like Gomes, who is from Waterbury, Conn., but never received serious interest from UConn.
''I'd love to recruit the best player in the country, but we're not going to get him,'' Welsh said. ''So it's just a waste of my time. We might as well recruit Ryan Gomes and find sleepers like that.''
Welsh has surrounded Gomes with capable players who know their roles.
The senior center Marcus Douthit, who averages 3.8 blocks a game, is the perfect anchor for Providence's 2-3 zone. The sophomore guard Donnie McGrath, who has hit 38.1 percent of his 3-pointers, gives the Friars an outside threat to complement Gomes's inside play. Providence's second-leading scorer, forward Rob Sanders (13.4 points a game), returned to practice this week after missing eight games because of broken fingers. He is expected to play tomorrow when the Friars play host to Seton Hall.
The senior guard Sheiku Kabba plays point guard, and after growing up as the fifth of 14 children in the Bronx, knows all about sharing.
''We're all unselfish,'' Kabba said. ''The biggest thing with us right now is we're learning how to win. Everyone is on the same page.''
That outlook helped the Friars in their biggest victory this season. They trailed Illinois, then ranked 14th, by 12-0 at Madison Square Garden on Dec. 9 before regrouping for a 70-51 victory. It also helped Providence overcome two brutal losses -- on last-second shots against Texas and Rutgers in consecutive games in early January.
The Friars, true to their new spirit, have bounced back to win their next six games.
''That just shows how much we've matured,'' Gomes said. ''Everyone is behind everyone.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
