This winter's unrelenting cold spell has produced one dividend to warm even the chilliest New Yorker's heart: wild bald eagles have been hitching rides on ice floes in the Hudson River as far south as Battery Park and spiraling across the skies over Grant's Tomb.
''I'm wondering if I really could have seen a bald eagle flying over the Hudson River this afternoon?'' asked one e-mail sent to New York City Audubon by a startled member who had taken a walk Thursday in Riverside Park near 104th Street. ''Since I've been trained in spotting their large bodies and large tails while in the Pacific Northwest, when I caught that sight over the Hudson today I had to do a double take.''
Urban park rangers for the city's Department of Parks and Recreation have also been doing double takes. While stray eagles have in some years been spotted migrating across the boundaries of the five boroughs, the rangers have been dazzled by the profusion of eagles they are seeing this year and the fact that some eagles are lingering for days. In the last four weeks, rangers have repeatedly spotted a mother and two of her young on an ice floe near the George Washington Bridge, and on Monday a department falconer saw an eagle on an ice floe near the Battery.
On Thursday, when three urban park rangers -- Sara Hobel, the rangers' director; Tom Cullen, a master falconer; and Yvonne McDermott, the wildlife manager -- took a reporter and photographer to a lookout on the Palisades three miles north of the bridge, a white-capped adult, its broad wingspan flat as an ironing board, sailed in for a landing below them. A few moments later, a dark-headed immature eagle could be seen soaring over the waters off Spuyten Duyvil, which divide the Bronx from Manhattan, and another was perched in a tree near a boat landing at Englewood on the New Jersey side.
After tramping back through the snow from the edge of the cliffs, Ms. Hobel said that the eagles she had seen were almost surely not any of the eight baby Wisconsin eagles the rangers introduced over the last two years in Inwood Hill Park to demonstrate that these raptors can thrive in a city's gritty environment. For one thing, none is old enough to have an adult's white head. Still, Ms. Hobel speculated that the presence of the Inwood Hill eagles had shown their wilder cousins that the city environment was congenial.
Like northern suburbanites heading south to find fresh fish at Le Bernardin, eagles have been heading toward Manhattan in search of catfish, eels and shad because the lakes and streams farther north are mostly iced over. The lower Hudson, though, still has a channel of slate-gray fresh water and the eagles hop among the floes waiting for a fish -- sometimes a dead or disoriented one -- to streak by. Eagles have vision eight times as acute as humans and they can snare a fish in their swift talons jetting at 50 miles an hour, experts say.
Tom Lake, a naturalist with the State Department of Environmental Conservation who specializes in the Hudson River estuary, said this winter's prolonged freeze had meant that floes of ice were moving farther south than usual and that foraging eagles had been cruising on those floes.
''Eagles use ice floes the way you would use the moving sidewalk at J.F.K.,'' he said. ''They're saving energy while at the same time they're getting a meal.''
After a hundred-year absence, the first eaglet was born on the river in 1997, Mr. Lake said. There are now eight nests and 60 eagles that call the river home.
Peter Nye, leader of the endangered species unit of the state's Department of Environmental Conservation, said that the presence of eagles as far south as the Wall Street district would be ''an aberrant occurrence.''
But Adrian Benepe, the parks commissioner, said that the appearance of the eagles was another indication that the overdevelopment of the suburbs had made the city, with its 40,000 acres of parkland and an increasingly robust ecology, more attractive. While exotic birds have always used the city as a caravansary, a red-tailed hawk has set up permanent quarters above the window of a Fifth Avenue luxury building and great blue herons have been biding time at islands off the Triborough Bridge.
''This puts the lie to the notion that an urban environment is inappropriate for eagles,'' Mr. Benepe said.
Ms. Hobel also sees their sojourn here in more promising terms.
''The world is going to get more urban, so if we can figure out how to maintain their species in an urban setting, we're way ahead of the game,'' she said.
Correction:  February 5, 2004, Thursday  An article on Saturday about the sighting of bald eagles around New York City misstated the relationship of three eagles spotted by park rangers on an ice floe in the Hudson River, near the George Washington Bridge. They were an adult and two juveniles, all of unknown sex, not a mother and two of her young.
