The scene is a typical Keys seascape. Backcountry mangroves dot the warm water of Florida Bay. Herons dive for fish. Wealthy boaters step onto the decks of vessels with names like ''Endless Summer'' and ''Toadily Wasted'' to clink glasses in appreciation of another setting sun.
On land, things turn a little hazy. There's supposed to be a saloon with rickety floorboards soaked with spilled beer. Shouldn't a steel-drum player be interpreting Jimmy Buffett songs? Instead there is a new Olympic-size swimming pool. Mark Foster of Britain, one of the fastest freestyle sprinters in the world, glides through a cool-down, his long arms winding into the water without a splash. Near the diving pool, a group of elite swimmers cycles through a dry-land workout.
Gary Hall Jr. is the tall one, impossible to miss at 6 feet 6 inches. Wavy blond hair falls in his eyes as he twists to catch a medicine ball. He switches stations, puts on boxing gloves and begins punching the training mitts his coach, the former Olympian Jon Olsen, is holding. Each punch sings a staccato work song unfamiliar on an island known more for escape than for elite athletics.
Hall is an eight-time Olympic medalist and holds the United States record in the 50-meter freestyle. At age 29, he says he is swimming faster than ever. Hall says he believes other swimmers, if given a chance to stay with the sport, could also improve.
''U.S. Swimming is all about building the sport, which is fine, and which they do well,'' he said, referring to the sport's governing body in the United States. ''What they don't do is take care of the athlete who wants to stick with the sport into his 20's and 30's. That's where we feel we can serve a purpose.''
Using seed money from his father, Gary Hall Sr., a three-time Olympian, the younger Hall formed the Race Club in September. A group of elite swimmers called the Circle of Champions has joined Hall at the Founder's Park aquatic center in Islamorada. Stavros Michaelides of Cyprus, Roland Schoeman, a South African record holder in three events, and Sabir Muhammad, an American who set collegiate records at Stanford, are among them. Swimmers can qualify for the Circle of Champions if they have been ranked among the top 20 in the world in any event within the past three years, or if they have been ranked among the top three in their country during the last year.
In addition to practicing in the Keys, Race Club members rent themselves out for appearances at swim meets and clinics from Florida to New Jersey. They sell the T-shirts that Hall carts around in his yellow Jeep; the shirts have the club's crest and shield, with a red griffin emerging from a blue-and-white-striped sea. The goal is to sell enough shirts, make enough appearances and secure enough corporate sponsors to become self-sustaining, allowing swimmers to ignore money concerns and focus only on their workouts.
''For an athlete to continue training, to merely continue competing, that is being rich,'' says Olsen, the club's head coach, who swam at the 1992 and 1996 Olympics, winning five medals, four of them gold. ''We've never been able to do that before.''
Islamorada is an unlikely place to start. It is an island village where Ted Williams Way is named for a Hall of Fame fisherman who just happened to play baseball, too. The Islamorada ethos is conveyed by the posted business hours at the City Hall Deli: ''Open some days about 9:00 a.m. or 10:00 a.m., occasionally as early as 7:00 a.m. but some days as late as 12:00 p.m. or 1:00 pm. Some days or afternoons we aren't here at all.''
The rising wealth in the Keys enabled Islamorada officials to buy land for the Founder's Park, although the purchase forced the closing of the Lagoon, a waterfront spot known for its alcohol-intensive Sunday brunch. Fields for baseball, softball and soccer, along with an elaborate skateboard park, stand in its place. The 50-meter pool features eight lanes and a 12-foot diving pool.
''For a swimmer, just finding a place to practice is a challenge,'' Hall said. ''When I found out this was just sitting here, it didn't take much to get me down here.''
Race Club members have already adapted to the community. The team celebrated New Year's Eve with the locals at the Hog Heaven Sports Bar. The next day they climbed onto Hall's boat and went spear fishing, grilling what they caught for dinner.
Most of the club members live in a concrete bungalow within walking distance of Craig's Restaurant, known for its fish sandwiches. In the backyard of the house, a hammock swings from a gumbo-limbo tree. Marine taxidermy adorns the lime-colored walls in the living room, decorations that brought instant respect from neighborhood youngsters on Halloween. Before a recent practice, the Australian sprinter David Carter played a video game on the house PlayStation. Another Australian, Michelle Engelsman, lounging in a leather chair, nibbled on toast smeared with Vegemite. Although they still rely on parental support to meet their rent and food costs, they say the Race Club is a blessing.
''It's paradise here, it really is,'' Engelsman said. ''All we do is train and eat and sleep. There's no distractions. It's great.''
The Race Club is a sort of worker's union, which Hall has also named the Association of Professional Swimmers. When Hall talks about the future, he sees rival professional clubs facing each other in televised meets. He sees professional swimmers sticking with the sport into their 30's, inspiring a new generation of athletes the way the N.B.A. lures young players to basketball.
''There is a finite amount of money, which we deplete a bit every day,'' Hall said. ''We want to get it self-sufficient because the future of the sport is at stake, and I think it's worth pursuing.''
There's enough start-up money to last through December. After the Olympics in August in Athens, club swimmers will probably tour nationally. At practice, an audience of palm trees watches Hall and other club members slip into the water for their sets. The water is warm. The air carries the scents of hibiscus and suntan oil and saltwater. Eden wasn't bad at the beginning. For now at least, they are in paradise, swimming.
SWIMMING
