With panic over avian influenza crippling the chicken industry in Asia and fear over mad cow disease in the United States sending beef eaters to the poultry department, the time may never be better to be an American chicken producer.
''You'd hate to think of this problem as a good thing, but there are some sales opportunities out there,'' said Richard Lobb, a spokesman for the National Chicken Council, which is anticipating a banner year.
The United States' passion for low-carbohydrate, high-protein diets has also been a boon to the poultry business. Prices for American birds are 25 percent higher than last year, and broiler exports are expected to grow as Asia's producers cope with a spreading epidemic.
At the International Poultry Exposition here, the industry was in all its feathered finest on Friday, showing off the United States' poultry producing prowess and the machinery, medicines and feed that turn fluffy birds into crispy Chicken McNuggets.
The annual convention, which drew 800 exhibitors and 19,000 poultry men, and a few women, to the Georgia World Congress Center, featured a dizzying array of hatching, processing, packaging and rendering contraptions that have long since turned the backyard chicken coop into a relic of rural America.
There were automated slaughterers, hissing pluckers, whirling skinners and fast-moving egg sorters that would have made Rube Goldberg's head spin. Among the more compelling innovations were a mechanized harvester for scooping chickens out of the roost, a hands-free neck-breaking machine and an antibiotic administering device that uses pressurized air to inject 3,500 chicks an hour.
''You see, the bird feels no pain,'' said Karim Menassa, a Canadian inventor, demonstrating his gun on a rubber stand-in. Over its eight-week life span, the average chicken receives five or six injections, Mr. Menassa said, and a stressed-out bird often produces inferior flesh. The happier the bird, the tenderer the meat. ''Chicks have feelings, too,'' he said.
Live birds would have presented sanitary challenges for convention employees, but there were plenty of synthetic specimens, a few stuffed roosters for taxidermy aficionados and an assortment of sliced, diced and pressed samples to show off the latest modes of processing.
David Anderson was offering a hen called the Heritage 32, which he said could lay 160 eggs in its lifetime, and Jason Fryar was selling an imposing machine that uses infrared pulses, vacuums and conveyor belts to pick out stillborn embryos, known in the industry as ''lay deads.'' The device, called the Egg Remover, can sort 50,000 eggs an hour.
George Missbach demonstrated a machine that keeps inedible objects from finding their way to the dinner table. Mr. Missbach's company, Safeline, of Tampa, Fla., makes an X-ray device that ferrets out wayward bone shards and a metal detector that culls flesh with embedded bits of metal.
Nuts, bolts and the occasional knife tip, he said, invariably find their way into the processing assembly line. ''You could fill this hall every year with the stuff that comes out of the plants,'' he said, showing off the $45,000 machine, which hovers over a conveyor belt. ''It's a good return on your investment because you don't see your company's name in the paper when there's a recall.''
Frank Dupps of Germantown, Ohio, was marketing a mechanized system that turns chicken offal, about 15 percent of a good-size fryer, into lucrative byproducts. The fat finds its way into cosmetics and soaps; blood, bones and viscera become cattle feed; and hydrolyzed feathers often end up in dog food bowls. ''We can help you turn your waste into gold,'' Mr. Dupps said.
Not that every product was a technological wonder. Kirby Blalock's company, the Atlantic Paste and Glue Company, makes supersize sticky rat traps and flypaper in 22-foot-long rolls.
If there were any doubts that his product does the job, Mr. Blalock displayed an oversize picture of a sample hanging in a hen house. The glue paper, he said, held 100,000 flies.
''I know it looks kind of gross,'' he said, ''but then again, you've never been inside a chicken house in July.''
