A senior State Department official said Friday that he could see no reason why Taiwan should hold a referendum on its relations with mainland China.
''As much as we respect Taiwan's democracy, the referendum in question does raise questions,'' Richard L. Armitage, the deputy secretary of state, said in a press briefing in Beijing. He made the remarks after a day of talks with senior Chinese officials, including Prime Minister Wen Jiabao and Defense Minister Cao Gangchuan, on issues ranging from the North Korean nuclear crisis to the reconstruction of Iraq.
The referendum, scheduled for March 20, will ask Taiwan's voters to decide whether the island should obtain advanced antimissile weapons if China refuses to renounce the use of force and withdraw missiles aimed at it, and whether Taiwan should negotiate with China over a peaceful and stable framework for talks.
Mr. Armitage suggested that Taiwan's planned ballot was not intended to resolve a truly contentious domestic issue. He warned that it was destabilizing volatile relations between Taiwan and mainland China.
''As I understand it,'' Mr. Armitage said, ''referenda are reserved for issues that are very divisive or very difficult, and the wording that I see in the referendum seems to be neither divisive or difficult, so I think this raises questions about the motives of those who want to put it forward.''
The referendum has been condemned by Chinese officials, who see it as another step in the efforts by Taiwan's president, Chen Shui-bian, to establish the island's formal independence from China. The mainland government maintains Taiwan is a part of China.
Mr. Armitage said his talks with Chinese officials also dealt with resuming the ''six-country talks'' aimed at defusing North Korea's nuclear weapons program. He praised China's ''strenuous efforts'' in organizing the talks, which brought North Korea and South Korea together with the United States, China, Japan and Russia in November. But he emphasized that it was in China's own interest to rein in North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
Mr. Armitage was previously reported as saying that he hoped the talks would resume as soon as February, but in the briefing on Friday he declined to specify a date.
''Both sides expressed hope that we'd have six-party talks soon,'' he said.
Mr. Armitage repeated the Bush administration's policy that it wished to see no unilateral acts that threatened the delicate status quo between Taiwan and mainland China, and he reiterated that the United States was committed to helping Taiwan under the Taiwan Relations Act.
Commentators on Taiwan said Mr. Armitage's remarks were likely to add to fears there that Mr. Chen had alienated Taiwan from the United States.
A stream of criticism from the administration, especially remarks by President Bush during his meeting in December with Prime Minister Wen, has hurt Mr. Chen's standing in Taiwan, said Philip Yang, an expert on international affairs at the National Taiwanese University.
''I think Chen is under tremendous pressure,'' Mr. Yang said. ''He has brought Taiwan-U.S. relations into a serious deterioration, and the lack of understanding and trust is becoming a very important issue.''
