An hour before tipoff, traffic backed up about a mile down University Avenue, the main road from Interstate 35W to Williams Arena on the University of Minnesota campus in Minneapolis. Outside the arena, where it was 17 degrees, two heavily bundled scalpers worked the sidewalk. Inside, the second-largest crowd of the season -- 13,638 -- left scant seating room in an arena affectionately known as the Barn.
Unusual? For a Gophers men's basketball game, yes. But not for a women's game.
In a state where the Vikings are king and hockey is religion, the Minnesota women's basketball team is winning a place in the hearts of sports-minded Minnesotans. Not only are the 14th-ranked Gopher women more successful than the men's team -- which is without a victory in Big Ten play -- they are more beloved as well.
Though the Minnesota women (16-3, 5-3 Big Ten) blew a 9-point second-half lead Sunday in a 72-69 loss to Michigan State -- its third straight defeat after a 15-0 start -- and botched a chance to tie the game in the final seconds, no one booed. And afterward, so many fans jammed the lobby to get players' autographs that university officials cut the line off after an hour.
''It's great, it's a lot of fun, it gets me going,'' said the 5-foot-9 senior guard Lindsay Whalen, the Gophers' most popular player, who Sunday became the university's career scoring leader for men and women. ''We get excited playing in front of this crowd. It gives you a lot of extra energy.''
And Sunday's crowd was not even the largest of the season. The Gophers drew 13,817 on Jan. 11. The best men's crowd so far this season is 13,401.
A crowd of 7,312 at the Barn saw the Gophers end their three-game losing streak Thursday night with a 78-46 victory over Indiana.
University officials anticipate that the first women's sellout will be on Feb. 8 for Penn State, since only about 800 tickets remain in the 14,625-seat arena; that would be especially noteworthy because the N.H.L. All-Star Game is in nearby St. Paul the same day. The Gophers' average attendance of 8,256 leads the Big Ten women and ranks eighth nationally.
''It's exciting knowing 13,000 people want to come and see our team play,'' Minnesota Coach Pam Borton said. ''This is a great market for women's basketball.''
It is a remarkable achievement for a program that three years ago averaged 1,087 fans after seven straight losing seasons. Back then the women played in the 5,600-seat Pavilion, a converted hockey rink in the back of the arena building. ''It was an empty feeling,'' said Whalen, then a freshman.
Center Janel McCarville arrived the next season and could not entice anyone except close friends to watch.
''Some people in my classes, I'd tell them to come to the games, and they'd go, 'Nah,' '' McCarville said. ''They wanted to go to the guys' games and wouldn't spend money to come see us. Obviously, that's changed. People love a winning program.''
The turnaround began in 2001-2 with the arrival of McCarville and the hiring of Coach Brenda Frese. With games moving to Williams midway through the season, Frese led the Gophers to a surprising 22-8 record and an N.C.A.A. tournament berth before moving on to Maryland.
Borton, a former Boston College assistant, took over before the 2002-3 season and continued the success. The Gophers (25-6) reached the N.C.A.A. Round of 16 with a stunning 68-56 upset of ninth-ranked Stanford on the Cardinal's home court.
This season, with Whalen and McCarville as a dominating outside-inside combination, the Gophers won their first 15 games and were ranked as high as sixth until consecutive Big Ten losses to Purdue, Penn State and Michigan State, all nationally ranked.
Whalen, a perimeter shooter and penetrator from Hutchinson, Minn., averages 21.8 points a game and is one of only nine women in N.C.A.A. history with more than 2,000 points, 500 rebounds and 500 assists. Whalen's seven 3-pointers Sunday set an arena record, but she drew the biggest oohs and ahhs for a snappy pass to Kelly Roysland for a fast-break layup.
''Lindsay Whalen is a great, great player, an all-American,'' Michigan State Coach Joanne McCallie said. ''Didn't she wow the crowd with that behind-the-back pass? I don't know what else I can say about her.''
The 6-2 McCarville, a Wisconsin product nicknamed Shaq for her physical presence, averages 15.7 points and 10.1 rebounds as a low-post complement to Whalen. ''Most teams try to stop one or the other, because I don't think you can stop both,'' Borton said.
No longer do the players beg people to come watch. Season-ticket sales skyrocketed to 3,940 from 232 three years ago. The Gophers, with 11 of their 14 players from Minnesota, are especially popular among families with young girls who see the players as role models.
''I've been told by schoolteachers that girls want to grow to be Lindsay Whalen,'' the Minnesota athletic director, Joel Maturi, said. ''What a great thing to hear. She's having a great impact on young people.''
Ed Drenttel of Eagan, Minn., took his Pinewood Elementary School girls' basketball team to Sunday's game for that reason. Whalen is 10-year-old Leigha Jacobson's favorite player. Jordan Drenttel, Ed's 11-year-old daughter, likes McCarville.
''She can score and play great defense,'' Jordan said. ''And I like her picks.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
