While the Rangers were losing to the Buffalo Sabres at Madison Square Garden last night, Eric Lindros remained at his apartment in Manhattan, two days after sustaining his eighth concussion since March 1998.
''He was seen by Dr. Karen Johnston yesterday in Montreal,'' Rangers Coach Glen Sather said, referring to the noted concussion specialist. ''Her evaluation was that he is day to day. We'll see how he reacts over the next 48 hours.''
Lindros, 30, must remain symptom-free -- meaning no headaches, dizziness, blurred vision or lack of concentration -- for a 48-hour period before he can do anything athletic, even something as minor as riding a stationary bicycle.
Johnston has previously treated Lindros, who flew to Montreal yesterday to be examined by her, then flew back to New York. He was not expected to accompany the Rangers to Buffalo for Saturday's game.
When asked how long he thought Lindros might be out, Sather said: ''You can't even take a guess on these things. We just have to wait and let the doctors evaluate him.''
Sather said the Rangers would be cautious while Lindros attempted to work his way back -- if he chooses to do so. Sather also said that Lindros would keep in close contact with Johnston.
''She has so much data on Eric,'' Sather said. ''And she has pretty well become the expert on postconcussion syndrome or the concussion itself. So I think we're better off if we keep him seeing her. He trusts her. He feels very strongly that she is the person he'd like to see.''
Sather, who praised Lindros's performance on the ice and as a team leader, said he did not talk to him yesterday and that he would leave him alone for several more days. ''Our trainers talked to him,'' Sather said, adding that Lindros would ''talk to the doctor every day'' as well as to the Rangers' trainer, Jim Ramsay.
''I am not going to talk to him every day,'' Sather said.
Matthew Barnaby, who rooms with Lindros on the road, said he talked to him before last night's game. ''I wanted to know how he was feeling,'' he said. ''He was feeling pretty good. I just wanted to make sure of that.
''He was tired today. He did a lot of traveling yesterday, back and forth, to get checked out. He was on more of an even keel today, and I think that's a good sign. Just by the tone of his voice, he seemed better. Hopefully, it's a good sign that his voice sounded upbeat and he's doing better.''
HOCKEY
