It's time again for America's ultimate marketing extravaganza. The Super Bowl telecast tomorrow will feature the usual slate of ads peddling beer and cars, and not one but several competing erectile-dysfunction medications. What viewers will not be able to see is a clever ad that shows children working adult jobs before stating, ''Guess who's going to pay off President Bush's $1 trillion deficit?''
Enhancing male sexual performance is one thing, but public policy advocacy is beyond the pale when it comes to acceptable Super Bowl fare. CBS rejected MoveOn.org's anti-Bush ad. MoveOn.org, a liberal group that held a contest to select the ad, says that it was willing to pay the going rate to run it -- companies are spending more than $2 million, on average, for a 30-second spot during the game. The network, citing its decades-old policy against accepting paid policy advocacy ads, also turned down a spot submitted by People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals.
CBS is being accused of censoring an anti-Bush ad to curry favor with the White House and federal regulators. That seems unfair. All the networks (as opposed to local affiliates, which have their own policies) have consistently rejected such advocacy commercials from groups other than political candidates. Right now CBS's incensed critics are on the left, but chances are that the policy has shut out far more conservative messages (pro-gun and anti-abortion rights, for instance) than liberal ones.
That does not mean that the network was right. The CBS argument that contentious policy matters are best left exclusively to its news division strikes us as wrongheaded and patronizing. The networks should be screening ads for accuracy and taste, then leaving it up to viewers to judge for themselves.
It is regrettable that MoveOn.org's ad and similar messages, from the left or the right, are not considered suitable for the Super Bowl. About 130 million viewers in the United States are expected to watch the Patriots take on the Panthers. That it is deemed necessary to shield viewers from pressing public issues while they are being bombarded with commercial pitches is a sad commentary on the state of our culture, and of our democracy.
