In a test on the rights of patent holders, the Tokyo District Court on Friday ruled that the Nichia Corporation must pay 20 billion yen ($189 million) to the inventor of a widely used semiconductor device.
Shuji Nakamura, now a professor of materials and electrical engineering at the University of California at Santa Barbara, developed the device, a blue-light-emitting diode, when he worked for Nichia, a manufacturer in Tokushima Prefecture. The award over the transfer of patent rights -- the largest ever in Japan -- includes interest payments and 90 percent of Mr. Nakamura's legal costs.
The decision, which can be appealed, opens the way for other inventors to make claims on the revenue generated by their research. It will also probably persuade more Japanese companies to come to even stricter agreements on the compensation for inventors working in their laboratories.
For years, Japanese companies have tightly controlled the rights to research developed by their employees, sharing little or none of the money earned from the patents and royalties with their researchers. Dr. Nakamura, for instance, received just 20,000 yen ($189) from Nichia when it patented his invention.
On patent filings, Japanese companies list their names above the inventor's; Western companies typically file patents on behalf of their employees and pay them a percentage of the profits.
Like any company, Nichia has gone on to license the technology, generating millions of dollars in royalties. Eager to generate new sources of income, Japanese companies have been selling and protecting their patents more aggressively in recent years.
Mr. Nakamura's invention has become a crucial part of flat-panel displays and other video screens. Frustrated by receiving so little compensation, he left Nichia in 1999 and later filed suit demanding control of his patent. He lost that challenge in 2002, when the courts decided that companies control the patents on research done in their laboratories.
Dr. Nakamura then filed another suit demanding a share of the profits from his invention. This time, his award was the amount he requested.
His victory will probably inspire other inventors to challenge their employers for control of their work, lawyers say.
''These laws have been on the books for a while, but haven't been used,'' said Ken Siegel, managing partner at the law firm of Morrison &amp; Foerster in Tokyo. ''We're likely to see more of these cases as people realize there is an opportunity.''
Companies, though, will probably fight back not just in court, but by asking employees to sign more specific agreements about the sharing of profits from inventions, Mr. Siegel said.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
