Richard Rednour spent the last week of his 28 years at the Domino Sugar plant in Brooklyn learning how to write a résumé.
''Network'' was among the other pieces of advice Mr. Rednour picked up this week at the employment classes the plant had offered to workers who will soon be re-entering the job market. Yesterday, the plant's owner, American Sugar Refining, ended nearly all operations at the Williamsburg refining and packing plant, which has overlooked the East River since the 1880's.
Some workers, including Mr. Rednour, 50, a shipping and warehouse foreman, will be looking for work for the first time in decades.
''I learned this past week that I'm a dinosaur,'' Mr. Rednour said yesterday, taking a final drag during his final cigarette break outside the complex of brick and concrete buildings that stretches across more than 11 riverfront acres just north of the Williamsburg Bridge. ''Having a job for a long time in one place is not necessarily a good thing. It used to mean I was reliable.''
More than 220 others who have reliably arrived for work for years will not return on Monday, leaving fewer than two dozen workers to operate the plant at a greatly diminished level -- reduced to packaging sugar cubes and filling plastic toy figurines with cinnamon sugar -- until it closes permanently later this year. American Sugar, which bought the plant in 2001, announced in August that it would close because of falling demand for cane sugar in an age of beet sugar, high-fructose corn syrup and other competing sweeteners.
What will eventually become of the plant is unclear, but speculation among those standing outside it in the cold yesterday morning, shaking hands and saying goodbye, was that it would go the way of the soda factory, the knitting factory, the boot polish factory and so many other factories whose brick shells have been transformed into housing and commercial space to make way for the gentrification rippling through Brooklyn.
Williamsburg has changed as the manufacturing plants that once defined it have declined. In Brooklyn as a whole, the average number of manufacturing jobs declined to 33,967 in June 2003 from 88,800 in June 1984. In June 1958, the figure was 222,200, according to data from the state and the United States Department of Labor.
Now, retailers on nearby Bedford Avenue trade on that industrial past. One store, Brooklyn Industries, sells clothing and bags, while another, Spoonbill and Sugartown Booksellers, includes an image of the Domino plant in some of its advertising materials.
A spokeswoman for the Department of City Planning said the plant was not likely to be turned into housing. Under a proposed rezoning of the Williamsburg and Greenpoint waterfront, the Domino plant site would remain industrial or commercial, possibly with limited retail offerings like a hardware store, or office space.
''We really wish to keep the current mix of zoning uses, which are characteristic of the neighborhood,'' said the spokeswoman, Katie Maccracken. ''We have not been approached to change it.''
Florida Crystals, the Florida agriculture conglomerate that is a co-owner of American Sugar, does not have immediate plans for the site when it closes later this year, said its vice president, Jorge Dominicis.
''This wasn't a decision made because we've got some other plan,'' Mr. Dominicis said in a telephone interview. ''We're not that far along.''
He said that while the company was reluctant to lay off workers, a decline in sugar demand had forced it to close the plant, one of two the company owns in the New York area. Some workers may find jobs at the other plant, in Yonkers, he said.
The Brooklyn plant endured the boom and decline of Brooklyn's sugar industry -- New York was the nation's largest sugar refiner in the late 19th century -- and the end has not come easily. Intermittent strikes since the 1980's increased tension between labor and management, closing the plant for 20 months from 1999 to 2001, and yesterday several workers disputed the way American Sugar was interpreting their severance pay plan.
Brendan McPartland, the union representative for many of the machinists and mechanics leaving yesterday, said that the plant closing was ''a tragedy'' and that the union would challenge the company's interpretation of the severance agreement.
Jack Lay, president and chief executive of American Sugar, said the dispute would have to be resolved through arbitration.
Mr. Lay, 74, a former manager of the plant's refinery, said the distinctive neon Domino Sugar sign, long a landmark for residents of downtown Manhattan, would no longer shine.
''I think the sign is pretty much out of business,'' he said. ''We would love to have it on for advertising purposes, but it's just become too difficult'' to maintain.
