Jean-François Dehecq, the chief executive and chairman of the French drug maker Sanofi-Synthélabo, arrived in the United States this week for a series of meetings with some of the largest shareholders of Aventis.
Mr. Dehecq repeatedly made his pitch in a suite of rooms at the St. Regis Hotel in Manhattan. Asked how his message was being received, Mr. Dehecq said that it was still early.
''We are at the beginning of the story, and we have to explain what we are trying to do,'' Mr. Dehecq said on Thursday. Apropos of this, The Wall Street Journal reported yesterday that Novartis had hired advisers to examine the feasibility of serving as a white knight to Aventis. A Novartis spokeswoman refused to comment on the report.
Mr. Dehecq and Gérard Le Fur, the research chief of Sanofi-Synthélabo, said that they had settled upon Aventis as a target in part because there was no other company that they could feasibly buy.
Mr. Dehecq said that Schering-Plough and Bristol-Myers Squibb, both American drug makers, could not have been targets because of their share-holding structures. Either of those companies could have given Sanofi a footing in the American market.
Shares of both Schering and Bristol-Myers are held by large institutional investors who would have to divest themselves of their shares in the companies if they were taken over by a European company, Mr. Dehecq said. ''It is impossible to buy across the Atlantic,'' he said.
So Sanofi was left to pick through the remaining European drug makers ''and there are not a lot of companies left,'' he said. That Aventis is French had little to do with the decision, he said.
''What we have decided to build is a strong European drug company with a strong French base and a strong German base,'' he said.
But a large part of the deal is providing Sanofi with enough marketing muscle to take on rivals in the United States, the Sanofi executives said. That Mr. Dehecq was ensconced at the St. Regis Hotel when his company's own offices are just 14 blocks away was an indication of this need. Sanofi's offices near Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan are modest and have a just-moved-in feel about them. There is not enough space there to accommodate a retinue of executives, bankers and visitors.
The Sanofi marketing operation in the United States is similarly modest. The company has about 2,000 sales representatives in the United States, and Dr. Le Fur said that was not nearly enough.
''We will have a street fight with two products, Avapro and Diovan,'' said Dr. Le Fur, referring to the marketing battle between Sanofi-Synthélabo's hypertension drug and that of Novartis, which is now the top seller in the United States.
The company must also gear up to fight Pfizer, which will soon introduce a sleeping pill to compete with Ambien from Sanofi-Synthélabo, Dr. Le Fur said. And thousands more sales representatives will be needed to sell its smoking-cessation drug, Rimonabant, which is expected to be introduced in 2006. Together, Aventis and Sanofi-Synthélabo would have more than 6,000 sales representatives, about the size of the sales forces of Merck, Novartis and AstraZeneca.
Mr. Dehecq reiterated his view that his offer for Aventis was fair. ''We have to find the equilibrium between Sanofi and Aventis shareholders and show that we have a beautiful story for the future,'' he said.
As for the top management of Aventis, Mr. Dehecq said that they ''are not the story of the company.''
''Everybody who could support this project, they will find a position in the new company,'' Mr. Dehecq said.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
