If the prospect of Super Bowl XXXVIII's celebration of football and commercialism leaves you cold, do not despair. Television executives have not completely abandoned you.
The game is expected to attract 80 million or more viewers for CBS tomorrow night, but competitors are counterprogramming offerings ranging from ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy'' to ''The Amityville Horror.'' And to lure viewers during the Super Bowl's halftime show, Horizon Productions in Los Angeles is showing a pay-per-view event, ''The Lingerie Bowl,'' which will feature a tackle football game between teams of models and actresses in lacy underwear.
The major networks are following the usual counterprogramming strategy of courting women. ABC will show ''Notting Hill,'' a film starring Julia Roberts and Hugh Grant. NBC, meanwhile, will show three straight hours of ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,'' starting at 8, after its sister channel Bravo finishes its own marathon of the show. TNT is showing a ''Charmed'' marathon, while ESPN plans four hours of figure skating.
The strategy is less obvious at some other channels, like the Fox network, which will show the Will Smith alien-invasion movie ''Independence Day,'' whose audience, Fox admits, overlaps with the Super Bowl's.
''Look, against the Super Bowl you're kind of picking up scraps,'' said Preston Beckman, executive vice president for strategic program planning at the Fox network. ''It's not like there's a magic bullet that's going to make you beat it.''
But ''Independence Day'' was a success during last year's Super Bowl, drawing an average 6.2 million viewers from 7 to 10 p.m., according to Nielsen Media Research. Those ratings were higher than those of any other program in that time slot except the Super Bowl itself. The only competing program to attract more viewers last year was the Michelle Pfeiffer movie ''The Deep End of the Ocean,'' which did not begin until 9.
The programming reflects the perception that women are more likely to be uninterested in the game. More men do watch the Super Bowl, although the proportion is not as skewed as some might think: last year 42.2 million men over 18 watched, compared with 32.6 million women, Nielsen reports.
Competing during the big game presents an especially difficult challenge for channels with primarily male audiences.
For example, typically 70 percent of History Channel viewers are men, said Lynn Gardner, the channel's director of public relations. To make the most of tomorrow night, during game time the channel will run ''Biblical Disasters'' and ''Who Wrote the Bible?'' (They will be followed by ''Sex in the Bible'' at 10:30.)
''This programming seems to appeal to more women than usual,'' Ms. Gardner explained.
But what to do at Spike TV, which bills itself as the network for men?
''We really didn't counterprogram the Super Bowl,'' said David Schwarz, a spokesman for Spike, whose Sunday night offerings will include wrestling and dating shows. ''We know guys will be watching the Super Bowl. We'll be watching, too.''
In previous years, some networks did try to compete more strenuously at halftime, with special episodes of shows like ''Saturday Night Live'' and ''Fear Factor'' on NBC. But this year the field is being left to ''The Lingerie Bowl.'' Its producers lost their initial sponsor, Dodge, after complaints from dealerships and women's groups. PartyPoker.com is now backing the special, which costs $19.95.
''It will play well with men and women,'' said Mitch Mortaza, Horizon's president. ''With men, for the obvious reasons, and for women it's an incredible lingerie fashion show, with red carpet arrivals and more.''
