Bleary, refracted sunbeams shone through the patterned windows of the Friendship Baptist Church in Bedford-Stuyvesant yesterday, casting dim light around cantilevered balconies weighted with mourners in Sunday finery and mourners in hooded sweatshirts. The ringing overtones of clipped, two-note chords from a pipe organ announced the entrance of a coffin bearing the body of a young man shot dead by a police officer.
Between the illuminated crucifix and the floral arrangements sat the mayor of New York City. When his turn came to speak, Michael R. Bloomberg quoted the Bible and spoke of his love for his own children. He offered sympathies but made no apologies or promises.
As it would turn out, he did not need to say more, for his administration's response to the shooting was praised in the fiery oratory that followed.
One black city councilman, noting the long history of mayors who have rushed to support police officers who killed young black men, rose to call Mr. Bloomberg's actions so far, including his presence at the funeral, a turning point for the city.
''This is a defining moment,'' said the councilman, Albert Vann of Bedford-Stuyvesant. ''Things can happen differently in this city.''
But, he quickly added, changes in relations between races and between the police and the people they patrol are contingent on the condition -- and here he thanked Mr. Bloomberg -- that ''somebody had to have the courage to tell the truth.''
The mayor's appearance at the funeral served as the culmination of an official response that stood in stark contrast to handlings of similar shootings by previous city administrations. Mr. Bloomberg visited the family of the young man who was killed, Timothy Stansbury Jr., 19, breaching an angry crowd and walking up a staircase across the street from the one that Mr. Stansbury had tumbled down just hours before.
The police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly, on the day the bullet was fired, said the shooting appeared to be unjustified. And yesterday, prosecutors in Brooklyn presented the facts of the case to a grand jury for an indictment of Officer Richard S. Neri Jr.
The funeral drew a huge crowd. Early in the morning, a line in the entranceway doubled back on itself, winding into the church and back again.
The mourners moved slowly past the open coffin. Mr. Stansbury looked like a filled-out version of the gangling runt who had posed for a family photograph, widely published in the past week.
The pews were filling up with teenagers, teachers from Public School 93, people who live on Herkimer Street near Mr. Stansbury's mother and people who live on Lexington Avenue near Mr. Stansbury's grandmother. Uniformed crossing guards, colleagues of Mr. Stansbury's mother, took the latecomers' seats on the side.
Out from the Greene Room came Mr. Stansbury's family -- his mother, Phyllis Clayburne; his father, Timothy Stansbury Sr.; his sister, Timetress Stansbury -- but a muffled wail called them back. When they re-emerged, a group of men was carrying Irene Clayburne, the dead man's grandmother.
They made their way to their seats, -and the Rev. Craig Gatty read from the Bible.
''Let not your hearts be troubled,'' he said.
The organ played, and a singer asked in melismatic tones for strength to climb a mountain.
Mr. Bloomberg rose, to applause. Ms. Clayburne, he said, had asked him how to make sense of spending her life protecting children as a crossing guard and losing her own son before his 20th birthday.
''I can't answer why,'' Mr. Bloomberg said.
Elected officials and religious leaders followed him to the microphone, drawing boisterous applause for expressions of anger. After more than an hour, attention turned briefly to the young man in the coffin, memorialized in the little plastic prayer cards as Tim-Tim.
The organ played again, and a woman sang that she does not know too much about tomorrow. Rev. Gatty spoke of God.
Finally, Mr. Stansbury's sister, Timetress, took the microphone. She read a poem, thanked the mayor and made sidelong reference to the well-known details of her brother's life--the efforts to earn a high school diploma, the job at McDonald's.
''My brother paid taxes like everybody else,'' she said. ''He had to pay taxes to the person who took him out of here.''
She asked those assembled to live their lives, and with that, the crowd crushed through the doors, past the ushers in white dresses holding boxes of tissues, and into the bright noonday sun on Herkimer Street.
