Aides to Howard Dean's Democratic presidential campaign unveiled a new strategy on Friday that looks beyond the seven states choosing delegates on Tuesday to the Wisconsin primary on Feb. 17.
''Our goal for the next two and a half weeks is simple: become the last-standing alternative to John Kerry after the Wisconsin primary on Feb. 17,'' said Roy Neel, the new chief executive of the Dean campaign. ''We may not win any Feb. 3 state, but even third-place finishes will allow us to move forward, continue to amass delegates in Virginia and Tennessee on Feb. 10, and then strongly challenge Kerry in Wisconsin.''
The leap-frog strategy is highly unusual because it presumes that Dr. Dean will not be able to win any of the 13 states that vote before Wisconsin and that he will have enough money to last that long without a victory.
The Dean campaign acknowledged that this strategy had never been used successfully, but it suggested that a slow accumulation of delegates could keep the campaign alive. It also announced that former Vice President Al Gore would campaign for Dr. Dean in the coming days.
The campaign has appeared to be in free-fall since Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts won in Iowa and New Hampshire. As recently as Thursday, Dr. Dean said he would for the most part by-pass the seven Tuesday states, which are not particularly hospitable to him, and set his sights on Michigan. But Friday's announcement raised the prospect that he might not be able to carry Washington or Michigan, which vote on Feb. 7.
Saying now that Wisconsin is his do-or-die state may give Dr. Dean a little breathing room while lowering expectations. The campaign said it saw Wisconsin as the gateway to the collection of populous states, including California and New York, that vote on March 2 and may be more receptive to him.
''Why Wisconsin?'' Mr. Neel's announcement asked. ''First, it is a stand-alone primary where we believe we can run very strong. Second, it kicks off a two-week campaign for over 1,100 delegates on March 2, and the shift of the campaign that month to nearly every big state: California, New York, and Ohio on March 2, Texas and Florida on March 9, Illinois on March 16, and Pennsylvania on April 27.''
Dr. Dean had already planned to spend the weekend in Wisconsin, Washington and Michigan after perfunctory stops on Friday in four of the seven Tuesday states.
Even as the strategy announcement was made by his campaign in Burlington, Vt., Dr. Dean gave a feisty performance here on Friday night, even mocking his own widely panned concession speech on the night of the Iowa caucuses.
But the word from Burlington suggested the gravity of the situation. The campaign said that it would not spend any money on television advertising in the seven Tuesday states so it could redirect its resources toward Michigan, Washington and Maine, which votes on Feb. 8.
The goal is to have the field of seven candidates whittled down so Dr. Dean can challenge Mr. Kerry one-on-one, a contest the Dean camp believes it can win as Senator Kerry faces greater scrutiny. Dr. Dean has given hints of how he will challenge Mr. Kerry, saying Mr. Kerry has accomplished almost nothing in his 19 years in the Senate. He contrasts that with his nearly 12-year tenure as governor of Vermont, during which he established health care for most children younger than 18.
''We intend to make this campaign a choice,'' Mr. Neel's statement said. ''We alone of the remaining challengers to John Kerry are geared to the long haul.''
Although it is not clear where Mr. Gore will campaign, the former vice president won Wisconsin, as well as Michigan and Washington in 2000.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
