Senator John Kerry stood squarely at the center of the Democratic presidential race on Friday, trying to keep his focus on President Bush, but facing assaults from two rivals on affirmative action and health care.
Fighting for new victories in a set of Feb. 3 primaries and caucuses, Mr. Kerry sought to avoid getting detoured from his main mission: presenting himself as the best alternative to Mr. Bush, whose record he attacked on the Iraq war and on veterans' issues.
''There are 99 words in the State of the Union address about steroid drug use in sports; the word 'veteran' -- it doesn't appear once,'' he said at a veterans' rally here in South Carolina, a state with a large population of military dependents and retirees.
And Mr. Kerry told reporters that Republicans were ''scared stiff about'' his candidacy.
''That's why they are sending their attack dogs out,'' he said, referring to criticism of his Senate record on national security issues by Ed Gillespie, chairman of the Republican National Committee.
But on a day when Mr. Kerry also won big labor union endorsements, his opponents were scrapping to stop him from winning after his victories in Iowa and New Hampshire.
One rival, Senator John Edwards, went on the air with a new advertisement in South Carolina extolling his local roots and promising to restore thousands of textile mill jobs lost in recent years.
Other Democrats went on the attack. At a predominantly black college in South Carolina, Gen. Wesley K. Clark pounced on Mr. Kerry for statements about affirmative action 12 years ago.
''Back in 1992, Senator Kerry wrote it was 'inherently limiting' and 'divisive' and 'fostered a culture of dependency,' '' General Clark said. ''Affirmative action's a very important program to me.'' He added, ''If people want to question it, that's their right. But if they do, they ought to admit it, because we're not going to beat George Bush with old-style, fudge-it-up politics.''
Mr. Kerry said the general had misquoted him.
''Let's not have any politics here, let's speak the truth,'' the senator told reporters. ''You can go read the quote. I said, very clearly, I have always voted for it, I have always supported it. I've never, ever been different.''
The Clark campaign produced an April 1992 quotation from the Congressional Record in which Mr. Kerry said affirmative action was divisive because of ''the degree to which people receive it with some resentment -- albeit at different levels in different places.''
David Wade, a Kerry spokesman, said the senator, like former President Bill Clinton, had supported preserving affirmative action programs, but changing them.
Howard Dean also ramped up his criticism of Mr. Kerry, saying here that Mr. Kerry had done nothing in Washington and dismissing the senator's defense of his Senate record in a debate as ''Washington blather.''
''I think Senator Kerry's a fine person, but he hasn't accomplished much in the Senate -- 350 bills introduced, 9 passed; 11 health-care bills introduced, none passed,'' Dr. Dean said. ''I think we need a doer, not a talker, as the nominee of this party.''
At an education forum in St. Louis, Dr. Dean continued his attack: ''You're not going to change America by nominating somebody who's a Washington insider whose biggest long suit is talk.''
That drew a response from Mr. Wade that ''apparently this newest of the new anger-powered Howards is a master of desperate distortions.''
As his rivals beset him on two flanks, Mr. Kerry battled for South Carolina, standing in front of a huge American flag as his surrogates ridiculed the president's military credentials and sought to refute the idea that he, as a senator from the Northeast, could not carry South Carolina.
Mr. Kerry appeared with his biggest-name South Carolina supporters: Senator Ernest F. Hollings, Representative James E. Clyburn, and Alex Sanders, the former president of the College of Charleston. Later, he was also endorsed by Don Fowler, the former Democratic national chairman.
It was former Senator Max Cleland of Georgia, who lost three limbs in Vietnam, who delivered the most scathing attack on President Bush on behalf of Mr. Kerry, a decorated Vietnam War veteran.
''We need a real deal, like John Kerry, not a raw deal, like what's in the White House now,'' Mr. Cleland said, as his voice fell nearly to a whisper. ''We need somebody who felt the sting of battle -- not someone who didn't even complete his tour stateside in the Guard.''
Mr. Bush was in the Air National Guard in Texas from 1972 to 1973, but did not appear for duty from May to November 1972 when he was working as the campaign manager for Winton M. Blount, a Republican Senate candidate in Alabama. A National Guard official and Mr. Bush's spokesmen have said he made up the dates, as Guard regulations allow.
Mr. Cleland spoke after the Rev. David Allston, a Rock Hill, S.C., native who was the gunner on Mr. Kerry's Vietnam swift boat, recalled that ''after a firefight John would come up, and he would put his hands on me, and he would say, 'David, are you all right?' And I began to think -- I said, 'He cares about me.' ''
Mr. Cleland said: ''That's what we all need. We need a commander-in-chief who is a commander who cares for his troops, who gives them a little touch, and when they come home, takes care of them.''
Mr. Hollings acknowledged that South Carolina remained Bush country as of now, but said Mr. Kerry could change that. He recalled that during the Reagan administration, when he was working on the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings legislation to cut federal deficits, ''when the Democratic leadership walked away, I went to Chris Dodd of Connecticut and John Kerry of Massachusetts, the 'liberal from Massachusetts.' And he not only willingly laid his life on the line in Vietnam, but he was willing to lay his political life on the line in Washington. Don't give me that stuff about 'liberal from Massachusetts.' ''
Mr. Kerry also picked up the endorsements of the 700,000-member Communication Workers of America, the third and largest national union to support him so far; the Michigan Education Association, which represents 157,000 teachers in Michigan; and the 34,000-member Local 951 of the grocery workers' union, Michigan's largest.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
