Anyone wondering whether the loss of Eric Lindros's production for the Rangers would be offset by the addition of Jaromir Jagr's found out last night: Not yet, maybe not at all.
The Buffalo Sabres won, 3-1, at Madison Square Garden, handing the Rangers a loss in their first game since Lindros sustained a concussion Wednesday. It was their third loss in the four games Jagr has played since the Rangers obtained him from Washington last week.
''We can't replace Eric really with anyone,'' Coach Glen Sather said at the morning skate. Then his players went out and proved him right.
Goaltender Mike Dunham made 32 saves for the Rangers and was sharp in his first start since sustaining a mild concussion against Philadelphia on Jan. 22. The Rangers lost for the sixth time in their last seven games to drop to 19-22-7-4, slipping to 11th place in the Eastern Conference. With 30 games remaining, they trail the Islanders by 6 points for eighth place, the last playoff spot.
''It's time to push the panic button here; we don't have much time right now,'' defenseman Dale Purinton said. On a roster littered with All-Stars past and present, it was Purinton who scored the Rangers' goal last night, his first since Dec. 3, 2002.
The Rangers trailed, 2-1, after two periods, and the crowd at the Garden alternated boos aimed at the players with chants of ''Fire Sather!'' Sather is also the team president and general manager.
Buffalo's first two goals came on power plays. With Rangers defenseman Boris Mironov serving a double-minor for high-sticking Milan Bartovic in the face at 9 minutes 51 seconds of the first period, Daniel Brière knocked in a loose puck from the slot at 12:36 to give the Sabres a 1-0 lead.
In the second period, the Rangers were caught with too many men on the ice at 15:52, when left wing Garth Murray, in his first N.H.L. game, jumped over the boards too soon. After killing that penalty, the Rangers could not stop the Sabres after Martin Rucinsky went into the box for boarding at 17:11. Chris Drury flipped a shot from the low slot over a sprawling Dunham at 18:02 to make the score 2-0.
The Rangers answered 45 seconds later on Purinton's goal. With Matthew Barnaby fighting for position with Buffalo defenseman Henrik Tallinder in front of the net, Purinton's shot from the left point deflected off one of Tallinder's skates and past goalie Martin Biron.
The goal was Purinton's fourth in 157 career games.
Last night was Jagr's 1,000th league game. Jagr played on a line with Rucinsky and Mark Messier. With Lindros out, Sather moved Messier, the 43-year-old captain, to the team's top line.
Bobby Holik centered Chris Simon and Barnaby. Petr Nedved centered the rookie Jed Ortmeyer and Aleksei Kovalev. And Jamie Lundmark centered the Rangers' Murray and Paul Healey, who were called up from Hartford of the American Hockey League on Thursday.
Kovalev, who scored 37 goals last season, has just 10 goals through 52 games. He has not scored in his last seven games. Jagr, who has led the league in scoring five times in his career, has been held without a point in three of his games with the Rangers. Each time, the Rangers have been held to one goal.
''I'm here to answer questions,'' Holik told reporters after the game. ''But the questions are all the same, because we play the same way.''
SLAP SHOTS
Washington Capitals defenseman JASON DOIG, whose hard check left ERIC LINDROS with a concussion Wednesday, was suspended for two games without pay by the National Hockey League on Friday for kneeing Carolina center KEVYN ADAMS on Thursday. Adams will miss three to four weeks with a sprained ligament in his left knee, the Hurricanes said. . . . GLEN SATHER was asked why the Rangers put the veteran forward PASCAL RHÉAUME on waivers earlier in the week. He was claimed Thursday by the St. Louis Blues. Sather said the Rangers felt Rhéaume needed more ice time, so they wanted to try to demote him to Hartford.
HOCKEY
