Near the end of one of the most competitive and highly watched seasons in recent N.F.L. history, Commissioner Paul Tagliabue called on the league's 1,696 players to embrace their status as role models and warned them that they could face increased penalties during the 2004 season for taunting and similar acts.
During a 45-minute news conference on Friday that covered various topics, including the discovery this season that four Oakland Raiders had tested positive for the designer steroid THG, Tagliabue addressed the concern that certain activities on the field and off the field have reflected poorly on the league.
Tagliabue said that several coaches had called him to ask for harsher penalties for players who taunt or celebrate excessively. Jets Coach Herman Edwards was among those who called Tagliabue to request that some players face a suspension, in addition to fines, for certain acts.
''Many coaches called me when incidents occurred that they felt were way outside the rules and uncalled for and humiliating to their own players and embarrassing to players, including cellphone incidents,'' Tagliabue said. ''The discipline will continue to escalate unless it stops.''
During the season, New Orleans Saints receiver Joe Horn pulled out a cellphone after scoring a touchdown against the Giants. The league fined him $30,000. On the same day, Cincinnati receiver Chad Johnson hid a sign in a snowdrift and unveiled it after scoring a touchdown, a stunt that cost him $10,000.
During the 2002 season, San Francisco 49ers receiver Terrell Owens pulled a Sharpie pen from his sock after scoring a touchdown, autographed the football and handed it to a business associate in the crowd. Owens was not fined.
''My level of concern matters less than the level of concern of the coaches, the owners and the other players,'' Tagliabue said. ''Unsportsmanlike conduct, be it cellphones or pens, are strictly prohibited.''
Tagliabue also addressed the discovery in November that Bill Romanowski, Barret Robbins, Dana Stubblefield and Chris Cooper of the Raiders had tested positive for THG.
A positive test for steroids, among the league's banned substances, usually carries a four-game suspension, but Tagliabue delayed any suspension of the players pending further discussions between Harold Henderson, the chairman of the league's management council, and Gene Upshaw, the executive director of the players' union.
The union has said that suspensions should be issued only for positive tests of urine samples taken after Oct. 6, when the league began testing for THG.
The league's management council has held that a four-game suspension should encompass positive tests no matter when the tests were taken.
Tagliabue said he was reluctant to suspend the players because the positive tests were not publicized until late in the season. The Web site www.CBS.SportsLine.com reported the positive tests on Nov. 16.
''There were issues of notice and squad adjustments that were not contemplated by our policies,'' Tagliabue said. ''Gene Upshaw and the management council are continuing to discuss those issues of discipline.''
Without pinning himself down, Tagliabue also addressed the issue of hiring members of minority groups for front-office positions, saying the league's owners have had discussions about extending the rule that requires teams to interview at least one minority candidate for head coaching vacancies.
''I don't see us doing a mirror image or saying that because we did it over here, we're going to do it over there,'' Tagliabue said. ''The issues and questions you have to deal with outside of the coaching area are quite different than the coaching arena.''
In discussing Ohio State running back Maurice Clarett's lawsuit challenging the N.F.L.'s eligibility rules, Tagliabue said the league had not discussed an out-of-court settlement. Under the league's rules, athletes must be at least three years removed from their senior year of high school to enter the draft. Clarett, a sophomore who helped lead Ohio State to the national title as a freshman, was suspended in September after a National Collegiate Athletic Association investigation found that he had received benefits worth thousands of dollars and had lied to investigators.
PRO FOOTBALL
