An underground electrical fire blew the covers off three manholes in a succession of explosions yesterday on a street in Queens, shattering windows, knocking out power to two apartment buildings and forcing the evacuation of dozens of residents as acrid smoke and carbon monoxide billowed upward, fire and utility officials said.
An elderly woman who had trouble breathing was treated at the scene, and no other injuries were reported.
The cause of the fire and explosions, on Crescent Street near Ditmars Boulevard in Astoria, was under investigation, said Martha Liipfert, a Consolidated Edison spokeswoman. But fire officials said the blaze apparently began and spread along electrical lines under the street, leading to three explosions shortly before 5 p.m. that one resident likened to the cannonading in Tchaikovsky's ''1812'' Overture.
The first explosion, outside a four-story brick building at 21-70 Crescent Street, hurled up a manhole cover near the west curb and sent smoke pouring into the street. Minutes later and some 100 feet to the north, two more explosions blew off a pair of larger, heavier covers from square sidewalk electrical boxes a few feet apart.
The force knocked out power to adjacent buildings at 21-70 and 21-62 Crescent Street, shattered 11 windows on the facades and terrified residents throughout the neighborhood. Firefighters and utility crews responded to fight the flames, and 30 residents of 21-70 Crescent were evacuated after carbon monoxide was detected seeping into the building from a basement electrical box, officials said.
The fire was declared under control at 6:53 p.m., and the evacuated residents, who had taken refuge from the cold in nearby cafes and a school, were allowed back into their apartments at 7:15, the city's Office of Emergency Management said. Plywood was put up to cover the shattered windows last night as residents recalled a frightening day.
''It sounded like the cannons in the '1812' Overture,'' said Michelle Colletti, 40, an occupational therapist whose apartment at 21-70 Crescent overlooked the scene. Her lights dimmed just before the first explosion, she said, and as she looked out and saw smoke, her first thought was to unplug her appliances and save her cats, Bernie, Henry and Phineas.
She managed to get Bernie down to her parked car, but by the time she went back for Henry and Phineas the firefighters were barring her way and evacuating the building. There was talk of deadly carbon monoxide fumes, and she was worried about the cats. But there was hope: fresh air was blowing into the building through the shattered windows.
