The time had moved well past 11 p.m. at the Canoe Club, a restaurant in Hanover, N.H., and aides to Gen. Wesley K. Clark had twice urged him toward the door. He simply would not end a conversation with Meghan McCoy, a medical student, who wanted to know why he wanted to be president.
Finally, the aides called over their secret weapon: Gene Caulfield, General Clark's 63-year-old brother-in-law.
''Wes,'' Mr. Caulfield began.
''I'm making a sale,'' General Clark protested.
''Well close the sale, and let's go,'' Mr. Caulfield replied.
Part enforcer, part court jester, counselor, filter and truth-teller, Mr. Caulfield occupies a unique spot on the Clark campaign. For the general, who has never run for office, he is a reassuring barometer of how the campaign is running from day to day -- gauging who among the staff is happy or not, what seems to be working on the stump and what falls flat. He also lent General Clark an Argyle sweater on a cold January in New Hampshire -- an act that was intended to keep the candidate warm and to perhaps soften his military image, but that resulted in his being teased relentlessly by late-night television talk show hosts. (The Clark campaign auctioned the sweater on eBay and donated $5,404 in proceeds to a program for homeless veterans in Manchester, N.H.)
Many candidates have had family members whom they kept close on the campaign trail: Robert F. Kennedy was often at John F. Kennedy's side; Frank W. Hunger, Al Gore's brother-in-law traveled with the vice president in 2000, and George W. Bush was a sometimes intimidating presence on the trail with his father in 1988. But rarely is it the case that both the candidate and the confidant have no experience in politics. For General Clark and Mr. Caulfield, that does not seem to matter.
''You just need somebody along when you've never been in politics and you don't know anybody that's working for you,'' General Clark said in an interview. ''You need somebody to just help you manage. He helps me keep family obligations together. He just gives me a sounding board, and he's my friend.''
Mr. Caulfield is equally sanguine.
''When the speech is being given, I'm working in the background to see what's going on,'' he said. ''Any organization can always have some help with its operations. That's what I've done for a long time.''
He did so for 14 years at the American Stock Exchange, beginning in 1970 and finishing as vice president for floor operations.
Mr. Caulfield, who has a degree from Fordham University and a master's in business administration from Adelphi University, then moved to the Securities Industry Automation Corporation and to Quotron, the financial data distribution company that became part of Reuters.
Close though they are, outwardly the two share little in common. General Clark exhibits a laconic military demeanor, the product of his time in the armed services, when he lived in 31 places in 34 years. Mr. Caulfield is a folksy Brooklyn native who has lived in the same house in Denville, N.J., since 1970.
They became friends when General Clark, then a West Point cadet, began going to Brooklyn to date Gertrude, his future wife and the sister of Mr. Caulfield's wife, Kathy.
Last summer as he was talking with potential supporters about whether to seek the Democratic presidential nomination, General Clark asked Mr. Caulfield to attend the meetings, and they spent a weekend together just before the general announced a decision.
It was a natural progression, then, when General Clark asked Mr. Caulfield to join the campaign.
Only occasionally does Mr. Caulfield offer policy advice, as when he suggested that the general mention vocational and technical schools as well as colleges when talking about his education plan. But staff members say they rely on Mr. Caulfield to convey messages that they do not want to give directly -- like why he should be listening more to the headquarters in Little Rock, Ark., than to the people around him on the trail. Mr. Caulfield, in turn, judges if those messages should reach the general.
Both men have a keen sense of humor, but where General Clark's kidding often takes on a competitive edge, Mr. Caulfield's is aimed at himself as often as at others.
''He's a real prankster,'' said Amad Jackson, who serves as the general's personal assistant and bodyguard. When trackers from rival campaigns showed up at events to keep tabs on the general, Mr. Caulfield put on a deadpan façade and repeatedly stood uncomfortably close to them, seeing how long it would take them to move away from the candidate. Once the spies got the joke, Mr. Caulfield welcomed them like another campaign worker.
He also provides a more important function, Mr. Jackson said. ''At times when the general's exhausted or there are too many people around, Gene takes over,'' he said.
On the night of the Iowa caucuses, for example, virtually the entire Clark staff, dozens of volunteers and scores of reporters and cameramen were crammed into the campaign's Manchester headquarters. At 8 o'clock, as the returns began to flow in from Iowa, Mr. Caulfield abruptly cleared everyone out of the state director's office. General Clark, it turned out, wanted a quick nap.
Mr. Caulfield insists he does not aspire to a high-level position in the White House. ''There are too many people who walk around in any environment with big egos,'' he said. ''My general philosophy in life is that I'd like, for one or two people, to make their lives easier.''
He does want General Clark to win, he said. Does he think it will happen?, he is asked.
''I'm a pessimist,'' he said, shrugging. ''But I think he should win.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONFIDANT
