Adecco, the world's largest employment services group, said on Friday that an investigation begun two and a half weeks ago into accounting weaknesses at its North American unit had so far not uncovered any problems large enough to dent earnings significantly for 2003.
Seeking to reassure investors unnerved by Adecco's disclosure on Jan. 12 that its 2003 results would be delayed while its finances were being re-audited, the Swiss company's board issued a statement saying that Adecco had also reduced its net debt in the fourth quarter of last year to 900 million euros ($1.1 billion).
''The board has so far found no evidence demonstrating any major misappropriations or irregularities that would be financially significant to the company as a whole,'' the company said. ''Instances of local misappropriation and irregularities -- mainly at branch level -- have been identified in certain countries.'' The company did not identify the countries.
The company said that business remained healthy because of stronger demand last year and that the company's financial position was sound.
The statement did not make clear whether the problems were confined to Adecco Staffing North America, which is based in Melville, N.Y., and has offices in the United States, Canada, Puerto Rico and Mexico, or whether Adecco operations in other countries were involved.
Analysts and investors were heartened by the company's statement that it had reduced its debt -- a sign, they said, that no fraud of major financial proportions had occurred. Shares of Adecco rose 8.05 Swiss francs, to 65.50 Swiss francs on the Zurich exchange. The company is based in Wallisellen, outside of Zurich.
Adecco's directors made it clear that the chief executive, Jérôme Caille, remained at the helm. There has been speculation that his departure was imminent after Adecco's largest shareholder, Klaus Jacobs, told the Swiss business monthly, Bilanz, in an interview that he had set a deadline for Mr. Caille to raise investor confidence or leave.
Adecco's directors said that they had also appointed one of the company's top executives in the United States, Ray Roe, as the new chief executive of Adecco's North American operations, which include Adecco Staffing North America, the professional staffing and services unit Ajilon and the career services business Lee Hecht Harrison. Mr. Roe was previously chief executive of Ajilon.
The board said that it had appointed Richard Kilsby, a former executive director of the London Stock Exchange, as an ''independent monitor'' to ensure the integrity of an investigation into Adecco's North American accounting problems currently being conducted by New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison.
Analysts welcomed the news. Matthias Egger, an analyst at the Swiss bank Pictet &amp; Compagnie in Zurich, said that although misappropriation was not good, it was a probable hazard for a group as large as Adecco, with more than 28,000 employees in about 68 countries.
''The significant debt reduction gives us confidence that there is not a major case of fraud,'' Mr. Egger said in his daily note to investors. ''The company must be relatively sure that it will not have a significant financial impact to communicate in this wording now.''
Mr. Egger added that the biggest financial risk remained that of class-action lawsuits. Several suits have been filed in New York against Adecco by investors who accuse the company of giving a false impression of its finances.
He noted that Adecco has reserves of 1 billion euros ($1.24 billion) and that awards in similar suits have been $100 million to $500 million and were settled on average two years after the cases were filed.
Adecco's directors said that the investigation was still at an early stage and gave no indication of when 2003 profit figures, which are being recalculated by Ernst &amp; Young, would be made public.
''We are working to reinforce and improve our systems and our finance function and are determined to work through and learn quickly from these problems,'' said the company's chairman, John Bowmer, who is overseeing the investigation. ''We expect that Adecco will be an even stronger company when coming out of this period.''
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
