General Motors is close to becoming the second automaker to settle a class-action lawsuit alleging that the industry's lending practices let car dealers discriminate against blacks and other minorities when they set loan rates.
Lawyers representing tens of thousands of African-American car buyers have reached a tentative settlement with the General Motors Acceptance Corporation, the financial services division of G.M., both sides said Friday.
The agreement may save millions of dollars for buyers of all races when they finance vehicles through G.M.A.C., which lends money to help people buy cars and trucks made by G.M. and other manufacturers.
The tentative agreement, which was reported Friday by The Wall Street Journal, is expected to curb the amount dealers can add to interest rates charged on car loans and to shed light on G.M.A.C.'s lending practices. In the past, after G.M.A.C. agreed to make a loan at a certain interest rate, the dealer who had applied on behalf of the buyer could increase the rate by several percentage points and keep the difference.
The specific terms of the tentative agreement have not been disclosed. ''The details are being worked out as we speak,'' said Wyman Gilmore of Grove Hill, Ala., a lawyer for the plaintiffs. ''We expect to file a specific agreement with the court Monday.''
Under terms of the tentative agreement G.M. will not have to pay punitive damages.
Last February, Nissan settled a similar suit. Cases are still pending against the financial services divisions of the Ford Motor Company, DaimlerChryslerToyota and Honda, and nine banks that make car loans.
While final details are being worked out, the agreement is expected to be submitted on Monday to Judge Aleta A. Trauger of Federal District Court in Nashville for approval.
The practice of dealer markups on loans has been criticized by consumer groups because many consumers do not understand that dealers have had wide discretion to add percentage points to the interest rates on loans offered by G.M.A.C. and other lending giants. Not all loans involve markups and for the last couple of years the major domestic automakers have been heralding zero interest loans as a selling point to buyers with good credit.
Dealer groups have said the markup is simply a retail fee the dealer is due for shopping among lenders.
''The dealer markup reflects a legitimate retail fee for a service rendered,'' said Alan Starling, chairman of the National Automobile Dealers Association, in a statement last year.
Class-action lawsuits filed in recent years allege that the markup practice turned into illegal discrimination as dealers set higher interest rates on loans to minorities.
''Our studies have shown that minority consumers are more likely to be marked up than white consumers,'' said Stuart Rossman, a lawyer at the National Consumer Law Center, which is representing some of the plaintiffs in the cases.
''African-American consumers are twice as likely to be marked up as white consumers, and when a white consumer and an African-American in the same credit tier are marked up, then the African-American consumer is paying twice as much markup,'' he said.
A study backed by the plaintiffs looked at $421.6 million in dealer markups paid by 1.5 million G.M.A.C. borrowers. African-Americans accounted for 8.5 percent of the customers but paid $83.9 million, or 19.9 percent of the total markup.
G.M. has disagreed with the study's methodology.
The lawsuits do not allege that G.M.A.C. or the other big lenders companies discriminate when they set their own rates. Rather, they contend that the industry's standard practices have given dealers the discretion to discriminate.
''Discrimination is illegal, it's a bad practice and it is bad for business,'' said Toni Simonetti, a spokeswoman for G.M. ''G.M.A.C. has consistently shown leadership opposing discrimination and has a proven record, in millions of financed transactions, of fair treatment of consumers and of helping the American people buy the cars they want.''
G.M. has already moved to put a cap on the dealer markup it permits, setting a cap at 4 percentage points in 2001 and lowering it to 3 percent percentage points in 2002.
Plaintiffs' lawyers have said that lowering the markups further would continue to limit the discretion dealers would have to inflate loans.
