Richard Seymour, New England's dominant and fierce defensive lineman, was raised in Gadsen, S.C., by parents who taught him to mix humility, hard work and family loyalty when building a bridge toward success.
Seymour, 24, has steadily crossed that bridge. In three professional seasons, he has earned two consecutive Pro Bowl berths, including one this year; a Super Bowl championship; and the chance for a second title in Super Bowl XXXVIII on Sunday.
But in the week preceding New England's home game against Jacksonville on Dec. 14, Seymour hit what was for him the equivalent of a land mine. His grandfather, Edward Wider, died of cancer. Seymour traveled home for the funeral, but because of a miscommunication with his coach, Bill Belichick, about when he would return, he was benched at the start of the Jacksonville game. Seymour eventually played and produced a stirring outing with seven tackles, a forced fumble and a sack. He exited that week, however, with even more scars.
Seymour thought his benching was unwarranted. Many of his teammates agreed. Some of the Patriots' assistant coaches did, too. A day after the game, Belichick maintained that benching Seymour at the start of the game was a coaching decision based on team policy.
''I understand the questions that are going to come on that and I can't get into every policy, every coaching decision and every reason that goes into every decision that I have to make for the team,'' Belichick said.
The conflict said plenty about Seymour's focus in particular and his teammates' in general. It clarifies how much winning -- and the Patriots enter this Super Bowl with 14 straight victories -- is a salve.
Even now when Seymour talks about the benching, it hurts him. Even now he disagrees with it, and, among the Patriots, he is certainly not alone.
But Seymour is not about building roadblocks or barriers. His foundation points him another way.
''My grandfather was 71 or 72 years old, and he was a contractor just like my dad,'' Seymour said. ''Sometimes they worked on projects together, and I worked with them, too. Family comes first to me. The whole situation was tough. Getting benched made it tougher. Any starter wants to start.
''I was basically gone for a couple of days during the week to see my grandfather for the last time and be with my family,'' he said. ''I did not get back in time for a Thursday practice. But I had done my work, and I was ready to play.''
His voice was growing softer now and his eyes stared into nowhere.
''Once I got in the game, I still had a job to do,'' Seymour said. ''I was going to play for my grandfather, and I did. It's just not in my personality to let anything get the best of me. I handled the situation. It hurt. But I'm not about holding grudges. Coaches coach and players play.''
Seymour is a prize player who is building a bridge toward joining a handful of players among the N.F.L.'s best. Actually, he might already be there.
He is terrifically athletic and strong at 6 feet 6 inches and 310 pounds. This season he has played every position on the Patriots' defensive line. He rushes the passer (8 sacks), excels in run defense (80 tackles) and drops nimbly into pass coverage (10 passes defended). He has played fullback in New England's short-yardage offense. In the divisional playoff against Tennessee, he blocked a 31-yard field-goal attempt in a game the Patriots won, 17-14.
He represents what could be an even greater hybrid of versatility for N.F.L. defensive ends.
Seymour, from the University of Georgia, was the sixth overall pick in the 2001 draft, which featured Michael Vick's selection at No. 1 by the Atlanta Falcons. Vick was followed by offensive tackle Leonard Davis (Arizona); defensive end Gerard Warren (Cleveland); defensive end Justin Smith (Cincinnati); and running back LaDainian Tomlinson (San Diego). With the exception of Vick and Tomlinson, Seymour has been a better player than the others selected before him. He is already one of the Patriots' captains.
New England's robust nose tackle, Ted Washington, has played 13 pro seasons for five different teams. He had this to say about Seymour: ''The way he's going now, if he keeps his head straight, with his work ethic, he's going to be one of the best in the league. His skills speak for themselves. He still has a lot to learn, but to know what he knows now, he's far ahead of great defensive linemen I've known over the years.''
Seymour said he started working with his father in construction at age 6, first being the water boy for the crew, then several years later making mortar, passing bricks and blocks and rolling wheelbarrows full of materials. As he grew, he gained more responsibility, and he said that today he could build a foundation for a home and brick it himself, ''with a little help.''
Block by block, he is building his career, wowing his old neighborhood, where his games on Sunday have become an event with barbecues and celebrations at the home of his parents, Richard and Debra. His father gave him tough love and always reminded him that ''nobody beats you when you work hard,'' Seymour said. His mother encouraged him to ''always pray and be humble,'' he said.
He gave his father his first Super Bowl ring. If he wins this one, it will be a gift for his mother. He cannot go home to South Carolina if he loses to the Carolina Panthers in this Super Bowl, he said, laughing.
''We've got a young team with a good nucleus, so maybe we can win a few more Super Bowls and I'll finally get a ring for me,'' Seymour said. ''I played on a little league football team that was 0-20. In high school, we only made the playoffs once. At Georgia, we went to bowl games and did not live up to our expectations. So this is a new situation I am in.''
But one he is building on solid ground.
PRO FOOTBALL
