Gov. John G. Rowland twice had the state pay to move furniture between his official residence in Hartford and his lakeside cottage in Litchfield, according to documents that were subpoenaed by federal investigators. The two bills, one for $890 and one for $861, stem from moves that took place in Nov. 20, 2001 and May 1, 2002. Both invoices are conspicuous in their lack of detail beyond noting that a ''large piece of furniture'' was being transported in each case.
Asked about the invoices yesterday, the governor's office said it would have no comment, and could not say whether the furniture was state or personal property.
Federal investigators have been poring over records involving the governor's mansion on 990 Prospect Avenue in Hartford as part of a sweeping investigation into whether corruption played any role in the awarding of state contracts. That investigation kicked into high gear after Mr. Rowland admitted in December that he had allowed state contractors and state employees to pay for improvements to his cottage, contrary to earlier denials.
As the bills were being made public, the bipartisan House committee that will determine whether there are grounds to impeach Mr. Rowland met yesterday in Hartford to review the résumés of lawyers applying to be special counsel to the group.
If the furniture being transported involved state property, Mr. Rowland, a Republican, might have to explain why it was being moved to a modest getaway house for his family that is not ordinarily associated with state business. If it involved personal property, Mr. Rowland might need to explain why the state was being billed.
A woman answering the phone yesterday at Fallon Moving and Storage Inc. in Windsor, the company that handled both moves, said she would relay the message to the company's owner, who never called back.
After years of neglect, the governor's mansion has been overhauled in recent years with a combination of millions of dollars of private and public money.
A source close to the governor said that given the dates of the moves, it was possible that both moves involved an outdoor hot tub that had figured prominently in last month's scandal concerning the cottage.
One of the falsehoods that the governor had told was that he had bought a hot tub in Torrington years ago and had it moved from the governor's mansion to the cottage at some point. Later, he admitted that his assistant, Christine Corey, and her husband, Paul, had given him the tub as a birthday gift in 2001.
According to the invoices, the first move was scheduled for Nov. 20, 2001, with ''one large piece of furniture'' going from the cottage to the mansion.
Then in the following spring, on May 7, 2002, the bills show, five men working 7 hours each were hired to transport a ''large piece of furniture'' from the mansion back to the cottage.
