Despite relentless attacks against President Bush from the Democrats running to replace him, Republican state party leaders said on Friday that they agreed with the White House's campaign strategy of having the president concentrate on running the country instead of responding to the criticism.
''The most important thing is what he does, rather than engage in partisan debate,'' said George Sundheim, the California Republican chairman, who was attending the Republican National Committee's winter meeting here.
''The president has a positive message, which is what he's doing as president,'' Mr. Sundheim said. ''That's what people are paying attention to. It'll be great for him to get out there, but now the most important thing to help him win is to be presidential.''
Jayne Millerick, the New Hampshire party chairwoman, agreed, saying: ''He's doing absolutely what he needs to do. I don't see any rush for him to respond to the Democrats. His actions speak louder that any of their campaign rhetoric. His actions show him as a positive leader.''
Even in a closely divided state like Ohio, Republican officials seem satisfied if Mr. Bush delays personally fighting back.
''He has to continue to do his job as president,'' said Robert T. Bennett, the Ohio chairman. ''But I look forward to him getting engaged later, maybe in the spring. I'm sure after April 1 he'll be stepping up his campaigning.''
The patience expressed by these and other state party leaders here both reflected and encouraged a White House strategy to keep Mr. Bush above the fray while surrogates respond on his behalf. Only rarely has Mr. Bush even acknowledged the frenetic activity among Democrats, as he did obliquely in New Hampshire on Wednesday, just after the Democratic primary, drawing a laugh with the comment, ''I understand there's been some activity in the state of New Hampshire recently.''
He has another postprimary trip planned for next week, to South Carolina, but the heavy lifting has been left to others, like Ken Mehlman, campaign manager for Mr. Bush's re-election effort.
In a speech to the party on Friday, Mr. Mehlman drew sharp distinctions between the Democrats and Mr. Bush, insisting that any of the leading Democratic candidates would ''turn back'' the country to a less safe and less prosperous time.
''We're not yet sure of the name of our opponent on Election Day,'' he said. ''But we already know that Americans will have a clear choice. That's because our opponents agree on an agenda that can best be summarized by one of the two front-runners for the nomination, Gov. Howard Dean: They want to take America back. Backwards.''
Speaking before the same group on Wednesday, Ed Gillespie, the national Republican chairman, made similar points but saved most of his criticism for Senator John Kerry, whose victories in Iowa and New Hampshire have made him the biggest bull's-eye for Republican attack.
Although most state party leaders agreed with Mr. Bush's decision to ignore the day-to-day attacks, some said they longed for a more aggressive approach, even this early in an election year. Alan Novak, the party chairman in Pennsylvania, another closely divided state, praised White House strategists for acknowledging how crucial Pennsylvania was to both parties. Al Gore narrowly carried the state in 2000, and voters elected a Democratic governor, Edward G. Rendell, in 2002.
Mr. Bush has already visited Pennsylvania ''close to 30 times,'' by Mr. Novak's count, but the chairman said he would still like to see Mr. Bush more assertive in his own defense.
''Everybody's anxious for the campaign to begin, and a lot has begun,'' Mr. Novak said, referring to an early start to organizing. ''But I'd like to see more from the president. I'd like to see some aggressiveness; I like him to be a little more forceful. It would go a long way toward reinforcing the enthusiasm we've already begun to develop, and I'd like to see that matched.''
