Michael Wolff, the contentious media columnist for New York magazine who was part of a failed bid to buy the publication last year, has left the magazine to become a contributing editor at Vanity Fair.
Mr. Wolff, who has generated a great deal of controversy and attention with his acid-etched portraits of media moguls since joining New York in 1998, will write eight columns a year for Vanity Fair on the media industry and will also produce three long feature articles, according to Vanity Fair's editor, Graydon Carter. ''I have read his work over the years and I have always thought he was a gifted writer,'' Mr. Carter said. ''I like the way his mind works.''
Mr. Wolff, according to friends, had been negotiating with a number of news media outlets, including The Wall Street Journal. He begins at Vanity Fair on March 1.
Mr. Wolff may have jumped before he was pushed. In a twist worthy of one of his weekly columns, when it was learned last fall that Primedia was putting New York magazine up for auction, Mr. Wolff publicly announced that he expected to be part of a bid for the magazine. He eventually helped put together a group that included Mortimer B. Zuckerman, owner of The Daily News; Nelson Peltz, a billionaire investor whose Triarc Companies owns Arby's restaurants; Jeffrey Epstein, a money manager; Donnie Deutsch, chief executive of the advertising agency Deutsch Inc.; and Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax films. The group had been the presumptive favorite, but on Dec. 16, Bruce Wasserstein, a Wall Street deal maker, made a successful $55 million bid for New York magazine.
Mr. Wolff said at the time that he expected to continue to work for New York, but executives at the magazine said that they expected he would leave at some point after his public participation in the failed bid. Mr. Wolff said he had a year remaining on his contract but was worried that the transition in ownership to an owner he did not know would be a problem.
Caroline Miller, editor in chief of New York, said, ''We had a great ride, but we are going into a new chapter here, as is Michael, and I think it's pretty exciting for everyone.''
Mr. Wolff's column was called ''This Media Life'' and won a National Magazine Award in 2002. His new column will appear in the same magazine that publishes James Wolcott, another columnist who has won the National Magazine Award and also focuses on the media. Despite the possibility of a clash of two combative writers, Mr. Carter said he believed that the two columns were fundamentally different, with Mr. Wolcott focusing on what actually appears on the movie and television screen, and Mr. Wolff concentrating on how the media business drives and defines politics and business.
