A Staten Island fire captain who worked in the firehouse where a firefighter was critically injured in a brawl on New Year's Eve said yesterday that he was leaving the department.
The captain, Terrence M. Sweeney, was among six firefighters who had been reassigned to administrative duties earlier this month after the firefighter, Robert Walsh, was hit in the face with a metal chair by a fellow firefighter on Dec. 31.
Capt. Sweeney, head of Ladder Company 76 in Tottenville, and the five other firefighters were reassigned as part of an investigation into the assault and a suspected cover-up of the incident.
In a report last night, WNBC-TV said that Capt. Sweeney was retiring.
In a brief telephone interview last night, when asked if he was leaving the department, Capt. Sweeney said he was, but added that ''it wasn't my decision.'' He gave no further details, and it was not clear when Capt. Sweeney would leave.
Fire officials have said Capt. Sweeney was one of the firefighters who helped bring Mr. Walsh to the hospital on the night of the fight. Several days later, Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta said firefighters had initially given false accounts to doctors about how Firefighter Walsh was hurt.
Earlier yesterday, two veteran fire officers were suspended without pay after the police said they had been drinking in uniform in a Manhattan karaoke bar they were supposed to be inspecting, the Fire Department said yesterday.
The officers, Lt. Robert Doherty and Capt. Terence Walsh, face 90-day suspensions if convicted of departmental charges, said Francis X. Gribbon, a department spokesman.
Police officers who were called on Thursday night to the bar, Sing Sing Karaoke, on Avenue A in the East Village, caught the fire officers with beer, a law enforcement official said. It was not clear what prompted the call to the police.
Ray Noaki, the manager of Sing Sing Karaoke, said the two uniformed firefighters had been sitting by a large window in the bar, fully visible to passers-by. They drank at least four beers between them, he added.
The charges are the latest in a series of alcohol-related incidents involving firefighters. Earlier this month, two firefighters in East Harlem were suspended and four officers were reassigned after investigators doing a spot check found alcohol in a locker.
This month, Fire Department officials said that a lieutenant and two other firefighters from another firehouse had been caught in September drinking in uniform at a bar in Manhattan with their truck parked outside. They were suspended for 30 days without pay, the officials said.
In the latest case, Lieutenant Doherty, 44, a 19-year veteran, and Captain Walsh, 40, a 15-year veteran, were working in the department's Public Assembly Unit. Their duties included going to bars and restaurants and making sure that sprinklers were working and fire exits were not blocked, as well as verifying that the establishments had valid certificates of occupancy.
The lieutenant and the captain were at Sing Sing Karaoke to reinspect the bar, which had been found without a valid certificate of occupancy several months earlier, Mr. Gribbon said.
Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said yesterday that the police were called to the bar around 9:40 p.m. on Thursday.
A call to Capt. Peter Gorman, the president of the Uniformed Fire Officers Association, the union representing the two officers, was not returned yesterday.
Drinking in uniform is a violation of Fire Department rules, not the law. At a promotion ceremony for fire lieutenants on Tuesday, Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta reiterated the department's zero tolerance policy for drinking on the job.
