Carol Channing remembers it all: how she circled Tulane Stadium in New Orleans on a float at halftime of Super Bowl VI in 1972 and how she sang ''Hello, Louis'' as a tribute to her late friend Louis Armstrong.
''I knew it was a big deal,'' she said by telephone yesterday from Boston. ''Everybody knows the Super Bowl. Everyone was screaming. Somebody threw a silly little diamond bracelet at me. I loved it, just loved it, but it felt no bigger than the places David Merrick booked us in for 'Hello, Dolly.' I was thrilled.''
In 37 years of staging the Super Bowl, the National Football League's taste in halftime and pregame music has evolved, as has the need to augment the game with entertaining, promotable glitz.
Tomorrow night's show will feature Janet Jackson, P. Diddy, Kid Rock and Nelly -- no one with a serrated edge, but no one warbling from the Perry Como songbook.
John Collins, the N.F.L.'s senior vice president for marketing, declined to specify what the halftime show costs, but said, ''It's the most expensive 12 minutes in show business.''
In the late 1960's and through most of the 70's, the league's stodgy bookings veered sharply from the expanding youth culture. The bill was often filled with marching bands and drill teams, Woody Herman, Al Hirt and Up With People. In 2002, the last time the Super Bowl was in New Orleans, U2 rocked the Louisiana Superdome.
The N.F.L.'s musical impresarios might not be mistaken for Russell Simmons, but they realize the need to create a loud, noisy, memorable halftime spectacle, starring big names with the muscle to keep people from surfing to competitive programming and causing ratings to slip during the 23 minutes between the halves. The goal is to appeal to a broad spectrum of viewership with performers who can dominate a concert stage and to blunt programming that other networks might deploy, like this year's pay-per-view ''Lingerie Bowl,'' with two teams of models in short shorts playing football for 20 minutes.
''We're not the Grammys, so we don't have to reflect the current trends in the music business,'' Collins said. ''We don't have to push the envelope; we just need to be big, relevant and inclusive.''
Robert Thompson, a professor of media and television studies at Syracuse, said that the attempt to be musically broad-based will alienate some viewers.
''The Super Bowl is vulnerable only at halftime,'' he said. ''There is no musical act that cuts across the full demographic spectrum, so people will open a bag of Doritos during P. Diddy and go to the Lingerie Bowl.''
If the musical acts have grown more contemporary and popular as the promotion of the show becomes slicker, they have not become overly hip, the rock critic Robert Christgau said.
''It really hasn't been that much of an evolution,'' he said. ''They've always put on respectable pop music. Puff Daddy is respectable. U2 is respectable. Are they better than Up With People? You can say the hegemony of youth culture was not recognized back then. But U2 isn't that young. U2 started 25 years ago.''
For the second time in the last four Super Bowls, MTV is producing the halftime show, a complex technical venture that requires rapidly setting up the stage, then just as quickly taking it off the field at Reliant Stadium in Houston.
The mandate from the marketing-oriented league is clear, said Dave Sirulnick, an executive producer of of the show for MTV. ''Know who the audience is,'' he said. ''MTV is 12 to 24, and the N.F.L. is 18 to 80. It's a little bit different from what we do, but we know our role.''
There have been three distinct eras in the N.F.L.'s development as a halftime concert promoter. The period of marching bands, Carol Channing and salutes to the Caribbean, America's bicentennial and the Peanuts comic strip reflected an era when the league appeared to need filler between the second and third quarters.
The second entertainment epoch began in 1993 when Michael Jackson's performance, surrounded by 3,500 children at the Rose Bowl, produced a 45.5 Nielsen rating, above the game's 45.1 rating.
Jackson's appearance -- at a time when he was closer to his peak popularity -- provided a vivid reversal from the previous year, when a ''Winter Magic'' halftime extravaganza starring Gloria Estefan and the figure skaters Brian Boitano and Dorothy Hamill produced a rating that was 19 percent below the game's. That was the year when Fox counterprogrammed halftime with a live version of the network's sketch comedy ''In Living Color.''
The Jackson period featured artists as diverse as Clint Black, Diana Ross (who left Sun Devil Stadium by helicopter), Stevie Wonder, Phil Collins, Christina Aguilera, Smokey Robinson, Tony Bennett, Patti LaBelle and Phil Collins.
The newest era, now in its fourth year, started with MTV's first halftime, at Super Bowl XXXV, when Aerosmith's rock warhorses were paired with the then-immensely popular boy band 'N Sync, surrounded by thousands of fans on the field in Tampa, Fla.
''We thought Aerosmith was always up for something new, and maybe they would do something with 'N Sync, and do a rock meets pop,'' Sirulnick said.
In 2002, U2 performed before a backdrop with the names of those who died in the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks four months earlier.
The 2001 halftime show's halftime rated a 40.1, less than one percent below the game.
For the N.F.L. and its halftime producers, landing major artists and groups is easier than ever. Sirulnick said that everyone MTV asked to appear agreed to sing, although the league pays only expenses.
''Years ago,'' he said, ''before it got to the level of production it's at now, a lot of top-name artists were probably not as interested, even though it was a huge TV audience.''
One music industry executive said that with sales falling in most musical categories, record labels ''are dying'' to put their artists on a halftime show that can reach as many as 130 million viewers nationwide and five or six times as many worldwide.
''Artists realize that nothing can be this powerful,'' said the executive, who spoke on condition of anonymity. ''If they're asked, few would turn it down.''
The increased quality of the halftime show has been mirrored by an improvement in the entertainment shortly before the game, and interest in the pregame performances from the television networks. Two years ago, Paul McCartney performed, followed last year by Celine Dion and Carlos Santana. This year, the roster includes Aerosmith, Willie Nelson, Josh Groban and Toby Keith.
''The pregame had been something of a stepchild,'' said Rob Heller of the William Morris Agency, who has consulted to the producer of the segment. ''All of a sudden, instead of acts to entertain the in-house crowd, it's developed into a top-quality musical showcase.''
Channing said she would try to watch Sunday's game, but sounded a bit chagrined at the changes in scope and style at halftime since she performed in 1970 and 1972.
''Who,'' she asked, ''will be riding in on the float?''
PRO FOOTBALL
