A French court on Monday ordered Morgan Stanley to pay 30 million euros, or $38 million, to LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, ruling that research by the Wall Street bank defamed LVMH.
The case brought by LVMH contended that the luxury goods analyst for Morgan Stanley had issued biased research to help its investment banking client, the Gucci Group, LVMH's biggest rival.
The verdict said Morgan Stanley had made numerous errors. But the court mostly pointed to opinions that in the United States would be viewed as clearly within the proper realm of analysis even if the forecast implicit in those opinions turned out to be incorrect.
Critics of LVMH's suit had expressed concern that it would lead to analysts' being afraid to criticize any company, a point Morgan Stanley raised in saying it would appeal the ruling. But LVMH argued that analysts could now feel free to speak without being under pressure from investment bankers at their firm.
The court also said on Monday that Morgan Stanley might be ordered to pay more later after an expert determined what other damages LVMH had suffered. LVMH sought a 100 million euro award .
''The facts constitute a serious fault on the side of Morgan Stanley, to the detriment of LVMH,'' said Gilbert Costes, the top ranking judge of the Commercial Court of Paris. Morgan Stanley, he said, ''caused a moral and material prejudice to LVMH's image, which justifies reparations.'' He said the 30 million euro judgment covered the ''moral'' part of the damages. A tribunal of judges heard the case.
The judge said that Morgan Stanley's statements about LVMH, in analyst opinions and in interviews by company officials with reporters, included numerous errors and that the facts of the case constituted ''faute lourde,'' or an intention to do damage.
Stephan Newhouse, the president of Morgan Stanley, said the firm would appeal the ruling. ''Morgan Stanley believes this judgment is completely wrong and sets a dangerous precedent,'' he said.
''Research cannot constitute 'fautes lourdes' because it contains comments that are not positive, unless the giving of an opinion becomes in itself an offense,'' he said. ''The judgment has very serious implications in France for freedom of speech and analyst independence and threatens the very existence of analysts. This cannot be good for investors.''
He added: ''This opens the floodgates for companies to use the threat of legal action to persuade analysts only to make positive statements about them.''
The court's opinion noted concerns over conflicts of interest from research and investment banking operating under one roof. Morgan Stanley and other big Wall Street firms agreed in late 2002 to a $1.4 billion settlement with regulators over charges that analysts published misleading stock research.
In an interview, Oliver Labasse, a spokesman for LVMH, said analysts had no reason to be concerned over the court's ruling. ''We have never attacked the analyst, never,'' he said. ''We have attacked the deviant, biased behavior of Morgan Stanley, which in our view and in the tribunal's view today, did not respect the Chinese wall between the analysts' sector and the investment banking sector of the bank.''
Analysts, he said, should be pleased by the ruling. ''The analysts will have the ability to use the judgment today to say to the bank, 'Don't put pressure on me.'''
But Rick Levitt, a research manager at Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein, was more concerned. ''I think this is a Pyrrhic victory for LVMH and for French companies because it's going to make every major bank certainly think long and hard before expanding coverage of French companies, which is not a good thing,'' he told the Reuters news service.
The verdict on Monday is the latest development in a long-running feud between Gucci and LVMH, which is best known for its Louis Vuitton leather goods and its Moët &amp; Chandon champagne. LVMH, led by the French magnate Bernard Arnault, lost a bidding war of two and a half years for control of Gucci and agreed to sell its remaining Gucci shares to François Pinault, a French billionaire who had helped Gucci thwart Arnault's advances.
The judge said that Morgan Stanley had contributed to the failure of the LVMH bid.
LVMH sued Morgan Stanley, Gucci's banker, in November 2002, accusing its London-based luxury goods analyst, Claire Kent, of publishing unusually critical research notes about LVMH.
LVMH contended that Ms. Kent published biased research to benefit Morgan Stanley's investment banking relationship with Gucci. Ms. Kent has been ranked the top analyst in her sector for nine consecutive years by money mangers polled by Institutional Investor magazine.
Morgan Stanley filed a countersuit last May accusing LVMH and its chairman, Mr. Arnault, of instigating an ''unjust and abusive procedure'' against it and demanding 10 million euros in damages and the publication of a final court verdict, which it assumed would be in its favor, in 20 newspapers and magazines.
In court, LVMH argued that Ms. Kent's research caused irreparable harm to the company's image in the financial community. ''A hundred million euros is a small amount compared to the damage LVMH's image has suffered,'' a LVMH lawyer, Georges Terrier, told the court. ''The harm's been done because the worm's already in the fruit.''
He cited what he said were dozens of factual errors in Ms. Kent's reports and accused her of unjustifiably warning investors in a July 2002 report that a downgrading of LVMH's debt rating by Standard &amp; Poor's might be imminent.
Judge Costes said in the decision that he accepted LVMH arguments that a variety of opinions expressed by Ms. Kent, and other officials, constituted errors, including one that the Louis Vuitton brand had reached maturity. That, the judge said, could leave the impression that it was bound to decline.
Morgan Stanley, he found, was ''sorely lacking'' in its duty to be independent and was guilty of denigrating LVMH. ''Such behavior is not acceptable in a professional financial analysis firm of international reputation, which must constantly check and verify its information, taking into account the stakes for the investors and companies involved.''
Morgan Stanley was criticized by LVMH both for not highlighting its relationship with Gucci and for noting, in the fine print of its research reports, that the investment banking firm employed some former LVMH officials. The latter disclosure, the judge found, could have led an investor to conclude, erroneously, that ''anything that Morgan Stanley said about LVMH, notably about its faults and weaknesses, could only be true.''
