A 12-year-old boy was fatally injured by a car in Brooklyn last night, the police said.
The victim, Nysean Gayle of 417 Ocean Avenue, died at Kings County Hospital Center at 9:35 p.m., the police said. Another boy, also 12, suffered minor injuries in the accident.
The boys walked onto Bedford Avenue from between two parked cars near the corner of Parkside Avenue in Prospect Lefferts Gardens about 6 p.m., the police said.
A 2001 Ford sedan, traveling south on Bedford Avenue, hit the boys, the police said. The driver, who stopped, was not charged, a police spokesman said.
The accident happened a day after a driver in another fatal pedestrian accident surrendered.
That driver, who struck and killed a man on Park Avenue on the Upper East Side Saturday night, abandoned his sport utility vehicle nearby and continued with a planned trip to Atlantic City, taking a bus from Manhattan, the police said yesterday.
The driver, identified as Gurpreet Oberoi of Queens, was arrested about 3:30 a.m. yesterday, several hours after he returned, the police said.
Mr. Oberoi, 26, was charged with leaving the scene of a fatal accident, unauthorized use of a vehicle and driving with a suspended license, the police said.
Two friends who had been with Mr. Oberoi in a green 1999 Chevrolet Suburban registered to his father, remained in Manhattan and went to the 34th Precinct station house in Washington Heights in the hours after the death, the police said.
Later, after being urged by the police, the two called Mr. Oberoi in Atlantic City, told him they had talked to investigators and persuaded him to return and talk to the police.
He returned by bus about 1 a.m. yesterday and surrendered to the police, the authorities said.
The man who was killed, Peter Hornbeck, was on his way to a bar with several friends about 11:45 p.m. Saturday when he was struck crossing Park Avenue at East 96th Street, the police said. Mr. Oberoi was driving north, the police said.
Mr. Hornbeck was dragged for about a block. The car sped away without slowing and the Suburban was found a little while later at Lexington Avenue and 100th Street, the police said.
Mr. Oberoi's license, according to motor vehicle records, was suspended four times, for speeding and for failing to pay fines and failing to answer a summons.
Mr. Hornbeck moved into his apartment about eight months ago, according to the superintendent of his building, Juan A. Nieves.
''He loved this neighborhood,'' Mr. Nieves said.
