Jason Kidd is the Nets' franchise player and Kenyon Martin and Richard Jefferson are the complementary forwards, a triad around which the Nets have built back-to-back conference championships. A lesser-known starter is shooting guard Kerry Kittles, but as Kidd said after practice Monday: ''We go to the next level when Kerry plays well. It is like a sixth gear.''
In the last four games, Kittles has averaged 17.5 points, well above his season average of 12.7, and made nearly 54 percent of his shots. His teammates have noticed those statistics, especially the three victories, and they want Kittles to shoot more.
''We try to tell him to forget that last pass,'' Kidd said. ''I'd like his shot attempts go up even more.''
At 11 shots a game, Kittles has taken fewer shots than Kidd, Martin or Jefferson in the Nets' 35 games this season.
The reserve guard Lucious Harris said, ''I always tell him, you should be getting 15 to 20 shots a game.''
But that does not seem to be Kittles's nature. Asked his response to Harris's prodding, Kittles said, ''I tell him to go in and do the same thing.''
Nets Coach Byron Scott said Kittles's impact on games can often be decisive.
''Kerry has flown under the radar,'' Scott said. ''But he's our quiet assassin. We're a pretty tough team when he's going well. I want him to be aggressive. I want him to go out and find his shot.''
Kittles is also among the team's best defenders, but with an invariably low-key demeanor, he draws far less attention than the Nets' big three of Kidd, Martin and Jefferson.
''That's O.K. with me,'' Kittles said. ''I don't need the stories or the commercials. People who know the game know I can influence the game. I don't ask to be in the spotlight.''
But should Kittles maintain his roll, there will be no avoiding it, and he will continue to be a growing focus of the offense.
''We all know what Kerry can do for us,'' Kidd said. ''We will find ways to keep him involved.''
That's something even Kittles acknowledged. ''They're always telling me to shoot the ball,'' he said. ''Obviously, if you're making them, your teammates are going to find the hot hand.''
REBOUNDS
The arraignment of EDDIE GRIFFIN, accused of felony aggravated assault with a deadly weapon, has been postponed in Houston from Wednesday until Jan. 20. A separate hearing will also take place Jan. 20 over a marijuana possession charge filed against Griffin in April. Griffin was released by the Houston Rockets last month and signed by the Nets. (AP)
BASKETBALL
