MANY years ago, so far back that ''orange alert'' meant your Uncle Maury was returning from Florida with a crate of citrus fruit, Jules Feiffer drew a cartoon strip about poverty. It was a series of ''talking head'' panels, each with the same man. He used to be poor, he said.
But someone told him that ''poor'' was defeatist. He was, instead, needy. Then another person came along and said ''needy'' was no good. Our man was ''underprivileged.'' So he went around being underprivileged, until someone else said he should really think of himself as ''disadvantaged.''
He still didn't have a dime to his name, the man finally said.
But he was building a heck of a vocabulary.
That old Feiffer strip came to mind the other day with word that the city pound, formally known as New York City Animal Care and Control, planned to give pit bulls a makeover. Think of it as ''Clear Eye for the Stray Pup.''
An obvious problem with pit bulls is that their very name does not exactly inspire universal confidence or affection. So Animal Care and Control, a nonprofit agency that works with the city's health department, decided that a new label -- and perhaps with it a new image -- was in order. Thus was born the ''New Yorkie.''
Faster than you could say Rin Tin Tin, New Yorkers made clear that they thought this the most misbegotten idea since jalapeño soda. Their growls reached Ed Boks, the animal control agency's executive director. In short order the New Yorkie as an idea was, if you will, put down.
''It was a hot-air balloon to see how people would react, and we've pretty much scrapped it,'' Mr. Boks said. ''It sort of misfired. It turned more into a distraction than anything else.''
Perhaps it was inevitable that the suggested name change would invite derision. This is a city where people are ready to boo their own grandmothers if they feel the situation calls for it. Mr. Boks may not have seen the Bronx cheers coming because he had arrived here only recently, from Arizona.
His intentions were honorable. Each year, his agency arranges for the adoption of 11,000 animals; cats and dogs reign. But 35,000 others, including nearly 6,000 pit bulls, have to be killed, though the approved word is the much nicer-sounding ''euthanized.''
Mr. Boks (''rhymes with jokes'') wants to bring that number down to zero in five years. ''It may take longer,'' he said, ''but there's a lot to be said for deadlines.''
INDEED. We know from deadlines. But there is simply no accomplishing what he wants without persuading more people to take a dog or a cat home. With that in mind, he figured that giving pit bulls a cuddlier name would be one way to give them a leg up.
They're really not as bad as many think despite their reputation as child-killers, Mr. Boks said. In the right hands, he said, a pit bull can be as personable as any breed. It's when drug dealers and other ne'er-do-well owners enter the picture that bad things happen to good dogs.
Although his tactic backfired, it was no different from what many people do when faced with what might be called a branding problem. Movie producers sometimes reissue a poorly received film under a new title in the hope that it will not bomb a second time.
Some leading hip-hop labels altered their names recently to clean up their misogynist, violence-prone reputations. Murder Inc., for example, now calls itself The Inc. Another label, Death Row, recast itself as Tha Row. Tha reason for tha changes is plainly to bring in more dollaz.
Government has long been a leader in rebranding. In Edward I. Koch's first term as mayor, his budget people proposed ''service delivery system consolidations.'' That was what they called school closings. Under Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani, welfare offices became ''job centers.''
Long before that, prisons were turned into ''correctional facilities'' and their wardens became ''superintendents.''
And politicians of all stripes have never been eager to acknowledge that they preside over economic decline. Rather, they experience ''negative growth.''
After all that, labeling an animal with image troubles a New Yorkie doesn't sound so absurd.
Maybe Mr. Boks would find less resistance if he renamed not the dogs but the owners. He could call them ''heroes.'' The word is already so overworked that stretching it a bit further would be barely noticed.
Better yet, ask Jules Feiffer if he has any thoughts. He's proved himself to have a keen ear for an enriched vocabulary.
NYC
