After months of criticizing President Bush and contributing millions of dollars to organizations that oppose his policies, the philanthropist George Soros said on Monday that he believed three of the Democrats running for president -- Howard Dean, John Kerry and Gen. Wesley K. Clark -- could generate enough support to defeat Mr. Bush in November.
''There is no doubt about Howard Dean's abilities and qualities for being president,'' Mr. Soros said after giving a speech at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace sharply critical of the administration's foreign policy. ''Other candidates are also qualified. I'm also a great advocate of Clark and Kerry.''
All three, he said, had views very similar to his own. ''I'm not picking one particular candidate,'' he added, ''but I am keen on Dean.''
Mr. Soros, 73, a billionaire businessman who has spent liberally over the years to help democratize closed societies has recently turned his political focus toward home. He is concentrating on Mr. Bush for foreign policies since the 2001 attacks that he contends have distorted American values, alienated other countries and made the United States less safe. He has donated millions of dollars to several organizations whose prime goal is defeating Mr. Bush in November.
Until Monday, though, Mr. Soros had not publicly expressed a preference for any of the nine Democrats running for president. In responding to questions after his speech, he had especially kind words for Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont.
In his speech, which echoed themes of his just-published book, ''The Bubble of American Supremacy'' (Public Affairs Books), Mr. Soros asserted that the Bush foreign policy was based on two premises: that ''the United States will not tolerate any military rival globally or in any region of the world, and, second, we have the right to engage in pre-emptive military action.''
Such an approach, he said, exempts the United States ''from any constraint imposed by international law,'' ultimately making the country less safe and less capable of fostering free and open societies around the world.
The Democratic Contributor
