Representative Christopher Shays, the state's most prominent Republican politician and a longtime friend of embattled Gov. John G. Rowland, called on the governor Monday to resign.
''He has lost the trust of the people,'' Mr. Shays said. ''And he does not want to work to restore that trust.''
As he started an emotional news conference here, Mr. Shays took a deep breath and then outlined his history with Mr. Rowland stretching back two decades, saying this moment was especially painful because it meant the loss of a friend.
The announcement came on the same day that six more Republican state senators said Mr. Rowland's resignation would be in the best interest of the state. Eleven out of 15 Republican senators have now called for him to step aside after he admitted taking gifts from people who are the subject of a federal corruption investigation.
The governor's support among the public also continued to erode, with a new poll showing that 63 percent of residents believe he should resign and 56 percent saying an impeachment process should begin if he refuses to step aside. The poll, by the University of Connecticut, surveyed 601 residents and has a margin of error of 4 percentage points.
Dean Pagani, Mr. Rowland's chief of staff, said after the news conference, ''The governor was elected to a four-year term, and he is going to complete that.'' Mr. Rowland, a Republican, was elected to his third term in 2002.
Mr. Pagani said the governor ''thinks the federal investigation is the best path to the truth.''
A friend who spoke to Mr. Rowland before Mr. Shays's news conference, but after it was clear that the congressman would call for him to step down, said the governor was resolute in his determination to try to vindicate himself. ''It's a war and we are going to win it,'' the friend reported Mr. Rowland telling him. The friend spoke on the condition that he not be identified.
Mr. Rowland's aides said they expected him to begin making appearances around the state. The goal would be to appear with mayors who support him.
But even as the people around the governor continue to insist that he will remain in office, the bad news has kept on coming. Mr. Shays seemed to recognize as much in his news conference on Monday. ''There is a feeling of a bit of piling on, and I am becoming a part of it,'' he said. ''But I am not prepared to stand by a governor, even a friend, who has done wrong, lied about it, and then refused to account for his actions.''
Mr. Shays became the second of the three Republican representatives from Connecticut to call for Mr. Rowland's resignation. Representative Rob Simmons called for his resignation over the weekend. Nancy L. Johnson, the third representative, said Monday night that she supported a legislative inquiry but did not call for him to step down.
Mr. Rowland has admitted lying about accepting free work and gifts at his cottage from people who did business with the state. Many of those people are at the center of a federal corruption investigation.
Mr. Shays said the issue was not just a matter of what was done at the cottage. He cited a pattern of conduct stretching to 1999, when Paul J. Silvester, the former state treasurer appointed by Mr. Rowland, pleaded guilty to corruption charges.
Mr. Shays said that before the appointment, he and the governor were told that Mr. Silvester was a ''bad guy.'' When Mr. Silvester's malfeasance became public, Mr. Shays said he was willing to give Mr. Rowland the benefit of the doubt. But, he said, as the scandals mounted and even Mr. Rowland's deputy chief of staff pleaded guilty to accepting cash and gold bribes, he found himself asking, ''Why is that happening?''
He added: ''Will I be surprised when more things come out? Absolutely not.''
The congressman's public call marks a turning point in a relationship that began when he and Mr. Rowland served together as state representatives in the early 1980s.
Mr. Shays met with Mr. Rowland several weeks ago and said he laid out a series of steps the governor needed to take to restore trust after his admission that he lied. Most important, Mr. Shays said, the governor needed to be candid with the press to the point where it might look ''absurd.'' Mr. Shays added that he had called the governor on Friday to tell him of his decision but that Mr. Rowland had not returned the call.
Asked how his friend got to this point, Mr. Shays said, ''My own theory is that he trusted very few people.'' He added: ''It is almost a bunker mentality.''
Mr. Shays tried to convey the pathos of Mr. Rowland's fall from favor. ''He is so respected in Washington,'' he said. ''He has a wonderful relationship with the president of the United States.''
Mr. Rowland's aides say he remains the chairman of President Bush's state re-election campaign, but party operatives said any public role for Mr. Rowland was in doubt.
Mr. Bush is expected to appear at a fund-raiser in Greenwich at the end of the month, but where once Mr. Rowland would most likely have stood by the president's side, the party official said, ''I don't think they will want him there.''
Within the state Republican Party, there seems to be increasing division. Mr. Shays called for the state party chairman, Herb Shepardson, to resign if he continued to offer only uncritical support of the governor. Mr. Shepardson shot back by insinuating that Mr. Shays's constituency was Democrats, not Republicans.
While there has been little partisan rancor about Mr. Rowland's predicament, Mr. Shays recognized that some people might take pleasure in twisting the knife at this moment and could even see his statement as a betrayal.
''There is a little bit, as I walk into this room, of 'And you too, Brutus.' ''
