Steven T. Florio, chief executive of Condé Nast Publications, home to magazines like Vogue and Vanity Fair, will step down next month after 10 years overseeing the publishing company, the company announced yesterday.
He will be succeeded by Charles H. Townsend, chief operating officer of both Condé Nast and the Advance Magazine Group, which runs the back-office functions for all the magazine divisions within the parent company, Advance Publications.
Mr. Florio, one of the more outsized personalities in the magazine industry, has had an occasionally tense relationship with his idiosyncratic and critical boss, S.I. Newhouse Jr., chairman of Condé Nast Publications and co-chairman of Advance Publications. In addition, Mr. Florio has had health issues in recent years, and three senior executives at the company said Mr. Newhouse was increasingly uncomfortable with Mr. Florio's health-related absences.
Mr. Florio, 54, said his desire for a less hectic lifestyle, and not his health problems or Mr. Newhouse's urging, led to his decision to step down. He said that after a recent talk with Mr. Newhouse he decided it was time to relinquish his sometime 18-hour days as chief executive and assume the role of vice chairman of the Advance Magazine Group, where he will work on special projects and strategic planning.
Mr. Townsend, 59, who as the head of the Advance Magazine Group had already been in charge of Condé Nast's circulation, finance, technology and shared services departments, now adds Condé Nast's advertising sales and corporate marketing to his portfolio. Although he works for a hands-on owner -- Mr. Newhouse often arrives at work before dawn and begins going over reports from the various publications -- Mr. Townsend will soon control everything, save editorial functions, at the second-largest magazine company in the United States.
And if he has any say about it, Condé Nast will not be No.2 behind Time Inc. forever.
''I think that we are the only ones who have the ownership and the financial wherewithal to stand up to Time Inc.,'' Mr. Townsend said.
He said that Condé Nast planned to expand the publications it already had, start others and buy still others.
''You can't be a boutique publisher in this age,'' he said. ''After making the transition into the big leagues a few years ago, I think that we have a growth-based destiny.''
The magazine industry has undergone significant consolidation in the last decade, with bigger publishers gobbling up independents and midsize magazine companies. Time Inc., for example, bought the men's sports and leisure publications of Times Mirror Magazines in 2000. And Mr. Townsend arrived at Condé Nast in 1994 after the company he ran, the women's magazine division of The New York Times Company, whose holdings included Family Circle and Child, was sold to Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing.
After serving as publisher of Condé Nast's Glamour, Mr. Townsend was named executive vice president in 1995. He took on the chief operating officer role at Condé Nast in 2000 and became chief operating officer at Advance Magazine Group in 2001.
Several other executives at the company had been seen as candidates for Mr. Florio's job, including Mary Berner, chief executive of Fairchild Publications and Mitchell B. Fox, chief executive of the company's golf magazines unit, but Mr. Newhouse said that Mr. Townsend was an easy choice for the job.
''Chuck has been such a part of the management of the company that it is not much of a stretch to appoint him,'' Mr. Newhouse said. ''I think that there is another factor as well -- after Steve's extraordinary strengths as a marketer, it seemed important to have somebody whose strength are in the administration and general business of publishing.''
Ms. Berner said that the company executives, most of whom, including her were hired by Mr. Florio, would have an easy time adapting to Mr. Townsend's quieter version of leadership.
''He is a really good strategist, a big-picture thinker who knows where all of the moving parts are,'' she said. ''He already knows and has the respect of all of the publishers here.''
Mr. Florio, who took over as chief executive in 1994 after serving as the senior business executive at The New Yorker, is known as an aggressive salesman with a rhetorical set to match. In 1998 Fortune magazine suggested that ''even his supporters acknowledge that in Florio's hands, truth is a fungible commodity.'' Mr. Florio told the magazine he ran Condé Nast as if it was a public company, but the profit margins according to Fortune were below 8 percent.
The company is private, so accurate figures are hard to come by, but senior executives have said the company has improved its profit margins since the Fortune article, and in fact enjoyed a record year last year.
The company has also become much bigger during Mr. Florio's tenure. The Condé Nast unit published 13 titles when he took over, according to Mr. Florio; and it will have 18 when Cargo, the company's new shopping magazine for men, begins publishing this spring.
New magazines that Condé Nast started or acquired in the last decade include Wired, Lucky and Teen Vogue. One newcomer, Condé Nast Sports For Women, folded after several changes in focus, while the long-running Mademoiselle closed during Mr. Florio's tenure.
At last month's holiday lunch, Mr. Newhouse was lavish in his praise of Mr. Florio, and a party to celebrate his tenure is scheduled for next week's meeting of the company's publishers in Florida.
Mr. Florio said that the timing seemed right to move on.
''I have 18 direct reports, I am out every night, I have to travel to Europe all the time and I am in here at 6 a.m. every morning,'' Mr. Florio said. ''I asked for a lunch with Si and told him that I was interested in a change in lifestyle and he asked me to serve as vice chairman and report directly to him, which is an opportunity that I am really excited about.''
''I have had this job 10 years, been here 25, and this Christmas, he gave me the only compliment I had had the whole time I have been here,'' Mr. Florio added. ''We've just had the biggest year in our history and I am celebrating my anniversary, so it all seemed right.''
Correction:  January 22, 2004, Thursday  An article in Business Day on Jan. 13 about plans by Steven T. Florio to step down as chief executive of Condé Nast Publications misstated the timing of his successor's arrival there. The successor, Charles H. Townsend, headed the women's magazine division of The New York Times Company but joined Condé Nast in 1994, before -- not after -- that division was sold to Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing.
