President Bush announced plans on Monday to expand high-technology cooperation with India significantly, and possibly to ease export restrictions, but only after India strengthens controls to keep sensitive materials in the proper hands.
In a statement in Monterrey, Mexico, Mr. Bush called the plan ''an important milestone in transforming the relationship between the United States and India.''
He said the proposal was directed toward three areas: civilian nuclear activity, with an emphasis on safety and regulatory issues; civilian space programs and peaceful uses of space technology; and improved conditions for trade in sensitive technologies. He also said Washington and New Delhi would broaden a dialogue on missile defense.
Mr. Bush signaled his satisfaction with India's efforts in fighting terrorism, saying his offer was the fruit of a ''strategic partnership'' that was laid out in November 2001.
''We are working together to promote global peace and prosperity,'' his statement said. ''We are partners in the war on terrorism and we are partners in controlling the proliferation of weapons of mass destruction and the means to deliver them.''
The actions proposed have been eagerly sought by the government of Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee and his predecessors, stretching back nearly two decades, in the belief that development depended on greater access to advanced technology and engineering.
But India has distressed Washington by failing to guard against the re-export of some high technology to other countries, including Iraq, American officials say. In 1998, when India exploded nuclear devices and Pakistan followed suit, Washington scaled back its cooperation and urged other countries to do so.
Officials at the Indian Embassy in Washington were not available for comment. An announcement in New Delhi is expected Tuesday.
A senior State Department official, in a briefing for reporters, conceded that details were scant. He said it would take several months, and possibly years, for the plan to take full effect.
The official emphasized that most of the initial action would have to come from India, which must first reassure Washington that high-technology materials would not be misused or re-exported.
The guarantees could come through legislation and enforcement to protect sensitive materials in India, the official said.
''What we're offering is contingent on specific steps'' by India, he said.
The administration will not offer India any help with its nuclear weapons or missile programs, the official said. It will also continue to restrict access to items of significant advantage in war, including space-launch vehicles and high-resolution, remote-sensing devices.
In the long run, American officials envision working closely to ensure the safety of nuclear reactors, selling certain sophisticated tools that are currently blocked, even working with Indian officials to build a commercial satellite.
The plans to advance relations came a week after India announced that it would resume peace talks with its archrival, Pakistan, but American officials insisted the United States gesture had been in the works for many months and should not be seen as a ''reward'' for trying to re-establishing talks.
