Two powerful interest groups, health workers and hospitals, are proposing an audacious and costly effort by New York State to cover one million people without health insurance and modernize hospitals. The proposal would be financed by a tax on businesses that do not insure their workers and by a billion-dollar state bond act.
The plan by 1199/S.E.I.U., the health care workers' union, and the Greater New York Hospital Association comes at a time when the powers in Albany are vowing to rein in health care costs and not to raise taxes. The proposal, which would require changes in state law approved by the Legislature and the governor, is certain to draw criticism from conservatives in government and influential business lobbying groups.
But the union and the hospitals are a formidable political force in New York, with a history of spending millions of dollars on advertising, lobbying, phone banks and campaign contributions to bend lawmakers to their will. In the past, they have won approval from Gov. George E. Pataki and legislators in both parties for major expansions of state health care programs and state spending.
The core of the plan is what in Albany has been called play-or-pay, a $3,000 tax on employers for each worker they do not insure, with a smaller levy for small businesses that pay low wages. No state imposes such a tax of any significant size, health care advocates say. Some of the money would be used to increase the number of people in New York's state-subsidized health plans like Medicaid, Family Health Plus and Healthy New York, which together already constitute the most expansive such system in the country.
Hospital and union officials, who control a multimillion-dollar lobbying fund, said they would use it to begin an advertising campaign in the next few weeks to promote their plan, a tactic they have used to great effect in the past. ''We will do whatever it takes to educate New Yorkers of the benefits of this initiative,'' said Dennis Rivera, president of 1199/S.E.I.U.
The plan calls for the sale of $1 billion to $2 billion in state bonds, possibly through a November ballot question, to provide low-cost loans to New York's financially troubled hospitals. The proposal puts some broadly worded restrictions on that money, saying that it would be used, for example, to make hospitals safer and more efficient.
It calls for the state to relieve New York City and the counties of their contribution to the Family Health Plus program, a fast-growing burden that local governments complain is forcing them to raise taxes. It also gives subsidies and tax breaks to businesses that already insure their employees. The aid to counties and businesses is meant, in part, to win allies in what will surely be an uphill legislative battle.
''It is the boldest initiative we've ever undertaken,'' said Kenneth E. Raske, president of the hospital association.
The plan's authors say that aides to Mr. Pataki and legislative leaders were briefed on it last week, and the authors intend to go public with it this week.
Reaction from the Capitol yesterday was cautious. John McArdle, chief spokesman for the Senate's Republican majority, noted that the majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, had worked with Mr. Rivera and Mr. Raske in the past, and that they had pledged to help the Senate curb the cost of Medicaid, the government health plan for the poor. One obvious area of agreement, he said, is a state takeover of the counties' share of Family Health Plus, which covers low-income adults who do not qualify for Medicaid.
''At this point, I would just say we're looking at their plan, and we share the same goals here and we get there in different ways,'' Mr. McArdle said.
The governor's office did not return calls seeking comment.
Charles Carrier, chief spokesman for the Assembly's Democratic majority, would say only, ''The Assembly is reviewing it.''
The National Federation of Independent Business, the main lobbying group for small businesses, vehemently opposed the plan. ''A lot of these companies don't even show a $3,000-per-employee profit, so if you hit them with a $3,000-per-employee tax, you put them under, you bankrupt people,'' said Mark P. Alesse, director of the New York arm of the group.
He disputed a contention by Mr. Rivera and Mr. Raske that the tax would persuade many employers to begin providing insurance.
But Clifford R. Donaldson, Essex County manager and president-elect of the New York State Association of Counties, embraced the proposal. ''We believe that every New Yorker, regardless of ability to pay, deserves access to health care, and we also welcome anything that recognizes that counties can no longer afford to pay such a big share of that effort,'' he said.
The $3,000-per-employee assessment would be reduced, on a sliding scale, for businesses that have 25 employees or fewer and pay workers less than about $27,000 a year. Under the plan, the state would also pay 20 percent of the cost for a small business to buy worker coverage.
The people Mr. Raske and Mr. Rivera hope to cover are mostly the working poor. More than 3 million of New York's 19 million people have no health insurance. Of those, about 2 million have jobs or are supported by people who work. Most of those families have low incomes, but not so low that they would qualify for Medicaid or other government programs.
''We're talking about getting at more than half of them, more than one million,'' Mr. Raske said.
The state adds taxes to hospital bills to help pay for care for the uninsured so that, in effect, employers who cover their workers help carry the weight of those who do not. Lowering the number of uninsured would allow the state to significantly reduce those charges.
In recent weeks, the talk of health care in the Capitol has been about restraining the rising cost of Medicaid, which has become the biggest piece of New York State's budget. Last month, the Senate Republicans unveiled a detailed plan to curb Medicaid expenses. Mr. Pataki, a Republican, is expected to propose his own Medicaid trims when he unveils his 2004-5 budget this month.
The goals of curbing Medicaid costs and a major new program to cover the uninsured are not necessarily contradictory, but they point in opposite directions, philosophically and fiscally.
From anyone else, a plan like that put forward by 1199 and the hospitals could be dismissed as pie in the sky, especially in a weak economy. But officials in Albany say their track record requires a serious look at the proposal.
In 1999, the two groups proposed raising the state cigarette tax to pay for creation or expansion of several programs for the uninsured. The plan was at first viewed as a long shot, but the union and the hospitals spent $10 million on ads promoting it, they threatened to spend more to attack politicians who stood in their way, and they got what they wanted.
Two years ago, the state faced a budget deficit, and health care cuts were expected. Instead, 1199 and the hospital association persuaded lawmakers to approve the conversion of Empire Blue Cross and Blue Shield to a profit-making company, and to devote much of the resulting windfall to hospitals, to pay for workers' raises.
In return, 1199, a historically Democratic union, supported the re-election of Mr. Pataki and many Republican legislators.
