Ever since the Spirit rover touched down on Mars on Jan. 3, workers have been arranging rocks of various sizes on a test field here to match the terrain in the latest pictures of the landing site. Before, the ''sandbox,'' as they call it, was a field of dreams. Now, a duplicate rover is rehearsing the first actual maneuvers of the most capable robot ever to traverse the surface of another world.
Early Thursday, if all goes well, nearly four years of design, development and practice driving here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory and on deserts something like Mars will be put to the ultimate test. The 400-pound, six-wheel Spirit is to ease down a ramp from its landing base. Let the exploration begin.
Of all the scientists and mission officials at the control center here, none will be following Spirit's first moves with more of a sense of personal responsibility than Dr. Mark W. Maimone. He is a computer scientist and robotics specialist who, other scientists say, is the laboratory's architect of the software for the rover's operations.
''He's the man of the hour when the rover goes to work,'' said Dr. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell, the principal science investigator for the mission.
Dr. Maimone has been preparing for this moment since 2000. Scientists told him they wanted a rover that could drive up to 300 feet a day. It had to be able to follow an itinerary sent each day to its computer by flight controllers, but also make on-the-spot decisions when faced with obstacles. At a distance of more than 100 million miles, meaning that round-trip radio signals take almost 20 minutes, Mars was too far away for ground controllers to do the driving.
His instructions, Dr. Maimone recalled, were ''to make the rover smart and able to sense on its own its surroundings, the slope of terrain and any hazards in its way, which rocks to drive over or avoid.''
Other engineers were designing and building Spirit and its twin, Opportunity, scheduled to land on the opposite side of Mars on Jan. 24. Each is about 5 feet long, the size of a golf cart. The only previous rover sent to Mars, Sojourner in 1997, was 2 feet long and 22 pounds.
The new rover has metal wheels designed to make tight turns. The undercarriage holds a computer and other electronic controls. Extending from the body is a mechanical arm for reaching out to examine a rock or patch of soil in microscopic detail.
Above that are broad panels of solar cells to produce electricity to drive the motor and other systems. On the top deck are the main antennas for communications, a mast mounted with cameras for panoramic and three-dimensional photography and a set of remote-sensing scientific instruments. The mast and cameras were developed at Cornell, and two of the spectrometers for analyzing rocks and soil were supplied by Germany.
The rover's ''eyes'' are four tiny cameras, two in front and two behind, that scan the immediate surface for hazards. What it sees is communicated to the on-board computer, which Dr. Maimone and a team of engineers have programmed with what-to-do instructions for all the contingencies they could think of.
The system was put to repeated trial runs here and in the Mojave Desert, resulting in numerous software modifications. The rover never ran off a cliff it came to and in time, when instructed to drive from one point to another, it proved able to find the safest and shortest route on its own. It went around any rock more than eight inches high and proceeded cautiously when going over a rise into terrain beyond what flight controllers had seen in photography.
In the weeks ahead, the driving team of engineers and computer specialists will work closely with scientists to plan each day's journey. After studying pictures and data of the previous day's progress, scientists must decide where they want the rover to go and what they want it to do next. The driving team will translate the plan into specific commands to be radioed to the rover.
''We will tell the rover to go to point xy and stop at this or that rock along the way for a set amount of time to use the robotic arm or perform other scientific tests,'' Dr. Maimone said. ''We won't know how successful it was until we hear from it when the day's travels are complete and it transmits a report in data and pictures.''
Spirit is expected to spend only four hours exploring in the middle of each Martian day. Scientists and engineers at the control center are envious.
''This rover has a good deal,'' Dr. Maimone said. ''We humans spend 20 hours a day planning and analyzing, and Spirit only has to spend a few hours on its job.''
Scientists on the $800 million mission have high expectations but are well aware of the challenges.
''You think of these vehicles being robot field geologists,'' Dr. Squyres said. ''You go to a place with clues of interesting things, and the challenge is: how well and how much can you do through the eyes of a robot millions of miles away.''
One advantage, Dr. Squyres noted, is the rover's superhuman qualities. Not only can it go where humans have yet to travel, but some of its instruments, like the infrared spectrometer, can see things human vision cannot. For example, he said, it can look hundreds of feet ''across the plain and see a rock and know its mineralogy without going over to it or bringing it back to a laboratory to do the analysis.''
For the first week or so, Spirit will not wander far. It will concentrate on testing the stability of the surface and gathering chemical and mineralogical data on the nearest rocks. Only then will it be sent on longer excursions across the undulating plain and possibly to the low hills on the horizon.
''We don't have our Martian driver's license yet, so we are going to take it nice and slow,'' Dr. Squyres said.
