President Bush won strong support on Monday for his plan to overhaul the nation's immigration system from President Vicente Fox of Mexico, who called it ''a very important step forward for many Mexican workers in the United States.''
For his part, Mr. Bush acknowledged that politics played a part in his proposal to offer legal status to millions of illegal workers, but he said that did not undercut the merits of his plan.
''Yes, there's politics involved,'' Mr. Bush said in a joint news conference with Mr. Fox in this bustling commercial center in the Sierra Madre, where the two were meeting at a conference of 34 leaders from the Western Hemisphere. ''And there will be politics probably involved in whether or not it passes Congress. But the reason I proposed the initiative is because it is the right thing for America to do.''
Both leaders used the occasion to make up publicly after their split over the war in Iraq, which was opposed by Mr. Fox, once one of Mr. Bush's closest friends among world leaders. Mr. Bush essentially said here that the argument was past.
''Vicente Fox is a good enough friend for him to be able to express his opinion to me without the loss of friendship,'' Mr. Bush said as he stood with Mr. Fox during the news conference, at the Quinta Real Hotel. ''And he didn't agree with the decision I made. But the decision I made was the right one for America.''
The immigration plan is critical to the domestic politics of both men. For Mr. Bush, it offers an opportunity to appeal to the Hispanic voters who are essential to his success in the election this year. For Mr. Fox, it offers an opportunity for realizing part of a long-held goal to help Mexican migrants.
''This has been a priority of the Fox administration, and they have made that clear,'' said Tony Garza, the United States ambassador here. Midway through Mr. Fox's six-year presidency, much of his domestic agenda -- tax, fiscal, energy and social reforms -- has been stalled by his opponents in Congress and his own political failings. He badly needs a victory, and may have a better chance in the United States Congress than at home.
Mr. Bush said he did not see his proposal as a simple offer of legal status to Mexicans who had broken American laws, which is the view of many conservatives in Congress. Under the plan, an illegal immigrant would have to have a job and a sponsoring employer to apply for legal temporary worker status in the United States. He reiterated Monday that temporary workers would be expected to return permanently to their home countries after their work period expires.
''This plan is not amnesty,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I oppose amnesty because it encourages the violation of our laws and perpetuates illegal immigration.''
Mr. Bush's trip here to Monterrey, in the northern state of Nuevo León, about 150 miles from the border city of Laredo, Tex., is his fourth to Mexico since he took office. During the news conference, he invited Mr. Fox and his wife to visit his ranch in Crawford, Tex., on March 5 and 6.
As the summit meeting formally began Monday evening, the nations still had no agreement on a declaration that is supposed to be issued by their leaders on Tuesday. Such texts are usually agreed upon well in advance. The lack of a statement indicated the depth of disagreement among the leaders.
The United States wanted the summit meeting to set a goal of 2005 for a hemispheric free-trade zone, the Free Trade Agreement of the Americas. It would include the 34 members of the Organization of American States, whose economies together total $11 trillion. Cuba is not included.
But not even Mr. Fox, nor Canada's leader, Prime Minister Paul Martin, thought that was realistic. This conference, Mr. Fox noted, was not called to discuss free trade.
The conference presents Mr. Bush with the opposition of what amounts to a ''new left'' in South America, led by President Néstor Kirchner of Argentina and President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil. Those leaders see the world through their nations' own wrenching experiences with the free market.
Brazil has urged other countries to refuse to ratify a conference declaration including free trade unless Mr. Bush addresses the United States' $20 billion in annual farm subsidies.
Another thorn in Mr. Bush's side in Monterrey is President Hugo Chávez of Venezuela. He lashed out at the very idea of formal dinners and conferences among world leaders.
''While we, the presidents, go from summit to summit, our people go from abyss to abyss,'' he said in an interview with a local television station. ''These summits are social gatherings -- we fly, we say hello, we share one or two meals, we sign a paper, we have a photo taken, and that is all.''
Whether the nations would have a paper to sign remained in some doubt on Monday night.
Another stumbling block emerged. Some leaders objected to an effort by the United States to oust nations deemed to have corrupt governments from the Organization of American States and ban them from future meetings.
Mr. Bush separately issued an order barring people deemed corrupt from entering the United States.
The United States would equate corrupt governments with undemocratic ones. The question is who decides who is corrupt. The proposal faced ''a lot of resistance,'' said Bill Graham, the foreign minister of Canada.
''All countries have corruption,'' he said. ''Who will decide whether a country is invited or not?''
