In a surprise move Monday, the Miami Dolphins named Dan Marino, their former star quarterback, as the team's senior vice president for football operations.
Marino, 42, has worked as a football analyst for CBS and HBO, having retired from the Dolphins in early 2000 after a record-setting 17-year career. He was never mentioned by the Dolphins as a candidate in their two-week search to find someone to head their football operations, and he has no front-office experience.
Rick Spielman, the previous senior vice president for football operations, has been named general manager, a position that Coach Dave Wannstedt has, in effect, been filling.
Wannstedt -- who survived widespread calls for his firing after the Dolphins missed the playoffs for the second straight season -- and Spielman will report to Marino, who will work directly under the team's president, Eddie Jones.
But club officials stressed that Spielman would have the final word on all player personnel decisions, especially the draft.
The Dolphins recently announced they would take away Wannstedt's responsibility to select free agents and draft picks, leaving him to concentrate on coaching.
''A lot of things you do in life you do with a gut feel, and I think this is one of those things,'' the Dolphins' owner, H. Wayne Huizenga, said at the team's training facility.
''Something just tells me this is the right thing to do,'' Huizenga added.
The club interviewed seven candidates, including Spielman, before choosing Marino, who threw for 61,361 yards and 420 touchdowns, both N.F.L records.
Almost certain to be elected to the Pro Football Hall of Fame when he becomes eligible in 2005, Marino acknowledged that he faced a challenging ''learning curve'' in becoming as skilled as a football executive as he was as a quarterback. Yet he shrugged off the idea that only a few high-profile former athletes have made a successful transition to the front office.
''It's a big step for me, but I feel at this time in my life it's the next step I want to take,'' he said. ''It's going to be an evolving process as I learn all I can and try to help this team any way I can.''
Asked at a news conference Monday whether he might be perceived by some as a figurehead, Marino flatly rejected that notion, and Huizenga was incensed by it.
''I take issue with that question,'' Huizenga said, seizing the microphone from Marino.
''Here's a guy that's on CBS television. They gave him 4 jillion dollars to work there. He's not going to quit a job like that to come here for someone to say it's a figurehead job. This is serious business. We're trying to win. Whether you think it's serious or not, this is not a figurehead position. Really, I don't like even suggesting that.''
Jones, the Dolphins' president, cautioned not to discount Marino because he has no front-office experience.
''Talking with him over the last few days, it's clear that he takes that knowledge that he got on the field beyond that,'' Jones said. ''He has a real feel for the game and I think that's going to translate into helping the organization.''
Marino said he had talked to Huizenga on numerous occasions about rejoining the team in some capacity, and discussions intensified over the weekend. He said he finally accepted the post Monday morning.
''People ask me why I would take a job like this where there's some risk involved,'' Marino said. ''Because you have to take risks to get results, and my reward would be to be involved in a great organization.''
Despite his passing skill, Marino never won a Super Bowl. He acknowledged that this was among the reasons he found this job so appealing.
''Let me tell you,'' he said with a smile, ''I've thought about that a lot and maybe this is a way I can get the opportunity.''
Marino will stay with CBS until after the Super Bowl on Feb. 1 in Houston.
PRO FOOTBALL
