An investigation by USA Today into the accuracy of reporting by Jack Kelley, a foreign correspondent who has reported for the newspaper since its inception more than two decades ago, has concluded that he ''repeatedly misled'' editors during the inquiry but has not resolved whether he falsified information in his articles, according to a draft of an article that the newspaper was preparing for publication today.
Mr. Kelley, whose byline appeared in the first edition of USA Today in 1982, and who later filed articles from 90 countries, according to a biography supplied by the newspaper, resigned last Tuesday.
The editor of USA Today, Karen Jurgensen, provided no reason for his departure at the time. But the draft of the article said Mr. Kelley resigned after his editors discovered that he had ''set in motion a plan to deceive them'' as they sought last year to fact-check a 398-word article that he submitted from Yugoslavia in July 1999.
In that article, which appeared on the front page and carried a Belgrade dateline, Mr. Kelley reported that United Nations war crimes investigators had discovered a ''Yugoslav army, three-ring notebook'' that contained ''a direct order to a lieutenant to 'cleanse''' a village near the city of Pec in Kosovo, an ethnic Albanian majority region.
After receiving an anonymous complaint last summer about possible embellishments or falsifications in Mr. Kelly's reporting, his editors became dubious of the Yugoslavia account, as well as of several other articles. These, according to The Washington Post, included a report in 2000 in which Mr. Kelley accompanied nine Cubans as they tried to leave Cuba by boat.
When pressed about how he came to see the Yugoslav Army documents, the draft of the article said, Mr. Kelley offered two different accounts. One involved a single translator, while the second involved two translators who assisted him in interviewing a human rights activist in Belgrade.
But when the human rights activist ''could not remember talking to Kelley,'' the reporter ''appears to have arranged for a woman who had worked for him on other assignments to pose as one of the translators.''
The maneuver was foiled with the assistance of a private investigative firm hired by the newspaper. The firm compared a tape recording of a conversation between Mark Memmott, a USA Today reporter investigating Mr. Kelley's work, and the supposed translator to another tape recording, this one of an interview with ''a woman Kelley had hired years before, when he was on assignment in Russia,'' according to the draft of the article. ''The two voices matched,'' the article said.
Mr. Kelley, who could not be reached for comment last night at what was thought to be his home number, was quoted in The Washington Post on Sunday as saying he had ''panicked and used poor judgment'' during the inquiry.
The departure of Mr. Kelley, 43, a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize in 2002 for his reporting on terrorism, comes after a year in which allegations of journalistic malfeasance drew wide attention, particularly the case of Jayson Blair, a reporter for The New York Times who was found to have fabricated or plagiarized passages in at least three dozen articles. Over the last week, the talk of Mr. Kelley's situation has riven the newsroom of USA Today in northern Virginia.
In interviews yesterday, half a dozen reporters and editors, each speaking on the condition of anonymity because they said they feared alienating top editors, said they had experienced a range of emotions, including anger after reading his admission in The Post article.
The draft of the article contained excerpts from a statement that Mr. Kelley sent to USA Today, expressing regret for ''the mistake I made during the course of this investigation'' and asserting that ''people who truly know me realize that this mistake is inconsistent with my history.''
The article also quoted Mr. Kelley as saying that ''in 21 years I have never had a correction or retraction printed.''
But a reporter who was part of the investigation was able to find at least one correction: an acknowledgment by the newspaper, published on Nov. 27, 2001, that Mr. Kelley had erroneously reported that Gen. Tommy R. Franks, then head of the United States Central Command, had been in the Marines.
While the draft of the article said USA Today editors had yet to find evidence that any of Mr. Kelley's other articles contained falsifications and needed to be corrected, it quoted Ms. Jurgensen, the top editor, as saying that the matter ''is not settled.''
Mr. Kelley's company-supplied résumé reads somewhat like an anthology of foreign correspondence, recounting how he had covered ''all major overseas conflicts and events since 1990.''
Reporting on the Israeli-Palestinian conflict in 2001, Mr. Kelley drew perhaps the most direct attention -- writing a first-person, front-page account about how a last-minute change in lunch plans had spared his life when a suicide bomber struck the restaurant where he planned to dine.
Mr. Kelley's byline last appeared in the newspaper in October.
Reached early last evening, a spokesman for USA Today, Steven Anderson, declined to comment on what the article might say.
