After a night of poor sleep, what could be more enticing than a nap the following day? But for insomniacs, even napping is difficult.
''Insomnia patients, when you give them a nap opportunity during the day, they can't fall asleep, even though they say they are tired,'' said Dr. Michael H. Bonnet, professor of neurology at Wright State University School of Medicine and director of the sleep laboratory at the Dayton Veterans Affairs Medical Center.
The observation is one piece of evidence that it is not just everyday worries that keep people from getting a good night's sleep. Dr. Bonnet said he believed that insomnia had a physiological component and that insomniacs tended to be hyper-aroused, accounting for their difficulty in napping.
Studies by him and others show that compared with sound sleepers, insomniacs have higher heart rates and body temperatures, as if they were in danger and preparing to fight or flee.
''Their furnace is turned up higher than control individuals,'' he said.
Dr. Bonnet simulated insomnia in healthy young sleepers by giving them the caffeine equivalent of 12 cups of coffee a day for a week. By the end of the week, they had become more anxious, as shown on a personality test. Some researchers suggested that lack of sleep caused the anxiety.
But Dr. Bonnet did another experiment involving healthy sleepers who did not take caffeine but were awakened every time an insomniac in the next room woke up, so that the sleep patterns were identical. At the end of the week, the healthy sleepers had not become more anxious. And they were able to fall asleep faster than insomniacs could.
Dr. Bonnet said he concluded that it was the body's arousal, from the caffeine in the first experiment, that had caused the anxiety, not the lack of sleep.
Not everyone supports the physical cause theory, however. Some believe insomnia is caused by worries about daily life. Others, like Dr. Michael L. Perlis, an associate professor of psychiatry and director of the sleep research laboratory at the University of Rochester, say that if worry is keeping people awake, it is worry about not being able to sleep.
Some people, Dr. Perlis said, ''say you are awake because you are worrying.''
''I would say you are worrying because you are awake.''
Dr. Perlis said he thought insomnia was caused by a conditioned response that produces changes in the brain or central nervous system. After a while, he said, merely walking into the bedroom is enough to cause brain activation. ''You're going to walk in that room and you're going to wake up,'' Dr. Perlis said.
Some people undergo behavioral therapy to treat their insomnia. To make sleep more likely at night, they are told not to compensate for lost sleep by going to bed earlier or napping. To associate the bedroom with sleep only, they are told not to watch television in bed and to leave the bedroom if they wake during the night and cannot get back to sleep.
Dr. Charles Morin, professor of psychology at Laval University in Quebec, found in an oft-cited study that patients getting behavioral therapy did better in the long run than those taking sleeping pills because the effects of the pills wore off after they stopped taking them.
''With medication we tend to get quicker results, but with behavioral therapy we get longer-lasting benefits,'' Dr. Morin said. But neither therapy works that well, he added. ''Very few people actually become good sleepers with treatment.''
