If you happen to tour the Eisenhower historic site here on a Friday afternoon, chances are that your guide's badge will read ''M.D.'' That is because the 85-year-old tour guide was Dwight and Mamie Eisenhower's physician.
When William North Sterrett retired as a family practice doctor in his native central Pennsylvania in 1990, he decided to volunteer his time at the Eisenhower home and farm, which he had visited so often as a physician. The staff quickly realized that it had a natural tour guide on its hands.
The Eisenhowers originally bought 189 acres adjacent to the Civil War battlefield in 1950. They rebuilt the existing house in 1955 and used the property intermittently while they lived in the White House. Gettysburg became their home when they left the White House, in 1961.
In 1980, a year after Mrs. Eisenhower's death, the National Park Service opened the historic site, which includes the couple's modified Georgian farmhouse, a barn built in 1887 and a putting green from the 1950's.
For Dr. Sterrett, who prefers to be called North, volunteering is a way to keep alive his connection to the Eisenhowers. Born in rural Mifflintown, Pa., he graduated from the University of Pennsylvania Medical School in 1943. After a brief internship and some military training, he was assigned to the 32nd General Hospital Unit, spending the end of World War II in Osaka, Japan.
It was there, in 1945, that Dr. Sterrett first met General Eisenhower, who as the commander of Allied Forces in Europe had just defeated the Nazis. The general was visiting the Pacific theater, where the war against the Japanese was still going on.
After the war, Dr. Sterrett returned to Pennsylvania, setting up a medical practice in Arendtsville with his brother-in-law. As was typical of family practitioners then, he covered a large area, making house calls, delivering babies and treating multiple generations.
At the end of 1960, Dr. Sterrett received a telephone call from Dr. Harold Johnson, a Gettsyburg physician. Dr. Johnson had been asked to become the primary physician for the Eisenhowers when they moved to Gettysburg. He had agreed, but wanted help. He chose Dr. Sterrett.
The doctors knew a lot about Eisenhower's medical history, and so did the rest of the country.
In 1955, in his first term, Eisenhower had suffered a heart attack. Although his physicians originally tried to conceal what had happened, Eisenhower disagreed, instructing his press secretary, James C. Hagerty, to ''tell them everything.''
Eisenhower's case, in contrast to the illnesses of Presidents Woodrow Wilson and Franklin D. Roosevelt, set a new standard for disclosure. Indeed, discussion of intimate details, like the president's bowel movements, made some people squeamish.
Eisenhower suffered two other major illnesses in his presidency. In 1956, he underwent surgery for an obstruction caused by Crohn's disease, an inflammation of the intestines. In 1957, he had a small stroke.
But his health remained reasonably good for the rest of his term. And from 1961 to 1965, Dr. Sterrett recalls, things were quiet, and he was able to address a series of chronic disorders.
For example, Eisenhower was under strict orders to eat a bland diet for his Crohn's disease. But one morning Dr. Johnson called Dr. Sterrett to tell him that Eisenhower was experiencing great discomfort in his abdomen. The physicians immediately made a house call and found their patient in severe pain.
As Dr. Sterrett recalls, they asked the former president what he had eaten for dinner the previous night. ''Pig knuckles and sauerkraut,'' Eisenhower quickly replied, knowing full well that he had violated the rules.
When Dr. Johnson asked him why he had done it, Eisenhower was equally forthright. '' 'Cause I like it, darn it!'' he declared. The problem soon went away.
Another major concern was Eisenhower's heart. In the 1960's, the risk factor model for preventing heart disease was first gaining popularity. Dr. Sterrett knew that he might avoid another heart attack by controlling his patient's hypertension and getting him to stop smoking.
Eisenhower did take his blood pressure pills but cigarettes were another matter. Although Dr. Sterrett pointed out the growing evidence that smoking caused heart attacks and lung cancer, Eisenhower continued his habit.
At some point, Dr. Sterrett stopped pleading. When you're talking to a five-star general, he confesses, ''you don't usually tell him what to do.''
Given his relatively good health in the early 60's, Eisenhower remained very active, traveling around the globe, maintaining an office at nearby Gettysburg College and playing golf.
But in 1965, he was admitted to Walter Reed Hospital in Bethesda, Md., for more heart problems. By this point, he was beginning to develop congestive heart failure, in which water accumulates in the body. Dr. Sterrett treated him with diuretics to remove the fluid.
The doctor also recommended bed rest and a low-salt diet. As was typical, the active and opinionated Eisenhower did not follow orders.
By the last year of his life, Dwight Eisenhower was in and out of Walter Reed, where doctors tried to manage his worsening heart disorder. He died there on March 28, 1969, at the age of 78.
Dr. Sterrett remained as Mamie Eisenhower's physician for the next 10 years, and succeeded in getting her to stop smoking.
Mrs. Eisenhower remained quite healthy until September 1979, when she suffered a major stroke. Dr. Sterrett found her in bed, where she customarily did her writing and directed the household. As usual, her husband's half of the bed was full of books, which Mamie kept there to feel less lonely.
Once again, Dr. Sterrett had to send an ailing patient to Walter Reed. Mrs. Eisenhower died there on Nov. 1, 1979, at 82.
Dr. Sterrett makes his presentation to tour groups in the Eisenhowers' living room. He points out interesting furnishings, like a marble fireplace that was once in the White House, a black lacquer coffee table from South Korea and a silk Tabriz rug that was a gift from the Shah of Iran.
Visitors then tour the home by themselves, viewing, among other things, a series of oil paintings by Eisenhower and the temporary office he used while recovering from his 1955 heart attack. In the entrance hall is Mamie Eisenhower's guest book, which visiting dignitaries and grandchildren alike were obligated to sign.
Dr. Sterrett says that he has no plans to let his age stop his volunteer work. Caroline Sterrett, his wife of 54 years, notes that her husband is always in a great mood on Thursday nights, anticipating the next day's duties.
Colleagues at the Eisenhower site love to listen to Dr. Sterrett's presentations. ''It's been very beneficial to have a volunteer who knew them so well,'' a park ranger, Richard Lemmers, said.
When visitors learn that he was the Eisenhowers' doctor, they occasionally pry for extra details. But he is careful to respect doctor-patient confidentiality, only discussing illnesses that are part of the public record. ''If people ask too many questions,'' he said, ''I tell them that it is none of their business.''
Even though the Eisenhowers were his patients, Dr. Sterrett also remembers them as friends. When he is asked what they were like, he does not hesitate in answering, ''Both were good, down-to-earth Gettsyburg citizens.''
Correction:  February 6, 2004, Friday  An article in Science Times on Jan. 13 about the recollections of a physician for President Dwight D. Eisenhower and his wife, Mamie, misstated the year Eisenhower met the doctor, William North Sterrett. It was in 1946, not at the end of World War II in 1945.
