Shares in Adecco, the world's largest employment-services company, plunged Monday morning after the company said that problems with accounting and financial controls would force an indefinite delay in its 2003 profit figure.
At the low in Swiss trading, the stock was down 48 percent, but it recovered some of its losses later on and ended with a loss of 35 percent, falling 28.8 Swiss francs to end at 53 Swiss francs, or $43.40.
In an interview Monday, Adecco's chief financial officer, Felix Weber, said the company's announcement made the problems sound worse than they were. In a statement released before the Swiss market opened, Adecco said that it had found ''material weaknesses in internal controls in the company's North American operations of Adecco staffing.''
The statement added that Adecco was also looking into ''possible accounting, control and compliance issues in the company's operations in certain countries,'' which it did not identify, and that its results would be published once all of these issues had been resolved.
An independent lawyer, who was not identified, was appointed by the board's audit and finance committee to conduct an investigation, the company said.
Mr. Weber, the chief financial officer, said the problems should not be seen as accounting irregularities, the view taken by many analysts and news reports.
''It doesn't mean you have irregularities, but that the control environment is not so good,'' Mr. Weber said, referring to the company's statement. ''It's not a question of mistakes, but a question of judgment,'' he added, speaking from the corporate headquarters in Wallisellen outside Zurich.
''We wanted a delay due to a change of audit approach and due to material weaknesses identified,'' he said. ''Because of this, we have ordered an audit and review of compliance in other markets,'' he added, saying the checks in other countries were spot-checks rather than complete reaudits.
''We do not feel comfortable that we can rely on the control environment in the U.S.A.,'' he said.
Adecco was formed in 1996 when Adia of Switzerland was merged with Ecco of France. It acquired Olsten in the United States in 2000 in a $1.6 billion cash and stock transaction.
Adecco was audited until 2001 by Arthur Andersen, which collapsed in the wake of the Enron scandal. It was audited in 2002 by Ernst &amp; Young, which gave Adecco a clean opinion and said that it complied with United States accounting rules. Ernst will conduct the reaudit in New York.
Adecco's shares trade on the New York Stock Exchange, as well as in Switzerland. In later New York trading, American depository receipts, representing a quarter share, were down almost 26 percent, or $4.37, to $12.56.
Last fall, Adecco reported that its United States operations had run into operating headwinds, but it was not clear Monday whether those problems played a role in the control issues the company cited.
In its third-quarter financial release, it said that United States sales rose 4 percent in dollars but were down 9 percent in euros. The company said that ''profitability was again affected by higher costs for workers compensation and unemployment insurance.'' It added that ''operating costs have been further reduced, but these reductions do not cover the loss of gross margin.''
A large shareholder in Adecco, Klaus Jacobs, a former co-chairman of the company whose son now serves on Adecco's board, reported to the Securities and Exchange Commission last week that a company controlled by his foundation sold shares in December.
The company, KJ Jacobs A.G., reported selling 78,938 shares in the Swiss stock market from Dec. 2 through Dec. 15. The shares sold for the equivalent of $8.3 million, or $3.1 million more than they were worth at the Zurich close on Monday.
In a telephone interview, the chief financial officer of KJ Jacobs, Daniel Pfister, said that he had made the decision to sell the stock, which he said was a small part of the overall position. The filing said KJ Jacobs owns 21.9 million shares, or 11.8 percent of the company.
Asked why the shares were sold last month, Mr. Pfister replied, ''We don't comment on our investment decisions.''
That same S.E.C. filing reported that KJ Jacobs had transferred 6.39 million shares to members of Mr. Jacob's family. Ekkehard Kuppel, the chief executive of KJ Jacobs A.G., said the transfer had long been planned and took place on Dec. 12 because that was the 18th birthday of Mr. Jacobs's youngest daughter.
He declined to say if the family members had since sold any shares. The block transferred to them in December was worth $645 million at the time. It was worth $414 million at Monday's closing price in Zurich.
Mr. Weber said that Adecco had an opinion on when the company would issue its delayed 2003 results, but he said he could not give it because he did not want to pressure the auditors as they went over the company's North American accounts again and double-checked Adecco audits in other countries.
Asked who was responsible for Adecco's weak control or accounting environment, Mr. Weber said, ''It goes right down from the C.E.O. to regional management.''
Mr. Weber said that he regretted that analysts and investors appeared to have misinterpreted Adecco's statement. He said the wording had been determined by the company's United States lawyers, who wanted to assure it complied with rules of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
Earlier, an Adecco spokeswoman in Zurich, Vanessa Muir, said that neither she nor anyone else at the company was authorized to comment at this stage ''because of legal restrictions.'' But Mr. Weber broke the company's silence.
In the interview, Mr. Weber said the problems disclosed on Monday were unrelated to an incident two years ago, when analysts said the company appeared to have overstated profits.
Ronald Wildmann, head of Swiss equity at Bank Leu in Zurich, said that in the first quarter of 2002 ''there were some fears that accrual adjustments were credited back'' to the profit-and-loss statement, he said. ''As a result the worry was that the published increase in gross margin was probably overstated.''
Mr. Wildmann said that Mr. Weber explained at the time that it was just a timing issue between quarters and in the end, Mr. Wildmann and other analysts accepted Adecco's assurances that this was a one-time issue of relatively little importance.
