Martin Brodeur has done the math. The Devils could be a .500 team the rest of the season and still make the Stanley Cup playoffs, he said. They would have 93 points. The Islanders got in last season with 83.
Then Brodeur stopped and smiled. The Devils? A .500 team?
''That's probably not going to be acceptable for us,'' he said.
No, probably not.
With three Stanley Cups in nine seasons, the Devils have set such a high standard for themselves that scratches on the door are regarded like front-end collisions. A two-game losing streak -- the Devils have had two this season -- is almost a calamity.
''Were trying to finish as high as we can and be at our best,'' defenseman Scott Niedermayer said Monday. ''If you get too comfortable where you are, you'll get into a funk, where we've been.''
As much as the Devils (21-10-9-1) have scuffled -- they were 2-3-2-0 in their first seven games and are 3-4-2-1 in their last 10 games -- they still have the same number of points, 52, they had after 41 games last season.
They have a 13-game unbeaten streak this season, and they did not go more than nine games without a loss last season. Had General Manager Lou Lamoriello been offered 52 points at midseason in, say, September, he would have grabbed them.
As puzzling as the Devils' 1-4-1-0 stretch had been before a 1-0 victory Saturday over Toronto, the victory over the Maple Leafs, the top team in the Eastern Conference, seemed to burn off some of the fog, as far as Lamoriello is concerned.
''We have not been playing well, but having said that, I have to be extremely pleased with the way we played in Toronto,'' Lamoriello said Monday. ''We did the little things that make us successful -- the things that we had been slipping in.''
Lamoriello makes sure to mention that the needle on his barometer moves a lot. He likes the makeup of his team, and he feels as if the Devils can win another Stanley Cup without making a trade -- or two.
''If there's an opportunity to get better, no matter what we have right now, you'd have to do that,'' he said.
The Devils have scored 97 goals in 41 games, the same number as in the first 41 games of last season. Their defense, despite the retirement of Ken Daneyko and the addition of the rookies Paul Martin and David Hale, is actually stingier.
''I couldn't be more happy with them,'' Lamoriello said of Martin and Hale.
The Devils have allowed 74 goals through 41 games this season; after 41 games last season they allowed 83. Brodeur already has nine shutouts, as many as he had last season. He has never had more than 10 in a season.
The Devils have never been a glamorous team. Pat Burns, their eternally grumpy coach, pointed out recently that the Devils encountered the most problems when they have tried to be too fancy. The Devils are net-crashers.
''We wanted to make the easy play at the blue line and try to thread the needle with a pass through the zone and try to make the play on the other side, and it simply wasn't working,'' Burns said after a 4-1 loss to Tampa Bay last Friday.
On the other hand, they have had legitimate reasons for not doing better. They have been playing short-handed. ''We have not had a full team for a long time,'' Lamoriello said.
Right wing Jamie Langenbrunner, perhaps the Devils' best player in the first 21 games, has missed the last 20 games after an operation on his left knee. He is expected to return to the ice this week to resume training, but he has been hampered by the flu.
The Devils say they look forward to having a full lineup again, merely to see how good this team really is. There is still no collective bargaining agreement in place for the 2004-5 season, and this season could be the last run for the veteran nucleus of this team.
''We might not have a next year,'' Brodeur said. ''This is a year of your career, and you don't play until you're 50 in this game.''
HOCKEY
