On the way to setting team records and earning a Pro Bowl selection, running back Stephen Davis carried the Carolina Panthers to legitimacy this season. The Panthers finished first in the National Football Conference South and reached the N.F.C. championship game in no small part because of Davis.
Now there is concern that Davis will not be available Sunday when the Panthers play at Philadelphia for the chance to reach the Super Bowl for the first time in franchise history. Davis pulled a quadriceps in his left leg Saturday in a 29-23 overtime victory in the N.F.C. divisional playoff at St. Louis on Saturday. He left after a 64-yard run in the second quarter, finishing with 86 yards on 6 carries.
Panthers Coach John Fox said Davis, who rushed for a team-record 1,444 yards in the regular season and 190 yards in two playoff games, would be questionable against Philadelphia.
''Typically, you just kind of start treatment on it and play it by ear day to day,'' Fox said Monday during his weekly news conference. He did not speculate on how long Davis could be out.
''Everybody's different,'' Fox said. ''The degree of the pull, the particular player and how they handle injuries, there's no 100 percent right diagnosis.''
Davis had 115 yards against Philadelphia in their regular-season meeting, a 25-16 victory by the Eagles on Nov. 30 at Ericsson Stadium. If he is unable to play Sunday, the Panthers will rely on the backup DeShaun Foster, who replaced Davis against St. Louis and finished with 95 yards on 21 carries.
That was the second time this season Foster became the primary running back after Davis was injured during a game. He rushed for 85 yards in a victory at Indianapolis on Oct. 12.
Foster also started two games while Davis was injured, rushing for 56 yards on 22 attempts against Tampa Bay and gaining 76 yards on 21 rushes against Detroit. Foster was inactive against Philadelphia during the regular season because of a broken hand.
''Certainly we'd love to have him,'' Panthers quarterback Jake Delhomme said of Davis, ''but both games he's gotten hurt in, DeShaun has stepped in and done a good job and we won those. We want Stephen back there, but if not, we feel DeShaun will do a pretty good job.''
Meanwhile, Fox's confidence in place-kicker John Kasay has not wavered. Kasay faltered in the previous meeting with the Eagles, missing three field goals and an extra point in that 9-point loss. It was only the third time in Kasay's 13-year career that he had missed that many field goals in a game.
''He did struggle against Philadelphia,'' Fox said. ''He'd be the first one to tell you. It's part of being a professional athlete. You're going to have struggles. He dealt with them, he fixed them. I think he's been outstanding for us since, and we're expecting him to be outstanding as we go forward.''
Kasay had hit 15 field goals in a row and was 3 for 3 against St. Louis before missing his final two attempts. He hit the left upright on a 53-yard attempt in the fourth quarter and was wide right on a 45-yarder that would have won the game in the first overtime period. That came moments after Kasay had nailed a 40-yard field goal for an apparent victory. It was waved off by officials, who penalized the Panthers 5 yards for delay of game.
Fox was still looking over that penalty Monday. He said that the officials were late getting a ball on the field and that perhaps the 25-second clock should have been reset.
''I was pretty disappointed the first one didn't count,'' Fox said. ''It was right down the middle. That's something we're working through now as far as the delay of game. But it's hard to go through a season and not miss one. Like a quarterback, it's hard to go through a season without missing a pass. I wouldn't trade him for anybody else.''
PRO FOOTBALL
