Nobody questions Michelle Wie's talent, or her potential as a golfer. Wie is 6 feet tall with a lean athletic build, drives the ball close to 300 yards and already has a top-10 finish in an L.P.G.A. major championship. Last year, at age 13, she became the youngest golfer to win an adult United States Golf Association title, capturing the Women's Amateur Public Links Championship.
Professionals who have seen her play marvel at her ability.
''She has probably one of the best golf swings I've ever seen, period,'' said Davis Love III, one of the world's best players.
But at age 14, is Wie taking on too much, too soon? That is a question being posed to Wie, and her parents, as she prepares to compete in the PGA Tour's Sony Open in Hawaii on Thursday.
Though the Tour does not keep official age records of competitors, Wie is believed to be the youngest player to compete in a Tour event, and the youngest girl. Wie is following in the footsteps of Annika Sorenstam, who became the first woman in 58 years to play a PGA Tour event last year, when she captured the country's attention while missing the cut at the Colonial in May. Suzy Whaley also played on the PGA Tour last year, when she missed the cut at the Greater Hartford Open.
Wie, a ninth grader at Punahou School in her native Honolulu, gained entry into the Sony on a sponsor's exemption, and the presence of a 14-year-old girl competing against players like the defending champion, Ernie Els, Vijay Singh and Love has fans and players buzzing about this event like never before.
Just as Sorenstam's decision to compete against men created strong opinions, so has Wie's. While Wie believes she can make the cut at the Waialae Country Club Course that she has played numerous times, others are concerned that taking too many early lumps against superior competition could hurt her long-range development. She did poorly against professional men twice last year, missing the cut on the PGA Tour's developmental Nationwide Tour, and on the Canadian Tour. Now she is setting her sights on the world's best Tour.
Wie's father, B. J., finds it absurd to think that playing this week could damage his daughter's future. And he does not appreciate those who have already stereotyped him as a pushy father, trying to capitalize on his daughter's talent.
''It's easy to think that way, because pop music stars' parents are pushing them,'' B. J. Wie said at last week's Mercedes Championships. ''Michelle is living a very normal life. My strong philosophy is that as long as she is playing golf as an amateur, not playing for money, she can play on any level, on any tour. She's lucky to get all these invitations. We have to take advantage of it. What if she refused to play the Sony Open? That's a waste of an opportunity.''
But would Wie be better served learning to dominate on the amateur level before competing against professional men? Tiger Woods thinks so. Woods took seven sponsors' exemptions during his amateur career; Wie has already taken eight. Concentrating on his amateur career, Woods won three consecutive U.S.G.A. junior amateur championships, followed by three consecutive United States amateur championships. Meanwhile, Wie has yet to win the U.S.G.A. junior girls championship, or the United States women's amateur championship.
''I think it's pretty neat that she's playing,'' said Woods, who will not compete in the Sony. ''But I also look at the philosophy, too. You need to play and win, too, learn the art of winning. My dad was a big believer in that. I didn't go nationally until I was playing well enough to win consistently at the junior level in my own Orange County.''
Michelle Wie admires Woods but disagrees with his theory.
''I certainly think winning helps, but I think winning one big thing helps more than winning 10 small junior tournaments,'' she said last week, after competing in the Mercedes Championships pro-am. ''Once you win junior tournaments, it's easy to win multiple times. What I'm doing now is to prepare for the future.''
Those concerned about Wie's emotional and social development have not spent much time around her. She is intelligent and charming, with maturity far beyond her years. Watching Wie socialize at a tournament party last week, joking with her parents, conversing easily with adults who were eager to meet her, she was the picture of contentment, a happy teenager.
But even Sorenstam cannot imagine doing what Wie will be doing at age 14. Sorenstam was already established as the best women's player in the world when she played at the Colonial. But at age 14, Sorenstam was not sure she would become a professional golfer.
''I started playing golf when I was 12,'' Sorenstam said at the Mercedes last week. ''I didn't break 70 until I was maybe 16 or 17. I can't relate to what she's going through, but I can relate to what it feels like to play in a PGA event. With all the experience I had, I thought it was tough. If she's just going through this to learn, she's going to learn a lot. But it's not going to be easy. She's jumping into the lion's pit.''
Sorenstam also made it clear that she was supportive of Wie. She was impressed by Wie's ability last year when they played together at the Nabisco Championship, and Sorenstam hopes that Wie realizes her full potential.
''Go out there and enjoy it,'' Sorenstam said she told Wie about this event. ''She's 14 years old. I think everyone understands what a fantastic player she is. Give her a break, let her have fun and enjoy it.
''She has a different approach. I don't know if it's her approach, or her parents' approach. Who knows what the right approach is? She's obviously come a long ways already, so they're doing something right.''
Despite Wie's familiarity with Waialae, many players do not give her much of a chance to make the cut, particularly if the Hawaiian winds blow severely during the tournament. If Wie struggles to break 80, many players do not think she will gain confidence from the experience.
''You know, I don't know, I wish her all the best,'' Singh said. ''If it was my son, I think I'd teach him how to win. You know what I mean? You put young kids out there to learn how to win golf tournaments. For Michelle, she's going out there and she's not winning. It's always negative when you don't win. You need to win golf tournaments. She's not going to do that playing against the men.''
But to the Wies, winning is not the point this week. It's the experience. Wie plans to play a practice round Tuesday with Els, and she will gain knowledge from being around the world's best players, competing in their environment. Wie believes she can make the cut if she plays her game, but she is not afraid of finishing poorly.
''There was a poll that 70 percent of the people think I'm going to miss the cut,'' Wie said. ''So if I miss the cut, no one's really going to be sad. Only me. I don't think there's really a negative side to this. It's what I want to do, and people can't really judge.''
Wie plans to play six L.P.G.A. events on sponsor's exemptions this year, and if she gets other exemptions on the PGA Tour, either this year or in the future, she plans to accept them. Some people felt Wie played too much last summer, but she disagrees.
''I think I'm pretty normal, aside from this,'' Wie said. ''I go to school. I'm not tutored. I'm not home-schooled. Burnout doesn't really concern me right now, because if I think about burnout, then I'm already burned out. People say I'm too young. But the difference between girls and boys is that girls mature faster.''
So Wie continues to dream, and dream big. She talks of one day playing on both the L.P.G.A. and the PGA Tours. She insists that she plans to attend college, probably Stanford, before turning pro. She talks of becoming the first woman to play in the Masters.
Playing this week is part of Wie's dream and, she hopes, a glimpse into her future. So ready or not, Wie is looking forward to her PGA Tour debut.
''I've always wanted to play in the Sony Open,'' Wie said. ''It's like a dream come true.''
GOLF
