A Sportswear Talent Steps Up
Until this month, Pina Ferlisi was one of fashion's best-kept secrets. She was the designer of Tommy Hilfiger's first women's line in 1995 and the creative talent behind the debut of Marc by Marc Jacobs, Mr. Jacobs's young-in-spirit secondary line, in 2000. Now Ms. Ferlisi will claim the limelight for herself: as designer of a new sportswear collection for Gap.
Ms. Ferlisi, 38, is not the first fashion talent to be accorded star billing by Gap. In a surprising reversal of long-standing policy, the company, which once kept its designers' identities as closely guarded as that of a C.I.A. field operative, has been vigorously promoting a roster of new designers, each with an impressive pedigree. On that list is Louise Trotter, a Calvin Klein veteran who is now vice president for women's design, and Steve McSween, formerly of Club Monaco, who is in charge of men's design.
In billboarding its fashion talent, Gap seems to be signaling a fresh direction, promoting fashion over basics. ''It definitely is a new strategy for us,'' Sean Krebs, a Gap spokesman, said. ''We're excited to have a face and a voice for the customer to relate to.''
The strategy, which gives the company's essentially conservative wares a more pronounced fashion identity, was conceived more than a year ago under Gap's new management, headed by Paul Pressler, the chief executive, to help stem 20 consecutive months of declining sales. Retail analysts say that putting names and faces behind the product is a way for the company to reinvigorate itself. ''In a world where even Wal-Mart has Levi's, it's about creating a sexiness for the brand,'' said Wendy Liebman, the president of WSL Strategic Retail, a New York research and consulting firm. Richard Jaffe, a retail analyst at UBS Warburg in New York, said Gap's decision to promote designers was ''a way of saying to shoppers, 'Look, we're bringing in all these cutting-edge, fashion-right people to make our brand those same things.' ''
Gap made its first raid on Marc Jacobs in 2002, plucking out and promoting Emma Hill, Mr. Jacobs's handbag designer, to be vice president for accessories. Like many designers attempting to restore vitality to a fatigued fashion label, Ms. Hill, 34, sought inspiration in the company's archives.
''I wanted to take a look very iconic to Gap and interpret it in accessories,'' she said. Hence, her twill, her rip-cord nylon and her leather bags are decorated with rivets, brass closures and outer pockets. Horn and enamel buttons and oversize grommets are also faithful to the utilitarian spirit of original Gap jeans.
Most emblematic of the new direction is the trench bag, in camouflage-style prints, replete, as its name suggests, with flap pockets, D-ring hardware and an adjustable strap like the belt of a trench coat. Some items are meant to look as if they have taken a beating. ''I like them to seem love-worn, like you've had them in your closet for years,'' Ms. Hill said.
Ms. Ferlisi's design approach, by contrast, is more forward-looking. ''I pretty much started with a clean slate,'' she said, ''though I did think about the emotional adjectives that historically have been part of Gap DNA.'' Words like ''sweet, naïve and optimistic'' came to mind, she said, with the result that the spring 2004 collection, her first for the company, is streamlined and contemporary while evoking the innocence of the Eisenhower era.
The line, which arrives in stores this month, is characterized by 1950's touches like cropped or cuffed cigarette jeans, close-fitting striped sweaters and jackets styled like trench coats in a candied palette of coral blue and green.
At Gap, Ms. Ferlisi operates much as she did earlier in her career, overseeing 60 designers, including graphic artists, print designers and fabric researchers. What is different is her visibility, which she seems to take in stride.
''Public recognition is nice,'' she said, ''but that's not why I do what I do. I love the design process. For me, creating a T-shirt is no different than creating a ball gown. I put the same energy into both.''
Front Row
