'' 'Twas the night before Christmas and all through the house, not a creature was stirring . . . '' Brendan Miller, 7, paused as he read the words of the holiday poem from a photocopied page. He looked up, stealing a glance at his audience. Then he continued: ''. . . Not even a mouse.''
Meanwhile, that audience, Robert Landrau, nodded to the boy's rhythm as if it were jazz.
It is moments like these that make holidays and every other day special for Mr. Landrau and his family.
In February 2002, Mr. Landrau's wife, Gloria Quinones, 37, died of cervical cancer. Mr. Landrau, 33, was faced with raising the family on his own. In addition to his daughter, Stephanie Landrau, 15, there are Ms. Quinones's two sons, Pablo Anthony Rodriquez, 12, and Angel Matos, 17. Recently, Mr. Landrau has also become a father figure to Brendan, the son of his companion, June Hollins, who now shares their small apartment in a public housing project in Manhattan.
''She was fighting cancer for five years,'' Mr. Landrau said of his wife. ''She got operated on and they said she was free of cancer, and it came back. She fought for a year and it got worse and they couldn't control it anymore. It spread all over her body. It's been very hard for us.''
Making it harder still to confront that loss and those new family responsibilities has been the fact of grappling with unemployment. Mr. Landrau, a nurse, worked full time until the last stages of his wife's illness, when he quit to devote himself to her care. ''What made me do that was one time she stopped breathing and I had to give her CPR,'' he said. ''I was scared after that to leave her alone.''
Although the composition of the family has changed, Mr. Landrau emphasizes strengths that have remained constant. ''No matter how difficult or how different it looks,'' he said, ''I tell them, since Mom hasn't been here and things have been different, that no matter what things are, they are still the same. Just because things look different it doesn't just mean that. Everything is just love and care and as long as you have that, you have everything in life.''
Despite the pain of their loss, the family strives to remain optimistic. That is evident all around their apartment, which is decorated with stuffed animals and teddy bears, most of which were given to Mr. Landrau by his patients. He had won the largest toys for Ms. Quinones at an amusement park.
Brendan, pointing to a metal box containing Ms. Quinones's ashes, said, ''Anthony says that Gloria's in there.'' It is in the center of an arrangement of photos, mementoes and artificial roses, the family's homemade shrine to Ms. Quinones.
The children support each other. Stephanie and Pablo help Brendan with homework. Pablo writes poetry and has Brendan hooked. ''They get along very well,'' Mr. Landrau said. ''They feed one another to get the strength and the power in that.''
To get to this point, the family has had some help along the way. Since a few days after his wife's death, Mr. Landrau's family has received homemaker services from the Children's Aid Society, one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. The homemaker, Marian King, comes six days a week -- after school on weekdays to help coordinate pickup from school, homework and dinner, and all day on Saturday. The help has been indispensable to the family and has also allowed Mr. Landrau to look for work. The family's minimal resources come from welfare and food stamps.
Through the Children's Aid Society, the family and children have been receiving counseling services. Stephanie and Pablo are working on their erratic performance in school, while Pablo is dealing with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder. Angel recently spent more than a year at a residential treatment facility, working on behavioral issues.
Searching for a bright spot, the family participated for the second straight year in the Children's Aid Society's Homemaker Service holiday gifts project, which was started in 1999 with funds from the Neediest Cases. The project gives $10 per parent to a homemaker, who then helps the children buy or create inexpensive gifts for their parents. Last year, the Neediest Cases contributed $810 to the initiative.
A gift for their father was a rare opportunity for the children. Brendan worked hard on a letter and picture for him. ''About how nice he is,'' Brendan said.
Together, the children, Ms. King and Ms. Hollins planned the big gift for Mr. Landrau. One day, Mr. Landrau received a call on his cellphone. It was Ms. King, asking him to meet her and the children because they had been acting up. ''I go out there and they're like, 'Merry Christmas!' '' he said. ''They had all these different tropical fishes for me.''
For Mr. Landrau, the fish were a precious gift. But the holidays also brought a present for the whole family, one that allowed them to focus not on loss, but on its happy opposite: on Dec. 19, Angel came home.
''There is no better time than to have him back just before Christmas,'' Mr. Landrau said. ''It was very special and wonderful.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,701,877.64  Recorded Thursday: 44,986.00
Total: $6,746,863.64  Last year to date: $7,168,492.65
