A longtime writer and illustrator of children's books, Mordicai Gerstein, won the 2004 Caldecott Medal yesterday for ''The Man Who Walked Between the Towers,'' his account of how Philippe Petit, the French aerialist, strode a tightrope between the World Trade Center towers in 1974.
The award, announced at the American Library Association's midwinter meeting in San Diego, is given annually by a division of the association to the illustrator of ''the most distinguished American picture book for children.''
The other major award announced yesterday, the Newbery Medal for contribution to children's literature, went to Kate DiCamillo for ''The Tale of Despereaux,'' a witty fable about a tiny mouse, a princess and an evil rat. It was illustrated by Timothy Basil Ering and published by Candlewick Press.
The Gerstein book, published by Roaring Brook Press, a division of the Millbrook Press, is a spare narrative illustrated with ink and oil paintings. It begins with ''two towers side by side'' and explains in pictorial detail how Mr. Petit suspended a cable and then triumphantly moved between the towers. One fold-out illustration looks down from above at the young man holding his balancing pole; another looks up at him from the perspective of people in the street.
The Caldecott Medal has occasionally been given to books that deal with nonfiction subjects. Few children's books have addressed the 9/11 attacks, but ''The Man Who Walked Between the Towers'' concludes: ''Now the towers are gone. But in memory, as if imprinted on the sky, the towers are still there. And part of that memory is the joyful morning, August 7, 1974, when Philippe Petit walked between them in the air.''
Mr. Gerstein, in a telephone interview from his studio in Massachusetts, said he started the book immediately after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001.
''I had lived in New York,'' he said, ''and the towers were part of my furniture. I had a 1987 New Yorker profile of Philippe on my shelf. I went right to it, reread the profile and wrote the book.''
''It was a difficult book to sell,'' he said, ''so immediate and so raw. Some publishers thought it had negative connotations.''
While he was making the illustrations, Mr. Gerstein spoke to Mr. Petit, and after the book was published, he sent him a copy. He received a three-page letter in calligraphy in reply, he said, and he met Mr. Petit for dinner in New York. To Mr. Gerstein's delight, Mr. Petit did magic tricks throughout the meal.
Mr. Gerstein's previous book, ''What Charlie Heard'' (Frances Foster Books/Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux), was a picture biography of the American composer Charles Ives. Mr. Gerstein's interest in the 19th-century wild boy of Aveyron, France, who lived in the woods, produced both a novel for young people, ''Victor,'' and a picture book, ''The Wild Boy,'' both published by Frances Foster Books.
The children's book awards, decided by large committees of librarians, are important to parents and publishers, who value the gold and silver stickers as symbols of quality and buy accordingly. Libraries and bookstores immediately order hardcover copies of winning titles, and the books remain in print for years.
As runners-up, two Newbery Honor books were named: ''Olive's Ocean'' by Kevin Henkes (Greenwillow Books) and ''An American Plague: The True and Terrifying Story of the Yellow Fever Epidemic of 1793'' by Jim Murphy (Clarion Books).
There were three Caldecott Honor books: ''Ella Sarah Gets Dressed'' illustrated and written by Margaret Chodos-Irvine (Harcourt), ''What Do You Do With a Tail Like This?,'' illustrated and written by Steve Jenkins and Robin Page (Houghton Mifflin) and ''Don't Let the Pigeon Drive the Bus!,'' illustrated and written by Mo Willems (Hyperion).
