State evaluators issued a grim assessment of New York State's first three charter schools yesterday, citing mostly poor test scores, inconsistent academic progress and inadequate financial management.
They called for one school in Harlem to be closed, for a school in Albany to shut its failing middle school grades and for another in Harlem to receive only a probationary extension of its charter.
The three schools were the first to open under the state's 1998 charter school law and their five-year charters are up for renewal this month. The assessment was sobering news for supporters of charter schools, who say they provide competition for traditional public schools and offer parents a much-needed alternative.
''It certainly sends a strong notice that the accountability for charter schools is for real,'' said David Levin, the superintendent and co-founder of KIPP Academy, a charter school in the South Bronx. ''It is not just enough to have satisfied families. You really have to live up to the expectations outlined in your charter. It puts us all on notice.''
There are 50 charter schools in the state, 34 in New York City. No others are up for review this year.
To renew their charters, the schools were required to report on their progress in meeting the educational objectives in their original charters, and to provide detailed financial statements, copies of annual reports and some measure of parent and student satisfaction.
In judging the first three renewal applications, the evaluators, from the State University of New York's Charter Schools Institute, posed questions like: Is the school an academic success? Is the school a viable and effective organization? Is the school fiscally sound?
The evaluators examined testing data, visited the schools and reviewed application materials. They said results at the John A. Reisenbach Charter School in Harlem were so poor that it should close. A second Harlem school, Sisulu Children's Academy, has had mixed results and should get a probationary two-year extension, they said.
''There is little evidence that the school has fulfilled its mission of providing a rigorous curriculum and approach that develop children's strong basic skills and ability to think critically,'' the evaluators wrote of the Reisenbach School. ''Plans for increasing academic achievement are inadequate and reflect a low level of academic expectation,'' they added.
The third school up for review, New Covenant Charter School in Albany, overcame early problems, switched management companies and met with notable success in elementary grades, they said.
But its seventh and eighth grades are failing, and evaluators said its charter should be renewed only for kindergarten through sixth grade.
''The school is on the road to achieving its mission at the primary and elementary academies though in the words of the school's board, it is not yet where it needs to be,'' the evaluators wrote.
The recommendations were submitted to the SUNY Board of Trustees, which will decide whether to renew the charters at a meeting on Jan. 27.
''One thing this highlights is there is no quick fix,'' Mr. Levin said. ''Nothing is the holy grail.''
Experts said the three schools may had been particularly vulnerable to problems because they were created quickly, and cautioned against drawing wide conclusions about all of the state's charter schools.
A draft report by the State Education Department found mixed results among the charter schools, with some singled out for exceptional results. But many of the schools have not existed long enough to have a track record based on test scores and other performance data.
Some charter school advocates praised the SUNY evaluators for holding the schools to high standards. ''We support these recommendations,'' said Bill Phillips, the president of the New York Charter Schools Association. ''You can see a clear link between the academic performance of the school and the rewards and consequences.''
Mr. Phillips said test scores were ''compelling'' evidence against renewing the Reisenbach School's charter -- only 7 percent of eighth graders met state standards in math and just 13 percent met standards in English.
Daniel F. Oscar, the president of the Learning Project, a nonprofit group that runs the Reisenbach school, said that he and other officials hoped to persuade the SUNY trustees to give them more time to improve the school. The Learning Project also runs the Newark Charter School in New Jersey.
''We feel strongly that the school should be held to task for those test scores being low,'' Mr. Oscar said. ''We also think they are taking an extreme step after one bad year to recommend that the school be shut down.''
James H. Rosenfield, a former president of CBS Television, has agreed to serve as acting chairman of the school's board of trustees. He said the school had raised its enrollment too quickly, adding 220 students last year for a total of 600.
''We took too many students on and we couldn't cope with it,'' Mr. Rosenfield said, adding that parents and staff would fight to keep the school open.
David Henahan, a SUNY spokesman, said trustees would review the evaluators' recommendations, but said he could not predict what the board would do.
At Sisulu Children's Academy, the principal, Norma Figueroa-Hurwitz, said she was thrilled to hear the school was recommended for a two-year probationary renewal of its charter. ''The school basically had to live through its growing pains the first four years,'' she said. ''I really feel the children are going to benefit from having the school stay open.''
Some state officials credited Dr. Figueroa-Hurwitz, who was hired as principal in August, for a swift and successful turnaround effort.
At the New Covenant Charter School in Albany, there was mixed reaction to mixed news. Eleanor P. Bartlett, president of the school's board of trustees, said she was not surprised that evaluators had recommended eliminating the middle school grades and renewing the elementary school's charter for five years.
''I think this gives us an opportunity to certainly build on our strengths,'' she said. Ms. Bartlett said teacher turnover and disciplinary problems had hampered the middle school grades and that the school had been ''trying to do too much too fast.''
Across the country, some states have moved aggressively to close failing charter schools while others have been more lax. A report in October 2002 by the Center for Education Reform found that 194 or 6.7 percent of the 2,874 schools granted charters nationwide had been closed.
Another 77 schools were consolidated back into their original school districts and were not counted in the report as being closed and 84 of the schools granted charters had never opened.
New York City education officials said they were pleased that the charter schools were being held to rigorous standards. ''Renewing or rescinding their charters is the key element that allows charter schools to have freedom,'' said Jerry Russo, press secretary to Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein.
Mr. Russo said city officials would help students from any charter school that is forced to close. ''We will make places for all students returning from poorly performing charter schools,'' he said.
James Merriman, executive director of the SUNY Charter Schools Institute, which issued the recommendations on the three schools, said that wider conclusions about the state's charter schools could be drawn next year, when 13 SUNY-authorized charter schools come up for review and 4 others will be up for review by the New York City Department of Education.
Mr. Merriman said the findings about the first three schools should be taken in context. ''As the State Education Department report has shown, charter schools are working, improving and increasing student learning and achievement,'' he said. ''As these recommendations show, the chartering process is also working by holding schools accountable for results.''
