Airline passengers who voluntarily submit to a background check to demonstrate that they are not security risks could receive identity cards that would exempt them from being routinely selected for extra screening at airports, a spokesman for the Transportation Security Administration said Monday.
But such travelers would still go through the same basic screening as everyone else and would go on for closer inspection if they set off a metal detector or if a screener saw something suspicious in the X-ray of their carry-on bags, the spokesman said, under a pilot program once called ''trusted traveler'' and now known as ''registered traveler.''
The agency has always been unenthusiastic about the idea, although some airlines and frequent travelers have been eagerly anticipating such a system since the terrorist attacks of 2001 prompted more stringent inspections at airports. Congress recently ordered a pilot program and provided $5 million for it.
Mark O. Hatfield Jr., the spokesman, said the government would not allow passengers to go onto airplanes unscreened. But it could use a registered traveler system to reduce the number of people going through secondary screening, Mr. Hatfield said, in which a security agent uses a metal-detecting wand on a passenger, checks the passenger's shoes, and may also inspect the carry-ons.
That takes only an additional three or four minutes, he said, so ''individuals will have to decide'' whether obtaining a card is worthwhile. It is not clear who would bear the cost of running a background check on the traveler; one idea is that the applicant would pay.
Some passenger advocates had hoped for more. ''I don't think that will be helpful,'' said David Stempler, president of the Air Travelers Association, who said the problem was having to get to the airport early to allow for screening.
''We had expected that either there would be a separate security lane for registered travelers, or in the alternative, a priority lane with the regular checkpoint,'' Mr. Stempler said.
Mr. Hatfield, in a conference call with reporters on Monday, also said his agency was continuing on a schedule that it laid out last September to introduce by this summer a revised computer system that would identify ticket buyers who needed extra attention from security agents.
The program, the Computer Assisted Passenger Prescreening System, known as Capps 2, has provoked objections from privacy advocates, because it involves the use of commercial databases. Agency officials say airlines will supply the passenger's name, phone number, home address and a new element, date of birth, which the agency will forward to commercial database companies that will respond with a numeric ''score'' that indicates the likelihood that the passenger's identity is legitimate. The data gathered in the search would be retained only until the passenger had completed the itinerary, according to officials.
Major airlines in the United States, wary of offending their customers, have refused to supply data for a test of the system, but Mr. Hatfield said his agency could use data from European airlines on passengers arriving from Europe. When the system takes full effect, he said, the airlines would either supply the data voluntarily or be ordered to do so. Agency officials say the airlines have told them they will not resist a uniform order.
The new system would replace an older version that uses less information and refers about 14 percent of ticket buyers for extra scrutiny. The goal is to cut that to 5 percent or less, Mr. Hatfield said.
In addition to identifying passengers who may be threats to aviation, the new system is also supposed to point out those wanted for violent crimes, he said.
