Robert B. Zoellick, the United States trade representative, sent letters to more than 140 countries yesterday saying he hoped to push for renewed global trade talks this year.
Adopting a conciliatory tone, Mr. Zoellick said he would visit four countries next month to promote the convening of a top-level trade meeting this year.
He said that he hoped to invigorate the global trade agenda for developing nations that has languished since the World Trade Organization talks fell apart in Cancún, Mexico, last year, according to a summary of the letter released by his office.
''Outreach, listening is an important part of this,'' Richard Mills, the spokesman for Mr. Zoellick, said.
After the collapse of the earlier talks, Mr. Zoellick accused several developing countries of being ''won't do'' nations that were good at making demands but poor at creating compromises.
Now, according to a statement released by his office, Mr. Zoellick wants to promote an approach to trade that would focus on agriculture, goods and services. But he offered few new concessions by the administration.
Instead, Mr. Zoellick suggested compromises that would require that Europe make most of the concessions, a big step away from the agreement he reached with Europe last year.
For instance, Mr. Zoellick's letter said that the W.T.O. needed to eliminate all agricultural export subsidies by a certain date, a concession that hits Europe rather than the United States, which does not use those subsidies.
European officials said yesterday that they ''very much welcome the engagement from the U.S. to reinject life into the W.T.O. talks.''
Anthony Gooch, the spokesman for the European Union in Washington, said, however, that to focus on European export subsidies without considering the United States export credits for agriculture was unfair.
''It may look politically correct,'' Mr. Gooch said, ''but this does not necessarily make it the necessary precondition.''
The original proposal by the United States, released in 2002, calls for a global reduction of farm subsidies that would largely leave intact the administration's annual $19 billion in farm subsidies.
Three former United States trade representatives said at a forum last night that Mr. Zoellick was wise to break away from the Europeans and reach out to developing nations to find a compromise. ''The letter was wonderful,'' said Carla A. Hills, who was trade representative under the first President Bush.
The letter was reported in The Financial Times yesterday. Through a spokesman, Mr. Zoellick said he would not speak directly to the news media about his initiative.
Mr. Zoellick is facing criticism that his trading strategy is faltering. He missed the deadlines for bilateral trade agreements with Australia and Morocco last month. He scaled back his ambitions for a free trade area for the Americas, although President Bush will try to revive that discussion in talks this week in Mexico at the Summit of the Americas. In the trade agreement reached with four Central American countries, his only new trade pact last year. Mr. Zoellick fell short of his goal of including Costa Rica, the richest nation of the five Central American nations in the talks.
''Bob Zoellick has no momentum and he may be backsliding,'' said C. Fred Bergsten, director for the Institute for International Economics in Washington.
Some 20 developing countries -- including China, Brazil and South Africa -- formed a new trading group at the Cancún talks solely to pressure the United States, Europe and Japan to reduce or eliminate their agriculture subsidies estimated at $300 billion a year.
They said that the unwillingness of wealthy countries to address the developing world's concerns about agricultural trade was the real stumbling block.
Special attention has been focused on the $12.9 billion the United States pays in subsidies to farmers to grow cotton and to United States textile companies to buy that cotton.
The W.T.O. allowed several West African nations to make a proposal at Cancún that the United States and other nations reduce or eliminate subsidies to farmers and textile companies. The African nations said the subsidies distorted trade and unfairly destroyed the livelihood of some of the world's poorest farmers.
In his letter, Mr. Zoellick makes no concessions on cotton but does say he will discuss the issue.
Brazil has mounted a legal challenge to the cotton subsidies, in the first case that the W.T.O. has accepted on agricultural subsidies. A preliminary decision is expected this spring and could open the door to more cases against farm subsidies in the wealthier nations.
