International Traffic Up For Most U.S. Airlines
Despite tightened security measures that included more than 15 canceled foreign flights over the holidays, most domestic airlines carried significantly more international traffic last month than in December 2002, according to the airlines' monthly traffic reports.
Foreign airlines are also reporting more robust traffic on overseas routes. British Airways' passenger traffic on routes to North and South America rose 5.9 percent in December, even though it was among the airlines forced to cancel a handful of flights because of security fears over the holidays. The airline said it had a 4.7 percent increase in traffic in first-class and business-class seats, mostly attributable to heavier demand for premium seats on long-haul flights.
A discernible increase in business travel has been lifting international traffic across the board, said Philip Roberts, editor in chief of the Unisys R2A Scorecard, a monthly research report.
International traffic was not ''impacted in any measurable way'' by the tightening of security and the canceled foreign flights, Mr. Roberts said. In fact, he added, ''there seems to be a message that customers are feeling travel is safer'' as a result of the higher security at domestic airports and the introduction last week of stricter visa procedures for visitors to the United States.
Mr. Roberts said that the increase in foreign travel had not led to higher international fares and was not likely to for some time because of intense competition on both Atlantic and Pacific routes. However, he said, the demand for business-class seats is rising in tandem with the increased capacity in airlines' premium cabins on international flights.
''If you don't book far enough in advance'' he said, it is now sometimes ''difficult to get the flights you want.''
JetBlue Will Charge For Fox Programs
JetBlue Airways, which already offers 24 channels of live television on in-seat screens, said that it was adding movies, satellite radio and other features to its inflight entertainment systems. Customers will have to pay a fee, to be announced later, JetBlue said, for the movies and other new digital video programs, though the existing DirecTV and the new XM Satellite Radio programs will be free.
The News Corporation's Fox Entertainment Group will supply the first-run movies, as well as television features, news and sports programs, promotions for Fox products and other features. JetBlue said it would begin testing that service in the spring and expected to have it operating on all planes in the fall.
JetBlue said it would install an ''in-seat credit card reader'' system for passengers to purchase selections on the new multichannel digital video system with Fox programming.
Demand Increases For High-Speed Links
Demand for high-speed Internet service grew sharply among business travelers in 2003, hotels and other businesses say.
One indication of that comes from Wayport Inc., a leading supplier of high-speed Internet service for business travelers. According to Wayport, which is based in Austin, Tex,. total customer connections more than doubled in the second half of 2003.
The company provides Ethernet and Wi-Fi service in more than 140,000 hotel guest rooms and 700 hotels, as well as in 12 airports and more than 100 McDonald's restaurants.
JOE SHARKEY
BUSINESS TRAVEL
