UP on the scoreboard, the numbers had the Indianapolis Colts prepared to punt. If they couldn't convert a third-and-9 at their 37-yard line in the fourth quarter Sunday at Kansas City, they would surely punt. On the Colts' sideline, their place-kicker, Mike Vanderjagt walked over to where Hunter Smith was warming up, punting softly into a net.
''Now listen to me,'' Vanderjagt said. ''I don't know if you remember how to do this, but you've got to put your helmet on, then you've got to go out on the field, take the snap and punt the ball.''
Smith laughed. He had not punted in the Colts' playoff opener the week before against the Denver Broncos, and against the Chiefs he also had not punted. Moments later, when Peyton Manning completed an 11-yard pass to wide receiver Brandon Stokley for a first down, he didn't have to punt. And when the Colts completed their 38-31 victory to advance to the American Football Conference championship game in New England next Sunday, he remained Hunter the Punter who hasn't needed to punt.
''In the shower later, Brandon looked over at me and said, 'You don't have to take a shower,' '' Smith was saying yesterday by telephone from his home in the Indianapolis area. ''And other guys have been teasing me, saying, 'How much did you make today for doing nothing?' ''
Every so often a pro football team will so dominate a game that its punter is not needed. In their 51 seasons in Baltimore and Indianapolis, the Colts did not need to punt in only 5 games. But now, with Manning directing their high-octane offense, the Colts have not only gone two games without punting, but two consecutive playoff games. It's an N.F.L. record.
''We had a game two or three years ago in Buffalo, where I didn't have to punt, but this is incredible,'' Smith said.
During the season, Smith, a 6-foot-2, 209-pound Texan, ranked fifth in the A.F.C. with a 42.2-yard average, and seventh with a 35.5 net average. That speaks well for the hang time of his punts. The longer and higher the hang, the more likely the punt returner will call for a fair catch, negating a runback.
''Some guys can punt the ball 45 yards with a 4.4 hang time every time, but when I really catch one, it goes really high,'' he said. ''Against Minnesota three years ago, I had a 5.69 hang time.''
Growing up in Sherman, Tex., where he was a quarterback, wide receiver, tight end, punter and kicker in high school, Smith attended a football camp where one of the instructors was the renowned Ray Guy, the former Raiders punter. In the 1976 Pro Bowl at the Louisiana Superdome, one of Guy's punts soared up and up into a gondola about 90 feet above the playing surface.
''Ray told me about that,'' Smith said. ''As he looked up at the gondola, the referee said, 'You're not going to. . . . ,' and Ray said, 'No, I'm going over it.' ''
Not that Smith hasn't earned his salary. As a quick-handed holder on place-kicks, Smith and long snapper Justin Snow's accuracy have contributed to Vanderjagt's perfect record in field goals: 37 of 37 during the regular season, 3 of 3 in the playoffs. On extra points, Vanderjagt was 46 of 46 during the season, 10 of 10 in the playoffs.
''Justin's the best punt-snapper in the league; I've never had a bad punt snap from him,'' Smith said. ''I don't think most people appreciate how difficult it is to do what he does -- throw a 15-yard pass between your legs with your head upside down. And Mike's an easy kicker to work with. Some kickers need time to get ready. I just wait for Mike to nod, then I call for Justin's snap.''
Now completing his fifth season with the Colts, Smith was a seventh-round draft choice in 1999 out of Notre Dame where his 41.2-yard career average was second to Craig Hentrich, now the Titans' punter.
Three years ago, as a member of Morningstar International, a nondenominational ministry, Smith went to Peru in the off-season to improve the physical, mental and spiritual lives of impoverished people there. But he sounded as if his time there improved his understanding of people everywhere.
''I think I got a lot more out of it than the Peruvians did,'' he said. ''You see people happy there with very little. We're so microwaved here, it takes so much more to please us. In Peru, they take joy in relationships, God and family. You come back thinking that America is impoverished in different ways.''
Smith and his wife, Jennifer, are planning a Morningstar International church in the Indianapolis area; he plays the guitar and the piano, she sings.
But for now, Hunter the Punter is preparing to punt in Sunday's showdown, with the winning team qualifying for Super Bowl XXXVIII on Feb. 1 in Houston. The weather for the Colts' offense (and for a punter who didn't need to punt) is not likely to be as comfortable at Gillette Stadium as it was in Kansas City or at the RCA Dome the week before.
''Near the end of the Broncos game, Tony Dungy turned to me and said, 'I hope we haven't made you work too hard today,' '' Smith said with a laugh, referring to the Colts' coach. ''But we've played in New England when it was nippy and windy.''
Maybe so, but each of Smith's three previous visits to Foxboro were in September or early October. It will be much more nippy and windy Sunday when, almost surely, Hunter the Punter will need to punt again, if not several times. Here's hoping he remembers how to put on his helmet, go out on the field and punt the ball.
Sports of The Times
