Chris Wingert's frenetic month culminated Friday night in St. Louis when he was named the winner of the Hermann Trophy, awarded each year by the Missouri Athletic Club to the nation's top male and female collegiate soccer players. (Cat Reddick of North Carolina won the women's award.) There are more adventures to come.
''It's been hectic, but I haven't looked at it in those terms,'' Wingert said. ''I've been looking at it from the standpoint that I'm immersed in soccer now more than anything else. I'm enjoying it.''
Wingert, a 5-foot-11, 160-pound defender, helped lead St. John's to the final of last month's N.C.A.A. Division I tournament, where the Red Storm lost to Indiana, 2-1, in Columbus, Ohio.
After the title match, Wingert, 21, who is from Babylon, N.Y., on Long Island, returned to the St. John's campus in Queens to complete his undergraduate work a semester early in communication arts with a 3.79 grade point average. Wingert was also named the Scholar-Athlete of the Year by the National Soccer Association of America on Dec. 23 and is the first person to win both that award and the Hermann Trophy. He was also the defensive player of the year in the Big East Conference for the second straight year.
That is not all. Wingert is a member of the United States Olympic team, which is training in Carson, Calif. The team is preparing for next month's eight-nation qualifying tournament for the Summer Games in Athens. Those qualifying games will be played in Guadalajara, Mexico.
Finally, Wingert is likely to be among the top five selections in Friday's Major League Soccer draft, which will be conducted in Charlotte, N.C. Wingert would like to end up with the MetroStars, but his ''local'' club does not have a pick in the draft until the third round, the 21st selection over all.
''First and foremost, I want to get the chance to play, wherever I go,'' Wingert said in a telephone interview Sunday from California. ''The MetroStars would be a good situation. I know Bob Bradley. I've trained with his teams and I think he would give me a chance to fight for a spot. But they have four outside backs.''
Wingert played as a central defender for Coach Dave Masur at St. John's, but he is now more likely to end up on the outside, marking a speedy striker.
''The biggest demand when you move outside is being very fit and moving up and down the line quickly,'' he said. ''So in camp with the Olympic team, that hasn't been a problem.''
EUROPE  Too Much Vacation Time?
In Germany, Franz Beckenbauer, the president of Bayern Munich, wants to abolish the Bundesliga's six-week winter break. Meanwhile, in England, Sir Alex Ferguson of Manchester United, Arsene Wenger of Arsenal, Sven-Goran Eriksson of the English national team and the chairman of the F.A., Geoff Thompson, all want English clubs to get a break over the Christmas and New Year's holidays.
''We are the only country out of the top nations that has a break in the summer and the winter,'' Beckenbauer told the Munich newspaper Abendzeitung. ''It is a total luxury. I am sure our winter break will soon be removed from the calendar.''
The Bundesliga's 18 clubs last played on Dec. 17 and will not return until Jan. 31. Many clubs are now training in warm-weather locations, like Florida and Dubai.
By contrast, the schedule of English clubs is crowded over the holidays. This season, Premier League teams played 3 league matches in 13 days, beginning the day after Christmas (Boxing Day) and continuing through Jan. 7.
''Other countries in Europe have a break, and it would be very interesting to find out statistically if clubs from those countries do better in European competitions,'' Thompson told Agence France-Presse. ''I have a feeling they may do better.''
Leagues in Spain, Italy and France are off for about two weeks during the holidays.
AFRICAN NATIONS CUP -- Club teams throughout Europe are never happy losing players to international tournaments like next month's African Nations Cup in Tunisia.
Tottenham's Frederic Kanoute, who was born in France, has agreed to play for Mali, the country his father is from. Yesterday Burkina Faso called up striker Abdoulaye Cisse, who plays in France for Montpellier. Portsmouth, which is struggling in the English Premier League, will be without Yakubu Aiyegbeni, its Nigerian striker; and Wolverhampton will lose Henri Camara to Senegal.
BARCELONA -- The Spanish club has worked out a loan deal for the Dutch midfielder Edgar Davids with Juventus of Italy. Barcelona officials also said they were interested in the Swedish striker Henrik Larsson, who said he planned to leave Glasgow Celtic at the end of this season.
Corner Kicks
COLLEGES -- Tom Fitzgerald, the former coach of the Columbus Crew in M.L.S., has left U.C.L.A. after two seasons (the Bruins won the N.C.A.A. title in 2002) to return to the University of Tampa, where he won the Division II title in 1994.
INTERLIGA TOURNAMENT -- Santos Laguna and Atlas will play for one of two spots for Mexican clubs in the Libertadores Cup. The loser will play the winner of the match between Morelia and Club América for Mexico's second place in this year's South American club championship.
GUATEMALA -- FIFA has suspended the Guatemalan federation from all international competitions, including the upcoming regional World Cup and Olympic qualifiers, because of ''government interference.'' Government officials took control of the federation's building on Dec. 23 and barred federation officials. Yesterday, Panama's women's team was named to replace Guatemala in Olympic qualifying next month in Costa Rica.
OLYMPIC QUALIFYING -- Olympic qualifying games in the Concacaf region will not be televised in the United States. The games next month in Mexico (eight nations, including the United States, playing for two spots in the Athens Games) will be available only via closed circuit, which is picked up primarily in bars and restaurants that cater to Hispanic patrons. There was no response to e-mail messages sent to Concacaf officials seeking comment.
COMINGS AND GOINGS -- Defender Carlos Bocanegra, 24, has left Chicago of M.L.S. forFulham of the English Premier League.
San Jose General Manager Johnny Moore resigned yesterday for personal reasons.
Los Angeles traded midfielder Simon Elliott to Columbus for a first-round choice in next year's draft.
SOCCER REPORT
