Clement E. Conger, a curator who transformed the diplomatic reception rooms at the State Department and the state rooms of the White House into graceful quarters filled with antique furnishings and fine art, died Sunday at a hospital in Delray Beach, Fla. He was 91.
The cause was pneumonia, said Pat Heflin, his former assistant at the department.
Mr. Conger, a courtly Virginian who grew up around fine English antiques, was a self-taught authority on American antiques and interiors.
He was known in the capital as the Grand Acquisitor. Over some 30 years, Mr. Conger raised millions of dollars in private money and in donations of antique furniture, porcelain, paintings and silver to decorate the department and to build the White House collection and restore its public rooms to the grandeur of the late 19th century.
An article in The Washington Post in 1986 said Mr. Conger ''raised more money for the United States government than anyone outside the Internal Revenue Service.''
In a 1982 article in The New York Times, Mr. Conger, referring to the State Department's diplomatic rooms, said that ''we entertain kings, prime ministers and heads of state here.'' He added that ''when we tell them that everything was made in America, they can't believe their eyes.''
The Americana collection that Mr. Conger amassed at the State Department ranked as one of the largest in the world, worth more than $100 million, officials say. Ceilings were raised there, thousands of feet of mahogany floors were laid over concrete Palladian-style arches, Chippendale-style doors were constructedm and a glass wall was covered with hand-carved Georgian-style paneling.
When the Department of State building was constructed in the late 1950's, it was planned that the top floor would include official diplomatic reception rooms for entertaining distinguished visitors. But the rooms in the glass and chrome structure were ''motel modern,'' Mr. Conger said in The Times, with the women's lounge looking ''like quarters for a Chicago gangster's moll, all turquoise, red and green.''
President Richard M. Nixon asked Mr. Conger to help acquire antiques for the White House, where he began to spend his afternoons. His mornings, then, were spent at the State Department.
In 1986, Mr. Conger was replaced as curator by Rex Scouten, who had established a close relationship with President Ronald Reagan and Nancy Reagan as chief usher of the White House. Mr. Conger retired from the State Department in 1992 and spent two years consulting for Christie's auction house.
Clement Ellis Conger was born in Harrisonburg, Va., on Oct. 15, 1912. He was a graduate of Strayer College and George Washington University.
He is survived by his wife of 55 years, Lianne Hopkins Conger of Delray Beach; three children, William R. Conger of Maurertown, Va., Jay A. Conger of Manhattan Beach, Calif., and Shelley L. Conger of Los Angeles; and two grandchildren.
