New York City fire marshals are investigating whether the 15-year-old boy charged with causing a fatal fire in the Bronx on Dec. 30 in a possible suicide attempt may have caused another fire, at his private school in Queens 10 days earlier, law enforcement officials said.
The boy, Hasan Mohammad, denied to investigators that he had started the fire at the school, Darul-Uloom New York, on Dec. 20, the police said. They said the fire had destroyed a ground-floor apartment that the school had just renovated but it resulted in no injuries. Investigators did not release details about that investigation but said arson had been the cause of the fire.
Friends, neighbors and relatives of Mr. Mohammad, a Bangladeshi immigrant, reacted with shock and sadness yesterday at his arrest, describing him as playful and energetic, though at times unruly.
''I'm so sorry to see my son with handcuffs on,'' Abdul Karim Mohammad, the boy's father, said yesterday afternoon as he left his house in the Bronx for his mosque. ''It's something I never thought would happen. I'm so sorry.''
Hasan Mohammad was arraigned in criminal court yesterday and charged as a juvenile with two counts of second-degree murder and three counts of arson, among other charges. If he is convicted of the murder charges, he will face a maximum sentence of nine years to life in prison, said Steven Reed , a spokesman for the Bronx district attorney, Robert T. Johnson. The boy is being held without bond, Mr. Reed said.
The fire, at 1437 Glover Street in the Parkchester area of the Bronx, killed Maria Cruz, 20, and her mother, Brenda Casanova, 41, and critically injured two people -- Ms. Casanova's 17-year-old son, Carlos, and a 2-year-old boy.
Mr. Mohammad immigrated to the United States from Bangladesh with his parents and four siblings three years ago, his brother Rashed Hasan Mohammad said. The family lives in part of a three-story house on Doris Street, a block from the site of the fire.
Neighbors said they had often seen Mr. Mohammed walking with his father and brothers to the family's mosque several blocks away or having barbecues in the summer, and said they were friendly and personable. The thin, small-framed boy known to his family as Zobaer loved to play his GameBoy and often played catch with his brothers in the family's backyard or did chores around the house like taking out the garbage, friends and family said.
''The kid was very nice, polite,'' said Alex Torres, 39, who lived a few blocks away and talked to the family daily during walks in the neighborhood. ''I've never seen him doing anything where you would say that kid is trouble.''
''They were very religious,'' he added.
Mr. Mohammad and his two brothers attended Darul-Uloom New York, a school and mosque in Jamaica, Queens, until two weeks ago, though teachers said they did not know why the boys' parents had pulled them out. The curriculum at the Islamic school, at 87-74 150th Street, is centered on students fully memorizing the Koran, school officials said.
At the school, Mr. Mohammad had a more troubled history. He often missed classes, did not turn in assignments on time and, when he was present, disrupted class, said Fareed Tapan, 45, one of Mr. Mohammad's teachers.
''This is a religious environment where all children are taught to be obedient,'' he said. ''But I wouldn't find him to be quiet like all the others. He was a little bit out of control.''
The Dec. 20 fire started at 7:30 p.m. in one of the ground-floor apartments owned by the school. At the time, people were in the basement mosque, at prayer.
''When we came up, the entire apartment was on fire,'' said Ghazi Bokhiri, the owner of the building. Mr. Bokhiri said he did not believe that Mr. Mohammad had started the fire because none of the students were present at the time.
Officials would not say whether they found a definitive link between the fire and Hasan Mohammad.
The boy told investigators that he started the fire as part of a suicide attempt. He told them he had planned to kill himself by running into the building but hoped that others would think he did it to save lives, the police said. The authorities saw Mr. Mohammad leaving the scene of the early morning blaze with burns on his face and hands, and decided to question him further because he smelled of gasoline, they said.
Mr. Mohammad was released yesterday from Lincoln Hospital and was arraigned in the afternoon. Throughout the day, people in the neighborhood talked in disbelief about the arrest.
''This is really sad,'' said Mohammad Uddin, the imam of Baitul Aman Islamic Center, Mr. Mohammad's mosque in the Bronx. ''Those who passed away, we pray for them.''
