Quite unexpectedly, the Bush administration has indicated a desire to revive efforts to make the global trading system fairer to poor countries. Robert Zoellick, the United States trade representative, sent letters yesterday to more than 140 other members of the World Trade Organization to express his hope that 2004 not be a ''lost year'' and set forth some ideas for breaking the impasse reached by trade negotiators at a meeting in Cancún, Mexico, last September.
This is the most constructive overture by the administration since Cancún, where more than two years of negotiations to make global trade more expansive and fairer seemed to fall apart. The main culprits were negotiators from Europe, Japan and the United States, including Mr. Zoellick himself. They refused to agree, without conditions, to begin dismantling the subsidies and agricultural tariffs that hurt farmers in the developing world.
In Cancún's acrimonious aftermath, the Bush administration appeared content to let the talks founder. Washington portrayed Brazil and other developing nations that insisted on a clear resolution of the farm subsidy question as obstructionist, and indicated that it would negotiate bilateral agreements with more willing partners.
Yesterday's initiative suggests that the administration is wisely reconsidering that take-it-or-leave-it attitude. The United States can ill afford, on either economic or political grounds, to allow the global trade liberalization talks to fail.
Indeed, the timing of Mr. Zoellick's letters was telling -- they were sent the day President Bush flew to Mexico to meet with hemispheric leaders. America's lavish subsidies, which give our farmers an unfair advantage in the global marketplace, fuel anti-American resentment throughout Latin America.
It was especially significant for Mr. Zoellick to say he did not want 2004 to be wasted. The W.T.O.'s deadline for the now-threatened round of talks falls at the end of this year. But there has been widespread concern that the United States will be incapable of addressing the issue in an election year.
The administration seems to be rethinking its determination to make common cause with the Europeans. In contrast with his stand at Cancún, Mr. Zoellick conceded in yesterday's letters that W.T.O. members must agree to ending export subsidies -- the most egregious kind of support, doled out mostly by the European Union -- by a specified date. The most convincing way for Washington to reclaim its moral leadership on trade, however, would be to phase out cotton subsidies, which have proved so devastating to the fragile economies of West Africa.
The administration has floated ambitious agricultural trade proposals in the past, only to retreat from them when it mattered most. But we hope that this time, the change in tone signals the beginning of a more lasting and meaningful policy realignment.
