Iran's religious establishment is trying to grab full control of the next Parliament by arbitrarily disqualifying thousands of candidates, many of them leading reformists, including some 80 current legislators seeking re-election next month.
Candidates have been excluded before, but the sweep of the exclusions announced Sunday by the Guardian Council, a clerically appointed body, vastly exceeds past interference. They would eliminate political competition in scores of contests, handing back to religious conservatives the parliamentary majority that voters overwhelmingly denied them four years ago. Though Iranians are demoralized by how little the reformers have accomplished, they should firmly reject such a travesty of democracy.
Iran's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, declined to set aside the exclusions yesterday despite a parliamentary sit-in and resignation threats from provincial governors. Washington and the European Union also expressed their concern. Pressure should be sustained until Ayatollah Khamenei changes his mind.
Though thwarted at every turn, the reformist lawmakers represent Iran's best near-term hope for peaceful democratic change. They have tried to use their parliamentary majority to curb torture, limit political prosecutions, expand press freedom and reduce the power of unelected authorities. The clerical conservatives, by contrast, are a politically exhausted force. They have woefully mismanaged the economy and kept the country estranged from its neighbors and trading partners.
Reformers and conservatives now more or less agree that Iran needs to begin finding ways to mend fences with the world. Hard-liners figured prominently in last year's agreement to permit expanded nuclear inspections. One interpretation of the Guardian Council's actions is that the mullahs will relax their opposition to some policy changes, provided they are able to carry them out themselves.
The mullahs may be calculating that if they offer Washington enough concessions on limiting nuclear programs and ending support for terrorists, America will lose interest in pressing for Iranian democracy. The Bush administration has a chance to prove that the mullahs' cynicism is misplaced.
