All through last season, one thing about Roger Clemens was never in doubt: he could still dominate hitters. He said repeatedly that he was retiring, but his 41-year-old body was not yielding to time. When the season ended, Clemens was amazed that he felt so strong.
Still, while he sometimes left open a tenth-of-a-percent chance that he would return, he usually insisted he was done.
He never expected to come back, but he also never expected Andy Pettitte, a close friend, to leave the Yankees. When Pettitte came home to Houston after the Yankees' tepid effort to re-sign him, everything changed.
Now Clemens has called off retirement before ever taking the rocking chair from the attic. He will continue his career with the Houston Astros, agreeing to a one-year, $5 million contract to pitch for his hometown team yesterday.
''Any individual has the right to change his mind, and I don't know if I really did change my mind,'' Clemens said. ''There was so much good to doing this. With the overwhelming response since Andy signed here, that made all the difference. It's pretty much as simple as that.''
Clemens expressed interest in pitching for the United States Olympic team in Athens next August, but the team was eliminated in regional qualifying on Nov. 7. As recently as Nov. 12, he said there was ''no scenario'' under which he would play again. He had seemingly capped a remarkable career by going 17-9 in a regular season that included his 300th victory in June and a standing ovation at Fenway Park in August, when Red Sox fans who had jeered him for years gave him what they thought was a final salute.
After what appeared to be Clemens's final pitch, a fastball in a strikeout of Florida's Luis Castillo in the seventh inning of Game 4 of the World Series, the fans at Pro Player Stadium rose in tribute, with Marlins players doing the same. Clemens lifted his cap and touched his glove to his heart, signaling the finality of the moment.
''At that point, I was done in my mind,'' Clemens said. ''Once Andy signed here and Houston was able to acquire him, everything started falling into my lap, and things started changing that way.''
By then, the Yankees had no chance to retain him. Believing that Clemens was retired, the Yankees did not offer him salary arbitration by the Dec. 7 deadline, closing their negotiating window until May 1.
The Yankees do not receive any draft choices as compensation for Clemens's departure.
General Manager Brian Cashman said that if the Yankees had known Clemens would play again, they would have tried to sway him to stay in New York.
''We would have definitely had a discussion about it,'' Cashman said. ''But we all have the right to change our mind.''
Randy Hendricks, one of Clemens's agents, said that after Pettitte signed with the Astros, the Yankees' president, Randy Levine, told him the Yankees would understand if Clemens did the same. ''Randy Levine told me a day or two after Andy signed that if Roger signed with the Astros, it would be with the Yankees' blessing, which Roger greatly appreciated,'' Hendricks said in an e-mail message.
Even if the Yankees could have spoken further with Clemens, Hendricks said, there was no chance he would have re-signed with them. Clemens has four sons, including two in high school, and the Astros were the only team he considered.
''We all thought he was retired, including Roger,'' Hendricks said. ''The big difference was Andy signing and the response of the Houston community. He would not have played anywhere else.''
After Pettitte's Dec. 11 signing, Clemens was all but hounded to join him. His sons gave him an Astros hat for Christmas. Clemens golfed with Astros first baseman Jeff Bagwell. A Houston radio station offered Clemens another Hummer if he signed; in a going-away gift, Clemens received one from his Yankees teammates in the color of the University of Texas, his alma mater.
''I'm going to hold that radio station to it, because my wife wants a white one,'' Clemens said. ''She doesn't want a burnt orange one.''
The final push came from the Astros' chairman, Drayton McLane, who assured Clemens he could leave road trips on days he was not pitching if sons Koby, 17, or Kory, 15, had an athletic event.
''Drayton came to my house and discussed certain issues,'' Clemens said. ''I definitely will be able to see my two older boys play ball, and we'll have to balance it out to make both ends work. I fully intend to do that.''
At a news conference at Minute Maid Park in Houston yesterday, Clemens was hailed as a civic treasure.
''This is a celebration for the people of Houston,'' said Houston's mayor, Bill White, addressing Clemens, ''and I want to say thank you.''
Clemens will benefit if the Astros' attendance increases markedly this season. He will receive a $200,000 bonus if the Astros draw 2.8 million fans, and $200,000 at each 100,000 interval up to 3.4 million. The Astros drew 2.45 million fans last season, when they finished 87-75, one game behind the Chicago Cubs in the National League Central.
The Houston Chronicle reported that the deal included a 10-year personal services contract for Clemens after he retires. ''When people think of the Houston Astros, I want them to think of Roger Clemens,'' McLane told The Chronicle.
The Yankees had thought of Clemens as their own, inviting him to spring training as an instructor, and, according to Clemens, engaging him in talks about a broadcasting job.
But now Clemens is an Astro, adding a fourth team to his future Hall of Fame plaque. Clemens has been adamant about wearing a Yankees cap on his plaque, even though he spent his first 13 seasons with Boston and only five in New York. Clemens said yesterday that he still wanted to represent the Yankees in Cooperstown, and Jeff Idelson, a vice president at the Hall of Fame, said Clemens's opinion would be considered.
''His career is still evolving,'' Idelson said. ''I said a year ago that we'd sit down with him if he were elected in 2008. Now it'll be 2009, if he only plays one more year.''
Clemens deflected a question about whether this would be his final season, saying it was a matter he was not thinking about. He also said he had no concerns about playing in the National League, where he will have to bat. Clemens is a well-known intimidator on the mound who has spent all 20 major league seasons in the American League, batting only during interleague play and the World Series.
For Clemens, it was a day to celebrate. He has more history to make, but none of it will be for the Yankees.
''No one will ever take away from me what I did there -- the championship rings, the 300th-win game,'' Clemens said of the Yankees. ''That will never diminish.''
BASEBALL
