The number of public companies that revised their annual financial statements climbed to a record last year, according to preliminary findings from a study.
There were 206 restatements of annual audited financial reports last year, up from 183 in 2002, according to a summary of the study, which is expected to be released today by the Huron Consulting Group, which was founded by senior consultants from several firms, including the Arthur Andersen accounting firm.
The total number of restatements, which includes revisions to quarterly reports, fell slightly, to 323 from 330 in 2002.
''The good news is it looks like we're at least starting to level off,'' said Lynn Turner, former chief accountant at the Securities and Exchange Commission and managing director for research at Glass Lewis, a research firm in San Francisco. ''The bad news is, we're still as high as what we've been in recent years.''
The increase in the number of revised annual financial reports is particularly troubling, Mr. Turner said, given that the number of companies filing results with the S.E.C. has declined. According to a Huron study released last year, the number of public companies registered with the S.E.C. fell 14 percent from 1999 to 2002, to fewer than 9,400 from nearly 10,600.
Huron Consulting will release its full report on restatements some time next month, the chief operating officer, Joseph J. Floyd, said. Closer analysis should disclose the kinds of problems that led to restatements of audited financial reports, Mr. Floyd said. ''I don't think we have really dug into what were some of the trends by issues'' in studies in previous years, he said.
From the study's results, it appears that overall reasons for restatements changed last year. While in past years, most corrections involved recognition of revenue, reserves -- money set aside to cover anticipated costs for restructuring, liability, debts that cannot be collected or other expenses -- were the most common issue in 2003. The number of restatements involving reserves and contingent funds rose to 68 last year, from 53 in 2002 and 36 in 2001, according to the study.
''This whole category, I think, is one that has caught a lot of attention from a lot of interested parties,'' Mr. Floyd said.
Dennis R. Beresford, a professor of accounting at the University of Georgia, said that there were many types of reserves but most involved an estimate of a future cost to the company.  While estimates may change, Mr. Beresford said, ''changes in estimates don't require restatements.''
That means that companies either deliberately overstated or understated needed reserves, or they found significant errors, he said. In a case of fraud, Mr. Beresford said, a company might overestimate needed reserves to reduce current profits and have money available in later, leaner years, or underestimate them in order to bolster revenue in the current period.
''It means that companies either through oversight or through purposeful behavior just deliberately screwed this up,'' he said.
Mr. Beresford also expressed surprise that the number of restatements of audited financial results had risen.
''I know there were a lot of restatements that followed another accounting firm taking over from Andersen,'' he said, referring to Arthur Andersen, the firm that audited Enron and in 2002 was convicted of obstruction of justice for trying to hinder the government's investigation of the accounting by Enron. ''I would've thought most of those would've worked their way through the system in 2002.''
