Brian Cashman never invited Roger Clemens for a sit-down meeting to discuss Clemens's retirement plans. But it was understood in passing conversation that Clemens would be done after the season.
''Did I talk to him about retiring? Yeah,'' said Cashman, the Yankees' general manager. ''He said he was taking it to the house.''
Clemens is still doing that. The catch is that he will be commuting from his house to Minute Maid Park, where he will pitch for the Houston Astros. Cashman never expected that at the start of the off-season, but he said yesterday that he had no hard feelings about Clemens's decision to continue playing.
''He doesn't need to justify his decision to me,'' Cashman said. ''If I talk to him, I'll ask how his family's doing and how he's doing. We're going to concentrate on the 2004 Yankees, and, obviously, he's going to concentrate on the 2004 Astros. They're going to get one of the greatest competitors of all time.''
George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, praised Clemens in a statement while expressing some of the Yankees' befuddlement at his decision.
''Roger Clemens was a great warrior for the Yankees -- a teacher and a leader,'' Steinbrenner said. ''He told the world he was retiring, and we had no choice but to believe him.''
In a conference call with reporters, Clemens said he did not worry about tarnishing his Yankees legacy or damaging his relationship with Steinbrenner. He said he tried to call Steinbrenner this off-season, including after Steinbrenner fainted last month.
''There's been so many players that have come through there and left and still have great ties with the Yankees,'' Clemens said. ''I don't foresee that being a problem. I can't tell you how many Yankee fans I've run into that have said, 'If you keep playing, we'll root you on, and thanks for everything you did in New York.' Everybody I've run into, it's been nothing but positive.''
Clemens joined the Yankees in a February 1999 trade that sent David Wells to the Toronto Blue Jays. Many Yankees fans reviled Clemens from his years with Toronto and Boston, but he won them over with five seasons of largely exceptional performances.
Cashman has called Clemens perhaps his best acquisition, and he said Clemens fulfilled all of the Yankees' expectations.
''I'll always think of him as a Yankee,'' Cashman said. ''He lived up to everything we could have ever asked for when we decided to acquire him from the Blue Jays.''
Clemens, who said he spoke last weekend with the Yankees' captain, Derek Jeter, has maintained that he always left open the possibility of playing again. Even before he decided on it, Clemens had publicly compared himself to Michael Jordan, who returned to the N.B.A. after his first two retirements.
''I'm kind of glad I left that percentage point open,'' Clemens said, though he added, ''I never expected this to happen.''
Asked during the conference call if fans would think he was a phony or a fraud by deciding to play after all, Clemens bristled.
''A lot of Yankee fans say, 'We'll miss you in New York,' and I will miss them terribly,'' Clemens said. ''Fraudulent is a little strong word, I think.''
INSIDE PITCH
The Yankees signed TONY CLARK to a one-year, $750,000 contract to back up JASON GIAMBI at first base. Clark, 31, had 16 homers in 254 at-bats for the Mets last season
BASEBALL
