Last week, Texas A&amp;M abolished its preferential admission policy for the relatives of alumni, calling it an ''obvious inconsistency'' in a system that is supposedly based on merit alone. Yet the move has hardly ended the furor swirling around the university's admissions policies.
Local politicians had been outraged that the university continued to give special treatment to relatives, or legacies, the vast majority of whom are white, while refusing to give the same consideration to minority applicants.
But ending preferences for legacies was not their goal. In fact, the same politicians said yesterday that scrapping the policy was a poor substitute for reinstating affirmative action as a way to achieve diversity.
''This discussion is far from over,'' said State Representative Garnet Coleman, Democrat of Houston. ''They act like they've done something for students of color by eliminating the legacy program. They have not. The new policy takes away the advantage of some students, but it does not remedy the obstacles faced by students of color and women.''
Texas A&amp;M's decision underscores the volatile relationship between affirmative action and legacy preferences. While one has been the center of intense legal struggles, the other has often been cited as no less discriminatory but scarcely challenged in courts.
Other public universities, like the University of Georgia, have eliminated their legacy programs in recent years, in part to ensure that if affirmative action is not being applied, then neither are other nonacademic criteria.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina has made the issue part of his campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination, saying legacy programs give an ''unfair advantage'' to those who do not need it. Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, has also introduced legislation to require universities to put out detailed statistics on the race and income of the students who benefit from the practice.
Even ardent opponents of affirmative action often condemn legacy programs, arguing that they perpetuate the same kind of advantages as considerations of race.
Edward Blum, a senior fellow at the Center for Equal Opportunity, which opposes affirmative action, described the legacy programs as ''bad educational policy,'' saying, ''It smacks of elitism.''
Robert M. Gates, the president of Texas A&amp;M, acted last week after local lawmakers, members of Congress and community groups held news conferences across the state to denounce the university's preferential treatment of legacies.
The outcry came because the university decided last month against using affirmative action in admissions. That left it in the unusual position of rejecting race as a factor while still allowing family ties to influence the admissions process.
''To be so adamant about race not being a factor and then to have such a large legacy program is hypocrisy,'' said State Senator Rodney Ellis, Democrat of Houston. ''It's just so blatantly inconsistent that it defies common sense.''
At highly selective universities, several nonacademic factors are usually considered simultaneously, including race, geography, legacy and sometimes even how generous a family may later be to the university.
At Texas A&amp;M, most students are accepted on the strength of their academics, Dr. Gates said. He also said that while some alumni were frustrated by the elimination of the legacy program, most understood the reasons for doing away with it.
In each of the last two years, more than 300 white students were ultimately admitted to the university because their family members had gone there, The Houston Chronicle reported this month. That is nearly as many as the total number of black students admitted to the university in those years.
Because of a 1996 appeals court ruling known as Hopwood, universities in Texas were barred from considering race in admissions until a Supreme Court ruling in June allowed the practice. Since then, several of Texas A&amp;M's competitors have begun to look at race once again.
But Dr. Gates contends that his recent revamping of the university's admissions policies were intended to increase diversity on campus. More students will be evaluated on the basis of their hardships, experiences and leadership potential than before, he said, and outreach in predominantly minority areas will be particularly aggressive.
