A therapy that increases patients' survival rate to 4.7 percent from 1.5 percent may not sound like a breakthrough, but that is how an editorial in a medical journal last week described a new treatment to revive people whose hearts had suddenly stopped.
The new advance was an old drug, vasopressin, injected before a shot of the standard therapy, adrenaline. In people who had no pulse or electrical activity in their hearts, a condition called asystole that is almost always fatal, 12 of 257, or 4.7 percent, who got vasopressin survived, in contrast to only 4 of 262, or 1.5 percent, who got adrenaline.
The findings, published in The New England Journal of Medicine, came from a study of 1,186 people in Austria, Germany and Switzerland led by Dr. Volker Wenzel of the University of Innsbruck.
In the editorial accompanying the study, Dr. Kevin McIntyre, a cardiologist and an associate professor of medicine at Harvard, wrote, ''These advances should be translated into a new standard of care without delay.''
In a telephone interview, Dr. McIntyre said: ''When you consider that there have been years of pretty dismal success in the resuscitation of patients with asystole, I think this could be seen as a distinct breakthrough. There's been so little progress that a bit of promise is exactly what we need.''
Dr. Vinay Nadkarni, a spokesman for the American Heart Association and an associate professor of anesthesiology and pediatrics at the University of Pennsylvania, said the heart association would consider the study in developing new guidelines for resuscitation.
Dr. Nadkarni also said a study like Dr. Wenzel's would have been extremely difficult to conduct in the United States, because the experiment was done without consent from patients or their families. Relatives were not always available, and the patients themselves were unconscious, so they were simply assigned at random to get the standard treatment, adrenaline alone, or vasopressin followed by adrenaline if the vasopressin alone did not work. Hospital ethics boards permitted the study, and when surviving patients and their families were told about it later, they were free to withdraw from further study.
''There is currently an expensive and complex mechanism to get an exception from informed consent in this country,'' Dr. Nadkarni said. ''It's really stifled cardiac arrest research. Most of the recent resuscitation research has had to be done outside the U.S.''
He added: ''This group really did this study on a shoestring budget. Vasopressin is a very commonly available, relatively cheap drug. There's not a lot of interest from industry to support studies.''
In the United States, about 1,000 people a day die suddenly of cardiac arrest. It is not the same as a heart attack, though a severe heart attack can bring it on. Cardiac arrest is often caused by coronary artery disease, which can damage the nerve tissue that generates electrical impulses to regulate the heartbeat. Many people have collapsed and died without even knowing they had heart disease.
More than 50 percent of patients with cardiac arrest have a condition called ventricular fibrillation, in which chaotic electrical activity prevents the heart from beating effectively. If a defibrillator is available to shock the heart back into a normal rhythm within a few minutes, many patients can be saved. But 20 to 40 percent of patients in cardiac arrest have asystole, which does not respond to a defibrillator. Instead, they are treated with rescue breathing and chest compressions, and a shot of adrenaline, which has been used for about 100 years to try to revive people whose hearts have stopped. But those efforts usually fail.
When doctors find patients in asystole, Dr. McIntyre said, they are ''tempted to throw up their hands.''
Current medical guidelines call for adrenaline, with vasopressin considered as a secondary alternative, because doctors had little information about using it by itself for asystole.
Dr. Wenzel's group decided to study vasopressin because some small studies in people and in the laboratory suggested that it might help improve the oxygen supply to the heart and the brain. In addition, adrenaline has drawbacks, like depleting the body's oxygen and disrupting heart rhythm.
Dr. Wenzel said he was surprised to find that vasopressin seemed to help people with asystole. On the basis of laboratory work, he said, he had expected that the drug would improve survival rates in other patients, people who had ventricular fibrillation that did not respond to a defibrillator.
But, he said, ''A lot of times you cannot directly extrapolate the experience from the lab to the emergency medical service or the intensive care unit.''
