Was Howard Dean ever really regarded as the Birkenstock candidate? That seems a fuzzy memory now, six days before the Iowa caucuses, as the Democratic front-runner has disported himself day in and day out on the campaign trail in a manner that has failed to conjure up images of Buffalo Springfield albums or the graphics on a pint of Ben &amp; Jerry's. So committed has Dr. Dean been to his let's-do-business look of rolled shirt sleeves and a meticulously knotted tie that he stuck to it even while handing out pancakes from behind a griddle to voters in Iowa over the weekend. No T-shirts for him. Instead, he protected his oxford cloth with a green apron.
Criticized for his imbalances of opinion -- reversing his view on free trade, evincing support for the Iraq war resolution while maintaining an antiwar platform -- Dr. Dean has remained consistent in his dress, while his opponents have made greater use of the politician's closet.
Despite their differences, most of the candidates have styled themselves in accordance with the customary code of presidential primary dress. The goal, paradoxically, is to look unpresidential, said Bruce Bimber, a professor of political science and communication at the University of California at Santa Barbara. ''Dressing down, rolling up your shirt sleeves, this is universal; you're saying I'm not part of the government you're electing me to,'' Professor Bimber said. ''We haven't loved authority in an unmitigated way since Kennedy.''
Representative Richard A. Gephardt has availed himself of the working man's cloth and the golfer's pullover. He might turn up in a union jacket if he's addressing members of the International Association of Machinists or speaking at a V.F.W. hall. And he might opt for a sweater and khakis in intimate settings. ''Clearly he's got to expand the base beyond unions to middle class voters so this makes sense,'' said David Redlawsk, a professor of political science at the University of Iowa. ''I think there's a real Middle America thing to the V-neck sweater,'' he added. ''It's practical and it covers up a wrinkled shirt.''
''Middle America'' is not the message instantly conveyed by the V-neck sweaters favored by Joseph I. Lieberman, who has been concentrating his campaign efforts in New Hampshire. Senator Lieberman has appeared in the sort with necklines high up to the collarbone. It is disconcertingly fashion-forward for a man of his devout faith and seriousness -- a look more befitting a candidate who might do his best stump work at an East Hampton fund-raiser. ''This smacks of a bad adviser trying to make him seem less grandfatherly,'' said Marion Maneker, author of ''Dreaming in the Dark: Lessons in Men's Style From the Movies.'' Instead, Mr. Maneker added, ''the effect is of a German auto executive.''
It is hard to recall when the sweater has been the subject of so much attention in a presidential race. Last week Gen. Wesley K. Clark bought a green wool crew neck at an L. L. Bean outlet in Concord, N.H., while a team of reporters waited outside. When he put on an argyle sweater, also in New Hampshire, political commentators balked at his misguided effort to lure female voters in a garment that calls to mind a children's television show host. Playing to his audience too literally, he switched to a sweatshirt that simply read ''college'' when doling out pancakes himself at a breakfast held at Dartmouth College.
Beyond that, every candidate is using style to militate against some specific negative preconception. Knowing the world does not take him as seriously as it might, the Rev. Al Sharpton rarely goes anywhere in anything other than a suit.
At the same time, Senator John Kerry has tried to dilute his image as a man who has no idea how to dig into a Philadelphia cheese steak. On the campaign trail, he has tried to make voters forget he is worth hundreds of millions of dollars by throwing on a leather bomber jacket with patches. It is meant to reinforce the idea that Senator Kerry would be fully capable of getting up in front of a karaoke machine and singing all the lyrics to ''Jungleland,'' if asked. Lately, he's attired himself more effortlessly in a canvas hunting jacket.
Senator John Edwards has a somewhat different issue to combat -- that he is, for lack of a more appropriate phrase, too pretty. Teased early on in the campaign for his perfectly coiffed hair and dubbed the Breck Girl, Senator Edwards has campaigned in fleece-lined windbreakers, suggesting a suburban Regular Joe-ness. For the now enormously wealthy son of a millworker, it is a look that is neither too moneyed nor self-consciously like a plumber.
From a fashion point of view, none of the candidates look particularly eye-catching. But that is how it must be, as evidenced by Dr. Dean's immediate backtracking last fall after telling of being complimented on his appearance and suggesting he was a metrosexual. On second thought he was really a square, he said. ''In our age when we venerate style, we still don't like our politicians to look stylish,'' Mr. Maneker said. ''The great men of style in government were guys like Dean Acheson, who couldn't ever have been elected.''
