When the German cabaret singer Ute Lemper narrows her eyes, purses her lips and strikes the pose of a cultural ambassador haughtily dispensing Old World sophistication to New World barbarians, the comparisons with Marlene Dietrich are inescapable. No matter that their voices have little in common. Dietrich's low, husky come-ons and Ms. Lemper's fierce cat-scratching yowl imply very different artistic temperaments. But both evoke the commanding arrogance of an international femme fatale who knows 10 times more about life and love than the rest of us poor fools.
Multilingual and pan-European in outlook, Ms. Lemper sings Jacques Brel and Édith Piaf as well as Brecht-Weill and Frederick Hollander. And in her new show, ''Voyage,'' she expands her reach to touch Middle Eastern and South American territory, accompanied by an extremely flexible trio of piano, guitar and drums. At Friday's opening-night show of an engagement that runs through Jan. 31 at the Cafe Carlyle, there was even an original song, ''September Mourn,'' about 9/11, written in English but stiffly Germanic in its diction.
Early in the show Ms. Lemper recalled that outspoken political satire was a fundamental ingredient of German cabaret during the Weimar era. And throughout the program she compared that period and its ''divine decadence'' (to quote Sally Bowles) to today, with its discordant mixture of post-9/11 anxieties and brazen greed and titillation. The high point Friday night was a version of Brecht and Weill's ''Moritat'' that became a musical montage incorporating fragments of ''Alabama Song'' (from ''The Rise and Fall of the City of Mahagonny'') and ''All That Jazz'' (from ''Chicago'').
The number was the most pointed example of Ms. Lemper's restless iconoclasm. A radical ironist, she exerts a mimelike control over every gesture, wildly rolling her eyes and underlining lyrics with forceful body language that parodies the angularity of German Expressionist portraiture. Gone is the core of romanticism that informed Dietrich's performances. Ms. Lemper is far more interested in breaking boundaries than in breaking hearts, and as she crashes through barriers, her studied recklessness is at once compelling and a little scary.
CABARET REVIEW
