WHEN H.I.V. drained Carlos Sandoval of his health and forced him to leave behind his career as a Manhattan lawyer, he retreated to the East End of Long Island to figure out where his life was headed. The answer, as it turned out, was to the Sundance Film Festival.
In September 2000, Mr. Sandoval, 51, was reading a newspaper at his boyfriend's home in Amagansett when he came across an article about two Latino day laborers from the hamlet of Farmingville who had been attacked by white men promising work. Mr. Sandoval, whose heritage is Puerto Rican and Mexican-American, was horrified by the crimes.
Even though he had no experience in filmmaking, Mr. Sandoval became determined to make a documentary to examine the attacks and the boiling pot that Farmingville had become. The project would take two years, it would cost $572,000, and it would immerse Mr. Sandoval, a soft-spoken man, into a community where emotions were at a fever pitch and where residents on both sides of the debate often screamed first and thought later.
''I didn't think about how scared I would be,'' Mr. Sandoval said. ''I was in hostile territory, alone.''
The movie that emerged, ''Farmingville,'' will be shown at Sundance on Sunday, one of 16 documentaries in competition at the film festival.
One recent evening, Mr. Sandoval and his co-director on the project, Catherine Tambini, were huddled inside Mr. Sandoval's Upper West Side apartment preparing for the festival. The neat studio with the egg yolk-colored walls had become a cluttered editing room and repository for some 250 videotapes of raw footage.
Mr. Sandoval bit his lower lip as he apologized for the clutter, then went back to watching his movie, which was playing on a television in the corner. The lawyer turned filmmaker, who attempts eloquence on every subject, said he saw the film as a rondel, a poem that returns to a refrain as it spools along.
The product playing on the television appeared much more raw. Protesters screamed at each other. The camera swept over the grimy abandoned building where the Farmingville laborers were attacked. A laborer pulled up his shirt to reveal a deep scar.
After deciding to make the documentary, Mr. Sandoval moved into Farmingville in early 2001, renting a bungalow for $850 a month. He tried to create a home there and weave himself into the community. He planted flowers in his backyard and said hello to his neighbors. He went to church on Sunday and took chicken-and-rice dinners to community meetings.
Mr. Sandoval wanted to tell the immigration story from both sides, so he had to make friends with the laborers as well as the non-Latino residents of Farmingville who derided them. Sometimes, his efforts flopped. Often people did not trust Mr. Sandoval and his crew, and they would refuse to be interviewed, or would agree to participate in the movie only to back out or leave town.
But he became friends with others, like Margaret Bianculli-Dyber, who led a residents' group that protests illegal immigration. Ms. Bianculli-Dyber, who is featured in the movie, espouses views that are the opposite of Mr. Sandoval's sympathies with immigrants and laborers, yet Mr. Sandoval said he grew to like Ms. Bianculli-Dyber's wit. ''It's very hard for me to judge and hold people to judgments,'' he said.
Mr. Sandoval said that being in Farmingville during such tumult was at times a frightening and unfamiliar life for him and for Ms. Tambini. They talked on cellphones for fear that a land-line call would be tapped, and they stored footage of the movie in a heavy safe, worried that someone might set fire to Mr. Sandoval's rented bungalow.
The 78-minute documentary, culled from the 200 hours of footage that Mr. Sandoval and Ms. Tambini had gathered, gives an intimate glimpse into the world of Farmingville, where more than 1,000 laborers arrive each year to work as landscapers and handymen. With spare narration, the movie swoops from the street corners where laborers wait for work to rancorous meetings of the Suffolk County Legislature to the bedrooms and living rooms of immigrants and anti-immigration activists.
Mr. Sandoval is no Pollyanna, but he has idealistic goals for the movie. He said it was his attempt to curb racism like the kind he had experienced growing up in Southern California.
''He's got the altar boy mentality,'' Ms. Tambini said. ''He's always trying to do the right thing.''
He said he never got involved in gangs like many others in his neighborhood, but he disappointed his mother all the same when he went to Harvard, and later to law school at the University of Chicago, instead of becoming a priest.
His health has improved since 1996, when he left law, but at the time, Mr. Sandoval did not know whether he would live more than another few years, he said. Making the movie was an attempt to do something significant before he died.
''I though this was going to be my swan song,'' he said, quickly apologizing for being so maudlin.
PUBLIC LIVES
