Israel's president, Moshe Katsav, issued an invitation on Monday to the Syrian president, Bashar al-Assad, to come to Jerusalem, but Syria rebuffed the offer as a stunt.
It was the latest strange sign that while they are still not talking openly to each other, Israeli and Syrian leaders seem suddenly preoccupied with talking about each other to everyone else.
Through Turkish, Egyptian and other channels, Mr. Assad has let it be known that he would like to resume talks that collapsed in 2000. Through many of the same conduits, the Israeli government has let it be known that it suspects Mr. Assad is merely trying to evade American pressure.
Separately, the Israeli government disclosed the arrest of an Israeli Jew accused of using his taxi to drive a suicide bomber to the site of an attack on Dec. 25 that left four people dead.
The man, Ofer Schwartzbaum, a 39-year-old settler living in the West Bank, admitted that he had known he was driving two Palestinians who did not have legal permits, the government said. But he said he had not known he was driving a suicide bomber and his accomplice, officials added.
For about $23, he carried the two men on a short trip from an Israeli Arab town, Kfar Kassem, to a bus stop on the Geha highway. One of them later blew himself up.
The bomber was from a West Bank village, Beit Furik, and it was not disclosed how he had entered Israel in the first place.
Responding to a question about Syria's overtures, Prime Minister Ariel Sharon said Sunday night that Israel would agree to begin negotiations only after Syria dropped all support for terrorism and abandoned any conditions of its own.
But Mr. Katsav, whose position is largely ceremonial, said he placed no conditions on his invitation. ''There is no precondition,'' he told Israel Radio. ''He is invited, as far as I am concerned, to Jerusalem to meet with the state leaders.''
But Mr. Katsav also accused Syria of using airplanes sent to Iran with earthquake relief to fly weapons back to Lebanon for Hezbollah, the Lebanese guerrilla group.
A senior Israeli security official said that through Hezbollah, Syria was sponsoring Palestinian terrorist attacks against Israel. President Assad, he said, ''is the axis around which everything moves.'' He said that in making overtures to Israel, Mr. Assad was reacting to American pressure that was strengthened by the Iraq war.
The Israeli official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said Syria, like Libya, was committed to radicalism not for ideological reasons but for pragmatic ones, to rally national support. He said that meant the Syrian leadership could change course if it felt support for terrorism threatened its interests rather than protecting them.
Mr. Sharon's office was silent about the president's invitation, in what was widely interpreted as a signal of disapproval.
Syria swiftly rejected the invitation. The official Syrian Arab News Agency said, ''Partial solutions and media maneuvers do not achieve peace.''
Silvan Shalom, the Israeli foreign minister, said the Syrian rejection showed ''that the Syrian leadership is not serious and is not demonstrating willingness and readiness.''
Syria's news agency said the government's position was that talks on the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights should resume where they left off. But Mr. Sharon has insisted that they start from scratch.
The reason for that disagreement, apparently, is that the only area remaining in dispute after the earlier negotiations was a small strip of land at the edge of the Sea of Galilee. For Mr. Sharon, to resume where talks broke off would be to concede almost all the Golan Heights, a strategic redoubt where some 17,000 Jewish settlers live.
Mr. Sharon has repeatedly suggested that he would prefer to focus on talks, now frozen, with the Palestinians. He said again on Monday in a speech to Parliament that if those peace talks failed, he would pursue a plan to separate the populations unilaterally, moving some Israeli settlements and withdrawing some forces from the occupied areas of the West Bank and the Gaza Strip.
Mr. Sharon has said he would yield far less territory in this unilateral plan than he would through a negotiated agreement.
The deputy prime minister, Ehud Olmert, said in an interview on Monday in The Jerusalem Post that Mr. Sharon might begin his unilateral withdrawal in the second half of 2004.
