The Police Department is expanding a year-old anticrime initiative that narrowly focuses officers on neighborhoods, subway stations and housing projects with nagging crime problems, the mayor and the police commissioner announced yesterday.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly have often credited the initiative, Operation Impact, with helping to reduce violent crime around the city, and yesterday they said it decreased crime 33 percent last year in the areas where it operated.
The expanded initiative will funnel more than 1,000 rookie police officers and about 700 officers who worked on it last year into 52 new impact zones, officials said. The areas include 26 subway stations in the Bronx, Brooklyn and Manhattan, parts of 22 precincts around the city and 9 housing developments in Brooklyn and the Bronx. The planned expansion was first reported in The New York Post on Sunday.
Some of the zones are as small as a subway station or, in one case, a stretch of Church Avenue in East Flatbush that is several blocks long. Others encompass sprawling housing developments or swaths of precincts, like the 47th in the Eastchester section of the Bronx. They include crime-prone areas, like East New York in Brooklyn, which has two zones, and the Upper East Side of Manhattan, where a zone stretches from East 83rd Street to East 89th Street, from Lexington to Second Avenues, officials said.
Mayor Bloomberg, who along with Mr. Kelly announced the expansion at a news conference at the 104th Precinct in Ridgewood, Queens, one of four precincts to have new impact zones added this year, said the department would funnel new officers to the zones twice a year, as they graduated from the Police Academy.
''We keep changing our strategy as the needs in this city change,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. He added that the Police Department did sophisticated analysis to identify and select the zones and then flooded them with the new officers along with veterans and supervisors from gang and narcotics units.
''Going where the bad guys are is the right thing to do,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''Just spreading your resources throughout the entire city wastes them and doesn't give you enough to focus on addressing the real problems.''
Commissioner Kelly said that the department carefully monitored activity in the areas around the zones on a daily basis. ''The secret is to be agile, to be flexible,'' he said. Asked whether the intense focus on the zones pushed crime to other areas, Mr. Kelly said, ''It's something that we constantly have to be concerned about,'' adding, ''We look at displacement all the time.''
Last year, the Police Department coordinated the initiative with the city's five district attorneys and it resulted in more than 32,000 arrests and nearly 376,000 summonses in the impact areas, officials said.
