Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, Iran's supreme religious leader, said Monday that he would not intervene for the moment in the gathering confrontation between the two main political camps in Iran -- the hard-liners and the reformists -- after a review panel that he controls barred hundreds of reformist candidates from running in parliamentary elections next month.
Ayatollah Khamenei, meeting with governors from around the country who threatened to resign en masse if the exclusions stood, urged them to avoid tension.
''Once all legal steps have been exhausted, if we arrive at a sensitive situation which demands a decision, there can be no doubt that I will intervene and give my opinion,'' he was quoted as saying on state-run television.
''We must respect the law and act according to it, because a bad law is better than lawlessness and violation of the law,'' he added.
The hard-line Guardian Council, which has blocked most reforms aimed at strengthening civil society in Iran, is charged with vetting the credentials of all candidates. It rejected nearly half of the 8,200 candidates who had registered to run for the 290-seat Parliament on Feb. 20, including some 80 current members of Parliament.
The Guardian Council has disqualified candidates in previous elections, but this is the first time it has eliminated such a large number of prominent members of Parliament who had won their seats with high number of votes, among them the brother of President Mohammad Khatami.
The conservatives took a drubbing in the 2000 parliamentary elections, losing control of the legislative body to the reformists. Although the Guardian Council still stymied the reformists' attempts to change Iran, this latest move is viewed by political analysts as an attempt by the conservatives to use all power available to them to make sure they regain control of Parliament.
In recent weeks, the conservatives have also been co-opting some of the reformist agenda, carrying out changes that will make Iran less isolated internationally. They include accepting more inspections of its nuclear facilities and opening up to formerly estranged neighbors like Egypt.
''It seems that the conservatives are determined to eliminate their political rival in the political scene during this election,'' said Saeed Laylaz, an Iranian journalist and political analyst. ''They know that people are too disappointed with the reformers to come to the streets.''
Outsiders often find Iran's complicated political process baffling. On Monday in Tehran, Javier Solana, the head of foreign policy for the European Union, suggested that Europe would find it difficult to view the coming elections as fair if a large number of current politicians were barred, and said questionable elections might affect relations.
''The fairness of an election is not only on the day of the election; the process should be fair,'' he said at a news conference with Kamal Kharrazi, the Iranian foreign minister. ''It is very difficult for me to explain to the Europeans how M.P.'s who are representatives of people could not participate again in elections.''
Many of the reformist members of Parliament barred from running protested by continuing a sit-in that began Sunday, and they threatened to take further action if the decision was not reversed. Eliminated candidates have the right to appeal to a Guardian Council oversight panel, but little change is expected.
The reformists are in something of a bind, because their plight is unlikely to attract much popular protest. Although Iranians, especially the young, gave them the landslide victory four years ago, their supporters have been disappointed that they did not use their popular mandate to push harder to carry out reforms. In the meantime, scores of newspapers have been closed and student protesters have often been arrested.
''We had said that we will not participate in a show election, and if our protest does not bring any results, we will not be able to participate in the elections,'' said Ali Shakourirad, one of the legislators in the sit-in. ''We want all candidates who have been eliminated illegally to be allowed to run in the elections.''
He said reformers had predicted that a large number of them would be barred. ''But we participated in the elections because we consider elections to be the best channel for democracy,'' he added. ''We do not want to be forced to pay a high price for democracy.''
Parliament members with impeccable revolutionary credentials expressed surprise over their rejections. One of them, Ali Hosseini, told the daily Iran that he was in the opposition before the 1979 revolution and had spent time in jail with Ayatollah Khamenei. Reza Youssefian said he had volunteered to fight in the war with Iraq at the age of 15 and had served eight years as a prisoner of war in Iraq.
Conservative candidates swept the municipal council elections last year because reformist supporters stayed away from the polls as a means of protesting the lack of change in Iran. Parliamentary elections were expected to follow the same pattern, and the lukewarm support for the protesting members of Parliament underscored that.
Leaders of the student movement met with the reformist legislators in a sign of solidarity, but said they would not take further action. Students took to the streets in the thousands in June to protest limits on their freedom.
''Unfortunately, members of Parliament did not object to the widespread rejection of candidates until their own turn came, but we will support any action that is against undemocratic means,'' said Mehdi Aminzadeh, one of the leaders of a student movement called Office for Fostering Unity.
''Reformers faced obstacles during their tenure, but we believe that they did not have a clear plan and were not firm enough to force the establishment to give in to the people's demand,'' he added.
