India's governing party, seeking to capitalize on both a booming economy and new peace prospects with Pakistan, said Monday that it would seek to hold early elections with the aim of securing a renewed mandate by April.
The national executive of the Bharatiya Janata Party, which leads a governing coalition of more than 20 parties, adopted a resolution at the end of a two-day meeting in Hyderabad calling on the government to seek early elections.
''The hour of reckoning has come,'' Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee said. ''The situation is in our favor. We have been able to win the people's confidence with our performance. It is natural to think that we should have a fresh mandate.''
The announcement follows weeks of speculation that the party would seek to move up the elections, which must be held by the fall, in order to capitalize on its domestic and foreign policy successes.
On the back of a strong monsoon, a boon to agriculture, India's economy is expected to grow at least 7 percent in the year ending in March. Mr. Vajpayee's agreement last week with Pakistan to restart talks on Kashmir in return for Pakistan's ending of its support for violent separatists has only increased his party's popularity. ''There is a feel-good factor in every walk of life,'' said the party president, M. Venkaiah Naidu.
In an effort to add to that feel-good factor, last week the finance minister, Jaswant Singh, announced some small benefits for the middle classes and for businesses. The top customs rate was cut to 20 percent, from 25 percent, on all nonagricultural goods, for example, and a 4 percent surcharge was eliminated. The government also reduced tariffs on cellphones, refrigerators, washing machines, televisions and computers, and eliminated a 15 percent air-travel tax.
On Sunday, the B.J.P.'s general secretary, Pramod Mahajan, said elections would be held to demonstrate the party's leadership, stability and performance. The meeting in Hyderabad focused on economic policy, with the party vowing to make India an ''economic superpower.''
The Bharatiya Janata Party rose to power on a Hindu nationalist platform, but has lately sought to temper its overt use of Hindutva, or Hindu-ness.
Many in the party believe early elections will free the party to move more quickly on economic reforms, which have often been slowed by political opposition. Many of the measures proposed on Sunday, like expediting changes in the country's electrical power system, have been fought by powerful political constituencies like farmers.
But Mr. Mahajan and Mr. Vajpayee also made clear that the party would try to focus public attention on the disarray of the rival Congress Party, and especially its leader, Sonia Gandhi, the Italian-born widow of Rajiv Gandhi. Mrs. Gandhi's ''ability and nationality'' would also be issues, Mr. Mahajan said on Sunday.
The party passed a resolution saying, ''As far as the B.J.P. is concerned, we are firmly of the view that only Indian-born Indian citizens should occupy the country's top positions.''
The Congress Party, which dominated Indian politics for more than 40 years, is trying to regroup after losing three of four state elections in December. Mrs. Gandhi has been trying to sew up alliances in an effort to bolster the fortunes of a party that long shunned them.
Last week she formed an alliance with the Dravidian Advancement Party of Tamil Nadu. It was a major reversal for Mrs. Gandhi, who in the past had accused that party of facilitating her husband's killing with its support for the Liberation Tigers of Tamil Eelam, Sri Lanka's violent secessionist movement. Rajiv Gandhi was assassinated in 1991 by a woman who was identified as a Tamil Tiger suicide bomber.
At a rally in Hyderabad on Sunday, Mr. Vajpayee made clear that his party would seek to make even Mrs. Gandhi's alliances a target. ''Congress is entering into an alliance with a party which was sometime back accused of assassinating Rajiv Gandhi,'' Mr. Vajpayee said. ''It is an unprincipled alliance.''
Mrs. Gandhi, in turn, while campaigning in Uttar Pradesh, accused the governing coalition of being ''an anti-farmer government.''
The Bharatiya Janata Party could face a tougher fight than its current ebullience suggests. It is struggling in Uttar Pradesh, India's most populous state, and has lost three allies in Tamil Nadu in quick succession.
