Signaling his return to mayoral politics, Fernando Ferrer is expected to report this week that his campaign committee has raised $700,000 over the last few months, officials involved in his fund-raising operation said yesterday.
Mr. Ferrer's fund-raising activity has been watched with great interest by those in the city's political world, because until November, he had not established an exploratory committee or even indicated that he might be a candidate for the 2005 Democratic mayoral nomination.
Mr. Ferrer, the former Bronx borough president who has run twice for mayor, has not declared his candidacy. But the fact that he is working quickly to raise money is the best indication that he intends to be taken seriously as a mayoral contender.
While Mr. Ferrer's supporters insist that he has raised an impressive amount in two months' time, he will nonetheless have a considerable amount of catching-up to do.
All candidates who participate in the city's Campaign Finance Program are required to report their fund-raising activity at regular intervals, and the next filing is Thursday.
Council Speaker Gifford Miller has led the fund-raising among the Democrats, having amassed $1.5 million as of the last filing period in July. He is expected to report another $1 million since then.
William C. Thompson Jr., the city's comptroller, who reported raising $1 million in the last filing period, is expected to show a sharp increase in his fund-raising.
United States Congressman Anthony D. Weiner and Assemblyman Brian McLaughlin are considering running and have each raised more than $1 million. And C. Virginia Fields, the Manhattan borough president, who reported $220,000 as of last July, is expected to have raised several hundred thousand dollars more.
Mr. Ferrer is still viewed as the pre-eminent politician among the city's Hispanic population. His 2001 candidacy caused a surge in Hispanic voting. He also won more than two-thirds of the black vote. He came in first in the Democratic primary for mayor in 2001 and narrowly lost the nomination runoff to Mark Green, the city's public advocate.
