If change comes from the bottom up, the basement of 1414 Brooklyn Avenue in the sprawling, rundown Vanderveer Estates apartment complex in Brooklyn holds hope for improved conditions under the new owners.
On Wednesday night, instead of the usual gangs of scrabbling rats, the basement held only half a rat. ''It's not as bad as it usually is,'' said Carleen Oliver, 74, a retired preacher and unofficial tenant organizer, stepping around the remains.
Across the litter-flecked courtyard, though, Lesa Rouse keeps foil roasting pans in the bedroom of what is now her sixth-floor walkup (the elevator has been broken since Christmas) to catch the water that pours in through the ceiling. The door to the roof, removed by workers during the summer, still lies off its hinges, providing a fresh breeze that is unwelcome in winter, especially when the heat cuts out, which is often.
Vanderveer Estates, 59 brick buildings spread across 30 acres of East Flatbush, is going through one of its periodic cycles of ostensible rebirth. One of the city's larger privately owned working-class enclaves (bigger than all but a few public housing projects), home to about 7,000 mostly Afro-Caribbean and African-American residents, Vanderveer is on its sixth team of owners in the last 20 years. This one is led by the Emmes Group, a Manhattan real estate firm running the property for a California pension fund that bought Vanderveer out of bankruptcy in August for $87 million.
As others have, the new managers vow to make conditions livable again at Vanderveer, a decent address when it was built a half-century ago and was home to, among others, a teenage Barbra Streisand and her family. They plan $15 million in repairs, from overhauling the elevators to replacing all 17,472 windows.
Emmes has asked tenants to be patient. ''This is akin to turning around a battleship,'' said S. Lawrence Davis, a principal of Emmes.
But the history of failure at Vanderveer raises a question: Can anyone profitably operate an immense, rent-stabilized low-income complex without running it into the ground?
Assemblyman N. Nick Perry, who lives around the corner from the complex and has been trying to help right it since the mid-80's, described a circle that has proven impossible to break: New owners come in, make repairs and start getting the more responsible residents involved in keeping things up. Vandals and thoughtless tenants undo some of the work. Management gets sick of having to fix the same things over and over and becomes less responsive, even when problems are not the tenants' fault. Tenants lose faith because they are not getting basic services. The owners focus more and more on just collecting rent. Mistrusts multiply. The place falls apart.
''Even when people come in with good intentions,'' Mr. Perry said, ''they are defeated by the high need to spend money to maintain things.''
Jennifer Levy, the co-director of the housing unit at South Brooklyn Legal Services, which represents poor tenants, said that after years of managerial neglect, the infrastructure of Vanderveer Estates is now worse than those of most city housing projects.
Ms. Oliver's daughter Kimberly Oliver, a counselor at a youth shelter, described the range of conditions: ''Some people have rats, some people have leaks, and some people have rats and leaks.''
And some residents are still doing what they can to bring down the quality of life. Most of the front-door locks are broken, and Kimberly Oliver said that in addition to crime and drugs, she frequently sees dirty diapers flung from windows.
The sagging fortunes of Vanderveer mirror those of many New York neighborhoods. The complex was built in 1949 and 1950 on the site of the old Flatbush Water Works as a haven for working families -- Barbra Streisand lived at 3102 Newkirk Avenue, downstairs from the Chinese restaurant owners who gave her her first job.
Many apartments still have hardwood floors and some building lobbies have chandeliers and potted plants, but Vanderveer has decayed over the years.
In 1981, the owners did $23 million in renovations but botched the job so completely that the city, which helped finance the work, ended up suing the managers. A subsequent landlord hopefully renamed the place New Vanderveer Estates, made $8 million in repairs, started a free summer camp and got the vacancy rate down to 2 percent but eventually threw up its hands.
The next owner ran the number of housing-code violations up to about 14,000 before being convicted of paying bribes to replace union maintenance workers with nonunion help.
In 2001, Citibank foreclosed on another owner, Michael Konig, for not paying his bills and for letting judgment liens from city agencies pile up, and Vanderveer went into receivership. The receiver did some repairs and got the number of code violations below 10,000. Last summer, the Los Angeles County Employees Retirement Association bought Vanderveer and brought in the Emmes Group as asset manager, with instructions to increase the value of the property.
To that end, Mr. Davis said, Emmes hopes to raise rents, which now average $720 a month for Vanderveer's 2,500 apartments, to the legal maximum, which varies by apartment. The company also plans to sue more nonpaying tenants. At the same time, Mr. Davis said, Emmes will try to get the tenants more involved while overseeing a complete physical overhaul. Emmes used that strategy -- successfully, Mr. Davis said -- at a complex in the Bronx called Eastchester Heights several years ago.
Brad Lander, director of the Pratt Institute Center for Community and Environmental Development, said that it was possible, if challenging, to provide decent housing at $600 or $700 a month, and that the relatively low price of $35,000 a unit that the pension fund paid would make things a little easier.
The consensus at Vanderveer is that Emmes has accomplished little in its first five months but that it is too soon to jump to conclusions. Niomi Jones, a tenant organizer for the advocacy group Acorn, said the managers originally said they would begin fixing roofs and replacing elevators in October. Neither job has begun yet.
Kevin J. Riley of Douglas Elliman, the firm hired by Emmes to handle day-to-day management of the property, said the work on the elevators and roofs should begin in the spring.
Thursday night, Vanderveer officials and tenant leaders from about 20 of the buildings squeezed into the front room of a vacant first-floor apartment for a meeting of the new management-tenant council.
Mr. Riley gave a sense of just how bad the problem was when he told them not to expect immediate miracles. ''Your cabinet that's not quite falling down but needs to be replaced, your apartment needs to be painted, that's not going to happen just yet,'' he said. ''Those types of conditions that are life-threatening, that are health risks, we're going to deal with them.''
Some tenants expressed security concerns after the discovery of the bodies of two murdered men in a garage last month. Others complained that the heat had conked out on Wednesday night.
Small successes were applauded. Tracey Hamilton, an accountant who has lived at Vanderveer since 1976, reported that she had persuaded neighbors in 35 out of the 42 apartments in her building to let the exterminators in.
A handful of the tenants left the meeting encouraged.
''I've seen Vanderveer come up, I've seen it come down,'' said Ms. Hamilton, ''and I'm seeing it slowly coming back up again.''
