Lawrence J. Ellison stepped down as chairman of the Oracle Corporation on Monday but will remain chief executive as part of an executive realignment.
Jeffrey O. Henley, the chief financial officer, will succeed Mr. Ellison as chairman in what was described by company officials and board members as an effort to use the company's top talent more effectively.
As part of the shuffle, two of the top-ranking executives, Safra A. Catz and Charles Phillips, were promoted to share the position of president, reporting to Mr. Ellison, who co-founded the company in 1977.
During Mr. Ellison's tenure, Wall Street and industry analysts have frequently raised questions about the issue of succession. The company said Monday that the changes were not made in response to those queries.
''The primary purpose of these changes is to place these people in better positions to serve our customers,'' said Michael J. Boskin, chairman of the Oracle board's nomination and governance committee. ''In Jeff's case, he has been growing beyond the C.F.O. role for many years.''
Mr. Henley, who is already a member of Oracle's board and has worked for the company for 13 years, will remain a full-time Oracle employee as part of the shift, and will spend more of his time on board matters as well as customer-related issues.
Ms. Catz's new role largely formalizes the duties she has already been performing -- running the company's global operations. Mr. Phillips, who is a rising star at Oracle, has focused on sales operations and will retain that focus in his new position.
Despite pressure from institutional investors and government regulators for corporations to separate board and executive positions, Dr. Boskin said that the executive shifts were not for corporate governance reasons. Oracle, he said, had already put in place the kinds of governance structures required by new laws.
The question of succession at Oracle has been persistent since 2000, when two top-ranking executives, Ray Lane, the president, and Gary L. Bloom, the executive vice president, quit within five months of each other.
Mr. Lane in particular had been viewed as a stabilizing force; since his departure, Mr. Henley has been placed in that role. The company said it had begun a search for his successor.
Since the resignations, Mr. Ellison has been the principal architect of the company's business strategy.
He has argued publicly that Silicon Valley technology is increasingly a mature and consolidating business. In June 2003, Mr. Ellison tried a takeover of PeopleSoft, one of Oracle's close competitors. The effort has turned into a protracted and bitter battle.
Ms. Catz joined Oracle in April 1999, and she has been a board member since 2001. Mr. Phillips joined the company last May, and he was named to the board on Monday.
TECHNOLOGY
