The N.F.L.'s Final Four includes a hot team (Indianapolis), a heady team (New England), a hungry team (Philadelphia) and a humble one (Carolina).
It is a collection of teams that lost on opening day (Philadelphia and New England), two teams that once played in the same division (Indianapolis and New England) and two that have only sparse connections (Carolina and Philadelphia).
It offers battles of slick offense (Indianapolis) against brick defense (New England) and two teams (Carolina and Philadelphia) that have adopted rugged, physical approaches to every task.
After a season of so many close regular-season encounters, the playoffs have taken similar form with a record three overtime games. Each game last weekend was decided by 7 or fewer points. Both conference championship games Sunday -- Indianapolis versus New England in the American Football Conference and Carolina versus Philadelphia in the National Football Conference -- are rematches from the regular season.
This quartet got together on the same day -- Nov. 30 -- of the regular season. Philadelphia won, 25-16, at Carolina and New England won, 38-34, at Indianapolis. The rematch offers a golden prize, a trip to Super Bowl XXXVIII, and this time the venues are switched, with Philadelphia and New England serving as the hosts.
''You have to make adjustments when a team beats you,'' Tony Dungy, the Colts' coach, said here Monday as his players seemingly floated around their complex, relishing the fact that they are one victory shy of reaching the Super Bowl.
''We have to play better against New England than we did the last time,'' Dungy added. ''We have to find ways to turn that game around.''
That was what Carolina was asking Monday -- what can we do differently?
All the while, New England and Philadelphia expect a repeat.
The focal point in the A.F.C. championship game lies in quarterback Peyton Manning versus the Patriots' defense. Manning entered the postseason with an 0-3 playoff record, but in two playoff games he has thrown eight touchdown passes and no interceptions and led his team to 41 points against Denver and 38 against Kansas City. His offense has scored 10 touchdowns and 3 field goals and has not punted in 17 playoff possessions.
The Patriots, however, make a habit of cooling hot quarterbacks. It is a mark that Coach Bill Belichick has left wherever he has been involved with a defense. Manning has played nine games against Belichick-laced defenses and Manning is 4-5 with a 60.5 completion percentage, 15 touchdown passes and 14 interceptions. The Patriots' players, Belichick and his defensive coordinator, Romeo Crennel, do not fear Manning.
Will they find a new version of Manning with new tools at his disposal that changes their view, or will they answer his audible-inspired play with knockout defense?
LOOSEN THAT NOOSE -- No team left in the playoff field except Philadelphia played in a conference championship game last year. In fact, this is the Eagles' third consecutive appearance in the game. In 2002, they lost at St. Louis. In 2003, they lost at home to Tampa Bay.
There is pressure on Philadelphia to at least get to this Super Bowl that is unlike that of the other participants. Even some of the Eagles have talked about not wanting to be remembered like the Buffalo Bills. If they do not beat Carolina, the Eagles will not; the Bills reached and lost four consecutive Super Bowls. At least they got there.
This is a game where the Eagles must find a way to relax and not be consumed by the issue of what happens if they lose a third straight N.F.C. title game.
RUNNING TO WIN -- There are two quarterbacks in Sunday's games -- Manning and Carolina's Jake Delhomme -- who are not major threats to scramble and break down defenses. But Philadelphia's Donovan McNabb and New England's Tom Brady run fearlessly during playoff football. Especially McNabb.
McNabb does not like being called a running quarterback and tends to shy away from it during the regular season. But with running back Michael Westbrook out for the season, McNabb knew that against Green Bay, someone had to pick up the running slack.
He did, rushing for a playoff quarterback record 107 yards that complemented his 248 passing yards and 2 touchdowns.
Playoff football offers the best of McNabb because he sheds his hesitancy about running and features his complete game. Carolina can expect more of it.
WHEEL AND DEAL -- A pass pattern that keeps surfacing during these playoffs involves wheel routes. They are giving defenders fits.
One idea of it is a receiver lines up wide left, runs 10 yards downfield, stops in a spot and spins like a wheel and then runs across the field. This play has the effect of the counter run or the bootleg pass where offenses take advantage of overpursuing defenses.
Wheel patterns use the defense's initial, hard reaction to a first move to gain separation: the defender breaks hard right, the receiver breaks hard left and free. Look for this route to be a factor in both championship games.
