Louis Barone, who stands accused of fatally shooting a fellow patron at Rao's restaurant in East Harlem on Dec. 22, said two words in court yesterday: ''not guilty.''
But in a handwritten statement dated Dec. 23 that he gave to the police and that the Manhattan district attorney's office released, also yesterday, Mr. Barone had a lot more to say, including details about his gun and about how the other patron, Albert Circelli, was shot to death.
As the now-familiar story goes, Mr. Barone objected to Mr. Circelli's complaints about the live entertainment at Rao's, the famously exclusive Italian restaurant. Harsh words were exchanged between the men. At one point, Mr. Barone wrote in his statement: ''He kept pointing his finger at me. I said, 'You don't have to talk to me like that.'''
Eventually, Mr. Circelli, 37, rose to pay his bill.
''I was really mad at this point, I had blood in my eyes,'' Mr. Barone wrote.
''I had my gun in my right pocket,'' he continued. ''I got up and started to follow the guy out of the bar.''
Mr. Barone wrote that he approached Mr. Circelli from behind, at a distance of three or four feet, and, he said, ''I shot him in the back.''
''The guy fell down face first near the doorway to the kitchen,'' Mr. Barone wrote. ''While the guy was falling down I fired another shot at him. I snapped at that point, I went ballistic.''
The shooting continued to attract a lot of news media attention in court yesterday, as it has since the crime occurred at Rao's, which was packed with holiday diners when Mr. Circelli began complaining about the singing of a noted Broadway soprano, Rena Strober. She had been singing ''Don't Rain on My Parade.''
Mr. Barone, 67, was arraigned on charges of second-degree murder, assault and criminal possession of a weapon yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, and he appeared alert but emotionless. A prosecutor has said that Mr. Barone has past arrests on charges of gambling and weapons possession, and investigators have said that he was a bookmaker for the Luchese crime family. Mr. Barone remains in custody. In his statement, Mr. Barone said that he has had his .38-caliber pistol for two years, that he got it from a friend and that he thinks ''the gun is clean.''
Mr. Barone also wrote that he had a timely reason for having the gun in his possession, explaining he had ''been carrying it lately because of the orange alert.''
On Dec. 22, the night of the shooting, before the police took Mr. Barone's written statement, they spoke with him outside the restaurant. The substance of what he told them was also released yesterday by the district attorney's office. According to those papers, Mr. Barone told Police Officer Charles Hollis: ''I didn't do it! Did the guy die?''
Mr. Barone was arrested after another diner at Rao's identified him as the gunman.
