From Dunce to Genius
There are two kinds of people in this world: those who can skip stones, and those who cannot. If you are among the second group, take heart. A team of French researchers has shown what it takes to succeed.
They did this by constructing a unique piece of laboratory equipment -- a stone-skipping machine -- at the Research Institute for Out-of-Equilibrium Phenomena in Marseille. They used the machine to launch spinning disks of aluminum (as proxies for stones) into a water tank, and recorded the result using a high-speed video camera.
Much of what they discovered any competent stone-skipper already knows. For instance, when it comes to proper stones, flat and round are best. Spin is also good, because the gyroscopic effect keeps them stable. And the heavier they are, the faster they must be thrown: below a certain velocity, a stone will always sink.
But the crucial detail, they report in the journal Nature, is less obvious. This is the ''angle of attack'' of the stone -- the angle at which it hits the water. Any angle over 45 degrees, the researchers say, and the stone will sink. And to optimize the number of skips, an angle of 20 degrees is best. A stone at that angle spends the least amount of time in contact with the water, and thus loses the least energy. So it can keep skipping, on and on.
Squashing a Pest Theory
There are many arguments for and against genetic engineering, but a leading one in its favor is the tantalizing prospect that redesigning certain disease-bearing pests may help to eliminate those diseases worldwide. In particular, work has been done toward genetically modifying mosquitoes so that they can no longer transmit diseases like malaria and yellow fever.
But recent research by scientists at the University of California at Riverside and the University of Maryland is discouraging. The studies, reported in The Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, show that genetically altered mosquitoes will have a tough time outside the laboratory.
The researchers studied a mosquito species that transmits yellow fever, and introduced three alterations of the type commonly used in transgenic work. They studied the insects' fertility rates, survivability to adulthood and other aspects of the life cycle, comparing them to wild-type, unmodified mosquitoes.
The transgenic mosquitoes produced fewer eggs, had higher rates of infertility and had a lower percentage of eggs reaching adulthood.
In all, the modified insects' reproductive rates were much lower. So if they were introduced into the wild, they would lose out in competition with their more robust cousins. This state of affairs would not do, since the goal of engineering a mosquito that won't spread disease is to have it muscle out the wild ones.
The researchers suggest that more careful engineering of mosquitoes is necessary to find those modifications that will not hurt their survival.
Whale Watchers' Find
The news is better concerning a far larger creature, the blue whale, which in fact is the largest animal on earth. The whales were hunted close to extinction in the first half of the 20th century, and today the population in the Southern Hemisphere is considered the most threatened.
Now scientists have discovered feeding and nursing ground for blue whales near the fjords off southern Chile. As reported in The Proceedings of the Royal Society: Biology Letters, the scientists from Chile and other countries sighted 47 groups of whales -- more than 150 in all, including 11 mother-calf pairs -- during the southern summer and fall last year.
The numbers make it the most important Southern Hemisphere feeding ground yet found, and it should be an ideal place to conduct studies on the whales' recovery.
Observatory
