The Securities and Exchange Commission may file civil charges against Computer Associates, the giant software company, for violating securities laws by booking sales before contracts were signed, the company said yesterday.
For two years, federal prosecutors and commission lawyers have investigated whether Computer Associates used accounting tactics to inflate its reported sales and profits in the late 1990's, a period when the company's three top executives received a $1.1 billion award tied to the performance of its stock.
The company, which is based in Islandia, N.Y., specializes in software that helps big companies manage their mainframe computers and networks. Since 2000, it has radically changed the way it sells software, and its reported sales have fallen almost 50 percent.
Yesterday, Computer Associates disclosed that the commission had sent the company a Wells notice, a letter warning the company that it will probably face civil charges. The commission's staff has recommended charging the company with inflating its revenue, Computer Associates said.
Investors shrugged off the company's disclosure. Computer Associates shares fell only slightly yesterday, and several analysts said they believed that the company was close to putting its accounting problems behind it.
Legal experts said the government's intention to bring civil charges did not mean that the company would also face criminal charges.
''The S.E.C. investigation does not have to mirror completely the criminal investigation,'' said Robert Mintz, a former federal prosecutor and a white-collar criminal defense lawyer at McCarter &amp; English, a law firm based in Newark.
Federal prosecutors did not return calls for comment.
The S.E.C.'s five commissioners must still rule on the recommendation, but the commissioners almost never disagree with the agency's staff and a Wells notice almost certainly means that charges will be brought unless the company settles the case, Mr. Mintz and others said.
''Once you get the notice, it's an uphill battle to convince the commission not to follow the recommendation of staff,'' Mr. Mintz said. At best, companies can sometimes persuade the commission to narrow the charges, he said.
Computer Associates has 30 days to respond to the notice. Robert Gordon, a spokesman for Computer Associates, said the company could not comment on how it planned to respond.
The S.E.C. also sends Wells notices to individuals whom it expects to charge with securities law violations. Mr. Gordon said that as far as the company knew, no current or former Computer Associates employees had received Wells notices. John Nester, a spokesman for the commission, said the S.E.C. did not comment on active investigations.
In October, Computer Associates said that an internal investigation by its audit committee had found that during its fiscal year ended in March 2000, it had recognized sales from contracts that had not yet been signed. As a result of the inquiry, the company forced Ira Zar, its chief financial officer, and two other executives in its finance department to resign.
But many former employees of Computer Associates have said that the company's accounting problems run far beyond backdating contracts in its 2000 fiscal year. The employees say that throughout the late 1990's, the company used a variety of accounting tactics to inflate its sales and profits and to convince Wall Street that it was growing as a result of new product sales instead of contracts it had acquired when it bought other companies.
In October 2000, Computer Associates changed the way it sold software and the way it reported its sales. The change effectively allowed the company to count some sales and profits twice. Some former and current employees have said the company made that change to hide the fact that it had previously inflated its profits.
But the new accounting method ties Computer Associates' reported sales much more closely to the cash it actually receives, and investors appear to be satisfied that Computer Associates' accounting problems are behind it. The company's stock more than doubled in 2003. Yesterday it fell 13 cents, or 0.4 percent, to $27.99.
Nitsan Hargil, a senior technology analyst at Friedman, Billings &amp; Ramsey, said he thought the company would move to settle the commission's allegations quickly, since it has already admitted that it inflated revenue in the 2000 fiscal year.
''They will not go to court over this in my view,'' Mr. Hargil said. ''They will do whatever needs to be done to come to an agreement, as the company is clearly in the wrong here.''
Market Place
