In the closing days before the Iowa caucuses here, Howard Dean has slipped into turbulent territory, facing challenges in both Iowa and New Hampshire, the two states where he is looking to nail down the nomination with early victories.
Here in Iowa, where the race between Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt is remarkably close, Dr. Dean's supporters expressed distress at what many described as his faltering performance in a televised debate Sunday. The Des Moines Register, the state's largest newspaper, described Dr. Dean in a front-page article as ''again on the defensive.''
It was the latest in a series of difficulties Dr. Dean has encountered at the very moment his competitors -- in particular, Senators John Edwards and John Kerry -- have made an aggressive late-campaign push for support among undecided voters.
In New Hampshire, which holds its primary a week after the caucuses, Gen. Wesley K. Clark has taken advantage of having the state almost to himself, as Dr. Dean tends to the tough battle in Iowa, drawing crowds that are beginning to rival the ones that typically show up to see Dr. Dean. Although Democratic strategists say they see little chance that Dr. Dean will lose New Hampshire, General Clark's rise is threatening Dr. Dean's once-dominant position in the state and could dash his hopes of essentially ending the contest with an overwhelming victory there.
General Clark is not competing in Iowa, and until at least Monday, when a group of Kerry supporters in Manchester challenged his Democratic credentials, escaped the attacks that have battered the Democrats who are competing here.
As he adjusted to this new terrain, Dr. Dean dropped all pretense of comity on Monday, throwing away big chunks of his stump speech and abandoning his pledge to avoid attacks on opponents. ''I'm going after everybody because I'm tired of being the pin cushion here,'' he said.
At the same time, advisers debated what -- if anything -- they needed to do to deal with General Clark's success in New Hampshire. One Dean adviser likened the retired military man's performance to Dr. Dean's early rise in the polls last year that went unnoticed and largely unchecked by Mr. Kerry, who at the time was the dominant candidate.
''The reason that all those folks are coming at us debate after debate, newspaper column after newspaper column, is because they're afraid,'' Dr. Dean said Monday as he charged across Iowa in full fighter mode. ''They're afraid of having ordinary people run their country. This is our country, it's not their country.''
This difficult period comes as Dr. Dean's almost nonstop year of campaigning appears to be taking a toll. He seemed tired and rattled on Monday morning, as he did at the debate, and stumbled over a few words at several smaller gatherings as he recited yet again the sound bites he has repeated easily 1,000 times. But by evening, as he roused a crowd at a spaghetti dinner in Fort Madison, he seemed back on his game, and indeed delivered his fuller speech.
''I am rejuvenated and ready to fight,'' he said. ''When people attack me, that rejuvenates me.''
Dr. Dean's advisers said Monday that they were neither surprised nor worried about the suddenly stormy climate.
''Of course it's going to have an effect,'' said Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager. ''Who can get hammered this long without it having some effect?''
Still, some of Dr. Dean's advisers said they felt constrained by how hard they could battle back, worried that Dean supporters drawn to the campaign by a promise of an ''end to politics as usual'' would recoil at a reprise of the tough campaign tactics that have become a staple of American politics. In New Hampshire, some Dean supporters objected when the campaign distributed leaflets at a rally for General Clark noting that the general had voted for Ronald Reagan and Richard Nixon.
Several Dean advisers said that they remained confident of victory not because of their candidate, but rather because of the campaign organization he had assembled. Mr. Trippi pointed to the extensive get-out-the-vote operation Dr. Dean has put together in New Hampshire and Iowa, as well as the intensity of his supporters, factors that many Democrats say continue to give Dr. Dean a big edge in both these states.
''We have more volunteers and more active supporters than any campaign,'' Mr. Trippi said. ''Does anyone question the strength of the Dean organization in Iowa and New Hampshire?''
Many Democrats said that Dr. Dean also had the advantage of an uncommonly loyal base of supporters.
Still, even some Dean supporters expressed distress at his halting performance at the debate, in which the Rev. Al Sharpton managed to do what none of Dr. Dean's more established competitors had managed this year: knock him off his game. Mr. Sharpton challenged Dr. Dean on the absence of minorities in his cabinet when he was governor of Vermont.
''He looked like a deer caught in the headlights,'' Jeff Bovee, 33, a professor of exercise science at Central College and a Dean supporter, said at a Dean appearance here Monday morning. Throughout the day, Dr. Dean portrayed himself as an outsider, and criticized his three main opponents -- Mr. Gephardt, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards -- as Washington insiders, lambasting them for voting to authorize President Bush to go to war in Iraq and in favor of his education initiative.
''Who was the first one who stood up against George Bush?'' he asked when a woman asked whether he was tough enough to face the incumbent in a general election. ''Who was the one who was willing to take on George Bush when his popularity was at 70 percent?''
''We've had a hard couple of months with all those folks from Washington beating up on us,'' he told a few dozen people gathered in Washington, Iowa. ''This is the time we can get our revenge.''
Several Democrats said that Dr. Dean's challenge in New Hampshire was less serious than the one he faced here. For one thing, General Clark is suddenly being challenged. On Monday, Mr. Kerry's campaign chairwoman, Jeanne Shaheen, attacked General Clark, noting that he had spoken warmly about President Bush at a fund-raiser shortly after the president took office, and had voted for Richard Nixon and Ronald Reagan.
''This candidate is not a Democrat,'' she said. ''Wes Clark is not a Democrat.''
General Clark spent much of his day in New Hampshire, where he avoided responding to Mr. Kerry's attacks.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER VERMONT GOVERNOR
