What a difference a year can make in the international tracking of infectious diseases like SARS, which created havoc with international travel and economies in 2003.
A year ago, the transmission of SARS, or severe acute respiratory syndrome, was occurring in Guangdong Province in China. But provincial and Chinese officials did not report SARS to the World Health Organization, as they were supposed to do. Initially, officials kept secret the cases of the new disease that were first detected in November 2002. Then officials lied until the disease spread from Guangdong and China to other countries in Asia and Canada in February 2003.
Confronted with that evidence, China could no longer deny the beginning days of what the W.H.O. called the first severe and easily transmissible disease to emerge in the 21st century.
Now, in an effort to persuade the world that they are cooperating and taking steps to control the disease, Chinese officials have slaughtered hundreds of civets and other animals in which the SARS coronavirus has been found. Also, they are reporting even suspect SARS cases to the W.H.O., something that is not required, said Dick Thompson, a spokesman for the United Nations agency.
But the spate of new cases reported by China -- one confirmed and three suspected -- has caused some confusion and some concern. From a reporting standpoint, this is a more honest approach compared with reactions to previous cases, when not only China, but also other countries lied, despite agreements to share such information.
Unintentionally, the more open reporting may be distorting the picture. The reports have sparked concerns over the possibility of a new outbreak in China and Hong Kong, although no one is certain.
So far this year, epidemiologic investigations have found no link between any two of the four cases. Epidemiologists have traced hundreds of people who came in contact with the patients in the early days of their illnesses, but the experts have not turned up more infections.
That, in turn, raises the crucial question: how severe is the problem if doctors identify cases but health officials cannot find the sources? W.H.O. officials say they do not know. The agency says that it is still very early in its investigation and that it urgently needs more information about what Chinese officials know about the four cases.
The Chinese officials had agreed to send specimens from the first patient to other laboratories in the W.H.O. network and said they would do the same for the second case. Presumably, they will do the same for the others.
Without definitive test results, there are several possible explanations for the uncertainty surrounding the new cases. Diagnostic tests in the initial stages of SARS are imperfect. They tend to be more reliable as a patient recovers.
Test results are relayed from local to national to international officials in China, as they are in the United States and elsewhere. So there could be delays in relaying results from Guangdong to Beijing and then to the World Health Organization.
If Chinese officials broaden the definition of a possible SARS case, they will probably turn up cases unrelated to SARS, like other respiratory diseases with similar symptoms.
Even the significance of the one confirmed case is unclear. The patient is a 32-year-old freelance television producer who was discharged from a hospital in Guangdong after recovering fully and uneventfully from pneumonia. The man denied having any contact with civets, an animal related to the mongoose. All 81 of his contacts are well, and the observation period is over, the World Health Organization said.
The second reported patient is a waitress, 20, at a restaurant in Guangzhou, the province capital. She is hospitalized and is reported to be recovering. She reported coming in contact with 100 people in the 14 days before her illness, and all are so far reported well.
Responding to an invitation from Chinese officials, the W.H.O. has sent experts in epidemiology, infectious diseases, sanitation and other fields to Guangdong to seek a possible source of the man's infection. The team is also expected to help Chinese officials investigate possible environmental sources of transmission from other humans and animals.
Chinese officials have not disclosed the number of people tested for possible SARS. If they have tested hundreds of people and only the four have shown some evidence of SARS, then SARS might represent less of a health problem.
Because the available tests to detect SARS in its earliest stages have serious limitations and the virus often cannot be detected in sputum in the first days of the illness, the health organization has recommended that doctors take specimens from the nose, throat, stool and blood. No stool specimen was taken from the television producer, according to a scientist involved in the investigation.
The initial tests on the producer caused confusion. But other tests on similar specimens did not, prompting some virologists to question whether the initial specimen was contaminated at a lab where earlier tests for SARS had been conducted.
The W.H.O. now says, ''Each specimen should be divided into samples at the bedside, rather than in a laboratory, where the risk of contamination is heightened.''
The advice is needed, the agency said, because ''it is likely that numerous other suspected cases will be reported over the coming weeks.''
Health officials say they believe that they need to investigate each suspected case and that health workers should wear gowns, gloves, masks and other cumbersome equipment to care for patients in isolation. The reason is that outbreaks of many infectious diseases start with one case. The costs of chasing down a number of false alarms is less than missing the one case that could start another international epidemic like the one last year.
THE DOCTOR'S WORLD
