Locked in a tight race with Howard Dean in the Iowa caucuses, Representative Richard A. Gephardt is spending much of the next three days outside that critical state as he raises money for his campaign in New York; Beverly Hills, Calif.; and Chicago.
Mr. Gephardt, who arrived yesterday in New York, is the sole Democratic hopeful seriously competing in Iowa who is scheduled to be fund-raising outside the state in the last week before the caucuses on Monday. His advisers say Mr. Gephardt, in his second quest for the presidency, has to duplicate his victory in 1988 in Iowa to have any chance at securing the nomination, and some of his supporters have questioned his gamble to leave the state.
Mr. Gephardt says he is confident he will win Iowa and wants to lay the groundwork for the primaries that follow to ensure that he will not run out of money, as he did in 1988.
''I would feel, I'm sure, better if I could just stay here and dig in and do this job every minute of every day and every minute of every night,'' Mr. Gephardt said yesterday in an interview in Council Bluffs, Iowa, as he headed to the airport. ''But I also learned in '88 that if you win Iowa but don't have the money and or the organization and the campaign in these other states that you're ultimately not going to get through the whole obstacle course.''
He is combining fund-raising with an appearance on ''The Late Show'' on CBS and a speech at the Council on Foreign Relations in Manhattan, as well as union rallies in Washington State and Michigan. He says those activities will keep him in the news and rally potential supporters.
He is also squeezing in time with voters in Iowa, holding two campaign rallies yesterday and another tomorrow. His aides say that despite his absence he has a formidable organization to bring out the vote.
Mr. Gephardt plans to spend the last four days of the campaign in Iowa.
Yet some experts say he is taking a calculated risk. ''I suspect he's well known enough so that a couple of days won't hurt,'' Peverill Squire, a professor of politics at the University of Iowa, said. ''But it's a gamble. There still some uncertainty about who is on top.''
Over the last three days, Mr. Gephardt has lost the contest for the endorsement of Senator Tom Harkin, who decided to back Dr. Dean, and of The Des Moines Register, which endorsed Senator John Edwards of North Carolina.
It is unclear how much of a difference those announcements will make. Mr. Gephardt, of Missouri, won the caucuses in 1988 without those endorsements.
On a typical day of heavy campaigning, Mr. Gephardt hits about seven campaign stops. Between Monday and Wednesday, he will be meeting only three groups of Iowa voters.
''It hurts,'' said State Senator Dick Dearden, a Des Moines Democrat who has been campaigning for Mr. Gephardt. ''Any time you miss Iowa and campaigning, it hurts you.''
Mr. Dearden, who campaigned for Mr. Gephardt in 1988, said he understood that the campaign needed to continue raising money.
''You don't want Super Tuesday to come and we're broke,'' he said. ''We don't want to be there again.''
Mr. Gephardt says he raised $18 million last year, falling short of his goal of $20 million. He has only enough money to cover costs through the Feb. 7 contests and is counting on an infusion of cash to carry him through the remaining primaries. Dr. Dean, by contrast, raised almost $40 million in 2003.
Mr. Gephardt has taken pains to conserve cash. His senior advisers took a voluntary pay cut last year, and he typically stays in budget motels while traveling in Iowa. Until this month, he usually flew coach on commercial airlines, while many rivals chartered planes.
He spent much of last week shoring up his support in New Hampshire, North Dakota, Oklahoma and South Carolina, states with primaries that follow the Iowa caucuses.
''My experience,'' he said, ''leads me to believe that we've got to raise the money and we've got to run a campaign in enough of these states so that if we get the momentum there's some place to take it.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MISSOURI REPRESENTATIVE
