THEIR biggest blunder came back to bite the Yankees a second time yesterday.
Never in the 31-year ownership reign of George Steinbrenner have the Yankees suffered the embarrassment that the Houston Astros inflicted on them in the past month, with the theft of Andy Pettitte now being followed by the luring of Roger Clemens out of his short-lived retirement.
''If Andy had signed anywhere else, we wouldn't be talking today,'' Clemens said yesterday, clearly linking his signing to Pettitte's and explaining the change in his retirement plans, which he said had been 99.9 percent definite.
After the Yankees lost the 1981 World Series to the Los Angeles Dodgers, Steinbrenner apologized to the people of New York for his team's losing effort. He might want to consider apologizing now, both to the fans and to his team.
The Yankees never had a chance to re-sign Clemens for a sixth season because he spent all of last year saying he was retiring. The Yankees took him at his word because he meant what he said. He changed his mind and unretired to play for his hometown team, the Astros, only after they snatched Pettitte, his pal and workout buddy, from the Yankees as a free agent.
Clemens can't hurt the Yankees unless they meet in the World Series, but his presence in a Houston uniform is hugely embarrassing for the Yankees. Could the Yankees have avoided what happened?
''We weren't part of that process,'' General Manager Brian Cashman said.
But the Yankees initiated the process by letting Pettitte flee Yankee Stadium. His departure was the biggest blunder of the Steinbrenner regime. Steinbrenner has long said that letting Reggie Jackson leave after the 1981 season was his biggest mistake. But adopting a laissez-faire approach to Pettitte last year dwarfs the Reggie mistake. Now that Clemens has unretired, the mistake grows even larger.
Just as the Yankees excuse themselves for the Clemens decision, they throw up their hands on Pettitte and say, Don't blame us, Andy wanted to play at home. Like Clemens, Pettitte lives in the Houston area.
But Pettitte, a mound mainstay for the Yankees for nine seasons, wasn't thinking last winter of playing in Houston. Nor in spring training. Not even at the end of last season.
''Did I expect that they might reach out to me after the World Series? I kind of did,'' Pettitte, a 31-year-old left-hander, said after signing with the Astros a month ago.
But the Yankees didn't reach out. Had Pettitte, a two-time 21-game winner, been another team's free agent, the Yankees probably would have offered him at least $15 million a year for five years. Yankees players have long complained that Steinbrenner treats free agents from other teams better than he treats his own.
In Pettitte's case, Steinbrenner had a blind spot, just as he did when Dave Winfield played for him in the 1980's. Steinbrenner didn't recognize the value of the pitcher whose 149 career victories, one Pettitte fan speculated yesterday, make him the most likely of the current major league pitchers to win 300.
Had Steinbrenner aggressively pursued Pettitte, made him a strong offer last spring or last September and told him he wanted him to be the anchor of the pitching staff for the next five years, Pettitte almost certainly would have succumbed and said, ''Where do I sign?''
But the Yankees let Pettitte test the free-agent market, which they said he had told them he wanted to do, and gave him time to generate a desire to go home. It was only when Pettitte signed with the Astros that Clemens began thinking about unretiring.
''Everything changed once Andy signed here in Houston,'' Clemens said yesterday on a conference call. ''If the Astros hadn't acquired Andy Pettitte, this wouldn't have happened.''
He had already begun making plans, Clemens said, to go to New York next season, see one or two of Pettitte's starts at Yankee Stadium and play golf with him. ''Andy's meant a lot to me over the last couple years,'' the 41-year-old Clemens said, citing ''the workouts he's helped me with'' as one of the reasons for their relationship.
Clemens said he was surprised that the Yankees did not sign Pettitte. ''Before the playoffs started,'' he said, ''it was weighing on his mind. I told him he'd get a bunch of offers from teams, and the Yankees would swoop in and sign you.''
But the Yankees didn't swoop or even take much of a swing.
''We didn't allow Andy to go,'' Cashman said. ''Andy chose less money to pitch at home.''
That he did, but only after the Yankees dawdled. The Astros picked the Yankees' pocket, then turned around and snatched the Rocket.
By deciding to play another season, Clemens leaves himself open to criticism by people who believed him when he said he was retiring. But, he said, ''Any individual has the right to change his mind.''
Anyway, don't blame Clemens; blame the Yankees.
''I was in a shutdown mode,'' Clemens said. ''I never expected this to happen.''
On Baseball
