A developer is spending nearly $150 million to buy Manhattan Plaza, the twin-towered complex near the Broadway theater district where most of the apartments are set aside for performing artists, real estate executives have said.
Related Companies, one of the largest residential developers in the city, signed a contract late last month to buy the complex, which sprawls across the square block between Ninth and 10th Avenues and 42nd and 43rd Streets. The sale, which requires a number of government approvals, is not expected to close for several months.
Manhattan Plaza, which has 1,689 apartments, a 1,000-car garage, tennis courts, swimming pools and restaurants, has become something of an icon in the theater district, and not just because many of the residents work in the industry. (The complex is home to Kenny Kramer, the inspiration for the Kramer character in the ''Seinfeld'' television comedy. Mr. Kramer lived across the hall from Larry David, a co-creator of ''Seinfeld,'' and his antics were memorialized in several episodes.)
But most residents of the 46-story complex are not stars. Many rents are heavily subsidized under the federal government's Section 8 housing program, and in recent years many tenants have feared that the owners would drop out of the program and try to convert the complex to expensive market-rate housing.
One resident, Larry Block, 61, said, ''The city made it clear that they would not allow new management to come in, buy it, and raise the rents thousands of dollars.''
Stephen M. Ross, chairman of Related, said he would not be making any changes to the nature of the complex.
''We're committed to affordable housing in New York City,'' Mr. Ross said, ''and we're looking to extend the Section 8 contracts.''
Richard Ravitch, a general partner of Manhattan Plaza Associates, confirmed that a deal was in the works. The contract requires approval by the city and the Department of Housing and Urban Development.
A group led by Mr. Ravitch and Irving Fisher built Manhattan Plaza in the 1970's as a middle-income complex under the Mitchell-Lama housing program. But as costs soared and the city fell into a fiscal crisis, construction halted.
The developers sought additional subsidies, ultimately from the federal government, to bail them out. The Department of Housing and Urban Development agreed to steep rent subsidies for about 70 percent of the apartments for tenants working as film or television actors, singers, dancers, stagehands or musicians, if they met certain income limits. The remaining apartments are reserved for local residents.
At the time, the average federal subsidy for each apartment was $5,000 a year, with tenants paying an average of $2,088 a year in rent. The complex, Mr. Fisher once told a reporter, quickly became ''harder to get into than Harvard.''
