After Brazil's left-leaning national government decided over the weekend to continue fingerprinting and photographing American citizens arriving in this country, the municipal government here, fearing damage to tourism with carnival approaching in a little more than a month, on Monday obtained an injunction against the practice.
The appeals court ruling applies only in Rio de Janeiro, the main port of entry for the more than 500,000 Americans who visit Brazil annually, though late on Monday afternoon, the federal police said they had not begun carrying out the change because they had not received official notification. For at least the next 30 days, Americans arriving at other Brazilian cities will still be subjected to the security measures, which have resulted in long delays and official complaints from the American government.
Brazil introduced the measures at the beginning of the month in response to a new American program that applies to all foreigners who require visas to enter the United States. A federal judge in the Amazon state of Mato Grosso took offense, describing the American policy as ''violating human dignity, xenophobic, and worthy of the worst horrors of the Nazis,'' and ordered that all Americans arriving in Brazil be subjected to the same treatment.
The Brazilian Foreign Ministry has justified the action by citing the principle of reciprocity, which it described as ''a basic element of international relations.'' But the appeals court judge who issued the Monday ruling, Catão Alves, rejected that position, noting that the heightened security measures here were not taken for the same reasons that the United States has cited for its measures.
''If the United States of America has reasons to adopt the measures that have been questioned by the prosecutor's office,'' the judge wrote, ''Brazil, with no plausible motive since the fear of terrorist attacks happily is not part of national life, cannot do the same solely on the basis of reciprocity, because that would cause millions of dollars of damage to the national economy.''
Over the weekend, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva brushed aside objections that the judiciary was interfering unconstitutionally in making foreign policy and decided not to appeal the initial lower court ruling, which led to the Rio government's appeal. An executive order published Monday sets up an interministerial working group instead and gives it 30 days to determine permanent security procedures for arriving foreigners.
After initial delays of up to nine hours for arriving Americans, the inspection procedures at Brazilian airports and seaports are gradually improving. The Brazilian Federal Police acknowledge that they were caught by surprise when the measure was announced and are moving to install electronic machines similar to those used in the United States.
The inspection procedures applied to Brazilians arriving in the United States have been a sore spot since they were imposed after the Sept. 11, 2001, attacks. In January 2002, the Brazilian foreign minister at that time, Celso Lafer, was forced to allow his shoes to be examined when he arrived in Miami. The action was considered petty and disrespectful here and generated considerable resentful comment.
Though government officials have repeatedly said the countermeasures, widely popular here, are not a reprisal against the United States, few take those declarations seriously. ''In private, mainly at the Foreign Ministry and the presidential palace, there are people who adore this saga and want to give the judge a kiss on the forehead,'' a columnist, Eliane Cantanhede, wrote in the daily Folha de São Paulo last week.
Mr. da Silva, a former factory worker and labor leader, belongs to the Workers' Party, which has often expressed anti-American sentiment during its 24-year history. Since taking office a year ago, however, Mr. da Silva, while consistently criticizing American foreign policy, has sought accommodation with the Bush administration on economic and trade issues.
Mr. da Silva and Mr. Bush are scheduled to meet Monday night in Monterrey, Mexico, at a conference of Western Hemisphere heads of state. Brazilian officials said they expected the fingerprinting dispute to come up at the talks, but indicated that they would not back away from their insistence that Americans can only be exempted from fingerprinting here if Brazilians are exempted from the heightened security procedures in the United States.
