Two French journalists sentenced to six months in jail over the weekend for traveling to a Pakistani city without the government's permission were freed on appeal on Monday. But a Pakistani journalist working with them was missing and was believed to be in government detention.
On Saturday, a judge sentenced Marc Epstein, a reporter, and Jean-Paul Guilloteau, a photographer, of the French weekly L'Express to six months in prison and fined them $1,750 each for traveling to the southwestern city of Quetta without government permission. The sentence was stayed for a week to allow an appeal.
The French journalists, along with their Pakistani colleague, Khawar Mehdi Rizvi, were arrested in Karachi on Dec. 16 after returning from Quetta.
Under a policy begun last year, Pakistan's Interior Ministry issues journalists restricted visas that bar them from traveling to the cities of Quetta and Peshawar and certain other spots without government permission. Resurgent Taliban forces are believed to be organizing attacks into neighboring Afghanistan in and around the two cities.
Pakistani officials accused the journalists of staging a film about the resurgent Taliban in Quetta, but never formally charged them in relation to those accusations. The advocacy group for news organizations, Reporters Without Borders, said such allegations were false.
Afghan officials have complained that Pakistan is not doing enough to prevent Taliban remnants from reorganizing on its territory. Pakistan vehemently denies the charge.
In a ruling on Monday, Justice Zawar Hussain Jaffery of Sindh High Court reduced the sentence of the French journalists from six months to seven days. Because they had already spent that long in police custody, the journalists had served their sentence, the judge ruled. But he also doubled the amount of their fine, to $3,500 each.
Officials said that as soon as the journalists paid their fines, their passports would be returned to them and they would be free to leave. Reporters Without Borders praised the judge's decision but called for the release of the Pakistani journalist.
''This ruling also acquits Pakistani journalist Khawar Mehdi Rizvi, who because of his nationality committed no crime by traveling to the Quetta region,'' the group said in a letter to Foreign Minister Khursheed Mehmood Kasuri. ''We ask you to release him without delay.''
Masood Khan, a spokesman for the Foreign Ministry, said Monday that all foreign journalists who visit the country ''must respect Pakistani laws.'' He said Mr. Rizvi was still under investigation.
