Fabulous Brooch, Prince Metternich!
MADELEINE ALBRIGHT looked resplendent at the Council of Foreign Relations dinner. Oops, no. It was the second annual Gem Awards, given for excellence in journalism devoted to jewelry. STANISLAS DE QUERCIZE, president of Cartier Inc. U.S., was there on Friday night at Cipriani's, as was the jeweler DAVID YURMAN; CARMEN BORGONOVO, an editor at W magazine, and DEBORAH NORVILLE, host of television's ''Inside Edition.''
But why was the former United Nations ambassador and a successor to Thomas Jefferson there?
''I love fun events and events that celebrate happy things at a time when life is tough,'' explained Ms. Albright, who was wearing a glittering silver and diamond pin in the shape of a panther on the left lapel of her black formal jacket.
Indeed, she said, her pins have played a part in post-cold war diplomacy. One day when she talked with IGOR S. IVANOV, the Russian foreign minister, she wore a small pin that looked like part of a ground-based antimissile system. ''Is that one of your interceptors?'' Mr. Ivanov teased. Ms. Albright replied, ''We know how to make them really small, so NEGOTIATE!''
SADDAM HUSSEIN once called her a snake, so during a United Nations debate on an Iraq resolution, she said she wore an antique pin in the shape of a coiled snake.
''It got to be a fun game,'' she recalled. ''Balloons and butterflies when I was feeling great. A spider when I was feeling devious. Bees when I wanted to sting somebody.''
And the panther she had on now?
A 1930's antique lent her by Cartier. ''Stanislas told me this panther is a symbol of female power,'' she said. She added, ''Endearing and yet you had to be a little careful of it.''
You Got Me Straight Trippin', Boo!
There were no former or current cabinet officers at the New York Film Critics Circle Awards dinner on Sunday night at Noche.
But QUENTIN TARANTINO, LIV TYLER and SOFIA COPPOLA were there.
EUGENE LEVY, the deadpan comic actor who won for best supporting actor in ''A Mighty Wind,'' told the audience of directors, actors, screenwriters and critics that when actors said they couldn't care less about reviews, ''in the words of AL FRANKEN, they are lying liars!''
Mr. Levy then thanked many people because, he said, clutching his award, ''unlike other participants here, I think this is it for me.''
''Kill Bill: Volume 1,'' Mr. Tarantino's film, won no awards that night. The director, having refreshed himself with a vodka and cranberry, lots of ice, explained to our Boldface correspondent why the release of ''Kill Bill: Volume 2'' had been delayed until mid-April.
Leaning against the bar, his patent leather shoes flashing, Mr. Tarantino said he and his crew ''worked like dogs'' to finish the first film in time for its October release.
''And then I had to go, literally - this is no joke - all around the world to publicize it and everything, so when I got back, I had to take a month off, I had to take a break, I could not just go back in to editing, I had to just chill a little bit.'' Then he laughed a Woody Woodpecker laugh. ''It'll make the movie better, I promise you, that I'm awake during the process.''
Uhhhh, Let's Get Ready To Rumbaaaaaa!
Sadly, so few of our encounters with Boldface Names end with the Name asking, ''Do you wanna see me do the rumba?''
So, when DORIS EATON TRAVIS, 99-year-old Ziegfeld girl and new author, actually asked us the other night, we assented-- with gusto.
With that, Ms. Travis, in town to promote ''The Days We Danced: The Story of My Theatrical Family,'' took to her feet. She raised her right hand, rounded her left around the back of an imaginary partner, and set her caboose sashaying.
Ms. Travis, who now lives in Norman, Okla., wrote the book to chronicle the stardom of her family (two brothers, two sisters) on Broadway and in Hollywood during the 1910's and 1920's.
And when is Ms. Travis's 100th? The conga line begins March 14.
with Joe Brescia and Melena Z. Ryzik
Boldface Names
