After cheating the fates on fourth down and forever, Eagles Coach Andy Reid awoke Monday morning and paused to consider the state of his team and of his adopted city.
The two previous seasons ended where the Eagles will be next Sunday, in the National Football Conference championship game, leaving room for critics, cynics and doomsayers, of which there are plenty in this town of cheese steaks and sharp elbows.
''A lot of the guys have walked this road,'' Reid said, speaking of his players and, in a sense, of this sports-crazed city, which has gone almost 21 years without a major pro sports title. ''Any time you go through it once, you kind of understand the magnitude of it. Our guys have gotten here and didn't achieve, so you even understand it a little bit more.''
Will the Eagles (13-4) be of sound mind when they are host to the Carolina Panthers (13-5) at Lincoln Financial Field, or will the fresh wounds of recent playoff failures make them jittery?
This is the tightrope the Eagles must walk after clutching a memorable 20-17 overtime victory over the Green Bay Packers on Sunday.
The victory inched Philadelphia closer to the N.F.L.'s ultimate high, a trip to the Super Bowl.
Looked at a different way, the victory set this burg up for another punch in the stomach, like the ones taken in St. Louis after the 2001 regular season and at Veterans Stadium, against Tampa Bay, last season.
''We've been to this mountain before; we just haven't conquered it,'' Eagles safety Brian Dawkins said after defeating the Packers. ''We're going to go out and be loose. We're going to have fun. We've talked about it. If you're tense, don't come in here.''
Eagles players, who had the day off Monday, should at least feel lucky after their escape against the Packers, made possible by Donovan McNabb's 28-yard completion to Freddie Mitchell on fourth-and-26 with 1 minute 12 seconds left in regulation.
Reid, during a news conference Monday, put the play into a historical context, comparing it to the Immaculate Reception by Pittsburgh Steelers running back Franco Harris against the Oakland Raiders in an A.F.C. playoff game in 1972.
Asked the odds of converting fourth-and-26, the pudgy Reid said: ''Slim. A lot slimmer than you and me.''
The play saved Philadelphia's season and allowed Lincoln Financial Field to erupt after a mostly silent night.
At one point during the news conference, a reporter asked Reid if he sensed the trepidation of some Eagles fans, an almost palpable fear of investing in a team that takes them to the altar every season, then makes a mad dash out a side exit.
''I really don't worry about all that,'' he said. ''I think the fans will be out of their minds. I don't think they were scared yesterday and I don't think they will be Sunday.''
Dawkins said, ''Until we get to the dance and get off the plane and I can wave to my fans, I'm not going to be satisfied.''
On the flip side of the Eagles' victory was a Packers team that cleaned out its lockers.
Brett Favre, who did not speak with the news media after the game, was also unavailable for comment Monday, according to a Packers spokesman. Favre's poor throw in the face of a blitz led to Dawkins's interception in overtime.
''I know how competitive he is,'' said Reid, who served as a Packers assistant coach from 1992 to 1998. ''I know that hurts. He takes a lot of responsibility on his shoulders, and I thought about that afterward. But that's part of the game, and he'll be back out there next year firing away.''
The Eagles' next shot comes against a Panthers team they defeated, 25-16, in Charlotte, N.C., on Nov. 30, when the Panthers' John Kasay missed three field goals and an extra point.
''We're going to have to bring our lunch pail and a coffee mug,'' Dawkins said of trying to defeat Carolina again.
A Philadelphia loss would surely be devastating for veterans like McNabb and Dawkins, two players who have been through playoff losses and watched the faces in the locker room change the next season.
Victory does not ensure continuity in the era of free agency, but a Super Bowl trophy cures most ills.
Even in Philadelphia.
''If all of the guys leave,'' Dawkins said of his teammates, ''I want to send them home with something on their hands to remember me by.''
PRO FOOTBALL
