HIGHLIGHTS
FILM: WELLESLEY REACTS -- Responding to criticism and other comments in e-mail messages, letters and phone calls from concerned alumnae reacting to the film ''Mona Lisa Smile,'' the president of Wellesley College has distributed a message to help them ''to set the record straight.'' The letter from the president, Diana Chapman Walsh, expresses confidence ''that the movie is unlikely to do us any lasting damage'' and regret at the distress it has caused alumnae, especially those from the 1950's. Directed by Mike Newell (''Four Weddings and a Funeral'') and written by Lawrence Konner and Mark Rosenthal, the film stars Julia Roberts as a free-spirited art historian from California ''who moves East to teach at a demure, snooty Wellesley College in 1953 and shakes up the place enough to be deemed subversive by the institution's hawk-eyed thought police,'' Stephen Holden wrote in his review on Dec. 19 in The New York Times. She teaches modern art and encourages students to chose careers instead of marriage. Many alumnae said they regarded the film's depiction of the college, its students and its faculty as an inaccurate caricature. In her letter to the alumnae, Ms. Walsh said, ''The movie, to a far greater extent than the screenplay we originally read, characterizes the college as rigid and hidebound and the students as rich and spoiled.'' She also said, ''First, it's important to keep in perspective that the film is a Hollywood fantasy set in an imaginary 1953-1954 academic year.'' She pointed out that the name of the college is in the public domain, and its use could not have been prevented. ''Second,'' she wrote, ''we had no control over the film, no influence whatsoever on any editorial or artistic decisions.'' Although some scenes were shot elsewhere, the college did assent to filming on its campus in Wellesley, Mass. ''Since the beauty of our campus is a matter of special pride, the answer seemed obvious, and the shots of the campus are, indeed, spectacular,'' Ms. Walsh wrote.
WASHINGTON: NEW FORD'S THEATER DIRECTOR -- Ford's Theater has tapped Paul Tetreault, left, the managing director of the Alley Theater in Houston, to be its producing director, responsible for programming the season's new productions and overseeing its administration. He succeeds Frankie Hewitt, who died of cancer at 71 last February after three decades at the theater in Washington. During Mr. Tetreault's 10 years at the Alley Theater, it produced the world premieres of Horton Foote's ''Carpetbagger's Children'' and Eve Ensler's ''Lemonade,'' as well as the American premiere of Edward Albee's ''Play About the Baby.''
HONG KONG: MOURNING A STAR -- The film stars Jackie Chan, Michelle Yeoh and Tony Leung were among more than 1,000 mourners who turned out yesterday in Hong Kong for the funeral of the Chinese pop diva and actress Anita Mui, who died of cancer at 40 last month, The Associated Press reported. Her deep and melancholic voice was familiar to Chinese audiences worldwide, as were her efforts to raise money for the pro-democracy movement in China and for victims of the SARS outbreak last year in Hong Kong. ''Our Édith Piaf,'' was the way she was eulogized by Cheung Man-yee, Hong Kong's former director of broadcasting. On Sunday an estimated 6,000 fans lined up near the funeral parlor to pay their respects.
LISBON: ARCHITECT SOUGHT -- Oscar Niemeyer, the 96-year-old Modernist architect renowned for the futuristic look of the Brazilian capital, Brasília, says he is willing to come out of semi-retirement to design a new cathedral in Lisbon. ''I would do it with enthusiasm,'' he said. ''Cathedral projects are always fascinating.'' His response came after the mayor of Lisbon, Pedro Santana Lopes, said on Saturday that he would like to hire Mr. Niemeyer for the project, Agence France-Presse reported. Plans for the cathedral, initiated 25 years ago, have been hung up by disputes over rights to the riverside lot where it would be constructed. But final say about a designer rests with the Roman Catholic Church of Portugal. Last year Mr. Santana Lopes hired the award-winning Frank Gehry to renovate a dilapidated theater district in Lisbon's center.
FOOTNOTES
Featuring 2 world premieres, 8 United States premieres and 13 New York premieres among its 29 productions, the 13th annual New York Jewish Film Festival opens tomorrow at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln enter. A collaboration between the Jewish Museum and the Film Society of Lincoln Center, the festival, with films from 14 countries, runs through Jan. 29. Among the films: ''The Birch-Tree Meadow,'' with Anouk Aimée, above. . . . Some 100 prints, proofs and related objects will go on view today at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in what is billed as the first comprehensive survey of the American artist Chuck Close's innovations in printmaking. ''Chuck Close Prints: Process and Collaboration'' continues through April 18. . . . Described as her first museum exhibition since 1972, ''Diane Arbus: Family Albums,'' with more than 50 photographs and 57 contact sheets, opens today and continues through March 27 at the Grey Art Gallery at New York University.
