Stephon Marbury cupped his ear and yelled to the crowd, summoning one more burst of energy from his weary body in the final electric seconds of regulation.
The Knicks had staged a stirring 20-point comeback against the Dallas Mavericks that began in the third quarter and culminated in the final seconds of the fourth.
With the Knicks trailing by 6 points, Marbury forced a foul beyond the 3-point arc and hit all three free throws. Then on the inbounds pass, he smothered Steve Nash and knocked the ball away. Penny Hardaway, double-teaming on the play, picked up the loose ball and passed it to Allan Houston, who buried a jumper with 5.9 seconds left to tie the score for the first time.
The Knicks held the Mavs to only 14 points in the fourth -- what Dallas usually scores in three blinks of an eye -- by switching from zone to primarily man-to-man defense. But after expending so much energy, the Knicks did not have a drop of reserve in overtime against a team with wave after wave of weapons and fell, 127-121, last night.
''It was an old-fashioned shootout,'' Mavericks Coach Don Nelson said.
Dirk Nowitzki, whose last-second shot was blocked by Kurt Thomas, scored the first basket of overtime and Nash scored off a turnover by Hardaway, punching the air out of the Knicks.
The Mavericks engaged the Knicks in an aerial assault throughout the game. With Marbury leading the way with 38 points and 14 assists, the Knicks were able to fire back, providing more sparks than Madison Square Garden had seen this season.
''Dallas is a good team,'' Marbury said. ''They know how to make plays at the end of the game. It's a learning process for us together as a new group. If we get into situations like that again, we will know.''
But in the end, neither his game, nor the support of 18,230 fans, were enough. The Knicks had crucial breakdowns in the end, stemming from a miscommunication by Knicks Coach Don Chaney in the final 28.5 seconds of the game. Chaney is already on the hot seat, with Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president, refusing to endorse him before the game.
The Mavs were leading, 123-119, when they took the ball out of bounds with 28.5 seconds left. Michael Finley took the ball up the court and, strangely, Houston did not foul him for nearly 12 seconds. When Finley passed halfcourt, Houston looked over to Chaney, who shouted for Houston to foul with 16.9 seconds left.
The fans reprised their ''Fire Chaney'' chant.
''It was a miscommunication,'' Chaney said. ''We wanted to get Allan to cause a turnover. I'll take the blame for that. We normally would foul in a situation like that with 26 seconds.''
Houston said: ''I was waiting on somebody telling me to foul, when I should have been more aware. I should have known we were down four. I didn't know how much we were down.
''He'll take the blame and I'll take the blame, too.''
Finley made the free throws with 16.9 seconds left. Marbury missed a 3-pointer with 13.9 seconds, and the Knicks had to settle for an exhausting defeat.
''Even going into overtime, it was almost like we were still exhaling a little bit instead of getting ready for overtime,'' Houston said. ''And they made the first punch, the first run in overtime, that kind of hurt us and they kind of took the momentum right away.''
For Houston, Nowitzki's jumper and Nash's layup made the difference. The Knicks dropped to 15-24, while Dallas improved to 21-16.
Marbury had his best game as a Knick, scoring 18 points in the third quarter. He shot 14 of 25 while playing 52 minutes. Houston added 29 points and Hardaway, who started for the injured Keith Van Horn (hyperextended right knee), scored 19.
Nowitzki led the Mavs with 31 points, Nash scored 28 and Finley scored 17 of his 25 in the third quarter. Antawn Jamison scored 23 points off the bench.
With the 7-foot Nowitzki playing an agile center, the Mavericks presented the Knicks with all kinds of mismatches. The Mavs easily shot over the zone, which Dikembe Mutombo anchored, and raced to an 89-69 lead midway through the third quarter.
In the fourth quarter, the Mavericks led by 101-86, when the Knicks decided to gamble on the mismatches and played more aggressively on defense with double teams and man to man. ''We have to play like that from the beginning,'' Marbury said.
Houston scored the first 7 points of the fourth quarter and the Knicks' shut down the shot-happy Mavericks for nearly four minutes.
The Knicks went on two 9-0 runs, pulling within a point until the Mavs made their move again. The teams went back and forth, with Nash giving the Mavs a 111-106 lead with 1 minute 23 seconds to play. Houston sank a 3-pointer to cut the deficit to 2 points.
Jamison and Nowitzki made two free throws each and Marbury then induced Nash to foul him beyond the 3-point arc, setting up the wild finish.
''We haven't held Marbury below 30 in about five years, it seems like,'' Nelson said. ''So it shouldn't surprise me that he did that.''
It just was not enough.
BASKETBALL
