CNBC, the business-oriented cable network owned by General Electric, laid down new restrictions yesterday on the trading of stocks and bonds by its employees and their immediate relatives.
Taking one of the hardest lines to head off financial conflicts of interest in the media industry, CNBC said that its managers and news staff and their spouses and dependents would no longer be allowed to own individual securities, other than those of their employers. The rest of the network's full-time employees, all the way down to those who apply makeup and hairspray to guests, will be able to keep any securities they own, but will not be allowed to buy more.
The changes came five months after the network received criticism for letting a star reporter, Maria Bartiromo, interview Sanford I. Weill, the chairman of Citigroup, after disclosing that she owned 1,000 shares of the company's stock. Other CNBC reporters and anchors have told viewers about various stock holdings, as they were required to under the network's previous policy.
Responding to Ms. Bartiromo's disclosure in late July, Robert M. Steele, the senior faculty and ethics group leader at the Poynter Institute, said in an interview then that ''Disclosure doesn't resolve a conflict of interest; all it does is reveal that a conflict exists.''
Several news organizations, including The Wall Street Journal and BusinessWeek magazine, bar reporters from writing about companies in which they own a stake. CNBC's policies were less restrictive, though they were stricter than those of some other news organizations, like Fortune magazine and Fox News. Now they are among the toughest in the industry.
Al Tompkins, who teaches ethics courses at Poynter, a nonprofit organization in St. Petersburg, Fla., that studies the news media, applauded CNBC executives for making changes before they had to respond to a scandal involving the finances of a staff member.
''Good for them for actually doing something while their pants aren't on fire,'' Mr. Tompkins said. ''The Maria thing was a dust-up compared to what could happen to them.''
CNBC executives would not comment about the reasons for the changes. In a statement, a CNBC spokeswoman, Amy Zelvin, said: ''CNBC's reputation for integrity is paramount to what we do and is key to our viewers. We continually work to set the highest possible standards in everything we do, which is our role as the industry leader.''
The prohibition on buying securities is effective now, but the network set a deadline of Jan. 31, 2005, for managers and news staff members to sell the corporate securities they own or to place them into blind trusts. They will continue to be able to invest in mutual funds. The extension of the policies to all employees of the network and to their spouses and other members of their households -- even mothers-in-law who live with them -- goes beyond what most news organizations have adopted, Mr. Tompkins said.
Mr. Tompkins said he found the clamp-down on investing activities by relatives curious because NBC, the sister network of CNBC, has drawn criticism for employing as news reporters Andrea Mitchell, the wife of the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, and Maria Shriver, the wife of California Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger.
Few journalists outside of CNBC were aware of the network's policy change yesterday. One who had been briefed on it was Paul Steiger, the managing editor of The Wall Street Journal, which has a partnership with CNBC.
''It's a good, smart, tight plan and ideally tailored to a TV network where the reporters are often dealing on air with a broad range of topics,'' Mr. Steiger said. He said that CNBC's move brought up some interesting ideas about possible changes in policies at The Journal, but added that ''It certainly isn't going to cause us to tear up ours and start over again.''
THE MARKETS
