A small mechanical doll walks under a table at which a gaunt man sits hunched. In another solo, a woman in a business suit zips through a collage of gestures that evoke a lifetime of emotion.
Later dancers swim fluidly through a cascade of movement. A different group in street clothes comments on life's absurdities. Finally a faceless woman, head covered by a scarf, becomes a powerful grotesque.
These images from five companies in the Japanese Contemporary Dance Showcase over the weekend told us what this event at Japan Society reaffirms annually: the experimental dance scene in Japan spawns surprise and creativity.
In earlier years the companies on view caused a sensation with their zaniness and aggressiveness. The groups on Friday and Saturday alluded more quietly and generally to the showcase's usual critique of industrialist society.
In ''Ozma,'' choreographed by Fukurow Ishikawa for his Project Fukurow, the relationship between the hollow man and the mechanical puppet under the table offered a haunting study in alienation.
Tetsuo Sanari was the man who raised a book and saw a doll on the table suddenly move its limbs. As an electronic score (by Breuer) broke the silence, the man saw his world disappear when the table and the doll, operated by remote control, moved offstage. In a solo filled with soft dives, headstands, back flips and angular positions, the man seemed to call back his inner self. A new doll, walking upright with every joint articulated, appeared under a table.
Mr. Ishikawa entered to wind white tape around Mr. Sanari's face, then stretched the tape across the stage. Two women (Naoko Ishikawa and Keiko Hirata) danced quickly as the man sat in mummified angst. When finally only the little doll was left in darkness under the table, a life seemed extinguished. In a piece that could charm with gimmickry, ''Ozma'' acquires instead a mythic resonance.
Un Yamada achieved another comment on the human condition. ''Lock'' is a sitting dance with Ms. Yamada moving through a brilliantly accelerated series of arm and head movements. Office boredom reaches into existential woe. In ''sky/lark'' Ms. Yamada plunged more directly into an interior life, accumulating detail in a leg-flicking solo that ends in release.
Mika Kurosawa challenged the audience with a grotesque solo in ''Diana/Aktaion for Pierre Klossowski,'' an homage to the French artist, who was also the brother of the painter Balthus. Removing a black scarf that covered her face, she resembled a pouting, faded burlesque dancer. She repeatedly fell prone or hopped in squats to a tape of cello music and squeaks. There is more than first meets the eye in this surreal solo, which evokes lost youth if not past glory.
The two group pieces were more conventional. Toru Shimazaki is clearly a polished modern-dance choreographer with classical training, as seen in ''River.'' Three couples in his Dance Barbizon company moved with exceptional fluency in and out of slippery partnering and lifts. The currents of movement were apt for a work entitled ''River'' although hints of relationships were evident by the end. The piece was the audience favorite, a tribute to Mr. Shimazaki's craft.
''Unreasonable Mme. Belle'' was more imaginative, if fragmentary. Choreographed by Shigehiro Ide for his troupe, Idevian Crew, the dancing was in terse phrases and nicely disjointed. Hiroko Motohashi was the woman in a kimono among four women and a man in Western dress in a work that may have something to do with retaining individuality amid conformity.
DANCE REVIEW
