With growing accord, Arctic experts say rising temperatures, retreating sea ice, thawing permafrost and other changes at the top of the globe could have far-flung effects, a few beneficial but most potentially harmful.
The Arctic changes could accelerate the rise in sea levels that is already being measured as many ice sheets and glaciers melt in response to a century of slow warming, experts say.
In Greenland, for example, where a recent cool spell is one of the only exceptions to the Arctic-wide warming, ice has still been shed through summertime melting at an accelerating pace for 25 years.
Such shifts could also destabilize climate patterns -- for example, sharply cooling Europe -- by disrupting currents between the Arctic and Atlantic Oceans that determine how tropical heat is distributed to temperate regions.
Some benefits could accrue, as well. For example, some fish are expected to thrive in warmer northern waters, and treeless tundra regions could see more forest growth. But the negative consequences are far more certain.
Climate and ocean experts also generally agree on one other vital matter: it is not yet possible to say what portion of Arctic change is being caused by rising levels of carbon dioxide and other emissions from human sources and how much is just climate's usual wiggles.
The main impediments to figuring this out, they say, are a lack of data on past Arctic climate shifts and a poor understanding of the Arctic climate system, with its swirling weather and America-size ocean full of snaking currents of chill, warm, briny and fresh waters.
This will make it impossible, probably for years to come, to determine if the changes are ''a smoking gun'' proving that humans have fiddled dangerously with Earth's thermostat, said Dr. Mark C. Serreze, a sea-ice researcher at the University of Colorado.
''It's going to remain a probabilistic thing,'' Dr. Serreze said. ''You can never say definitively, yes.''
Most experts on the region agree now that the Arctic shifts are so widespread, and differ so much from earlier warm spells, that rising greenhouse gases have to be playing at least some role.
For example, a big warm-up in the 1930's occurred mainly around the North Atlantic, scientists say, and probably was caused by a shift in ocean and air circulation patterns there. The current warming is much broader, including northern Alaska, Canada and parts of Eurasia.
Some scientists say the warming and ice loss may be the result of long-term Arctic atmospheric cycles akin to the periodic El Niño drumbeat in the tropical Pacific.
But others note that summer ice retreats on the Arctic Ocean have continued apace even though the atmosphere there is no longer in its warm phase.
Prompted by scientists' growing concerns, federal agencies are focusing more money on Arctic research, mainly through a National Science Foundation project called the Study of Environmental Arctic Change, or Search. The goal is to improve computer models and charts of past change by collecting as much data as possible from fields as disparate as glaciology and fisheries biology.
The project has a budget of about $10 million a year supported by a variety of agencies. Those agencies include the Navy, which recently conducted a study of the strategic implications of an ''ice-free Arctic'' and concluded it might have to build new vessels to patrol a new ocean.
Many Arctic scientists say that the Navy's concerns are legitimate, and that the prospect of a blue cap at the North Pole later this century instead of a white one is real.
