The State Legislature voted on Monday to bring New Jersey in line with California's automobile emissions requirements, the nation's strictest.
The bill, which mandates that automakers use advanced technology on more vehicles, passed in the Senate by a 31-to-5 vote during the day, and on Monday night in the Assembly by a 53-to-15 vote, with 2 abstentions.
In other actions in the closing hours of the legislative session, lawmakers gave final approval to measures forbidding the use of hand-held cellular phones while driving and tightening the code of ethics for legislators.
Environmentalists lobbied furiously for what they called the ''clean-car bill,'' which mandates that a certain percentage of vehicle sales in New Jersey consist of low-emission models by 2009 and a smaller number to be pollution free by 2012. The measure also lowers emissions limits for each manufacturer's total fleet.
''This is the most important clean-air policy move forward in at least the last 20 years in New Jersey,'' said Dena Mottola, the executive director of the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group. ''We'll have more clean cars coming into the state as early as this year. We're putting ourselves on the path to emissions-free cars in the not-too-distant future.''
The California plan has been adopted by New York, Massachusetts and Connecticut. The states mandating stricter rules have settled on a single standard so that manufacturers, who are given more leeway by federal law, do not have to make different cars for each state.
But manufacturers and auto dealers maintain that the costs of advanced technology will be onerous, and will depress the market by forcing higher prices for consumers.
''If manufacturers are forced to spend millions of dollars chasing a goofy California mandate, there will be that much less money to spend on research and development and initiatives,'' said James B. Appleton, the president of the New Jersey Coalition of Automotive Retailers.
The legislation says that by 2009, carmakers must produce 40,000 hybrid vehicles, running on gas and electricity, and 128,000 low-emissions vehicles, using a conventional gas engine but cutting tailpipe emissions by at least 70 percent, for sale in the state. The manufacturers are to receive credits for low-emissions vehicles put on the road since 1999.
Charlie Territo, a spokesman for the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers in Washington, said the initial costs of adopting the California program in New Jersey ''could be well in excess of $12 million.'' At the same time, Mr. Territo said, because emissions controls are already improving steadily, ''we believe that this legislation will have little if any impact on the air quality.''
But Amy Goldsmith, the director of the New Jersey Environmental Federation, said the manufacturers ''will sell them like hot cakes.''
Ms. Goldsmith said that when Toyota built 36,000 hybrid cars, all were sold in six weeks. Half the buyers went online to buy the new model, the Prius, Ms. Goldsmith said, ''unseen and undriven.''
The votes on Monday ended a two-year campaign to bring the measure to the floor. It had been stalled in committee but had a bipartisan list of more than two dozen sponsors. Gov. James E. McGreevey has said he will sign the measure.
The Legislature also gave final approval to a ban on using hand-held phones while driving, although drivers can be fined only if stopped for another offense. New York adopted such a ban in June 2001, becoming the first state to do so.
In the session's last hours, legislators also gave tributes to departing members. The Legislature elected in November will convene on Tuesday, just before Mr. McGreevey's annual address to its first joint session. Democrats will control both houses for the first time in a decade, having broken the 20-20 tie in the Senate.
The senators applauded the Republican co-president, John O. Bennett, who was defeated in November. Mr. Bennett, joined on the floor by his wife, Peg, three daughters and baby granddaughter, told his colleagues, ''Thanks for the memories.''
Correction:  January 15, 2004, Thursday  An article on Tuesday about the adoption of automobile emissions standards in New Jersey patterned after California's regulations misidentified another state with a similar law. It is Vermont, not Connecticut.
