From atop a small rise at the eastern end of the Ahmanson Ranch, a vision of two Californias spreads as far as the eye can see. To the west lies a stunning, uninterrupted vista of Ventura County's oak- and chaparral-covered mountains. To the east, the developments of the San Fernando Valley spread across hundreds of square miles.
Until recently, it appeared that despite stiff opposition from environmentalists, opponents of sprawl and celebrities like Rob Reiner and Martin Sheen, parts of this 2,983-acre ranch would add to that sprawl, with 3,050 new houses. But this fall the ranch's owner, Washington Mutual, the big savings institution, dropped its $2 billion development plan and decided to sell the land to the Santa Monica Mountains Conservancy, a state agency, for $150 million.
The opening of the ranch as public parkland in mid-November, made possible through a bond measure for watershed protection, ends one of the most contentious development debates in recent California history.
''This was all going to be leveled,'' said Rorie Skei, chief deputy director of the conservancy, pointing toward a broad plain and a historic ranch house surrounded by oak, eucalyptus and citrus trees. ''It was to be right in the middle of the community and town center.''
Climbing into a four-wheel-drive Ford Excursion, Ms. Skei set out to show what Californians had gotten for their money. As the S.U.V. rolled past a huge oak that would have been axed, she first pointed to the sky, where a white-tailed kite was hovering over an unseen rodent. A small flock of horned larks burst from a nearby thicket.
''There are very few places you can see larks anymore,'' she said. ''This is ideal grassland habitat.''
Soon the truck was moving along the oak- and willow-lined banks of Las Virgenes Creek. This is the headwaters of Malibu Creek, which, after a dramatic trip along Malibu Canyon Road, empties into the Pacific at the famous Surfrider Beach. The creek arrives at the beach carrying a load of urban-runoff pollution, however, and Ms. Skei said more runoff, from two golf courses and thousands of cars and homes, would most likely have sullied its waters further had the project gone ahead.
''That's red-legged-frog habitat,'' she said. ''When they found the endangered spineflower, they also found this highly endangered frog population that no one knew was here.''
After passing under the branches of an ancient walnut tree, Ms. Skei stopped to chat with a jogger, Gary Stone of nearby Newbury Park, who was on a lunch break from his job at a technology company.
''It's a snapshot of Southern California before it got developed,'' Mr. Stone said of his surroundings. ''I mean, there's 10 million people over that hill, and you'd just never know it. I used to run up Las Virgenes Creek, and I always looked over here and just thought, 'It's so sad -- they just can't pave that thing over.' I was amazed when this got stopped.''
Mr. Stone, 44, said he voted in 2002 for the $3.6 billion bond measure, Proposition 50, that financed protection of the ranch, of Los Angeles's Ballona Creek wetlands and of sites elsewhere in the state.
''I don't mind paying taxes for this,'' he said.
A little farther, Ms. Skei found two mountain bikers prodding at a small coiled rattlesnake to get it off the road. ''It might not have gotten out of your way,'' said one, Ron Beck, 49, of the Northridge section of Los Angeles.
Mr. Beck and his friend Randy Savre, 45, of Simi Valley, are employees of California's Department of Water Resources. They said they had already ridden more than 10 miles on a trip connecting over 15 miles of Ahmanson trails to a trail network of hundreds of miles in the Santa Monica Mountains National Recreation Area. While the two men agreed that Southern California needed more housing, they said they favored plans that would increase density while leaving more open space.
''You have to build; you can't always say 'not in my backyard,' '' Mr. Beck said. ''But you can do it more efficiently.''
Moving again, Ms. Skei was quick to point out that in spite of California's enormous fiscal problems, the bond money that paid for the ranch purchase and other conservation efforts had been supported by 55 percent of California voters.
For Washington Mutual, the decision to sell the Ahmanson Ranch, named for the family that once owned it, hinged on the passage of Proposition 50.
''Prop 50 was critical,'' said Tim McGarry, a company spokesman, ''because it showed that voters statewide wanted park expansion. This presented something to respond to that transcended narrow and purely local interests, and made us disposed to listen carefully when the state's top environmental officer approached us to discuss alternatives to the project.''
Mr. McGarry said the company was pleased with the financial outcome, although he added that ''most of us have mixed feelings.''
''This will be a wonderful park,'' he said, ''but it would also have been a wonderful place to live. It's just realism to point out that resolving the future of Ahmanson Ranch has not resolved the challenge of a population that continues to grow.''
Looking down on the sprawling San Fernando Valley, Ms. Skei said there were still some 50,000 sites approved for home building but not yet developed in the nearby Santa Clarita Valley. Then she regarded the undeveloped hills to the west, and smiled.
''You know, you come out here and you can see what was so enticing about California to the forty-niners besides gold,'' she said. ''This is California.''
