I was at the swimming pool of the Venetian Resort Hotel Casino in Las Vegas, talking on my cellphone to another guy, telling him I was in a meeting and too totally swamped to see him, and he was telling me the same about his schedule. Then I walk out of my cabana straight into him. We just laughed and went out for a beer.
I travel about 250,000 miles per year, two to three weeks out of the month, about 60 percent domestic, for my public relations firm. In late January, I go to Washington, New Orleans, Las Vegas, Germany and Los Angeles, and that's just in an eight-day period. I have more frequent-flier miles than I know what to do with.
The Continental Airlines Web site lets you auction off frequent-flier miles, and I won a New York Marathon package this year, which was terrific. They sent a limo to take me to the V.I.P. tent area at the starting line. So before the race I had O.J., sports drinks and a bagel.
Continental put a sticker on my race number to identify me as a V.I.P., so at the finish line people grabbed me to take me to a special reunion area with food, drink, massages plus passes for my parents. What the hell else am I going to do with my miles besides upgrades internationally? I still have 750,000 miles left in my account.
Once on the Delta Air Lines shuttle from Reagan National Airport in D.C. to New York, I was in the airline club and found a metal detector wand in one of my bags. I brought it back to the security guy, who said, ''We've done that a lot.''
I wish more airports had gyms, but except for Las Vegas, I've seen them only in airport hotels. Logic would suggest people who travel on business a lot want to get in shape, and studies show successful people are more in shape. And give us wireless Internet at the airline clubs; we'll take it over anything else.
Because I'm Platinum at Starwood Hotels, I often get upgrades to suites. Usually whenever I'm in the middle of nowhere in a city where I don't know anyone, that's when I get the four-bedroom Presidential Suite. I feel like sleeping two hours in each bed. How come this never happens when I'm in Thailand on vacation or in Mexico with my girlfriend?
I carry a lot of wireless devices; at least three phones, one a dataphone so I can get e-mail and text messages; an extra cellphone battery; an extra phone cable; a glow-stick that produces light without batteries; and a Dell Inspiron 8200 with Wi-Fi capability. Text messaging is the most reliable thing in the world. It works even when cellphones are down.
Most of my travel is for my Upoc clients, a mobile community which lets you create cellphone messaging groups, and Yoo-hoo, the chocolate drink. Another time I was at a meeting in California with an ex-client, the largest distributor of adult pay-for-view movies on cable. A company that made the movies was also at the meeting, and gave me about 30 porn DVD's. At LAX airport, I was selected for a random screening. For some reason, I always make the random screening. Maybe I fit the young entrepreneur terrorist profile they're looking for.
Two women open my bag, pull out one porn DVD after another and look at each one. The look of disgust was probably the biggest I've ever seen, even though I told them it was for work.
The guy sitting next to me in first class, after my frequent-flier upgrade, who saw the whole thing, said, ''I guess what you do pays well.'' I'm just the publicist; they're my client, I told him.
Frequent Flier  Correction:  January 15, 2004, Thursday  Because of an editing error, the Frequent Flier column in Business Day on Tuesday, about the president of Geek Factory, a public relations firm in New York, misspelled his surname. He is Peter Shankman, not Shenkman.
