Environmental protection under the Bush administration often seems to refer to the political environment and not the stewardship of the nation's precious resources. In the latest attack on existing safeguards, the Interior Department is quietly gutting yet another legal safeguard against the wholesale pollution and burial of streams in Appalachia by the strip-mining industry.
In 2002, the administration essentially repealed a longstanding provision of the Clean Water Act prohibiting the dumping of mining wastes in streams. Now, under what is advertised as a ''clarification'' of the law governing surface mining, the administration is eliminating a ban dating from the Reagan era against mining activity within 100 feet of a stream.
Taken together, these two rollbacks can only encourage and accelerate the horrific process called mountaintop removal, which has already buried about 1,200 miles of Appalachia's vital streams under mammoth piles of bulldozed waste. This serial decapitation of the coal-rich hills has long been a matter of furious conflict between the mining industry and the residents and environmentalists defending the life and beauty of the Appalachian hollows. Hundreds of square miles of mountaintops have been dynamited away, and dozens of communities bought out and buried.
The new regulation changes a standing prohibition against mining within 100 feet of a stream if it will degrade water quality. In the future, mining companies will be required to respect the buffer zone merely ''to the extent practicable.'' This is an open invitation to industry to ignore a rule that, as a practical matter, has been routinely abused as regulators looked the other way.
Anyone who has visited the ravaged heart of Appalachia can see that hundreds of streams have been snuffed from the landscape, not merely degraded. Industry's ballyhooed reclamation projects stand out as Potemkin oases along the scarred horizon. Meanwhile, a federal study uncovered by a Freedom of Information Act initiative warns of more devastation to come. It may be a coincidence that the new rule comes as Republican fund-raisers are priming the campaign donation pump. But the ''clarification'' brazenly certifies the protection of Big Coal at the expense of the environment.
