THE battle between CBS and NBC over ''The Apprentice'' -- the new rat-race reality series on NBC featuring Donald J. Trump -- is developing into quite a feud.
CBS is taking several unusual steps in an effort to blunt the viewership of ''The Apprentice'' before the NBC reality series gets off the ground on Wednesday nights. Among its maneuvers, CBS counter-scheduled popular hourlong dramas like ''CSI: Crime Scene Investigation'' and ''Cold Case.'' Those moves came after NBC decided to broadcast a special preview edition of ''The Apprentice'' last Thursday.
Stunt scheduling, as this activity is known in TV, is not uncommon as networks try to discourage viewers from sampling shows on other channels by enticing them with specials or programs shown at different times. At stake is millions of dollars in advertising revenue, not to mention ratings supremacy on Thursday, the most lucrative night of prime-time broadcast programming.
But stunts are not typically wielded against a series like ''The Apprentice'' that was introduced in midseason and not intended to last a full season. NBC has ordered 13 weeks of the series, which presents 16 would-be moguls competing for a job with Mr. Trump in New York. Mr. Trump is an executive producer of the show, along with Mark Burnett, who created ''Survivor'' for CBS.
''It sounds like big boys with big toys fighting,'' said Steve Koonin, executive vice president and chief operating officer at two cable networks in Atlanta owned by Time Warner, TBS Superstation and TNT. ''It's kind of a chess match to see who blinks first.''
The combatants are Jeff Zucker, president for entertainment, news and the cable group at NBC, part of the NBC division of General Electric, and Leslie Moonves, chairman and chief executive at CBS, a division of Viacom. Always feisty in challenging each other, they are particularly eager this TV season to gain their networks one or both coveted titles of most-watched by all viewers, a category that CBS now leads, or most-watched by viewers ages 18 to 49, a category that NBC now leads.
''Of course there's gamesmanship and competition between the networks, and that's O.K.,'' Mr. Zucker said in a telephone interview. ''This is all good for network television.''
A CBS spokesman, Chris Ender, said Mr. Moonves could not be reached for comment. Mr. Ender described the situation as ''no big deal, just two successful and competitive networks jockeying for position.''
Two additional elements are intensifying the competition.
One is that after Mr. Burnett created ''Survivor'' -- a big hit -- for CBS, he developed his next two reality series, ''The Restaurant'' and ''The Apprentice,'' for NBC.
The other is that CBS did not renew a contract to broadcast three beauty pageants owned by Mr. Trump -- Miss Universe, Miss USA and Miss Teen. NBC now broadcasts the pageants. (Further fueling the feud, Mr. Trump appeared last night on the NBC entertainment-magazine show ''Access Hollywood'' and criticized Mr. Moonves by name, calling for his dismissal.)
Here is a brief recap of the moves and countermoves. NBC announced last month that ''The Apprentice'' would appear from 8 to 9 p.m. (Eastern and Pacific times) on Wednesdays, starting this week, but decided to offer the first episode as a 90-minute preview last Thursday, from 8:30 to 10. To siphon viewers from the preview, CBS scheduled a special rerun of ''C.S.I.'' from 8 to 9, in addition to a regular, new episode from 9 to 10.
Though viewership of the preview episode of ''The Apprentice'' fell as it progressed, never a good sign, the ratings over all were much stronger than NBC had anticipated. ''The Apprentice'' scored the highest ratings in a year for any first episode of a show among viewers 18 to 49. Not only did 27.8 million people of all ages watch some or all of the episode, it tied ''The West Wing,'' Mr. Zucker said, as the most-watched show among viewers with household incomes of more than $75,000 and more than $100,000.
(The advertisers on the preview episode included marketers that rarely if ever run commercials during reality shows. Among them: the Careerbuilder and Yahoo HotJobs job-search Web sites.)
On Friday, the day NBC was crowing about the preview episode's ratings results, CBS scheduled a special new episode of ''C.S.I.'' to run against the second episode of ''The Apprentice'' on Wednesday. Also on Friday, NBC decided to shift the second episode to Thursday night, from 8:30 to 9:30, and run in its place on Wednesday an encore of the preview episode, edited to 60 minutes.
CBS then countered by moving the new episode of ''C.S.I.'' to Thursday from 9 to 10, against the second half-hour of the second episode of ''The Apprentice,'' to be preceded by another rerun of ''C.S.I.'' from 8 to 9. In its place at 8 p.m. on Wednesday, CBS will show a rerun of ''Cold Case.''
''As a professional in advertising, it's hard enough to follow all these yo-yo games the networks are playing, so I can imagine what it's like for the viewers,'' said Peter Gardiner, chief media officer at Deutsch in New York, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
''The good part is, the first episode of 'The Apprentice' did great numbers,'' Mr. Gardiner said, ''and NBC is using what appears to be a hit to bolster its ratings on what's arguably the most important night of the week.''
Mr. Gardiner is one of three executives at Deutsch who will appear on the second episode, judging a competition between the two teams of contestants to create a campaign for Marquis Jet, which subleases flight time on corporate jets.
''That should add some ratings points in New York,'' Joe Mandese, editor of Mediapost, an online and print publication in New York, said, tongue firmly in cheek.
For all the maneuvering over ''The Apprentice,'' NBC intends for Wednesday to be its regular night, partly to offer a stronger lead-in series for ''The West Wing,'' which appears from 9 to 10 p.m., and partly because Mr. Burnett's contract with CBS prohibits any of his other reality series from appearing against ''Survivor,'' which returns to CBS's Thursday night schedule on Feb. 5.
However, in settling in on Wednesdays, the second half of ''The Apprentice'' will soon be facing at 8:30 a formidable competitor: the weekly episode of ''American Idol,'' returning for a third season on Fox Broadcasting, that reveals the winners and losers of the talent contests as determined by viewer votes.
Mr. Zucker said he was nonplussed. ''Who,'' he asked, ''is a bigger American idol than Donald Trump?''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
Correction:  March 25, 2006, Saturday  An article in The Arts on March 13 about Tony DiSanto, executive vice president for series development and animation at MTV Networks, misstated the role of Mark Burnett, one of the ''reality auteurs'' to whom a media professor compared him. (Similar errors occurred in more than a dozen earlier articles, dating to July 2001.) Mr. Burnett is an executive producer of ''Survivor,'' not the creator. Charlie Parsons, another executive producer of ''Survivor,'' created the format, initially for a Swedish show, on which it is based.
