The KPMG accounting firm said yesterday that its deputy chairman was stepping down and that its top tax shelter partner was put on administrative leave after severe criticism of its ethics at a Senate hearing two months ago and a continuing court fight with the Internal Revenue Service over tax shelters that the government says were abusive.
The move appeared to signal another significant victory in the government's efforts to rein in the sale of abusive tax shelters through public criticism rather than litigation. Two other big accounting firms, Ernst &amp; Young, and PricewaterhouseCoopers, earlier shut down their tax shelter units in the face of similar criticism and promised internal changes.
Eugene D. O'Kelly, chairman of KPMG, the third-largest accounting firm, announced that the deputy chairman, Jeff Stein, would retire at the end of the month. Mr. Stein had previously overseen the firm's tax services unit.
Jeffrey Eischeid, whose testimony drew the sharpest criticism at the Senate hearing, was removed as tax partner for personal financial planning and placed on administrative leave, Mr. O'Kelly said. Richard Smith, vice chairman of the firm's tax services unit, was reassigned to unspecified new duties. KPMG issued a statement that said it ''is committed to fill our role as a responsible corporate steward.''
''These changes are consistent with our ongoing consideration of the firm's tax practices and procedures, and reaffirm KPMG's commitment to the highest standards of professional practice and responsibility,'' the statement said. ''We look forward to a lasting impact for these decisions, and for our firm to operate in a fully positive, productive, client-oriented environment.''
A KPMG spokesman, George Ledwith, said the three men would have no comment.
From 1997 through 2001, KPMG collected $124 million in fees for tax shelters that cost the government at least $1.4 billion in lost revenue, a report by minority staff of the Senate Permanent Investigations subcommittee estimated.
Senator Norm Coleman, the Minnesota Republican who is chairman of the subcommittee, took the personnel moves as a clear sign of change at KPMG.
''I applaud the actions of KPMG to make sure the individuals involved in this scandal will no longer play active roles in this company,'' Mr. Coleman said. ''The departure of these three individuals together with substantial changes in operating procedures allow KPMG to begin with a clean slate. This strong action on the part of KPMG reaffirms the strong promise they made at our hearings that they are truly committed.''
Senator Carl Levin, the Michigan Democrat whose staff investigated KPMG's tax shelter sales, praised the shake-up but added words of caution.
''A change in culture at KPMG is absolutely critical,'' Mr. Levin said. ''Our investigation revealed a culture of deception inside KPMG's tax practice. If the changes announced by KPMG today represent a real reform of that culture, they are welcome.''
At the November hearing, Mr. Eischeid parried at length with Mr. Levin, who posed questions based on tax shelter sales pitches, memorandums and internal e-mail messages. When Senator Levin was unable to extract from Mr. Eischeid a yes or no answer to whether he had written a memorandum that showed the tax shelters had no purpose but tax avoidance, which by law makes them invalid, Mr. Eischeid tried to deflect the question.
The senator then rephrased his question and Mr. Eischeid sat silent for a spell before volunteering that he had not answered immediately because ''I don't know how to change my answer.'' Mr. Levin suggested that Mr. Eischeid ''try an honest answer.''
In an interview after the hearing, Mr. Eischeid defended his conduct and expressed surprise that the senators had questioned his ethics.
Donald Alexander, a Washington tax lawyer who was the I.R.S. commissioner during the Nixon administration, said yesterday that the changes at KPMG showed that audits and litigation were not the only way to attack tax shelters.
''The I.R.S. strategy of jawboning has worked well,'' Mr. Alexander said. ''The I.R.S. has come on strong and has put the fear of God into a lot of people.''
The Bush administration's commissioner, Mark W. Everson, who has emphasized tax law enforcement, said yesterday that ''assuring that accountants and attorneys adhere to professional standards and follow the law is a cornerstone of our ongoing efforts to curb the use of abusive tax shelters by corporations and high-income individuals.''
In a related development, an administrative law judge yesterday barred a former I.R.S. criminal investigator from representing clients before the agency.
The former investigator, Joseph R. Banister, an accountant in San Jose, Calif., maintains at his Web site, www.freedomabovefortune.com, that the tax laws are a hoax. He has counseled several small business owners who do not withhold taxes from their workers paychecks that their conduct is lawful. He could not be reached for comment last night but has said the proceedings are aimed at unfairly silencing critics of the tax system.
