Decades ago, David A. Damon Jr. used to come to his father's bar and banquet hall to spin records, the vinyl kind, for the regulars.
It was a place where people stopped after fishing on Oneida Lake. Or for banquets celebrating another year of bowling competition. For nine years, the Elks ran the hall, about 10 miles north of Syracuse, as their private club. But in 1996, when the club could no longer afford the mortgage payments, the son took it back as his retirement venture.
Mr. Damon never meant to make much money. His business, Damons, was just a place where the memories were as old as the chairs (also the vinyl kind).
But he never meant to lose money, either. And he did after the state's smoking law went into effect last July. ''I got killed,'' said Mr. Damon, 69, a retired engineer. ''I didn't just lose the smokers; I lost the friends of the smokers, the nonsmokers, who didn't want to hang out without them.''
''People used to come in after golfing,'' he added. ''I stopped seeing fishermen, too. I used to have bowling banquets, but people decided they'd rather shake hands at the last game and go home. They changed their lifestyles.''
When the weather began to turn last fall, even the bar's loyalists dropped off after growing tired of tramping out to the gravel parking lot in the cold for a smoke. Mr. Damon said his receipts were down by $1,000 a week. He laid off his only employee, a part-time bartender, and was using his retirement savings and Social Security checks to keep the bar open.
''There used to be 15 to 20 cars in the parking lot, and now you see two,'' said Michael Smith, a regular who gave up smoking years ago.
Alarmed, Mr. Damon went to Onondaga County officials to exercise a provision in the smoking law intended for just such a predicament. After he proved his economic hardship, and demonstrated that the bar had a separate room suitable for a smoking lounge, the county granted a waiver. Scott Wexler, executive director of the Empire State Restaurant and Tavern Association, a trade group, said he thought the waiver for Damons was the first in the state.
Apparently it will not be the last. ''There's going to be a few more that meet the criteria,'' said Gary R. Sauda, the director of environmental health for the county, which is considering 24 other applications.
The association believes that 10 percent of the state's 16,000 restaurants and bars that are licensed to sell alcohol will ultimately find ways around the tobacco law. How they do so will vary.
When smoking restrictions in the state Clean Indoor Air Act were tightened last year, the state law superseded local smoking laws. But it allows New York City and those counties with full-service health departments to decide whether they will grant waivers and under what conditions. In rural counties without full-service health departments, the state policy for exemptions takes over, said Claire Pospisil, a State Health Department spokeswoman.
Some places, like New York City, and Westchester and Suffolk Counties, do not offer waivers, health officials said. Nassau County recently decided to offer them. ''It's happening as we speak,'' said Cynthia Brown, a spokeswoman for the county's Health Department.
Other counties decided to offer waivers but did not establish guidelines for applications, a situation that has stalled the process.
Some counties may have been waiting for direction from the state, which issued guidelines just in December suggesting that bars that lose 15 percent of their business may be eligible, said Mr. Sauda, the Onondaga environmental health director. Onondaga decided to not require a certain percentage, only a substantiated drop.
Two ''economically depressed'' counties in the state may try to give waivers to any bars that ask for them, Mr. Wexler said, though he declined to name the counties.
The delays and different rules have led to confusion, frustration and perhaps action, Mr. Wexler said. ''News that a bar in Cicero is getting a waiver has stimulated the effort for a level playing field,'' he said. ''The smoking ban will be a major topic in the Legislature this year. I just don't think it's going away.''
Since news of the waiver broke, Mr. Wexler said, his office has been getting about a dozen calls a day from bar owners who feel hopeful for the first time since the law was passed.
Even in counties that have guidelines in place, like Onondaga, bar owners face a lengthy approval process. Mr. Damon said the paperwork took weeks, ''not including thinking time,'' he said, ''because I guess thinking time doesn't count.'' He turned over financial records comparing receipts from August through October over a three-year period, and they showed a 40 percent drop in business last year, after the ban took effect. He escorted county inspectors through Damons, showing them a separate banquet room and ventilation system.
His application was approved and the waiver was hand-delivered during the holidays. ''Now I have to see if I can get customers back,'' he said.
As reports of the waiver have spread, he has picked up some new patrons. ''I saw it on the news,'' said Shawn Prell of North Syracuse, ''and I said, 'Good! We're going to this place.' '' Ms. Prell stopped in for a drink on a recent afternoon with her husband, Ed. ''We even called our friends.''
The Prells confirmed what Mr. Damon believed: that smokers cut down on the number of times they went out to bars or restaurants, but not on their cigarettes, after the ban took effect. ''We used to go out every week, but now we go out once a month,'' Ms. Prell said. ''We're saving money.''
Mr. Damon clearly hopes to change that. He pointed the Prells toward the smoking lounge and poured their first drink.
