All men, at some level, are 13. Or so one might have concluded from the tone of Pitti Immagine Uomo, the big men's wear trade show held last week in Florence, which was a major center for Italian fashion until Milan stole the spotlight three decades ago.
If in most societies masculine rites of passage are organized around puberty and the onset of the reproductive years, in a materialistic culture, the transition to adulthood is best marked by the stirrings of an independent ability to select and consume. Americans enter a mature demographic cohort at 13, the age by which most marketers say that the buying patterns of a lifetime are formed.
Pitti Immagine barely registers on the consciousness of the average consumer. Yet it is probably here and not in centers of image-making like Milan and Paris where most real clothes are sold. It is here that 678 companies and 793 brands from 24 countries set up booths inside a medieval arsenal called the Fortezza da Basso. It is to Pitti Immagine that retailers allocated a major proportion of their budgets for acquiring the clothes that will ultimately occupy major real estate in stores: that is, the sportswear that is the backbone of the trade.
''The casual side of the business shows the greatest growth,'' said Kal Ruttenstein, the fashion director of Bloomingdale's. ''Yes, suits are becoming strong again, but jeans, T-shirts and sweaters continue to drive the bottom line.''
Despite everything that has been said about so-called metrosexuals, most American men still enjoy dressing the way they did before they started to shave, spending, for instance, more than $13 billion on T-shirts annually. This may help explain why some of the major trends in menswear for fall 2004 here included snowboard graphics, soccer and rugby-style lad clothes, neo hip-hop layering and the sort of goofy gray denims that those with long memories will associate with Steve Martin and Dan Aykroyd as two wild and crazy guys.
''We must absolutely design some fresh solutions,'' the designer Philippe Starck was heard to say on a video accompanying the introduction of his new line for Puma, molded high-tech sneakers and boots that, beyond being sleeker than most contemporary footwear, don't appear to solve any great quandaries.
In the video, as often in life, Mr. Starck is seen wearing a porkpie hat that gives him the appearance of someone who, despite having global fame and his own Gulfstream V jet, somehow resists the conventional markers of maturity. ''We must realize that we were bacteria four billion years ago,'' Mr. Starck says on the video, apropos of nothing in particular. ''Then we were fish, then frogs, then monkeys, then the supermonkeys we are now.''
Man the supermonkey is a notion so redolent of adolescence that it floated through the head of this reporter throughout a fair where some of the major excitement attached to brands like Lonsdale, which built its business on athletic shells; Onitsuka Tiger, which manufactures acid-colored ''Kill Bill'' sneakers fit for kickboxing Uma Thurman; Juicy Couture, which now produces its schlumpy but expensive velour sweat clothes for gentlemen; the proliferating hipster jeans companies like Paper Denim &amp; Cloth, Evisu and Chip &amp; Pepper; and Ecko, the hip-hop line that has held on to street cred (check the next perp walk in the newspaper) when most rap-inspired labels seem frantic to cash out.
To commemorate the 10th anniversary of his company, Mark Ecko staged a new collection entitled ''Drop Out'' at the Mercato Centrale di San Lorenzo, Florence's historic food market. Amid the market's iron stalls fragrant with pork sausage and aged Parmesan, Mr. Ecko sent out a series of fancied-up slacker clothes in materials like cashmere, heathered flannel and houndstooth printed corduroy.
One of the wittier brands to come out of Pitti Immagine barely produces or designs new clothes. ''We never wanted to change the world of fashion,'' explained Christian Obojes of Retrofame, which bills itself as the largest customer for vintage T-shirts in the world. What has made Retrofame the darlings of stores like Barneys in New York and Harvey Nichols in London is a line of T-shirts bought in bulk from rag houses, then sanitized, relabeled and affixed with an iron-on ''biography'' of each shirt's original owner.
''Every single designer, from D&amp;G to Dior, goes to the flea market and gets 60 percent of their ideas there,'' Mr. Obojes said. Most of those designers are left struggling to breathe life into concepts recycled on average every 10 years. ''We thought, at a certain point, 'Why remake it?' '' said Mr. Obojes, whose business concept is both irresistibly post-postmodern and teenage in its simplicity. ''We thought, 'Why not just buy the originals?' '' said the designer, who last year bought 35,000 T-shirts from American rag houses. ''Why not just clean them up and sell them again?''
Correction:  January 22, 2004, Thursday  An article on the Fashion page on Jan. 13 about Pitti Immagine Uomo, a men's wear trade show in Florence, Italy, misspelled the given name of a designer there. He is Marc Ecko, not Mark.
