Near the end of Monday night's game against Seton Hall, Providence Coach Tim Welsh had the look of a man waiting for the other shoe to drop.
Twice in the last week, the Friars were beaten by last-second shots, against Texas and in their Big East opener at Rutgers. Now Welsh's Friars, after misfiring from the free-throw line for the second consecutive game, were leading by only 3 points in the final minute.
But this time the desperation shots -- 3-point attempts by Andre Barrett, Andre Sweet and John Allen in the final eight seconds -- clanged off the rim, and the Friars exhaled after a 63-60 victory over Seton Hall at Continental Arena.
''This team has shown me an awful lot during this trip, just sticking together,'' Welsh said. ''I am so proud of them, because they could have packed it in.''
It was a back-and-forth game for most of the second half until Providence wrested the lead for good with a 6-point surge. Ryan Gomes had 4 of the points and Donnie McGrath, who missed two late free throws to give Rutgers life on Saturday, scored Providence's last basket of the game on a breakaway layup with a minute and a half left.
It then became a waiting game for the Friars. Barrett, who led the Pirates with 14 points, hit a 3-pointer from the top of the key with 50 seconds left, cutting the lead to 3. Seton Hall fouled Tuukka Kotti, a 46 percent free-throw shooter, with 30 seconds left, and he missed the front end of a one-and-one, giving the Pirates hope.
J. R. Morris's 3-point attempt with 17 seconds left banged off the backboard and the rim, forcing the Pirates to foul again. Sheiku Kabba, an 83 percent free-throw shooter, fared no better than Kotti, missing the first shot to give the Pirates another chance to tie.
Barrett missed from the top of the key, then Sweet grabbed the rebound and missed from the right corner. Allen's last-second heave from the left corner also missed.
''It's even tougher when you lose when you haven't lost in a while,'' Seton Hall Coach Louis Orr said. After an eight-game winning streak, the Pirates fell to 11-3, 1-1 in the Big East.
Providence (9-3, 1-1) committed eight turnovers in the first eight minutes, and Seton Hall jumped to a 21-11 lead. But the Pirates' lack of depth and poor free-throw shooting (8 for 14) allowed the Friars to get back into the game.
The Pirates' 60-point output was a season low. Gomes and Marcus Douthit led the Friars with 14 points each, with Douthit hitting 7 of 10 shots from the field.
''I can live with the 60 points; it's the defense that bothers me,'' Orr said. ''We can't let anybody come into our building and shoot 47 percent.''
BASKETBALL
