When the Rev. Al Sharpton forced former Gov. Howard Dean to admit in a debate on Sunday that he had never appointed a black or Hispanic to his cabinet, he was hoping to damage him enough so that minority voters would cast their ballots for Mr. Sharpton. But that does not mean he wants them to refuse to vote for Dr. Dean should he land the Democratic nomination.
That, at least, is what Mr. Sharpton suggested on Monday that his strategy had been. And during a campaign swing through this city on the eve of the Washington primary, it was clear he had struck a chord. People repeatedly approached Mr. Sharpton on the street and thanked him for eliciting Dr. Dean's admission in the debate in Iowa.
Nevertheless, Mr. Sharpton said that regardless of Dr. Dean's past: ''I still think what he is saying is good in terms of race. And I still think that if he happens to get the nomination, I would support him wholeheartedly against President Bush.''
The Washington primary is largely symbolic, with no delegates up for grabs and more than half of the major candidates skipping the contest altogether. It was designed by political leaders here to highlight the fact that residents of the District of Columbia do not have voting representation in Congress. Among the major candidates, only Dr. Dean, Mr. Sharpton, Representative Dennis J. Kucinich and former Senator Carol Moseley Braun are on the ballot.
But for Mr. Sharpton, the primary is an important step that he hopes will help elevate him to a role as a kingmaker in the Democratic Party. He wants to assume the position that the Rev. Jesse Jackson played in the 1984 and 1988 presidential elections, when Mr. Jackson captured the vast majority of the black vote in the primaries and with that a central role at the Democrats' nominating convention and within the party.
And so while other candidates were barnstorming Iowa, Mr. Sharpton was crisscrossing this city, hoping that Washington can give his campaign momentum for his next big test, in South Carolina next month. To achieve the status he wants in the party, Mr. Sharpton will have to attract black and Hispanic voters, the groups that have represented his political base. And his repeated attacks on Dr. Dean show that he sees him as a threat to that goal.
So Mr. Sharpton has been on the offensive against Dr. Dean, even if it is not clear that the strategy will win him many more votes.
It was about 8:30 this morning when Mr. Sharpton arrived at the Anacostia metro stop to greet people as they headed to work. Cynthia Kain, 34, had been there for hours before he arrived. Ms. Kain is exactly the kind of voter Mr. Sharpton is hoping to draw, but she was campaigning for Dr. Dean.
She said she liked that Mr. Sharpton was in the race and appreciated the issues he was raising. In fact, Ms. Kain said, ''I am disappointed Governor Dean didn't have any people of color in his cabinet.''
But she still plans to vote for Dr. Dean. ''I like the fact I think he can beat George Bush,'' she said.
Later in the day, Mr. Sharpton was campaigning along Georgia Avenue, a broad commercial thoroughfare that cuts past Howard University. He walked into a barbershop and a dry cleaning shop, shaking hands, smiling. Young men were coming up, shaking his hand, saying he had their vote, when Clifton West, 70, elbowed his way through the crowd.
''You're the first major politician to be on Georgia Avenue since Clinton came here,'' said Mr. West, who has run a business in the neighborhood for 40 years.
As Mr. Sharpton moved on, Mr. West said that he liked what Mr. Sharpton had to say, but that he was not likely to vote for him.
''There are very sophisticated people in this city in political terms,'' Mr. West said. ''They know he doesn't have a snowball's chance of winning.''
Aware of his difficult position, Mr. Sharpton is already hedging his bets, trying to define anything but an overwhelming victory for Dr. Dean as a victory for him.
''If he can't beat me four- or five- to one here, and we make it competitive, it's a victory,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''It's just him against us. If this is not a complete rollover, then he should be very concerned.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MINISTER
