On the principle that this country didn't win the Battle of Midway by cowering in a root cellar, I spent a good portion of the recent Code Orange alert phase traveling by air.
Airport checkpoint security was uniformly efficient and polite. The only difficulties I encountered were traffic jams at airport approach roads, where police blockades typically funneled vehicles into a single lane for the once-over. Yet even these were surmountable. For example, my car-service driver to the Newark airport spotted the snarled traffic near the terminals one morning and turned off onto a ramp leading to a side road that wound its way behind the chokepoint, deftly avoiding the blockade altogether. All of the taxi drivers and other airport regulars seemed to know the shortcut.
''This is the way a terrorist would go,'' the driver pointed out dryly.
In the back seat, I quickly thumbed through my copy of the Business Travel Almanac 2004, a new book that I was carrying to read on the plane. Sure enough, on Page 211 was a map of the terminals and approach roads to the Newark airport. In fact, the almanac has maps of more than a dozen airports.
Never mind that such information is readily available online and elsewhere to anyone with the time and interest to spend hours digging it up. A few days later, I told the book's author, Donna Williams, that carrying her almanac meant I could have come under severe suspicion by the authorities, even though I'd slipped through security undetected.
''Darn it,'' she replied. ''It would have been really good press for the book if you'd have got arrested.''
Well, I've done some embarrassing things to flog a book (ask me about that Sally Jessy Raphaël show), but I am not looking to get busted for someone else's book, as useful as I think that book might be.
Ms. Williams's almanac, a paperback recently published by Que Publishing ($19.99), came out right around the time that almanacs in general were getting a bad rap in the law enforcement community. That was during the peak of the Orange Alert just before the New Year holiday, when the F.B.I. sent an intelligence bulletin to thousands of law enforcement agencies in the United States warning that terrorists could ''rely on almanacs'' to look up maps and other minute details to help them plan dastardly deeds.
The almanac alert elicited amusement in the news media, where editors predictably dispatched reporters to get comment from the folks at the Farmer's Almanac.
The 430-page Business Travel Almanac has an eye-catching red and black cover and is, indeed, crammed with minutiae about the logistics of traveling on business. There are sections on 15 major cities, with airport and local maps. The city guides include comprehensive information on parking, transportation, hotels and top restaurants. There is also handy information on things like mobile technology, on-the-road businesses and supplies, and even which lodging chain owns which hotel brands, and in which niches. There is also a six-page list of the three-letter codes for about 200 domestic airports.
Anyone who has ever annotated a college term paper knows how much grueling, eye-squinting work there is in digging up all these pesky little details and getting them right. Ms. Williams said she started her business career as an investment banker and later went on to an Internet start-up that ''was a wild ride till the market crashed and everyone got small.''
Doing an almanac fits her because an almanac is all about those little details, she said. Still, an almanac required more detail work than she had imagined.
''I used to do a lot of strategy work in business, and when any hot new idea for business development came up I would say, 'O.K., if this is such a great idea how come nobody else has done it?''' she said. ''And I applied that to myself when I thought about doing this book. Then I realized when I got about halfway through that the reason no one else had done this was because no one was that naïve.''
Workdays disappeared in long slogs through city, airline, hotel, government and other Web sites, where information was often confusing or out of date. Once compiled, the basic information was bolstered with more than 100 interviews.
I am not a great fan of reference-shelf travel books, which often are full of sketchy information and almost invariably out of date upon publication. But specifically because it is composed of tiny little facts over a wide landscape of business travel concerns, Ms. Williams's almanac is actually something I'd use.
''One of the challenges I set was, I didn't want this book to be fluff on how to pack and that kind of stuff,'' she said. ''My career has been spent writing memorandums for acquisitions. I'm really numbers- and fact-oriented. This is kind of the only book I could do. I wrote what I knew how to do. Lots and lots of tables.''
On the Road appears each Tuesday.
BUSINESS TRAVEL: ON THE ROAD E-mail: jsharkey@nytimes.com.
