In an effort to pick up the pace of reconstruction in Iraq, representatives of more than 300 international companies and nearly 300 Iraqi businessmen are attending a three-day conference, Outreach 2004, here to explore possible partnerships.
The Iraqi companies are desperate for business and a chance to revive their battered country, but in many instances they are thin on capital, equipment and technology and feel they are getting only the scraps from the American reconstruction project. The Americans and other foreign companies have the resources, yet many remain hesitant about setting up shop in Iraq, still plagued by almost daily violence.
''Our goal is to make sure Iraqis are deeply involved in the reconstruction of their country,'' said David Nash, a retired American admiral overseeing reconstruction programs in Iraq, said of the conference, which ends Tuesday.
The conference is the latest of several such Iraq reconstruction sessions. Yet none have been held in Iraq, where such a large gathering of foreigners would make an inviting target for Iraqi insurgents.
The money is starting to flow, though, and the projects, many involving the restoration of oil facilities and of electrical and water services, are moving forward, American officials said.
The United States government has authorized spending $18.6 billion over the next few years, and Mr. Nash will oversee much of that as director of the Project Management Office for the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq.
Last week the American engineering giant Bechtel National won a contract that could be worth as much as $1.82 billion. But smaller companies are focusing on the thousands of more modest projects and subcontracts that are expected to be available. Col. Anthony Bell, the chief contracting officer in Baghdad, acknowledged that Iraqi companies had not won large contracts. But he said they had won nearly two-thirds of the smaller contracts to date.
A stroll around the cavernous exhibition hall, where companies from 21 countries have set up booths, quickly produced stories of the complicated rebuilding effort.
Steve Jones, a North Carolina-based vice president with the conglomerate Ingersoll-Rand, used a laptop computer to show that his company had $19 million in sales in Iraq last year, for equipment ranging from refrigerated trucks to road-paving machinery.
Ingersoll-Rand's involvement in Iraq's oil industry dates back a half-century, and the company wants to establish an office in Iraq. Yet no company official has gone to Iraq since the American forces captured Baghdad in April, Mr. Jones said, citing the lack of security.
In recent years the company has been working through Cessco, a Jordanian-Iraqi company, and many Western companies may be looking for similar arrangements until Iraq becomes more stable.
''I've heard several of our American exhibitors say, 'If I go to Iraq, my wife will divorce me,' '' said Tom Kallman, chief operating officer of the Kallman Group, a New Jersey-based company, which organized the event.
Kellogg Brown &amp; Root, a subsidiary of the American oil services concern Halliburton, already has a large presence in Iraq.
Security is a constant worry, though, and five of its workers have been killed, said Tom Crum, the chief operating officer in the Middle East for Kellogg Brown &amp; Root. Still, he said Iraq is making steady progress.
Predictions of future Iraqi prosperity are small consolation for Abdul Hakim Ali al-Qaisi, one of four Iraqi brothers, all engineers, who run a family construction business. The company, Al Qabas Group, was established in 1961 and collaborated with successive Iraqi governments on large building projects.
Since the war, the company has handled only odd jobs, like supplying a few air-conditioners to a foreign contractor.
''The Americans say foreign companies should work with Iraqis, but it hasn't happened yet,'' Mr. Qaisi said. ''We are one of the largest water treatment companies in Iraq, and we never heard about the contracts in this field until the foreign companies had already received them.''
Mr. Qaisi viewed the exhibition more as obligation than opportunity. ''We have to be here just to let others know that we have not retired,'' he said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: RECONSTRUCTION
