There is an eternal disagreement in individual sports whether athletes are better off competing less and training more.
Michelle Kwan belongs to the less-competition school, and on Saturday night in Atlanta she won her seventh straight United States women's figure skating championship. Sasha Cohen, with four major competitions and two other appearances earlier this season, seemed worn down and finished second.
At 23, Kwan, who had not competed this season before the nationals, remains the measuring stick. This time, she was near perfect in the decisive free skate, as witness the perfect scores of 6.0 for presentation from seven of the nine judges (the other two gave her 5.9's). She looked fresh and vital.
''I felt the audience skate with me at the end,'' she said. ''It was a crazy experience because you can feel the energy and the vibe. I've always been pretty emotional, and the last couple of months have been very up and down.''
Less than two months ago, Kwan decided she needed coaching. So she replaced Scott Williams, who was more of an adviser, and hired Rafael Arutunian, a full-time coach.
Only two weeks before the nationals, Cohen, 19, made a coaching change, too. Out went the strong-willed Tatyana Tarasova, who had coached 12 Olympic champions. In came Robin Wagner, who had coached Sarah Hughes to a surprise gold medal in the 2002 Salt Lake Olympics.
Wagner seems to have the same rapport with Cohen as she had with Hughes. But Cohen's heavy early-season competition (her idea, not Tarasova's), and an illness that reduced her training time, seemingly took a toll.
Cohen, with her athleticism and long ballerina lines and moves, has more pure skills than Kwan. Putting those skills together for four minutes of free skating is another matter. Cohen did not skate with her usual energy and tired deep into her program. She fell on a triple toe loop, the simplest of the triples.
Minutes after she finished, she was asked if she would like to do her program over. ''Part of it,'' she said, smiling wanly.
FIGURE EIGHTS
The first three female finishers (MICHELLE KWAN, SASHA COHEN and JENNIFER KIRK) and the first three men (JOHNNY WEIR, MICHAEL WEISS and MATT SAVOIE) were named to the United States team for the world championships March 22-28 in Dortmund, Germany.
FIGURE SKATING
