Few things in Hollywood are as they first appear.
That was the case again this weekend when studio executives for Sony Pictures Entertainment said that the Tim Burton fantasy ''Big Fish'' beat out the final chapter of ''The Lord of the Rings '' for the No.1 spot at the domestic box office. Howls could be heard from Beverly Hills to Malibu on Sunday morning as competitors called early estimates for ''Big Fish'' foul.
Now that the final numbers are in, ''The Lord of The Rings: The Return of the King'' continues to reign at the box office. ''Big Fish'' earned $13.8 million in its first weekend of wide release, according to the box-office tracker Exhibitor Relations, compared with the $14.5 million originally projected by Columbia Pictures, a unit of Sony. ''The Lord of The Rings,'' on the other hand, brought in $14.2 million, more than its original $14.1 million tally, giving the movie a total of $312 million since opening Dec. 17.
So did Columbia lie? No, said Jeff Blake, a vice chairman at Sony. ''Whenever it's close, it gets sticky,'' he said.
Columbia came up with the $14.5 million figure based on the previous week's box office, he said. So far the movie has earned $23.3 million domestically. Columbia fixed its estimate Monday morning as soon as it realized it was wrong. ''We adjusted to reality as soon as possible,'' Mr. Blake said.
It was not the only adjustment, though. Exhibitor Relations said that another Columbia offering, ''Something's Gotta Give,'' was ranked No.4 on Sunday but should have been No.5, with $7.7 million. After the final tally, ''Cold Mountain'' from Miramax went from No.5 to No.4 with $7.8 million. ''Cheaper by the Dozen'' from 20th Century Fox was in third place.
The inaccuracies highlight just how important the box-office numbers have become to feeding the marketing machines of studios, which use early estimates to promote their movies in Monday morning newspapers and television shows.
Besides the No.1 spot, No.3 and No.5 are equally as contentious because many media outlets list only the top three or five movies. Even more vexing to the industry, two studio executives said, is that newspapers and television programs rarely correct overinflated estimates that turn out to be wrong.
For a smaller movie that needs word of mouth to prosper, a No.1 ranking can give it the necessary ''hmmm'' factor, or the moment when an infrequent moviegoer decides to go to a film to see what the fuss is about.
That is why executives at New Line Cinema, which released ''The Lord of The Rings,'' seemed sanguine Monday, knowing that no matter what the ranking, they still had the biggest holiday hit.
''As much as we like to be No.1,'' said David Tuckerman, president of domestic distribution at New Line, ''if we are not, it's not the end of the world.''
