A few formerly deleted scenes are the only real extra feature with François Ozon's ''Swimming Pool,'' but among them is a snippet of telephone conversation that thankfully doesn't meddle with the mystery but, had it been included in the movie, might have at least answered one basic question that will occur to most viewers. No reason is given for why the scene was deleted, or why it was shot in the first place.
There is no explanation of anything, just the right approach for a tantalizing film that is best savored for what one imagines to be the case -- or not. Sarah Morton (Charlotte Rampling), a very British and somewhat burned-out mystery writer, goes to her editor's house in the south of France to rejuvenate and jump-start her next Inspector Durwell adventure. There she encounters a troubled young sexual volcano named Julie (Ludivine Sagnier), the editor's daughter, who becomes Sarah's housemate.
Both are disappointed by swimming pools. Sarah calls them cesspools of living bacteria. Julie prefers the ocean. Pools are boring and ''have no infinity,'' she says. Nevertheless she torpedoes naked through the pool in her father's backyard, and even Sarah jumps in for a demure paddle.
Of different eras and inclinations (Julie is half-French and noisy during sex with random partners), the two women annoy each other no end until Sarah has a change of heart. Finding Julie lost and touching, she starts writing about her. The pages flow in what might be a Morton mystery without Inspector Durwell, though we never see what is written.
A crime occurs, but interpretations differ, leaving us with both ''a thoroughly mannered, mischievously artificial confection and an acute piece of psychological realism,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times. ''Whose psychology, and which reality, remains ambiguous even after the tart, delicious final twist.'' 2003. Universal. $26.98. 103 minutes. R and unrated versions.
'MI-5'
In a minidocumentary with the first six episodes of the BBC drama about a team of British intelligence agents, Stephen Garrett, its executive producer, gives a strikingly pedestrian account of the beginnings of a series that, Alessandra Stanley wrote in The Times, ''is startlingly, embarrassingly better than equivalent American C.I.A. shows like 'The Agency' or 'Alias.' ''
Mr. Garrett and associates decided to do a spy show -- perhaps not the most original concept -- and were told that with the cold war over, nobody would care. After the show was rejected, they had to wait until all the decision makers changed jobs and they could pitch the idea again.
Situations from Northern Ireland to the Mideast provide plenty of work for crack counterterrorist agents like Tom Quinn (Matthew Macfadyen), Zoe Reynolds (Keeley Hawes) and the unit's senior member, Tessa Phillips (Jenny Agutter, memorable as a teenage beauty in the 1971 film ''Walkabout'').
Much has been written about the show's emphasis on tensions between the British and American intelligence establishments, but Mr. Garrett says that he and the writers also wanted to convey what it's like for agents when they take their work home with them, or what to do when the wife and kids find a bomb in the breakfast nook.
The episodes are slick all right, but the DVD menu introduces a hooded figure called ''dark angel'' who trips an alarm while leading us around the extra features. By the time he shuts it off, no one would be unapprehended. 2003. $49.98; three discs. 360 minutes.
'Buffalo Soldiers'
On DVD Gregor Jordan's ''Buffalo Soldiers,'' available today from Buena Vista, has the same problem it did when it opened in theaters last summer. Given the situation in Iraq and Afghanistan, a movie about the total corruption of the United States Army in 1989 seems beside the point.
The film is adapted from a book by Robert O'Connor. In Germany an Army supply clerk named Ray Elwood (Joaquin Phoenix) puts together a black-market operation that will sell about any piece of government property and also specializes in cooking up huge amounts of heroin and dealing weapons to terrorists.
Mr. Phoenix gives a clever, convincing performance in a movie that has striking moments. In a commentary Mr. Jordan says that murders and suicides were common in the Army in that era and that $85 billion in weapons were missing. Even so, the film can't get beyond being in the wrong place at the wrong time.
''If 'Buffalo Soldiers' were a better movie -- and made good on its apparent ambition to join the nihilists-in-uniform tradition of Mike Nichols's 'Catch-22' and Robert Altman's 'M*A*S*H' -- then there might be something to argue about,'' Mr. Scott wrote in The Times. ''But the picture is sloppy when it should be incisive, indulgent when it should be astringent, and ultimately unsure of what it is mocking and in what spirit.'' 2003. $29.99. 95 minutes. R.
'Ikiru'
Akira Kurosawa's 1952 classic about the late awakening of a dying man to the possibilities of life thrives by killing the fellow in the middle of the film and continuing with posthumous reflections. In a superb making-of documentary with a two-disc special edition released today by Criterion, Shinobu Hashimoto, who wrote the film with Kurosawa and Hideo Oguni, says that Oguni had to convince Kurosawa that the film would work after losing its main character.
Another splendid documentary follows Kurosawa through every phase of filmmaking, from scripts and storyboards to editing and music. A section on directing is the strongest, revealing a complicated mind working hard and sometimes fruitlessly to get across notions to actors. $39.95. 140 minutes. Japanese with English subtitles.
'Johnny English'
Rowan Atkinson stars as a bumbling secret agent in the James Bond mold. A documentary says that the idea came from a commercial for a credit card. ''Unlike most movies of this kind, which run out of steam and ideas as they go along, 'Johnny English' gains momentum, nudging you along from a few stray giggle to helpless, giddy laughter,'' Mr. Scott wrote in The Times. 2003. Universal. $26.98. 88 minutes. PG.
NEW DVD'S
