Just days after a federal judge ruled that the maker of the painkiller OxyContin had improperly delayed generic competitors by misleading the patent office, the company filed a petition on Friday with federal regulators seeking a further delay of rival versions.
Purdue Pharma, a privately held company based in Stamford, Conn., said in its petition to the Food and Drug Administration that the agency should not approve generic versions of OxyContin until their makers come up with plans to restrict abuse of the drug.
A Purdue spokesman, Robin Hogen, noted that generic pills must have labels that are identical to the branded drug's, and that OxyContin's label has a reference to the company's abuse management program. Purdue added that reference in December, eight years after the company introduced the drug and at least two years after its abuse became widely known. Mr. Hogen said the company waited to change OxyContin's label until after a Dec. 17 meeting with the drug regulators.
In other action, Richard Blumenthal, the attorney general of Connecticut, said yesterday that he was coordinating with other state attorneys general an investigation into Purdue for potential antitrust violations. OxyContin is one of the largest drug expenses for most state Medicaid programs, Mr. Blumenthal noted. ''The states may well have been scammed if Purdue misused its patents,'' he said.
The Prescription Access Litigation Project, a consumer group, has also sued Purdue, accusing it of antitrust violations. The consumer group is seeking class-action status for its suit.
Federal drug regulators approved OxyContin for sale in 1995. The drug offers a 12-hour dose of oxycodone, a popular and powerful narcotic. Sales soared in part because Purdue marketed the medicine aggressively. Abuse became rampant.
In 2000, Endo Pharmaceuticals Holdings filed to sell a generic version of the drug, and Purdue sued to halt it. On Jan. 5, Judge Sidney H. Stein of Federal District Court in Manhattan ruled that Purdue's patents were invalid because it had misled the patent office.
Endo prevailed in the suit in part by showing that Purdue had said that it made a discovery without actually doing any clinical studies. Endo's lawyer showed that Purdue's filings to federal drug regulators contradicted those it made to patent examiners.
An Endo spokesman said the company was still considering whether to introduce its generic version soon or wait until after the appeals court ruling.
Federal regulators have given Endo preliminary approval for its drug but have not granted final approval. The F.D.A. usually grants final approval to generics in the days after the resolution of a legal proceeding, but in this case the agency may wait to resolve Purdue's petition.
An agency spokeswoman confirmed that it had received Purdue's petition. ''We will review it carefully,'' she said.
Purdue derives more than 70 percent of its $1.8 billion in annual revenue from OxyContin. Generic pills often grab 80 percent of a branded drug's sales within a few months.
