A Dover Township police officer died Tuesday night after being hit by a New Jersey Transit commuter train while investigating a fire near the tracks, the Morris County prosecutor announced yesterday.
The officer, Arthur Ohlsen, 44, would have completed 19 years on the force in February. He was married and had two sons, Joseph A. Devine, chief of investigations for the prosecutor's office, said.
''It happens somewhat regularly throughout the state of New Jersey, where individuals are struck by trains,'' Chief Devine said. ''Some may be suicides, which is clearly not the case here. But when you're on the tracks the Doppler effect can make it hard to hear a train.'' He was referring to the apparent change in a sound when the source or the listener is in motion, relative to the other.
Michael M. Rubbinaccio, the Morris County prosecutor, said Officer Ohlsen was on duty at the scene of the fire, on an embankment where the New Jersey Transit tracks pass under South Salem Street in Dover, when he was hit at 8:40 p.m. by a train out of Hoboken. There were reports that homeless people might have been living nearby, but Mr. Rubbinaccio said it was too early to ascribe blame for the fire.
''We are certainly aware that felony murder charges related to the commission of arson can result when, in the course of investigating of that arson, an officer or an individual was killed,'' the prosecutor said when asked about possible criminal liabilities. ''But it is too soon to talk about specific charges here.''
Mr. Rubbinaccio said that Officer Ohlsen had not been alone on the tracks, but was directing fire units responding to the fire. The officer was flown to Morristown Memorial Hospital by helicopter and was pronounced dead at 9:45 p.m. by Dr. Mark Cockburn.
Officer Ohlsen was the 24th person to die after being hit by a New Jersey Transit train in 2003, said Ken Hitchner, a spokesman for New Jersey Transit. The number for 2002 was 27.
Correction:  January 7, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Thursday about a police officer in New Jersey who was killed when a commuter train hit him misstated the name of the locality for which he worked. It is the town of Dover, not Dover Township.
