Imagine your grandfather suddenly acquiring a spiffy wardrobe, hair implants and a fancy sports car. He might appear more interesting to strangers, but he would surely seem strange and unfamiliar to family members who have known and loved him through the decades.
That is what happened to the Rose Bowl, ''the granddaddy of 'em all,'' after it joined the Bowl Championship Series in 1998 and gave up its automatic matchup between the champions of the Big Ten and the Pac-10 Conferences.
A B.C.S. championship game in Pasadena two years ago between Miami of the Big East and Nebraska of the Big 12 seemed out of character. It got even worse last year when Miami's Orange Bowl matched Iowa of the Big Ten against Southern California of the Pac-10. Both won a share of conference championships. The Rose Bowl settled for Washington State and Oklahoma, a lesser attraction before a stadium that was less than full.
That is why the mood around this season's Rose Bowl is as sunny as a Southern California sky.
Thursday's game matches U.S.C. (11-1) against Michigan (10-2). At stake is at least a share of the national championship for the favored Trojans, who are first in the Associated Press poll of the news media.
It is not just that the game again features the champions of the Pac-10 and the Big Ten. It is also a return to tradition in a sport that venerates its rituals and history. With their familiar uniforms and prestigious alumni, U.S.C. and Michigan are instantly recognizable to a national audience of fans who may never venture near their campuses.
''One of the things that so many of us love about this matchup is that this is somewhat of a return to what we know the Rose Bowl to be,'' U.S.C. Coach Pete Carroll said Wednesday. ''It takes us back to something that we've all held very dearly. The return to the tradition that comes out of this great matchup is something we need to recognize that we all really like.''
The Wolverines, ranked fourth, cannot claim a share of a title with an upset. If they win, the undisputed champion will be Louisiana State or Oklahoma, who play Sunday in the Sugar Bowl in the officially sanctioned B.C.S. championship game, with the matchup determined by a combination of polls and computer calculations.
That game will be played at night, on artificial turf, in a domed stadium. For all its commercial trappings, the Rose Bowl will again be played on grass and under skies that shine with daylight at kickoff and fade to dusk at the final whistle.
Michigan Coach Lloyd Carr said he had been telling his players about the bands, the noise, the backdrop of sunshine and mountains. ''I would never be disappointed to take a team to the Rose Bowl,'' Carr said.
He spoke while wearing a navy blazer and a necktie. In contrast, Carroll wore a pullover shirt with a soft, open collar and chatted on in streams of consciousness. Carroll called himself ''a West Coast guy operating in a West Coast environment. It just seems to fit. It has flowed so well.''
Carroll and Carr took different routes here. Carroll was fired by two N.F.L. teams, the Jets and the New England Patriots. Carr worked his way up as an assistant at Michigan.
Their quarterbacks are very different as well. Matt Leinart of the Trojans, a redshirt sophomore, replaced a Heisman Trophy winner, Carson Palmer, and expectations were modest. But Leinart's first pass went for a touchdown, and he threw 34 more touchdown passes with only 9 interceptions while accumulating 3,229 yards.
John Navarre, a senior for the Wolverines, tolerated scrutiny and criticism until recently because he had not won important games on the road and had failed to defeat Ohio State. But Navarre accomplished both this season while amassing 3,060 yards, 23 touchdown passes and 9 interceptions. He said earlier this week that ''I've definitely learned a lot of life lessons from it.''
Although U.S.C. has a tradition of producing singular stars at tailback, this season's team distributes the ball-carrying duties among LenDale White (728 yards), Hershel Dennis (644) and Reggie Bush (480). The glamour back in the game is Michigan's Chris Perry, whose 17 touchdowns and 1,589 yards made him a Heisman Trophy finalist. ''They'll run it down your throat if you give them half a chance,'' Carroll said of Perry and the Wolverines.
Perry also caught 42 passes. Braylon Edwards led the Wolverines with 75 catches, 14 for touchdowns, and 1,031 yards. His counterpart on U.S.C. is Mike Williams, with 87 catches for 1,226 yards and 16 touchdowns. Both teams played high-scoring games all season, and Carroll, a defensive specialist, said, ''I hate the thought of it, but it could be a very offensive day for both sides.''
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
