IT'S weird: even as communications technologies become more advanced, the older, simpler methods sometimes seem to become more attractive. Video chats over the Internet may be free and easy, but the masses stick to the humble telephone. Cellphones can transmit both voice and photos, but millions of people prefer to fire off short, painstakingly typed text messages. What's next, a comeback tour for smoke signals?
The popularity of Nextel, whose cellphones double as national walkie-talkies linking its customers, proves the point. Remember walkie-talkies? To speak, you have to hold down a button on the side of the phone. Only one of you can talk at a time. You can say ''Over!'' after each utterance (although these days, a little beep conveys the same point).
This old-fashioned idea, called Direct Connect, helped Nextel become a major cellular player, and accounts for its preposterously low customer-turnover rate (less than 2 percent a year, Nextel says). All that success couldn't help but attract the attention of bigger players, who within the last few months have introduced their own rival walkie-talkie services: Verizon Push to Talk and Sprint Ready Link.
Now, next to regular cellphone calls, push-to-talk might seem positively archaic. After all, everyday cell service doesn't require specially equipped phones, it permits the two parties to talk simultaneously and it doesn't require you to press a button to speak.
But push-to-talk has charms of its own, starting with its delicious immediacy. On a Nextel phone, for example, there's no waiting for the call to connect, no counting one ringy-dingy, two ringy-dingies, and no airtime spent on pleasantries like ''Hey, it's me. How ya been?''
Instead, you highlight a name in your address book, press the push-to-talk button, and start talking. At that very instant, your voice emerges from the other Nextel phone, wherever in the country it happens to be. (You can also choose to make the other phone chirp or vibrate, permitting the other person to accept or decline your request to chat. Which approach you adopt depends on your relationship with your callees and their likelihood to be onstage, in a meeting or at a séance.)
This immediacy contributes to the second benefit of push-to-talk: It saves money and conversation time. Nextel's statistics show that on average, a push-to-talk call lasts only a quarter as long as a cellular call. Maybe there's not much technical difference between a cellular speakerphone and a walkie-talkie exchange, but there's obviously a psychological distinction. You just get your business done more efficiently using push-to-talk.
The third benefit of push-to-talk is group calling: You can set up lists of people and then speak to all of them at once, as though on a highly targeted public-address system. In certain fields, like construction, sales and trade-show management, walkie-talkie phones are as indispensable as oxygen.
Nextel, Sprint and Verizon may all say that they offer push-to-talk service. In fact, though, the offerings as dissimilar as apples, oranges and lychee nuts.
Take pricing, for example. With Sprint, it's simple: you can add unlimited push-to-talk time to any voice plan for $15 a month. For example, $80 a month gets you 1,100 anytime cellular minutes and all the pushing and talking you can stand. (If you already subscribe to Sprint's $15-a-month Vision Internet service, adding push-to-talk is only $5 more.)
Verizon charges $20 per month above your chosen voice plan, which means it's not as good a deal. Your $80 a month buys unlimited walkie-talkie time but only 700 anytime cellular minutes.
You'll need several hours and a certified public accountant to wade through all of Nextel's billing options -- you can pay for push-to-talk calls à la carte, by the ''bucket'' of minutes or with unlimited service -- but they all wind up costing less than Sprint or Verizon. For example, you can pay $70 a month for 1,000 anytime cellular minutes and unlimited walkie-talkie time. (Nextel's group calling is much more expensive, though; more on this in a moment.)
Nextel's nine push-to-talk phone models start at $50 and run all the way up to a BlackBerry for e-mail addicts. Sprint offers three models, all expensive ($300 and up): a chic silver flip phone, a chic blue flip phone with camera, and a ruggedized, industrial-looking brick. Verizon offers only one push-to-talk model: a thick $200 Motorola flip phone with poor battery life and a black-and-white screen right out of the Reagan era. (More models are on the way.)
On all of these phones, a single button press shuts off the speakerphone during walkie-talkie calls. Having to hold the phone to your ear as a result sacrifices a little of that Rambo-esque military chic, but you'll be much more welcome at social gatherings.
There are operational differences, too. Sprint's phone screens say ''You have floor'' or ''Floor is open'' during a push-to-talk call, a nice touch. Verizon's phone book icons tell you if your callers are within range with their phones turned on.
On the other hand, you can't add a push-to-talk number to a Verizon phone's address book except through a Web site, which is utter nonsense.
Group calling is very different, too. You can't add more than five people to a Sprint group, or 10 to a Verizon group. Nextel groups can include 25 people, but you can reach them simultaneously only if they're in your home region -- a surprising limitation. Furthermore, Nextel treats group calling as an extra-cost, à la carte service, and it gets expensive fast. (Sprint's push-to-talk prices include group calling. Verizon's group calling is free until Feb. 1; the company hasn't announced what it will charge thereafter.)
Sprint and Verizon both mock the fact that Nextel phones have separate numbers for cell calls and push-to-talk calls. With Sprint, as the company's Web site puts it, ''users have only one number to remember for both types of calls.''
The truth is, of course, that you don't have to ''remember'' Nextel's push-to-talk codes any more than you have to remember regular numbers; either way, you generally dial by name, from your address book. In fact, having a separate number for walkie-talkie calls is actually a perk. By giving it out selectively, you can control who has that kind of breakthrough, on-demand access to you.
By far the most important difference between the services, though, is what industry insiders call ''latency'' (and everybody else calls ''infuriating delay''). When you push-to-talk on a Nextel phone, the other phone chirps in less than a second, and the conversation begins. But with Verizon or Sprint, the other phone takes 8 or 14 seconds to chirp, respectively. Suddenly, the issue isn't ''Can you hear me now?''; it's ''Can you hear me yet?''
Once you're connected, the latency improves -- it takes about two seconds for each utterance to arrive at the other end (vs. one second on Nextel) -- but it's still annoying. (The difference: Whereas Nextel phones are true two-way radios, Sprint and Verizon phones work by transmitting brief sound recordings over the Internet, much the like the increasingly popular Internet calling services for home-phone fans.)
Sprint and Verizon don't seem to understand that two of the three crucial push-to-talk advantages (saving time and airtime minutes) rely on instantaneous connections. Heck, if you had 14 seconds to kill, you could have just made a regular cellphone call. Or written a letter.
All three services could stand improvement, though. For starters, you can push-to-talk only with fellow subscribers of the same cell company, a foolish and self-defeating limitation on the carriers' part. (The Nextel Web site suggests that ''A mother can plan the school carpool schedule with other parents,'' but omits the essential clause, ''after first somehow persuading all the other mothers to dump their old cellphones and switch to Nextel.'')
Note, too, that when you're pushing-to-talk, incoming cellular calls go straight to voice mail. But when you're on a cellular call, you get no indication at all that somebody tried to reach you by walkie-talkie.
Finally, there's the little matter of coverage. No matter which carrier you choose, push-to-talk works primarily on the coasts and in populous areas east of the Mississippi. The Sprint and Verizon cellular networks are actually much larger, but push-to-talk doesn't work on the lighter-shaded portions of the coverage maps at sprintpcs.com and verizonwireless.com.
Of course, if you choose Sprint or Verizon, the cellular coverage is an important plus. When you're out of push-to-talk range, you have a Plan B: making a regular cell call. When you're beyond Nextel's smaller network, you can't call at all.
But in pure push-to-talk quality terms, Nextel is still the only game in town; it's the only company that delivers truly instantaneous connections. At this early point in the history of push-to-talk, the Verizon and Sprint feature might be better named push-to-wait.
STATE OF THE ART E-mail: Pogue@nytimes.com
