LORCAN O'HERLIHY, an Irish-born architect living in Los Angeles, is accustomed to designing homes that command glamorous hillsides and ocean views. His first house, on nine acres in Malibu, Calif., was built in 1990 for his parents. (His father is the actor Dan O'Herlihy.) Since then, he has designed a number of oceanfront homes and hilltop eyries and has renovated a 1955 Richard Neutra house for Gary Levinsohn, a producer of ''The Patriot'' and ''Saving Private Ryan.'' In every case, he had incomparable California scenery working in his favor.
These days, Mr. O'Herlihy, 44, is best known for designing a condominium next door to the Schindler House, one of Modernism's most revered residential landmarks, in West Hollywood; ground is to be broken next spring. When the developer unveiled the design in May, some preservationists cried foul. But many of the city's most prominent architects rallied to Mr. O'Herlihy's defense, arguing that his design is an innovative and appropriate model for the three- and four-story housing Los Angeles needs.
During the controversy, Mr. O'Herlihy has also built his own home, a serene light box on a cramped plot on a busy Venice thoroughfare.
''For all these years, I've watched Lorcan build magnificent houses for other people, and I've always wished we could live in one too,'' said his wife, Cornelia Hayes O'Herlihy, an actress who appeared last year in the Bruce Willis movie ''Tears of the Sun.''
Their property, a plot not much bigger than the footprint of a New York town house, was a far cry from Mr. O'Herlihy's usual site. In 1996, the couple paid $178,000 for a 600-square-foot wood shack, largely because they liked its location, three blocks from the beach, and the low-key artsy ambience.
Venice holds a special appeal for architects. Despite its history of bodybuilding and tattoo parlors, it has become something of a design enclave. The O'Herlihys' neighbors include the architects Mark Mack and Roger Sherman. Lawrence Scarpa and his wife, Angela Brooks, are renovating a bungalow for themselves, and Frank Gehry, who did much of his early work in Venice, has cleared ground for his new home.
The O'Herlihys lived in their shack until 2002, when they tore it down. Their new house, completed in May on a budget of $500,000, stands out like a banner against a row of drab stucco town houses on Pacific Avenue: an ebullient coffee-bean-colored box with a syncopated stair-step pattern of windows encircling the house.
''Most people would have considered our site unbuildable,'' Mr. O'Herlihy said. ''It's a tiny lot, 25 feet across and 55 feet deep, on a busy street, hemmed in by close neighbors and swaths of traditional stucco construction. We didn't even have views; we had snippets of views.''
Faced with such a cramped plot, architects would typically adopt the tunnel strategy: let light enter at the front and back of the house, and hermetically seal the sides. But this is Southern California, and Mr. O'Herlihy was determined to bring in its sunlight on all four sides, despite the claustrophobic setting.
He started with a conventional three-story box with roughly 2,400 square feet of space. ''Radical architecture doesn't have to be about folding and bending a building, à la Gehry,'' he said. I'm a Modernist at heart. I believe in simple shapes.''
He then turned the simple shape into a light-filled cube with 105 vertical slit windows positioned to frame the most desirable views (leafy tree branches, a slice of a swimming pool, a back staircase painted bright red ) while editing out less auspicious surroundings.
''When you first see our house, it seems very haphazard,'' Ms. O'Herlihy said. ''But the more you look, the more you see there's a pattern there, you see it makes sense.'' He varied the windows with opaque structural glass, which blurs bad views, and panes tinted with yellow and blue gels, creating a Mondrian effect. The staggered pattern is mimicked on the outside by cement board panels, some painted blue and green.
Most three-story homes are built with wood frames, obliging designers to place windows in conventional positions within the frame. Mr. O'Herlihy freed himself from this constraint by using a welded steel frame, which, because of its simplicity, cost little more than wood and allowed him to pierce the walls with his eccentric arrangement of windows.
''Lorcan had to find a balance between the view and the natural light,'' Mr. Scarpa said. ''He's boxed in. He couldn't have picture windows, so he created these small picture frames, so many that they make for both nice light and nice views.''
Mr. O'Herlihy ensured that the living, dining and kitchen areas would get the most light possible by elevating them to the third floor, with two bedrooms and baths beneath them on the second floor. The ground floor has a studio for Mr. O'Herlihy, who is also a painter, and a carport. ''We're flipping things for a new way of living,'' he said.
There are 28 windows in the living room and 20 each in the master bedroom and kitchen. ''Because of all these windows, we have such a gentle light inside,'' Ms. O'Herlihy said. ''It's not harsh, as it would be if we had big walls of glass. The colors are soothing.'' At night the house glows like a colorful lantern.
The entrance is located in a slender alley. From there, a steep staircase rises through the center of the house, leading to an 800-square-foot roof garden and a glass-walled reading nook with views of the ocean and the Santa Monica Mountains, where Ms. O'Herlihy studies scripts in quiet isolation. ''I didn't even ask him,'' Ms. O'Herlihy said. ''He did that for me.''
The sensation of light in the round is enhanced by the open plan of the floors. Mr. O'Herlihy designed a central core containing the staircase, an open kitchen and storage. By leaving the outer walls exposed, he maximized the light and the sense of spaciousness.
''I've developed new ways of bringing light and air into my own house,'' Mr. O'Herlihy said, ''and I look forward to applying them in multifamily dwellings.''
One of the first beneficiaries will be the 18-unit condominium complex, clad in glass and cedar, to go up next to the Schindler House. Preservationists argued that the design would encroach on the landmark, which Rudolf M. Schindler built for himself more than 80 years ago, and eliminate its sense of light and space.
Peter Noever, a Vienna-based museum director, and other opponents staged a competition for alternate designs, drawing submissions from Zaha Hadid, Peter Eisenman and the Vienna-based firm Coop Himmelblau. But some local architects, including Thom Mayne of Morphosis, declined to participate. Mr. O'Herlihy is well regarded among Los Angeles architects, and his design is generally seen by them as a worthy prototype for the three- and four-story residential buildings rapidly replacing the city's single-family homes.
''There's been a lot of controversy, but the pendulum has swung, and in the end Lorcan will be the real winner,'' Mr. Scarpa said. ''He has designed a good solution. It's quite different, but modern in spirit, and sensitive as well. When people see it they usually say, 'Why the outrage?' ''
The new ideas Mr. O'Herlihy used in his own house turn a century of California design on its head, according to Mr. Sherman, who teaches architecture at the Southern California Institute of Architecture. ''Early modern architects in Los Angeles like R. M. Schindler and Richard Neutra, as well as the Case Study House architects of the 1940's, broke ground with houses that were like thin veils between inside and out,'' he said. Those houses reached out to the landscape, and the landscape reached in to the house.
''Lorcan's house is virtually closed off to the outside,'' Mr. Sherman added. ''It's really about how you feel when you're inside.''
Mr. O'Herlihy agreed. ''It's a constrained site, but you don't feel constrained,'' he said. '' That's what I'm most happy about.''
HOUSE PROUD
