It was mighty quiet at the Coffee Station on Wednesday.
Too quiet, especially for the townspeople and tourists who lined up along the walls inside what is Crawford's only diner for a glimpse of the town's most famous resident, who usually comes for a cheeseburger to ring out the old year.
This year, President Bush was a no-show.
Maybe it was Code Orange. Or maybe Mr. Bush, who has not been seen in public since he arrived here Friday and headed into his 1,600-acre ranch, did not want to answer questions about mad cows, his attorney general or his New Year's resolutions. Whatever the reason, a president who was remarkably chatty this time last year -- taking reporters on a brisk hike, and answering questions about North Korea and Saddam Hussein in the diner's parking lot -- was nowhere to be seen.
The disappointment was palpable inside the Coffee Station, which, like Iraq, is under new management since Mr. Bush's last New Year's visit. Doug Cheatham, a Texan who moved to Connecticut years ago, brought his wife, Zora, and other family members well before noon. They scanned the crowd, looking for tell-tale signs, including Secret Service agents. There were a few -- but they were coming for lunch, without their protectee.
Diners had to sign up for a table. Words rarely spoken inside -- ''Brown, table of two, we're ready for you'' -- were shouted above the din as scores hoped to score a table next to the president's.
''I came last year one day too early,'' Mr. Cheatham reported. ''I guess I missed again.''
The White House is so guarding Mr. Bush's privacy that it declined to say who is staying at the ranch, or even what the president and Laura Bush planned to do for New Year's Eve, other than have dinner with friends and family.
But Mr. Bush's plans for New Year's Day were disclosed: He will travel to Falfurrias, Tex., to hunt quail with his father and former Secretary of State James A. Baker III. Mr. Baker has been hunting bigger game for Mr. Bush in recent days, asking allies to forgive Iraqi debt. That fact raised the question of whether this will be a working shoot.
''It's a social event,'' Trent Duffy, a White House spokesman, said. But he conceded he could not say what they might discuss while they reloaded.
