The first recognizable melody played on grand piano No. K0862 was the opening of the theme from ''The Simpsons,'' but only one person at the Steinway &amp; Sons factory in Queens heard it.
Inside a soundproof booth, Eric Thompson smiled, even though the notes sounded flat. His job is to tune not-yet-finished pianos like No. K0862 a bit lower than normal, as a precaution against tightening brand-new strings too quickly.
After ''The Simpsons,'' No. K0862 was broken in by a machine that pounded the keyboard four times a second. Then its hammers got a touch-up. Its middle pedal -- used so rarely in piano music that one foreman calls it ''the mystery pedal'' -- was installed.
And as No. K0862 was pushed from one workbench to another, it provided a demonstration of teaching and learning, of how factory workers hand down the unwritten secrets of their jobs.
Steinway has a long oral tradition. Some music historians say this goes back to the 19th century, when Steinway's bosses worried about other companies stealing away the best workers. Steinway kept its operations compartmentalized -- woodworkers, for example, were almost never promoted to be tuners. This kept workers in the dark about everything but their assigned jobs. For generations, there was no how-to manual at Steinway. The job descriptions the company wrote in the 1980's mention the tools needed for each step in making a piano, but not how to use them.
So Steinway's half-dozen foremen and the experienced workers in each department show newcomers the fine points.
''Each person you have to teach slightly differently,'' said James Lefflbine, the foreman who supervises Mr. Thompson. ''That's something I think you learn in school. Some people don't learn as much from one teacher as they do from the next, but in this environment, we don't have that luxury, where I can just say, 'I give up on this guy because he doesn't understand me.' I have to go and find another way to teach him or her.''
Take the pounding machine, which is supposed to break in a piano faster and more evenly than a pianist could.
''I can say, 'You like cars?' '' Mr. Lefflbine said. '' 'You like engines?' The pounding machine is similar to an engine. It has a camshaft and pistons. I can say: 'The pistons are what move the car. Well, it's the same thing that pounds the piano.' ''
No. K0862's time in the pounding room -- a soundproof booth like Mr. Thompson's -- was clocked by a man who is happier at Steinway than he was in his last job, as a detective at an athletic-shoe store. ''I didn't like that,'' said the worker, Nelson Cruz, recalling his days of collaring shoplifters and worrying that they would pull guns or knives on him. ''A lot of risk for little pay.''
A Matter of Degrees
Before No. K0862 could be tuned and pounded, it needed strings. It needed a cast-iron plate. And it needed a soul.
The 400-pound plate, made at a foundry in Ohio, was fitted to the piano's wooden frame by Eddy Salvadon, who has worked at Steinway for 12 years (and whose brother, Paul, who also works there, would later shape the piano's hammers).
He began by hooking an octopuslike rope around the plate so he could lift it in and out of No. K0862. Then he sprinkled black powder on the wooden pinblock -- ''This is where I get to play like I'm an artist,'' he said -- before lowering the plate in and pulling it out. Most of the powder stuck to the plate. The handful of smudges that remained on the pinblock told him where there were gaps.
He tackled the plate, sending sparks flying as he shaved away fractions of an inch with a grinder. He planed the pinblock. He raised and lowered the plate 14 times until the smudges disappeared.
Then, said Andrew Horbachevsky, a Steinway manufacturing director, Mr. Salvadon had to position it horizontally inside the rim. ''It's nine feet long,'' Mr. Horbachevsky said. ''If you're off a few degrees, it makes a difference.''
The next stop for No. K0862 was a machine that trimmed the inside of the rim in preparation for perhaps its most important addition: the sounding board. ''One size does not fit all,'' said Michael Mohr, another Steinway manufacturing director. ''Once this is done, that soundboard will not fit any other piano.''
Then No. K0862 was wheeled around the corner, the plate was suspended on a rope above it, and Ante Glavan went to work.
Mr. Glavan has one of the factory's most demanding jobs: bellyman. It is a job that figures in the company's storied tradition: William Steinway, the son in Steinway &amp; Sons who was the company's first president, was a bellyman for a while in the 19th century.
A bellyman glues in the sounding board, the sheet of slightly curved wood that will serve as the piano's amplification system. This piece, more than any of the thousands of other parts under the lid, will determine how good No. K0862 will sound. Mr. Glavan will also glue on the bridge that will support the strings, and he will carve notches for the metal pieces that will hold them in place.
His job got its name long ago because the only way to do it is for the bellyman to lie on his stomach on top of the sounding board, with the plate hanging overhead. And before long, Mr. Glavan, who is 57 and came to New York from Yugoslavia in the 1960's, was doing just that.
His boss -- who is also his brother-in-law, a wiry, silver-haired foreman named Lou Begonja -- watched as Mr. Glavan planed more wood from just inside the rim. ''We want to make sure the inner rim follows the same pitch as the board,'' Mr. Begonja said, for the soundboard is not flat -- it rises in a slight curve toward the middle.
''That's basically the secret of the Steinway,'' Mr. Begonja said. ''That's basically the whole idea. The beautiful sound the Steinway has comes from that.''
Mr. Glavan brushed glue around the inner rim and pressed the sounding board into place. Then he lowered the plate and marked where he would glue the bridge. Piano technicians call this step ''taking the bearing,'' and it is crucial because it creates the path for the strings.
''On a violin,'' said Mr. Mohr, one of the manufacturing directors, ''the strings run up to the bridge and down to the neck. It's almost the same on a piano: up to the bridge and down to the plate. Since you have that upward angle, it puts a load on the soundboard. If the angle is too much, it could cause the soundboard to be choked and not free to vibrate. So half a millimeter matters.''
Mr. Glavan stretched what looked like a handful of silver shoestrings over the bridge, where the strings will eventually go. He did not bother with a ruler. ''I know how to do this without the tool,'' he said. ''I'm here too many years.''
He tapped. He planed. He hammered. He glued. He checked that the notches he had cut without measuring were the right depth. And then he pounded the bridge with his fist. ''This,'' he said as the echo reverberated, ''is good sound.''
Precision, by Machine
Mr. Glavan worked on No. K0862 the way bellymen have always worked on pianos: with hand tools. But the next steps in building the piano involved machines Steinway began using only a few years ago -- one to drill holes in the pinblock at a 4 1/2-degree angle, the other to twist the strings around the pins.
Steinway stopped having workers do these jobs by hand not because the machines are faster, but because the machines are more accurate, Mr. Mohr said.
The man operating the drill, Chris Mammarelli, had another job on his mind. He is No. 6,081 on the list of applicants who have passed the city's firefighter test. The city will call more than 2,000 applicants before his number comes up, so he expects to be at Steinway awhile longer.
At the stringing machine was Anous Vertus, who wraps adhesive tape around his fingers each day to guard against cuts -- steel strings can shred flesh, he said. By the time he finished with No. K0862, it had 243 strings -- 75 of its 88 notes had three strings, five bass notes had two strings, and the eight lowest bass notes had only one.
''What's changed is the consistency of the job,'' said Mr. Mohr, who began his career at Steinway as a stringer in the 1980's. ''Each pin is fed in at the right angle. When it's done by hand, one guy could hit the pin in four shots. Another guy would need seven or eight shots, and the angle might not be perfect.''
Mr. Mohr slapped the strings with the palm of his hand. No. K0862 rumbled. ''You get that? That thunder?'' he asked. ''It's alive now.''
Strings, Hammers . . . Action
Now it was time to marry the action -- the hammers that will strike the strings, and the complicated mechanisms that drive them in response to the pianist's touch -- to the keys themselves. The pairing -- bolting the metal frame that holds the action onto the wooden frame that holds the keys -- was begun by a woodworker named Michael Farrell and completed by another worker, Reuben Sookhai.
Mr. Farrell also crowned the keybed, the open space at the front of the piano that the action and the keys will slide into. ''We're trying to create a high spot in the center -- one thirty-second of an inch'' Mr. Lefflbine, the foreman, said of the middle C key. ''Over the two-foot width of the keyboard, it's a slight, slight slope, but that tapering will help.''
A thin curl of wood rolled out of Mr. Farrell's $500 plane with each careful stroke. ''You forget how small the measurements are here until someone comes in and applies for a job and says, 'I've been working construction the last 20 years,' '' Mr. Lefflbine said. ''He'll think an eighth of an inch is close.''
No Bouncing or Clacking
Every piano has dampers, triangular pieces of felt that rest atop the strings, stopping them from vibrating. The dampers on No. K0862 (and the damper pedal, the one on the right, which lifts all the dampers at once) were put in by Earl Baldwin, who said the jokes about being a Baldwin in the Steinway factory have ''kind of faded out'' with time.
He has worked at Steinway since 1988 and has permanent markings -- big bruises -- on his arms just below his shoulders, from reaching deep inside thousands of pianos. Before dealing with the dampers, he fitted in a felt-edged slat that would keep the keys from bouncing and clacking. The one that went into No. K0862 was the second one he pulled from a bin -- he rejected the first one as too thin. ''Somebody's going to spend $100,000 to buy a piano, you don't want the piano to start making noise,'' he said.
Next he installed the damper pedal mechanism, and then the 71 dampers themselves. Why not 88? The notes at the treble end of the piano do not have dampers.
Making Good Enough Better
Mr. Baldwin attached the damper heads to the wires that lift and lower them. Then he sent No. K0862 around the corner, where it picked up perhaps its most esoteric part, the sostenuto pedal. This center pedal, when it is pressed, holds up the dampers of the keys being played at that moment, so those notes continue to sound.
To Mr. Lefflbine, the foreman, the sostenuto-pedal installer is a good worker who has learned to be a better worker.
Leonel Anantua, who has worked at Steinway for 20 years, has to insert a rod that will connect the pedal to the action. He also has to fit a device called the sostenuto monkey next to the hammers at the bass end. When the pianist releases the sostenuto pedal, those two parts are supposed to drop the dampers smoothly.
Not smoothly enough, Mr. Anantua said as he tried it. Half an hour of tinkering followed.
''He could leave that till final adjustment, but he won't,'' Mr. Lefflbine said. ''He's a quick study. When we went over this his first couple of days on this job, he said: 'I got it. I'm perfect.' I said, 'Those are words that shouldn't leave your lips yet.' One piano, I made him go over it for an hour and a half, because there were small tweaking motions that needed to be done. Leo felt it was good enough, but I felt he was not up to my standards. One part moved a little fast, and that could cause other parts to fail.
''This,'' he said, ''is the difference between 85 percent and 100 percent.''
Invention for 900 Hands
It is something of a mystery. The same 450 workers bend and shape the wood the same way. The sounding boards are made to the same specifications. The strings and pins, hammers and keys -- there should be no variation.
Yet every piano that Steinway &amp; Sons produces has its own sound. Some Steinways are modest, some monumental. And no one knows exactly why.
This is the seventh article in a series following one concert grand, No. K0862, as it is made at Steinway's factory in Astoria, Queens. The eighth article will look at how the piano's personality is formed as it is voiced, regulated, retuned and inspected.
Additional materials, including the previous articles and conversations with Steinway workers who have had a hand in building No. K0862, can be found online at nytimes.com/piano.
Invention for 900 Hands
