SEPHARAD  By Antonio Muñoz Molina  Translated by Margaret Sayers Peden  385 pages. Harcourt. $27.
''In our dry inland country,'' Antonio Muñoz Molina writes of his native Spain, ''night trains are the great river that carries us to the world outside and then brings us back.''
In the weave of mourning and meditation that goes into ''Sepharad,'' trains are a recurring image for European pain and displacements through much of the 20th century. No doubt the author was particularly recalling the jolting, wooden-seated journeys of the years after the Civil War -- early in the succession of Europe's horrors -- when a devastated people began to move slowly about like a stricken animal regaining its legs.
But there is also Primo Levi peering through the chinks of his boxcar en route to Auschwitz and seeing Italian place names give way to German and then to Polish. There are Kafka and his lover, Milena Jesenska, consulting timetables -- he in Prague, she in Vienna -- to arrange their trysts, shadowed already from within and without, at a railroad hotel on the border.
There is Margarete Buber-Neumann, a German Comintern official living in Moscow, deported eastward to the gulag under the Stalin purges and then, after the Molotov-Ribbentrop treaty called for such vicious repatriations, riding the length of Siberia westward to a Nazi concentration camp. Where, as it happened, she met Jesenska -- soon to die -- and heard her recite the parables in which Kafka prefigured the era's bitter history.
It is not only the trains that recall the German writer W. G. Sebald, who used railroad tracks as the Holocaust image in one section of his great and terrible book ''The Emigrants.'' Like Sebald, Mr. Muñoz knits history's horrors into a universal consciousness that darkens the lives and souls of individuals, not just long afterward but long before. It is as if -- as in Eliot's ''Burnt Norton'' -- not only space but time as well were bent along an Einsteinian curve that unites past, present and future.
''Sepharad'' lacks the German's stunning calculus of implication and association, far-ranging and centered, and the sculptured music of his writing. There is much that is loose, some that is repetitious and a little that is self-indulgent. At its best, though, it is moving and often astonishing.
Like Sebald, Mr. Muñoz Molina wanders among fictions, memories, readings -- many of them private and seemingly unconnected with history's evil -- like a householder returning to a cyclone-struck home and finding much, and nothing, intact.
Along with Buber-Neumann's ordeal, Levi's deportation and Kafka's rendezvous, there is the beautifully told life and death of an aunt of the author's wife. There is the ragged love of two Madrid street derelicts, and the author's early job as desultory theatrical booker of second-rate performers and musicians. His real world back then was Pascal, Kierkegaard, Kafka and Levi (''My life was what didn't happen to me''). There were his own haunting departure meditations years later, when he learned he had leukemia.
If trains are an important image, it is the frontiers they lead to that are at the heart of ''Sepharad.'' Some are literal: the defeated Spanish Republicans flee into France where the border turns fighters into abused internees. Another, wistful border crossing: a Spaniard, traveling through rural Argentina, spots a melancholy old man with a shabby overcoat and worn briefcase boarding a bus. He recognizes the exiled former president of the Spanish Republic, Niceto Alcalá Zamora, and turns away, embarrassed.
Mr. Muñoz develops the border theme in a much larger sense: the uprooting of lives by strokes of time, history and the approach of death (He quotes the Spanish poet Jorge Manrique: ''How life is passing; how death is coming, silently, silencing.'') He writes of his own frontier crossing: from health to lethal illness.
He writes of Eugenia Ginzburg, an active party member in the city of Kazan, finding herself gradually frozen out at meetings and eventually, after ignoring warnings, arrested. He writes of Hans Neumann and his wife, Margarete Buber-Neumann, waiting in Moscow's Comintern hotel for the secret police to arrive.
The bespectacled officer in charge searches the apartment and finds a letter from Stalin, with whom the Neumanns had been friendly. ''Worse and worse'' he says, and takes Hans away. Margarete, arrested later, never again sees the man who had been an important party leader in pre-Nazi Germany.
There are other borders. One of the finest stories in ''Sepharad,'' apparently fictional, tells of a young officer who had joined Spain's Blue Division fighting with the Germans against the Russians. Billeted with a peasant widow, he refuses to take her bed, sleeps in an adjoining shed, shares his food with her and her son.
Russian guerrillas arrive one night; she persuades them he is not like the Germans. When he is sent to the front his German replacement dislodges the woman. The guerrillas return and kill him; the Germans burn the woman and her child alive. As an old man the Spaniard thinks back to the time when, for once, a frontier lighted up when crossed instead of darkening.
Time, imperceptibly, draws its own borders. Mr. Muñoz Molina describes the decay of the Spanish cultural center in Tangier; no longer an outpost of Spain's pretensions -- no longer maintained in any case -- to influence in the region. He writes of the rich collection of Spanish art and books at the Hispanic Society in New York, which he found shabby and unvisited.
Long before such examples there was a grievous, ancient border crossing: the uprooting of Spain's Jews in 1492. A 1,000-year existence, largely settled if not altogether untroubled, changed suddenly into generations of wandering. ''Sepharad'' -- in Hebrew, the word means Spain, and Sephardim means the Spanish -- is Mr. Muñoz Molina's contribution of his own country's early portion in the universal history of bitter frontiers.
And since history, like time and space, has bends as well as straight lines, there was the use made in the 1940's of a 1920's law that gave Sephardim everywhere the right to claim Spanish nationality. A Spanish diplomat drove regularly through wartime Budapest collecting Jews and issuing passports (legally or otherwise) that allowed them to escape death and get out.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
