Three-year-old Vida was brought here to the Kermanian Orphanage, 75 miles north of Bam, on Monday, three days after an early-morning earthquake ripped that city apart. She has not slept, the staff members say, and refuses even to leave her nurse's arms. ''I want my mother,'' she cries, over and over. ''Her name is Farah.''
Vida is one of the 1,200 children the government knows of so far who lost parents in the earthquake. There is also 8-year-old Ali, who will not speak, except to say that he hopes his uncle, who survived, will take him home. Atefeh, 7, spoke nervously to a visitor about her paintings. ''I am from Bam, but it gets bad earthquakes,'' she said, looking at the palm trees in her paintings. A nameless 6-month-old girl with a broken shoulder finally fell asleep after crying for hours.
President Mohammad Khatami visited this orphanage, one of three in Kerman, on Monday. Toddlers greeted him with, ''Hello, Daddy.'' ''Look at my car,'' said a little boy, holding up his red plastic car. ''This is my doll,'' said a girl.
Rescue workers, no longer searching for survivors, are turning to many other challenges. Among them are the special needs of orphaned children. A team of psychologists and psychiatric workers was sent to the province this week, to help the suddenly parentless begin to cope. There are practical efforts, too, like starting schools in tents.
But the pain the children suffer is unfathomable. The children at the orphanage have been bombarded with gifts from well-meaning people, but they react with anger, or apathy.
''All of them come here with serious anxiety problems,'' said Arezoo Hussein Rezai, the orphanage's psychologist. ''They constantly cry, hide under their blankets or refuse to talk.''
Leila Beigi, a psychologist who works with orphans, said it took her three days to learn the identity of one 7-year-old at the Kermanian orphanage. ''I joked with him, tried playing with him, sometimes showed my frustration but he refused to tell me even his name,'' she said.
Some older children simply leave, said Dr. Reza Khoshnood, the vice president of Kerman's Welfare Organization for social affairs. But many return.
''Every day we are sending several of the teenagers back to Bam with our own cars because they want to go and find their homes,'' he said. ''They come back a little calmer after they see there is nothing to go back to.''
The quake's death toll, now at an uncertain 30,000, included an uncounted number of children. But surprising stories are emerging about some who survived.
The official Islamic Republic News Agency reported that two brothers were pulled from under the rubble on Wednesday, after rescue workers were attracted to the spot by the singing of two canaries. And according to television reports, a 5-year-old girl took food and water to an 11-year-old boy who was buried up to his chest in debris, keeping him alive until rescue workers dug him out on Tuesday.
There are stories at the orphanages, too, but many of the children are too traumatized to tell them. An exception, Motahar Norouzi, 14, at Moaven Nassri, said she spent five hours trapped on her bed under rubble. ''I kept on screaming the first few hours, but I was breathing with difficulty by the time they got me out,'' she said.
Strong family ties are the norm here in southern Iran, and there are hopes that relatives will claim many orphans. Hundreds of people come every day to Kerman's orphanages looking for children they know.
Nosrat Amarian, 20, has not been able to find her 4-year-old nephew. Orphanage workers have promised to look for him at hospitals around the country, since thousands of victims were flown elsewhere for treatment. Some 70 percent of the children who have arrived since the earthquake have already gone home with a relative.
''Relatives insist to take the children but we know from past experiences in other earthquakes that some 30 percent of them return them,'' Mr. Khoshnood said. ''That is when our hard job begins.''
