Winding up several days of campaigning in the South at a V.F.W. post here, Gen. Wesley K. Clark promised on Wednesday to add $2 billion to the budget for health care services for the nation's veterans.
''We've got veterans hospitals closing; we've got people who have to drive six hours to get a checkup; we've got veterans that are waiting six months to get an appointment,'' General Clark said. ''That's not health care. I don't know what it is, but that's not fair to the men and women who served.''
General Clark is rarely more at ease on the campaign trail than when he is inside a dusty, dimly lit V.F.W. or American Legion post like this one, where the smell of cigarettes and beer lingered even at the earliest hours. He shakes hands, swaps stories of this regiment or that battalion and thanks veterans for their service, a plus for any candidate campaigning in this state heavy with veterans and active-duty personnel.
The 65 or so veterans and others who showed up Wednesday at Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 3433 in this small town near Charleston were friendly, but they were not content with a simple handshake. They complained about long waiting times for appointments with Veterans Administration doctors and about a policy that limits a disabled veteran's ability to draw both retirement and disability pay at the same time.
As many candidates for the Democratic nomination have done, General Clark vowed to take on those problems.
''We're going to fix the veterans' issues here in America,'' said General Clark, who retired as a four-star Army general in 2000. ''We're going to put the full funding we need to get the Veterans Administration to meet our service members' and former service members' needs.''
He promised to extend full-time health coverage to members of the Reserve and National Guard, who are covered only when on active duty.
As he campaigned across the South this week, General Clark courted the military vote with broad talk of patriotism and support for the troops and a specific message of better health care and other benefits. It was a message that was well received at fund-raisers, house parties and large rallies that stretched from Little Rock, Ark., to Charleston. Veterans of Korea, Vietnam and the 1991 Persian Gulf war, current members of the service and an occasional West Point cadet turned out to see the man they call simply ''the general.''
Some veterans have been inspired to do more. Michael Thomas, a former Navy lieutenant who served under General Clark in the Kosovo campaign, quit his job as a lawyer for a financial services company this fall to join the Clark campaign as a veterans outreach coordinator in South Carolina.
Jerry Hall, a resident of nearby Summerville, S.C., offered General Clark some unsolicited advice on Wednesday, saying he should highlight veterans issues in his advertisements. That would get the word out to the broader public, which Mr. Hall said had grown more supportive of active troops but mistakenly believed that military service guaranteed a lifetime of benefits.
''None of that is in your campaign ads,'' Mr. Hall said. ''That's like winking at a woman in a dark room. She ain't going to see you do it, so you're not going to make out.''
When General Clark stopped laughing, he said, ''I won't forget that,'' but he did not promise to use veterans issues in advertising.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE RETIRED GENERAL
