It took the Rangers 54 years to finally win another Stanley Cup. It took them only 53 to match another achievement: winning back-to-back overtime games in which the same player scores the winning goal.
On Tuesday night, defenseman Tom Poti became the second player in Rangers history -- and the first since the 1950 Stanley Cup finals -- to pull off the overtime feat.
Poti redirected a diagonal pass from Aleksei Kovalev past Kings goaltender Cristobal Huet 39 seconds into overtime in a come-from-behind 3-2 victory at Los Angeles.
On Monday night, Poti scored off a feed from Martin Rucinsky to give the Rangers their first overtime victory this season, as the Rangers rallied for a 3-2 victory at Phoenix.
Although there has been criticism directed at perceived deficiencies in Poti's defensive play, Rangers Coach Glen Sather says he wants Poti, an offensive-minded defenseman, to jump into the play even more, as he did on the overtime winners.
''Why not?'' Sather said Wednesday morning at the team's hotel before the Rangers flew to St. Louis, where they were scheduled to practice later in the day and play the Blues on Thursday. ''When it's appropriate. But he's figuring it out -- especially in overtime.''
According to the Elias Sports Bureau, since the N.H.L. went to a five-minute sudden-death overtime format in the 1983-84 season, Poti is the third player to score winning goals in overtime in consecutive games.
Poti joined Buffalo right wing Maksim Afinogenov (February 2001), and a current Rangers teammate, defenseman Greg de Vries, who did it for Colorado (January and February 2003), as the only players to accomplish the feat in the regular season.
It was Don Raleigh who scored the overtime winners for the Rangers in Games 4 and 5 of the Stanley Cup finals in April 1950 before Pete Babando scored the Cup-clinching goal for Detroit in double overtime of Game 7. That happened to be Year 10 in a Stanley Cup drought that would continue for the Rangers until 1994.
This season, four of Poti's six goals have been winners, the most among N.H.L. defensemen through Tuesday. Over all, his six goals were tied for ninth among defensemen.
''The puck definitely seems to be going my way,'' Poti said Wednesday morning. ''I felt I was playing good early on; I just wasn't getting many points.''
Actually, Poti's offensive output has dropped this season. Last season, Poti ranked seventh among N.H.L. defensemen with 48 points, on 11 goals and 37 assists. It was a career high. With 11 points on 6 goals and 5 assists in 32 games this season, Poti ranked 51st among N.H.L. defensemen in scoring through Tuesday.
Poti pointed out that last season he received more time on the power play, where he recorded 3 goals and 18 assists. For much of this season, Kovalev has taken Poti's place on one of the power-play points.
''But I'm fine with that,'' Poti said. ''I just want to win.''
Until Poti scored his consecutive overtime winners, the Rangers had not won in overtime, or in games they had trailed after two periods, or on the back end of games they had played on consecutive nights.
The Rangers are now 2-3-5 in overtime, 2-11-0-1 in games they have trailed after two periods and 1-2-2-1 on the back end of games on consecutive nights.
At 15-13-5-3 over all (with overtime losses not counting as defeats), the Rangers are two games over .500 for the second time this season. And on Thursday night in St. Louis, they will be trying for their first three-game winning streak of the season.
Still, if the season had ended on Wednesday morning, the Rangers would be a point out of the playoffs, which they have missed out on the past six seasons.
Meanwhile, Poti's name is still floating around in trade rumors. Should Tampa Bay decide to trade goalie Nikolai Khabibulin, Sather would no doubt consider offering Poti to the Lightning.
''That's definitely in the back of your mind, when you read stuff like that,'' Poti said. ''It probably does affect your play. But if something happens, something happens.''
HOCKEY
