Gov. John G. Rowland personally sponsored for state jobs two children of a partner in a private development project, according to a log of job-seekers that the governor's office kept in the months after his 1998 re-election. The daughter of another partner was also hired by the state.
A spokesman for the governor said the jobs, reported on Wednesday in The Hartford Courant, were awarded strictly on merit.
State officials also indicated Wednesday that federal investigators, who are looking into the circumstances of renovation work done at Mr. Rowland's vacation cottage in Litchfield, had widened their inquiry to include renovations at the governor's official residence in Hartford.
H. James Pickerstein, a Fairfield lawyer whose office was hired by the state to manage subpoenaed documents, confirmed that the state's Department of Public Works had been ordered by federal investigators to turn over documents regarding construction work and improvements done since 1997 at the residence.
Mr. Rowland has been under intense scrutiny since his admission Dec. 12 that he was not truthful when he first denied having accepted free work on his Litchfield cottage from contractors and state aides, some of whom are the subjects of a federal investigation into possible corruption in the awarding of state contracts. On Tuesday, legislators on both sides of the aisle said they were educating themselves on the process for impeaching a sitting governor.
Mr. Rowland issued a statement about his involvement in a real estate partnership, First Development Group L.L.C., on Dec. 18, in response to queries from journalists. The partnership was formed in 1996 and included four people: Mr. Rowland, Robert Capanna, Michael H. Cicchetti and Anthony R. Cocchiola. The four subdivided a parcel of land in Naugatuck and Prospect into two dozen building lots. Mr. Rowland said his initial investment of $7,200 earned him $60,000 before the partnership dissolved in 2001.
The log listing the names of 313 people who have applied for state work indicates that 10 were sponsored by Mr. Rowland. They include a son of Mr. Cicchetti, Michael J. Cicchetti, and a daughter, Kara. The son first worked for Mr. Rowland in 1995 as a staff assistant, before the development partnership was formed.
Mr. Cicchetti was named undersecretary of the state's Office of Policy and Management after Mr. Rowland's re-election in 1998. His sister, Kara Cicchetti, worked on that re-election campaign and later was in charge of the governor's appointments to boards and commissions, according to Dean Pagani, the governor's spokesman.
Michael H. Cicchetti, a Waterbury lawyer, handled Mr. Rowland's divorce from his first wife, Deborah, and was appointed by the governor to the University of Connecticut's board of trustees. Mr. Cicchetti did not return a message left with his secretary at his law firm Wednesday. Michael J. Cicchetti would say only that he worked at the Office of Policy and Management, earning about $110,000 a year. He referred other questions to Mr. Pagani. Kara Cicchetti could not be located by telephone. ''Mike and Kara Cicchetti are more than qualified for the jobs they were given,'' Mr. Pagani said. ''Their father is a friend who did a business deal with the governor. They weren't involved in the deal themselves.''
The names of Michael and Kara Cicchetti appear on a 20-page draft document titled ''Résumé Log Post Election.'' The log is one of thousands of pages of Rowland administration documents that are being reviewed by federal investigators and that have been made public by the governor's office.
The log, which Mr. Pagani said was compiled in the months after Mr. Rowland's 1998 re-election, lists the names of people seeking state work and a brief sketch of their previous jobs and background information. It also lists the names of sponsors, several of whom are lobbyists, administration officials or prominent Republicans and Democrats.
Jo McKenzie, who is a friend of Mr. Rowland and his wife, Patricia, and who manages the governor's residence, is listed in the job-seekers' log as sponsoring Mark McKenzie for a job at the Department of Correction supervising inmate crews who repair state vehicles. A spokesman for the department said his salary range was $39,000 to $50,000. Mark McKenzie was identified by The Hartford Courant as a nephew of Jo McKenzie. Ms. McKenzie was subpoenaed by federal investigators about the cottage inquiry.
Mr. Rowland's name, in the form of his initials, J.G.R., appears in the log as sponsor for 10 applicants, including the Cichettis.
Melissa Cocchiola, the daughter of Anthony R. Cocchiola, also a First Development partner, was hired by the state's Department of Public Utility Control, in August 1998, and earns about $51,000 a year working in consumer education, according to a spokeswoman for the agency. Mr. Cocchiola operates Cocchiola Paving. The company hauled $2,000 worth of topsoil to Mr. Rowland's Litchfield cottage in 1997 but was not paid until six years later. Since 1995, Mr. Rowland's first year as governor, Cocchiola Paving has been awarded contracts for state work totaling $1.3 million, including paving at the State Capitol complex in Hartford, according to state records. In a statement released Dec. 18, the governor said he had had nothing to do with the awarding of the contracts to the Cocchiola company. A call to Mr. Cocchiola on Wednesday was not returned. Melissa Cocchiola could not be reached by phone.
Republican leaders characterized the revelation that the governor had hired the children of his one-time business partners as insignificant.
Louis C. DeLuca, a Republican who is Senate minority leader, noted that the Cicchetti children campaigned for the governor. ''Patronage positions go to people who work in the party,'' Mr. DeLuca said. ''This is normal.''
But James A. Amann, a Democrat who is House majority leader, said he it demonstrated ''a pattern that fits with all the other lapses surrounding Mr. Rowland.''
On Tuesday, legislative leaders are scheduled to meet with the governor to discuss the controversy surrounding the cottage.
Mr. Amann said he intended to focus the meeting on what he saw four avenues available to Mr. Rowland: ''resignation, impeachment, indictment or an internal hearing.''
''Either that or he'll have to convince me how he intends to stay on, and let me tell you, it will be a tough sell,'' Mr. Amann said.
