Ten years ago, getting into a government-run museum after 1 p.m. to see a Raphael in Milan, a Titian in Venice, a Michelangelo in Florence or a Caravaggio in Rome was tantamount to finding a post office open at that hour. Close to impossible.
With little interest in making art more accessible to the masses and even less interest in the bottom line, the Italian museum system failed to innovate as its counterparts in the United States and Europe had done years before. Museum shops, if they existed, were dingy and sold low-quality postcards and academic books that were inaccessible to most museumgoers. Guides in English -- to say nothing of French, German and Spanish -- were nonexistent, as were eating establishments.
In 1993, when it came time to discussing how museums could become more self-sustaining, someone suggested the unthinkable: perhaps the museums should be run less like post offices and maybe, just maybe, private businesses could be brought into help. A decade later the experiment has, by most accounts, been a success. But supporters say there is still work to be done, and critics sound dire warnings that mixing economics with art may spell the end of Italy's cultural heritage.
Italy's more than 400 state-run museums still lose money, as do the vast majority of museums in the world, but last year the government made 11.6 million euros -- about $12 million -- through concessions sold to private companies to run shops, restaurants, ticketing, guided tours and more.
''When I got here the idea was that money is dirty, art is sacred and the two things should not be mixed,'' said Danny Berger, who after almost four decades at New York's Metropolitan Museum of Art joined the Cultural Ministry 10 years ago to help write the Italian law that allows private companies to run some parts of the museums. ''It took a while, but that attitude has changed.''
While the United States has been the trendsetter in privately financing art institutions, in most cases just 10 percent of museum budgets are covered by revenue from stores and entrance fees, according to Salvatore Settis, who worked for six years at the J. Paul Getty Research Institute in Los Angeles and wrote a book assessing Italy's plans to change the way the country's cultural patrimony is managed.
Mr. Berger, who has worked through eight Italian governments and six cultural ministers, said: ''Some people think you can make money with culture, but that's just not true, the numbers just aren't there. What you can do is make money towards supporting culture.''
And that is the idea behind selling concessions to private companies, which pay a fee to run part of a museum and then take home the profit they generate.
The amount made by the government on the concessions has climbed every year, reaching 11.6 million euros in 2002. A national lottery inaugurated in 1997 generates another 150 million euros a year that is used for restoration. The Cultural Ministry does not make public how much it spends on museums or how much the museums lose each year.
A shift that touches something as dear to the Italians as their artistic heritage could not take place without strife, especially since the flip side of making the museums more self-sustaining has been the government's decision to reduce funding.
''There is a perception that you can cut the government funding, privatize the museums and then as if by magic they will suddenly begin making money, but that is absolutely not the case,'' said Mr. Settis, who is the rector at the Scuola Normale University in Pisa. ''Even in the U.S., museums lose money, but they get by with little or no government funding because they live off their large endowments.''
Interest from the investments made by those endowments sometimes provides as much as half of the budget for museums in the United States.
Many American museums also support part of their operations with membership fees, a rarity in Italy.
With the changes in the museum system has come a shift in the general perception of the role art should play in the everyday life of Italy's citizens and how museums should be financed. Four years ago, Milan's Bocconi University established an undergraduate program called ''Economics and Management for the Arts,'' to help illuminate the relationship between cultural institutions and their markets. Ten years ago, a university degree program with that title and declared mission would have been unthinkable.
Italy's 400 state-run museums are just the top of a cultural pyramid that swells to more than 4,000 once private museums and those run by regional and city governments are added. There are also more than 100,000 churches and chapels, many of them holding masterpieces.
