The last couple of years have been lousy for the corporate takeover business. The war in Iraq, the accounting scandals and the stock market's resulting instability all worked against the kind of megadeals that reshaped corporate America in the late 1990's.
Despite the unimpressive number and size of deals in recent years -- deal volume in the United States rose to $525 billion last year from $439 billion, attaining a level that compares with 1995, according to Thomson Financial -- a bevy of overeager Wall Street deal makers typically manage to predict that merger mania will return in the next year.
This time, though, they may be right.
The capture of Saddam Hussein, the beginning of criminal cases against those accused of accounting chicanery and a steadier stock market may finally provide enough confidence in the boardroom and the top echelons of management to pursue more deals. Companies in industries like wireless telecommunications that have been waiting for the right moment to merge -- like Cingular and AT&amp;T Wireless -- may finally be emboldened to make a move, which would probably cause a domino effect of other deals.
''You have some companies that have held off doing transactions in the past couple of years until business and market conditions improved,'' said Steven Baronoff, who runs the mergers and acquisitions practice at Merrill Lynch. ''If you look at the level of dialogue, the pipeline and the activity, it all points to a meaningful improvement in 2004.''
While all economic indicators suggest more deals, some of the biggest companies may still hesitate to begin an acquisition binge just yet. ''The Fortune 100 are waiting for top line growth to signal that their businesses have turned around,'' said Jack Levy, chairman for mergers and acquisitions at Goldman, Sachs. ''When they experience a measurable revenue lift, I think big companies will focus on doing deals again.''
The main factor in the willingness of companies to pursue deals this year may be investors' reactions to the first spate of transactions. Of course, one bad deal could ruin the party. For example, Bank of America's agreement in October to buy FleetBoston Financial for $48 billion in stock at the time was met with so much skepticism -- Bank of America's stock fell 10 percent the day it was announced -- that some deal makers say several other major mergers were pushed into abeyance, including a merger between AT&amp;T and the BellSouth Corporation. Deals like that could come back, but they are likely to be structured much more conservatively. Big premiums are out. (A 40 percent premium was the main reason that Bank of America's deal for FleetBoston was panned.) Large, transforming deals are a bit dicey. (Anthem's $16 billion acquisition of WellPoint Health Networks was almost too much for the market to accept.) And so-called mergers of equals, where executives from both companies share power, are out.
''Mergers of equals where there is not absolute clarity about management accountability are out of favor,'' said Donald Meltzer, global co-head for mergers and acquisitions at Credit Suisse First Boston. ''Boards are demanding to know who is going to deliver the projected benefits of the deal and how they are going to make it happen.''
A lawsuit by the Las Vegas casino mogul Kirk Kerkorian, which is being tried in Delaware, is also likely to weigh on companies contemplating mergers of equals. He sued DaimlerChrysler, asserting that the German company Daimler-Benz and the American company Chrysler fraudulently labeled their 1998 deal a merger when it was actually envisioned as a takeover -- giving him no takeover premium as a Chrysler shareholder.
Even if megadeals do not return, scores of smaller deals are likely to be driven by the hundreds of private equity firms that have cash. ''There is a lot of private equity money that needs to be put to work,'' said Ray McGuire, co-head of global mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley. He said firms may be willing to invest for lower returns because stock market returns were lower.
With all that money sitting on the sidelines, private equity firms have become much more aggressive about how they have spent it in recent months, placing riskier bets and outbidding corporations that were once unbeatable.
''Private equity buyers have become more strategic in the sense that they are prepared to make a thoughtful longer-term bet on how a target's fundamentals are likely to develop, without having to worry about near-term stock price reaction,'' Mr. Meltzer said. Corporations, on the other hand, he said, ''have become much more disciplined about ensuring that acquisitions are likely to create, rather than destroy, shareholder value.''
That may be one reason that Edgar Bronfman Jr. and a group of financiers led by Thomas H. Lee Partners were able to win a $2.6 billion auction for the Warner Music Group, beating EMI, which was unwilling to make a bid high enough to compensate Time Warner for the possibility that regulators could block the deal.
Another recent factor bolstering the bigger private equity firms, like the Blackstone Group or Thomas H. Lee Partners, is that they often own companies that they can use to compete against corporate rivals.
For example, Blackstone has been eyeing the Blockbuster video chain, a unit of Viacom, people involved in the negotiations say. One reason Blackstone may be interested in Blockbuster, which itself is considered a risky bet, is that it already owns Columbia House, a direct marketer of music, DVD's and videos.
But private equity executives warned that their rush of deal making might already be over.
''Private equity people looked at the environment in 2003 as a once-in-a-decade opportunity,'' said Stephen A. Schwarzman, chairman and president of Blackstone. ''At some point as the economy recovers, the corporations will become the ones that are aggressive.''
