Charlie Ward walked through the locker room Tuesday night after the Knicks' fourth straight victory, 102-73 over the Miami Heat. As he headed down the hall at Madison Square Garden, he slapped hands with teammates, saying goodbye to all who passed, eliciting strange glances and laughter from his friends.
It was a light moment for Ward, but it belied his true feelings. With the Knicks quickly trying to rebuild their roster, shipping Clarence Weatherspoon to Houston in a deal that brought another point guard, Moochie Norris, to New York, Ward did not need long to figure out that he could be the next player to depart.
''This happened before, and not just on our team, but everyone's team,'' said Ward, who has the second-longest tenure with one team among active players in the league, 10 years. ''You see it. I haven't had it happen to me, so I don't know the feeling, but just the hint of it makes me cry, you know, because no one likes change in any situation and when it happens you deal with it. There's a lot of guys here who have been on other teams. I've been blessed to be on one team my whole career, so that's lovely.''
The Knicks have four point guards: the recently promoted starter, Frank Williams; Ward; Norris; and Howard Eisley, who has drifted from starter to the end of the bench. That does not include Milos Vujanic, the Yugoslav who remained in Europe after he was selected by the Knicks in the second round of the N.B.A. draft in 2002.
If Isiah Thomas, the team's president of basketball operations, plans to thin the crowd at point guard, it will take little of his sales ability to find a taker for Ward, and Ward knows it.
Ward has playoff experience and a dream contract for teams seeking salary cap or luxury tax relief. He is in the final year of a six-year, $28 million contract, so his $6 million salary will come off the cap at the end of the season. But for a team intent on saving, his deal includes a buyout, in effect until Jan. 10, in which he can be released and owed just the approximately $2 million already earned.
Ward may be the more desirable player for the Knicks to retain. Eisley's contract runs three more seasons beyond this one, with a total of $26.5 million, although the final season is a team option of $7.4 million with a partial guarantee.
Asked on Tuesday night if the Weatherspoon deal meant anything for the current point guards, Thomas said that it did not but added: ''As we continue to shuffle and retool our roster, at some point in time we have an overload of one spot or one situation, but we'll continue to keep moving forward. Sometimes it can be a tough business, but our players will adjust.''
Asked if he could manage four point guards on his roster, Coach Don Chaney said, ''That's virtually impossible.''
Ward's agent, Craig McKenzie, said he expected something to happen with Ward.
''We've had several conversations now,'' McKenzie said. ''We have an idea of what Charlie desires, but a lot has to do with Isiah and getting the number down for the team. Right now, it's still very much up in the air.''
One team official said that Portland and San Antonio could be the primary targets for a deal.
The Spurs have only Jason Hart behind Tony Parker at point guard but an excess of swingmen who may interest the Knicks. The Trail Blazers have spoken of their willingness to deal. Among the Blazers the Knicks are interested in are point guard Damon Stoudamire and power forward Rasheed Wallace.
Ward shrugs at the prospects, having heard trade speculation often.
''Well, I'm playing basketball,'' he said. ''It doesn't bother me any. We know it's a business. We do have four point guards, so we'll deal with whatever happens. As of right now, today, we're all still here. We're going to come to work just like we always do.''
Ward presents a Catch-22 for Thomas. With the Knicks one game out of the final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference at 14-19 and playing well over the last week, Ward may be the team's best option at point guard in the postseason. He has delivered in pressure situations before.
Guard Allan Houston, a close friend of Ward's, said: ''We all just want to be the best. We want to be the best team. We struggled for a long time. It's not our job to agree or disagree. Our job is to just step up to the plate and be the best you can be. We're just going to trust whatever happens, it is for the best.''
PRO BASKETBALL
