Who could blame Indianapolis Coach Tony Dungy if he were frantically concerned about his defense as it prepares for the Colts' first-round playoff game Sunday against the Denver Broncos at the RCA Dome?
For starters, the Colts stumbled into the postseason. They lost Dec. 21 to the run-happy Broncos, 31-17, in Indianapolis, then needed a fourth-quarter comeback against the Texans in Houston last Sunday to clinch the American Football Conference South title. In both games, the Colts were plagued by poor tackling and defensive lapses.
Then there is the Colts' recent playoff history. Last season, Indianapolis lost to the Jets, 41-0, in a wild-card game. The Colts have dropped five consecutive playoff games, surrendering an average of 29 points.
Dungy, however, has been as calm as always this week and is confident that his defense will rebound against the Broncos. ''We got a lot of young guys that are resilient, and they're always ready to go the next week,'' he said Wednesday.
In their regular-season victory over the Colts, the Broncos controlled the ball for 45 minutes and ran for 227 yards and 3 touchdowns -- without their star running back, Clinton Portis, who was sidelined with a sprained ankle. His backup, Quentin Griffin, running behind an imposing line, torched the Colts for 136 yards on 28 carries. The Broncos have the league's second-best rushing game.
But that loss to Denver is now a distant memory in Indianapolis.
''If you get caught up in the revenge and all that, it's really wasted thinking,'' defensive end Chad Bratzke said. ''You have to focus on your job at hand. They're a good football team, and we just have to go out there and play well to have a chance to win.''
Many defensive players would not talk about the recent postseason losses or the fact that the Colts (12-4) have not won a playoff game at home since 1971, when they played in Baltimore. How other Indianapolis teams fared in the postseason is irrelevant to Sunday's game with the Broncos (10-6), they insist.
''No one even remembers the Jets,'' linebacker David Thornton said.
Quarterback Peyton Manning, who has taken heat from fans and the news media for going 0-3 in the playoffs during his six-year career, says he thinks the Colts will need to score often against Denver. Still, Manning agreed with Dungy that it was quite likely the defense would rebound against the Broncos. ''I have a lot of confidence in them,'' Manning said.
What the Colts' defense lacks in size and experience, it tries to compensate for with speed. Last season, his first in Indianapolis, Dungy turned a defense that ranked 29th in 2001 into the league's eighth-ranked unit. This season, however, the defense dropped to 11th over all and was tied for 20th against the run. It surrendered 31 or more points in three of the final four home games.
In Dungy's six years as head coach of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, he earned a reputation as one of the sharpest defensive minds in the game. This season was only the second in his eight years as a head coach in the N.F.L. that his defense was not ranked in the top 10.
''We haven't been where I wanted to be all year so, yeah, it is tough for me,'' Dungy said.
The players have been vocal about their feelings. Defensive end Dwight Freeney, who led the team with 11 sacks this season, has criticized teammates for poor tackling on more than one occasion. He said that the loss to Denver was embarrassing but that history would not repeat itself if the Colts tackled properly and kept Denver's running game off the field.
''We have to get them in some three-and-out situations,'' Freeney said. ''We have to believe in the system. We have to have fun out there. We have to play with a lot of energy and play confident.''
Another player who wants to have fun is Portis, who is now healthy. But he said he did not expect to see the Indianapolis team that gave up 465 yards of total offense to Denver.
''You can't expect the defense to go out and give up the same thing,'' Portis said in a telephone interview Wednesday. ''We know they want to attack our quarterback, and we got to try and limit that. But all great coaches make adjustments, and Coach Dungy, I'm sure he's going to have adjustments to stop our running game.''
When asked what those adjustments might be, Dungy just smiled.
PRO FOOTBALL
