As the Giants interview prospective head coaches, they find themselves jumping between offensive and defensive specialists. Today alone, they will interview one of each: the New England Patriots' defensive coordinator, Romeo Crennel, and offensive coordinator, Charlie Weis.
Add the two coaches Giants officials have already talked to -- the former Jacksonville Jaguars coach Tom Coughlin, whose background is offense, and the St. Louis Rams' defensive coordinator, Lovie Smith -- and the field is split.
Should the Giants pursue Louisiana State Coach Nick Saban, the scales would tip, 3-2, in favor of defense.
''I want a teacher and I want someone from a winning background,'' Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi said. ''The rest of it is, I just want the best person for the job.''
With the same pool of names linked to nearly all of the seven official head coaching vacancies in the National Football League, it seems most of the teams searching for a head coach are thinking alike. Only Atlanta appears to be skewing one way, with the defensive coaches Smith, Crennel and Saban atop their list. The Falcons have also interviewed San Francisco's defensive coordinator, Jim Mora Jr., and will speak to Pittsburgh's offensive and defensive coordinators, Mike Mularkey and Tim Lewis.
Few others, however, have a firm strategy in mind. Buffalo and Chicago have Coughlin and the former Giants coach Jim Fassel on their lists. Both men are offense-oriented but polar opposites in style; Fassel is known as a players' coach and Coughlin a strict disciplinarian.
Accorsi has other traits in mind, however, as he makes his rounds with John Mara, the Giants' executive vice president.
''We want someone who is used to winning,'' Accorsi said. ''There is a knack to winning, a way to go about things. Some people just find a way to win. You can't make a manual out of it. We're trying to find someone with that knack.''
All of the Giants' candidates have a winning background. Coughlin revived a moribund Boston College program and started an expansion team from scratch and made it a winner. Weis and Crennel have helped the Patriots win a Super Bowl under Coach Bill Belichick. Smith went to St. Louis after helping Coach Tony Dungy turn the Tampa Bay Buccaneers into a winner. Saban has been a successful head coach at two colleges and was Belichick's defensive coordinator in Cleveland.
All but Smith are limbs off the Bill Parcells coaching tree. Coughlin, Crennel and Weis were Giants assistants under Parcells, as was Belichick.
''It's an interesting concept that you should have an offensive coach because the game is run through the quarterback,'' Accorsi said. ''But some of the great coaches of all time -- Tom Landry, Chuck Noll, Don Shula -- were defensive guys who coached the quarterback.''
What binds the great coaches, Accorsi said, is not a particular style or an orientation, but that they are great teachers.
''I think this is still a teaching job,'' Accorsi said.
PRO FOOTBALL
