The ignominious departure of the Redskins' head coach, Steve Spurrier, is the story of the day in Washington, which is not only the capital of the world's sole superpower but also home to one of the storied franchises in pro football.
Mr. Spurrier's resignation, tendered rather awkwardly on Tuesday after he recorded 12 victories and 20 defeats in two seasons, has momentarily replaced politics and mad cow disease as the stuff of conversation in the salons of Georgetown, working-class apartments, country clubs and shot-and-beer saloons.
Not everyone around the capital wears burgundy and gold on game days, of course. But it is true that the ranks of Redskins fans include people as diverse as politicians and superlawyers, mechanics and postal workers, teachers and their students.
So it was understandable that The Washington Post on Wednesday devoted six articles (one of them on the front page), three columns and an editorial to Mr. Spurrier's departure.
Of course, Mr. Spurrier is not the first outsider to ride into Washington on a wave of confidence and leave in failure, a fact in which he may now find comfort while on the golf course.
''Mr. Spurrier's fall was not fun to watch,'' the Post editorial said.
Actually, it probably was, at least among the coaches and fans whose teams were regularly thrashed by the Spurrier-coached University of Florida squads of 1990 to 2001. The Gators won so easily and often, and Mr. Spurrier made so little effort to affect modesty, that his detractors called him Steve Superior. But this is about failure, not success.
''Washington is a place -- whether you're in politics, journalism or sports -- where you're being tested against a very high standard,'' Senator Bob Graham, Democrat of Florida, said Wednesday from his home in Miami Lakes. Mr. Graham had nothing but sympathy for his friend. ''He had such high expectations; it just didn't work out,'' he said.
Mr. Graham has good reason to be fond of the coach. When Bob Graham, class of 1959, was at the University of Florida, his beloved Gators were truly bottom-dwellers, ''the team everyone wanted to schedule for homecoming,'' the senator said.
But under Steve Spurrier, the Gators were one of the nation's dominant teams. In his 12 seasons there, Florida won 122 games, lost just 27 and tied one. All his teams finished at or near the top of the Southeastern Conference, and the 1996 team won a national championship.
So why did he not succeed in Washington? The Wednesday morning quarterbacks offered up various theories: The coach wasn't enough of a disciplinarian. He was lost in a world of salary caps and free agency and other things that make the pro game so different from the college version. Perhaps worst of all, the pass-happy offense that worked so well in college was not suited to the pro game.
(On that last point, The Washington Post said Mr. Spurrier was so offense-oriented that he would occasionally flub the names of his defensive players. But maybe that should not count against him too much. After all, President Ronald Reagan once confused his housing secretary with a mayor.)
Mr. Spurrier was also accused of making the kind of mistake another Southern outsider made when he came to Washington. His critics thought the coach relied too much on former Florida players and on inexperienced assistants, much as Jimmy Carter brought with him a crew of Georgians who, at least in the eyes of their critics, were out of their depth in the capital.
''It's different playing in Washington,'' Joe Theismann, the former Redskin quarterback and current television analyst, said Wednesday from his home in suburban Virginia. ''There's a legacy of excellence.''
That is surely true, although the luster has dimmed of late. The Redskins have won three Super Bowls, the most recent 12 seasons ago. They have not played in the postseason since 1999.
And, yes, Mr. Theismann said, the spotlight is hotter here. ''Washington is the seat of world power,'' he said. ''It's always going to be in the headlines one way or the other.''
Perhaps, Mr. Theismann suggested, Mr. Spurrier just could not stand losing. Twenty losses in his two seasons here were one more than he endured in his last nine in Florida.
Inevitably, some blame has attached to the Redskins' owner, the communications entrepreneur Daniel Snyder, who must now hunt for his fifth head coach since he bought the team for $800 million in 1999, when he was 34. Some people who agonize over the Redskins' fortunes have said Mr. Snyder should realize that being a business whiz does not make him a football genius.
Mr. Theismann said he was sure the Redskins would return to power, once they got some stability and a coach who would provide direction and discipline. Especially discipline. ''Football players are like children,'' the old quarterback said.
And anyone who thinks football is just not that important should recall that President Bush fainted while eating a pretzel and watching a football game (not a Redskin contest) two years ago. And it may be worth recalling that in 1986, weeks after the Iran-contra scandal erupted, the Redskins' coach, Joe Gibbs, said he had no idea who Oliver North was. The team was in a playoff chase, after all.
Now that the name of Steve Spurrier has been added to the long list of great college coaches who did not succeed at the professional level, it may be fair as well as charitable to close with Mr. Graham's perspective. Never mind the Steve Superior talk, he said, calling his friend ''a role model of decency.''
Had Mr. Spurrier stayed longer, he might have succeeded, the senator said. He may have a point there. The famed coach Tom Landry lost 53 games in his first six seasons in Dallas, although the Cowboys were an expansion team at the time.
''Washington expects a much earlier, and surer, demonstration of your capabilities,'' Mr. Graham said.
Washington Memo
