Burger King has added something different to its Whopper ads: chicken.
Despite the discovery of mad cow disease in the United States last week, executives at the Burger King Corporation have decided to go ahead with a new Whopper television campaign. But after the government announced the presence of a single infected cow in the United States last week, Burger King executives met to discuss how the company should react.
The result was that they instructed their creative team at Young &amp; Rubicam in New York to retool the ads to include the chicken Whopper. The ads will begin appearing on national networks on Sunday.
''We decided that if there's anybody who wants a chicken option, at this point, we wanted to remind them that the Whopper comes in chicken as well as the original beef,'' said Robert A. Doughty, a spokesman at Burger King. ''But, we have every confidence in beef and the safety of the beef supply.''
Like Burger King, big players in the meat industry are walking a delicate line in their marketing and communications efforts amid consumer concern over mad cow disease. While most food and restaurant companies and ranchers are depending heavily on the Agriculture Department to reassure the public that the American beef supply is considered safe so far, some companies are making moves to inform consumers that their individual products have not been tainted.
So far, beef consumption remains steady, analysts said. According to a survey by the NPD Group, 71 percent of Americans said last week that they were more concerned about mad cow disease, but did not intend to eat less beef.
''It will be hard for us to change our behavior unless it gets beyond this one cow,'' said Harry Balzer, a vice president of NPD.
The National Cattleman's Beef Association has taken a particularly aggressive stance to make sure consumers get the message that the domestic beef supply is safe. The group has held briefings almost daily since last week's announcement and has started a Web site (www.bseinfo.org) that addresses issues related to mad cow disease, formally known as bovine spongiform encephalopathy, or B.S.E.
To counter the widespread use of old film from outbreaks of the disease in Britain that shows large numbers of cattle in advanced stages of the neurological disease, the association hired its own crews to film healthy cattle across the country. The association sent its film, which shows cattle in dairy and livestock feeding operations, to more than two dozen television stations, including the national networks, cable news operations and local stations in Washington State, where the diseased cow was identified.
''What some are showing is a disservice to the American consumer because it is not accurate and it does not in any way represent beef production systems or animal husbandry in this country,'' Mark Thomas, the association's vice president for marketing, said. He added, ''I'm beginning to see a shift to video footage that is more typical of what the production system really looks like in this country today.''
Mr. Thomas said he did not know how many television stations were using the organization's film. The association still plans to go forward later this month with its ''Beef, It's What's for Dinner'' television campaign.
The McDonald's Corporation, the largest beef purchaser in the fast-food industry, has also mounted a public relations campaign, issuing news releases stating that the current case has nothing to do with its supply chain. McDonald's says that it does not use downed cows or animal parts that have been known to transmit mad cow disease.
On Tuesday, McDonald's executives posted a letter on the company's Web site to assure consumers of their products' safety. Copies of the letter will be distributed in McDonald's restaurants on Friday to customers who question workers about mad cow disease.
So far, McDonald's executives said, the mad cow incident has not affected sales or what customers order. The cheeseburger continues to be the most popular sandwich the company sells, a McDonald's spokesman, Walt Riker, said.
Mr. Riker said that the company had already dealt with the mad cow problem in several countries.
''There is just a tremendous depth of experience and learning and best practices, so when something like this happens we don't have to reinvent the wheel or go into what some people might think is a crisis mode,'' Mr. Riker said. ''It really is more standard operating procedure.''
Some companies, like Kraft Foods, which markets the Oscar Mayer brand, and Hormel Foods, said they were comfortable with the government's response and did not plan to mount aggressive marketing campaigns. At Wendy's International, executives have taken few steps to reassure the consumers, other than to report that the company's sales continue to be strong.
''With the incident that happened earlier in Canada this year, the public in general is more educated about what is involved and that fact that there's not really a risk to the American beef supply,'' a spokesman for Wendy's, Bob Bertini, said. ''The public is more familiar with B.S.E. and realizes that this involved one cow and did not pose a health risk.''
Executives at Swift &amp; Company said they were concerned that campaigns promoting other foods or vegetarianism could have a lasting effect on beef consumption. People for the Ethical Treatment of Animals, for example, plans to introduce an antimeat billboard and ad campaign within the next few weeks, The Wall Street Journal reported.
''Unfortunately, I think there are some people out there who feel that this is an opportunity to promote other agendas and to carry a scare message against meat, and I think that does a disservice to consumers,'' a spokesman for Swift, Jim Herlihy, said.
Industry analysts said that it was too soon to tell if companies' marketing efforts were working, but that if the past served as any guide, consumers might briefly shy away from beef purchases, then return. Beef consumption has picked up in Europe and in Canada after initially dropping with the discovery of mad cow disease. In the United States, consumers initially stay away from beef after outbreaks of e. coli contamination, but after a time they return, analysts said.
''We're going to know a lot more between the week after New Year's and the Super Bowl,'' G. Leonard Teitelbaum, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, said. ''We will know if the American public has partially turned away from beef as opposed to walked away.''
