The Internal Revenue Service and the Treasury Department took steps yesterday to ban an abusive tax shelter involving the use of Roth individual retirement accounts.
The shelter uses shell corporations to funnel investment contributions into the retirement accounts far in excess of the current limit of $3,500 a year.
The two agencies declared the shelter a ''listed transaction,'' meaning that taxpayers, both individuals and companies, must disclose their use of the shelter to the I.R.S. and that promoters, like accounting firms and lawyers, must keep lists of such taxpayers.
Such disclosure gives the Internal Revenue Service a way of pursuing the shelter's users and promoters, both of whom had carried out the transactions in secret. The agency is going after taxpayers who abuse shelters and in many cases is seeking back taxes and penalties.
The announcement came seven weeks after The New York Times reported on the workings of the shelter and its promotion by Grant Thornton, an accounting firm. The firm declined to comment yesterday on the agencies' actions.
The Roth I.R.A. has been an increasingly popular investment and savings vehicle since it was introduced in 1997. The retirement accounts allow investors to contribute dollars after taxes and then withdraw those contributions along with any future investment gains tax-free as long as the investors are more than 59 1/2 years old and have held onto the plan for at least five years.
The abusive shelter involves, among other steps, setting up a shell company, then making a Roth I.R.A. the owner of that company by shifting shares and dividends in large amounts to the Roth I.R.A.
''The acquisition of shares, the transactions or both are not fairly valued and thus have the effect of shifting value into the Roth I.R.A.,'' the agencies said.
The abusive shelter also violates I.R.S. regulations prohibiting self-dealing with Roth I.R.A. plans, it said. According to a lawsuit filed in 2002 by a West Coast technology executive who said Grant Thornton sold him the shelter in 2000, the accounting firm called the plan GIFT, or Generating Income Free of Tax.
The I.R.S. served a summons on Grant Thornton on Oct. 10 that challenged, among other things, the legality of the accounting firm's design of the shelter and its various forms. The agency is already investigating the firm regarding other tax shelters.
The abusive Roth I.R.A. reflects the mass-marketing of tax shelters, especially toward people who made money in the 1990's during the Internet boom. Previously, questionable tax shelters had been mainly the province of corporations and the extremely wealthy.
Promoters of questionable shelters often seek to exploit loopholes or confusion in the tax code, but the abusive Roth I.R.A. seems particularly egregious to some tax experts.
Joseph Bankman, a professor of law and business at Stanford Law School, said that ''common sense tells you, you can't put amounts in an I.R.A. when there are contribution limits.''
