A formal study ordered by the city has essentially cleared the way for the largest taxicab-fleet expansion in nearly 70 years. It concluded that adding 900 cabs over the next three years would not pose environmental concerns and indicated that a moderate fare increase would probably assuage taxi owners.
The proposed expansion, which is still subject to public hearings and action by the Taxi and Limousine Commission, would mean tens of millions of dollars for the city. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has already included revenue from the first round of medallion sales in this year's budget, and the Taxi and Limousine Commission, whose chairman is appointed by the mayor, has made it clear it favors more cabs.
The impact study, required by law and conducted at the city's request by Urbitran Associates, a New York City engineering firm, said that even intensified traffic jams posed by the influx of new cabs added to the 12,187 licensed taxis already on the streets could be mitigated by some modest adjustment in traffic-light sequences. The fare increase it seemed to suggest -- in the 25 percent range -- would be likely to placate cab owners who feared their market would become glutted. Taxi fares have not risen in more than seven years and are among the lowest among the nation's large cities.
''The significance in this is it's good news for cab users,'' said Bruce Schaller, who runs a cab research and consulting firm. ''It's the last hurdle to increasing the taxicab supply in New York, which is badly needed. It also seems to pave the way for a fare increase, which is also badly needed.''
The proposal to expand the yellow cab fleet, the biggest increase since the city imposed a taxi cap in 1937, has already received approval in Albany and from the City Council. Public hearings are scheduled to be held on the matter next Wednesday and on Jan. 12. The Taxi and Limousine Commission also needs to authorize the rules under which the medallions will be sold. That action is expected at a meeting on Jan. 29.
The intention is for 300 cabs to be added in each of the next three years, with the first group expected to be cruising city streets by June. The value of a medallion is currently around $225,000. Selling 900 new ones could generate about $190 million for the city. A third of that sum is already incorporated in the current year's budget.
Allan J. Fromberg, the deputy commissioner of the Taxi and Limousine Commission, said yesterday that the commission had no comment on the impact study, because public hearings still had to be held. The findings, though, came as no surprise.
Noach Dear, one of the commissioners, said the study's conclusions were what he expected, and he anticipated that the city would now go forward with the medallion sale. Like some of the other commission members, he favors a fare increase as well, though he said he was not sure of the appropriate size. ''There has to be a fare increase,'' he said. ''Without a fare increase, the sales will not be successful.''
What happens with fares will go a long way toward determining how welcoming taxi drivers will be of this rush of fresh competition. Bhairavi Desai, the director of the New York Taxi Workers Alliance, which represents many drivers, said her group remained opposed to additional cabs without a suitable fare increase.
The alliance has been pushing for a fare increase of nearly 50 percent, while the Metropolitan Taxicab Board of Trade, which represents fleet owners, wants a 23 percent fare increase. The current average fare is $6.85.
Both the increase in the number of cabs and the fare increase would directly affect only yellow cabs, which answer street hails and operate primarily below 96th Street in Manhattan and at the airports. Livery car services, limousines and gypsy cabs would not be directly affected.
In trying to gauge what might happen if as many as 900 more yellow cabs suddenly materialized on the city's streets, the impact study measured air quality and traffic flow at five heavily used intersections in Manhattan.
One vital question addressed by the experiment was carbon monoxide emissions. The study concluded that levels would be the same or at worst slightly higher with the additional cabs.
New York City air has vastly improved since the mid-1980's. Carbon monoxide, according to state air-monitoring data from an East 34th Street testing station, has remained well below federal limits.
In assessing the effects of 900 more cabs on an already nearly immovable traffic flow, the study examined car activity at the five intersections.
The study concluded that congestion at the studied intersections would be significantly worse with the new cab influx. However, it said that this could be pretty much addressed by altering the traffic-light sequences so that just one second of green time was changed at each of the locations.
On a third crucial question, the economic impact on medallion owners, the study found that medallion prices would be likely to drop if fares remained the same. It studied the impact of fare increases of 23.4 percent and 44.2 percent, and concluded that a fare increase in the 25 percent range would be the ''most neutral action'' in offsetting the impact of the expansion on medallion values.
On the inscrutable matter of how to get a cab when your plane leaves in 15 minutes, the study had nothing to say.
