Pining to buy an island where the ale is limitless, the beaches are wind-whipped and castles are a dime a dozen? This island, along with an offshore property, is not quite for sale, but at least it has a price tag now, courtesy of the government's Office for National Statistics.
The United Kingdom -- that is, England, Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland -- is officially valued at $8.8 trillion, a sum that includes all of its property and buildings, machinery, roads, bridges, planes, trains and automobiles. It also includes all the money deposited in its banks and other financial institutions. Plus everything on the shelves at Harrods.
''It's hard to imagine anything so valuable that it is out of the reach of Bill Gates,'' boasted an article for the statistics agency's internal publication, Horizon.
Statisticians at the agency said they came up with the figure using new models and more detailed information measuring all of Britain's assets. According to their numbers, if Britain's 58.8 million people decided to cash in on their country's estimated worth, they would each receive the comfortable sum of more than $150,000. (Although they then might be asked to bail out the government, which, the statisticians determined, has a negative net worth of $222 billion, after the national debt and other obligations have been deducted.)
The $8.8 trillion price tag does not include data from 2003, which, with the departure of the soccer superstar David Beckham and his wife, Victoria, to Madrid -- along with their vast net worth -- could be expected to alter considerably any future calculations.
More than half of the $8.8 trillion figure comes from the value of people's homes, a total that has more than doubled in the last 10 years. Commercial and public property accounted for about $1 trillion, and the country's roads, bridges, pipelines and other infrastructure were valued at $961 billion.
But why come up with a price tag at all?
The agency said that devising a price tag for the United Kingdom would help economists develop economic models and use the data to make financial predictions.
''It includes everything that is tangible,'' said John Hallmark, a spokesman for the Office for National Statistics. ''Things in factories, airplanes, private cars, houses, etc. We do surveys and get the value.''
Included in the price, for example, are 93,000 square miles stretching 600 miles from England's southern tip to Scotland's most northerly reaches. There are 9,040 miles of coast and a few mountains, the tallest of which, Ben Nevis in Scotland, measures 4,406 feet.
The country does nicely with oil, soccer, gardens and pharmaceuticals, and offers a varied mix of people -- 300 languages are spoken in London alone. Its unpredictability -- best savored through its weather, the punctuality of its public transport and the behavior of its royal family -- is boundless.
But not all Britons find the $8.8 trillion sum (5 trillion in pounds) or the statisticians' attempts to compute a price at all, a laudable exercise in spending the taxpayers' money.
The journalist Max Hastings, writing a two-page column in The Daily Mail on Wednesday, said he could picture Prime Minister Tony Blair and Chancellor Gordon Brown sitting ''with their pocket calculators'' trying to work out exactly how much of that £5 trillion they could tax and squander.
Mr. Hastings lamented the statisticians' dismissal of ''invisible assets'' whose value cannot be set. ''How can anyone place a value on national ownership of the Dover sole or the potted shrimp?'' Mr. Hastings asked. ''Think of Agatha Christie and Miss Marple, of Alec Guinness.''
''A proper nation is not a place but an idea, compounded of an amalgam of past, present and future,'' Mr. Hastings wrote. ''The secret of happiness for any society is to cherish its identity rather than seek to suppress it, or worse still reduce us to the mere cash value we all represent at the bank.''
London Journal
