''She didn't know he was there in the high foggy dark. He saw her face again as she passed under the yellow fog light, saw that she didn't like the darkness and fog and loneness . . . He could hear her heels striking hard on the warped pavement as if the sound brought her some reassurance. He didn't follow her at once.'''
Yikes! The lady better watch out.
''He'' is Dix Steele, a serial killer in the 1947 pulp-fiction novel ''In a Lonely Place,'' a vividly drawn noir tale full of hard-boiled characters, a tormented war veteran, a femme fatale and a detective. The book was a classic of the form, but it stands out from many of its competitors because it was written by a woman, Dorothy B. Hughes.
When people think of pulp they generally conjure up male authors like Dashiell Hammett or Raymond Chandler. But in its heyday women were there alongside the men, sometimes subverting its conventions.
''In a Lonely Place'' is one of three delicious examples of the pulp genre, written by women and reissued in November by the Feminist Press in a series called Femmes Fatales. The others were ''The Girls in 3-B'' (1959), a lesbian romance by Valerie Taylor, and ''Skyscraper'' (1931) by Faith Baldwin (a wildly popular writer in her day), about young women going to the city to find work and love. All have their original lurid cover art -- a girl fleeing a serial killer through dark city streets, girls in semitransparent slips, a girl posed against a skyscraper suggestive of a phallus.
Pulp fiction, some of which was first properly published in hardcover, got its name from the cheap paper it was printed on. In its heyday from the 1930's to the 50's, pulp was sold in vending machines and drugstore racks everywhere. The pulps were usually written in spare language, sometimes without narrative coherence or character development. But the stories moved fast, and they were a guilty pleasure, easy to hide under the mattress. Today they provoke a kind of laughter of recognition of those sometimes painful prefeminist days when women were either dames or virgins, forced to chose between love and marriage, and often punished for being sexual.
Livia Tenzer, the series's editor, and Jean Casella, publisher of Feminist Press, write in a forward to the books that although the Hays code curbed the depiction of sex in movies, pulp fiction largely escaped censors. Then again, many of these books were later made into films. Pulps were relatively small books that could be read furtively and discarded. Writers sometimes used pseudonyms, and readers tended to identify the books by subject rather than author, providing a certain anonymity and enabling writers to explore forbidden territory.
What distinguishes pulp written by women, Ms. Tenzer said in an interview, ''are images that counter the standard, conventional myths about American womanhood.'' ''Skyscraper,'' for example, published during the Depression, taps into male anxieties about women taking away jobs.
''The woman with a job was both a gravy train for a man and a male fear,'' Laura Hapke, author of ''Daughters of the Great Depression'' (University of Georgia Press, 1995), who wrote the book's afterword, explained in an interview.
Lynn, the main character in ''Skyscraper,'' is 22, ''a small girl, beautifully and firmly made,'' who makes $1,900 a year and, when we meet her, lives in a chaperoned residence for women. In a change from most working-girl novels, this one specifies the character's job. Lynn researches the financial backgrounds of potential clients for the trust department of a bank. And she is good at it.
Lynn falls in love with Tom, who can't afford to marry yet. He doesn't want his wife to work, and she can't contribute to the family income anyway, because their employer generally dismisses women who marry. Lynn, like all good girls, keeps her virginity. ''You must go,'' she tells Tom after a steamy kiss. ''It's terribly late. What will people think?''
In the end the company changes its rules. Lynn marries without having to resign; she doesn't have to choose between marriage and a career.
''In a Lonely Place,'' which was made into a movie directed by Nicholas Ray and starred Humphrey Bogart in 1950, also taps into male anxieties about working women. Dix Steele is a veteran who says he is writing a novel. (In the movie he is no longer the killer.) He falls in love with Laurel, ''a bitchy dame, cruel as her eyes and her taloned nails. Cruel as her cat body and her sullen tongue.'' Meanwhile, the women of Los Angeles are being murdered by the serial killer. Hughes was also a poet, and The New Republic called ''In a Lonely Place'' ''a latter-day 'Crime and Punishment.' ''
In an afterword, Lisa Maria Hogeland, a professor at the University of Cincinnati, notes that ''Lonely Place'' is one of many pulps about returning war veterans with adjustment problems. One problem was that while the men were away, women went to work, creating an intense sexual anxiety in the culture, she says, and an effort to redomesticate them. To Ms. Hogeland, ''In a Lonely Place,'' told from inside the killer's mind, is a critique of the era's misogyny. And unlike other books of their kind, this one doesn't blame the killer's mother for his violence or his female victims for being too sexual.
The violence is also largely offstage, ''a significant departure,'' Ms. Hogeland writes, ''and an important aspect of the novel's feminism.''
''The Girls in 3-B'' focuses on three working girls who, rebelling against domesticity and trying to rise in the world, move to Chicago and rent a shabby apartment together. The author's name, Valerie Taylor, is a pseudonym for Velma Young, a published poet who also wrote romances and was an activist for the elderly and for lesbian rights.
One girl, Barby, works in a department store and falls in love with her supervisor, Miss Gordon. In a typical pulp touch, Barby's lesbianism is attributed to rape, in this case by an older man. ''Ruined at 13,'' Taylor writes. ''Like an apple that looks nice and shiny but is rotten at the core.''
But ''The Girls in 3-B'' is a departure from most lesbian pulp, says Lisa Walker, professor of English at the University of Southern Maine in Portland, in that the lesbian, instead of committing suicide or becoming alcoholic or going straight with the help of a sensitive man, finds happiness in the end simply as a lesbian. Barby moves in with Ms. Gordon, who is ''slim and tailored'' and ''neat and integrated and without problems.'' She even has a great apartment. ''How can anybody want a man when there's this?'' she asks.
The Feminist Press is planning more Femmes Fatales. Among them is ''The Blackbirder'' (1943), also by Hughes, scheduled for the spring. In it a rich American girl in Paris during the Nazi period joins the Resistance. Another, in the fall, is ''Bunny Lake Is Missing'' (1957), a psychological thriller by Evelyn Piper (the name is a pseudonym for the novelist Merriam Modell).
The story is sure to fray every mother's nerves. A woman drops her child off on the first day of school, returns to pick her up and finds her missing.
This working mother is especially unacceptable socially because she is also unmarried and refused to give her child up for adoption. As she desperately tries to find her daughter, nobody believes she would even have a child, and she is accused of being insane.
''The heroine is not staying home to bake apple pies,'' Ms. Tenzer said. ''This is revolutionary for the 1950's.'' But in this book, unlike others with women who become pregnant out of wedlock, the heroine is ultimately redeemed.
''We find bad girls, women who have illegitimate children, who have lesbian relationships,'' she added. ''They sometimes have their way in the end and get what they want. And they don't always get punished.''
