Herbie Hancock's band at the Blue Note this week exhibits a strange property of advanced jazz: it can be good on a micro level and not very good at all on a macro level.
If that sounds abstract, imagine this: you're listening to Mr. Hancock, a pianist and bandleader with a justifiably exalted reputation for 40 years, play Wayne Shorter's ''Footprints.'' As the band develops it, the tune becomes a kind of ad-libbed suite on ''Footprints''; this has been the constant idea running through the set, in Mr. Hancock's ''Dolphin Dance'' and in Cole Porter's ''I Love You.'' There's a lot of free improvisation going on, and the band uses cues. One player suggests a musical direction and the others follow, creating form as they go along. Mr. Hancock doesn't act controlling in this band. He plays with sensitivity and touch and has, as always, a large imagination for harmony. In theory, everything looks good.
But the drummer, Terri Lynne Carrington, is pummelingly loud, pretty much at all times. With the bassist Scott Colley, she makes the rhythms keep swimming toward the odd-metered funk of the 1980's M-Base school; Ms. Carrington had been part of that circle, as had the tenor saxophonist on stage, Gary Thomas. Those turns into new rhythms are interesting, and then the band sticks in one not-fascinating pattern for too long. Mr. Thomas's moody improvisations, with funk accents and curious retrograde-sounding melodic patterns, grows wan.
Finally Mr. Hancock finds a way to bring this ''Footprints'' to a close. The band dies down and he plays lovely, wide-voiced Debussian chords. Then the band perks up again, going into slow funk, perhaps intended as a tiny closer, a trick ending?
Your concentration has thinned since the beginning of the set, so you have a look around the room. The first thing you notice is that a lot of musicians are here: when Mr. Hancock plays a club, he generates excitement. The next thing you notice is that the Blue Note becomes aggressively ugly around year's end: the black-and-mirror diagonals on the wall, like a 1970's car showroom, are festooned with golden streamers behind the bandstand that reflect the stage lights back at you. The balloons on the ceiling and ''Happy New Year'' signs everywhere seem as piercing as the sound.
This just isn't ending; what's happening? Mr. Hancock, who's enjoying himself, plays soft rubato chords over Ms. Carrington's minimal dancefloor-beat pattern that sounds like your old downstairs neighbor's house records: Boompf. Boompf. Boompf. By this time the piece is 10 minutes and a psychic year beyond its ending. When ''Footprints'' finally builds to a fever pitch, the intensity doesn't seem warranted.
JAZZ REVIEW
