The Islanders had proved in their remarkable December that they could beat league heavyweights like the Devils, the Flyers and the Maple Leafs.
The one thing left on their to-do list was to stomp on one of the dregs.
Check. The Islanders completed the month with a 6-1 pounding of Pittsburgh on Wednesday afternoon in a sleepy Mellon Arena. The Islanders' six-game winning streak is their longest since 1993, and their 10 victories in December are their most since 1983.
This was the kind of game that would have tripped them up in darker times, when the Islanders were saddled with a seven-game skid after losing to the Rangers on Dec. 4.
Back then, a hapless opponent on the road was a virtual invitation to defeat. Except that the Penguins (9-20-5-3) cannot help themselves and the Islanders (19-15-2-1) cannot help capitalizing these days. They got two goals each from Jason Blake and Trent Hunter and took a 3-0 lead in the first period.
''It's tougher to play these guys than the New Jersey Devils,'' said Blake, who has 5 goals and 6 assists in his past 10 games.
Coach Steve Stirling interrupted the Islanders' celebration after they beat the Devils on Monday night. He warned them that losing to the Penguins would negate their hard work.
''I think they realized that you have to come in and take care of business,'' Stirling said. ''This is the kind of team that if we play our game, then we can beat them.''
The Islanders take a step up in class at Ottawa on Thursday night with a slightly fading reputation as road wimps. They have won three in a row to bring their mark away from home to 5-9-2-1.
Goaltender Garth Snow continued his career resurrection with 21 saves against the Penguins, who have won one of their past seven games. He lost a shutout late in the second period when Tom Kostopoulos glided down the middle of the ice and whipped in the puck from between the circles.
That seemed to satisfy many in the announced crowd of 11,939, who headed for the aisles and did not return.
Doubt over the outcome faded after three Islanders goals in the first period, beginning with the road-runner skating of Blake.
Blake scooted the puck through Konstantin Koltsov's legs, shoved it off the leg of the Penguins' Martin Strbak, and then beat goalie Sebastien Caron 56 seconds into the game. With 8 minutes 26 seconds left in the period, Hunter hit a lunging slap shot that caromed off Penguins defenseman Dan Focht for a 2-0 lead. After Adrian Aucoin's slap shot rebounded off Caron, Blake got two hacks at Caron from in tight. The second one went in with 1.6 seconds to go.
At a point when the game was still somewhat competitive, Snow stuffed the few breakdowns. He blocked two rapid-fire Koltsov shots midway in the first period, and he stopped a point-blank blast by Rico Fata later.
Snow, 34, has a journeyman's résumé but has played well enough to unseat the erratic rookie Rick DiPietro as the Islanders' No. 1 goalie. After fuming over his perceived role as aging mentor to DiPietro, he has occupied the net in all but one of the Islanders' past 10 victories, and DiPietro is temporarily in the minors.
Snow's past six games have produced a 1.33 goals-against average, more than a goal below his career average of 2.74.
''He's on a roll,'' Stirling said. ''He's no different than the rest of us. We have to ride that horse as long as we can. Sooner or later, we'll run into a team better than us.''
HOCKEY
