The death of a Newark high school wrestling coach from bacterial meningitis had parents and students lining up at hospitals and health centers for antibiotics this week to combat the infection, which experts say is fatal in about 15 percent of cases.
As of Tuesday 131 people -- 93 children and 38 adults -- have received antibiotics like Cipro, according to Brenda Jones, spokeswoman for the Newark Department of Health and Human Services.
Pedro Borda of Weehawken, who was wrestling coach at Barringer High School and also a teacher at Harold Wilson Elementary School, died on Saturday. His last contact with students and parents was believed to have been during a wrestling match at Kearny High School on Dec. 20. The disease has an incubation period of 2 to 10 days, so the likely incubation period has passed with no other cases reported, according to state health officials.
''It is highly unlikely that any related cases will occur,'' said Donna Leusner, spokeswoman for the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services. Between 25 and 50 cases of meningococcal disease are reported each year in New Jersey.
Markice Thomas, 14, who took Mr. Borda's Spanish class, was shocked to hear of his death, which was reported Wednesday in The Star-Ledger. ''I was heartbroken,'' he said. ''I said 'Nah, that's one of my favorite teachers.' '' He said Mr. Borda used his experience on the wrestling mat to teach in the classroom.
Markice and his two brothers, Khayree Johnson, 13, and Malcolm Ellis, 12, picked up antibiotics on Tuesday from the Newark Health Department. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, meningococcal disease, which killed Mr. Borda, is an infection of the spinal and brain fluid. Early symptoms include nausea, vomiting, fever and stiffness, but as the disease advances, the infected person develops rashes, has seizures and eventually slips into a coma.
''Nobody knows where it comes from, it's endemic, it's ubiquitous,'' said Dr. Jerome Levine, chief of the infectious disease division at Hackensack University Medical Center. He said that the disease could strike at any time during the year, and could be spread through respiratory secretions like sneezing or coughing. Usually, he said, it is spread through intimate contact. ''You couldn't get it if he walked by you in the hallway or in the classroom,'' he said.
Although he acknowledged the dangers in the disease, he cautioned against prescribing antibiotics indiscriminately. ''Goodness knows the parents of the children who had him as a coach must be in a panic,'' Dr. Levine said. He said that less than 15 percent of those infected with the bacteria die. He said the incubation period lasts a couple of days, but once the symptoms appear the disease spreads fast. It can be treated with 500 milligrams of Cipro for adults or two tablets of Rifampin over 48 hours for children.
''When we identify the disease we try to begin treatment within 30 minutes,'' he said. ''Once you develop the disease it can move very, very fast.''
