The Year in Searches
Web searches are a window on the Internet's zeitgeist. The ebb and flow of trends and personalities are what makes search spotting so interesting. How else to measure the public's interest in human cloning versus Clay Aiken?
In 2003, many of the same topics dominated search activity across AOL, Google, Lycos, and Yahoo. These include the file-sharing service Kazaa, ''American Idol,'' Britney Spears, Iraq, Kobe Bryant, Laci Peterson, 50 Cent and Paris Hilton. California's recall election proved the perfect meld of entertainment and news searches, although few typed in Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger's name correctly (Schwartzenegger was the most common misspelling, according to Yahoo).
Some of the results were disheartening yet unsurprising. Ms. Hilton's homemade sex videotape was the most sought-after file of the year. And Mr. Bryant's accuser in a sexual assault case was among the most searched-for women on Lycos -- the focus of more queries than Madonna or Anna Kournikova -- despite the widespread withholding of her name in the press.
Mexican food was the subject of more searches than Italian food on AOL, though Italians can take satisfaction in Ferrari's No. 1 ranking on Google's top brands list (followed by Sony and BMW). Lycos reports that Howard Dean generated more searches than John Kerry and Wesley K. Clark combined and was an object of more online curiosity than Mel Gibson or Tom Cruise was. Oddly, two of the year's biggest news stories, the Columbia shuttle disaster and the SARS outbreak, were absent from the list of top news searches on Yahoo and Google.
Lycos's top 10 fads of the year offered further proof of how far out of the loop I am. My daughter had clued me in to the online cartoon Homestarrunner.com (No. 10), but where was I when the rest of America was watching ''motorcycle customization TV shows'' (No. 5)?
Best and Worst of 2003
What were the best movies of 2003? The worst TV shows? The coolest inventions? The top news?
It depends on whom you ask, of course: year-end ''best'' and ''worst'' lists are sublimely subjective. Now, Rex Sorgatz, 31, a writer and Web producer in Minneapolis who maintains an influential Web log on media and culture, has made it easy to browse such lists.
Mr. Sorgatz's year-in-review page (www.fimoculous.com/year-review-2003.cfm) offers links to hundreds of sites cataloging the year's cultural milestones in 23 categories, drawn from the mainstream press as well as alternative media and blogs. While all the expected topics are here, there are more offbeat lists like Science magazine's top science breakthroughs (satellite and telescope data that confirmed the universe is mostly dark matter and dark energy) or Merriam-Webster's words of the year based on online look-ups (''democracy'' and ''quagmire'' were Nos. 1 and 2).
Music is by far the largest category, an indication that it has overtaken film as the ''most populist medium,'' he conjectures, or perhaps just further proof that ''everyone thinks they can write about music.'' (Mr. Sorgatz is himself an ex-music critic.)
Indeed, compiling his list of lists has lent Mr. Sorgatz the kind of expansive perspective that breeds big ideas. One day, he'd like to ''coalesce'' them into a single meta-list of the year's top 500 cultural and news events.
Stat Wrap
Internet statistics can be slippery things. Estimates of the global online population often differ by hundreds of millions, for example. Will there be 700 million or 900 million people online by the end of 2004?
And there are few brave souls who venture a guess on the number of Web sites. Google currently searches 3.3 billion Web pages, but as someone pointed out to me, a search on the word ''the'' (the most commonly used English word) calls forth about 5.5 billion results (of which the satirical magazine The Onion and the White House are the first two).
The Net's overall performance improved slightly as measured by response time and reliability, according to the Internet Traffic Report (internettrafficreport.com).
What sites were people visiting on this better Internet? Nielsen/NetRatings told me that that the top online ''brands,'' or families of sites, in 2003 were AOL, MSN, Yahoo, Microsoft and Google. Nothing new there.
Shopping portals and comparison shopping services proved very popular in 2003, said Abha Bhagat, a senior analyst with Nielsen/NetRatings. ''A couple of years ago, people seached for information,'' she added. ''Now searches are being driven by shopping.''
Perhaps counterintuitively, an argument can be made that the site that made the splashiest debut last year was the government's National Do Not Call Registry (www.donotcall.gov), where fed-up consumers registered more than 55 million phone numbers.
On the Radar
What do the final screens of classic video games look like? You don't have to play them to see, thanks to the Video Game Museum's database of game endings (www.vgmuseum.com/end/arcade). Trivia enthusiasts will go into overdrive at Fun Trivia (www.funtrivia.com), which features more than 40,000 quizzes on thousands of topics. Charts All Over the World (www.lanet.lv/misc/charts) links to music charts worldwide. Did you know the No. 1 single in Australia is ''Predictable'' by Delta Goodrem?
Online Diary E-mail: online@nytimes.com
