TOM McGINLEY, the director of engineering for KISS 106.1 FM and four other radio stations in the Seattle area, recently decided to do some ad hoc market research. He wanted to find out if listeners could tap into a little-known technology that allows text information to be sent over a conventional FM radio signal.
So he and the station's staff came up with a contest to give away a DVD player to the 10th caller. But instead of broadcasting the promotion so people could hear it, they transmitted the message as a data stream visible on the display of some radios. They expected only a few calls, Mr. McGinley said, but the phone lines lit up.
Like the operagoers now accustomed to supertitles, those Seattle listeners and others are becoming attuned to receiving a small amount of printed information to accompany the sound on their radios, like a station's call letters or the name of the song that is playing. What they are experiencing is not satellite or digital radio, but a technology called Radio Data System, or R.D.S.
Used widely in Europe since the 1980's, R.D.S. has been virtually dormant in the United States for a decade. But as more cars come equipped with advanced radios and some major broadcasters invest in the technology, it may finally come into its own.
Motivated partly by the encroaching threat of satellite radio, broadcasters are waking up to the possibilities of the technology, said Mr. McGinley, a 38-year veteran of the radio industry who works for Infinity Broadcasting. Infinity owns more than 180 stations across the country.
''Station general managers and salesmen would rent cars when they went out of town. and they started seeing this R.D.S. capability on the stations that had enough vision to put R.D.S. encoding on early,'' he said. ''It might have been a competitor's station, and they would say, 'They've got it; why can't we have that?'''
In recent weeks, Clear Channel Communications, which is by far the country's largest radio owner with 1,200 stations, has been outfitting 192 of its stations in the top 50 markets with R.D.S. Another large broadcaster, Entercom, has deployed the technology to 60 of roughly 100 stations it owns nationwide. Infinity Broadcasting, Cumulus Media and a host of smaller broadcasters have also begun adding the capability to some of their stations.
Automakers are increasingly likely to include R.D.S.-capable radios in new cars. The technology is standard equipment on all Lexus and BMW models, and either standard or an option on many Ford, Chrysler and Toyota cars with high-end sound systems. General Motors estimates that at least half of the cars it ships to dealers have R.D.S. radios. Even some models of table radios and stereo tuners are incorporating R.D.S. displays.
R.D.S. is most commonly used to display station and song names, and some stations are beginning to deliver weather reports, stock quotes and sports scores as well. In Europe the technology is widely used to transmit traffic information, enabling drivers to avoid road hazards.
The potential for R.D.S. simply to generate revenue may be its most tempting use for broadcasters.
Allen Hartle, president of a company in Bellevue, Wash., called the Radio Experience, is working with Entercom and other broadcasters to equip stations with R.D.S. After a decade of struggling to convince industry executives and station managers of the value of pairing audio with visual information on the radio, he said, he has been buoyed by renewed interest in R.D.S., which some see as a new channel for advertisers.
''I would not be surprised if truly enterprising individual radio stations found a way of capitalizing upon this to add value to what they already are doing for their customers,'' Mr. Hartle said.
DMarc Networks of Newport Beach, Calif., which provides R.D.S. content to a dozen stations, including five Clear Channel stations in the Los Angeles area, has started selling ''radio text'' advertisements to music and film companies, including Warner Brothers and Sony Pictures, and to several mortgage lending firms.
Of course, text that appears on a car radio may also present a safety hazard if drivers shift their attention from the road for too long, said David Strayer, a professor of psychology at the University of Utah who studies driver distraction.
''A lot of new in-vehicle technologies have the potential to be more distracting because they are more cognitively engaging,'' Dr. Strayer said. ''If people do look at this as they might for a G.P.S. system, then you get a really big interference, and the longer your eyes drift, the greater the distraction.''
Although the technology is catching the eye of more listeners, it remains a novelty.
It took Dennis Litschi a year to discover that his BMW 530i could scroll R.D.S. text. Mr. Litschi, 58, who lives in Los Alamitos, Calif., south of Los Angeles, said he was surprised that Southern California's car culture had not attracted more stations to the technology sooner. Linking weather and traffic information to a car's navigation system is the most useful application, he said, and knowing the name of a song on the radio can come in handy.
Yet Mr. Litschi suggested that a captive audience can be attentive only up to a point.
''I wouldn't want it to become like the television stations that run a constant stream of information across the bottom of the screen,'' he said. ''At first things like that jump out at us, and then eventually we just learn how to ignore them.''
Words and Sound
A sampling of equipment capable of displaying Radio Data System information, for home or car:
TABLE RADIO -- Cambridge SoundWorks Radio 730. Information is available at www.cambridgesoundworks.com. $250.
AM/FM STEREO TUNER -- Denon Electronics TU-1500RD. Information is available at www.usa.denon.com. About $300.
CAR RADIO RECEIVER -- Kenwood KDC-MP922. Plays MP3-encoded CD-R/RW's as well as conventional CD's, CD-R's and CD-RW's. Also capable of receiving Sirius satellite radio. Information is available at www.kenwoodusa.com. About $350.
