IT was time for the Schwartzes to go legit. No more pirated music for us.
Of course, I am not talking about songs like ''A Pirate's Life For Me'' (We pillage, we plunder, we rifle and loot/Drink up me 'earties, yo ho!), but about the latter-day practice that its title suggests. I'm talking about copyright infringement, an international pastime enjoyed by millions thanks to file-trading services like Kazaa.
In the 90's, when Napster started, I tried it and was stunned to see the collaborative jukebox in the ether. Any song I could think of, any band -- Ultimate Spinach! The Zeros! -- was out there, crammed into a kind of massive, collective memory bank.
Unfortunately, it was also a massive, collective violation of copyright. The music industry has famously fought back, killing Napster with litigation and even suing individuals who shared songs on a large scale.
But I never really joined the trend, and did a lot more buying than downloading. As one whose living depends on copyright protection, I couldn't see myself denying others the value of their creative labors. And how would it look if a reporter covering online copyright issues got popped by the industry? So I steered clear of pirate waters.
But Sam Austin Schwartz, age 13, did not. And that's how the story of our search for legitimate online music began.
Sam, the middle child, is the musical omnivore of the family, and he is more than a little impulsive. He's the one who started to walk by running, and learned to stop by crashing into things.
That's pretty much how he got into online music, too. While I was away on an extended reporting trip last year, he downloaded Kazaa onto the computer in his room. Kazaa put every possible song at his fingertips, but the free music came at a price. Suddenly his PC slowed to a crawl, and the machine served up one pop-up advertisement after another. What was worse, many of the pop-ups were pornographic.
This wasn't a virus; it was a business model. Kazaa is free because it includes ad-serving software with the program. Or, as Sharman Networks, the creator of Kazaa, puts it on its Web site: ''Sharman Networks' costs are covered through companies who advertise with us. We could not afford to continue to offer you such a quality product with continual upgrades and technical developments without this revenue.''
This turn of events did not seem to trouble Sam. He didn't mention it to us, and he might have thought of it as some kind of bonus. As I said, he's 13. It was probably a little like that kid in ''Animal House'' who is looking at Playboy when a woman dressed as a Playboy bunny who has been knocked off a parade float flies through his open bedroom window and bounces onto his bed. The boy smiles, looks up and shouts, ''Thank you, God!''
That's not what Sam's 7-year-old brother, Joe, was saying, however. ''There are naked people on the computer!'' he complained. He seemed even more upset that he couldn't get through a sword-and-sorcery strategy game without being interrupted by pop-ups and crashes.
We knew that we had to do something quickly. So I took Kazaa off the machine and downloaded an adware-removal program, Ad-Aware from Lavasoft, to get rid of the bundled ''extras.''
Sam still wanted his music, however. And he wanted the immediacy of online exploration and delivery that his friends have through free services, and that he had tasted during his brief experience with Kazaa.
We could have gotten an ad-free version of Kazaa for $30, but my wife, Jeanne, and I weren't inclined to pay Kazaa after what it had done to Sam's computer. And I still had that little copyright problem. So we started looking into the alternatives.
Until recently it was hard to find another service worth using; the record companies were loath to license their music for online delivery, and believed that they were just tossing their songs out to thieves. Now the problem is choosing from among the growing number of services.
MusicMatch, the maker of a popular jukebox program for PC's, has opened a store. Roxio has kicked off Napster 2.0, a legal music store that carries the most infamous name in file trading. Scott Blum, the founder of Buy.com, has launched BuyMusic.com. Consumers will soon be able to buy online music from Hewlett-Packard, Sony, Dell, Wal-Mart and Microsoft. (Can you say ''bubble''?)
We decided to test two services: the iTunes Music Store from Apple Computer, and Rhapsody, from RealNetworks.
Apple sells songs. Users pay 99 cents per song, or about $10 per CD, to download music that can then be burned onto CD's or placed on an iPod. Rhapsody is a subscription service that gives users unlimited access to a stream of musical selections for a monthly fee of $10, with the option of downloading them for 79 cents per song. Sam would listen to music on Rhapsody, and he agreed that when he wanted to download a song, he would grab it from iTunes, which allows parents to set up a monthly allowance for downloading. We connected his computer to his stereo.
Within days, our house was full of music that we had never heard before. Sam was building on the recommendations of friends and exploring the lists of songs available from each service, in part because the services made it so easy to move through a genre, or an artist's work. Suddenly, we were hearing a tremendous amount of ska, the reggae-inflected music played by groups like Madness, Reel Big Fish and the Mighty Mighty Bosstones. There were new tracks from artists he had liked but not fully explored, like Simon and Garfunkel, and Everclear.
He liked the easy-to-use iTunes program, and decided to make it the central jukebox for digital copies (altogether legal) of his conventional CD's. I set up the downloading account for him, and decided to show him how to download from the music store. I selected Dutch DJ JXL's excellent remix of the Elvis Presley song ''A Little Less Conversation'' and paused before hitting the ''buy'' button.
''You're about to buy your first song,'' I said with a flourish.
''Second,'' Sam responded. He'd already grabbed one while I was out. ''Sum 41. 'Still Waiting.''' We pulled down the song anyway. We listened to its meaty thumpa-whumpa accompaniment to the Elvis hit. ''Whoa,'' Sam said. Dad, it seems, still has some tricks up his sleeve.
Here's the shocker: more than ever, he began asking us to buy CD's for him. He wanted discs from artists he had come to know online, with the liner notes and lyrics. His less copyright-friendly buddies send him the stuff they like, and if he likes a song, he listens to a better-quality version on Rhapsody or buys the track.
Amazing but true: music downloading spurs music sales, at least in our house. (Sam's 16-year-old sister, Elizabeth, has proven resistant to digital music's allure, content to lug around a case full of CD's.)
Sam's CD's are now stored on his hard drive, supplemented with tracks from iTunes. So he sets up playlists on iTunes and rocks the house, or plucks selections from Rhapsody and explores what's out there. We're saving for an iPod so that he can take his music with him.
Did I mention the cost? The $20 per month for iTunes will add up, as will the $10 per month for Rhapsody, once our free trial period is over. If you're keeping score, that's $360 a year, a significant new line item in the family budget. On the other hand, we already spend a fair amount on media: music, books and movies are important to us. We save money elsewhere: we don't have cable TV, for example. I assume that after a while we will figure out which music service best suits Sam's needs, and we'll drop the other one.
Not everything is perfect in legal-download land. Sam gripes about the selection: no White Stripes on Rhapsody, and he can't always find the songs he's interested in on iTunes, either. ''They had no Moxy Fruvous!'' he said with disgust. We're still waiting for a truly eclectic online store, something like cdbaby.com, the mail-order Web site that sells truly odd, eclectic and wonderful CD's like ''Prozak for Lovers,'' with its lounge-act renditions of rock classics like Elvis Costello's ''Pump It Up'' and the Ramones' ''I Wanna Be Sedated.'' There's still no replacement for the grand jukebox in the ether.
And there have been other surprises. One night Sam pointed to the liner notes from his latest Everclear CD, ''Slow Motion Daydream,'' and said, ''Here's the thing, if you want to see the words.''
Tipper wept! I wasn't quite prepared to actually know the words to songs like ''Volvo Driving Soccer Mom'':
Yeah, yeah, I really used to be a bad girl
I had a threesome with my sister and her boyfriend, Tom
I know I used to be a real wild child
But now I am a Volvo driving soccer mom
I suspect they make the print so tiny on those booklets so that Mom and Dad can't read the words. Oh, well. These days, popular culture, for better or worse, tends toward the X-rated. At our house, we're happy if we can keep the media environment somewhere around PG-13. So ''Slow Motion Daydream'' stays.
Besides, ''Volvo Driving Soccer Mom'' is pretty catchy. Jeanne and I listen to it now. In the minivan.
