You've read all of this season's ski magazines, periodicals and newspaper columns. Maybe you received new equipment over the holidays. And you have waited for the good snow conditions to arrive. (O.K., so maybe you're still waiting in some places.) At any rate, it is finally a new year. This, you are convinced, is going to be the best skiing or riding year of your life.
Here are a dozen or so new year's resolutions to be certain that is true:
1. Set personal goals for yourself. Get a pen and write them down.
When you get to the ski area, toss the paper with the goals on it into the lodge fireplace.
Watch it burn. Snicker at how seriously we sometimes take this sport. For goodness sake, I had you writing goals a minute ago. What is this, a get rich-through-real estate clinic?
Let's not forget why we do it. It is fun, almost childlike in its basic allure, to look at something as natural as snowfall and wonder what it would be like to slide across it.
Kids do it instinctively. Show a 2-year-old a blanket of snow and the first thing that kid will do is play in it. About 30 seconds later, if there is a hill nearby, the kid will wonder what it would be like to be flying down the slope.
2. Don't lose the wonder. Feel the wind in your face. Sense the delight of the descent, an amusement-park ride with you at the controls.
You want to write something down? At the end of the day, write down the name of the trail where you experienced that perfect moment when all was still and all was flying by at the same time, when an unplanned smile burst across your face, not because anyone was watching how well you seemed in sync with the mountain, but because you knew it. That was the moment when you knew why we do this.
3. Now that I have you all pumped up, let me speak directly to Mr. and Mrs. ''I used to ski, but . . . ''
I hear this all the time. The but is always followed by things like, ''We didn't have time for a big ski trip this year.'' This is usually followed by an admission that they haven't had time for the big ski trip for five years running.
Don't waste another season waiting to take the perfect ski trip -- when the snow conditions are perfect, the lodging plentiful, the exchange rate favorable and everybody's schedule in the family fits perfectly. It won't happen some years and the next thing you know, you won't have stepped into your skis or board for a decade.
So don't wait. If you get out there for one day or one weekend, you are still a skier for yet another year. You are part of the tribe, and it's important to stay acquainted with the tribe. So go to a local mountain for the day or a medium-sized hill for the weekend. With modern snowmaking, they are absolutely worth it.
4. Now that I have you all pumped up, let me tell you something else: Slow down.
You know who you are. The equipment is so good now, it might feel as if you can safely go faster than ever. That's not nearly as true as some think. Carving and holding an edge at 35 miles an hour is technically easier now, but that certainly does not make it safe in all terrain or on even mildly crowded slopes.
It is true that many people would be better skiers if they were a tad more aggressive and confident -- getting out over the fronts of the skis to make dynamic turns. But increasingly, I worry about the better skiers in our ultra-carving new world, the ones seduced by the grippy, snappy shaped skis who are inching forward for a last boost into high gear. There are limits. Slow down.
5. Along those lines, it's time for a helmet. The technology there is better, too.
Here are a final few resolutions to make your year better:
6. Take a lesson.
7. Stretch and run in place (even if for 60 seconds) before you get on the lift.
8. Wax your skis.
9. Ski with your hands up, in plain sight of your eyes.
10. Converse with strangers on the lift; you'll be better for it.
11. Don't ski the back country alone.
12. Don't listen to anyone, especially a local, who tells you a certain back-country stash is overrated. Hang back and follow that local.
13. And, most of all, smile. We are the luckiest tribe in the world.
THE SKI REPORT
