With the primary season about to begin, a look ahead at the challenges facing each of the Democratic candidates.
ADAM NAGOURNEY
CAROL MOSELEY BRAUN -- The former senator from Illinois has been a cheerful and persistent presence in the race but is unlikely to be a factor in its outcome. She is appearing at the debates, but for the most part is not a particularly visible figure on the campaign trail.
WESLEY K. CLARK -- General Clark skipped Iowa in hopes of a strong showing in New Hampshire and the South, and thus now faces the prospect of being shut out of the news for a few weeks. He is trying to present himself as the strongest alternative to Howard Dean for the wing of the party worried about a Dean candidacy. He has been successful in raising money, and should be able to at least hold his own against Dr. Dean after New Hampshire. He has sometimes proved a quirky presence on the cam-paign trail, however, as he struggles to adjust from the Pentagon to politics.
HOWARD DEAN -- With $40 million raised, thousands of energetic volunteers willing to sleep on couches and knock on doors, Dr. Dean has vaulted to the head of the pack. He could well wrap the nomination up early with decisive victories in Iowa and New Hampshire. But his penchant for off-the-cuff remarks has heartened the White House and stirred hope among opponents that his campaign will eventually implode.
JOHN EDWARDS -- Mr. Edwards has worked hard and spent heavily in New Hampshire and Iowa, but poll after poll has shown him trailing. His best hope is that there are muddled outcomes in Iowa and New Hampshire and that he wins in South Carolina on Feb. 3. He has deliberately tried to avoid the rough-and-tumble of the contest so far, hoping that doing so will distinguish him from this increasingly unruly pack.
RICHARD A. GEPHARDT -- Mr. Gephardt is making his second run for president, and once again, his make-or-break state is Iowa. Mr. Gephardt enjoys a solid base of labor and older supporters in Iowa, and it is hard to overstate the importance of those two groups there. Still, he has a tough road ahead. Even if he wins Iowa, he needs to raise money fast to carry him through to friendlier states like South Carolina and Michigan.
JOHN KERRY -- Mr. Kerry may be remembered for running the worst campaign of the year, squandering a perception by many Democrats that he was among the party's strongest candidates. Given the unease with Dr. Dean, it could still be premature to write him off. He has looked to making a strong showing in Iowa as a way of setting himself up to be the Comeback Kid in New Hampshire. Iowa Democrats say his campaign is showing signs of life there; whether it will be enough is another matter.
DENNIS J. KUCINICH -- Mr. Kucinich has staked out the left cor-ner of the party and assembled a loyal band of supporters. He has at several points challenged the purity of Dr. Dean's opposition to the war in Iraq, though to date there is no evi-dence that those questions have cut into Dr. Dean's support.
JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN -- Mr. Lieberman is looking to the third wave of primaries on Feb. 3, which includes states more hospitable to his moderate views. He hopes to score victories in them that would allow him to become Dr. Dean's main opponent. So far, though, it has not been an easy campaign for Mr. Lieberman; his easy-going manner and moderate views do not seem made for this election. He has yet to show the kind of strength in New Hampshire that some Democrats expected.
AL SHARPTON -- Mr. Sharpton, one of two blacks in the race, has made a concerted effort in South Carolina, where as many as half of the Democratic electorate could be black. If he is strong there, that could pose a problem for candidates like Mr. Edwards, General Clark and Mr. Gephardt, all of whom are looking to win there.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
