HIGHLIGHTS
BRITAIN: NEW YEAR'S HONORS -- Joan Plowright, left, the stage and screen actress whose film roles have ranged from ''The Entertainer'' to ''Enchanted April'' and ''Last Action Hero,'' became Dame Joan yesterday when Queen Elizabeth II's annual New Year's honors list was announced. The honor, the equivalent of a knighthood, was awarded to Dame Joan, the widow of Sir Laurence Olivier, in recognition of her acting. Named Commanders of the British Empire were the rock guitarist Eric Clapton; Ray Davies, who fronted the Kinks; Stephen Daldry, director of the films ''The Hours'' and ''Billy Elliot''; and Virginia McKenna, who starred in the film ''Born Free'' and became active in wildlife conservation.
OSCARS: READYING THE VOTE -- Nominating ballots are in the mail, sent out on Monday to the 5,803 voting members of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, along with a list of the 254 films eligible this year in the major categories, including best picture, according to news agency reports. The films eligible for the 76th Academy Awards are 25 fewer than last year. Last midnight was the deadline for qualification under rules that mandate, in part, that films must be more than 40 minutes long, open between Jan. 1 and Dec. 31 in a commercial theater in Los Angeles County for paid admission, and run for seven consecutive days. The nominating ballots must be returned by Jan. 17. Nominations are to be announced on Jan. 27. The Oscar ceremonies are on Feb. 29.
BOSTON: MONUMENT ON ICE -- Weighing 45 tons and towering 25 feet above the Common, an ice sculpture of the Edo Castle, home to the Tokugawa shogunate that ruled Japan for 250 years, was to have ushered in the New Year in Boston last night. But Mother Nature had other ideas, and yesterday, after several days of temperatures in the 50's, the castle, being worked on by three Japanese sculptors from Sapporo and a group of Americans, had to be demolished because it was melting. The structure, which was to be the major work among many ice sculptures on the Common, nevertheless ushers in the centennial celebration of the Japan Society of Boston. (The real Edo Castle, now the Tokyo Castle, with its curved-roof turrets and massive stone base, will celebrate its 400th anniversary in 2004.) Among other events, the celebration is to include exhibitions of Japanese art throughout the year at the Museum of Fine Arts, an exhibition beginning on Jan. 11 at the Children's Museum, Kabuki theater at the Wang Center for the Performing Arts in July, a geisha exhibition opening on Feb. 14 at the Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass., and various conferences and presentations at Harvard, Tufts, Wellesley and M.I.T.
THEATER: OPPORTUNITY FOR BACKSTAGE HOPEFULS -- Understudies of the world, take heart. Those who also serve by standing and waiting and waiting and waiting and waiting can take hope from the news from the Royal Shakespeare Society. Its new artistic director, Michael Boyd, has decreed that every understudy at Stratford-on-Avon shall be contractually guaranteed at least one full public performance in each production, according to The Telegraph of London. In discussing the plight of understudies, the article noted that Mary Martin, singing without a microphone, gave more than 2,000 performances in ''South Pacific'' in the 1950's without missing one.
FOLLOW-UP: ELLIOTT SMITH'S DEATH -- Officials of the Los Angeles coroner's office say they have been unable to determine whether the stab wounds that killed the Oscar-nominated singer and songwriter Elliott Smith, left, in October were self-inflicted. His body was found by his girlfriend at their home in Los Angeles. The coroner's report appears to leave unresolved the nature of Mr. Smith's death, initially thought to be a suicide, Reuters reported. Mr. Smith, 34, whose songs of despair and self-doubt made him a luminary of independent rock, was nominated for an Oscar and received widespread notice for his 1997 single ''Miss Misery,'' from the film ''Good Will Hunting.'' David Campbell, a spokesman for the Los Angeles coroner, said Mr. Smith died from two ''penetrating stab wounds'' to the chest. He said, ''The trauma that he sustained could have been inflicted by him or by another, and the coroner has not been able to make a determination.'' He added that although Mr. Smith appeared to have been taking antidepressants and medication for attention-deficit disorder, no illegal or controlled substances were found in his system. He said the case would remain open, and a spokesman for the Los Angeles Police Department said homicide detectives would also ''look again'' at the death.
BELGIUM: TINTIN GOES SILVER -- Belgium will celebrate the 75th birthday of the comic-book hero Tintin this month by minting a silver 10-euro coin in his honor. The ceremonial minting of the first coin will occur in the presence of the Belgian finance minister, Didier Reynders, and Fanny Rodwell, the widow of Herge, Tintin's creator, Agence France-Presse reported. The first adventure of Tintin, the boy reporter, was ''Tintin in the Land of the Soviets,'' which was followed by 23 full-length books translated into 50 languages; 200 million copies have been sold worldwide. Last year, Belgium struck a 10-euro coin to honor the centenary of the birth of the prolific novelist Georges Simenon, who was born in Liège.
FOOTNOTES
Ladbrokes, the British bookmakers who will take bets on just about anything, are offering odds of 7 to 1 that Jennifer Lopez will marry -- and divorce -- Ben Affleck in 2004, the BBC reports.
Correction:  January 3, 2004, Saturday  A picture in the Arts Briefing column on Thursday with a report about the Los Angeles coroner's inquiry into the death of the singer and songwriter Elliott Smith was published in error. It showed a former bandmate, the bassist Sam Coomes, not Mr. Smith.
