Gen. Pervez Musharraf took power in a coup. Now President Pervez Musharraf is on the stump.
On Thursday, Pakistan's president and army chief will face a vote of confidence by Pakistan's electoral college -- members of Parliament and the four provincial assemblies -- that would allow him to remain president until 2007. It is President Musharraf's latest attempt to provide some democratic legitimacy to his rule, which began when he ousted an elected prime minister in 1999.
There is little doubt that he will win, but many members of the opposition parties have indicated they will boycott or abstain from voting. A low yes vote would be an embarrassment for a man who won 98 percent of the vote in a referendum last year, albeit one heavily criticized as being rigged in his favor.
So over the past three days, in a series of striking speeches, General Musharraf has been addressing those who will vote on Thursday, defending not only his presidency, but his vision of Islam as a tolerant religion. He has gathered members of the electoral college at his heavily secured camp in Rawalpindi, the city where two recent assassination attempts against him -- including one last Thursday -- took place. Plans to travel to the four provincial capitals were canceled because of security concerns.
On Tuesday, the president spoke to the members of the provincial assembly of the North-West Frontier Province, where a coalition of six religious parties -- the Mutahida Majlis-e-Amal, or United Action Front -- holds power. Last week General Musharraf reached an agreement with the coalition's members of Parliament that he would step down as army chief in a year; in return, they promised to support some of the constitutional changes that he decreed last year.
Members of the coalition, who are expected largely to abstain from voting, have been among the most vocal critics of General Musharraf's support for the American campaign against terror, among other policies, so his comments to their provincial assembly members on Tuesday were particularly notable.
Wearing the gear of the commando he once was, but adopting a less aggressive stance than he has in the past, General Musharraf began by listing the world's perceptions of Pakistan, according to the accounts of two politicians who were present.
Pakistan, he said, was seen as helping to spread nuclear weapons, and as a recruiting ground for violent Islamic militants. It lacks democracy. Its struggle to liberate Kashmir is seen as cross-border terrorism, and its tribal areas as a haven for Al Qaeda.
These perceptions ''might not be right, might not be based on fact, but perceptions count, and we have to change,'' he said, according to Sikander Sherpao, a provincial assembly member who plans to support the president on Thursday.
President Musharraf described the perceptions as a ''minefield'' Pakistan would have to navigate, according to Mr. Sherpao.
But General Musharraf also seemed to make clear that he thought there was some truth to the perceptions. There was a problem in the tribal areas, Mr. Sherpao quoted him as saying, in which ''certain people were harboring certain people,'' and this needed to be stopped.
He said some people were taking advantage of Pakistan's open border with Afghanistan to ''carry out certain actions'' -- a reference to attacks carried out by Taliban militants in Afghanistan. He said those actions were isolated, not organized, but said that now that Pakistan was aware of them, it would crack down.
He referred obliquely to the attack on him last week, in which two suicide bombers rammed his motorcade, by saying the emergence of suicide attackers in Pakistan was a dangerous development. But he said the militants or fundamentalists who thought he had sold out to the West were wrong, that he alone would decide what was in Pakistan's interest, not outside, presumably Western, interests.
General Musharraf said that while many madrassas, or religious schools, did good work for the poor, some were hurting Pakistan's image by teaching intolerance. They needed to change, President Musharraf said. It was a provocative statement, given that some of those in the room run the madrassas of which he spoke.
He said religious conflict should end, and that it is not ''for us'' to decide who is a good or bad Muslim, according to Mr. Sherpao. Mr. Sherpao quoted the president as saying that the idea that ''jihad will take us straight to heaven'' should change.
General Musharraf talked about Kashmir as well, where Pakistan has long provided support to militants seeking to end Indian rule of part of that divided border region. Pakistan and India have been observing a cease-fire there for more than a month now, and the president seemed to suggest in a recent interview that Pakistan would set aside a demand for a plebiscite in Kashmir were India to show flexibility in return.
It was wrong to say he had sold out on Kashmir, President Musharraf said. But he also said that Pakistan wanted a ''peaceful resolution'' to the dispute.
The president spoke briefly about the recent questioning of some of the country's nuclear scientists to determine whether they had provided sensitive nuclear technology to other countries, notably Iran, Libya or North Korea. It is a difficult issue for Pakistan, which has taken great national pride in its nuclear program.
Inayatullah, a member of the religious coalition in the North-West Frontier Province, quoted President Musharraf as saying that the scientists would not be dishonored or disrespected, but that it was important that the international community not blame Pakistan for the spread of nuclear technology.
''He was defending the questioning,'' said Mr. Inayatullah, who uses one name.
