The Agriculture Department said on Wednesday that it had found some of the 81 cows thought to have been shipped to the United States from Canada with a cow that turned out to have the first case of mad cow disease seen in the United States.
Nine of the cows are still on the farm in Mabton, Wash., where the infected cow had lived.
''And we have good leads on all of the remaining animals,'' said Dr. Ron DeHaven, chief veterinary officer for the Agriculture Department. So far, Dr. DeHaven said, the leads have all been to farms in Washington, but the tracking is not finished.
It is important to trace the other animals in case they, too, are infected, so that they can be kept out of the meat supply. The infected cow is thought to have contracted the disease from contaminated feed, and animals raised with it might have eaten the same feed.
DNA test results on the infected cow should be available next week, and comparing them with results of animals thought to be its relatives in Canada should help determine the infected cow's origin.
At that point, Dr. DeHaven said, officials can decide whether to test the nine cows in Mabton. Live animals cannot be tested because brain tissue is required, and so they will have to be killed if tests are needed.
As a result of the Washington case, the number of cows tested for the disease, bovine spongiform encephalopathy, in the United States is expected to double in 2004, to 40,000 a year from 20,000, a spokeswoman for the Agriculture Department said. As in the past, three-quarters of the cows tested will be cows that because of illness or injury cannot walk, or downer cows.
The rest will be animals considered to have the highest risk of the disease, those more than 30 months old and those with signs of nervous system disorders.
That number is only a tiny fraction of the 35 million cows slaughtered each year. But Dr. DeHaven said that so far, the government had no plans to test every cow, as some other countries do. He said such testing was not necessary because mad cow disease was so rare in the United States. The current testing program is not meant to insure the safety of every beef carcass on the market, but only as a spot check to detect the disease if it ever appeared. Until now, it has not.
''It's too premature to make any kind of determination or prediction as to what we may or may not do at this point in time,'' Dr. DeHaven said.
Dr. DeHaven said that the decision announced on Tuesday to ban downer cows from the food supply means that most such animals will be sent to rendering plants, which boil the carcasses to produce protein for poultry and swine feed, tallow, fat, oil and other products, including some used in cosmetics. As a result, much of the screening for mad cow disease will move away from slaughterhouses to rendering plants and farms. Dr. DeHaven described that change as a major shift in the surveillance system for the disease and said the government would have to start working with renderers to make sure the tests are done.
A consumer group, Center for Science in the Public Interest, has questioned the government's policy of declaring animals with the highest risk to be those 30 months and older. Such older animals are to be targets of testing, and their brains, spinal cords and other nerve tissue will be banned from the food supply, while such tissue from younger animals will be considered fit for human consumption.
The consumer group has criticized the policy because a small number of animals younger than 30 months have tested positive for the disease in Japan and Europe. Moreover, a January 2002 document prepared by the Agriculture Department itself suggested that the age cutoff should be 24 months, not 30.
But at the news conference, Dr. DeHaven said that because cow parts were banned from cattle feed in this country, the likelihood of animals younger than 30 months being infected here were remote. Neither he nor any other officials were available after the conference to discuss the 2002 report.
