''DONYELL'S got several tattoos,'' Scott Berman said into his headset as Donyell Marshall wiped his feet on a towel just in front of him. It was the first of dozens of calls that Berman would have to make through that headset during the evening, as the Toronto Raptors visited the Philadelphia 76ers.
Marshall had long had tattoos, to be sure, but he had had them as a member of four other National Basketball Association teams. This was Marshall's first game as a Raptor after a trade from the Chicago Bulls. And Berman, as a 13-year member of the 76ers' statistical crew, perhaps the most honored of its kind in sports, duly noted Marshall's tattoos anew.
Berman's boss, Harvey Pollack, has been keeping N.B.A. statistics -- including arcana like tattoos -- since the league started in the 1946-47 season. And just because networked laptops have largely replaced typewriters and carbon paper, there is no reason to be sloppy.
The N.B.A. requires each statistical crew to keep a play-by-play record of each game through its GameStats program, developed by Information and Display Systems of Jacksonville, Fla., a technology company also known as IDS. As much as the N.B.A. likes to promote the free-form and flying nature of its game, when it comes to gathering statistics, the league is precise and computer-nerdy.
The process in Philadelphia starts three hours before game time, when Pollack's son, Ron, a computer consultant, comes to the Wachovia Center to make sure the computer system at courtside is ready for the game. There are three networked laptops for input, two at the scorer's table and one under a basket. Each has several possible screens to record everything from a substitution to a field goal to even the style of a dunk (slam, plain, alley-oop, reverse, running, fast-break or follow).
The main caller is generally Harvey Pollack, 81, who announces every permutation of play with the player's uniform number attached. For instance, when the 76ers' Allen Iverson stole a pass from the Raptors' Alvin Williams and passed to Kenny Thomas for a layup, the call would be ''turnover 20, steal 3, assist 3, finger roll 9.'' On one laptop, Ron Pollack taps with the eraser end of a pencil (''It's better than a stylus,'' he said) on a mockup of a half court to show where Thomas shot, then hits a number 9 on a list of the 76ers' numbers. With quick wrist flicks worthy of Michael Jordan, he hits the 3 for Iverson and his steal and assist. Meanwhile, Berman has recorded the Williams turnover on his laptop.
''On quick plays, you see why you need two people,'' said Berman, who in his other life runs a jewelry-manufacturing business. ''There is no room for error here.''
The Philadelphia crew tries to be extra careful with the laptop operator under the basket. ''There are often plays like rebounds or turnovers there that we just can't see from midcourt,'' Berman said. ''Not every arena does this, but we think we're the best.''
The laptops are networked to the game clock as well as to the scoreboards around the arena, so fans can see updated statistics immediately. The stats are sent to an IDS server in Florida, where IDS employees monitor for any possible glitch or power outage, and then they are relayed to www.nba.com, where fans can see play-by-play information online.
There is one secret stat, though.
''We record which referee calls which foul, but no one gets to see that except for the league,'' Ron Pollack said. ''They want to make sure certain things like that are monitored.''
During the game, the press checks monitors connected to the statistics crew's computers. At each timeout, running statistics are printed and given to each team, the home team first.
The league requires each statistical crew to provide the standard box-score items for each player: shots made and attempted, turnovers, assists, rebounds, points and the like. But it is Harvey Pollack, often using a pencil and paper and a typewriter, who takes the stat sheets many steps further.
With a staff of 11 interns at Wachovia Spectrum, the smaller arena across the parking lot from the Wachovia Center, Pollack leads an extrapolation of the play-by-play sheets with as many permutations as possible. There are four 8-by-14-inch pages filled with boxes. There are spaces for each illegal defense, minutes played, flagrant fouls, blocked shots, the game-winning shot, delay of game, style of dunk or other shot -- whatever can be imagined. After much manual transcription, the results are entered into a database.
From this, Pollack compiles his incomparable 232-page N.B.A. Statistical Yearbook. While it is not an official league record source -- the New York-based Elias Sports Bureau holds the contract for that -- the Pollack guide is essential among aficionados.
Pollack is widely credited with having invented the term ''triple double,'' which ordinarily refers to a player getting double figures in points, assists and rebounds. It is in his guide that tattoos are recorded. ''We only do visible tattoos,'' Berman said.
Despite savoring his typewriter, Pollack admits that the computer is now essential for his crew. ''It allows us to do so much more, which I am grateful for,'' he said. One year, he put out a graphic showing how well Shaquille O'Neal shot from various distances.
''Shaq came up to me and told me what a nut I was,'' Pollack said with a wink and a proud smile. ''But then he asked for an autographed copy.''
