David Wells, the left-hander whose final start of the 2003 season lasted one notoriously painful inning in the World Series, walked away from an oral commitment with the Yankees yesterday to sign a one-year contract with the San Diego Padres.
Wells, who will turn 41 on May 20, agreed to an incentive-loaded major league contract with a base salary of $1.25 million. Wells, who has been hampered by a bad back, could make $7 million if he stays healthy and pitches all season.
Befitting the unpredictable Wells, who was adored by George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, but barely tolerated by Manager Joe Torre and the pitching coach Mel Stottlemyre, Wells's second stint with the team ended the opposite way it started.
Wells had agreed to a one-year deal with the Arizona Diamondbacks before Steinbrenner intervened and offered him a two-year contract that Wells signed on Jan. 10, 2002.
Jerry Colangelo, the Arizona owner, was so incensed, there was widespread speculation that he asked the Boston Red Sox for less than he asked the Yankees to complete a trade for Curt Schilling this off-season. Arizona had asked the Yankees for Alfonso Soriano and Nick Johnson.
''It looks like he's going to do to us what he did to Arizona,'' Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman said of Wells yesterday. ''What comes around, goes around, I guess.''
Cashman did say he was surprised by Wells's abrupt decision. Asked if he was upset, Cashman referred to Wells by his nickname and said simply, ''That's Boomer.''
Although Wells's departure will leave the Yankees with a starting rotation consisting of five right-handers in a ballpark that favors left-handed pitchers, the Yankees were not willing to take as much of a gamble on Wells as the Padres were.
Cashman said that the club and Wells had agreed in principle on a minor league contract about three weeks ago. Wells, who had back surgery on Dec. 2, would have had to earn his way onto the roster.
A contract with the Yankees also would have included a weight clause for Wells, who has appeared to be heavier than his listed weight, 235 pounds. Cashman said a deal with Wells's agent, Gregg Clifton, was contingent only on a weigh-in.
Cashman said the only reason the deal was delayed was that Clifton had a family emergency. In the meantime, Padres General Manager Kevin Towers got in touch with Clifton, and they negotiated a deal.
Clifton said that a contract had not been completed with the Yankees and that there were still issues, including the weight clause, to be discussed. He said the Yankees also wanted Wells to be measured for body-fat percentage. The Padres did not insist on the weight clause.
Wells is a San Diego native, and the Padres are moving into a $458 million stadium, Petco Park. The Padres had considered signing the former Atlanta right-hander Greg Maddux but decided they could not afford him.
''He's a big-game pitcher and the perfect guy to head our staff,'' Towers said of Wells, who was 15-7 with a 4.14 earned run average last season and has a 200-128 record in his career. ''We think our staff is pretty strong right now.''
Towers said Wells would end his career in San Diego, which means he has pitched his last game for the Yankees.
His final start was a memorable one, but not for the right reasons. He had back pain while warming up for Game 5 of the World Series and lasted only the first inning of a game the Yankees lost to Florida, 6-4.
Cashman said yesterday that the Yankees were not counting on Wells's making the team; as far as Cashman was concerned, they did not lose a left-handed starter as much as a stopgap. But the Yankees, at least temporarily, have a rotation loaded with right-handers.
The Yankees' five starters are Mike Mussina, Kevin Brown, Javier Vazquez, José Contreras and Jon Lieber, who had reconstructive surgery on his right elbow on Aug. 8, 2002, and has never pitched for the Yankees. Wells would have been regarded as insurance for Lieber.
It appears that the Yankees will have a rotation entirely of right-handers for the first time since 1992.
Wells pitched two stints for the Yankees. Each lasted two seasons, and he was 34-14 in each. He pitched a perfect game on May 17, 1998, against Minnesota, becoming the first Yankee to do so since Don Larsen, who went to the same San Diego high school as Wells.
But Wells was increasingly hampered by lower-back pain in the second half of last season. After walking 6 batters in his first 134 innings, he walked five Boston hitters July 25.
The Boston game began a stretch in which Wells went seven starts without a victory.
The Yankees declined Wells's $6 million option for 2004, and he rejected their arbitration offer before they offered him the minor league deal that they thought, until yesterday, Wells would honor.
''Anyone who's known David knows he's had two dreams since high school: to pitch for the Yankees and to pitch for the Padres,'' Clifton said. ''I don't think too many major league players get a chance to do what David has done in his career, and this would be a way to end it all up.''
BASEBALL
