Two years and a few months ago, Anthony F. Fernandes quit his job as one of the most powerful men in Asia's music industry, cashed in his stock options, mortgaged his house and bought a struggling Malaysian airline with two jets and $37 million in debt. Days later, terrorists destroyed the World Trade Center.
What seemed then like a career disaster instead turned Mr. Fernandes, at the age of 39, into a revolutionary in Asia's airline industry. The downturn in travel enabled him to pick up aircraft cheaply, and Mr. Fernandes applied the budget model established by Ryanair in Europe to set up Malaysia's first low-cost carrier, AirAsia. AirAsia today handles 11,000 passengers a day with a fleet of 18 planes, offering fares as low as $2.60. (Ryanair has fares between European cities for under one euro, about $1.25.)
Now Mr. Fernandes is looking overseas. This month AirAsia started its first international flights, to neighboring Thailand. It will start flying next year to Indonesia, with its 235 million potential passengers, and possibly will begin service to India and China, with a combined market of 2.3 billion.
''We feel pretty vindicated,'' Mr. Fernandes said in a telephone interview from his office at Kuala Lumpur International Airport. ''A lot of people laughed at us at first.''
Now they are busy imitating. Lured by AirAsia's success and the rapid growth of Asia's consumer class, discount airlines are popping up all over: Indonesia has Lion Air and Air Paradise International, the Philippines has Cebu Pacific Air, Thailand has One-Two-Go and former executives from Singapore Airlines plan to set up a budget airline called ValuAir next year.
The incumbents are striking back. Singapore Airlines is starting a discount carrier next year to be called Tiger Airways, and Thai Airways International is looking for partners to help it start a discount carrier of its own.
''Everyone wants to have their own lost-cost airline,'' said John M.C. King, managing director of Aviation and Tourism Management, an Australian consultant group.
Views on whether low-cost airlines will flourish in Asia vary, however, depending on whom you ask. Those who sell airplanes, airports or advice tend to be of the opinion that low-cost carriers will redraw Asia's socioeconomic map, offering affordable international travel to millions and thereby fostering the integration of a region divided by water, politics and poor infrastructure.
But analysts who follow established carriers say it is the other way around -- the success of low-cost airlines depends on that map being redrawn. There are too few bilateral agreements that allow new, low-cost carriers to fly between countries, they say, and too few of the satellite airports that the airlines need to keep costs low. Moreover, in a region where most people still earn less than $7 a day, not enough people are well enough off to support a budget airline industry, they contend.
''The demographics don't support the low-cost carrier model in Asia,'' said Chin Y. Lim, an analyst at Morgan Stanley in Singapore.
Asia is already replete with small, low-priced carriers. Indonesia has no fewer than 10 and Thailand has 5. Most are held back by poor reputations for service and safety, reinforcing the conventional wisdom that Asia's flying public will accept nothing less than service that Americans might find servile. Singapore Airlines has long set the benchmark for marketing such attentiveness. Much of its advertising features fawning flight attendants in snug sarongs -- the airline still calls them stewardesses.
But many analysts contend that it was lack of competition that enabled big carriers like Singapore Airlines and Cathay Pacific Airways in Hong Kong to chase higher margins by wooing first-class passengers.
Low-cost carriers, they predict, will tap pent-up demand among less affluent Asians who typically travel by bus and hardly expect attentive service. AirAsia has already assumed a proletarian flavor -- its slogan is ''Now everyone can fly.''
''We're bringing cheap travel to the masses,'' Mr. Fernandes said.
Mr. Fernandes has a history of breaking conventions. Shipped off to boarding school in Britain to become a doctor like his father, Mr. Fernandes rebelled, earning an accounting degree and landing a job with the Virgin Group instead.
Eventually he left Virgin for Warner Music, which sent him back to Malaysia in 1992. In 1997, he became the head of the company's Southeast Asian operations.
By 2001, however, Mr. Fernandes said he had tired of the politics at what had become AOL Time Warner and decided to start his own airline. On a trip to Britain, he met Conor McCarthy, Ryanair's former director of operations, and enlisted him as an investor and adviser. Mr. Fernandes had envisioned a low-cost airline competing on long-haul routes. Mr. McCarthy encouraged him to focus closer to home.
With three other investors, Mr. Fernandes signed an agreement on Sept. 8 to buy AirAsia for a symbolic one ringgit (26 cents) and pay off its debts. The Sept. 11 attacks helped him by lowering the cost of buying and leasing used airplanes.
To keep costs down, AirAsia operates only one type of aircraft, the Boeing 737-300. It has no business class, no frequent-flier program and no in-flight meals, and it uses no air bridges into the terminals. Upon arrival, passengers descend stairs to the tarmac. It sells tickets directly over the Internet and even lets passengers book using their mobile phones. Flight attendants help clean the planes after landing, then board the next group of passengers.
The result: In the year ended June 30, AirAsia earned 30 million ringgit ($7.9 million) on sales of 324 million ringgit ($85.5 million). Earlier this month, it started its first international service, from Kuala Lumpur to the Thai holiday island of Phuket. In February, it will begin flying from Johor Bahru across the Singapore border to Bangkok.
Mr. Fernandes disputes analysts' warning that AirAsia is likely to run into more difficulties as it goes international. ''I don't see why it makes any difference,'' he said. As for Asia's relative lack of bilateral agreements to allow new carriers to ferry passengers from country to country, Mr. Fernandes says competition for tourist revenue is pushing more countries to open up.
Mr. Fernandes says that relatively low landing fees in Asia make up for a scarcity of the cheaper satellite airports that low-cost carriers rely on in Europe and the United States. In September, he set up a joint venture in Thailand with the company owned by the family of Thailand's prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra. The airline, AirAsia Aviation, will fly not only to points in Thailand, but also to Cambodia and Vietnam.
With so many destinations being added to his route map, Mr. Fernandes said he had no doubt that AirAsia would find enough customers in the region's growing middle class. But just in case, AirAsia and its Thai affiliate are planning to fly to India and eventually to China.
Ultimately, Mr. Fernandes said, low-cost airlines in Asia have an advantage in that Asia has almost no inter-regional highways and no high-speed international rail. ''There's a lot of sea in between,'' he said. ''Air travel is the only way to develop interconnectivity in Asia.''
