For the past 24 years, the Stars and Stripes was unfurled publicly in Iran only to be burned, so Iranians were astonished on Wednesday by its sudden unveiling in an official capacity -- not fluttering in the frigid winter wind, exactly, but glued to the peaked roofs of the three tents housing the American earthquake relief team.
''I guess that is O.K., but if they try to raise a flag, that will be a problem,'' said Sayid Muhammad Hashemi, a burly, bearded clergyman who brought his motorcycle to a screeching halt when he saw the flags. ''In my opinion the Americans should not be here. They came to Iran to unearth dead bodies while at the same time in Afghanistan and Iraq they are killing people.''
The erection of the tents for the 81-member United States team at the Revolutionary Guard base here, where dozens of other nations are already housed, drew a crowd of curious onlookers. Some locals expressed delight that the Americans were here in any capacity.
''The Iranian people don't have any problems with the Americans; it's the Iranian system that has the problem,'' one man said. But another voiced suspicion that the Americans were spies -- why had they waited a full five days after the huge quake to show up? -- while Mr. Hashemi fretted that a pillar of Iran's Islamic Revolution might be crumbling.
''Remember, the late Imam Khomeini always warned us that the relationship between your government and our government is that of a wolf to a sheep,'' said the cleric, a member of the Baseeji, volunteers who seek to keep the message of the revolution alive.
The flags were not the day's only incongruous sight. Two large trucks labeled Fairfax County Fire &amp; Rescue Department rolled past a portrait of the late revolutionary patriarch to get into the base. At the campsite itself the men and women -- some 30 members of the team are women -- worked side by side to put up the tents. The women fashioned head scarves from orthopedic arm slings because the prepacked emergency supplies lacked Islamically correct headgear.
The Americans acknowledged that a series of mishaps and transportation mix-ups had delayed their arrival to the point when search and rescue teams from other countries were leaving. A good dozen have already departed. But the Americans expect to stay at least one week.
The American team consists of two groups, about 20 from the search and rescue team and the rest the staff of a field hospital equipped for surgery, part of an international medical response group affiliated with Massachusetts General Hospital in Boston.
The search and rescue team will work with the Iranian Red Crescent to help assess the damage to the city's infrastructure and draw up a list of needs to be distributed to international donors.
Various nations have sent medical teams, but with 11,000 wounded evacuated after the city's three hospitals were leveled, there are no seriously wounded to treat. Instead the United States will join other countries in providing regular medical care. The team started setting up the nine-tent hospital in the early evening and expected to have it running by the time the New Year arrived.
''We are here to help restore normal medical care to this community, to deal with the problems of everyday life in any country -- babies, appendectomies,'' said Dr. Susan Briggs, the director of the hospital.
Brig. Gen. Hamid Aslawi, the Revolutionary Guard officer in charge of operations for the city, said it would be a welcome development. Many of the emergency response teams were more geared to trauma than to dispensing simple things like aspirin, he said.
But the patient load could dwindle somewhat because the city's population is gradually fleeing. With something under half the population of 97,000 either killed or injured and 90 percent of the buildings destroyed, the surviving residents are streaming out of Bam.
General Aslawi estimated that only about 15,000 residents remained, most living in tents on the wreckage of former homes. Four different tent cities are being set up on Bam's outskirts to house 10,000 people, with the first residents expected to move in on Thursday, he said.
That will make it easier for the bulldozers to remove the rubble and basically flatten the city. General Aslawi said just 68 bodies were recovered on Tuesday and he could not confirm any reports of survivors found Wednesday.
The real problem, the general said, is the need to provide long-term housing for the residents while the city is rebuilt. It will take at least three to six months for even temporary housing to be ready.
He unfurled a satellite picture of the city that showed the Afraz fault line slicing across the edge of the city like a wedge-shaped butcher knife.
''The idea has been raised that we should not rebuild here at all because of the extent of the damage and the presence of the fault line,'' he said. ''But geopolitically it is a very strategic place -- this is where the main routes from Pakistan and Afghanistan converge.''
For residents, the main problem was keeping warm, with temperatures dropping below freezing at night. Residents living in tents gathered around bonfires even at noon. One man said ruefully that the one benefit to not having enough tents was that sleeping 10 people per tent at least meant it stayed fairly warm.
Iran, with its Islamic government, does not celebrate the Western new year, and the foreigners here said they planned to keep celebrations low-key.
''It is a thrill to be here,'' said Dewey Perks, the battalion chief in the Fairfax County rescue squad.
And his New Year's celebration?
''We are going to open a bottle of Crystal Geyser spring water.''
