Gayle Warwick Fine Linen is a multinational player. Its high-end, handmade bed and table linens are woven in Europe, embroidered in Vietnam and sold in Britain and the United States. Sales are soaring, and its full-time staff recently doubled -- to two: Gayle Warwick and the assistant she hired in March.
These days, going global is all the rage for American small businesses. With surprising rapidity, they have discovered foreign markets; the Department of Commerce says the number of companies with fewer than 100 employees that export merchandise increased to almost 213,000 in 2001 from 96,000 in 1992. Collectively, in 2001, they generated almost $130 billion in exported goods, the department said.
Just because you are an American does not mean your business has to be based in the United States. Ms. Warwick discovered that with barriers to trade and investment falling everywhere, she was free to roam the world to make the contacts she needed to put her business together, then return to her home base in London to run the show. At first, Ms. Warwick, who is 50, operated from an office and a dining-room-turned-showroom in her home in the Pimlico district of London. Then in September, the store of the upscale British retailer Thomas Goode in the Mayfair district did away with its linen department and turned the space over to her company.
In 1990, Ms. Warwick arrived in London, where her husband, Ned, had just been named a news director for ABC; she had only a limited background in business. After graduating from Mount Holyoke College in 1975 as an art history major, she found work in public relations and then enrolled in law school at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill.
She dropped out when her husband was transferred to Philadelphia, and later accompanied him to Europe. By then, she had her hands full caring for two daughters, ages 3 and 7. But she came from an entrepreneurial family -- her father owned a lumberyard on Long Island, where she worked the cash register as a teenager, and her grandfathers ran their own Long Island plumbing and contracting companies -- so making the switch from homemaker to business owner was not an exotic notion.
The catalyst was a social encounter in the early 1990's with the Vietnamese wife of one of her husband's business colleagues, who showed her a hand-embroidered tablecloth from her native country and invited Ms. Warwick to visit her in Vietnam. The two women made the trip in 1995, had samples made and ordered other linens, which they shipped home and sold at charity Christmas fairs.
It was a start, but just a start. ''I thought there might be something in this, but I wasn't sure what,'' Ms. Warwick said. ''There was no connect-the-dots from my past to that moment and idea.''
After the Vietnamese woman moved away the next year, Ms. Warwick decided to go to Vietnam on her own to explore the possibility of setting up a linen business. That trip convinced her that she needed to do more research, and with the help of $16,000 in savings, she spent the next three years traveling to Italy, Ireland and Switzerland to talk with linen and organic-cotton spinners, weavers and finishers; to France and Germany to attend textile trade fairs; and to Vietnam to find embroiderers. ''You have to be really tenacious,'' she said of her learning experience.
Her increasing expertise and the contacts she made paid off. Executives of a French quality-control company in Ho Chi Minh City, once known as Saigon, put her in touch with exporters in Hanoi, for example, and they in turn helped her find skilled craftspeople in northern Vietnamese villages to work on her designs. She hired a French freight forwarder, SDV International Logistics, to handle her far-flung business by shipping unfinished and finished fabrics within Europe and to Vietnam, and then delivering the embroidered linens back to London and the United States. Although they do not do so for Ms. Warwick, freight forwarders can also manage payments, a potential godsend for small exporters dealing with partners scattered around the globe.
Ms. Warwick also hired an accountant to handle taxes; a consulting firm, Moon Communications, to market her bed and table linens and create her company's packaging, logo and Web site; and an artist, Rebecca Oliner, to help her design the linens themselves. The two women spent hours studying textiles in the Victoria and Albert Museum, the library of the Royal Horticultural Society and elsewhere. One of the 20 designs they sell is modeled on a piece of 18th-century lace they came across; another was inspired by a client's hydrangea garden.
After incorporating her business in London in 1998, Ms. Warwick began selling her linens from home and, on a limited basis, at the General Trading Company, a housewares store. They are pricey: One flat, organic-cotton, king-size sheet and two queen-size pillow shams start at $625, while linen napkins and placemats start at $75 each.
Helped by favorable mentions in British publications like The Times of London and The Financial Times, Ms. Warwick gradually built her distribution network and began to receive orders from well-known interior designers like Nina Campbell and Nicky Haslam. She also started selling her linens to upscale stores in the Northeastern United States, like Takashimaya on Fifth Avenue in New York and Gore Dean Antiques in the Georgetown area of Washington.
This gradual expansion has enabled her to overcome what Shaker A. Zahra, a professor of entrepreneurship at Babson College in Wellesley, Mass., calls ''the liability of newness.''
''The name recognition is not there for small companies,'' Dr. Zahra said. ''They have to overcome hesitation on the part of suppliers and customers.'' One way to do this, he said, is to build relationships with ''contacts who are key players in your niche,'' something Ms. Warwick has done not only with the British interior designers and American retailers, but also most recently with Thomas Goode, now the exclusive retailer of Ms. Warwick's linens in Britain.
''She has built a connection with a well-established name, which legitimizes her brand,'' Dr. Zahra said. ''And she could leverage the brand to expand to other parts of the market.''
The 500 square feet of space that Thomas Goode turned over to Ms. Warwick on the main floor of its Mayfair store has provided her with her first real showroom. She estimates that sales, which ranged from $40,000 to $60,000 a year from 1998 through 2001, climbed to $100,000 in 2003 and could reach $300,000 this year, allowing her to make a profit for the first time.
As her workload increased, she hired her first full-time staff member, Melanie Josey, in March. She is already planning a raft of new products, including children's organic cotton pajamas and women's silk loungewear that will be embroidered in Vietnam, and cashmere bed throws that will be made in Italy.
Her accomplishments notwithstanding, Ms. Warwick said she thinks she has become a global player by chance, rather than by design. ''I didn't set out to create a global business,'' she said. ''I just tried to find the best suppliers. It takes patience and persistence, but it is possible even for a small business to achieve this type of network.''
Donna Sharp, executive director of the World Trade Institute of Pace University in New York, sees unlimited opportunities for entrepreneurs like Ms. Warwick. ''There is a new culture and openness in international business today,'' Ms. Sharp said. ''With a little know-how, creativity and confidence, even the smallest business can find opportunities around the globe.
''Almost everyone can take advantage of trade-lead Web sites, or go to global conferences or trade shows,'' she said. ''The small businesses of today are the multinationals of tomorrow.''
SMALL BUSINESS
