It is billed as the biggest football game of the college season, a prime-time matchup on Sunday between two superb teams, Louisiana State and Oklahoma, for at least a part of a national title. For L.S.U. Coach Nick Saban, the outcome of the championship game in the Sugar Bowl carries a personal stake as well.
If the Tigers win and claim the Bowl Championship Series title, Saban will be paid one dollar more than the highest-paid college coach in the nation, according to an incentive clause in his contract. It means his annual compensation will exceed by that dollar the more than $2.2 million package paid to the coach who will stand across the field from him at the Superdome: Oklahoma's Bob Stoops.
How did coaching college football become so lucrative?
''Is Alex Rodriguez worth $250 million to play baseball?'' said Skip Bertman, L.S.U.'s athletic director and former baseball coach. ''Of course not, and it's not a question of whether a baseball player or a coach is worth that much. The issue is what is the market value.''
At least 23 college football coaches now earn $1 million, including the six coaches in the other three B.C.S. bowl games, which kick off Thursday with the Rose Bowl. That million-dollar benchmark, which was first reached by Florida State's Bobby Bowden in the mid-1990's, sometimes does not even include the abundance of performance incentives for everything from rankings and bowl games to players' academic performances.
Earlier this month, after completing an 0-13 season, Army hired Bobby Ross, the former Georgia Tech and San Diego Chargers coach, for a salary of more than $600,000, or nearly three times the amount it had paid his predecessor, according to academy officials. Earlier this week, Tennessee Coach Phillip Fulmer was given a one-year contract extension and a $140,000 raise, which increased his annual salary to $1,789,500.
The proliferation of bowl money and television contracts has powered this escalation in salaries. More than $90 million alone will be doled out by the B.C.S. to the conferences of the eight universities playing in the Orange, Rose, Fiesta and Sugar Bowls.
But many wonder how healthy it is to pay a football coach -- no matter how many stadium seats his team fills or television hours his team commands -- more than the president of a university.
''We've created a huge entertainment industry driven by the greed factor,'' said William C. Friday, chairman of the Knight Foundation Commission on Intercollegiate Athletics and president emeritus of the University of North Carolina. ''Name me a single company where a C.E.O. works with someone who makes five times more than him. What kind of business is that?
''When you add it all up, what's at stake is the integrity of the American university. You can't be an example of integrity and leadership when you have television networks and shoe companies subsidizing these coaches.''
The newfound riches trouble some of the millionaire coaches. Southern California's Pete Carroll, who is paid $1.5 million annually, conceded that he often thought about the disparity between his salary and the pay given the university's professors.
''It's all about supply and demand,'' Carroll said Wednesday at a news conference in Pasadena, Calif., where his Trojans will play Michigan in the Rose Bowl on Thursday. ''I don't think it's hard to justify that, when you take a look at the stadiums and the money that is generated by the programs and all that.
''But in another sense, in a more pure sense, it is kind of unusual that this would happen in a university setting, that there would be something that would be that far out of line. I think that's clear and it is somewhat uncomfortable at times for me to think about that because we are just coaching football. And other people are teaching some great stuff that is going to make somebody a doctor someday or a lawyer someday. And we're just coaching football.''
But some athletic directors say coaches and administrators should not apologize for the lofty economics of college football.
Dave Hart, Florida State's athletic director, said he had no problem paying Bowden $2 million annually. When Bowden took over the Seminoles in 1976, his salary was $35,000.
''He transcends Florida State University with the level of success he's had, so I think he's worth every bit we pay him,'' Hart said of Bowden, who is the winningest coach in Division I-A.
As at Oklahoma and many other major college programs, Louisiana State's $42 million athletic budget is raised from private donors, gate admissions and television contracts. Every scholarship awarded to the university's 550 athletes comes from the athletics' budget, as do the coaching salaries. L.S.U. football costs $8 million annually and generates more than 70 percent of the department's income, according to Bertman.
He says the university is intent on making Saban the nation's highest-paid coach whether he wins or loses the title game because L.S.U. believes he possesses the talent to become the next Joe Paterno, the longtime Penn State coach. In four seasons, Saban has posted a 38-13 record, and he has the Tigers contending for their first national championship since 1958. More important, according to Bertman, Saban spearheaded the drive to build the university's $15 million academic support center, and his players have not been involved in a single off-the-field incident.
Bertman also acknowledged that if L.S.U. does not pay Saban top dollar, one of the seven N.F.L. teams with head coaching vacancies will.
''I think a lot of professors -- guys with Ph.D.'s and 17-page résumés -- do not realize that no tax dollars are being spent and that we do not believe that athletics is more important than academics,'' Bertman said. ''And students and alumni love athletics, which makes it easier to sell.''
The Knight Commission's Friday points to the hidden costs a university faces in fielding a major athletics program, like facilities and upkeep. Of the 117 Division I-A programs, 40 percent reported an operating profit in 2001, according to an N.C.A.A. report released this fall that examined spending on college athletics. But without state and school subsidies, only 6 percent of athletic departments made money, according to the report.
Friday also said that if athletic departments acted as if they were part of the university instead of outside it, there would be higher graduation rates and fewer instances of academic fraud and off-field misbehavior by athletes.
He said the escalating salaries of coaches was a symptom of a larger problem in college athletics: excess in lieu of accountability. ''It's time for the American sports public to look in the mirror and say, 'Is this what my university is doing while they are educating my child?' '' Friday said.
Michigan Coach Lloyd Carr does not necessarily disagree. He makes more than $1 million a year and, like many of his colleagues, works endless days year round.
''Well, I think I'm always reminded that we are on college campuses,'' Carr said Wednesday. ''I think we are people who work extremely hard -- the hours, the intensity of the expectations, all those things, make it a profession where you earn your money.
''By the same token, I think with all the things that are going on, and all the issues, I certainly think that you can reach a point where it's too much, and I think the truth is, across the country, every institution has to make their own decision and every coach has to make his own decision.''
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
