The mezzo-soprano Susan Graham first tasted center stage as a little girl at family gatherings, where she did cartwheels and dances for relatives, making sure to punctuate her act with a generous smattering of hugs and kisses. ''I loved the attention,'' she said. ''It's been a through line in my life.''
Nowadays when Ms. Graham, 43, enters a room, she does so bathed in a spotlight on a 30-foot staircase with dozens of tuxedoed men literally falling at her feet. Art has amplified life. She is starring in the Metropolitan Opera's production of Franz Lehár's ''Merry Widow,'' conducted by Kirill Petrenko. Saturday night's performance will be the fifth of nine that run through Jan. 17.
Ms. Graham sings the role of Hanna Glawari, a young widow who has lost her husband, but gained his millions -- and along with them, throngs of admirers. Naturally, she falls for the one man who seems indifferent to her riches, Danilo, sung by the dashing Danish baritone Bo Skovhus. The two first sang these roles together in a flashy production in Houston last season.
''I felt like I was on Broadway, and it was suddenly 'Hello Dolly!' '' Ms. Graham recalled in a recent interview in her Upper West Side apartment. ''I never had so much fun in my whole life, singing and dancing all night long.''
The attention Ms. Graham gets in ''The Merry Widow'' might be a childhood dream, but it is also a decent encapsulation of her career these days. Both audiences and critics seem enamored by her supple, light and effortless singing. In April she gave a glowingly received Carnegie Hall recital debut, which Warner Classics has recently issued on a CD that also has been lavishly praised. In December she was named Musical America's Vocalist of the Year for 2004. After her Met run, she has scheduled a recital on Feb. 3 at the Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington with the soprano Renée Fleming and then a solo recital tour of 12 cities in the United States and Europe.
''It's very exciting,'' she said. ''This past year was a huge transition year.''
Most striking has been Ms. Graham's recent evolution beyond parts like the sprightly Cherubino from Mozart's ''Nozze di Figaro'' and into more attention-grabbing characters like the title roles of ''The Merry Widow'' and Offenbach's ''La Belle Hélène,'' as well as the formidable role of Dido in Berlioz's ''Troyens,'' which she sang for the first time in October at the Théâtre du Châtelet in Paris.
''As a mezzo there aren't that many great diva roles, so we reach a point where we have to reinvent ourselves a bit,'' Ms. Graham said. This has meant roles sometimes sung by sopranos but within striking distance for a high mezzo like herself. More generally, the shift has also signaled a maturation of her taste. ''I'm at an age in my early 40's where more powerful and mature characters are appealing to me,'' she said.
By her own description, Ms. Graham was a late bloomer. Born in New Mexico, she moved at an early age to Midland, Tex., where her father was a geophysicist for the oil industry. Her first instrument was piano, which she played avidly through age 17, when she had a traumatic memory slip while performing a Mozart Piano Concerto in recital. ''I thought, this is my living hell right now,'' she said. ''I knew it was not where I wanted to be. The piano is a great tool, but I'm not fully able to express myself on it.''
Ms. Graham had trained as a singer as well, and that same year she sang Maria in a high school production of ''The Sound of Music.'' ''Being on stage, I thought this bug had bit, and it's not going to let go,'' she said.
She studied music at Texas Tech University, but even at 21 her teachers still couldn't tell where her voice would settle, and whether she would become a mezzo or a soprano. While her voice took its time to choose, she just kept studying, eventually earning two master's degrees. The second came from the Manhattan School of Music, where she had her big break -- the title role in what was billed as the American stage premiere of Massenet's ''Chérubin.'' Her spirited singing earned her notice from the press as well as from an agent. ''It was the beginning of the beginning,'' she said.
That her first success came in French opera was no coincidence. Ms. Graham had long been passionate about the French song tradition, a repertory she has since claimed as a specialty. ''I loved French music even as a teenager,'' she said. ''It has a romance and a sensuality without being overblown, and I can relate to that. There's a subtlety to it, but at the same time it kind of grabs you.''
Critics have voiced a similar sentiment about Ms. Graham's approach to French songs. Tim Page wrote in The Washington Post that her performance of Debussy's ''Proses Lyriques'' in recital in March was ''all but perfect -- how luscious and ripe French phonemes sound as they float from Graham's lips!''
But she refuses to stick too closely to the French repertory. In 2000 she created the role of Sister Helen Prejean for the premiere of Jake Heggie's opera ''Dead Man Walking'' with a libretto by Terrence McNally, and her next CD will be a recording of Charles Ives songs with the pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard, a master of contemporary music. New opera roles in her future include Donna Elvira in Mozart's ''Don Giovanni'' in Chicago next fall.
It all appears a dizzying mix for a singer who has entered a new chapter of her career, one that to many looks increasingly like her prime. Yet Ms. Graham says she tries not to think about the scope of all her commitments, which extend into 2008. At the moment it is all about ''The Merry Widow,'' which suits her just fine. ''I get to hang out with Bo Skovhus and be chased by gorgeous dancers all night long,'' she said. ''What's not to like?''
