IF you have ever spent a soul-crushing hour behind the velvet rope of a hot new club, shivering as you tried to catch the eye of an impervious doorman with a magical clipboard, Gilbert Stafford is probably the man you cursed to eternal damnation as you slinked back into a taxi. For those still holding grudges, it might come as some comfort to know that Mr. Stafford, who has spent two decades lording over the entryways of clubs from New York to Miami, still feels your pain. ''Sometimes I go to bed at night and I can hear people screaming out my name,'' he says with a theatrical shiver. ''This is why I drink so much.''
These days Mr. Stafford, 51, is playing God at Crobar, the multilevel overhyped nocturnal playground for the fabulous and well-connected that recently opened in Chelsea. When more than 4,500 desperados showed up for the opening night hoo-ha last month, more than double the number that could squeeze inside, it was Mr. Stafford, towering over the multitudes with his crown of white fuzz and a mink coat, who shattered so many clubbing dreams. In the end, the police had to be summoned to shoo away the shut-outs.
In a city that often values juice over cash, Mr. Stafford is as close to royalty as they come. J. Lo, P. Diddy, Vin and Adrien know him by name, and every B-list schmo wishes he did. For the hundreds of losers who were turned away from Crobar's New Year's extravaganza last night, some pointers: leave the Today's Man get-up at home, don't show up with a posse of baseball caps, and, for God's sake, never, ever grovel.
''I look for people with a sense of fun,'' Mr. Stafford explains, sitting on one of Crobar's candy-red banquettes with two of his best friends: an unfiltered Camel and cup of black coffee. ''I like the guy who gets out of the cab bobbing or the gal who has spent all night getting ready for this moment.''
Crobar's owners, who have outlets in Miami and Chicago, aspire to recreate the bad old days of 1980's New York clubbing, when the dance floors of Limelight, Danceteria and Palladium drew downtown and uptown into a democratic jumble of pre-op trannies, Wall Street pinstripes and gangsta wannabes. To achieve that legendary mix, Mr. Stafford -- whose credentials include stints at Nell's, Trixies and Area -- dips into the crowd every so often to check on the alchemy. (A note to Crobar's breathless publicists: Mr. Stafford, whom they describe as ''the legendary doorman from Studio 54's heyday'' never worked at Studio, although he was an occasional guest.)
IT is the day before the big New Year's event, and Mr. Stafford's cell, with its 1960's porn film ring, keeps crashing the interview. ''Sorry, the tables are all sold out,'' he says to someone who apparently lacks cachet. He offers us a naughty wink, flips the phone shut and admits he is holding out a table for the right caller. ''This job requires the patience of Mother Teresa and the snap cruelty of Judge Judy,'' he says, his voice deliciously bass from a lifetime of chain-smoking. Tall enough to peer above a sea of plebeians, he walks with a lumbering gambol. His uniform consists of black patent leather loafers -- no socks -- a brindle-colored suede blazer and a polka-dotted ascot that receives frequent adjustments. He is by turns glibly theatrical and darkly philosophical, uncomfortably aware of the absurd power he holds in his large, lanky hands. ''I have the strangest kind of celebrity,'' he says. ''But sometimes the fabulousness wears thin.''
Raised in West Baltimore, the first of five children born to a psychiatric nurse and a man Mr. Stafford calls ''a scoundrel,'' he describes his childhood as remarkably unremarkable. ''I did not have a tragically black upbringing,'' he says. Still, life was not always a disco. Vivian Stafford was 18 when she had her first, and the two of them essentially grew up in tandem. ''We were both drama queens,'' he says.
There is still a wellspring of bitterness for Gilbert Stafford Sr., a home improvement contractor who disappeared early on and ''went on his merry way populating the city with kids,'' Mr. Stafford says. The drama queen bravura fades slightly when he talks about his father's recent death, which required tearful hand holding and some attempts at that thing called closure.
''At the end, he decided he might love me,'' Mr. Stafford says, eyes rolling. ''But we'll deal with that in therapy.'' It was the actor's dream that brought him to New York from Baltimore in 1974. There were some background bits on soaps and commercials and a delicatessen job, where he learned to slice lox as thin as Uma Thurman's waistline. Strikingly handsome with an irresistibly charming presence, there were too many boyfriends to count. He was, of course, never frozen out of a disco.
He landed his first club gig at Area, squiring Yoko Ono around the TriBeCa warehouse that epitomized New York nightlife before the chill of the Giuliani years. From there he moved to Nell's, Tatou and a dozen other spots across the city. Highlights? Nicely telling Walter Cronkite to go back inside with his drink, turning away a woman purporting to be Calvin Klein's maid and requiring an over-eager entrant to strip naked in the midst of winter. (The fellow got in.) He has also been shot at three times by the spurned.
One day, he will sell his memoirs, but for now there is a newborn club that needs tending. ''I complain a lot, but there are a lot worse jobs out there,'' he says. ''I probably have the only job where the customer is always wrong.''
PUBLIC LIVES
