The Nets were in such a rush to leave their locker room Wednesday night, it was as though they had lost.
Dressed in their best suits and throwback jerseys, they checked their watches and headed off to New Year's Eve parties. In many ways, however, the Nets already celebrated their new year more than two weeks ago.
Ever since the 47-point meltdown in Memphis, when Jason Kidd screamed at the coaching staff, the Nets have performed admirably in every game and have gone 6-2. They took care of the Golden State Warriors on Wednesday at Continental Arena, 88-70, and start this year in the same position they spent most of the past two -- first place in the Atlantic Division.
''You'll have a point in the season where it's chaotic or hectic or confusing,'' Kidd said. ''That's what breaks or makes a team.'' When asked by television reporters if he had any New Year's resolutions, Kidd said, ''No more tirades for me.''
He has rediscovered his sense of humor and his basketball rhythm. Playing only 29 minutes against his hometown team, Kidd notched 23 points, 7 assists, 5 steals and 3 3-pointers. He also appeared to record a rare dunk, though some spectators wondered if it was really a lay-in. Kenyon Martin, who is considered the authority on such matters because he demands five dunks a season from Kidd, ruled it a jam.
''I guess Jason liked the ball they used tonight,'' Martin said. ''It was a good choice.''
The Nets (17-14) traditionally get the breaks this time of year. They talked in training camp about winning 10 games a month, and they took advantage of a soft schedule this December to reach their goal. For all they accomplished, however, the Nets still didn't approach the standard they set a year ago, when they won 12 games in December.
It usually does not seem to matter when or where Kidd faces the Warriors. Whether he's at Continental Arena or back at The Arena in Oakland, he is always at home. Last season, Kidd scored a combined 63 points in two meetings against Golden State, and when the Nets' focus seemed to drift Wednesday, he caught their attention and stared down the Warriors.
''This was televised back home,'' Kidd said. ''I always try to play my best when family and friends can see me.''
After blowing two layups and watching his team fall behind by 9 points in the first half, Kidd started hunting outside shots. When he made them, Coach Byron Scott called more plays for him. As Kidd left the game near the end of the third quarter, the Nets led by 13 points and he had outscored Golden State's two point guards, Nick Van Exel and Speedy Claxton, 23-4.
''Jason Kidd played like an all-star,'' Warriors Coach Eric Musselman said. ''As soon as Kidd turned up the intensity, he changed the complexion of this game.''
The assistant Lawrence Frank asked Scott if he was going to insert Kidd and Richard Jefferson in the fourth quarter, but Scott wanted to see how the reserves would respond to his recent challenges. Kidd applauded on the sideline when Lucious Harris, Brian Scalabrine and the rest of the bench provided a final boost, raising the lead to 22 points.
The crowd of 12,131 could comfortably blow its noisemakers, having suffered through a tedious start. The Warriors, who upset San Antonio, Sacramento and the Los Angeles Lakers this season, ran around the Nets for most of the first half, moving the ball inside and finding easy baskets. Clifford Robinson scored 10 points in the first quarter, but the Nets promptly tightened up their defense and held him to two baskets the rest of the game.
Robinson's night was symbolic of his entire team's performance. The Warriors handily outshot the Nets in the first half and tied the score, 45-45, in the third quarter, but they posted only 29 points in the second half, and the Nets went on a 22-8 run.
As a group, the Nets gave mixed reviews to 2003. Kidd reminisced about the team's second consecutive Eastern Conference championship and said he would open a bottle of wine to commemorate a memorable year. Harris, on the other hand, did not look back so fondly. ''I'm glad it's over,'' he said.
For the Nets, a new season seems to have already begun.
REBOUNDS
Even if the Nets are sold, they will apparently play at Continental Arena for at least another season. The Nets had until Wednesday to inform the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority if they did not intend to play at the Meadowlands next season, and they let the deadline pass.
PRO BASKETBALL
