Black Dahlias?
Q. A catalog advertises its Bishop's Children dahlia as having ''almost black'' leaves. The pictures show very dark foliage, but I have been fooled by pictures before. Is the description accurate?
A. It will be a bright day when gardeners can buy plants that are as black as advertised. Meanwhile, think of dusky dahlias as being somewhere between bronze and dark plum, depending on the variety you choose.
If you start with tubers, you will know what color you are getting. If you start with seed, which is highly variable, get ready for some surprises.
The Children in question are descendants of a dahlia called Bishop of Llandaff, which was introduced in 1927 and is still popular for its finely cut blackish purple foliage and bright red-orange flowers.
Bishop's Children, on the other hand, will have leaves in a range of darks, from green mottled with bronze to the parent plum. The small, mostly single flowers might be any color from yellow to crimson, though tans and dull reds are more likely.
To ensure dark plants from seed, start several more than you need, then discard the paler ones after time in the sun brings out their true colors (or lack of them). If flower size or color matters, consult www.dahlia.org/DarkSources.html. This Web site contains brief descriptions of dozens of choices and provides the names of sellers.
Or go directly to Dahlias by Les and Viv Connell, P.O. Box 1595, Sumner, Wash. 98390, (253) 848-6251. Mr. Connell, who is particularly interested in dark-leaf types, sells treats like White Hallelujah, with blossoms as pale as its name suggests, and the exquisitely feathery Woodridge, which makes up for insignificant flowers with leaves as lacy as ferns. Tubers for Bishop of Llandaff and seeds for Bishop's Children are sold by Jung Seeds, www.jung.com or (800) 247-5864.
Hydrangea Blues
Q. Several years ago, I took a cutting from a beautiful blue-flowered hydrangea in northern New Jersey. It rooted well and is now a large bush in my garden in Brooklyn, but the flowers are always bright candy pink, or at best mauve, even though I apply aluminum sulfate several times a year. How do I get it to bloom blue?
A. In the old days, the common wisdom was that you needed acid soil for blue flowers on big-leaf hydrangeas. Then it became more generally known that the reason you needed acid soil was that the plant requires aluminum, which is unavailable when soils are alkaline.
This led many gardeners to skip directly to adding aluminum, but the old rule still applies: You can pour on aluminum until the cows come home or the soil is thoroughly poisoned, but the plant still won't be able to use it unless the soil is acid.
Though Northeastern soils tend to be acid, an abundance of concrete means city gardens can be alkaline. Check yours with an inexpensive pH tester (sold at garden supply stores). If it is only slightly alkaline, you can adjust it with an acidifier like sulfur or coffee grounds. Otherwise, it would be better to transplant the hydrangea to a container, where you can control the soil, or else learn to love pink.
A Lemonless Lemon
Q. The potted lemon trees that I saw fruiting all over Italy were so inspiring I started one from seed. It is now 8 years old, four feet tall and very healthy. It summers on my terrace and winters in my cool living room, getting eastern light all year. I give it regular feedings of Miracid. But it has never flowered or produced any fruit. Would it help to find it a mate?
A. The proximity of possible mates can sometimes make human beings bloom, but plants don't respond that way. Though it takes two for many trees to reproduce, even lonely ones flower.
And lemons are among the few common fruits that self-fertilize. So solitude is not the problem. Your tree may simply be too young; grafted lemons start flowering when they are 3 or 4 years old, but those grown from seed can take 10 years or even twice that. And you may be extending its childhood; constant fertilization tends to keep plants in the juvenile stage.
Try decreasing the food and if possible increasing the light. Lemons should (when ready) produce a few flowers even in an eastern exposure, but sunshine and citrus fruits are known as old buddies for a reason.
Garden Q &amp; A
