Ricky Clemons, a quick, talented point guard, played only one season for the Missouri basketball team, but it might take the university a lot longer to recuperate from the experience.
Clemons spent more than a month in jail last summer after pleading guilty to assault against a former girlfriend. During recorded telephone conversations from jail, he said that he and two other Missouri players had been given cash by assistant coaches.
The university and the N.C.A.A. are investigating Clemons's assertion, along with a host of related matters, including whether he was involved in academic fraud when he earned 24 credits in one summer so he could be admitted to Missouri.
Despite all this and a trail of problems that go back to junior college and several high schools in North Carolina, Clemons remains a hot basketball commodity. After Missouri revoked his scholarship, a number of Division II colleges let Clemons know, directly or indirectly, that they want him to play for them next season.
At least five of the colleges are historically black institutions, three of which are in his home state, North Carolina, said Shawn Walker, the basketball coach at Elizabeth City State in Elizabeth City, N.C.
''He's going to play at a black college next year,'' Walker said in a telephone interview. ''He's going to play in our league and he's going to play in North Carolina.''
Walker, like other coaches pursuing Clemons, is well aware that recruiting him carries plenty of risks. The coaches know the jagged path he cut through junior colleges in Idaho and Kansas, his arrests on domestic violence charges in Missouri and Idaho, and the hours of recorded phone conversations from the Boone County Jail here in Columbia that have deeply embarrassed several University of Missouri officials and endangered the basketball program.
But what Walker and the other coaches also know is that Clemons is a high-caliber player who could help a team win a Division II championship and enable a young, struggling coach to keep his job.
''A lot of reporters have asked: 'Why would you want this guy? Why would you want to take the chance?' '' Walker, 31, said. ''My message is that we're taking a chance on him for the same reason that Quin Snyder did.''
Snyder is the coach at Missouri, a former player at Duke whose career could hinge on the outcome of investigations by the university and the National Collegiate Athletic Association into the litany of accusations involving Clemons. Many of the allegations were first raised by Clemons's former girlfriend Jessica Bunge, who had accused him of choking her and keeping her involuntarily in his apartment in January 2003.
''I'm the coach in our league who has stood up and said, 'Yes, we'd take a chance on Ricky Clemons,' '' Walker said. ''I've made it very clear that the problems he has at Missouri he's not going to have at Elizabeth City because we don't have any money to give him.''
Walker added: ''You don't transfer down from those places, from a place like Rutgers or New Mexico, to go to Kentucky Wesleyan or Shaw or Elizabeth City unless there is a problem. That's the way we recruit players, because everybody's in the market for the same kind of kid.''
Not long after Missouri revoked Clemons's scholarship in July, several Division II colleges began to reach out to him, according to comments by Clemons on more than 40 hours of taped conversations from jail. The Columbia Daily Tribune reported that Clemons said in the recordings that he had spoken with coaches from Virginia Union in Richmond and Virginia State in Petersburg.
Only one person who said he was a coach is on the taped conversations, the newspaper reported; the man, who identified himself as being from Virginia State, told Clemons that he would put up money for Clemons to be taken care of until he plays for the university next season.
Coach John Hill of Virginia State vehemently denied that he had talked with Clemons. ''I've never called him; I've never even made contact with the young man,'' Hill said in a recent telephone interview.
But Hill also implied that other people might have reached out to Clemons on Virginia State's behalf. Hill said there might have been ''links that I have through the community that know of the young man and was trying to pursue him in my direction.''
''But to this day, I haven't made contact with him or actually spoke to him about Virginia State,'' Hill said.
The Columbia Daily Tribune reported that Walker, the Elizabeth City State coach, had acknowledged trying to recruit Clemons while he was in jail. But Walker denied that he had. ''That's a lie,'' he said in an interview.
Walker said he had received a faxed copy of Clemons's release from his scholarship at Missouri in November, long after Clemons was released from jail. He said only then had he called Clemons and talked with him.
Wherever Clemons winds up next fall, officials at Missouri could still be dealing then with the fallout from his time in Columbia. The assertion on the tapes that has no doubt raised the most concern at the N.C.A.A. is his statement that he received cash from assistant coaches; he also said that two other players, Arthur Johnson and Rickey Paulding, had been given money. Both players have denied that they received money.
A number of newspapers in the Midwest have obtained copies of the taped telephone conversations and reported extensively on their contents; among them are The Columbia Daily Tribune, The St. Louis Post-Dispatch and The Kansas City Star.
The reports on the conversations from jail have scarred the president of Missouri's university system, Elson Floyd, and the university's associate athletic director, Ed Stewart.
Floyd's wife, Carmento, and Stewart's wife, Amy, talked candidly on the telephone with Clemons about many subjects, ranging from payments to him by coaches to race relations at the university to the women's conviction that Clemons should stop dating white women, the newspapers reported. Bunge, the former girlfriend whom Clemons admitting assaulting, is white.
In one conversation last summer, Amy Stewart appeared to take delight at the problems that Clemons has caused the basketball coaches. ''You're going to take them down, you know that, right?'' Stewart told Clemons, according to the newspapers. ''You're taking them down. I'm taking great pleasure.''
Neither Ed nor Amy Stewart responded to requests for an interview.
Floyd, who has been overseeing Missouri's public university system for about a year, was drawn into the Clemons saga when Snyder asked him to mentor Clemons. Floyd was asked if, after all the disclosures and embarrassments, he would be willing now to say yes to a coach's request for him to work individually with an athlete.
''Clearly having gone through what I've gone through and what my family has gone through, there is no way I would have responded in the affirmative,'' Floyd said in a telephone interview. ''In retrospect, looking at that but clearly looking forward, I simply would not be in that situation with an athlete. I just wouldn't do it. This has been brutal.''
None of this recent history, however, has discouraged the Division II coaches who are intrigued by Clemons's talent on the court. Walker, the coach at Elizabeth City State, said he had expected Clemons to visit the university last Saturday, but he did not appear.
''Him not showing up this week is not a good sign for us,'' Walker said. ''There are people out there that are trying to steer him in particular ways, and there's going to be an advantage to them somewhere down the line.''
Walker added: ''That's maybe how and why Ricky's in the position he's in right now. What Ricky needs to do is find a place that's going to care about him and try to help him as opposed to kind of being shopped around. He's misguided.
''Everybody tries to make a little money off a kid like Ricky Clemons.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
