Afghanistan's constitutional convention was deadlocked for a third day Wednesday as some delegates refused to vote on amendments and their faction leaders argued over a few remaining issues.
Members of the assembly, called the loya jirga, showed rising frustration and anger at the stumbling proceedings, and warned that ethnic divisions were being aggravated to a dangerous level.
The assembly of 502 delegates has divided along ethnic lines in the last few days, with the largest group, the Pashtuns, arrayed against the minorities from the north of the country.
Delegates were debating angrily at the tea table while they waited for announcements on voting.
''Everyone is in a rage,'' said Habiba Danish, 23, a Tajik woman who is a teacher in the northern province of Takhar. ''Why are they not putting our ideas in the constitution? It is discrimination. If they don't accept our ideas, then we won't give up our weapons.''
The Tajiks are the most powerful armed faction and have dominated politics for the last two years because of their military strength. But the Pashtuns, rallied by President Hamid Karzai and his administration in recent months, have largely rejected Tajik efforts to amend the draft constitution.
As a result, there has been a logjam and each side has raised more and more objections in the last few days, throwing the entire constitution into question.
''It's a step back,'' said Ahmed Wali Massoud, the younger brother of the legendary guerrilla commander Ahmed Shah Massoud, who was killed by Al Qaeda operatives two days before Sept. 11, 2001. ''It's disastrous for unity.''
After hours of meetings until midnight on Tuesday and much of Wednesday, faction leaders and government ministers had agreed on only 2 of 12 outstanding amendments, he said. ''It is not working,'' Mr. Massoud said. ''People are dealing for something for themselves and are not thinking of the good of the country.''
The wrangling has aggravated underlying ethnic grievances, as the minorities from northern Afghanistan accused the Pashtuns of trying to impose their will, and the Pashtuns accused the northerners of spoiling the proceedings.
''The situation is getting out of hand,'' said Zaid Haidary, a Pashtun delegate from Wardak Province, just south of Kabul. ''One side was very quiet and patient but now both sides are very angry and it could go to violence.''
''There is a limit,'' he said. ''The Pashtuns' patience is running out.''
Faizullah Zaki, spokesman for the Uzbek leader, Gen. Abdul Rashid Dostum, called on the delegates to ''sit down together in a calm way.''
''We are interested in finding a way out,'' he said, ''finding compromises which could help move the loya jirga forward and have a happy end.''
The delegates have agreed on some 140 articles of the draft constitution over the last two and a half weeks. But up to a dozen articles that are ''problematic'' remain, the chairman, Sebaghatullah Mojadeddi, said. They include an article banning dual citizenship, another granting additional language rights to the Uzbek and Turkmen minorities, and a third creating a constitutional commission, all of which President Karzai opposes.
Faction leaders did agree on one of the most contentious articles concerning the powers of the president, according to Qayum Karzai, the older brother of the president. Opponents of President Karzai's plan for a strong executive had tried to introduce more parliamentary control over the president but appeared to have agreed to a text not very different from the original draft.
President Karzai has made it clear he wants the remaining issues to go to a vote in order to resolve them quickly and decisively. But the Tajiks and other ethnic minorities, who fear they will lose a vote to the Pashtun majority, are demanding further negotiation.
President Karzai blamed ''four or five people who are disrupting the jirga'' in comments to the press Wednesday, saying, ''They are not doing any good for themselves nor for the nation of Afghanistan.''
But the men Mr. Karzai was referring to, who include two outspoken editors of mujahedeen party newspapers, countered with accusations that the president and his supporters had been interfering in the loya jirga.
The president has used his two brothers, who are both delegates, and ministers and officials of his government to lobby delegates to support his preferred draft, said Abdul Shukoor Waqif Hakimi, chief editor of the newspaper Mujahid.
''I hope they stop the interference and pressure on us,'' he said. ''It is clear what they are doing. They want to push through a government draft.''
