DENVER is in the midst of the most ambitious highway graphics project ever. Carolyn Braaksma, a Denver environmental artist who seven years ago put 40-foot cactuses and a 67-foot lizard on 4 1/2 miles of concrete wall in Scottsdale, Ariz., has collaborated with Barb McKee, a former textile designer, to place giant birds, teepees and bison on Denver's 9 1/2 miles of new noise barriers, part of a project comparable in scope to the Big Dig in Boston.
But Ms. Braaksma's first meeting with officials at the Colorado Department of Transportation involved in the $1.67 billion construction project, scheduled for completion in 2006, went poorly. ''They nearly laughed me out of the room,'' Ms. Braaksma said. ''Painting something beige is still considered an enhancement in Denver. People just don't understand they could have something a lot nicer.''
Eventually, she and Ms. McKee found Steve Wilensky, senior urban designer on the giant project, familiarly known as T-Rex. T-Rex includes a light rail system and a 17-mile expansion of Interstate 25 that would have turned Denver's major north-south artery into a monotonous concrete corridor.
''These walls are huge,'' Mr. Wilensky said. ''They need to look better than just naked concrete slabs.'' Adding art, he declared, would also ''make them into landmarks so people could tell where they are.''
Concrete blocks bearing designs from Ms. Braaksma and Ms. McKee -- 20-foot swallows, 10-foot-tall bison, mountain ranges, cottonwood leaves and stylized city maps that make the token sea gulls on the Long Island Expressway look pathetic -- are now appearing along Route I-25. And the people of Denver have strong opinions.
''It's bad enough to have a highway dividing the neighborhood,'' said John Everest, an auto repair shop owner who led a successful drive to eliminate the walls next to his business. ''Adding noise barriers is like erecting a second Berlin Wall.''
Putting her art in what is almost her own backyard scares Ms. Braaksma. ''It's white-knuckle time,'' she said. ''After the walls were done in Scottsdale, I could leave, but I have to live here.''
In 1956, President Dwight D. Eisenhower started the Interstate System. Along its 42,795 miles of highway would come McDonald's, the Home Depot, the Mall of America and lots of trucks and noise. But from early on people nearby complained that they could not talk to one another (by day) or sleep (by night). By 1963 the first sound wall appeared, in Washington State, and in 1970 Congress decided to establish standards for highway noise levels. Any time they rose above 65 decibels, mitigation was required, usually with sound barriers.
On paper, the problem was resolved. But people were still unhappy. Sound barriers cannot eliminate traffic noise altogether; they are effective only for two or three houses in from the highway. What is worse, most barriers consisted of mile after mile of drab, poorly maintained walls.
This was not simply a visual issue. The more starkly utilitarian the sound barrier looks, the more likely complaints are to roll in. ''If people have to live with an ugly noise wall in their backyard day in and day out,'' said one Federal Highway Administration official, ''they'll tell you they don't hear any noise reduction even if you stand there with a meter. They'll look at you and say, 'I don't care what your meter says, I just can't hear any difference.' ''
HOW sound walls look may seem of little import, given that there are almost four million miles of public roads and only 1,600 miles of noise barriers. Because these walls exist only in populated areas, however, they are far more visible than statistics would suggest.
But they no longer need be monotonous or unadorned, thanks to Buck Scott, a contractor in Denver who discovered that he could produce concrete blocks with molded surfaces. That meant that concrete, which looked even more dreary than wood, could be decorative. Outside Chicago, a concrete wall went up that looked like a new wood fence. In New York and New Jersey, concrete noise barriers simulated cut stone and brick. On walls in Florida, birds and plants showed up in wallpaperlike patterns.
Noise-wall designers began experimenting. For a wall in Tucson, Ariz., the Seattle artist Vicki Scuri made compositions out of stylized cactus branches. In California, highway engineers replaced concrete with transparent plexiglass to preserve views. On a concrete barrier in Phoenix, the artists Mags Harries and Lajos Heder created 33 large-scale sculptures of pottery vessels and set them into special niches.
And now in Denver, on walls 8 to 16 feet high, Ms. Braaksma and Ms. McKee are providing local images where cars creep during rush hour or at other times whiz past at 55 miles an hour. From a distance, drivers will see mountains, rendered in three-quarter- to one-and-a-half-inch relief. From close up, they will recognize details like the corded rope used to outline the mountains. ''We wanted a pleasant backdrop, something subtle,'' Mr. Wilensky said. ''It's not a billboard.''
Ms. McKee said: ''People would look at our black-and-white sketches and say that's too busy and too detailed, and we kept saying it will change when it's monochromatic and sculptural. But that's a big leap for people to take, and the jury is still out.''
Initially the artists ruled out mountains and bison as too clichéd, but design committee members said such images helped the project seem part of Denver. ''The work has to talk to everyone because it's so big and people have no choice whether to see it,'' Ms. McKee said. ''You choose whether to go to a gallery, but when you drive on the highway you can't close your eyes.''
T-Rex officials and the artists held weekly meetings with local groups to talk about the walls. ''Every neighborhood had a range of opinions,'' Mr. Wilensky said. ''No walls, plain walls, shorter walls, you name it.''
In the end, most neighborhoods accepted them, perhaps in part because rejection of the walls required affidavits from at least 75 percent of affected property owners. One exception was a neighborhood called the Narrows, where Mr. Everest and other small-business owners protested that they would lose their view of the mountains and become invisible to passing motorists.
By contrast, businesses and residents in West Washington Park wanted the walls so much that more than 75 percent signed a pro-walls petition. But the association's request to use a brickwork or cut-stone pattern for the residential side of the wall rather than the designated native-grasses design went nowhere. ''We have to live with this art for the next 50 years,'' Jim Jones, president of the association, said. ''We were disappointed that the state didn't give any consideration to our concerns.''
When the wall is finished, Kathleen MacKenzie, a Denver City Council member, expects that some people will still be unhappy. ''I just hope the whole thing doesn't look ridiculous,'' she said.
If John Lane, a project manager for a corporate training company who commutes to his job every day on Interstate 25, is in the majority, she need not worry. ''Denver has such lousy architecture that I appreciate anything that's more than right angles and blank surfaces,'' he said. ''The bottom line is, you're still driving between perpendicular walls, but the art makes it a lot less claustrophobic. On a scale of 1 to 10, I'd give it an 8. It makes driving to work a lot nicer.''
