Jeff Fisher has molded the Tennessee Titans into a team with a gruff attitude. They are a physical team that seldom ducks from challenges and a confident one that offers a dare with flair. This upfront style has served the Titans well: over the past four seasons they have won more games, 56, than any other team in the N.F.L.
But when the Baltimore Ravens (10-6) are on the other sideline, the Titans have shriveled lately.
Tennessee (12-4) has lost five straight games to the Ravens. Fisher is 6-8 against them. Baltimore Coach Brian Billick is 6-2 against Tennessee. The biggest loss in this series for the Titans came in the 2000 playoffs, when they were 13-3 and had home-field advantage but lost, 24-10, to Baltimore, the eventual Super Bowl champion.
When Tennessee has faced the Ravens in recent games, the Titans' special teams have crumbled and the Ravens have forced turnovers that produced spectacular, game-swinging touchdowns.
So why do the Titans relish playing the Ravens on Saturday in Baltimore in an American Football Conference wild-card playoff game?
''Because our team has a short-term memory and does a good job of keeping perspective,'' Fisher said in a telephone interview yesterday. ''And because this team has as good a chance as any we've ever had to compete for the Super Bowl.''
Or as Titans running back Eddie George put it in a telephone interview yesterday: ''When they beat us in the playoffs in 2000, we were devastated. They put a hangover on us that lasted the next year, when we started 0-3 and then lost to them again to go 0-4 before we finished 7-9.
''That's a lot of impact from one team on another team. But sometimes in life you have to deal with the past in order to move to the future. Our goal is still to wind up in the Super Bowl. That's in Houston. We just have to start off in Baltimore now to get to Houston.''
This matchup features a fierce clash between Ravens running back Jamal Lewis, who rushed for 2,066 yards this season, and Tennessee's defense, which is No. 1 against the run. The Titans allowed 80.9 rushing yards a game this season. Since 1996, only 13 running backs have rushed for 100 or more yards against Tennessee, and Lewis is not one of them. In three starts against Tennessee, he has scored one rushing touchdown.
The Titans' primary objective Saturday will be to stop Lewis.
''The bottom line is you have to tackle him,'' Titans linebacker Keith Bulluck said. ''Obviously if it was that easy he probably wouldn't have 2,000 yards this season. But that's really what you have to do. You have to man up and tackle him. He has speed, power and agility. He's probably the closest thing that anyone has seen to Jim Brown. That's a big compliment, but that's what it is.''
The Titans will counter offensively with quarterback Steve McNair, who has been slowed by calf and other injuries in recent weeks. McNair is rested and healthy for this game, Fisher said. McNair, who threw 24 touchdown passes and 7 interceptions this season, had a passer rating of 100.4, which made him the only N.F.L. quarterback who finished with a rating over 100.
After consecutive losses to the Jets and Indianapolis, Tennessee finished the regular season with victories over Buffalo, 28-26; at Houston, 27-24; and against Tampa Bay, 33-13. The Titans used the backup quarterbacks Billy Volek and Neil O'Donnell to win two of those games.
''We're a 12-4 team, and you won't ever find one that has not figured out a way to win close games,'' Fisher said. ''But we've also had a great season accomplishing history here, with six games where we scored 30 or more points. In our final seven games we only had one team scheduled that had a winning record. We started off fairly well. The players were already thinking about the playoffs, and I would have rather played seven teams that had winning records. We've come through it all pretty good.''
Fisher recalled that in previous meetings, Baltimore blocked kicks and returned them for long touchdowns and that the Titans blocked kicks only to see the ball squib sideways out of bounds.
''We're looking for a new beginning,'' McNair said.
The Titans will look to score quickly and often against Baltimore and to neutralize Lewis.
''We have a young team with a core group of veterans and we expected a certain level of success this season,'' said Fisher, whose team lost to the Oakland Raiders in the A.F.C. championship game last season. ''Our whole thing was to win two more games than we did last year.''
Along the way for the Titans, exorcising the Ravens' hex would be a joy.
PRO FOOTBALL
