The 70th annual Orange Bowl on Thursday night is a game that neither the participants nor the game's organizers wanted.
The game matches Miami against Florida State; they have already met this season, and they are scheduled to play again on Labor Day.
Miami's Hurricanes (10-2) won the regular-season meeting Oct. 11 in Tallahassee, Fla., in a steady rain, 22-14.
Although the rematch should give the Seminoles (10-2) an emotional edge -- on the long-held theory that it is especially difficult to defeat a good team twice in one season -- Florida State Coach Bobby Bowden would rather have played almost any other team.
''If I lose, all my people are going to be mad at me,'' Bowden said. ''If I go to Nebraska and lose, nobody cares. But this is Miami and all my alumni are here. This will be a major pressure game.''
The Seminoles have some experience at meeting a regular-season opponent in a bowl game. Florida State has met Florida twice, although long before the current players were here. The Seminoles tied Florida in the regular season in 1994, then won the bowl game, 23-17. In 1996, the Seminoles won by 3 points during the regular season, then Florida routed them, 52-20, for the national title in the bowl game.
Miami had wanted a rematch of its Fiesta Bowl showdown for the national title against Ohio State last year, but the Fiesta Bowl did not feel the same way about that idea. The Orange Bowl wanted that game, which would have been a financial bonanza for local tourist-oriented businesses, at least compared with the fiscal flop it is now.
''I'm not going to be dishonest and say I'm not a little disappointed,'' Hurricanes Coach Larry Coker said of the matchup. ''We know what we're in for.''
Still, the Hurricanes' convincing victory in October -- Florida State scored as time expired to narrow the margin -- ran their winning streak to four games against Florida State. As Bowden said, ''I don't have anybody on my team that's beaten them.''
In the regular-season loss, Florida State quarterback Chris Rix was intercepted twice by safety Sean Taylor, one returned 50 yards for a touchdown. Rix insisted on passing deep, despite the conditions that day, and the Seminoles paid for it. Rix also lost two fumbles.
That is part of the reason Rix has received some uncomplimentary messages on his cellphone in recent days, with the callers essentially saying, ''Don't screw up the Miami game.'' He had an even more disastrous game against Miami as a freshman, with four interceptions and two lost fumbles.
In the October game, Rix did not have much help from the Seminoles' running game, which features the 6-foot-1, 255-pound tailback Greg Jones, who blistered Miami for 189 yards the year before. Jones will be playing his final college game.
Miami quarterback Brock Berlin, who transferred from Florida, enters the game with less emotional baggage. Berlin led Miami to comeback victories over Florida and West Virginia, lost his starting job for a game after the Hurricanes lost two in a row, then finished strong.
The late-season development of the freshman running back Tyrone Moss along with the senior Jarrett Payton, who has rushed for 854 yards this season, apparently took some pressure off Berlin.
''The way he ended the season was very positive,'' Coker said of Berlin. ''Having some help at running back has given him more confidence and given him some good things that he feels comfortable with.''
The matchup could be the final college game for several star players on each team, most notably Miami tight end Kellen Winslow, who figures to turn pro after a successful but controversial junior season.
''I think sometimes I'm the son of my father,'' he said, referring to Kellen Winslow Sr., a Hall of Fame tight end. ''I have a lot to live up to. There are cameras on me all the time. Everybody is watching you.''
Winslow rejects the notion that the Hurricanes, with five national championships and a winning streak against Florida State, come into this game with a bull's-eye on their backs. ''I think,'' he said, ''we put a bull's-eye on other people's backs.''
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
