Readers of this column had a slight surprise 40 years ago. They found that Albert Morehead, overstretched with other work, had yielded to this writer after 29 years at the helm.
Morehead had a powerful impact on the game in the 1930's, as player, journalist, author, editor, administrator and lawmaker. In 1934, at age 25, he helped Ely Culbertson win a hard-fought match for the Schwab Cup in England. He was Culbertson's chief executive in a wide-ranging business empire and in 1937 negotiated the merger of the American Bridge League and the United States Bridge Association to form the American Contract Bridge League. For many years he was the principal author of the laws of the game.
Morehead never forgot the diagramed deal, played in 1931 during the Depression. He sat South, and his one-heart opening and three no-trump rebid were normal then, when the game was less than nine years old. North's one-spade response was decidedly subminimum, and Morehead was horrified when the dummy appeared.
East won the club lead with the ace and returned the deuce, strongly suggesting that the suit was split 4-4. South therefore took his king and exited with the jack, knowing that West would have to do something helpful after scoring his clubs. That something proved to be a heart.
The declarer captured the heart king with the ace, led the diamond ace, and thought matters over. Since West might have played the jack from a J-10 combination, a modern player might rely on the principle of restricted choice. That principle was still two decades away, but Morehead had a different clue. With J-10 doubleton, West would surely have shifted to a diamond, not to a heart. The next lead from the closed hand was therefore a thoughtful diamond nine.
West won with the king and had to lead a major suit in this position:
West should now have led a heart, giving away a trick but not the whole store. Instead he led a spade, and South was able to take two tricks in that suit. He then cashed the diamond queen and crossed to the eight. That squeezed West in the major suits, and the declarer had made an unlikely contract, scoring a complete top.
This was played at the Lovejoy Bridge Studio in Manhattan, and Morehead was playing too well. The proprietor, Mildred Lovejoy, had set up a weekly series of 10 games, with a substantial cash prize going to the best performer. The best six scores would count, with nobody allowed to play more than twice with the same partner. Morehead scored more than 70 percent in five of the first six evenings, and nobody felt interested in playing thereafter. Miss Lovejoy refused to pay the prize, claiming, with some reason, that Morehead had ruined her competition. Instead she appointed him assistant manager of the club and paid him the princely sum of $25 a week.
BRIDGE
