JEAN-CLAUDE NEDELEC, an owner of Glorious Food catering, entered in toque and trench coat and marveled at the transformation of the Upper East Side kitchen of Agnes Gund and Daniel Shapiro. Gone were the linoleum counters, the corner stove and the 20-year-old cabinets encrusted with greeting cards and children's drawings. In their place stood a gleaming island of stainless steel with mahogany paneling, a four-burner stove by La Cornue and a sleekly hovering exhaust funnel. ''I've been everywhere, up and down Park Avenue,'' Mr. Nedelec said, ''but this is really something.'' And he set to work filling Parmesan cups with wild mushroom risotto for 100.
The Gund-Shapiro kitchen, designed by Markus Dochantschi, 35, who moved to New York from London in 2002, doesn't have a refrigerator that talks back, a microwave that surfs the Web or other bells and whistles. Instead, it offers a shrewd understanding of the work and leisure habits of its users. It is a small feat of social engineering and a prime example of an emerging space in the city home: the hearth for professionals. Besides being a working kitchen capable of turning out canapés for crowds or scrambled eggs for two, it is a crossroads for the support cast in the lives of Ms. Gund and Mr. Shapiro, her husband.
''We wanted something that would look nice and warm and be convenient for people,'' said Ms. Gund, 65, the emerita president of the Museum of Modern Art. And by people, she means not just family, but a steady flow of helping hands -- housekeepers, caterers, personal trainers and dog-walkers. They all use the kitchen, as does Ms. Gund, who, as one of Manhattan's busiest art patrons, often starts her long days of multitasking at the table there.
''She'll be on the phone at 6 a.m. making appointments, while a hairdresser is doing her hair and her husband is eating breakfast,'' said Michael Amaral, a stylist who has orchestrated Ms. Gund's parties for eight years. ''And then there are crates and canvases coming through all day long.'' Ms. Gund frequently lends from and rotates her collection, which includes rare and early works by Jasper Johns, Jackson Pollock, Roy Lichtenstein and Frank Stella. The kitchen is the staging area for art traffic as it comes and goes through the backdoor.
Since this is an art patron's kitchen, there had to be room for art here as well. In this case, it is a video starring the kitchen itself in a dream sequence that plays on a 21-inch plasma-screen monitor. Mr. Dochantschi made the video with Eric Schuldenfrei, a computer animator who recently created the video presentations for the finalists in the competition for the ground zero memorial, and Donald Cornett, a cinematographer.
It was Ms. Gund's interest in emerging artists that led her to Mr. Dochantschi. He started his career in the London office of Zaha Hadid, an architect known for gravity-defying explosive forms, who caught Ms. Gund's eye at the ''Deconstructivist Architecture'' show at the Museum of Modern Art in 1988. She has been following Ms. Hadid's rising star ever since. ''I couldn't ask a big name like that to work on a kitchen,'' Ms. Gund said. So she contacted Mr. Dochantschi, who continues to collaborate with Ms. Hadid on her work in the United States, most recently the Rosenthal Center for Contemporary Art in Cincinnati.
Ms. Gund's kitchen had not had a face-lift in 25 years, and her initial impulse was just to buy new shelves and a sink from a showroom, avoiding the nightmare -- and any incidental damage to the artworks -- of a full renovation. Mr. Dochantschi convinced her that he could complete the job in three months with minimum chaos by sealing off the kitchen and setting up a field canteen in a guest bedroom.
When they are not entertaining, Ms. Gund and Mr. Shapiro, a lawyer, eat out much of the time. A hot plate and a microwave on a bookshelf in the guest room held a kind of Gypsy's-life charm. ''At first I thought, 'Baloney to that!' '' Ms. Gund said. ''But making the guest room work might well be the most exceptional thing Markus pulled off.''
Kitchens themselves have never figured large in Ms. Gund's imagination or, for that matter, in her life. A daughter of privilege -- her father was the chairman of the Cleveland Trust Company -- she grew up in a large family (the second of six children) in a sprawling Tudor-style house in Shaker Heights, Ohio. ''We weren't allowed in the kitchen,'' she recalled, except on Sundays, when she and a brother made dinners of deviled eggs and Jell-O while listening to ''The Shadow'' on the radio. Even after she and Mr. Shapiro had four children of their own and were living in Kent, Conn., ''I never paid much attention to kitchens,'' she said.
In fact, at a recent holiday party soon after the renovation, Ms. Gund ushered in guests to see not the reborn kitchen, but a video playing a continuous loop. The work, ''Dicing Nature,'' opens with a scene of the empty kitchen with a vase of flowers in one corner. Then Mr. Shapiro's nephew, Bryan Calvert, a chef who owns Cafe Atlas on Central Park South, appears and slices up a grapefruit. In the next scene, a waterfall gushes from a ceiling vent, gradually filling the room with water. A couple of fish swim by. ''It's about the displacement of nature, the interaction between the use of food and nature, and our perception of nature,'' Mr. Dochantschi said, taking a stab at clarifying the plot.
At the party, for the Museum of Modern Art's membership committee, guests were riveted, especially by a vase of purple and white orchids on a bookshelf captured by a discreetly placed camera and inserted into the video. ''You can't tell what's real and what's been filmed before,'' said Neal Meltzer, an art consultant, while watching a scene showing the Cornue stove and the flowers dissolving into clouds in a blue sky. ''It's a little like a Magritte.'' As the party wound down, guests began turning the camera on themselves so that they too appeared in the video as the kitchen flooded.
Considering that people are spending more and more time in the kitchen, it was probably inevitable that art would find its way there as well, said Glenn D. Lowry, director of the Museum of Modern Art. The idea that it could be ''not just a place to cook and chat over a meal but actually a place for thinking about art was brilliant,'' he said.
It took three months to make the video -- almost as long as the renovation -- using software by Peter Flaherty, a video artist who worked on ''Alladeen,'' a mixed-media presentation at the Brooklyn Academy of Music last month. The jazziest aspect of the Gund-Shapiro video is the projection of a live image -- at the party, it was the orchids -- into the recorded clip. As it turned out, buying fish at the fish market in Chinatown and keeping them alive was almost as difficult.
The 20-minute video was included in the budget for the project. (Mr. Dochantschi and his clients declined to discuss how much was spent, except to say that it was about the same as for an off-the-shelf kitchen from a high-end European company.) Ms. Gund said that at first she was skeptical about the video, ''but when Markus explained it better, as being about the difference between what you think you're eating and what you really eat, I thought it was such a fun idea.'' The flat-screen monitor, positioned next to the table, also serves as a computer, a DVD player and a television set.
The Gund-Shapiro kitchen is Mr. Dochantschi's first. The only other project he has completed in the United States is the renovation of a town house in Greenwich Village for Hyatt Bass, a daughter of Sid and Anne Bass, and her husband, Josh Klausner. He approached the 400-square-foot kitchen with the intensity of a young architect with ideas to burn and much to prove. Today's kitchen is highly complex and layered, he said, like a Joseph Cornell box.
''It has to work on contradictory levels,'' he said, ''as a professional space for entertaining, a normal home kitchen and an extension of the living room.''
The kitchen's dual nature -- both ruthlessly efficient and inviting -- is reflected in the materials: steel counters and flush white cabinetry (no knobs), contrasted with warm mahogany-stained floors and a wall of bookshelves. The table, made by Alias, an Italian company, and sold at Moss in SoHo ($2,520), is made of foam-injected maple stained to look like wenge. The matching stacking chairs are light enough to hoist with one hand.
In consultation with Mr. Calvert of Cafe Atlas, who often cooks for the couple, Mr. Dochantschi designed the kitchen to streamline everyday procedures. A second sink was installed beside the stove to make it easy to pour off hot water from pasta, and the toaster and other small appliances are on a narrow counter that pulls out when they are in use.
Mr. Dochantschi oversaw the construction of Ms. Hadid's art museum, which opened in Cincinnati last spring, and he employed similar details -- and some of the same hardware -- in the kitchen. The adjustable steel shelves and the drawer pulls are the same as those in the museum's shop. Borrowing a museum storage technique, Mr. Dochantschi built cabinets up to the ceiling, the top ones for rarely used platters.
Mr. Dochantschi wanted to design a kitchen table that would attract as much attention as the video. He had in mind a liquid-crystal glass tabletop that could turn opaque at the flip of a switch. (The technology is in use in the dressing rooms at the Prada store in SoHo, designed by Rem Koolhaas). A shallow tray under the glass would hold Ms. Gund's collection of greeting cards, say, or place cards for guests. But Ms. Gund rejected the idea: she considered the table too expensive, and worried that it would be too heavy to move.
Even without the high-tech dazzle, the table, placed alongside the bookshelf and the flat-screen monitor, has become the household gathering place. When the grandchildren come over, they are more likely to watch a Knicks game than ''Dicing Nature.''
Despite her indifference to cooking, Ms. Gund is in the kitchen more than anyone. After all the guests and helpers have left, she works alone at night, arranging stacks of paper on the bookshelves and reviewing auction catalogs. ''I even feel a little sad when I turn off the lights and have to leave,'' she said. Usually, it's only a few hours before the morning crew arrives.
