New Year's Day is the pause between the past and the future -- after the grand retrospectives of Hanukkah and Christmas but before the resolutions and predictions kick in. This is one of the few moments in the year when we are almost forced to contemplate the strange propulsion of time that carries us along through life. You can choose your own metaphor. Do the years feel like combers rolling onto the beach, one after the other? Do you feel as if you're swimming downstream with the current of a mighty river? Or does this winter-shift from one year to the next feel like a portage through dark woods between two lakes?
From time to time most of us aspire to episodes of timelessness, if that isn't a contradiction in terms. Parents look at their children, or we look at our parents, and there is a horrifying thrill in how rapidly they change, a thrill that makes us want to stop time, as much for ourselves as for them. There are days so beautiful, so productive, so happy that we would like to fix them in our minds for good as the prototype of all days -- while knowing that what makes those days so memorable is also the fact that they slide past as if by their own momentum. But the momentum is ours, too. It's tempting to believe on New Year's Day that we are standing still while the world rushes on, as if we were passengers in one of Einstein's thought experiments. But who is to say that we aren't the ones rushing onward, and the world is trying desperately to keep up? Time's arrow is embedded in the very nature of this universe, and it's a good thing, too, because otherwise everything would be so disorganized.
These are not abstract lives we lead. The year 2003, like every other year we've lived, has a particular taste to it. Because of the war in Iraq, 2003 will stand out in our lives -- never quite blending into the lump of ''the early 21st century.'' Nor do you have to be very political to realize with a certain dread that 2004 has that election-year ring to it and that the fracas we are already caught up in will build and build until just a few weeks before next Thanksgiving. Today is a good day for feeling as if we somehow stand apart from our lives, slung above the tide, looking out over phosphorescent seas far below us. And because it's also Thursday, that feeling may last right through the weekend. But Monday is coming, and 2004 really begins in earnest then. It will be time to find out what this old life will bring us in a new year.
