I NEVER thought Steve Spurrier would surrender; I thought his ego would not allow him to bail out of the National Football League. But there it was, in black and white: Spurrier threw in the towel on Tuesday.
Spurrier's resignation as coach of the Washington Redskins has sent tremors to the Sugar Bowl in New Orleans, where Oklahoma will face Louisiana State in the Bowl Championship Series title game on Sunday. Bob Stoops, the Oklahoma head coach, is a good friend of Spurrier's.
The Spurrier debacle is a setback for a college head coach, like Stoops, who may want to jump to the N.F.L.
For now, Stoops likes where he is.
''Here, it's about the unity and the team and developing young men,'' Stoops said yesterday. ''This is not what I get when I watch the N.F.L. It's all about salaries and individuals. And there's very little accountability by players for production and winning.''
Spurrier believed in his heart of hearts that he would blow away the N.F.L. with his innovative passing attack. If he had come along a few seasons earlier and landed in St. Louis, the Rams might indeed be building a statue to Spurrier at this very moment.
Instead we are scratching our heads over the sudden departure of a legend in his own mind. Spurrier's failure will have repercussions in the N.F.L., where general managers and owners will shy away from hot-shot college head coaches with little, if any, N.F.L. experience.
''I'm not too sure that experience with Spurrier didn't take the enthusiasm away from owners to hire college coaches,'' Jimmy Johnson said yesterday in a telephone interview. Johnson said that Nick Saban, the L.S.U. head coach, could be more attractive because he has N.F.L. experience.
Johnson thought Spurrier was naïve.
''Pro football can be humbling,'' he said.
Stoops, who was Spurrier's defensive coordinator when the 1996 Florida Gators won a national championship, thought his former boss went into the pros with his eyes open.
Why have so few college coaches made the successful transition to the N.F.L.? Johnson won national championships at Miami and won Super Bowls with the Cowboys. ''It's a 7-day-a-week, 12-month-a-year job,'' Johnson said. ''It's not a part-time job. You don't approach it the same way you do in college.''
This is what Johnson told Butch Davis when Davis was deciding whether to leave the University of Miami for the Cleveland Browns. ''You're not going to have a life,'' he said. ''And you still may not win.''
The biggest barrier for Spurrier was not X's and O's but A, for attitude: at Florida, Spurrier, like most college coaches at his level, was lord and master. Johnson admitted that he was when he was at Miami.
The roles change dramatically in the N.F.L., and most college coaches cannot, or will not, adjust to the change of having players as peers, not students on scholarship.
''You're not dealing with kids that look at you like you're a father figure,'' Johnson said. ''You're looking at men who are making millions of dollars; they want to know why. In college you say, 'Do this, do that,' and no questions asked.''
That's why Tom Coughlin, who had a winning record with the Jacksonville Jaguars and is known for his unyielding discipline, would not be a good fit to return to the N.F.L. The news media talk about the Giants needing a firm hand, but that's why he was run out of Jacksonville. ''He wore thin toward the end there at Jacksonville,'' Johnson said. ''If you don't communicate and you don't motivate, you are going to wear thin or you're going to have a revolt.''
After practice yesterday, Stoops said that he had been contacted by an N.F.L. team this season. He did not say which one. He has a good life in Oklahoma. He makes good money, $2.2 million a year, and the recruiting faucet is on.
So why leave? The same reason Spurrier left Florida. You eventually wear out your welcome. What excited the fans and the boosters five seasons ago had become boring. Win 10 or 11 games each season but not a national championship.
The same fate awaits coaches in the N.F.L. A coach is hired to be fired.
Spurrier's resignation concluded a grand experiment: Could a hot-shot walk-on-water college coach come in and turn the N.F.L. upside down?
No.
College football is not the real world. They play for a mythical championship and players risk life and limb for bowl games that do not matter.
College football is a dress rehearsal for the reality of pro football. A player who leaves Oklahoma or L.S.U. for the N.F.L. with the same rah-rah attitude will be quickly disillusioned. The pro football player is an independent contractor: one season you wear green, the next you wear blue.
The college player, in theory, is a Tiger or a Sooner forever -- until he transfers or has his scholarship revoked. This is the world Steve Spurrier came from and will presumably return to. A world where the college coach can keep his foot on the players' necks 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
The fatal flaw of the college coach -- and this is what doomed Spurrier -- is that he deludes himself into thinking that the coaching genius is the overriding reason for success.
Spurrier received a rude wake-up call and the reverberations are being felt from Oklahoma to Louisiana.
Sports of The Times
