''THE L Word,'' Showtime's new mini-series about a tightly knit group of lesbians in Los Angeles who are as unabashed as their tightly knit group of gay brothers on ''Queer as Folk'' and as self-aware as the tightly knit group of heterosexuals were on ''Thirtysomething,'' doesn't lack for visual or narrative pleasure. The show is warm and bright and sexy; it's funny. You can easily stay up late, watching, simply to see what will happen next to the beautiful, ambitious, modern women living their complicated lives with one another: some trying to have babies, some trying to find love, some writing or promoting art or being famous sports stars, some still figuring themselves out. It's wonderful that some of the dialogue goes like this:
Young Lady A, pouting, to a rakish one-night stand: ''I really liked [having sex with] you.''
Young Lady B, who has already moved on, patiently: ''I liked [having sex with] you, too.''
The actual transitive verb they use is shorter.
This casual exchange is wonderful because of all the freedom and power and erotic agency it takes for granted, because of the edge of real disappointment it contains (rakes are rakes), and because it takes place on a street corner, in daylight. The fight for liberation is as grand as opera, but the dailiness of living a liberated life can come closer to soap opera; the police might not arrest you anymore, but it doesn't mean the girl you just slept with will call you back.
On ''The L Word,'' which begins next Sunday night, liberation also means material comfort and joy: these 21st-century lesbians drive convertible Saabs and Mini Coopers, chart their love lives on titanium laptops and play out their dramas by the pool at their Los Angeles bungalows. They're not super-rich, but TV-rich enough to spend a lot of time, in the way that TV people do, sitting around in cafes and trendy restaurants, flirting and discussing life. Their jobs are nominal; they have zero percent body fat; their teeth are blindingly white; everyone has sex constantly. What's not to like? As lightly toned by reality as the women on ''Sex and the City,'' the bold, soigné characters on ''The L Word'' suggest that L is also for limerence, that rapturous state of early love when the entire world is glowing and delectable.
This is a breakthrough in the annals of television's fantasy life. Being an L myself, a member of a group that has had a spotty presence on the small screen, I can testify with authority to the despair of bouncing along a life of risk, mystery and heartbreak only to turn on the TV and see two women in bad pantsuits gingerly touching one another on the forearm. ''The L Word'' tosses those pantsuits to the wind, and good riddance to them. A mini-series of one's own is progress, undeniably.
At the same time, however, watching the series left me with a strange sense of dislocation along with my happiness. A peculiar consequence of so rarely seeing your kind on television, in movies, in plays, what have you, is that you can become, almost unwittingly, attached to a certain kind of wildness: the wildness of feeling not only unrepresented but somehow unrepresentable in ordinary terms. You get so good at ranging around unseen (and finding less obvious characters to identify with, from Tony Soprano to Seven of Nine) that it can feel a little limiting to be decanted into a group of perfectly nice women leading pleasant, more or less realistic lives. You can think, ungratefully: Is that all there is?
Another consequence of living in a representational desert is that a tremendous urgency develops, a ferocious desire not only to be seen in some literal sense -- we do have a lesbian character, she's that one in the back in the pantsuit; did you miss that episode? -- but to be seen with all the blood and angst and magic you possess. Watching ''Angels in America'' on HBO last month, I was reminded of what Georgia O'Keeffe once said, that she decided to make flowers huge enough that people couldn't ignore them.
Among many other things, it seemed as if Tony Kushner, writing during an era when it felt as if one's entire world was about to end, was on fire to convey the impending apocalypse in no uncertain terms. At such a moment there isn't time to wait for general audiences to understand the importance of two gay men in a room, talking. You have to deploy images that can't be ignored: towering angels, galaxy-changing orgasms, history split in half and roaming loose around the world. It's like that. It's that big. Visibility is a tricky thing; is someone visible when you can point her out in a crowd, or when you understand what her life feels like to her?
What about when that life is just, you know, a life? No crashing cymbals of fate. No looming apocalypse. In ''The L Word,'' underneath the libidinous drumbeat (though I'm not complaining) is the interesting, subtler thrum of what Freud called ''ordinary unhappiness.'' Bette and Tina don't know whether they should break up or have a baby; Alice can only love women who treat her badly; rakish Shane might just drift around forever, unmoored. Alice is making a map on her computer of how every L in the galaxy has slept with every other L; speeches are made about how this shows that we're all connected by love (or something), but more fascinating is the off-handedness with which Alice says to a straight male co-worker that she's sure he's on her map, too, somewhere.
Tossed around with the lingerie (again: not complaining) on ''The L Word'' are some unstressed assumptions which are really quite radical, the primary one being that we live in a world in an advanced state of sexual identity blur. When the subject has anything to do with sex and love, television has always nervously herded like with like, but that conceit is already straining at the fence posts here.
In ''The L Word'' heterosexuals playfully remark to one another on which members of the same sex they find hot and sometimes dally accordingly; lesbians pick up men if they want to; one of the women is bisexual; and -- as in life -- gay people and straight people go to the same parties, live in the same neighborhoods and are even related to one another. In its most offhanded suppositions, the show has already gone past its own premise. Reasons for bringing the women together at the Planet, their local queer hangout, begin to vie with the increasingly obvious fact that they live on this planet, with everybody else.
And every time Pam Grier, who plays the semi-floundering straight sister to Jennifer Beals's successful, well-partnered, queen bee lesbian, appears on screen, she conveys a thickness of soul that's riveting. She's imperfect, not shiny, not rich. Even when her line readings go flat, you can't stop watching her, not because she's straight or gay, but because she seems so flawed and human. And she often has the dubious expression of a person who isn't entirely convinced she's got a place on any map.
Looking at Alice's growing chart of interconnection, one character remarks, ''It's like this whole crazy, tiny world.'' To which Alice responds, ''Crazy, yes, but not tiny.'' This is a quiet moment, these two gay women in a room, talking, but as axis-shifting in its way as an angel crashing through the ceiling. You can conclude from the glossy surfaces of ''The L Word'' that L stands for latte or Lexus and stop there. Or you can notice that in some of its less flashy moments the show has staked a claim on Large: as in a larger, denser, more ambivalent imaginary world, populated by imperfect and riveting citizens of all sexual stripes. Call me an optimist, but my money's on the latter.
TELEVISION Stacey D'Erasmo is the author of ''Tea.'' Her second novel, ''A Seahorse Year,'' will be published this summer.
Correction:  January 18, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about ''The L Word'' on the Showtime channel misstated its programming type. It is a series, not a mini-series.
