FOR nine years, John Juriga lived with a lie. The General Motors Corporation, his employer, had been battling an important trade-secret case, and Mr. Juriga, an engineer, had been hailed as a hero for finding a crucial memo that was a linchpin of the company's defense. But, just weeks before the case was to go to trial last spring in Superior Court in Waterbury, Mr. Juriga broke down and admitted he had faked the evidence.
Mr. Juriga's forgery is just one of many extraordinary twists in a bizarre business dispute that has been simmering in Connecticut since 1989. At issue: Did General Motors steal a breakthrough design in automotive cooling technology for its Corvette from Jack Evans, an inventor from Sharon, and then attempt, as Mr. Evans claimed, to drive him out of business so he wouldn't have the will or the means to fight back? G.M. denied the charge, but Mr. Evans insisted he has been robbed of a valuable trade secret.
''G.M. stole from me,'' he said, ''and I'll never stop fighting until I get back what was mine.''
Despite the forgery, G.M. won its case in Superior Court in August. Judge Robert McWeeny ruled in favor of the company, saying that Mr. Evans effectively gave away his rights to his trade secret years ago when he demonstrated the system to G.M.
Mr. Evans, who was seeking $612 million in damages, filed an appeal in November. A well-heeled group of 163 investors, among them several members of the du Pont family, is helping to fund the litigation and will get a cut if Mr. Evans wins. Fish &amp; Richardson, one of the nation's largest law firms specializing in intellectual property, is willing to gamble on the case. The firm, which has represented Mr. Evans since 1999, said it would continue the legal fight on a partial contingency basis.
This dispute is costing both sides millions. Mr. Evans estimated his legal bills are $3.5 million. G.M. won't disclose how much the case has cost the company, but, to handle its defense, it retained a hard-driving and high-priced litigator, John T. Hickey Jr., of Kirkland &amp; Ellis. Legal experts estimated the company's legal bill could be as high as $6 million.
Last month, it got a bit bigger. As punishment for the forgery, the company was ordered by the court to pay $556,000 to Mr. Evans. G.M. said it would not comment on the matter.
The dispute began almost 15 years ago in the spring of 1989. Mr. Evans, a respected automotive inventor , had been working for years on top-secret cooling technologies for the next generation of Corvettes as a subcontractor for G.M. This project was a high priority for the company. The Corvette was meant to be the flagship of its fleet, an icon of dazzling power and design that would awe drivers and lure car-buyers into dealerships. But the car was losing its appeal. Sales had been declining for several years.
The company was spending an estimated $100 million to redesign the engine alone, but its engineers were bedeviled by problems with the cooling system. They faced two challenges: The car's new design demanded a system that would cool a hot, high-performance engine, yet it had to be sleek and compact enough to fit under a more stream-lined hood. G.M.'s engineers were working on the design, and the company had recruited subcontractors to help, as well. Among them was Jack Evans.
Mr. Evans is a quirky fellow with a fierce intellect. The son of a prominent surgeon who is credited with inventing intravenous anesthesia in the 1920's, Mr. Evans enlisted in the Marines in 1966 to learn about nuclear power, but instead ended up installing minefields in Vietnam. He was seriously wounded during a mortar attack and spent eight months in a military hospital.
After coming home in 1968, he enrolled at Yale University, intending to become a doctor, but he dropped out after a few months because anti-war and anti-soldier sentiment was so strong on campus. He got a job working for a high-performance engine designer. After a few years, he struck out on his own and opened a shop near the race track in Lime Rock. There, he quickly won acclaim for his innovations, among them an oil sump still used in racecars today.
Like many business relationships, G.M. and Mr. Evans started out with a lot of backslapping and bonhomie in the early 1980's. Mr. Evans develops and races cars that compete on the Nascar circuit. Detroit's executives are regulars at racetracks; they are a breeding ground for new talent and technological advances. G.M.'s prestigious Corvette Group recruited Mr. Evans to work on special projects involving cooling systems. After several years, he was a regular subcontractor. His little shop behind his home in Sharon was billing GM about $70,000 a month.
While G.M. was fretting over the new Corvette, Mr. Evans said he believed he had solved its problem. He had designed a reverse-flow cooling system, which offered several advantages such as more horsepower and better mileage over standard cooling systems. Mr. Evans claimed his system had a breakthrough design: a vent no larger than a pinhole that allowed hot vapor to escape without the loss of too much cooling fluid. (G.M., at trial, said it has had similar reverse-flow systems for several decades.)
Invited to Detroit to demonstrate his technologies, he hauled a new Corvette to the automaker's test center outside Detroit, and installed the reverse cooling system there. Mr. Evans claimed G.M. employees broke into the car the night before the tests and reverse-engineered the engine. In doing so, he said they discovered his pinhole vent and, thus, the answer to the cooling-system problem. The tip-off, he said, was an access panel under the platform on which the test vehicle stood. He said the panel appeared to be slightly ajar when he returned to the test center the next morning.
At the time, Mr. Evans said he was assured by technicians that the car had not been touched, and he said he believed them. After all, Mr. Evans said, he had become friends with many of the executives and engineers at the company. He had been host to parties at his home during the racing season for G.M., and several of its executives had been houseguests. Mr. Evans said he left Detroit thinking the tests had gone well and his star was rising at G.M. (A G.M. technician who was present later testified that he didn't recall much about the test.)
Instead, he soon found himself strangling in debt. He said G.M. owed him $804,000 for his consulting work, and it was balking at paying. H. Douglas Robinson, a high-ranking engineer in the Corvette Group, said in an interview that the company had delayed paying consultants because of a wide-ranging audit of fees. Mr. Evans didn't have much paperwork to substantiate his efforts because almost all of the projects had been authorized over the telephone or during conversations at the racetrack.
''For years, I worked with those guys on a handshake,'' he said. ''They asked me to work on a project. I did my best and I always got paid in full.''
Before the audit, Mr. Evans said the company offered to pay his bill in full if he would turn over all royalty-free rights to his cooling technologies to the company. He refused. Several months later, the company made him a second offer: $150,000, or less than a fifth of his original bill. By then, he was desperate. Bills were piling up and collectors were harassing his family. To keep the business going, he had taken out a loan secured by his home from Connecticut National, which was later bought by Fleet Bank. He said the bank pressured him to accept the offer.
Perplexed at the turn in his relationship with G.M., Mr. Evans said he reluctantly signed a release thinking that it covered only the specific consulting work he had done for the company and not his reverse-flow cooling system and took the money. (Mr. Evans eventually sued Connecticut National for improper banking practices, and the lawsuit was settled in his favor in 1993. He received a substantial sum as part of the settlement.)
About a year later, a trade magazine featured an article about the new Corvette. Mr. Evans said he was thunderstruck when he read the fine print, which detailed a reverse-flow cooling system with a pinhole vent. He filed suit against G.M. in 1994, charging the company with theft of a trade secret.
Just weeks before the trial was to start last spring, G.M.'s lawyers announced that the key piece of defense evidence, a memo sketch of the breakthrough design dated 1988, a year before Mr. Evans showed his system to G.M., had been faked by an engineer in the Corvette Group. (G.M. itself helped discover the forgery. The company had demanded Mr. Evans allow them to perform forensic tests on his inventor's logbooks to determine their authenticity. He hadn't been aware of such tests, but after agreeing to turn over his logbooks, he decided to perform the same tests on G.M. evidence. The test indicated that the memo had been written sometime after 1992, not in 1988.) A retired G.M. mechanic also aided in the deception, lying that he had found the forged memo in his toolbox.
Pressed about the memo by Mr. Evans's lawyers, Mr. Juriga, the engineer, broke down crying, saying that G.M.'s lawyers had pressured him to come up with documents proving his department had invented the technology, but he couldn't find any. ''I just couldn't find the documentation,'' he said in a deposition, but he added, ''I knew in my heart of hearts that we had done the work on this.'' (Mr. Juriga would not comment. He was fired last spring by G.M.)
The case went to trial last spring and it lasted for four weeks. In September, Judge McWeeny ruled for G.M., saying the inventor effectively had given away his rights in two instances. The first was when he signed the release to get paid for his consulting work and the second when he signed a waiver before demonstrating the system to a trucking unit of G.M.
Mr. Evans vowed to continue the legal battle. Among other things, he said in his appeal that he was denied the right to a trial by a jury, which he said he thought would have been more sympathetic to his complaint.
He has some powerful and loyal backers. J. Thomas Light, a major investor who is married to a du Pont, conceded he has never gotten back a dime on the $4 million he has invested in Evans Cooling Systems. ''We have no intention of giving up the fight,'' he said. ''We intend to pursue justice in this case no matter how long it takes.''
Connecticut
