IN 1955, a group of 25 Japanese girls and young women who had been disfigured by the effects of the atomic blast in Hiroshima were flown to New York City to undergo reconstructive surgery at Mount Sinai Hospital. They were accompanied on their trip by the Rev. Kiyoshi Tanimoto, a Methodist minister in Hiroshima.
The performance artist and director Dan Hurlin first heard of the Hiroshima Maidens, as they were touted in the press, from a friend, the historian David Serlin, who came upon their story while researching a book. Mr. Hurlin couldn't get it out of his head.
What struck him in particular was a detail that seems a fabrication straight out of Kurt Vonnegut, or would, but for the existence of archival television film: while in New York, Tanimoto, along with his wife and children and some of the women, appeared on the television show ''This Is Your Life.'' There they met face to face with Capt. Robert Lewis, the co-pilot of the Enola Gay, the B-29 that had dropped the atomic bomb on Hiroshima 10 years before.
According to Mr. Hurlin, Lewis was not initially told that he would be meeting with survivors; before the taping began, he realized what the producers had in mind and fled the studio. He was later found at a bar.
Despite that interruption, the encounter proceeded as planned. A brief clip of the program, which survives in a Hiroshima documentary titled ''After the Cloud Lifted,'' shows a monumentally awkward meeting, with all parties civil and subdued.
Lewis is a barrel-chested man in a light-colored jacket, his prominent brow casting his eyes in shadow. He describes the events of Aug. 6, 1945, while Tanimoto nods as if in commiseration: ''At 8:15 promptly, the bomb was dropped,'' he says. He goes on: ''Shortly after, we turned back to see what had happened. And there, in front of our eyes, the city of Hiroshima disappeared. I wrote down later,'' and here Lewis rakes his fingertips across his forehead as he fights for composure, his voice almost faltering: '' 'My God. What have we done?' ''
Mr. Hurlin was ''slack-jawed with amazement'' at the story. ''I started to think about cultural reconciliation,'' he explained recently by e-mail. ''It was never really clear to me how countries -- Germany, for instance -- can collectively 'face their past.' '' As he puzzled over that issue, he started to formulate a play. (''I have three or four ideas percolating all the time,'' he said. ''The idea that bubbles to the surface most often is the one I often end up making.'')
He filled up nearly two notebooks with sketches and ideas, read widely and immersed himself in visual research, studying the work of Japanese wood block printmakers like Hiroshige and Hokusai, and the Japanese influence on the mid-20th-century architecture and furniture of Charles and Ray Eames. And in search of an 8-millimeter copy of the complete ''This Is Your Life'' broadcast, in July 2001 he went all the way to the Hiroshima Peace Memorial Museum.
He didn't find the film, but he did meet Michiko Yamaoka, one of the surviving Maidens. Mr. Hurlin was already immersed in the development of the play, but his conversations with Ms. Yamaoka helped shape the material.
The result, ''Hiroshima Maiden,'' is built around two characters: the Pilot, based on Lewis, and Michiko, somewhat loosely based on Ms. Yamaoka. The play opens on Wednesday at St. Ann's Warehouse in Brooklyn, where it is scheduled to run through Feb. 1. Ms. Yamaoka -- who, just 15 years old in 1945, is now in her 70's -- will be on hand for select performances and will answer questions from the audience.
''Hiroshima Maiden'' is the first of his pieces in which Mr. Hurlin does not appear. Live actors of any sort, in fact, are incidental to the production. It is performed in the style of bunraku, the centuries-old Japanese puppet theater. ''Puppets are a better mirror of our own selves,'' Mr. Hurlin -- who teaches puppetry, along with dance and performance art, at Sarah Lawrence College -- explained in an interview last month at a diner in Dumbo. ''They're immediately more engaging to me than a live actor. You watch an actor wipe his nose and think nothing of it. You see a puppet do it and you say, 'I know that!' What surprises everyone is how expressive they are. But what's really going on is an act of projection. The audience will use their imaginations to fill in the missing steps. Performance is a two-way street. It's what you read into it.''
Such universality might account for a proliferation of Object Theater pieces (''the new, cool puppetry parlance,'' according to Mr. Hurlin): the Broadway musical ''Avenue Q'' and Paula Vogel's play ''The Long Christmas Ride Home''; the films ''Being John Malkovich'' and ''Illuminata.'' Mr. Hurlin confessed to some wariness on this point. ''I'm a little sheepish saying all this because I'm fairly new to the form. Forgive me for rolling my eyes. I'm worried that puppetry is becoming the new black, but I am thankful that it's on the radar.''
In traditional bunraku, the voices of the puppets are spoken and sung by the Tayu, a narrator who also provides exposition and commentary. The Tayu in ''Hiroshima Maiden'' will not tell the story of Michiko and the Pilot, but rather a seemingly unrelated narrative of an American boyhood from 1955. Anything but a consoling look back at that era, it bears out, instead, the first line of the program notes, written by Mr. Serlin: ''Americans love nostalgia but they hate history.''
The Tayu describes a world suffused with anxiety: the Boy opening his eyes during Duck and Cover drills at school; mesmerized by the flashing ambulance lights at a traffic accident; obsessing over the myth of the Medusa and the fate of all those who gaze upon her. Every new experience is fraught with pitfalls and humiliations, there for the witnessing. Even the antics of Lucy Ricardo are almost too much for the Boy to bear (''He can watch any episode three quarters of the way through. He can watch her come up with a great cost-saving idea . . . or even how to get a job in a candy factory. . . . But what he can't stand to watch is what happens when her plan is put into action. He doesn't want to see that. Who would want to see that? That's not funny. It's embarrassing.'')
The wages of seeing are a longstanding theme in Mr. Hurlin's work. His previous two pieces fell under the collective title ''Everyday Uses for Sight.'' One dealt with looking as a form of refuge, telling the story of how as a young boy, in an effort to avoid the town bullies, Mr. Hurlin stayed inside, paging through art books. ''The other piece,'' he said, ''was about looking as danger, equating architecture with sex. When I was growing up in Jaffrey, N.H., I got the neighborhood boys'' -- those same bullies, a few years later -- ''to build me a clubhouse with a sunken living room. There was some voyeurism involved. I was hoping that the hot day would make them take their shirts off. They never did, but,'' he added, triumphant, ''they dug me that sunken living room.''
''Hiroshima Maiden,'' then, might be a meditation on looking as knowledge. Not the knowledge that brings power or peace of mind, but rather the grim, unasked-for knowledge of a terrible, incontrovertible truth.
The moral consequences of seeing and the fact that one cannot ''unsee'' something are made concrete throughout ''Hiroshima Maiden.'' The play's many arresting stage pictures are annotated, designated and diagrammed as if one were looking through a book -- an anatomy text, atlas or technical manual -- rather than watching live theater. The puppeteers employ all manner of props to direct and focus the gaze of the audience: arrows on sticks point to an otherwise ignored detail; empty wooden squares on long handles frame a puppet's hand or foot; when a tiny, glinting speck skitters across the floor, catching the Pilot's attention, another puppeteer stretches an elastic from the minuscule object to a large white circle printed with the silhouette of an ant. It's like a blow-up of the ''Area of Detail'' on a map. The ravaged face of the puppet Michiko is subjected to the harsh stares of others. Black-and-white sightlines painted on sticks extend from the eyes of the spectators toward her, as rigid and invasive as daggers.
In rehearsal, Mr. Hurlin confers with his cast of nine. The group is a mix of Caucasian and Japanese, as well as professional puppeteers and dancers. ''Dancers make great puppeteers,'' he said. ''They have a sense of the body and how to move it, which gives them a greater sense of the physiology of how to move a puppet. Plus, they're better ensemble players.''
Since the bunkaru puppets in the production are manipulated by three people -- one operating the head and right arm, another on the left arm and the third moving the legs -- seamless ensemble work is important.
They are conferring about the play's final scene, making suggestions and talking over one another in a friendly free-for-all, standing around the play's 3-and-a-half-foot-high co-stars, for the moment inanimate. ''What is your ideal ending image?'' asks one of the puppeteers.
''That they're seeing each other for the first time and can't take their eyes off of one another,'' Mr. Hurlin replies.
The cast members experiment with having a puppeteer stand between the two characters, holding one of the black-and-white sticks demarcating sight lines.
Eventually, they opt for a similarly black-and-white length of elastic stretched from the eye of one puppet to the other. Michiko and the Pilot are taken up by their respective teams of three puppeteers. They circle each other in silence, the line of their mutual, unwavering stares connecting them. Even surrounded by 10 live people, it is as if they are the only two onstage.
THEATER David Rakoff is the author of ''Fraud,'' a collection of essays.
