''IT ain't what you don't know that gets you into trouble,'' Mark Twain once said. ''It's what you know for sure that just ain't so.''
Millions of investors, ignorant of financial history, were taught expensive lessons when they eagerly absorbed the new conventional wisdom of the 1990's. Most prominent of those new certainties was the notion that stocks were the only sensible securities. Bonds, after all, provided neither double-digit annual returns nor cocktail-party cachet.
The responsible baby boomer, frightened by Wall Street promoters and unduly cynical about receiving Social Security, came to regard a heavy commitment to stocks as crucial to any chance of prospering and then maintaining a decent standard of living in retirement.
The main corollaries of stock pre-eminence were that you should buy more shares whenever prices dropped, and that you should hold on to them practically forever.
Weren't these the methods of Warren E. Buffett, the iconic sage of Omaha, whose net worth from investing runs to 11 digits?
The stock implosion that shattered these illusions in early 2000 resulted from a combination of forces. Not least of these was the belief in an Internet-based new era, a premise that anybody familiar with financial history should have found highly suspect.
In her highly readable and insightful ''Bull! A History of the Boom, 1982-1999'' (HarperBusiness, $27.95), Maggie Mahar exposes the ignorance, myths and avarice that surrounded the fin de siècle market bubble and subsequent bust. The book is an account not only of a swarm of naïve stock buyers but also of Wall Street hyperpromoters, greedy corporate executives, careerist mutual fund managers, complaisant accountants and company directors, beholden politicians and too many uncritical journalists swept up in the stock-buying frenzy. It also tells of misjudgment by the Securities and Exchange Commission and an error or two by the Federal Reserve.
In the process, Ms. Mahar, a financial journalist who was a senior writer for Barron's, makes a devastating case against the contention that the market is almost perfectly efficient -- that prices are the product of immediate, judicious weighing of all available information by rational investors. She quotes Robert J. Shiller, the prescient Yale economist, who declared this hypothesis ''the most remarkable error in the history of economic theory.''
Many of the novice stock buyers were stampeded by Wall Street warnings that this constant devotion to stocks was the only way they could build a satisfactory nest egg. This coincided with corporate America's desire to rid itself of the burden of traditional pensions and thus force employees to largely finance their own retirements; 401(k)'s were suddenly on everybody's lips.
It didn't help that independent research had become almost unavailable to individual investors because deregulation had shriveled the commissions that once supported it. As a result, information-age investors were lost in a torrent of incoherent data. Moreover, Wall Street was seeking to make up for lost commissions with investment banking business, leading to the rise of cheerleader analysts.
Company executives, meanwhile, were busy convincing investors that they should prefer stock buybacks to cash dividends -- a policy that happened to mask the earnings dilution that was produced by lavish executive stock options.
Pointing to what she calls ''fully deluded earnings,'' Ms. Mahar is particularly cogent in her discussion of efforts to require options to be considered expenses and deducted from profits. Under pressure, many companies have since adopted that reform.
Mutual fund portfolio managers, for their part, were generally forced by the system to be more interested in outperforming peers than in husbanding shareholders' accounts. The fixation lured many to speculate in ludicrously expensive market leaders.
''As the market climbed, most managers chose investment risk (for their clients) over career risk (for themselves),'' Ms. Mahar contends. Fund sponsors, she adds, made the piling up of fee-generating assets their top priority and had the gall to stick investors with marketing costs, even for funds closed to new investors.
Nor does Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, escape blame for fomenting an unsustainable boom, despite his famous December 1996 warning of ''irrational exuberance.''
Though investors may have put undue confidence in any human's ability to fine-tune economies, Mr. Greenspan seems to have succumbed too readily to new-era visions of productivity and may have overprepared for the possibility of disruption from the Year 2000 computer problem.
He also chose not to make it harder to buy stock on credit by raising margin requirements, calling this weapon a blunt instrument that would affect only small investors who could not maneuver around it, but nevertheless something that would ''guarantee'' elimination of the market bubble.
For thematic purposes, the book necessarily jumps back and forth in time, making for repeated, sometimes numbing statistical reminders of market levels at various points. And, in a well-edited work generous with credit to other observers -- footnoted, thankfully, in the back -- it is surprising that the name of Morgan Stanley's chief domestic strategist, Byron R. Wien, is misspelled some two dozen times.
Ms. Mahar's engrossing tale is grounded in the verity that sooner or later markets always revert to historical norms. She concludes it by endorsing the revived appreciation of cash dividends and underscoring, so long as inflation is contained, the ''miracle'' of compounding.
BUY-AND-HOLD investing is apt to disappoint, Ms. Mahar contends, noting that Mr. Buffett himself steps aside on occasion.
''Any value investor is a market timer,'' she declares. ''At the end of a cycle, when prices are higher, he stops buying.''
Commodities, gold, real estate and emerging markets may be profitable current avenues, she suggests, but her strongest single recommendation is the Treasury's inflation-protected securities, a riskless long-term investment. Inflation's eventual return is a given, she says, and stocks are an uncertain hedge.
''Knowledge of history is an investor's best defense,'' Ms. Mahar concludes. ''Despite all the financial engineering that attempts to eliminate risk, cycles appear to be as inevitable as the seasons.''
