A NEW species has been sighted in this Navesink River town, beached up on sautéed spinach in a little restaurant called Le Fandy. It is the cinnamon-crusted monkfish, and biologists say it represents yet another evolutionary turn in Monmouth County dining, until recently best known for lumbering Pleistocene creatures like the deep-fried clam strip and the leaden flounder fillet.
Martin Plastiak, 28, Le Fandy's chef and co-owner, spent two years in the kitchen of Le Bernardin, that temple of haute seafood in Midtown Manhattan, before striking out on his own and opening Le Fandy in late 2002. The monkfish dish is his own creation, derived from a five-spice preparation that he learned in the Bernardin sauce line.
Whatever its origins, it works. The fish, cut into small rounds, is meaty but not rubbery, and the dusting of cinnamon renders it intriguing -- a familiar taste in an unfamiliar setting. Spinach and creamy polenta round out the textures, and a ladleful of chorizo broth grounds the flavor. It is a quiet triumph of a dish.
Nor is it the only one. Mr. Plastiak, who grew up in Slovakia, obviously has a well-developed flavor memory. Recalling his mother's celery-root soup, he conceived of celeriac purée as a base for an appetizer of roasted diver scallops. The scallops are cooked to a lustrous brown but remain tender inside, and their nutty taste is balanced by the celeriac and by mushroom broth and a garnish of peppery microgreens. Similarly, Guyana shrimps are crusted with cilantro and grilled, then bedded on a lentil casserole whose earthy flavor is given a potent kick by chorizo. And strips of duck, chewy and full of character, make a fine base for an Asian-accented salad with endive, daikon sprouts and a soy-honey vinaigrette.
More conventional starters are well turned out, too. Salmon smoked at a farm in upstate New York is suave and deeply tasty. It is fine on its own -- with a garnish of crème fraîche and marinated cucumbers and zucchini -- or in a delectable (but very rich) croque-monsieur with caviar and melted cheese. Crab cakes have a bit more breading than some, but this is not a complaint: the breading is panko, and it renders the cakes crisp and savory. Thin-pounded tuna carpaccio, on the other hand, is oddly bland; its ginger-lime mayonnaise does little to redeem it.
Le Fandy's main-course menu is straightforward and trimly designed -- like the restaurant itself, its 47 seats arranged in a tight ''C'' shape under a dark ceiling and dark walls, with dim sconce lighting that gives it the dusky intimacy of a private club. (It was a deli, Mr. Plastiak says. It must have taken some serious renovating.) Dishes are tidily grouped under the headings ''Fish Course'' and ''Meat Course,'' their ingredients spelled out without fanfare or adornment.
And that's the way they come to the table. Veal chop, for example, is grilled and served on a bed of vegetables -- snow peas, cubed zucchini, shaved carrots, mushrooms and diced potatoes, as it turns out -- with a vigorous port-wine reduction. Unlike the Hulk Hogan monsters served elsewhere, this chop is of manageable size, and the flavoring is bold and energetic.
You supply wine, so it pays to think ahead. The veal chop would benefit from a lean, elegant red Burgundy like those we saw one weeknight at a neighboring table -- that of a blind-tasting club composed of 10 doctors who covered their bottles in cloaks of brown paper. The monkfish would stand up smartly to a sauvignon blanc or a spicy gewürztraminer.
It is harder to think of a wine that would complement the pork loin, a generous and tender cut that is unfortunately zapped by an overdose of thyme. Two promising fish entrees could use some refining, too. Pan-roasted halibut is well matched with braised romaine lettuce and a creamy sauce of oyster mushrooms and prosciutto, but the night we tried it, it was salty and a bit dry. So was sautéed grouper, with its bold pairing of caramelized onion and smoky bacon. Roasted rack of lamb was just fine, though hard as I tried I couldn't discern the promised goat cheese in its accompanying mashed potato. And seared yellowfin tuna is ably served by truffle broth and more of that celeriac purée.
Mr. Plastiak manages to squeeze a pastry station into his tiny kitchen, and it turns out an admirable pear tart served with caramel sauce, rum-raisin ice cream and a cloud of whipped cream. Molten chocolate tart is the real thing, rich and dark and potent, transcending what has become a dessert cliché. Other enticing possibilities -- pineapple rice pudding, fruit clafoutis -- were unavailable on both of our visits, and crepes with blueberries were disappointingly tough. As an alternative, Le Fandy offers an excellent cheese plate, forgoing bland popular standards like Brie in favor of more offbeat items like a lush triple crème from Pierre Robert and a gamy, blue-veined Montbriac.
Le Fandy may sound like the name of a quiet, winding river somewhere in Normandy -- an impression heightened by the evocative black-and-white photo on the menu -- but in fact Fandy is Mr. Plastiak's nickname from his Slovakian boyhood. (How he got it, he says, he has no idea.) It is also the name of a second restaurant he plans to open, this one in Staten Island. If that one is a success, the fate of the Fair Haven restaurant is uncertain. ''We'll have to see which one is busier,'' he told me. The prospect of his departure is alarming. New Jersey needs him, cinnamon-crusted monkfish and all.
Le Fandy  609 River Road, Fair Haven  (732)530-3338
VERY GOOD
ATMOSPHERE -- A small, handsome French restaurant, clearly dedicated to serious eating.  SERVICE -- Correct and pleasant, though not hearty.  SMOKING -- Not allowed.  WINE LIST -- Bring your own.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Crab cake, duck salad, croquet-monsieur, diver scallops, Guyana shrimp, smoked salmon; cinnamon-crusted monkfish, seared tuna, rack of lamb, veal chop; pear tart, molten chocolate tart, cheese platter.  PRICE RANGE -- Lunch: sandwiches and salads, $7.95 to $9.95; entrees, $12.95 to $14.95. Dinner: appetizers, $5.95 to $9.95; entrees, $23.95 to $26.95; desserts, $6.95 and $7.95.  HOURS -- Closed Sundays and Mondays. Lunch: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 11:30 a.m. to 2 p.m. Dinner: Tuesdays through Saturdays, 5:30 to 10 p.m.  CREDIT CARDS -- MasterCard, Visa.  RESERVATIONS -- Accepted for groups of six or more, but if your group is smaller it doesn't hurt to ask.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Fully accessible.  IF YOU GO -- Fair Haven is in northeastern Monmouth County, just east of Red Bank. The restaurant is 1.4 miles east of the intersection of Broad and Front Streets in Red Bank; Front Street turns into River Road at the Fair Haven line.  REVIEWED -- Jan. 11, 2004.
RATINGS -- Poor, Fair, Satisfactory, Good, Very Good, Excellent, Extraordinary. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
RESTAURANTS
