SOMEDAY, students of American business history may tear open ''Origins of the Crash,'' Roger Lowenstein's latest book, to learn why the last decade's bull market came to an ugly end nearly four years ago.
But for those who lived through it, rehashing it seems almost pointless when the hangover is still fresh. Introspection is illuminating only if it supplies information or insight that readers have not heard elsewhere. And investors who have had money in the stock market in the last four years would have easily had their fill by now of daily exposés on the excesses of American business.
They would know that corporate boards rarely apologize for giving obscene amounts of stock options to executives, even those who fail miserably. They would know about dot-com companies that promised to revolutionize the way business worked, but managed only to lose the billions they took from investors.
And they would no doubt know all about the stunning scandals that humbled corporate darlings like Enron, WorldCom and Tyco International. Are there really all that many buyers of business books out there who have yet to hear about L. Dennis Kozlowski's $15,000 umbrella stand or $6,000 shower curtain, paid for by the unwitting shareholders of Tyco?
If there are, then the Lowenstein book, whose subtitle is ''The Great Bubble and Its Undoing,'' is a smart way to play catch-up. The book, to be released by Penguin Press on Jan. 26, it is an intelligent look at what ails America's corporations. What's more, it arrives compliments of a business journalist who has tackled ambitious topics before, from the wizardlike success of Warren E. Buffett to the fall of the titans at Long-Term Capital Management.
Knowing Mr. Lowenstein's talents, readers may be disappointed that his latest work is heavy on third-person narrative and light on commentary. As the footnotes document, much of his tale depends on other people's reporting. The book springs to life, however, in those places where the author has conducted the interviews or shares his take on the goings-on, laced with his dry wit.
In a chapter about Enron, for instance, he is more himself when describing the web of partnerships that Enron created with J.P. Morgan that served to obscure the fact that the items being traded were essentially making a round trip. ''The only net effect was that Enron collected $350 million and bore an obligation to repay Morgan a slightly higher sum,'' Mr. Lowenstein writes. ''This is normally known as borrowing.''
More often than not, though, the book feels familiar. He makes the gauzy observation that stocks lost their bearings because ''the very culture encouraged the misbehavior and was, in large measure, its accomplice.'' In short, by being so obsessed with stocks and their ability to shower sudden wealth upon the average Joe, we are all to blame.
The book does a credible job of pointing the finger at those who might have done more to keep stocks from reaching unsustainable levels -- brokerage firm analysts who would get bigger paychecks for helping their employers win underwriting business than for providing investors with honest stock advice, and accountants and corporate lawyers who behaved as if they preferred the role of rainmaker to wet blanket. His list also includes wayward politicians, directors, ratings agencies and journalists.
Ordinarily, mutual fund managers might have been counted on to question the fantastic tales being peddled by Wall Street. But the author correctly notes what readers of the business pages are now seeing writ large in the mutual fund scandals: Why should institutional money managers pay attention to stocks' long-term prospects when they can make money simply by rapidly trading in and out of stocks?
Their willingness to lavish a premium on companies that reported consistent short-term earnings, accurate or not, was an open invitation to the sort of mischief that was rampant, according to Mr. Lowenstein. Chief financial officers who were good at the game were in great demand, the author says. Still, it is a bit shocking when he points out that for three years in a row, CFO magazine gave one of its coveted Excellence Awards to a chief financial officer who has since been indicted.
With options at stake, chief executives, too, began acting as if their role in life was to sell their company's stock rather than their products or services. To make his point, Mr. Lowenstein notes that there was nary a mention of stock prices in the memoir by Alfred P. Sloan Jr., who guided General Motors from 1923 to 1956. To that generation, ''the stock was merely a derivative yardstick,'' Mr. Lowenstein writes. ''In the 1990's,'' he adds, ''a C.E.O. would no more ignore his stock price than he would his cholesterol.''
A reader might wish that the author had devoted more ink to the lesser-known characters in his tales who raised red flags about corporate practices but were muzzled. Similarly, one might wish that the author had elaborated on one of the more profound effects of the scandals on America's place in the world: other countries are now rethinking whether they should adopt our system of financial reporting.
One of his sharper observations is how the Bush administration, which was quick to see how the political landscape changed after 9/11, was slow to recognize that Enron's fall had damaged the business environment. He argues persuasively that this might have been a blind spot caused by the president's and vice president's involvement with crony capitalism earlier in their careers.
''From the moment Enron admitted to having misstated its books, Wall Street, and also a considerable stretch of corporate America, were never the same,'' the author writes. ''They suffered the shock of recognition -- as if an attic trapdoor had been flung open exposing the family's supposedly demented aunt, and all of her cousins, nieces and nephews had seen a ghostly reflection of themselves.''
At moments like these, Mr. Lowenstein is at the top of his own game.
OFF THE SHELF
