A top Palestinian political group said Saturday that Palestinians reserve the right to declare a state if no Middle East peace deal can be reached, a move that mirrors Israeli talk of possible unilateral action.
Peace efforts have long been based on the premise that all major steps must be taken by mutual agreement. But with talks stalled, both sides have warned that they could abandon discussions and attempt to reach their aims without a formal deal.
The Palestine Liberation Organization's executive committee, which is headed by Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, met late Friday night and issued a statement early Saturday saying the Palestinians had ''the right to declare an independent democratic Palestine on all the territories that were occupied'' since the 1967 Arab-Israeli war.
That would include all of the Gaza Strip and the West Bank, including East Jerusalem, where the Palestinians want to establish a capital.
The Palestinian move comes three weeks after Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon, said that if the Middle East peace plan did not produce progress in the coming months, his government would be prepared to take steps on its own to separate Israelis and Palestinians.
Mr. Sharon's government is already building a separation barrier in the West Bank, saying it is intended to prevent Palestinian suicide bombings and other attacks. Palestinians have been fiercely critical of the barrier, which runs through West Bank land the Palestinians want for a future state.
Saeb Erekat, the chief Palestinian negotiator, stressed that the Palestinians remain committed to the peace plan, known as the road map, which envisions a comprehensive political settlement that would end decades of conflict and establish a Palestinian state.
But Mr. Erekat said the Israelis were threatening to ''bury the two-state solution by building the wall in the West Bank and confining us to towns that are prisons.''
''If Israel continues this, they will not have a partner on our side,'' Mr. Erekat said.
On Thursday, the Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, said that if there was no agreement creating a Palestinian state, the Palestinians might eventually push to become citizens of a single Jewish-Arab state.
Such a development is seen as highly unlikely. But some Palestinian politicians and academics have raised the issue recently in the belief it could put pressure on Israel.
Under current demographic trends, Arabs will, in a few years, outnumber Israeli Jews in the combined areas of Israel, the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, and Arabs would therefore be the dominant political force if there were a single state with equal voting rights for all.
Israeli officials, meanwhile, dismissed the recent Palestinian statements as empty threats.
''It would be a major mistake on their part to go for a unilateral state,'' said Raanan Gissin, a spokesman for Mr. Sharon. ''They are threatening themselves, not us.''
The United States opposes unilateral action by either side and has sought to encourage the parties to resume top-level contacts that broke down in August amid ongoing violence.
Mr. Sharon and Mr. Qurei both say they are willing to meet, but no talks have been arranged since the Mr. Qurei became prime minister three months ago.
