MANY otherwise cost-conscious Americans have been price-insensitive about their mutual fund investments. Driving five miles to save a dollar on a quart of olive oil makes perfect sense to many people who have never questioned paying higher mutual fund fees than big institutional investors do, even though these expenses can add up to thousands of dollars in a long-term investment.
Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, is out to change that. Fees took center stage in the settlement he reached in December with Alliance Capital Management in connection with accusations of trading abuses in the company's mutual funds. Alliance agreed to reduce its management fees by 20 percent for the next five years, generating an estimated $350 million in savings for Alliance fund shareholders. The firm will also disclose publicly how it sets fees. Mr. Spitzer has said that settlements with other mutual fund companies will focus on fees, which he has said are ''grossly out of control.''
The Investment Company Institute, the mutual fund trade association, issued a report on Tuesday that challenges the assumptions made by Mr. Spitzer and others. Mr. Spitzer, in turn, said in a statement that the institute's report was ''fundamentally flawed.''
What no one questions is that the pressure on mutual funds to reduce fees is beginning to come from multiple constituencies.
John P. Freeman, a professor at the University of South Carolina law school, said the Alliance settlement could be an opportunity for others to challenge fees in the industry. ''The settlement is a signal to everyone else that there's gold in them thar hills,'' said Mr. Freeman, who, with Stewart Brown, wrote a 2001 study that found that retail fund investors pay higher advisory fees than pension plans and other institutional clients. ''High-cost funds can book it that plaintiffs' lawyers are going to get in line.''
The heightened possibility of lawsuits over fees is bound to get the attention of fund directors, some legal authorities said. ''It's not as if boards don't take the fee issue seriously now, but this heightens awareness and probably causes boards to sharpen their pencils a bit more,'' said Ted Laurenson, a partner at Baker &amp; McKenzie, who specializes in securities law.
Max Rottersman, an independent fund consultant and editor of FundExpenses.com, which includes monthly commentary on fund fee issues, also said he expected pension and 401(k) sponsors to pay more attention to fees.
''Employees are asking, 'What are you doing to protect me?''' Mr. Rottersman said. ''Everyone is waking up about who their client is and understanding they need to take a more active role in that responsibility. You can't buy performance, but you can pay attention to fees.''
Mr. Spitzer's moves are also regarded as a marketing opportunity for funds. ''He's signaling to low-cost funds that they should push their competitive advantage on fees,'' said Lucas Garland, a research analyst at Lipper, the fund-tracking firm. Additional pressure may be coming from the NASD, formerly the National Association of Securities Dealers, which oversees fund advertising. An NASD proposal would require important fund expenses to be displayed prominently in all advertisements.
In the last few months, mutual fund fees have become something of a preoccupation in Washington. In November, the House of Representatives passed a bill that would, among other fund changes, require the Securities and Exchange Commission to expand fee disclosure to investors; the bill is now before the Senate.
Senator Peter G. Fitzgerald, an Illinois Republican who is a member of the subcommittee investigating fund fees, has called the industry's fee structure ''the world's largest skimming operation -- a $7 trillion trough from which fund managers, brokers and other insiders are steadily siphoning off an excessive slice of the nation's household, college and retirement savings.''
The S.E.C. has indicated that it will not wait for Congress to act. The commission chairman, William H. Donaldson, said he expected the S.E.C. to formally propose this month that fund fees be disclosed periodically in statements to investors as an actual dollar estimate based on an investor's assets in a specific fund. The House bill includes this provision. Currently, fee disclosure is presented in fund prospectuses and marketing material as a generic percentage of fund assets for all investors. Proponents of the personalized example say it will increase consumer awareness of the cost of various fund fees, and make fund comparisons easier.
IN addition, the S.E.C. has proposed a rule aimed at clarifying when investors are eligible to pay a reduced front-end load. Funds typically reduce the load for large investments of $50,000 or more in a single fund or across a fund company. But a recent S.E.C. study found that these ''breakpoints'' are not always disclosed to an investor. The study found that investors eligible for breakpoints were entitled, on average, to $364 in discounts they did not receive.
The S.E.C. has also asked for public comment on how best to disclose some hidden costs to investors, including so-called soft dollar arrangements, in which funds pay higher trading costs to brokers in return for research and other services; and directed brokerage, in which funds compensate brokers and advisers for directing investors to a particular fund.
Fund boards are another item on the S.E.C.'s agenda. To increase the likelihood that a board will act solely in the interest of fund shareholders, as mandated in the Investment Company Act of 1940, the S.E.C. wants to require that board chairmen be independent, and that independent board representation increase from a simple majority to three-fourths.
But given that proposals for change have been floating around for years, is the fee structure really shifting? ''I am not just hopeful, I am certain that we are going to see meaningful change that will impact fund fees,'' said John C. Bogle, founder of the Vanguard fund family. Because of the new atmosphere, he said: ''In the wink of an eye, 35 years of heresy has become dogma. Change is in the air.''
Mr. Spitzer's work on advisory fees draws on the research by Mr. Freeman and Mr. Brown. In 2001, they reported that the average advisory fee paid by mutual fund investors -- without any administrative charges -- was $56 per $10,000 in assets, compared with $28 per $10,000 for institutional clients.
Mr. Spitzer said in November that in 2002, Putnam Investments charged retail fund investors an advisory fee that was 0.40 percentage points higher than the fee charged to the firm's institutional clients. That translated into an extra $290 million, he said. Mr. Spitzer says that retail fund investors deserve ''most favored nation'' treatment, which would give them the same fee structure as institutional clients.
In its study last week, the Investment Company Institute said that because fund management differs from pension management, Mr. Freeman and Mr. Brown were wrong to compare the advisory fees. The institute said that fund advisory fees could include charges for administrative costs that are not part of pension advisory fees. These areas, the institute said, include the cost of preparing and distributing shareholder reports, portfolio accounting charges and legal costs.
Sean Collins, a senior economist at the institute and the author of its study, says a ''plausible way to make an apple-to-apple comparison'' between funds and pensions is to limit the fund universe to those that hire third parties, or subadvisers, to manage their portfolios. In those instances, the management fee paid to the subadviser is typically only for pure portfolio management, akin to the advisory fee paid to a pension manager. In the institute study, when only subadviser fees are included, the differential is just $3 per $10,000 ($28 for pensions versus $31 for funds with subadvisers).
In a statement, Mr. Spitzer said that the institute study looked at the 20 percent or so of funds that use subadvisers. ''The other 80 percent of funds in the industry still pay affiliated management companies an inflated fee for investment advice,'' he said. ''Those fees, which are not negotiated at arm's length, are significantly higher than the fees charged by subadvisers.''
Big institutions like pension funds may pay lower fees partly because they bargain harder. ''Institutional customers pay less because they understand the business,'' said Mr. Rottersman, the independent fund consultant. ''They know that once a fund has at least $100 million, all the extra advisory money goes to the bottom line. But the real reason institutional customers pay less is they know high fees eat into returns and they do have to report to a board.''
While mutual fund boards certainly have the assets to push for the same lower fees, the directors, who serve both the fund company and the fund shareholder, are not necessarily inclined to push hard for lower fees.
Vanguard, which is owned by fund shareholders and is known for its low-cost funds, has shown that mutual fund advisory contracts can be in line with those of pension funds. The company, the second-largest fund group after Fidelity, farms out management of its nonindex stock funds to independent advisers. It negotiates with those firms much as a pension fund would: at arm's length, on the behalf of shareholders. Negotiated savings are then passed along to them.
In their study, Mr. Freeman and Mr. Brown found that the weighted average advisory fee for 10 Vanguard funds run by outside money managers in 1999 was 0.149 percent, even lower than the 0.20 percent paid by pension plans. Those levels compared with an average of 0.50 percent for large mutual funds.
In a recent telephone interview, Mr. Freeman said, ''Vanguard's example is an embarrassment for the rest of the industry.''
The advisory fee is only one of a handful of annual charges that are bundled together and deducted from a fund's gross expenses. The combined charges, known as the expense ratio, are reported as a percentage of assets and prominently displayed in fund prospectuses as well as in fund performance tables.
In addition to the advisory charge, the expense ratio includes operating expenses as well as the optional 12b-1 fee, which is nominally a payment for distribution of a fund. The expense ratio does not include sales fees like front-end loads, which are paid by investors at the time of purchase, or deferred sales loads, which are levied when an investor sells fund shares.
According to an S.E.C. report in 2000, the average weighted expense ratio climbed to 0.94 percent in 1999 from 0.73 percent in 1977. The unweighted stock fund average, according to Lipper, grew to 1.4 percent in 2002 from 0.9 percent in 1978. In dollar terms, the increase documented by the S.E.C. translates into an extra $2,410 in fees for an initial $10,000 investment held for 20 years that grows at an average annual rate of 10 percent.
What galls proponents of fee changes is that the costs have crept up while fund assets have soared. Mr. Bogle cited a 40 percent increase in expense ratios from 1978 to 2002, despite a 114-fold increase in fund assets.
The absence of economies of scale in the expense ratio is in large part attributable to the industry's embrace of 12b-1 fees. Sanctioned by the S.E.C. in 1980, the 12b-1 fee was intended to help fund companies generate cash for marketing. The maximum 12b-1 fee is 1 percent. The NASD requires that no more than 0.75 percent be spent on direct marketing; an additional 0.25 percent can be designated for operational costs.
According to Lipper, the asset-weighted average 12b-1 fee is 0.34 percent, with a median of 0.65 percent. Total 12b-1 payments last year alone amounted to $9 billion, according to Lipper.
Mr. Rottersman said 12b-1 fees ''were already under a lot of scrutiny before Spitzer, and now they are going to be under an even bigger political attack.''
TO increase its share of the mutual fund supermarket business, E*Trade recently started a program that will rebate 50 percent of 12b-1 fees and some service fees to investors who hold funds in E*Trade accounts. Though E*Trade declined to provide specifics on its fund business, Lou Klobuchar, president and chief brokerage officer for E*Trade Securities, said that more than 90 percent of the funds offered through E*Trade charge the 12b-1 and service fees. Damping the impact of the rebate is the fact that the I.R.S. views the rebates as distributions that are to be taxed at ordinary income tax rates.
The firm started working on the proposal months before Mr. Spitzer began shining a spotlight on the fund industry, Mr. Klobuchar said. He acknowledged that E*Trade's program was intended to attract more money to the company, but said it was also designed to offer a ''competitive solution'' to fund investors.
It is a solution that assumes investors are ready to be price sensitive. And in the end, Mr. Spitzer's efforts come down to the same issue: Will consumers make fees a central part of their investing strategy?
''It's a matter of following the money,'' said Mr. Garland, at Lipper. ''If all of this attention causes money to flow to lower-cost providers, then you will see change by the industry.''
