CHANCES are that you have a family physician for regular checkups, but it is not likely that you have a personal lawyer to call for routine legal matters. According to the American Bar Association, half of all consumers who need a lawyer do not seek legal help. The reasons include cost and uncertainty: many people say they do not know how to find a good attorney.
This potential demand is fueling the growth of prepaid legal-services plans, also known as legal H.M.O.'s. The plans can be bought individually or obtained through some employee benefits packages.
Like health maintenance organizations, legal plans typically charge a monthly fee, or premium, often $10 to $25. That buys access to a network of lawyers in private practice. The lawyers usually provide a set package of free services, like document review, will preparation and representation in real estate transactions. Depending on the plan, clients can receive more complex aid, like trial representation, at discounted rates.
Most legal plans are aimed at consumers with annual household incomes of $50,000 to $150,000. ''People who have houses, kids, older parents, cars -- legal problems crop up all the time,'' said Alec Schwartz, executive director of the American Prepaid Legal Services Institute, a trade group set up by the American Bar Association. ''These plans allow you to call a lawyer while knowing the cost in advance.''
But benefits vary widely from plan to plan. So do coverage limits, potential out-of-pocket expenses, fee schedules and exclusions. Although most plans say they screen lawyers carefully before signing them on, consumers may need to perform a little due diligence of their own.
''Consumers should be aggressive in asking what they will get for their fees, whether there are additional charges and how the plan ensures that the lawyers are competent,'' said Jeanne Charn, director of the Bellow-Sacks Access to Civil Legal Services Project at Harvard Law School.
Legal plans, in some form, have been around for years. AARP offers members free half-hour consultations with lawyers in a network, plus discounts on fees for other services. Many labor unions have similar plans, and a few law firms offer their own legal plans to local residents. But the H.M.O.-style prepaid plan, marketed directly to individuals or as an employee benefit, appears poised for expansion. Large for-profit players, especially insurance companies like MetLife and the ARAG Insurance Company, have been expanding into the prepaid market in recent years.
In 1997, MetLife bought Hyatt Legal Plans of Cleveland, helping it to expand its employee benefit business to 694 employers in November 2003, almost double the 356 at the beginning of 2000. It recently signed up Sprint, which offers a legal plan for $16.50 a month. E.J. Holland Jr., vice president for benefits at Sprint, says that the 5,000 or so employees who have enrolled so far use the plan, on average, more than once a year, for debt matters, tax audits and traffic-ticket defenses.
LIKE Hyatt, ARAG has had continuing growth in employee benefit plans. The company, based in Des Moines, said it had 428 employers signed up last year, an increase from 283 in 1998. But now ARAG, with a product called LegalRx, is also selling directly to individuals.
The individual market is now dominated by the 1.4-million-member Pre-Paid Legal Services, a publicly traded company, and the Legal Services Plan, owned by the GE Financial Network.
Last November, ARAG said it would buy LawPhone, based in Lanham, Md., which has a strong presence selling to members of ''affinity'' groups like professional associations, credit unions and auto clubs. ''We saw an opportunity selling to consumers who don't have access to legal plans in the workplace,'' said James E. Kraynik, ARAG's vice president for product development.
A prepaid legal plan may be especially worth considering if you are thinking of drawing up a will, hiring a home-improvement contractor or moving a relative into a nursing home in the next year.
Charles G. Hatsis, 36, a vice president at the Bank One Corporation in Chicago, knew when he joined the company last January that he would be buying a house, so he signed up right away for the company's legal benefit plan, provided by ARAG. He was given a list of lawyers who specialized in real estate transactions; he interviewed several, reviewed their Web sites and chose one.
The lawyer gave him advice on the home-buying process. One deal went bad, Mr. Hatsis said, and his lawyer is litigating to have the down payment returned. Mr. Hatsis estimated that he had met with the lawyer 15 times, at no cost beyond his $14 monthly premium. (ARAG pays the lawyer.) The lawyer helped with the transactions for the house he would eventually buy and attended the closing. ''I have gotten tremendous value,'' Mr. Hatsis said.
In a majority of situations, according to the American Bar Association, issues brought to lawyers through such plans can be resolved quickly, before they turn into major problems. This is what Barry A. Cohen, a partner at Gelman &amp; Gelman, a 12-lawyer firm in Elmwood Park, N.J., has found in providing telephone consultations for LawPhone.
The typical caller, he said, needs ''quick advice'' on a house closing or consumer problem. Mr. Cohen says he advises them on additional steps they may need to take, sometimes steering them to a government agency. When callers need further legal help, he tells them to contact the plan's customer service department for a referral to another lawyer in the LawPhone network. Depending on the nature of the services, additional fees may be charged. LawPhone prohibits its telephone-access lawyers from taking on these callers as clients.
Whatever the plan, legal and benefits experts urge consumers to understand exactly what they're entitled to before signing up.
In Mississippi, around 500 consumers filed nine lawsuits in 2002 against Pre-Paid Legal Services, according to Brad Pigott, a lawyer in Jackson who represents the plaintiffs. Mr. Pigott said all of the lawsuits contended that advertisements, brochures and sales representatives had promised full coverage, but that very little service was actually provided.
In one of the complaints, for example, some of the plaintiffs contended that they had been promised civil trial defense but that the contract provided coverage for only 2.5 hours of pretrial counsel time. The contract also excluded from civil trial defense any divorce, child custody or bankruptcy proceeding, the plaintiffs said. The plaintiffs contended that they had not received the contract spelling out these details until after they signed up. Pre-Paid Legal denies the allegations in court papers, and the cases are still pending. The company did not respond to several requests for comment.
IF you are considering a legal plan, check first with your employer to see whether it offers one in its benefits package. Employer-based plans usually cover a broader range of legal services, with fewer restrictions, than plans sold to individuals. The individual LegalRx plan from ARAG, for instance, imposes a 90-day waiting period after sign-up for standard wills and uncontested adoption proceedings, but then pays the full costs; its employer-based plans impose no waiting periods.
Here are some other suggestions from legal and benefits experts, especially if you are buying an individual plan:
Compare the benefits of several plans. Plans run the gamut from telephone advice only to comprehensive services, which could include trial representation. Some companies offer several plans with varying coverage. A good place to start is the Web site of the American Prepaid Legal Services Institute (www.aplsi.org). The site has links to about 20 plans, though the institute does not endorse any in particular.
Check what is included as covered, paid-in-full benefits. Many plans offer unlimited telephone advice, and some provide unlimited face-to-face consultation. And while simple wills are usually covered at no extra charge, some plans may impose fees for creating a trust. One may cover adoption proceedings as part of the basic service, while another may defend you in traffic court.
Understand how the plan imposes additional fees. A plan may pay trial costs, but only up to a certain amount; the lawyer is then likely to charge by the hour. Many plans, though, have arranged with network lawyers to discount their regular fees for additional services. Some plans require lawyers to sign fee agreements upfront with clients. If they don't, ask for one anyway.
Look for exclusions. Many plans do not provide coverage for contingency-fee cases, lawsuits against your boss, tax audits or divorces. Many plans also limit coverage for ''pre-existing conditions,'' just as health insurers do, refusing to pay for any matter in which an employee knows of a pending legal dispute. If you want a plan to handle a continuing issue, ask first about restrictions.
Ask for a list of participating lawyers. Unless you are signing up for telephone advice only, make sure that there is at least one lawyer near your home. Some plans allow you to go out of the network, though you may have to pay the difference between the plan's coverage and what the lawyer usually charges. (Check for complaints with your state's insurance and consumer regulators, as well as the state attorney general's office and the local Better Business Bureau.)
Ask how the plans select lawyers for their networks. Hyatt, for instance, requires its legal staff to have at least five years of experience, to be licensed with a state bar with no complaints and to maintain at least $100,000 in malpractice insurance for each claim.
William H. Brooks, the chief executive of Hyatt, says prospective clients should also ask about how a plan resolves complaints about its service. He said the most common complaint was that a lawyer did not return a call promptly.
''We keep score,'' he said. ''If a law firm gets more than an occasional random complaint, we take them off our panel.''
