IT'S not that Wendy Kent Churchill doesn't want a shiny new showroom. She just wishes that it could look like a place to buy a luxury vehicle, rather than a military barracks.
But the macho, pared-down look is what the Hummer division of General Motors is pushing Ms. Churchill, a Fort Worth, Tex., auto dealer, to build. Unlike some automakers, she said, the company is not offering any financial help to add a new showroom. It doesn't have to, Ms. Churchill said, because so many competitors are vying for the right to sell new Hummers.
The drive for the new-style showroom, complete with exposed concrete, metal rafters and helicopterlike ceiling fans, is all part of Hummer's new corporate-image program, which calls for the rollout of 164 stand-alone, look-alike dealerships by 2005.
''If what they're really looking to achieve is quality, well, why can't that be done without it having to look exactly the same?'' asked Ms. Churchill, who has owned part of her grandfather's 68-year-old dealership, the Frank Kent Motor Company, since she was 18 and is now its president. Her current Hummer sales operation shares showroom and parking lot space with her other G.M. brands, Pontiac and GMC Truck.
Other dealers throughout the country are facing the same demands for change. Like clothing stores, restaurants and banks before them, automakers are now trying to convey a brand image not only with their cars but also with their stores, by leaning on their dealers to build look-alike showrooms around the country.
''I don't know of a manufacturer now that's not demanding that their zone managers maneuver their dealers to build a new prototype,'' said J. Roger Crownrich, a designer based in Dallas who has built more than 300 auto dealerships across the country since 1963. ''McDonald's seems to have gotten rich with an arch, and I think the manufacturers are all trying to do the same.''
Automakers are pushing for more than just a standardized logo on the side of a building. They want the dealership's architecture to be the new signature, said Paul Taylor, chief economist at the National Automobile Dealers Association.
Manufacturers like Ford Motor, Hummer and Volkswagen's Audi unit say standardized dealerships help to differentiate their brands from the competition and offer a consistent shopping experience.
Mike DiGiovanni, general manager of Hummer, said G.M. felt strongly about having its own Hummer stores. ''To build a premium brand, consistency is paramount,'' he said. ''If you don't have that, you're going to have a hodgepodge and people running around like a fire drill.''
Tom Durant, owner of Classic Hummer in Grapevine, Tex., was the first to build a stand-alone Hummer dealership in his state. So far, he said, Hummer's two models do not support a dealership solely for the brand. But he predicted that the new H3, a smaller and cheaper model coming next year, would make the difference. ''I think the investment is going to be more than worth it,'' he said.
Car companies have names for what they hope will be a renaissance in their showrooms. Volkswagen calls its new look the ''Marketplace,'' while Audi has named its program ''The New World of Audi.''
ALTHOUGH many states have franchise laws that prohibit manufacturers from forcing dealers to build new showrooms, they can entice them with preferential car allocations, low-interest loans and even cash.
Audi, for example, pays its dealers $500,000 to $750,000 to help defray costs, said Clint Sly, senior project manager for the Trammell Crow Company, a real estate company that is helping dealerships roll out the Audi program.
With arched roofs and 20-foot-high front windows that lean outward, the newly designed Audi dealerships look a little like airport hangars. They are intended to replicate the company's 20-year-old plant in Ingolstadt, Germany, where customers often go to pick up new cars as they roll off the line.
Inside the new showrooms, large colorful Audi banners are meant to draw the customer's attention to the receptionist's desk at the center of the showroom. The goal is to greet all customers upon arrival, said John Peterson, manager of retail facilities for Audi of America in Auburn Hills, Mich.
Audi says it is pleased with the results so far. Eighty of its 270 dealerships in the United States have converted to the new look. The company points to a customer survey last year by J.D. Power that showed a 22 percent increase in sales satisfaction at ''New World of Audi'' dealerships, compared with the older-style ones. Audi, however, declined to compare sales data for its new and old sites.
Audi started its revamping program in 1997, but it went through considerable changes in 2000 after the company hired McMillan Doolittle, the retail consultant based in Chicago, to assess what customers wanted, Mr. Peterson said.
The spread of standardized dealerships can be slow. On average, half of all dealers do at least some renovation once in five years, according to the dealers association. They feel pressure to do so not only from the manufacturer but also from their competition down the street.
Mr. Crownrich, the designer, said he might spend $100 a square foot on a dealership now, compared with $8 a square foot in 1963. The average dealership now has about 50,000 square feet of buildings on 10 acres, he said.
But if a dealership's architecture is synonymous with a car brand, the dealer's own business loses its brand identity, said Dr. George E. Hoffer, an economics professor at Virginia Commonwealth University and a frequent consultant to the auto industry.
''The physical facility is one way that you try to differentiate yourself,'' Dr. Hoffer said. If automakers demand uniformity in the look, he said, ''that's an interesting way to cut down on interdealer competition, by homogenizing the dealership, because it's one less thing they compete on.''
Still, while some dealers chafe at the idea of retrofitting their showrooms, others are eager to promote the car's brand over their own corporate image.
''At the end of the day, it's still about the product,'' said Mike Jackson, chairman and chief executive of AutoNation Inc., which sells 35 automobile brands in 287 locations and is based in Fort Lauderdale, Fla. ''Automotive will remain about the product, and the product brand should be supreme.''
Yet Mr. Jackson understands that many dealers may not agree. ''You'll find the vast majority want to exercise their entrepreneurial freedom and their entrepreneurial expression to distinguish their dealership in a market,'' said Mr. Jackson, who previously was president and chief executive of Mercedes-Benz U.S.A.
THE automotive retail industry is the largest consumer retail sector in the country, according to the Capital Automotive REIT in McLean, Va., which leases showroom property and buildings to dealers. The average dealership's profits were $615,700 in 2002, more than double the $307,000 in 1997, according to the dealers association.
''We saw that car dealerships have evolved from being a mom-and-pop business to a major corporation,'' said Todd Berko, a partner at Bel Air Partners, a firm based in Princeton, N.J., that advises dealers on the buying and selling of their businesses.
''Many times the car dealer is the wealthiest man in town,'' Mr. Berko said. ''They're highly profitable, cash-flow-generating businesses.''
The physical size of dealerships is also expanding, mainly because of consumers' expectations for more amenities and larger inventories.
''Customers are looking for a greater selection'' within each brand, said Mr. Peterson of Audi. Manufacturers have found that the best way to meet that need is by offering larger showrooms and parking lots that hold more inventory, he said.
Indeed, the racing legend Roger Penske recently completed construction of one of the largest auto dealerships in the country, the $100 million Chauncey Ranch in Scottsdale, Ariz. Sprawling across 41 acres, it sells 11 brands in 10 showrooms, all built to corporate-image standards. The site, which had been an Arabian horse ranch, also offers a paved test track and an off-road course -- as well as a racing museum and a Starbucks.
The emergence of large owners of dealerships like AutoNation, UnitedAuto Group and Sonic Automotive Inc. has contributed to the spread of standardized dealerships, said Thomas D. Eckert, the chief executive of Capital Automotive REIT.
''What the manufacturers did see is the opportunity to say to a public dealer, 'We'll let you buy this franchise, but you've got to build us a new store,''' Mr. Eckert said.
Mr. Jackson, of AutoNation, said that there was a reason for such a strong emphasis on corporate image programs.
''Someone who has spent, on the average, $27,000 for a vehicle very much enjoys coming to a center that is designed to specifically meet their needs, from a practical point of view and from an emotional point of view,'' he said. By pushing dealerships with consistent themes that promote only one brand, automakers are convinced that customers will grow to love the automobile store as much as they love the car. Although dealers generally tend to match that passion for the brand, many don't want to be told how to create a certain atmosphere in their dealership.
''Dealers are not cowboys, but they're individuals,'' said David Sova, managing principal of Car Store Design, a company based in Vashon, Wash., that represents dealers in negotiations with automakers over the design of new stores. ''They don't like being told what to do and frequently will do the opposite if you try to tell them what to do.''
Ultimately, auto manufacturers need to be careful, Mr. Sova said, because the efforts to create a uniform organization may scare off the type of people the companies need to sell their cars. ''The factories need those guys,'' he said. ''They need people that don't follow rules and will do anything they can to make a sale.''
