The first building to win Landmarks Preservation Commission approval since the establishment of the Gansevoort Market Historic District last September has been designed, in the words of its architect, Morris Adjmi, to ''maintain the spirit of the district and at the same time to create a building that has its own identity.''
In mid-July a groundbreaking ceremony is scheduled to be held at what is now a two-story building at 36-40 Gansevoort Street, on the corner of Greenwich Street in the West Village. When work is completed in mid-2005 by the developers Charles Blaichman and Abe Shnay, the two-story commercial building will have expanded to five stories and will measure 100 feet by 100 feet and 65 feet high.
The entire building is to be rented to commercial tenants, with retailers on the ground floor and space for offices, galleries and showrooms above. The project is expected to cost $15 million; the contractor has not yet been chosen.
The historic district generally runs from the north side of 14th Street between Washington Street and Ninth Avenue to the south side of Gansevoort Street, taking in the block bounded by West and Horatio Streets. Mr. Blaichman said he was drawn to the location because he had been involved with two other projects in the area. One was a six-story warehouse at 29-35 Ninth Avenue that was redeveloped into the SoHo House New York, a private club and hotel, and the Spice Market restaurant, which is expected to open in two weeks. The other was at 413 West 13th Street, where five stories were added to a three-story printing building; it now houses two art galleries and commercial operations.
As for the Gansevoort Street building, it could have been much higher and narrower. ''We originally had it designed for 78 feet high.'' Mr. Blaichman said, ''but the Landmarks Commission told us they'd like it lower and wider to be more in keeping with the neighborhood.''
Mr. Adjmi, the architect, said elements of the revised design included ''the integration of brick with metal, which is quite common in this district'' as well as ''the use of the large corrugated awning.''
EDWIN McDOWELL
Postings
