THE physics of life in a big family dictate that with so many bodies moving in so many directions at once, the gravitational force attaching siblings and parents can strain. As the family's older, larger beings in particular edge toward adolescence, they are increasingly immune to the gravitational pull of anything other than ''The O.C.''
To confront these phenomena head on, my wife, Karen, and I settled on a novel strategy: she would stay home in Connecticut with our younger two, Luca, 2, and Juliana, 4, while I took the older two, Rikki, 14, and Elias, 10, to Orlando's theme parks for three days last month. I tried to accept this fate gracefully.
Our plan was to scan the Internet for last-minute bargains and for ways to create the ideal itinerary for a 72-hour stay.
Air fare bargains and convenient departure times to Florida were tough to find as December's storms descended on the Northeast, but after surfing through a dozen or so Web sites, we found a relative deal on Expedia: round-rip air fare for three, plus three nights at the Walt Disney Dolphin resort at Disney for $1,500. It set us on Disney property, where we could maximize the park-attraction-per-hour quotient.
We arrived at the Dolphin on a Saturday night, poised for four Disney parks in two days, a half-day at Universal Studios Florida and a Tuesday afternoon flight home.
The kids squinted in my direction Sunday morning as I strode toward our hotel room's closed curtains, ready to reveal the weather for Day 1 of our Florida getaway. I gave a tug and heard stunned silence.
''It's a hurricane!'' Rikki finally wailed.
Looking out the window, I wasn't sure that she was wrong. Bent palm leaves quivered toward us like the fingers of a cartoon soothsayer. The rain was sideways and thick.
I hurried to my laptop and clicked to Weather.com. Eighty percent likelihood of rain all day. My wife called, and noted that many attractions at Disney's Magic Kingdom were inside. ''Maybe by the time you're out, things will start clearing,'' she said.
And so, armed with optimism and two cheap umbrellas, we leaned into the revolving doors that led outside to the hotel's Magic Kingdom shuttle.
Rikki was wrong: It wasn't a hurricane. It was only a monsoon. We retreated to the lobby, where I jokingly thought to myself that the pool at least wouldn't be crowded. Strangely enough the image began to make sense. ''Pool,'' I said.
''Pool?''
''Why not? Pool.''
The Dolphin's pool is a three-acre series of oases, punctuated by a 12-foot waterfall, two oversize hot tubs and a modest water slide. When we sprinted through the rain to reach it, a man and his son were hurdling the low chain that designated the slide as off-limits -- presumably for liability purposes, since no lifeguards were there.
A few minutes later they too were gone, leaving us the entire place. Oblivious to the rain, we played volleyball, swam races, stood in the waterfall, warmed up in the hot tubs and stole a few trips down the slide. At around noon we'd had our fill, and the rain was considerably lighter.
When our shuttle reached the Magic Kingdom, the sidewalks were drying. On the way in, we passed families who had done what my wife had suggested. One family trudged wordlessly toward the exits in saturated Santa hats, their pants and shirtsleeves soaked beneath clear parkas. They looked utterly defeated.
In a sense, we could relate, having endured a visit to the Magic Kingdom once before, in April 2000. But this was far different, because it was not blanketed by tens of thousands of other souls on spring break. Early to mid-December is among Orlando's slowest periods: a sweet reward for a family with ambitious plans and little time.
We jogged through the labyrinths leading to the Big Thunder Mountain roller coaster, then stood in line for perhaps 10 minutes before getting on the car. We glided through the short line at Space Mountain, screamed through the ride, and returned immediately.
Within three hours, the kids had checked off everything on our list. We headed back to the hotel, nearly exhausted. Our original plan was to visit the Animal Kingdom park in the afternoon, but as it closed at 5 p.m., I half-heartedly suggested Plan B: nap.
Incredibly enough, they bought it. We rose at 6:30 p.m., ready to tackle DisneyQuest, a multistory high-tech playroom. Donning helmets, the three of us sweated through a virtual-reality battle against comic book villains (Ride the Comix), leaving us with more motion sickness than from all the Magic Kingdom rides combined.
Next, we stood in line for Pirates of the Caribbean, a 3-D team combat game against animated buccaneers out of the Magic Kingdom ride that spawned the hit movie. During the 30-minute wait, Rikki and Elias made faces at each other, pushed each other, wrestled, punched and mocked one another nearly nonstop -- behavior that generally earns parental frowns at home.
It had been so long since I watched them this closely in playful battle that I'd lost my ability to appreciate the truly subtle thrusts and parries between brother and sister, and how purely they enjoyed it. I found myself laughing aloud.
After Pirates, I bailed out of DisneyQuest for some souvenir shopping as they stood in line for a simulated roller coaster ride. I retrieved them 45 minutes later, took a detour through the classic games floor -- where I wowed them with my PacMan skills -- and drove us back to the hotel. When we reached the parking lot at 11:45, I proclaimed our day a good start. ''Wait,'' Rikki said. ''We've only been here one day?''
Because the Dolphin sits on Disney property, we got an hour's early entry into Disney's Animal Kingdom on Monday morning. Dragging ourselves out of bed at 7, we took it on faith that it would be worth it. It was.
Besides being an amusement park, Animal Kingdom is an enormous zoo punctuated with wonderfully realistic sets from Africa and Asia, including native music. We rumbled through the Kilimanjaro Safari, during which Elias identified half the species before our tour guide did. (''Look. There's an okapi!'') Then we sped through the Pangani Forest Exploration Trail, lingering near the African silverback gorillas.
After a stroll through Asia's fauna, we arrived at the ''It's Tough to Be a Bug!'' film, which may have more suitably been named ''It's Tough to Be a Toddler!'' Like other newfangled shows, this attraction is 3-D theater with a twist: in addition to viewing characters on screen, participants are subjected to characters and devices lurching from the periphery, and seats that rock and rumble while various forms of precipitation spill from on high.
It's entertaining, if you can block out the screams of terror from small children whose parents were seduced by the attraction's cute-as-a-bug imagery. At one point, the lights dimmed, daunting music blared and fog spewed from the walls. A child a few rows behind us began weeping, and when giant spiders dropped down from the ceiling, he shrieked, unabated, for the remainder of the show. It reminded me of how challenging theme parks can be with little ones, and made me thankful to have just our older children, who can also maneuver more quickly from attraction to attraction.
After a lively trip through the park's new Dinosaur ride, we rushed to our car, with Epcot in our sights. Rikki's ''favorite place in the world,'' Epcot would this afternoon offer an additional attraction: the children's maternal grandfather, Frank Henrick, who winters in Delray Beach, and who joined us for the rest of the day.
The four of us toured Epcot's older rides, then gathered ourselves for a 45-minute wait at Mission: Space, the $100 million space shuttle simulator that opened in the fall. The wait was again entertaining, thanks to the kids, but also because of the multiple warnings from staff members, cautioning people prone to motion sickness, or those made uncomfortable by simulators. Or spinning. Or enclosed, dark spaces.
After the fourth or fifth warning sign or audio message, we added our own warnings. ''Don't do it!'' we joked. ''Run now!''
We may have benefited from such a warning. The four of us walked gingerly from this amazingly realistic simulator, impressed but nauseated. Enclosed in a cramped cockpit and instructed to press various navigation controls, we burst straight up through the atmosphere, then sped past the moon and landed precariously on Mars. I seem to recall other interplanetary elements as well, but I was too focused on preventing the launch of my breakfast to note them fully. We later found out that ''Mission'' the next day began including motion sickness bags in the passenger compartments.
Next on the agenda was an evening free of G-force lunacy, at Epcot's World Showcase, where Rikki honed her shopping skills and where Elias hunted snack foods.
At the Japanese pavilion, we marveled at the rhythmic grace of the taiko drummers. We were awestruck by the Dragon Legend Acrobats from central China, a group of children to whom the laws of gravity apparently do not apply. In the Africa outpost, Elias and I drummed alongside two storytellers and eight or so other amateurs while Rikki pretended not to be related to us.
After Chinese food, a stirring Christmas choral and orchestra concert and fireworks, we returned to the hotel to rest up for our finale, a morning at Universal Studios.
There, we found more tough-to-be-a-toddler type attractions, most notably Jimmy Neutron, Shrek and Terminator 3D. These theatrical experiences, though fun, would have been more enjoyable without the preview stage, where the audience is marched into a darkened holding pen to watch a video. On this gorgeous day with limited time and no crowds, it was torture.
When we took our places on Flight 339 from Orlando, the kids were munching French fries and chatting happily. I closed my eyes, settled back and waited for the G-forces of takeoff to press me back in my seat, and for this last ride to deliver us to the place where, I hoped, we'd gravitate toward each other with more frequency in the days to come.
Putting the trip together
Lodging and Parks
The 1,209-room Walt Disney World Dolphin, 1500 Epcot Resort Boulevard, (888) 828-8850, www.swananddolphin.com, is a 30-minute drive from Orlando International Airport. The hotel offers free shuttles to each of Disney's attractions and a free boat ride to Epcot and Disney-MGM Studios. The hotel portion of our Expedia.com package was $524, for a three-night stay. Dolphin guests, like others staying on Disney property, are eligible for the Ultimate Park Hopper Pass, allowing entry to all Disney parks; ours, for two days, were each about $66 a day. Parents with night life ambitions can leave the kids at Camp Dolphin for supervised play, for $10 per child per hour.
Admission to Universal Studios Florida for one day was $165.99 for three of us.
Web Sites
We found the best rates and flights for an Orlando package on Expedia.com: $1,520 total, which included air fare on Song airline (an arm of Delta) from Hartford to Orlando and our' stay at the Dolphin. Travelocity yielded the best car rental rate, $78 for a Toyota Corolla from Alamo for three days. For Orlando theme park information, TravelWithKids.About.com offered solid advice on attractions and bargains. The travel reviews at TripAdvisor.com were also helpful, as were those from ePinions.com. MouseSavers.com offered Disney-specific guidance; we'd have overlooked the Ultimate Park Hopper Pass offer without this site.
Dining
At the Disney parks, the chicken strips-and-fries platter, roughly $7, was the lunch dish of choice. Also at Epcot, we bought a three-course fixed-price dinner for three adults and one child for $123 (including soft drinks and tip) at Nine Dragons Chinese restaurant. The fare was uninspired, the service friendly and efficient, and the meal price also included priority seating at the evening's concert, saving us from a distant perch, or no seat at all.
BOB TEDESCHI
WINTER IN THE SUN BOB TEDESCHI is a frequent contributor to the Travel section.
