Republicans came out of the midterm legislative elections asking themselves two questions: what happened, and what's next?
What happened was that a politically weakened Democratic governor added seats to his party's legislative balance for the first time in a couple of generations and cemented New Jersey's transformation from a respectably middle-of-the-road Republican state to a swing state and then to one solidly in the Democratic column.
What's next is the governor's race of 2005, and that means the great mentioner is afoot on the political landscape again, whispering the names of the might-bes , the wannabes and never-will-bes as possible candidates to take on James E. McGreevey.
Right now, the list looks something like this: Christopher Christie, the United States attorney in Newark, who has made a name for himself rounding up crooked public servants; Douglas Forrester, who in 2002 ran (and paid for) a brave race against Robert Torricelli, only to find in the 11th hour that he was actually taking on Frank Lautenberg; Assemblyman Paul DiGaetano; and a handful of state senators, including Joseph M. Kyrillos, chairman of the state committee, Thomas Kean Jr., and Diane Allen; and others.
And looming over all of them is Bret D. Schundler, the former Jersey City mayor who ran a brilliant primary race in a big field and a clueless election campaign against Mr. McGreevey in 2001.
At this point, the 41-year-old Mr. Christie -- who was appointed by President Bush in 2001 -- seems to be the candidate for many important Republicans, which means all of them who do not want the job themselves. He's a youngster with scant electoral experience who has indicted or convicted dozens of office holders, appointees and their partners in crime. And he still has his sights set on some who used to be close to Mr. McGreevey. It is a record that could let him run as a crime-busting non-politician. After all, Rudolph W. Giuliani played that hand well in New York City.
Mr. Christie's prospects got a boost last fall from the one bright spot in the Republican legislative race, the victory of Bill Baroni of Hamilton over a Democratic incumbent, after Mr. Baroni ran on cleaning up government and attacking the pay-to-play phenomenon, expressed by the curious fact that the biggest contributors to state politicians tend to get the biggest state contracts.
''I think the people are outraged at the level of corruption that they come into in their daily lives and eventually people are going to say they've had enough,'' said Robert W. Ray, a former Whitewater special prosecutor who took a stab at the Senate race in 2002 before dropping out. ''If we run a Giuliani figure like Chris Christie, I think we could be successful.''
Mr. Ray's name has also showed up on lists of possible candidates, but in an interview, he seemed to be working on a different calculus, one that goes like this: after a rough year, President Bush is looking stronger all the time. If the Democratic presidential campaign is a disaster, the president could pull some new Republicans into Congress on his coattails this fall. Under that scenario, Mr. Ray, a resident of Monmouth County, thinks he might have a chance to unseat Representative Rush Holt in the 12th District.
There is another reason the corruption and scandal theme looks tempting to the Republicans: their favorite old chestnut, promising to cut taxes, is off the table. The budget is billions in the red, and even Washington Republicans who make New Jersey Republicans look like Naderites admit that they can't run against big government any more. The services that big government bring are just too popular. (That a lot of those services are being paid for with debt shifted onto our children and grandchildren is another story).
But before Mr. Christie can move into Drumthwacket he will have to deal with the two other principal might-bes besides Governor McGreevey. Mr. Schundler has kept his devoted army of conservatives -- a rock solid quarter or more of any Republican primary turnout -- tied to him by e-mail and frequent public appearances and so would start any race with a huge head start.
The other powerful unknown is Mr. Forrester, who has several advantages over Mr. Schundler: he has the personal fortune to pay what it takes to stand out in a crowded race, and has shown he is willing to spend freely. More than that, he is on good terms with Mr. Kyrillos and the party leadership for the way he drove Mr. Torricelli from the field and then labored on uncomplainingly -- or mostly uncomplainingly -- when the Democrats parachuted Mr. Lautenberg in. And they did that because Mr. Torricelli was trailing Mr. Forrester in the polls.
The key to the Republicans' hopes will be to keep to their good-government theme and deflect the Democrats' time-tested efforts to paint them as antiabortion gun nuts, Mr. Ray said.
''There is an opportunity here,'' he said. ''Are we capable and organized enough to take advantage of it? Or do we get sidetracked and knee deep in the weeds on issues that hurt us?''
ON POLITICS Iver Peterson reports from New Jersey for The New York Times.
