THREE holes into our golf vacation at the PGA National Resort and Spa in Palm Beach Gardens, Fla., we saw a stately looking gentleman zipping over to us in a golf cart bearing the sign: Golf Marshal. He did not inquire as to how we -- my friend Stefan and I -- were playing, but rather asked sternly what time we had teed off and then jotted it on his clipboard.
It was overcast and the course was nearly empty. Still, the marshal warned us that slow play was not tolerated at PGA National. Each hole on the resort's five courses has its own expected time of completion, he said, and all groups are monitored for speed of play. Laggards risk being kicked off the course.
''I've only had to do it once,'' he said, riding away.
This is golf at the PGA National: Golfers are not pampered, at least not on the course, and that's exactly why we had chosen it. Like most duffers, Stefan and I can only dream of playing PGA Tour-level golf, or of ever competing in a tournament where speed of play is monitored by a marshal. But that experience can be had at PGA National, which is one of Florida's largest ''stay and play'' golf resorts.
The golf club and hotel are surrounded by four 18-hole tournament-quality courses, with another, the Estate course, a few miles away. Even in Palm Beach County, where there are some 160 golf courses, the resort is a veritable golf-o-rama, the golf equivalent of an all-you-can-eat buffet.
Golf can be a casual game, eased by mulligans, gimmes, winter rules and other skirtings of the game's strict ordinances. But PGA National, as the name implies, provides an atmosphere of officialdom.
We were certainly good candidates for golf boot camp. Stefan and I play on New York City public courses, where golf means taking your clubs on the subway or, as at Mosholu in the Bronx, teeing off to the clattering of the elevated subway. But on our trip last month in Florida, the turf was perfect and the holes were patrolled by long-legged cranes as big as ostriches.
Shortly after our visit from the marshal, we stood on the sixth tee, a par 3, and stared at the green 206 yards away. There was water in front of it and to the left, and dense woods to the right. We weren't in the Bronx anymore, and had no interest in becoming the second set of golfers ever to be kicked off PGA National, so we hurried on.
We were playing the General, a course designed by and named after Arnold Palmer, whose galleries were called Arnie's Army. Like the other PGA National courses, the General is flat and expansive. It is a links-style course with many grass bunkers and water hazards on 16 holes. The 8th and 12th holes share a large green.
We pronounced the course conquerable, even as we dispatched ball after ball into woods and water. By the back nine, which has narrower, undulating fairways and more bunkers, our supply of Titleists dwindled.
We stumbled back to the hotel lobby, trudged over its zebra-striped marble floor and collapsed into snazzy wicker chairs. The safari motif made sense. It was a jungle out there.
The hotel and courses have been renovated in recent years, including the 339 guest rooms and suites. We had a standard room, which was modest in size and pleasant. The executive suites are larger and have a sofa and armchair, and there are several much bigger luxury suites.
All the rooms are traditional in style, with marble foyers and halls, and high-back poster beds. There are granite countertops in the bathrooms and wood-framed mirrors. Each room has a private balcony or terrace overlooking either pool, garden or golf areas. Ours overlooked lush gardens and the blue, glowing Waters of the World mineral pools of the European-style spa. The pools contain salts imported from renowned water sources, including the Dead Sea.
In all, there are nine pools. A group of women gathered for water aerobics in the main one, chatting in pairs and bobbing in the water until the instructor turned up ''Funky Town'' on the boom box and began the class.
Over at the Health and Racquet Club, the Fat-Free Salsa Class began. The 19 tennis courts, gym and squash courts all were busy, too.
In the era of Tiger Woods, the PGA Tour is immensely popular, and hackers and scratch golfers alike, men and women, from all over the world stay at the resort, which opened in 1981. Many are attracted by a name they equate with the PGA Tour, although the tour is a separate organization from the PGA of America, a governing body of club and teaching professionals.
Even more confusing, neither group actually runs the resort (it is run by Dolce International, a hotel and resort company). But the PGA brand -- those three magic letters -- is ubiquitous there.
It is on the PGA of America's national offices, an imposing white building presiding over the fifth green of the Haig Course, overlooking PGA Boulevard. The PGA emblem is stamped in the fine white sand in large ashtrays outside the hotel. It is on the menu (''the PGA Club Breakfast'') and even on the morning paper, which comes with a PGA National sticker bearing the slogan, ''Have a Championship Day!'' At times, it feels as if one's very vacation is sanctioned by golf's gods and governors.
During our three days there, fellow guests maintained tournament temperament: pleasant but focused. Even when the sun was shining, the pool areas were virtually vacant, as was the white-sand beach on the resort pond. But the three driving ranges and six practice greens were crowded with golfers, many of them taking lessons with instructors from the PGA National's Academy of Golf on the premises. It offers three-day golf schools, daily clinics and private instruction.
There are no caddies, and golfers are required to fill their own divots using the sandbox and shovel that each golf cart (carts are mandatory) is equipped with. The scorecards stipulate: ''A round of golf is to be completed in four hours or less,'' and ''All play will be governed by the U.S.G.A. rules of golf.''
The spa offers a Golfers Recovery facial, and you can get a manicure there or at PGA Nails, at the shopping center next to the resort.
It was all a bit daunting to live up to, trying to play a PGA-worthy golf with a public-course game. On our second day, we played the Haig, a course named after the golf legend Walter Hagen, designed for players of all skill levels. There is also the Squire, named after another legend, Gene Sarazen. A links-style layout, it is the shortest of the resort's five courses, but also the narrowest, requiring well-placed shots.
Both courses were designed by Tom Fazio. The Estate course, a short drive from the resort, is a Karl Litten design. These are all Florida flat and not incredibly difficult for good golfers. They were in good condition but the greens were not very fast when we played, since the Bermuda grass was overseeded with rye grass for the winter.
But the fifth course, the Champion, is a different story. We didn't play it, but were suitably intimidated when we took a quick tour.
The Champ, as it is known, was originally a Fazio design, too, but was redesigned in 1990 by Jack Nicklaus. It was the site of the Ryder Cup in 1983 and the P.G.A. Championship in 1987. The PGA Seniors' Championship was played there from 1982 through 2000.
Its 15th, 16th and 17th holes -- a stretch called the Bear Trap -- have been called some of the toughest on the Senior Tour. There is a plaque on the 15th hole, a watery par 3, that announces: ''You are now entering the Bear Trap.'' The sign reiterates Nicklaus's belief that any tournament played on the course ''should be won or lost right here.''
The Champ was recently renovated for $4.1 million and reopened a year ago. Bunkers were remade and the entire course was resurfaced and given a new irrigation system and cart paths.
Each hole has five sets of tees, and most tees face wide, watery expanses. Fairways are wide, but there are many well-placed bunkers to collect drives. There are no blind shots to greens, but some flagsticks were tucked tight behind sand traps.
WE had come to get in as much golf as we could, but if we had tired of the game, there were other sports we could have tried. Croquet, for one: the resort has five croquet lawns.
The croquet, too, had the air of officialdom. Men dressed all in white made passes at heavy balls with heavy mallets made of fine wood aiming at stiff metal wickets. The pro, Peter Just, a slim, handsome man smoking a thin cigar stood with a mallet dangling from one hand.
''Real croquet is like war or chess,'' he proclaimed. ''You could sit out for 40 minutes at a time and plan your strategy. I teach the golfers a modified version of it.''
I decided to stick with clubs rather than pick up a mallet, and joined a golf clinic, where a pro, Charlie Regan, advised me to strengthen my grip to avoid slicing and helped me swing ''on plane,'' in a smooth, continuous arc.
The first night, we were too tired to go out to dinner, so we raided our room's pay-as-you-take personal pantry. The next day, after playing till dark, we hit the Bear Trap, a sports bar in the hotel, and had a beer before repairing to Shula's Steak House, one of the eight restaurants at the resort.
Part of a chain named after Don Shula, the legendary head coach of the Miami Dolphins, it is famous for its large portions, Angus beef steaks and menus painted on official NFL game footballs. The walls in the darkish, wood paneled rooms are covered with large photographs in ornate frames of the Dolphins' perfect 1972 season.
Perhaps Shula's best-known dish is its 48-ounce porterhouse. Finishing one will get you inducted into Shula's 48-ounce Club and your name etched into a plaque on the wall. The club has 23,000 members and counting, including a man named Taft Parker, who has eaten more than 100 48-ouncers.
I declined the super steak, choosing instead the filet mignon, which came tender and juicy.
Food, however, was definitely a minor factor in our trip. One reason golf is so addictive is that, however badly you play, every round or trip includes at least one gratifying shot. For me, that shot came on the ninth hole of the Haig.
I was about 190 yards out from the green on the 368-yard par 4 with the ball sitting pretty on the tightly mowed fairway. The flagstick was tucked behind a steep bunker and there was a stiff headwind.
I hit a soaring 1-iron that seemed pinned to the sky. I can still see it now. Finally, it dropped down softly next to the pin and sat next to its deeply pocked ball mark, about eight feet from the hole.
I missed the putt, but I look forward to a do-over in the spring, in the Bronx.
90 holes await
The PGA National Resort and Spa, 400 Avenue of the Champions, Palm Beach Gardens, Fla. 33418; (800) 633-9150, fax (561) 622-0299, www.pgaresort.com, with its five courses, is all about the golf. But one can also play tennis and croquet, and enjoy swimming and spa treatments. There is a private, 26-acre sailing lake and a small white-sand beach.
The resort has 339 pleasant rooms and sprawling suites, and eight restaurants and lounges, including a Shula's Steak House and Arezzo, which offers Italian cuisine, including fresh seafood, pasta and pizza.
A double room ranges from $199 to $339 a night, depending on season; suites start at $239. Special low rates apply in summer.
The resort's five golf courses are private, open only to hotel guests and members. Greens fees range from $180 to $280. Carts are mandatory and cost $35.
The gold golf package includes at least one round of golf a day, a cart, two range ball tokens and a full breakfast for $282 a person a night in high season.
The platinum package at $399 a person, offers a larger room with two guaranteed rounds of golf, a golf clinic and breakfast.
The golf-spa package for $282 a person allows either a round of golf or two 50-minute massages or facials.
Generally, taxes and tips are extra, and single rates are available.
WINTER IN THE SUN COREY KILGANNON is a reporter for The Times.
