THE United States stock market had a bang-up year in 2003, but performance overseas was even better.
International stock funds, which can invest everywhere but here, posted an average return of 39.8 percent last year, in dollar terms, according to Morningstar Inc. Including dividends, the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index recorded a return of 28.7 percent. Some of the international outperformance was attributable to the slide in the value of the dollar.
W. George Greig, manager of the William Blair International Growth fund, which has about $2 billion under management, talked last week about his outlook for foreign markets this year. Following are excerpts from the conversation:
Q. What do you expect for the global economy in 2004?
A. I am struggling to figure out what might be changing in the world.
At this point, it doesn't look like very much is.
It still looks like things are going strong from one end of Asia to the other, from India to China. Economic recovery is looking stronger in Europe, but it is kind of peaking out in the United States and in the United Kingdom.
South America is very commodity-sensitive, and if you have a reasonable political and macrofinancial environment, it should do well. And the global agricultural economy is booming.
Q. Why did foreign markets begin swinging higher last year?
A. There were two catalysts.
The first was the end of the war in Iraq, which brought European markets back from the brink. The other was the end of the SARS crisis, which for a time masked a very strong rebound in Asia.
After the SARS scare, we got the sense that China was driving the global economy as much as the United States was.
Q. Emerging markets did much better than stocks in the developed countries. Where is your portfolio invested?
A. We are limited to 20 percent of the total portfolio in emerging markets, and for the last nine months or so we have been at the top of the range.
Our heaviest commitments in emerging markets are in China, Taiwan, India and Brazil. I am bullish on Brazil, even though its market doubled last year. About half our emerging-market exposure is in these four countries.
Emerging markets beat the rest of the world in 1999, lagged in 2000 and have outperformed ever since, both in the bear and the bull market. On a five-year basis, emerging markets have significantly outperformed developed-country markets, including the United States.
Q. How is the remaining 80 percent of the portfolio allocated?
A. About 24 percent of our money is in Japan, and another 6.4 percent is in Hong Kong, Australia and Singapore. Nearly 6 percent is in Canada. A little over 20 percent is in the United Kingdom, and about 23 percent in Continental Europe.
Q. The dollar has weakened substantially against the euro over the last year. But Europe has a wide range of economic and fiscal problems. Do they concern you?
A. I am worried about the European Union, where fiscal tensions are becoming very difficult. It looks like Europe is suffering from a lack of cohesiveness and political leadership.
As far as the currency is concerned, if you asked a trader, he would say the euro isn't strong; the dollar is weak. If the dollar were not weak, I think the euro would be the focus of currency traders.
Q. Which other countries or regions of the world worry you?
A. Pakistan, Taiwan and North Korea are the three countries I worry about.
The fact of all the attention and effort the Middle East has gotten in the last couple of years means that it is probably not as much of a threat, in a surprise sense, as it was. But if there were some sort of unforeseen extremist revolution in Saudi Arabia, or unforeseen developments in Palestine, that would not be good, either.
Q. What are the biggest holdings in the fund?
A. As of the end of September, our five biggest holdings were Vodafone, UBS, Nomura Securities, Samsung Electronics and Standard Chartered P.L.C.
Q. Do you sense a shift in sentiment about the wisdom of investing overseas?
A. There has been a shift in the last couple of years. At the end of the 1990's, people were asking what the point was of investing overseas, because we do everything better here.
A few years on, there is not quite so much cynicism about foreign economies. People hear about how competitive China is, and how many jobs are going to India.
As far as the allocation is concerned, the consensus view among most advisers and pension funds is that 10 percent to 20 percent of a portfolio should be invested internationally.
I wouldn't quarrel with that.
MARKET INSIGHT
