The years that Linda Fairstein put in as head of the Manhattan district attorney's Sex Crimes Unit yield gripping details in her new legal mystery, THE KILLS (Scribner, $25), on how sex crimes are perceived by the public (with prejudice) and handled in court (with prejudice masquerading as justice). Fairstein's heroine, a blond and brainy prosecutor named Alexandra Cooper, gets away with playing prima donna in this series because she is also a brilliant tactician. Even with a case that proves too tricky to be credible -- here, the violent history of a former military man on trial for rape is tied in with the murder in Harlem of an old woman who was at one time the mistress of King Farouk -- Alex saves face with the solid expertise she displays in the courtroom.
At times, it feels as if Fairstein were writing in two distinct genre styles. In racing after shadowy C.I.A. agents and mysterious pieces of historical evidence, Alex and her backup team of investigators are following the conventions of a thriller. But their overheated antics never make it into the courtroom drama, whose sobering scenes illustrate real problems in prosecuting sex crimes. ''The hardest thing about these cases was convincing a jury that a felony had actually taken place,'' writes Fairstein, who makes the legal issues more exciting than any high-speed chase.
Like Linda Fairstein, Jilliane Hoffman comes to the writing game with respectable credentials, as a former assistant state attorney and legal adviser for the Florida Department of Law Enforcement. But for all its pretensions as a legal thriller, her first novel, RETRIBUTION (Putnam, $24.95), is pure potboiler. To be sure, the premise of the story presents an unusual ethical dilemma for its heroine, who as a young law student was raped and nearly killed by a sexual sadist in a clown mask. More than a decade after her attack, C. J. Townsend is second in command at the state attorney's office in Miami, where she comes up against her rapist and realizes that she now has the power to make him pay for what he did to her. But having brought her story to this interesting moral crossroad, the author drops the philosophizing and goes right for the gross stuff -- the lurid handiwork of a serial killer who has put away his clown mask but is no more believable a villain in his current guise as ''Cupid.'' The book was actually dead in the water before it got to this point, doomed by its cliché-riddled prose, mail-order killer and impulsive heroine, whose icky habit of thinking in italics (''Don't let him beat you this time. Don't let him win'') is in itself a crime.
You have to admire a writer who can find the perfect context for a Randy Newman lyric like ''I'm dead but I don't know it.'' Russell Andrews pulls that off in APHRODITE (Mysterious Press/Warner, $23.95), a smart, cynical thriller that, like Newman's sly oeuvre, comes with a high quotient of pleasurable creepiness. The creep factor kicks in with the third killing, of a perky reporter who stumbles onto the secret of a strangely long-lived resident of a Long Island nursing home. That's the murder that grabs the attention of Justin Westwood, a small-town cop with big-time baggage who, in trying to protect the sole witness and her 8-year-old daughter, uncovers a conspiracy between the government and a major pharmaceutical company involved in ''an unholy experiment'' in biogenetic engineering. Andrews orchestrates the tension with a steady hand, keeping Justin and his charges one step ahead of sinister F.B.I. agents and a terrifying pair of hit men who really love their work. Although the noble Justin begins life as a stock character, he's got a good mind -- keen enough to work out this Chinese puzzle of a plot and twisted enough to accept the macabre conspiracy theory on which it's built.
Even grimmer, if that is possible, than ''The Guards,'' THE KILLING OF THE TINKERS (St. Martin's Minotaur, $22.95), Ken Bruen's second Jack Taylor crime novel, finds this discredited ex-guardsman back home in Galway, his latest attempt at redemption a hollow joke. Elbows on the bar, brain fried from cocaine, Jack is wallowing in self-pity and remorse when a Gypsy clan leader offers him another chance at salvation. Someone has been killing off young male tinkers, and the Irish police have studiously ignored the hate crimes. Outcast to outcast, can Jack help them out? Jack can and does, earning himself the inevitable stigmata from a savage lead-pipe beating that takes out all his front teeth. Bloodied and broken, Jack is still recognizable as Bruen's boy, a wounded street poet who believes in the redemptive properties of language (''My life and certainly my sanity had fled to reading through a thousand dark days,'' he tells us in a moment of lyric sobriety), but a man so consumed with guilt that he keeps robbing himself of the power of speech.
For bedtime reading, nothing beats a claustrophobic tale of fatalistic dread by the supreme master of suspense, Cornell Woolrich, whose score of novels and hundreds of short stories define the essence of noir nihilism. The hitherto uncollected 14 stories (all but one written between 1936 and 1943) that Woolrich's biographer, Francis M. Nevins, has selected for his centenary tribute, NIGHT AND FEAR (Otto Penzler/Carroll &amp; Graf, $26), are only a drop in the bucket of that deep, dark well of work; but they capture the bleak era of the late Depression and early war years and cover the full range of Woolrich's morbid obsessions. For all the vicious cops (''3 Kills for 1''), heartless mobsters (''Cigarette''), subtle killers (''The Fatal Footlights''), and relentless stalkers of women (''The Death Rose'') and children (''Through a Dead Man's Eye'') who roam these pages, his uncanny narrative perspective keeps pulling us into the mind of the weakest, most helpless character in the story -- the staked goat that senses the danger in the darkness and knows it can't escape. And although the period settings of burlesque houses, movie theaters and crummy hotel rooms are extraordinarily vivid, the final, unnerving story (''New York Blues,'' posthumously published in 1970) confirms that, for Woolrich, the most terrifying landscapes are the windowless cubicles of the anxious mind.
Crime
