EAST 93RD STREET in Manhattan, the street that the Marx brothers called home, pitches down so steeply from Lexington Avenue to Third that most pedestrians go right past the old brownstones and small apartment buildings. Two recent alterations, however, may slow the curious passer-by.
The oldest buildings on the block are the row houses on the south side. Three groups of these -- 158-166, 168-176 and 178-182 -- went up in the 1860's, even before Lexington Avenue reached the area.
They housed an assortment of prosperous families, as the census of 1870 shows. Cornelius Demarest, a lime dealer, for instance, lived with his family of four and one servant at 174.
The houses at 168-176 and 178-182 are fairly standard with brownstone fronts, but 158-166, although of the high-stoop variety, are executed with stone trim against brick fronts. Earlier than the other rows, their simpler, classical-style detailing gives them a dignity not evident in the usual brownstone house.
This is helped by their simpler fenestration: two windows wide, instead of the busier three of typical brownstones. The row was built in 1865 by George W. Beale, a wool merchant who lived one block south.
The final pair of row houses, 184-186, are trim little brick buildings with a later Victorian feeling, built in 1876.
ANOTHER kind of development came to the block in 1882 when the small apartment houses were built at 175, 177 and 179, each for eight families. Four stories high, they would have housed two families to a floor.
The 1890 city directory lists 10 families at 179, including those of Alexander Mills, an organ dealer, and a lawyer coincidentally named Montague L. Marks; at funeral services for Mr. Marks in the apartment later that year, the labor activist Samuel Gompers, a friend, spoke in memory of him.
The mixed character of the block is evident from the 1900 census. Charles Stehlin, a 62-year-old Austrian-born steamboat captain, lived at 162 with his family of four; his daughter Carrie was an artist, and in 1903 the Stehlins built her a studio, which was listed on the building permit as an atelier.
Across the street, in 179, the census lists, among others, a Russian-born glass blower, a Romanian-born artist, and Samuel Marks, a tailor, his wife, Minnie, and their children: Leo, 13, Adolph, 11, Julius, 9, and Milton, 7. This was before an additional son, Herbert, was born.
Together they formed, in the same order, the Marx Brothers: Chico (who affected an Italian persona), Harpo (who never spoke but honked a horn), Groucho (known for his trademark cigar and wildly fluctuating eyebrows), Gummo and Zeppo.
Their mother, a singer and actress, created a vaudeville act with her sons around 1905, the year the census listed Chico, Harpo and Groucho as clerks. Harpo's obituary in The New York Times said they started as the ''Six Musical Mascots.''
In his 1961 memoir, ''Harpo Speaks,'' Harpo said that in all there were 10 in the household, including other relatives, and that he learned to tell time from the clock on the tower of the Ehret brewery at 93rd and Second Avenue. By 1910 the family had moved to Chicago, and around 1930 Chico, Harpo and Groucho -- with Zeppo as the straight man -- began a series of five hilarious movies, including ''Monkey Business'' (1931) and ''Duck Soup''(1933).
In the 1920's and 1930's, new owners lopped off the stoops of the brownstones, and sometime after 1940 the ornate brownstone front of the Marx family building was shaved off. But little else of note happened to the buildings until the 1960's when Dr. Manuel Furer had the architect Glasser &amp; Ohlhausen redo his stoop at 166 East 93rd, with a restrained but distinctly modern right-angle staircase.
Dr. Furer recalls that when he arrived on the block ''there was still the smell of mash in the air'' from the Ehret, Ruppert and other breweries between Third and Second Avenues in the 90's.
In 1970, the architects Gueron &amp; Lepp built an entirely new front at 176 East 93rd, plain and modern, in a warm copper colored brick. Although it is customary in preservation circles to deride such buildings as ''intrusions,'' 176 complements the rest of the row while providing an interesting contrast.
Two of the houses, 170 and 186, are nearing the end of significant facade changes. At 170, the ground-level entrance has been redesigned and the front has been repainted a buff color. The designer, Julie Herzig, said that the front was already painted gray and the owners had decided not to go back to the original brownstone color because the house had white replacement windows. ''It would look like a man in a dark suit putting on white socks,'' she said.
At 186, the replacement of a missing stoop in brownstone-tinted concrete, designed by the architect George Sweeney, is almost finished.
When Alix and Philip Shearer bought the building in 1995, they made only limited changes. But they found that having a single entrance was a hardship, with visitors walking through the dining room. ''A second entrance gives us more flexibility,'' Mrs. Shearer said.
She said that they would also return the window lintels, now painted a limestone color, to the original brownstone color.
David Mitchell, an investment banker who lives in the old Demarest house at 174, says he was among the founders of the block association in the 1960's.
He recalls that he liked the mixed-income character of the block, with house owners on the south side and small apartments on the north side. ''One of the reasons I moved here was that I wanted my children to have the feel of the real world instead of living in a rich person's ghetto,'' he said.
Most people on the block know that the Marx brothers lived at 179, and almost as many accept as true that the houses were built for midlevel brewery executives -- a connection frequently attributed to row-house blocks in the low 90's off Lexington. But the identifiable builders of the row houses had nothing to do with beer.
Although the 1870 census lists occupations like gas fixture manufacturer, hardware dealer, builder, lace jobber and florist, that and later directories and census returns list no one connected to the brewery industry.
Streetscapes | Upper East Side
