MAIN STREET in Huntington has a new culinary star. Osteria da Nino shares a common ownership with Red, a stylish American restaurant just a few blocks away. The newcomer, however, is strictly Italian, from the food to the wine list to the décor.
Despite its storefront location and moderate prices, Osteria da Nino has the look of a special-occasion spot, with white tablecloths, carpeting and five elaborate chandeliers. Its beautiful pumpkin-colored walls end in a sage-green ceiling. Scattered around the room are standard lamps, the kind once found in grandma's parlor; decorative Italian pottery and a battery of hanging copper pots and pans. Patrons enter the restaurant through an upwardly sloping hall set with niches holding vases with tall, willowy branches. Thick velvet draperies separate this entry from the dining room.
The staff was exceptionally nice. Even the busboys recognized second-timers and smiled a welcome. Service was also efficient, with bread arriving immediately and water glasses kept full throughout the meal. The replacement of used silver and the delivery of dishes to the correct person were automatic.
Pleasant surroundings and warm welcomes can only take a restaurant so far. It's the food that makes or breaks it, and Osteria da Nino has it made. With one exception, everything we tasted satisfied. That sole clunker was a tough and tasteless Tuscan rib-eye sliced steak. It was in sharp contrast to the superior roast pork chops smothered in a flavor-packed mushroom ragout.
We also liked the sea bass under a topper of sweet peppers and onions, and salmon with a crunchy polenta crust. The braised veal osso buco won plaudits for its fall-away-tender meat but elicited a few grumbles for the large amount of carrots in the stew.
Pasta lovers are in luck. There are good choices on this menu. The linguine covered with tiny Manila clams, in their shells, was a delicious classic, as was rigatoni in a smoky bacon-rich amatriciana sauce. The pasta that beat out all the competition and the one I'll go back for was the hay and straw with mushrooms and truffle oil. We had a battle of the forks, reaching for another bite of this yummy dish.
Two salads that stood out were field greens topped with still-warm grilled vegetables and shards of Parmesan, and the panzanella. The latter included small cubes of bread, which were first crunchy and later soft from soaking up the dressing. It also had good quality tomatoes, seeded chunks of cucumber, chopped red onion and basil.
The No.1 appetizer was a generous mound of fresh baby artichokes sautéed with plenty of garlic. Eggplant Parmesan was also noteworthy. It was long on eggplant, featured a fresh-tasting, pulpy tomato sauce and kept the amount of cheese under control. Fried calamari and the refreshing seafood salad contained briny morsels of calamari that were firm yet tender. A special of sautéed broccoli rabe with a crown of Italian sausage and some of that wonderful tomato sauce also came up aces. And on a cold winter's night, a bowl of barley soup thick with carrots, onions and celery hit the spot.
Desserts set Osteria da Nino apart from most other Italian restaurants on the Island. Their homemade sweets are marvelous. No lineup of dry Italian cheesecake, soggy cannoli or soupy tiramisù here. There's even a homemade tartufo, not the one from central casting. Osteria da Nino's stars housemade chocolate gelato rolled in chunky chopped chocolate with brandied cherries in a light sauce.
A good pick for diners who want a not-too-sweet finale is the tangy mascarpone-yogurt mousse set upon a raspberry coulis. My favorite dessert was the chocolate mousse, a firm-textured cylinder with a mantel of orange zest and a puddle of refreshing passionfruit sauce. Other don't-miss-sweets were the lemon meringue tart with its first-class pastry and a special tiramisù given a new twist from its placement in a crisp cookie tuille. Even ubiquitous Italian cheesecake -- light, moist, served warm and garnished with a berry sauce -- was far above average. As is Osteria da Nino itself.
Osteria da Nino  292 Main Street, Huntington (631)425-0820  Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Comfortable, upscale storefront.
SERVICE -- Warm and efficient.
SOUND LEVEL -- Pleasant.
RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Barley soup, baby artichokes, eggplant Parmesan, seafood salad, fried calamari, broccoli rabe with sausage, panzanella salad, grilled vegetable salad, rigatoni amatriciana, hay and straw, linguine with clams, salmon, sea bass, pork chops, all desserts.
WINE LIST -- An all-Italian list of 43 ($21 to $115) with half the bottles under $30. There are also house wines at $5 a glass, $11 a half carafe and $20 a carafe. By-the-glass selections are $5 to $8.
PRICE RANGE -- Lunch, entrees $11 to $22. Dinner, appetizers $6 to $12; pastas $13 to $18; entrees $14 to $24; desserts $7.
CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.
HOURS -- Lunch, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m. Monday through Saturday. Dinner, 3 to 9 p.m. Sunday, 5 to 10 p.m. Monday through Thursday, till 10:30 p.m. Friday and Saturday.
RESERVATIONS -- None accepted.
WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Fully accessible.
REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Jan. 11, 2004.
RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT E-mail: lidining@nytimes.com
