ALLIES
The U.S., Britain, Europe,
and the War in Iraq.
By William Shawcross.
261 pp. New York:
PublicAffairs. $20.
WILLIAM SHAWCROSS, who made his journalistic reputation as the scourge of Henry Kissinger (in ''Sideshow''), and later anatomized the failures of international aid and of humanitarian intervention (in ''The Quality of Mercy'' and ''Deliver Us From Evil'') -- that William Shawcross -- has written a polemic ardently endorsing the war in Iraq. And that's not all. Shawcross also argues for the Bush administration's aggressive use of the doctrine of pre-emption, Donald Rumsfeld's distinction between old and new Europe, the neoconservative case for regime change, the perfidy of the French, the indispensability of the Americans and much else to gladden hearts in Washington. What's going on here?
Before addressing that all-important question, it needs to be said that Shawcross is a much better journalist than he is a polemicist. Some of his books, like ''Deliver Us From Evil,'' contain very little argument at all, though they nevertheless make for gripping, or at least intermittently gripping, reading. ''Allies'' is, alas, very close to journalism-free; Shawcross seems to have tapped it out almost without leaving his study. This is a bantamweight book that is passionately, but not always closely, argued. Yet it is an important book -- not so much because of what Shawcross has written as for the fact that he has written it.
The English press has subjected Shawcross's apparent rightward turn to searching psychological and cultural analysis (finally inheriting the family estate; marrying a ''socialite heiress''; cozying up to the royal family; re-enacting his father's own political pattern, etc.). Since ''Allies'' is silent on this subject, it's more instructive to consider the possibility that Shawcross has remained true to his principles, but that a morally driven foreign policy looks very different after 9/11 than it did before.
Shawcross is scarcely the only liberal or leftist to see the war in Iraq as the consummation, rather than the contradiction, of his principles. Christopher Hitchens is the best-known example; others include Paul Berman, Bernard Kouchner and André Glucksmann. These few brave souls have been pilloried by their coreligionists, who are inclined to view the United States as a greater threat to world peace than Iraq. Shawcross must have caught a lot of this himself, for he takes up the cudgel against the ''hate-America-first'' crowd, so busy loathing President Bush that they can spare ''not a word about what the Iraqi people had suffered for decades.''
It is impossible to make sense of the left case for war in Iraq without considering the history of the last half century. From the 1950's through the 80's, the West deployed military force to roll back Communism -- a threat the left considered wildly exaggerated, and often a flimsy pretext for self-aggrandizement. Then the Communist threat abruptly vanished. In the 90's, force was used or, more often, not used, in the face of humanitarian catastrophe, in Rwanda, Bosnia, Kosovo, East Timor and elsewhere. This scrambled the old ideological alignments, dividing both left and right. The antiwar left and realpolitik right opposed these ''CNN wars,'' while the Wilsonian moralists of left and right championed them.
In ''Deliver Us From Evil,'' Shawcross indicted the great powers for failing to act in the face of mass brutalization -- in Iraq, as well as in Africa and the Balkans -- and for making it impossible for the United Nations to do so. At the time, many neoconservatives were making the same argument, minus the part about the United Nations. Indeed, in ''Allies,'' Shawcross notes that while the neocons are considered ''radical'' for their insistence that evil regimes have sacrificed their absolute right to sovereignty, these arguments ''sound close to mainstream liberal internationalist thought.''
The attack on the World Trade Center upended the doctrinal order yet again. In the era of weapons of mass destruction, monstrous dictators, especially monstrous dictators in the Middle East, had become a threat to the West as well as to their own beleaguered people, so that humanitarian crises now had a strong national security element. This was the case for regime change in Iraq advanced by figures like Paul Wolfowitz; and it is Shawcross's as well. Though he appears to believe that Saddam Hussein's barbarity alone would justify intervention on humanitarian grounds, he also argues that Hussein's fascist state posed the same order of threat that Hitler's once did. The failure of much of continental Europe to support the war in Iraq, he insists, ''showed that it was still capable of failing the test that it flunked'' in the 1930's. Put that in your pipe and smoke it, M. de Villepin!
Shawcross virtually cribs from the work of the foreign policy analyst Robert Kagan, when he notes that since Europeans can never match the military power of the United States, they ''are more and more intent on emphasizing the vital importance of international structures, even those that give equal weight to those who abuse their precepts.'' The tangled syntax of that last clause may reflect Shawcross's own confusion, since he appears still to be a staunch supporter of that pre-eminent of all international structures, the United Nations. Indeed, Shawcross takes the truly counterintuitive position that the Munich-like failure to make common cause on Iraq proves the indispensability of the United Nations, since ''this very public and rancorous debate was actually taking place there.'' By that standard, the League of Nations proved indispensable when Italy invaded Ethiopia.
Perhaps the nod to multilateralism is a vestige of the old Shawcross. Plenty of liberal internationalists, or self-styled ''Blair Democrats,'' supported the war in Iraq, but with a lot more qualms than Shawcross or the neocons express. This is not because they had a different estimate of Saddam Hussein's moral nature or ultimate plans, but because of a difference between liberal internationalist thinking and neoconservative doctrine that Shawcross doesn't notice, or at least doesn't discuss.
Wilsonians, from Wilson himself through John F. Kennedy and even the first President Bush, believed in pursuing national goals through a network of enduring alliances and multilateral institutions; neoconservatives, or ''right Wilsonians'' like the current President Bush, are deeply skeptical that others share our interests or values, and thus are perfectly willing, and often eager, to act alone. Many pro-war liberals (and many pro-war not-so-liberals) believe that the Bush administration frittered away any chance of persuading reluctant allies to join us in Iraq by behaving toward them in a consistently high-handed and contemptuous manner. They also blame the administration for doing nothing to reward Tony Blair's lonely choice to stand with us.
Shawcross only briefly touches on the administration's manifest mistreatment of Blair, and in any case blames Jacques Chirac, rather than George Bush, for endangering the international order. Indeed, Shawcross hates the French president the way many of his former comrades-in-arms hate the American one. He writes that Chirac donned the anti-American mantle in order to distract French voters from his budding reputation as the ''Super Menteur,'' or ''superliar''; that he outdid even the Kremlin in his eagerness to do business with Saddam Hussein; and that since he ''must have known'' that his threat to veto a second United Nations resolution would make war inevitable, he has ''the blood of American and British soldiers on his hands.''
Might a more dexterous leader than George W. Bush -- his father, for example -- have flattered or manipulated Chirac into signing that resolution, and maybe even have conducted the war in Iraq as an American-led NATO operation? Shawcross does not contemplate the possibility. But you have to wonder if it wouldn't have been far better for us, and perhaps even a bit better for Iraq, if we could have gotten old Europe as well as new to buy in.
James Traub is a contributing writer for The Times Magazine who reports frequently on international relations and the United Nations.
