TIME out on the court. The Nets are up for sale, and at least one prospective owner wants to move the Nets and their fast-break offense from their New Jersey home to New York. Not again. History threatens to repeat itself.
This professional basketball franchise has endured its share of difficulties since it first took the floor in 1967. The team began as the New Jersey Americans in the old American Basketball Association before a new owner moved it to Long Island and renamed it the Nets almost 40 years ago. The Nets won two A.B.A. championships in the 70's before relocating to the Continental Airlines Arena in the Meadowlands.
Today, the Nets are once again among the best and most exciting teams in basketball. But true to the franchise's fractured history, it seems that just as the team is poised for greatness, the rug is being pulled out from underneath. Four bidders for the team were initially in the fray, with plans to move the Nets to Long Island or Brooklyn. That would figure with our state's bad luck and self image.
New Jersey Nets fans have suffered some of the worst indignities fans could, on the court and off. From a horrific start to the Nets' debut season in the National Basketball Association, to the forced trade of Julius Erving, to Coach Larry Brown quitting just at the Nets were ready to begin a playoff run, to Michael Ray Richardson's drug disaster -- and let's not forget the Secaucus Seven ownership group -- we have suffered long enough.
Now, with an outstanding young team led by Jason Kidd, who chose to re-sign with the NEW JERSEY Nets; with a young, loyal and growing fan base (despite what the current owners say); and with exciting changes promised at the Meadowlands because of the Xanadu project, the owners want to let the team be swiped from our state. Will the Nets become the latest example of the big business of sports, in which owners have no regard for fans? That's a flagrant foul in my book.
No matter how the New York Knicks fare this season, they always will be ''the'' hometown team in New York. Why then would any potential owners of the Nets, or more important, the fans, think that moving this team to New York would be good for the franchise? It will not. Though their best fans have always loved the Nets, the team has become something for all New Jersey to be proud of. The team needs to stay here.
On behalf of all New Jersey Nets fans, I say to the owner Lewis Katz (who promised us love before bailing out): Do the right thing. Sell the team to Charles Kushner, the only bidder who has promised to keep the team at the Meadowlands. As the Nets announcer Rick Zolzer always says at the start of every game, ''Introducing YOUR New Jersey Nets '' They are OUR team. Let's keep them here, in New Jersey, where they belong.
SOAPBOX Michael Kozlowski, a marketing manager from Waldwick, operates the Web site joenetsfan.com.
