IN the basement of the Social Club last Thursday night, the jungle drums were pounding away and the B List was in full cry. Ian Spiegelman, a graduate of Queens College and a tenacious leg man for Page Six, The New York Post's much maligned and slavishly read gossip column, was celebrating a birthday.
A pair of conga players riffed as a D.J. spun 80's and 90's hits, annotating a deafening soundtrack with insistent beats that suggested something of a caper was under way.
The guest of honor, who turned 30, would not say. Weaving through a crowd of media familiars, old pals and almost famous fast friends, Mr. Spiegelman declined to comment with a parade wave, suggesting that he had shot his mouth off one too many times in the presence of the press. As a guy who makes a living off people who say more than they should -- his recent first novel is titled ''Everyone's Burning'' -- he gave a wan nod to the irony of the situation, then got back to making sure his friends had fresh cocktails.
Britney was not there, but her recent toe-touch with the sacrament of marriage served as a maypole of conversation. A girl at the bar, whose own midsection framing was not that far from the pop tart du jour, suggested that ''Britney had gone too far.''
How far is too far? It is a long trip in this particular room. Here in the heart of Gossip World, countless people, boldface and not, were conversationally trashed as easily as someone stubs out a cigarette.
Maer Roshan, founder of Radar, a post-celebrity magazine, gave Mr. Spiegelman his first job when he was an editor at New York magazine.
''Ian is fearless, which is why I hired him in the first place,'' Mr. Roshan said. ''He is very much about speaking truth to power; unfortunately he speaks a little too loudly every once in a while.''
Watching as people made a beeline off East 27th Street into the doorway leading down to the party, Mr. Roshan said that gossip was no longer the exclusive province of specialists. ''Not long ago, CNN did 50 minutes following Michael Jackson's car,'' he said, ''and then when they said, 'In other news,' they mentioned that something like 50 people had died in Iraq.''
Chris Wilson, a colleague of Mr. Spiegelman's at Page Six, said their craft was harmless, a libretto to the modern-day puppet show that is celebrity culture. ''What we do is just a mirror,'' he said.
Mr. Wilson suggested that the running characters on Page Six, the Paris Hiltons and Alec Baldwins, who serve as steady dart boards for the amusement of others, were the better for it.
''They love seeing themselves celebrated and vilified,'' Mr. Wilson said. ''And they love watching their colleagues and contemporaries torn down for sport.''
The more brutal externalities of his handwork do not give Mr. Wilson pause. ''I sleep like a baby,'' he said.
DAVID CARR
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: URBAN STUDIES/GOSSIPING
