EVIL
An Investigation.
By Lance Morrow.
276 pp. New York:
Basic Books. $24.
WHEN President Bush's speechwriters substituted the word ''evil'' for the word ''hate'' in the now totemic phrase ''axis of evil,'' they tapped into an energy source that generates its own consequences. Even in this age that not so long ago thought of itself as mainly secular, the idea of evil is electric. Real-world events in Iraq and North Korea, if not Iran, have followed from the Bush administration's equation of those regimes with transcendent malevolence. The equanimity with which Americans regard the collapse of the stated purpose of the Iraq war -- its necessity to prevent Saddam Hussein's use of weapons of mass destruction -- is a measure of the broad acceptance of the war's more abstract purpose: to oppose evil. In this way, motivating Bush's supporters and discomforting his critics, the idea of evil has become a main tool of statecraft. That is why the thoughtful investigation of evil in Lance Morrow's new book is so timely. ''Evil'' can help Americans think more clearly about an ancient question that is urgent in a new way.
Evil is a most elusive subject, and Morrow knows better than to take it head-on. He is a well-established writer for Time, and this book has something of that magazine's breezy eclecticism. Citations run from Jean Cocteau to John Wayne; from Samantha Power to Slobodan Milosevic; from William James to William Buckley. As one would expect in a consideration of evil, Hannah Arendt is here, but so is Pumla Gobodo-Madikizela, the South African psychologist whose encounter with a torturer nicknamed ''Prime Evil'' is the perfect counterpoint to Arendt's encounter with Eichmann.
But the organizing center of this book is the work of those whom President Bush labeled the evildoers of Sept. 11. For that reason, there is nothing breezy about Morrow's approach. Indeed, the solemnity of this brooding rumination perfectly matches its grave subject. Morrow begins, in effect, by acknowledging the criticism of President Bush's use of the word ''evil,'' but to him both Bush's critics and defenders ''fail to see what evil has become in the world as it exists now. The word needs serious parsing.'' Yet Morrow proceeds more by implication than argument, more by metaphor than syllogism. Thus, evil is a ''current,'' a ''fungus,'' a ''vibration,'' a ''cloud,'' a ''hermit crab,'' +''parasitic,''++''an ax in space.'' Evil resides in specific human acts, and this book is rife with accounts of them. But it is more than any act: ''Evil is a strange, versatile and dangerous word that can be used to describe a genocide or to incite one.''
Always, Morrow returns to the public trauma that changed this discussion. ''The world's new dimension (computers, Internet, globalization, instantaneous communications, widely available instruments of mass destruction . . . and so on) amounts to a new metaphysics that, by empowering individual zealots or agitated tribes with unappeasable grievances, makes the world unstable and dangerous in radically new ways, and in doing so transforms both the political and personal dynamics of good and evil.'' This new metaphysics, however, affects not just fanatics and tribes but great nations, too. And there is the problem with the way evil has come to be discussed in Washington.
To the question ''Is America evil?'' Morrow wants very much to answer no. His own reaction to Sept. 11 was reflected in a column he wrote that very day for Time,+which+was given the title ''The Case for Rage and Retribution''; one senses here a nostalgia for the purity of that wounded anger. But Morrow resists the temptation to carry on this reflection from the moral high horse of the self-anointed innocent, and he warns especially of nurtured victimhood. Indeed, Morrow has the humility here to compare his own thinking, as expressed in that article, to the ethically problematic conclusions of a man who summarily executed prisoners in combat.
''Americans,'' he writes, ''are struggling now with the possibility that their country may be evil -- or, to be more practical, that their country may be doing evil in the world. The death, in Americans' own minds, of the certainty of American exceptionalism opens the possibility of American evil and is itself a part of the whole revival of the idea of evil in the world: Bush speaks of the axis of evil, and there bounces back the countertheme of American evil, indeed of Bush's evil.''
Even World War II, which was a campaign against evil if ever there was one, ended with ''the lingering terrible facts of August 1945, when the forces of good ended 'the Good War' by dropping two nuclear bombs, on Hiroshima and Nagasaki, thereby introducing an unprecedented new instrument of evil into the world.''
SUCH turns in history force an investigation beyond the mere question of right and wrong. Evil may be grounded in individual acts of human choice, but it operates as energy that reduces human intention to insignificance. Morrow insists that evil is larger than wrong: ''Evil suggests a mysterious force that may be in business for itself and may exploit human agency as part of a larger cosmic conflict.'' It is here that the language of religion has usually been invoked, as if the explanation for this mystery can involve only God and Satan. But the language of religion has its limits, too -- and religion's ready sponsorship of evil is a sign of that. Sometimes Morrow seems inclined to credit the old dualism, despite noting its history as heresy ''(Manichaeism, Gnosticism, Albigensianism, and so on).'' Seeing evil and goodness as transcendent polarities both reduces human beings to the status of spectators before a cosmic drama and makes them its permanent victims. We imagine ourselves as angels, but the devil makes us do it. Such hubris and such moral abdication both characterize much of what is heard from Washington lately.
But again, Morrow knows better than to locate evil with gods or demons, and he keeps the focus of this mystery where it belongs -- on the ever flawed and contingent human will. ''I think the opposite of evil is not good,'' he says, ''but rather, hope.'' Hope implies a choice, and haven't we seen that choice made again and again? As much as evil was made manifest on Sept. 11, so was this other thing. ''Hope,''+Morrow+writes, ''is goodness in a tight spot.'' It is ''the primary energy of the will to live, the will to survive.''
James Carroll is the author, most recently, of the novel ''Secret Father.''
