BEING named an American Dream Town in a national contest with no ground rules is an honor Greenport happily accepts, with reservations.
Winning took getting out the vote, but that's all.
Three towns in each state were in the running, selected by the contest's advisory board. Whichever one registered the most votes at the American Dream Town Web site won for the state. Anyone who wanted to could vote, but only once a day, and the town with the biggest total was named the national winner.
Greenport received 871 votes in less than a month after the village's Merchants Association got behind the effort, getting out the vote with e-mails to members, friends, and family. Greenport beat out Cooperstown, N.Y., which got 32 votes, and Tarrytown, which got 12.
But the big winner was Glen Rose, Tex., which received 52,560 votes.
The contest is the brainchild of Ingrid Lemme, the public-relations director at Gurney's Inn in Montauk and the longtime host of ''The American Dream Show,'' a cable television show, available to viewers in the Hamptons, about American success stories. The idea for the contest came to her after the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, she said, when shell-shocked New Yorkers sought refuge in outlying towns.
She saw that there was a renewed interest in small towns as travel destinations and started American Dream Town U.S.A. as a profit-making venture, to bring attention to small towns through an online contest. She recruited an unpaid board of advisers, mainly people in the media and many of them with ties to Long Island.
As a successful first-generation immigrant, born in Bochum, West Germany, Ms. Lemme calls herself ''an American Dream girl'' and speaks passionately about aiding the cause of world peace through the contest. She also hopes to generate advertising revenue through the site and to sell American Dream Town books and merchandise there.
As she was developing the contest, the Montauk Chamber of Commerce asked for her marketing expertise in giving local businesses a boost during a dry spell in early 2002. And so it came to pass that Montauk was named the national winner last year.
''There was no contest,'' Ms. Lemme said. ''It had to start somewhere, and what better place than the home of 'The American Dream Show' and American Dream Magazine, where we have so many families who symbolize the American dream in a beautiful community founded by a developer who symbolizes the American dream?''
Now that Greenport is the New York winner, no one in the village is exactly sure what that means.
Mayor David Kapell was delighted that Greenport won even if the village voted for itself because, he said, that shows strong community spirit, if nothing else. ''Greenport is Americana at its best,'' he said. ''It's beautiful, fiercely independent, able to overcome obstacles, and closely identified with the American dream. It has maintained its identity in its traditional roots while adding new features and modernizing old ones.''
Mr. Kapell said he was surprised that there would not be a further screening among the towns with the most votes. ''So it's only based on which towns get the most votes?'' he said. ''That doesn't seem very selective. Any town could win.''
Greenport and the other state winners will have a full page in a book about the American Dream Towns, to be published by Ms. Lemme's company.
Cork Maul, a pianist who lives in Greenport, is unmoved. ''I'm not a marketing type of person, but I'm really not impressed by Greenport winning the contest,'' he said last week. ''It's more about image than substance, and it's a shallow thing that confuses the real issues.''
But Jeffrey Colton, the president of the Greenport Merchants Association who has a bit more interest in marketing, said he planned to make the most of Greenport's win, which his group engineered.
''This contest can help us let people know about what makes Greenport a preferred destination compared to the mega-shopping in Riverhead, which has been a challenge to us,'' Mr. Colton said. ''Namely, it's a safe, fun place to take the whole family to enjoy the day, have a bite to eat and do some shopping.''
Word of Greenport's success in the contest has not exactly been shouted from the rooftops. At the Coronet Luncheonette last weekend, Pudgy Jimenez, the waitress, and her husband, Sooty, the manager, weren't aware that Greenport had won. But they weren't the least bit impressed when they were told. ''We don't need any more media attention,'' Ms. Jimenez said. ''A lot of locals already feel things have gotten out of hand.''
