IT as a milestone of sorts when Shanghai, China's biggest city, banned bicycles on its largest avenues last month, but also a belated acknowledgment of a change that has already transformed many large cities in China. Bicycles have gone from carrying more than 70 percent of travelers in Shanghai as recently as 1990 to from 15 to 17 percent now, according to the Shanghai Urban Planning Bureau.
China's four-wheeled future is on gleaming display at Shanghai's auto dealerships. At a Buick showroom fitted with soaring, plate-glass windows and a modern interior that looks a little like a coffee shop with cars, Yang Yi, 31, recently went shopping for his first car after a lifetime of public transportation, bicycles and walking. He was a little nervous as he carefully studied a deep blue compact model, and watched attentively when the salesman demonstrated how to check the dipstick.
''My friends showed me how to do it,'' he said. ''But I wanted the salesperson to give me a professional knowledge of how to examine it.''
Mr. Yang, a wine salesman in an increasingly cosmopolitan city, with a population that now exceeds 20 million, said he needed the car for work and to go driving with his wife on weekends. Also, he said, most of his friends were buying cars.
Automobile sales in China, which reached two million last year, are growing at an annual rate of more than 50 percent. The growth of private car ownership has brought with it a car culture that increasingly resembles the American one, but with even worse traffic jams, especially in Beijing. Downtown parking spaces have become precious.
Brand consciousness is so strong that people buy fake hood ornaments of luxury cars like Mercedes to put on domestically manufactured models. Chinese car owners even show a very American resistance to carpooling.
''People here are exactly like in the United States -- they want to be independent,'' said Bernd Leissner, president of Volkswagen Asia-Pacific, the largest foreign automaker in China. ''If you look on the highways, they are all driving alone. It's stupid, but they do it.''
Shanghai's decision to restrict bicycle access on major thoroughfares is especially noteworthy because city leaders have been more cautious than elsewhere about relying on cars. Wu Jiang, the city's deputy director of urban planning, said that while the city has only three subway lines now, five more are under construction and nine more are planned, a network intended to give the city 20 percent more miles of track than New York City.
But developers in Shanghai, as in virtually every big Chinese city, are erecting rows of apartment buildings on the outskirts, creating a new commuter class of people who prefer cars to mass transit.
Shanghai's main avenues must be able to accommodate these people, Mr. Wu said. Bicyclists here, and in other big cities, have had to move to the smaller streets and alleys, which honeycomb the older sections of China's cities, to get where they're going.
The switch from bicycles to cars is having serious health consequences. China has seven of the world's 10 most polluted cities, according to the World Health Organization, and pollution from cars has been rising quickly even as regulators have had some success in discouraging people from burning coal in their homes for heat and cooking. Mixing cars and bicycles in traffic is also deadly: bicycles account for three-quarters of all traffic accidents, Mr. Wu said.
In a country with an average income per person of $1,000, relatively few bicyclists can dream of affording a car, even though tiny models with minimal safety equipment and low-powered engines are available for less than $5,000. Bus service is excellent, but becoming slower as cars clog the main roads, according to a recent Chinese traffic study.
Still, after two decades of rapid economic growth, more and more Chinese are becoming sufficiently prosperous to buy their own cars, and see no need to forgo the comfort and status that comes with owning one.
''I wouldn't spend the money,'' Mr. Yang said. ''I'd save it if I weren't expecting better times.''
Banished Bicycles
