TWO years after the city closed the dance haven Twilo, denouncing it as a drug nest, Spirit, a New Age nightclub, has arrived in its place. Cleansing the cavernous West Chelsea club of its infamous past, Spirit hopes to provide entertainment through enlightenment.
''Modern dance culture has conditioned people to believe that drugs are a crucial part of the journey,'' said Robert Wootton, the owner of Spirit. But while sequestered in the African bush, he said, he had a vision of a holistic dance club. ''I've seen where the rave culture went wrong,'' he said. ''We want to bring it back to the pure state, in a nontoxic environment, where everyone's invited to participate.'' Mr. Wooten's wildly ambitious entry into the New York club scene carried a price, $18 million. (Spirit Dublin opened in 2001; five more Spirits are to open around the world.) The space at Spirit is divided into three areas: Body (a dance floor and mezzanine), Mind (a spiritual wellness center) and Soul (a restaurant). Mood-enhancing fragrances are pumped in through vents. On a recent Saturday night, the ''everyone's invited'' policy was in effect. Groovy older folks in loose-fitting clothing, break-dance crews with do-rags, Euro nightclubbers sporting tinted shades and office party strays circulated curiously, and calmly, through the zones. On the stage in Body, a music-dance troupe called Rapture interpreted American Indian mythology. A giant circular projection screen that read ''Spirit New York'' hovered above them. In the corner, a group of old-time hippies, who might vacation in Santa Fe or its like-minded outposts in Mexico, shook their arms, their gaze fixed on the performers. By the bar, a stylish man in his 50's watched a woman dangling on a rope, twisting it with her body. He claimed to be unaware of what was happening in Mind: harp massages, administered with a real harp, alcoholic elixirs and orange and yellow hues for sacral and solar plexis chakras. A house remix of OutKast's ''Speakerboxxx'' broke the spell and a woman in a white micromini and platform boots threw her arms in the air and ran out to the dance floor. ''The sound is awesome,'' said a man wearing a tight black shirt, walking up the stairs toward Soul. ''If it were crowded, this place would be banging.''
Six firemen with axes and oxygen tanks marched in in single file. No one seemed to mind their presence, or the sound of the fire alarm or the accompanying strobe lights. ''Are they a part of the show?'' asked one hipster, a Spirit pin affixed to his shirt. No, they were responding to a false alarm. An open mind, Mr. Wootton said, is Spirit's only velvet-rope policy.
Spirit  530 West 27th Street; (212) 268-9477.
GETTING IN -- Be on the guest list or pay $30 cover charge.  D.J. PICKS -- Sufi trance, house, soul, R&amp;B.  DRESS CODE -- Anything goes.  SIGNATURE DRINK -- Third Eye Indigo (Croc vodka, grape juice, ginger, citrus flavors), $10.  SIGHTINGS -- Jay-Z, Donna Karan, Tommy Hilfiger.
BOÎTE
