WOULD Auden approve? I think so. Whole rooms full of people eager to express a thought, a political belief, a yearning -- a phenomenon far more healthful than the one that inspires America to watch ''Average Joe: Hawaii.''
It's Thursday, in front of the open microphone at The Daily Grind in Denville. Rasheed Adero, 31, the host, works in insurance. Here's an excerpt from his poem, ''NJ Drive'':
I'm driving this poetry to a place called there
Where tom-tom meets snare
This windy-city style that Chicago couldn't bear
I'm driving under the influence of Hip Hop, fueled on Sonia Sanchez
Paul Lawrence Dunbar changed my oil, I ain't scared to take no chances
I'm urban, in my SUBURBAN, even if YUKON, me into INFINITI
I got metaphors in the car doors and similes where the antennas be
Feel my energy!
It's a good poem. More remarkable, it's part of a surge flowing in and out of meeting places, often alcohol free, that doesn't rely on a governor's arts budget or a legislature's largess. This surge runs wild, and even without the government telling it to, cuts across age, gender and racial lines.
At Kingdom's Sea and Soul on Vreeland Avenue in Paterson, the audience on the last Saturday of every month, when the poet Flowmentalz presides, is mostly black.
At River Rimes, the poetry slam at Brenner's Brew in Bridgeton, the crowd is more likely to be white and middle aged.
''We mostly get 30-to-40 year olds, but we also get teenagers,'' said Renee Rasinger, the host, who views this outpouring as an irrepressible desire for self-expression.
Slam poetry, the phenomenon of people reading their poems as part of a public competition, is hardly new. Jim Haba, poetry director for the Geraldine R. Dodge Foundation, says that poets have read competitively in the rude courts of Anglo-Saxon chieftains as far back as the fifth century.
''These weren't the courts of Henry VIII or Charles II mind you, but then these poetry competitions were not events that would happen at the local swine bar either,'' said Mr. Haba, who added that although the Dodge Poetry Festival doesn't feature slam events, it does feature poets who slam.
Among recent writers, Suheir Hammad, who performed in Def Poetry Jam on Broadway, and Jimmy Santiago Baca have both appeared at the festival.
All poetry was originally oral. The Odyssey was sung for hundreds of years before it was written down, but as printing grew more widespread, in the 18th century and afterward, the written poem tended to supplant the oral version. The immediate roots of the slam tradition are perhaps in the 1950's, when Allen Ginsberg and other beats began to read their work aloud, sometimes to jazz accompaniment, at galleries and bookstores in San Francisco.
Enter contemporary slam poets like Mr. Adero and Rob Hylton, a teacher at Weequahic High School in Newark, who, among others, have represented New Jersey at annual slam poetry competitions in Chicago and Minnesota the last few years.
''Considering that New Jersey has only competed nationally for the last seven years, the fact that we place in the top third is pretty impressive,'' Mr. Adero said.
''Emotion recollected in tranquility,'' William Wordsworth called the essence of poetry. A slam is anything but tranquil but it drives home the point. Describing one difference between the written poem and a poem read at a slam, Mr. Haba says, ''one is more long-lasting; one is more vivid and exciting.''
At the poetry festival at Summit High School, one of nine festivals organized by the Dodge foundation at high schools around the state, students now read in front of an open microphone at the end of the program.
''All of a sudden, you have this very exciting, very dynamic poetry being read by all kinds of students,'' said Lili Arkin, an English teacher at the high school.
In spite of its popularity, Ms. Arkin added, slam poetry is of high quality.
''People who do it well are not sloppy in their use of language,'' she said. ''They use imagery and metaphor; they use rhyme and meter. They practice the craft; they don't just rant.''
Partly because of slam, an unprecedented 106 of 850 students signed up to take poetry classes, Ms. Arkin added.
Unlike some forms of rap and countercultural expression, slam isn't based on profanity and doesn't celebrate materialism or self-pity. Mr. Hylton, 31, the son of a factory worker, is the first in his family to attend college or graduate school. An excerpt from his poem about a Jamaican immigrant:
If you won't vote, I will vote
and if you don't want it, I will take it
and if you can't hack it
I will walk into the fabric of this here American
society and come out like the three Hebrew brothers
There is no limit to how far we can go.
JERSEY
