SOME years ago a young violinist asked Pierre Boulez why he had never written a string quartet. ''Because the string quartet is dead,'' Mr. Boulez said. Like most of his notorious death sentences, this one proved spectacularly wrong. In recent decades the string quartet has enjoyed an impressive revival, and with good reason.
Throughout its history the string quartet has been a favored medium for classical composers. It is an unusually supple vehicle, alternately intimate and orchestral, conversational and introspective: a small group that lends itself to big statements. The glory of Western art music from the Classical age to the modernist era was bound up with the great quartet cycles of Haydn and Beethoven, Bartok and Shostakovich.
But by the 1950's fewer composers were writing for the string quartet, which had been overshadowed by more exotic ensembles. It began to seem as quaint as a Sunday afternoon chamber concert at the local church. It might have continued to languish but for the advocacy of two ensembles: the San Francisco-based Kronos Quartet, founded in 1973 by David Harrington, its first violinist; and the London-based Arditti Quartet, founded a year later by Irvine Arditti, the violinist involved in the Boulez exchange.
Passionate, unflagging champions of new music, the two groups have, between them, commissioned nearly a thousand works; that achievement alone should earn them a lasting place in music history. They have also inspired a wave of young string quartets that specialize in contemporary music, including Ethel and the Meridian and Flux Quartets in America, and the Brodsky, Keller and Balanescu Quartets in Europe. Not to mention the salutary impact they have had on the classical music scene as a whole, which has become a little less staid and a little more open.
Twenty years ago Kronos and the Arditti Quartet were widely seen as spiritual cousins or, perhaps more accurately, intercontinental rivals. They were playing much of the same music and working with some of the same composers: John Cage, Morton Feldman, Alfred Schnittke, Conlon Nancarrow. They still are. Both groups have recently released excellent recordings of Alban Berg's ''Lyric Suite.'' Yet it is their differences one notices these days.
Kronos (with John Sherba, second violinist; Hank Dutt, violist; and Jennifer Culp, cellist) has won a popular following by emphasizing tonal music, American and Eastern European Minimalism, and transcriptions of jazz, rock and world music. The Arditti Quartet (with Graeme Jennings, Ralf Ehlers and Rohan de Saram) has remained committed to the European postwar avant-garde and coolly indifferent to popular trends. Kronos's playing, though long on verve, is sometimes short on refinement; the Arditti Quartet's is often as glacial as it is magisterial.
Kronos's performances, theatrical and entertaining, feature amplification, splashy costumes, dramatic lighting and, more recently, videos. It wants to give its fans -- and its audiences are nothing if not adoring -- an ''experience,'' in Mr. Harrington's favorite word. In the Arditti Quartet's no-frills performances, the music is the experience. The difference between Kronos and Arditti concerts is like that between exhibitions at the Whitney Museum and the Museum of Modern Art.
Some of the difference has to with nationality. Kronos, a distinctively American ensemble, has sought, in time-honored American fashion, to defy convention by embracing a cheerfully inclusive populism. The Arditti Quartet, in contrast, has sought to extend the tradition of European modernism, with results no less adventurous but far more somber.
Leadership is an even bigger factor. Like other distinguished groups, Kronos and the Arditti Quartet each benefit from the shaping vision of a strong, determined leader.
Mr. Harrington, who was born in Seattle in 1949, is an aging hippie with an infectious love of the string quartet and a disarming desire to play the music he loves whether it's meant for strings or not. The seeds of his interest in string quartets were planted when, at 12, he heard the Budapest Quartet's recording of Beethoven's Opus 127 Quartet.
''Those E flat major chords had a wildness to them, and they became my private connection to the world of music,'' he said on a recent visit to New York. ''I just had to play that music.''
Yet his interest was never limited to classical music. As a teenager he listened not only to Berg, Bartok and Stravinsky but also to Hendrix, Coltrane and African music. ''If Hendrix were alive today,'' he said, ''I would do everything in my power to get him to write for Kronos.''
Early on, he chafed at the narrowness of the string quartet repertory. ''I remember getting out my globe one day and seeing Vienna way over there,'' he said, ''and thinking, O.K., Haydn was from over there, and so were Mozart, Beethoven, Schubert, Brahms and, later on, Schoenberg, Berg and Webern. A lot of incredible musicians. But Vienna is one little city. How come there wasn't any quartet music from Africa, from Asia, from the Middle East? It didn't feel right to me.''
Why should one care whether the great composers and improvisers of the Third World are writing for string quartet when one can hear their music -- arguably at its best -- on native instruments? ''But I wanted to play it,'' Mr. Harrington said. ''I think that the string quartet is capable of reflecting so many different feelings about life and so many sounds. It's a very generous medium, and there's room for so many approaches and possibilities.''
Mr. Harrington has spent much of his career courting musicians who never considered writing for string quartet. During the 1980's he commissioned works from composers outside the mainstream, like Terry Riley, the California Minimalist; Astor Piazzolla, the Argentine master of the nuevo tango; and John Zorn, the New York bender of genres. Since the 90's Mr. Harrington has ventured ever further afield from the tradition of notated music.
Kronos has not abandoned composers writing in the Western tradition. Last summer it released a beautiful recording of the Fourth Quartet by the Latvian composer Peteris Vasks, a wintry, ruminative work with echoes of Bartok, Shostakovich and Pärt. But the emphasis has clearly shifted toward what Mr. Harrington calls ''the space between the notes.''
What excites Mr. Harrington these days? ''Sigur Ros,'' he said, citing the experimental band from Iceland that churns out sonorous, funereal art rock. ''For me these are young musicians, in their 20's, whose approach is spiritual. What they're doing reminds me of the music of Gorecki and Pärt.'' What else has he been listening to lately? Bjork, Tom Waits, Godspeed You Black Emperor and Mogwai.
''I spend a lot of time listening to music,'' he said, ''but not to string quartet music.''
Mr. Arditti's views on the future of the string quartet could hardly be more different. ''At the end of the day, I think composers who are in the tradition of writing classical string quartet music do it better,'' he said. ''People have to know what they're doing when they write for the quartet.''
Unlike Mr. Harrington, Mr. Arditti, who was born in London in 1953 and studied at the Royal Academy of Music, never much cared for pop. ''I was always a fanatic for contemporary music,'' he said recently from Boston. ''Everyone else was listening to the Beatles, and I was listening to way-out music: Berio, Xenakis, Ligeti and later Boulez. None of my friends understood me. I never got into jazz. I was loyal to contemporary music. That's why I don't like playing crossover pieces.''
By ''contemporary music,'' Mr. Arditti has something fairly specific in mind: music of formal rigor and originality, music that, as he puts it, ''extends the sound of the string quartet.''
''We don't want to be pigeonholed as the quartet that plays the most difficult, complicated music,'' he said. But the Arditti Quartet has made no great effort to dispel that impression. To hear it perform Xenakis's ''Tetras,'' a work with dense, coiled masses of sound in no recognizable harmonic language, is to be reminded of the shock of modernism, the forceful, pitiless challenge it still presents to received ways of understanding music. As for composers writing tonal music, Mr. Arditti blithely said, ''They're less interesting.''
You can imagine what he thinks of Kronos. ''Twenty years ago we had much more in common,'' he said. ''Now there's very little in common. I don't know what they're doing now, but I think they're playing very light stuff. They're very concerned about appealing to people and how many CD's they're selling. We do take our public with us, but those who don't like to come along we don't go past a certain point to persuade.''
While Kronos has traveled far and wide collecting musical ''experiences,'' the Arditti Quartet has focused on more conventional modernism, recording the complete works of virtually every composer in the tradition, from Schoenberg and Webern to Luigi Nono and Helmut Lachenmann.
The Arditti Quartet's vast recorded output is an indispensable library that will be consulted by musicians and fans for years. Yet it is also a monument to how hermetic modernism can be. For if Kronos has perhaps paid excessive tribute to popular music, the Arditti Quartet has all but ignored it.
Does Mr. Arditti take pleasure in the fact that popular bands like Radiohead and Sigur Ros are drawing inspiration from the great modernist composers? ''I don't know much about pop composers who listen to contemporary music,'' he said. ''But I can understand why they would. It's difficult to be original. Why not learn from someone who's more skilled than you are?''
Then again, why not learn from someone who is -- or rather, appears to be -- less skilled than you are?
When I first started listening to contemporary music, as a teenager, I was a partisan of the Arditti Quartet's severe, uncompromising aesthetic: its fearless devotion to the challenges of modernism, its ''who cares if you listen?'' attitude. As much as I loved Kronos's recordings of Schnittke and Pärt, I felt betrayed by its forays into world music and rock, which struck me as cowardly capitulations to commerce.
These days I'm struck by how much great music the Arditti Quartet has neglected, works by the likes of Mr. Zorn and Steve Reich. I'm still skeptical of Kronos's taste for transcriptions of African music that sounds far better in the original instrumentation. Yet Kronos has also championed some of the most original talents in contemporary music, and its willingness to risk failure for the sake of a piece the players love commands respect.
Though it cannot match the Arditti Quartet's technical mastery -- few quartets can -- Kronos plays with poetry, charm, humor and a jazz-inflected swing that is rare among classical musicians. By the force of their distinctive sound, Mr. Harrington and his colleagues have triumphed over their imperfections.
In the end, whatever competition exists between Kronos and the Arditti Quartet can only be healthy. ''If you have four dedicated musicians like us and Kronos who play together every day,'' Mr. Arditti said, ''it's going to be more interesting for composers.''
Mr. Boulez, for his part, still hasn't written a string quartet. But Mr. Arditti did receive an apology from him recently: ''Remember what I said about the string quartet being dead? I'm sorry, Irvine, I was wrong.''
MUSIC Adam Shatz is the literary editor of The Nation.
Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 11 about the Kronos and Arditti Quartets referred incorrectly to Pierre Boulez's output as a composer. He has indeed written a string quartet; it is ''Livre pour quatuor,'' composed in 1948-9.
