I WAS changing my life, leaving the East Coast behind and flinging myself across the country to Seattle because I wanted to try something new. A road trip, solo, seemed a suitably adventurous way to get there -- more mind-expanding than flying and cheaper than shipping my belongings, I told skeptical friends.
But really, I was hooked on the romance of the cross-county drive. The idea of zooming along empty highways into a scarlet sunset or sailing across acres of prairie was tantalizing. I saw myself sitting at Western bars, talking to cowboys.
Before any of that, though, I had to plan my route. The south suggested gothic oddity and ghostly deserts. Very Thelma and Louise. But I had never spent more than four hours at a time behind the wheel, and going that way I would have to cover three states at a single clip. A northern route -- from New York to Chicago, into the Midwestern Plains and across the Rockies -- began to seem a saner choice.
Only in cyberspace, on the forum at www.roadtripamerica.com, did I betray my fears. Were there things a woman driving alone should beware of, I asked; indispensable items I must bring?
''All you need is excitement,'' the webmaster replied.
''Pepper spray,'' said a friend. ''At those truck stops, you've got to have pepper spray.''
I was determined that my trip cost less than $600, so my itinerary was largely based on locations of people who might put me up along the way. This made Pittsburgh my first stop, and I planned to set out from Saugerties, N.Y., on a sunny September morning. But road trips never begin on time -- not for rock bands or nuclear families, and certainly not for freelance writers -- so it was 3 p.m. by the time my tires touched the New York State Thruway.
Most travel manuals insist that you have to leave the Interstate to find what's left of American quirk, but on that first afternoon, even superhighways seemed grand. I gazed at the green valleys lining I-80 and scanned my life, piled neatly in the back seat, through the rearview mirror. By the time I got to Pennsylvania, I was laughing out loud.
For weeks my greatest concern had been road hypnosis, the fear that I would be lulled into a lonely sleep at the wheel. That never happened. People kept calling my cell phone and rousing me from dreamy reveries.
''Where are you now?'' a former boyfriend asked from his desk in Manhattan on my second day out. ''What are you seeing?''
I was in Indiana, rumbling past a tractor-trailer filled with mangy cattle who stared at me on their way, I imagined, to slaughter. I told him about the scarlet sunset instead.
During those first days, four or five hours behind the wheel wore me out; I tried to chat with gas station clerks wherever I could, hoping folksy inspiration might propel me a few more miles. At the Ernie Pyle rest stop outside South Bend, Ind., a freckled-faced cashier was so flummoxed by my attempts at conversation he rang up my purchases twice.
It took three days to push through Pennsylvania, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois and Wisconsin, and I spent much of the time pondering the tidy farmhouses dotting my route. Any of them could have starred on an America-the-Beautiful calendar, and I wondered what it felt like to live inside a picture postcard by the side of a highway.
All that uniformity shattered at the House on the Rock in Spring Green, Wis., about 45 miles west of Madison. At $19.50, it was the one roadside attraction I'd resigned myself to pay for.
Built between 1945 and 1960 by Alex Jordan, a medical school dropout turned professional dreamer, the 14-room ''house'' is actually a monument to hoarding. Stone hallways lined with arms and armor lead to rooms holding ivory tusks, vintage cash registers, jeweled crowns, model ships, miniature circuses and automated orchestras, all of it funneling visitors toward a great, clanging carousel, where 239 serpents, mermaids and satyrs spin without cease.
The staff claims that it takes five hours to fully absorb Mr. Jordan's private fantasy world, but I'd arrived just before closing and sped through the place like someone chased by demons.
''All by yourself?'' a voice behind me whispered as I hurried through the noisy darkness.
''You're doing very well,'' another guard said as I raced past an enormous calliope.
Naked, winged mannequins floated from the ceiling. Mechanical orchestras echoed in my mind. It felt like wandering through a child's nightmare, or what we may find when Michael Jackson dies.
After my House on the Rock experience, I was starved and feeling inexplicably dirty. Greenspirit Farm, a mile down the road, beckoned. I thought I'd buy a bag of apples for dinner and eat them all the way into Minnesota. An old man with a thick beard sat on a bench outside, whittling.
''When'd you leave New York?'' he said, barely looking up.
''Four days ago.''
''Where you headed?''
''Seattle,'' I said. ''Do you have any apples?''
''I used to live in New York -- Crown Heights,'' a younger man called out, emerging from the vegetable shed with a blond baby on his hip. ''What street did you live on?''
Greenspirit Farm had no apples, just two farmers who wanted to talk about Woody Allen and Coney Island. They said they'd never heard of a born-and-bred New Yorker leaving the city. I told them I was happy to be their first.
Dark hills framed the rest of my drive along bucolic Route 18, and in the twilight I felt like singing out at their beauty. Then I passed a sex shop in Rochester, Minn., where a 50-foot neon sign beamed messages toward the highway -- ''welcome sinners, we accept checks!'' -- and wondered how it all fit together.
In my determination to make this trip both scenic and economical, I learned that using my laptop to book hotel reservations on the Internet each morning shaved prices considerably, and of all the roadside chains, Motel 6 quickly won my heart.
The franchise is aimed at no-frills travelers who want plain, functional cleanliness -- fresh linens, hot showers and, presumably, secure door locks. True, the South Bend, Ind., version sat on a grim strip and suggested, with its cement-block walls and cigarette-scented front office, the kind of place where bad things might happen to naïve girls. But the room itself was sound, quiet and $36.16, including tax.
The Motel 6 in Rochester, Minn., where I watched ''Apocalypse Now'' on the free HBO , cost me $33.01. The one night I failed to book ahead electronically, in Mitchell, S.D., I spent $43.19.
As for eating, my plan had been to subsist on trail mix, water and fruit, arriving on the West Coast cleansed and thin. But I considered the $49.95 ice cream sundae at Margie's Candies in Chicago (yes, it's meant to be shared), and I did enjoy a butter-drenched egg-and-cheese sandwich at the Gateway diner in Wykoff, Minn. (population 460), south of Rochester.
The best meal by far came from a home kitchen in Glasgow, Mont., north of Fort Peck Lake, where a friend of a friend, who works for the State Department of Fish and Wildlife, let me spend the night. In the morning, he pushed a shiny breast of pheasant toward me -- bagged and smoked by a hunting buddy -- and suggested I make a sandwich for lunch.
''Watch out for buckshot,'' he said, as I hacked at the meat and smushed it between two slices of brown bread spread with horseradish.
Six hours later, I pulled the sandwich from my cooler, bit in and reeled at the sensations that came out. I could taste alder chips and wood smoke, a sense of rich and deliberate preparation -- and something else, something hard and small like a peppercorn. It ricocheted against my teeth and I spat it into my coffee cup. Buckshot.
Two Indians in cowboy hats stared at me as I sped past their pickup truck toward the mountains.
Several people had spoken reverently about Going-to-the-Sun Road, a 50-mile path cutting across the high peaks in Glacier National Park. My Glasgow host had insisted I drive it. An aging trucker I met at a gas station in Shelby, Mont., sealed the deal.
''On your way to college?'' he said, eyeing my license plates and the roof-high pile of clothes crammed into my Volkswagen.
I shook my head and laughed. College had been almost 20 years ago.
''Well, I graduated college in 1996!'' he crowed. ''Graduated high school in 1959!''
In between, he'd supported a wife and four children by driving every road in the country, and he reeled off three possible routes I might take from the gas pumps to Seattle.
''I was thinking, actually, of Going to the Sun Road,'' I said. ''Is it worth it?''
I'D been worried about this for hours -- already there had been one flat-tire repair and evening was coming fast. How breathtaking could a landscape be, anyway?
''Go for it!'' said the trucker, with a goofy thumbs up.
I set out along a road lined with golden aspens and studied the face of every driver coming the other way. I was looking for strain but saw only beatific smiles. I crept up 40-degree inclines and around hairpin turns, passed a glittering lake and touched rainbow droplets from a streaming waterfall.
At the summit, I pulled off the road and sat with two leather-clad bikers, staring across a misty canyon at the tips of evergreens poking from impossible precipices. Above us, the dark peaks seemed to be breathing.
The last leg of my trip took me along the craterous Columbia River Gorge to the Oregon Coast. I wanted one long look at the Pacific before turning north toward my new life.
It was pouring when I got to Oswald West State Park in Manzanita, Ore., but I sloshed down a muddy path zigzagging to the sea and tromped across the sand anyway. Sky and ocean blended into a silvery sheet and the sound of water was everywhere, trickling down the ravine, crashing onto the sea stacks, drumming from the sky.
In a grove of tall pines, a lone guitarist sat under a rickety shelter, strumming and eating raw oysters. He sang folk songs for me and offered to open a few Kumomotos.
I tasted the brine, breathed in the salt air and tallied my totals: I'd covered 11 states and 3,800 miles on 13 tanks of gas and 21 large cups of coffee. And I'd done it all for $592.85.
I'd aged nine days but I felt younger than I had in years. My face was soaking wet, and I was changed.
Trekking west, cheaply
On my leisurely, 10-day drive from New York to Seattle last September, I spent several nights at the homes of friends, who also fed me. That helped keep my average daily cost to $59.78.
Finding a Bed
My total lodging costs amounted to $275.01, after spending from $33 to $89 a night for five nights in motels.
The Best Western Grant Creek Inn, 5280 Grant Creek Road, Missoula, Mont., (406) 543-0700, fax (406) 543-0777, www.bestwestern.com, has 126 rooms, an indoor pool, fitness center and laundry. I paid $89.88, but in summer doubles are $109 .
The Comfort Inn Columbia Gorge, 351 Lone Pine Drive, The Dalles, Ore., (541) 298-2800, fax (541) 298-8282, www.comfortinn.com, has 56 rooms, all with microwave and minirefrigerators, an indoor pool and fitness equipment. While I paid $72.86, rates can range from $49 to $129.
Both hotels served free breakfasts, of which I took full advantage, taking fruit and rolls for later.
Otherwise, I chose Motel 6, (800) 466-8356 or www.motel6.com. My average Motel 6 cost was $37.45 a night.
Feeding the Car
In all, my driving costs came to $263.13, of which $202.58 was for gasoline. I paid $16.55 in tolls in Ohio, Indiana and Illinois. I also spent $12 to fix a flat tire in Montana, and $32 for a car charger for my cellphone.
Feeding the Driver
I spent only $62.24 on food, thanks to meals with friends and the free breakfasts at the two hotels. I spent most of my food money in grocery stores, rather than at restaurants.
Feeding the Spirit
House on the Rock, 5754 Highway 23, Spring Green, Wis., (608) 935-3639, www.thehouseontherock.com, closed last week until March 15, then will be open daily most of the year. General admission is $19.50.
Racing to cross all of South Dakota in a single day, I had little time to explore its famed scenery. But Highway 240 wends 14 miles through otherwordly landscape in Badlands National Park, (605) 433-5361, www.nps.gov/badl, and was worth the $10 fee.
CLAUDIA ROWE
FRUGAL TRAVELER CLAUDIA ROWE is a reporter at The Seattle Post-Intelligencer.
