Rabbi Fabian Schonfeld is no fan of car alarms, including his own. Occasionally, his blue Buick Century will start wailing and honking in the middle of the night. But it's a real problem if the alarm starts clamoring on the Jewish Sabbath.
''I take the remote and turn it off, but I can't do that on Friday night or Saturday during the day,'' said Rabbi Schonfeld, who leads Young Israel of Kew Gardens Hills, an Orthodox synagogue in Queens. ''Jewish law prohibits the use of any machine that runs on electricity. So when the alarm goes off, there's nothing we can do. A lot of people are upset.''
One of those unnerved is Patricia Dolan, president of the Kew Gardens Hills Civic Association, a group that seeks to maintain civility in this middle-class community, which has one of the city's largest populations of Orthodox Jews.
''Anybody who lives in New York knows these alarms go off when a bird passes by,'' said Ms. Dolan, who was raised in a non-Jewish household. ''The wrinkle is that this community is predominantly Orthodox. On a typical Saturday, the neighborhood is extremely quiet, until one of these alarms go off.'' Alarms, she said, can stay on for up to 90 minutes.
Neighbors along 73rd Terrace are sympathetic, but only to a point. ''It's a puzzlement,'' said Martin Silverman, who owns an alarm-equipped Ford Sable and worships at another Orthodox synagogue in Kew Gardens Hills. ''You want to protect your car, but you don't want to disturb your neighbors.''
James Gennaro, the councilman who represents the area, has proposed a remedy that would ease the problem throughout the city. He is chairman of the Council's Environmental Protection Committee, which is ushering through two bills -- introduced by Council members John C. Liu from Queens and Eva S. Moskowitz from Manhattan -- that would ban the sale and installation of audible alarms in the city. A final hearing on the Council measures could be held as early as this month, but their passage is uncertain. The Bloomberg administration so far has sided with car alarm manufacturers.
''The disdain for these devices crosses all socioeconomic, ethnic and religious boundaries,'' Mr. Gennaro said. ''They are supposed to shut off after three minutes, but many do not.'' In addition, Mr. Gennaro said, there is no evidence that car alarms deter thefts.
But Rabbi Schonfeld, for one, does not want to give up his car alarm. ''I do think it's a deterrent,'' he said. ''I feel more secure knowing the alarm is on. This is not a religious issue.''
DENNY LEE
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: KEW GARDENS HILLS
