Seeking to reform a child welfare system rocked by several high-profile abuse cases, Gov. James E. McGreevey named one of his top aides yesterday to lead New Jersey's Department of Human Services.
Mr. McGreevey appointed James M. Davy, his chief of management and operations to replace the current commissioner, Gwendolyn L. Harris, who said last month that she would officially resign Feb. 15.
But making it clear he was not waiting, Mr. Davy immediately called for an additional 30 days to prepare a court-ordered plan to reform the state's child welfare system, the department's Division of Youth and Family Services.
The department, which controls the division, received national attention and came under fire in January 2003, after Faheem Williams, a 7-year-old Newark boy in foster care, was discovered dead in a Newark basement, where his two brothers were found emaciated. In October, a family in Collingswood, N.J., was accused of keeping four foster children so badly malnourished that a 19-year-old weighed just 45 pounds, even though caseworkers from the division had visited the family.
Mr. McGreevey promised to make the overhaul of the troubled division a top priority. Yesterday, his spokesman said that he showed his commitment by appointing Mr. Davy, 50, one of the governor's closest advisers and a confidant since Mr. McGreevey was mayor of Woodbridge during the 1990's. Also, Mr. Davy has lately served as Mr. McGreevey's chief liaison to the Human Services Department.
At a news conference at his mansion yesterday afternoon, Mr. McGreevey said that Mr. Davy ''has consistently demonstrated an exceptional ability to manage government with great professionalism and compassion.''
''The challenges he will confront at the Department of Human Services are formidable, but he is well-equipped to meet them,'' he said in a statement.
Many child welfare advocates have long complained that New Jersey has neglected its child welfare agency and that caseworkers were undertrained, poorly supervised and ill-equipped to handle inordinately high numbers of caseloads.
Of the 37 children that state records revealed had died of abuse or neglect in New Jersey last year, 18 were known to state social workers. Division workers were monitoring eight of them and had closed case files on 10 others.
The advocacy group Children's Rights Inc. had sued the state on behalf of the children in the system and in June agreed to settle after Mr. McGreevey said he would enact a series of policy changes and allow a federal judge to enforce the plan.
Ms. Harris, who was appointed in February 2002, helped create a new master plan for the agency, but some critics called her slow to improve staffing, training and supervision. Others commended her broad vision.
Yesterday, the governor's press secretary, Micah Rasmussen, said that Mr. McGreevey appointed one of his most trusted aides because he wanted to keep close tabs on the overhaul.
''Governor McGreevey has worked with Jim Davy for more than 14 years,'' Mr. Rasmussen said. ''Jim is a career public administrator and the governor's go-to guy, his right-hand man.''
Mr. Rasmussen added, ''Jim is very organized in his approach to a problem and he's the person you want working up a blueprint to reform the system.''
The Human Services Department, which has seven other divisions, oversees programs to care for abused children, the mentally disabled and the poor. It is New Jersey's largest agency, with 19,000 employees, a $8.3 million budget and 61,000 children under its supervision.
Last March, Mr. McGreevey angrily rebutted and denounced reports that Mr. Davy helped influence parole proceedings for an organized crime figure. Mr. Davy's appointment to the $137,165-a-year position must still be confirmed by the State Senate.
Correction:  January 14, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Sunday about the appointment of James M. Davy as commissioner of the New Jersey Department of Human Services misstated its annual budget. It is $8.3 billion, not million.
