WHILE the nation's central bankers appear convinced that the economy can continue to grow briskly without kicking up inflation fears, a growing number of money managers are not so sure.
Many financial planners say that for prudent investors, now is the time to deal with inflation -- before prices actually spike.
A December survey of U.S. fund managers by Merrill Lynch found that 71 percent thought that inflation would increase in the coming 12 months, up from just 36 percent who thought so in August. And more than a third said in December that they believed that monetary policy was too stimulative, versus only 11 percent who said so in July.
''The Fed's motto has gone from WIN, as in 'Whip Inflation Now,' to SIN, as in 'Start Inflation Now,''' said Don Ross, chief investment officer for National City Investment Management, based in Cleveland.
That view, of course, runs counter to the position of the Federal Reserve. Last week, Ben S. Bernanke, a Federal Reserve governor, reiterated that the Fed's ''unusually accommodative'' stance on interest rates was justified, despite concerns that the economy was recovering much faster than had been expected. (The consensus forecast is for gross domestic product to grow at an annual rate of 4.4 percent this year.)
Mr. Bernanke said that productivity gains and a weak labor market were keeping inflation at bay. ''For now, I believe that the Federal Reserve has the luxury of being patient,'' he told a gathering of the American Economic Association in San Diego.
Recent economic data appear to support his argument, at least for the short term. Core consumer prices fell 0.1 percent in November, after climbing just 0.2 percent in October. Given the absence of wage pressures, Mark Zandi, chief economist of Economy.com, said, ''It's hard to see inflation being a major issue for 2004.'' Like Mr. Zandi, Mr. Ross said he thinks that inflation won't become a real concern until 2005.
But there are signs that inflationary pressure is simmering. The spread between the yield on 10-year Treasury inflation-protected securities, or TIPS, and 10-year, non-indexed Treasuries has widened to 2.3 percentage points, from 1.7 in June.
''It's a signal that inflation expectations are moving higher,'' said Daniel O. Shackelford, co-manager of the T. Rowe Price Inflation Protected Bond fund.
Commodity prices, meanwhile, have continued to boom. And though prices for finished goods are stable, producer prices for crude goods were up more than 18 percent in November versus the same period in 2002, according to the Labor Department.
Another factor that could drive prices higher, economists say, is further weakness in the dollar, which could increase the cost of imported goods for American consumers.
''I think we're going to have more inflation than almost everybody expects,'' said John Bollinger, president of Bollinger Capital Management, based in Manhattan Beach, Calif. Given the enormous amount of monetary and fiscal stimulus injected into the economy in the past two years, Mr. Bollinger said he thought that the nation could be headed toward 3 to 4 percent inflation in 2004, with an ''outside chance of seeing it north of 4 percent.''
John Caldwell, chief investment strategist for the McDonald Financial Group, based in Cleveland, said he thought that was a bit high. Still, Mr. Caldwell said strong economic growth and the Fed's willingness to keep short-term rates low could produce inflation of more than 2.5 percent this year.
That would be a jump from present levels. The core Consumer Price Index, which excludes food and energy, rose only 1.1 percent over the past 12 months.
''People underestimate the impact of even modest inflation in a modest-return environment,'' said Harold Evensky, a financial planner in Coral Gables, Fla. He argues that while 3 percent inflation may be tolerable in a period of 20 percent gains in equity prices, 3 percent inflation can quickly dent a portfolio earning just 6 or 7 percent annually.
Many financial planners are advising investors to start preparing their portfolios for a possible climb in prices.
''Since every talking head on the news and in print says they aren't worried about inflation, you better have it on your radar,'' says Marilyn Cohen, president of Envision Capital Management in Los Angeles.
''You don't have to change the asset classes you invest in,'' Ms. Cohen said. ''You just have to change the way those assets are invested.''
For instance, she recommends that bond investors shorten the overall duration or maturities of their fixed-income investments. For those who invest in bond funds, that means going from long-term portfolios to intermediate- and short-term funds.
As for traditional inflation hedges like gold, financial planners say it is important to weigh their risks, just as investors should weigh the risk of inflation itself.
For instance, gold and basic materials stocks already enjoyed substantial run-ups in 2003 as the economy began to rebound. Gold recently shot up to more than $430 an ounce, its highest level in a decade and a half.
Shares of basic-materials companies, which stand to benefit from rising prices -- had a 35 percent return, on average, in 2003. These stocks are now trading at 24 times 2004 earnings, making this sector the second most expensive in the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index, after technology.
An alternative is inflation-protected bonds, or TIPS. Created in 1997, these Treasury securities are backed by the full faith and credit of the federal government, as are other Treasury instruments. But unlike a traditional bond, with a fixed principal value, these securities have a principal amount that rises with inflation. So if you invest $1,000 in a 10-year TIP and inflation kicks up 10 percent over the next decade, you will get back $1,100 at maturity, in addition to the interest payments along the way.
Because investors must pay federal taxes annually not only on interest payments but also on the periodic inflation-adjustments made to the bond's principal (even though investors don't receive this so-called phantom income until redemption), financial planners recommend investing in TIPS through a tax-advantaged account.
I-Bonds, United States savings bonds that also offer inflation protection, are not tax-disadvantaged in this way. That means you do not receive interest from these savings bonds until you redeem them. They can be bought for as little as $50 at a bank or directly from the Treasury. But these savings bonds aren't that compelling today, because I-Bonds bought from now to April are yielding only 2.19 percent, less than the yield for the average two-year certificate of deposit.
Money managers caution against ignoring the risks in TIPS, which are a relatively new asset class. ''We should dispel the notion that you can't lose money in this investment,'' said John Hollyer, co-manager of the Vanguard Inflation-Protected Securities fund, which invests in a variety of TIPS.
Eric Jacobson, an analyst at Morningstar who follows TIPS funds, notes that when interest rates spiked in July, inflation-protected bond funds lost 4.8 percent of their value that month. For 2003 over all, TIPS funds, which invest in government inflation-indexed bonds of varying maturities, produced an average gain of 7.7 percent. And over the past three years, the average TIPS fund delivered annualized returns of 10.4 percent, which explains their popularity in recent years, despite low inflation.
Investors need to be aware of interest rate risk with these bonds, Mr. Jacobson said. For instance, if real interest rates --market rates minus the rate of inflation -- spike, the underlying price of TIPS could easily fall again, as it did in July. Sticking with intermediate-term TIPS funds, instead of long-term portfolios, may reduce but not eliminate this risk. TIPS investors may also be hurt if market interest rates rise in anticipation of inflation that never comes. If commodity prices continue to climb and the economy shows signs of accelerating, the bond market could sell off, pushing long-term market interest rates higher, even if the Fed kept short-term rates low.
But if the bond market is wrong and inflation stays low, real rates would still climb, threatening the underlying value of TIPS.
STILL, C. Casey Colton, manager of the American Century Inflation-Adjusted Bond fund, argues that if market interest rates rise alongside even modest inflation, TIPS funds are likely to do better than traditional Treasury bond funds. That is because ''real rates would rise at a slower rate than nominal rates,'' Mr. Colton said.
The average expense ratio of the 18 TIPS funds tracked by Morningstar is 0.51 percent of assets, which is competitive with other bond fund categories. But the Vanguard Inflation-Protected Securities fund charges just 0.22 percent. And Barclays Global Investors recently started an exchange-traded fund -- an index fund that trades like a stock on the New York Stock Exchange -- that tracks the TIPS market. That fund, called iShares Lehman TIPS Bond, has an expense ratio of 0.20 percent.
Perhaps TIPS investors would face their biggest risk if the economy grew as quickly as some people now expect, and without much inflation.
''In that case,'' said Mr. Shackelford at T. Rowe Price, ''there's an argument to be made that real yields offered by TIPS would start to look too low relative to returns offered by other assets'' -- namely stocks.
