As any decorator will tell you, tiny rooms are no place for the timid. Jeff McKay isn't a decorator; he had his own advertising agency for 10 years before he quit to smell the roses. But he has a keen eye, and he's no stranger to small spaces. (He gave his previous apartment -- all 310 square feet of it -- extra punch by painting it six shades of silver.) So when faced with decorating a small Manhattan pied-à-terre for himself and his partner, Michael D'Arminio, McKay thought big.
Since the 600-square-foot studio is really just a place to sleep, and because he can't sleep without windows, McKay put an antique brass canopy bed smack in the middle of the room while turning the windowless sleeping alcove into a dining/work space, adorned with decorative objets perched on brackets, in the manner of an 18th-century salon. At the foot of the bed is a sitting area with a settee and two plush chairs, and in the kitchen, which is seldom used for cooking, McKay added a silver-gilt bench, an Art Deco bar cabinet and an elegant mirror over the sink. As he says, ''Doing dishes is boring, so you might as well check your hair.''
The prevailing aesthetic is boho eclectic -- your Great Aunt Fanny meets the Rat Pack -- but with a pronounced French accent.
Why French? Because Paris is where D'Arminio, an executive with a cosmetics and fragrance company, is based, and where McKay spends much of the year, in the couple's ''very glamorous'' Napoleon III-era apartment. ''Everything is symmetrical there,'' he says admiringly. ''If they have to put in a door, they put in a false second door to balance it.'' Not so back in Manhattan, where virtually nothing in the studio was symmetrical; the closer McKay looked, the more imperfections he saw. But the New York apartment is a rental, so rather than invest a lot of money in correcting its shortcomings, McKay -- having learned a valuable lesson in French chic -- decided simply to camouflage them.
''I painted everything that wasn't symmetrical black,'' he explains. In fact, he painted the apartment's east and west walls black, and the north and south walls (as well as the floor) white. Then, with the help of James Corbett, a friend who is an interior designer, McKay added touches that were literally French, like the photomural of an interior at Versailles, and the gilt Baguès side table. There were also the frankly faux, like the French Provincial-style settee and the inexpensive brackets that McKay painted himself to display tchotchkes ranging from vintage Venini glass to the Lucite clock that once sat on his grandmother's television.
McKay calls the result ''a Walt Disney version of France,'' which is not so far from the truth. He has, after all, turned an uninspired space into a magic kingdom.
STYLE
