SOME mutual fund companies bring new funds to market in a way that exaggerates the funds' attractiveness. That is because the companies often do not disclose crucial aspects of the process, known as incubation, that led to the funds' creation.
These new funds are typically the best performers, as well as the only survivors, of a larger group of new funds that the companies have been managing privately for several years. Rarely do the companies report how many funds failed to emerge from incubation, or how the failed funds performed.
This selective reporting of incubator funds' returns can make the surviving funds appear to be better bets than they really are, according to Richard Evans, a Ph.D. candidate in finance at the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania. Mr. Evans devoted a chapter of his dissertation to incubation. A study that grew out of it is available at http://assets.wharton.upenn.edu/evansr/do--mf--risk--adjust.pdf.
According to Mr. Evans, assessing the surviving funds fairly depends on knowing how many others failed in incubation. No matter how impressive a fund's performance looks, it may be a bad bet if it was created alongside other funds that were discontinued because of poor returns.
There is another problem with incubation, according to Mr. Evans. A fund company may change the strategies of its incubated funds once they emerge into public view. If that happens, incubator funds' track records will not reflect the new approaches.
When funds are out of view, fund companies have an incentive to take higher risks. An incubation goal may be to spawn at least one or two funds with spectacular returns. When an incubator fund performs poorly, the company at most loses only the seed capital it has invested in it.
Incentives change once a fund emerges from incubation. Because the company's reputation is now on the line, its incentive to take risks falls, and a fund's strategy may shift.
Recognizing that incubator funds' performance can be misleading, the Securities and Exchange Commission has tried to prohibit fund companies from reporting the returns that funds produced during incubation. But because the regulations rely on a narrow definition of an incubator fund, they have not prevented some fund families from advertising such performance.
To be considered an incubator fund under the S.E.C. definition, a fund must be held privately. But companies can get around this by filing the paperwork to make their funds nominally public, while making sure that very few investors know about them.
For example, fund companies can choose not to mention their incubator funds in any prospectus. They can also withhold their performance from fund performance databases like those maintained by Lipper Inc. and Morningstar Inc. Jeffrey C. Keil, a vice president at Lipper, and Russel Kinnel, director of fund analysis at Morningstar, confirmed that their organizations depend on the cooperation of the fund companies. ''There's not a lot you can do'' if a fund sponsor refuses to provide data, Mr. Kinnel said.
Mr. Evans uses the Putnam Research fund to illustrate some aspects of incubation. This fund, which Morningstar places in its large-cap blend category, was one of 11 that Putnam Investments was incubating in late 1995. It was capitalized initially with about $3 million of Putnam's own money. It remained more than 90 percent owned by Putnam until July 1998, when the company first mentioned the fund in a prospectus.
Mr. Evans said that 5 of the 11 funds that Putnam was developing in late 1995 never emerged from incubation, and that the performance of the discontinued funds was generally poor. In contrast, as of mid-1998, when Putnam began publicizing Putnam Research and aggressively attracting outside investors, its historical return was nearly 30 percent, annualized.
This was when Putnam began providing the fund's returns in performance databases. In addition to reporting the fund's performance from that point forward, Putnam also provided those databases with its historical performance back to its birth in 1995.
The historical returns, of course, helped Putnam's efforts to publicize the fund. Morningstar does not include a fund in its star rating system until it has a track record of at least three years. But because Putnam Research's returns went back to late 1995, the fund received a star rating as early as late 1998, even though it had been offered to the public for only about six months. In early 1999, when the fund's performance was first reported in Morningstar's Principia database, it had a five-star rating, Morningstar's highest.
After emerging from incubation, Putnam Research performed well during certain periods. But its overall performance since mid-1998 has been mediocre, according to Morningstar, especially when compared with funds with a similar investment objective. Morningstar currently gives the fund two stars. (In addition, after regulators started investigating trading practices at Putnam Investments, Morningstar advised late last year against making new investments in any Putnam mutual funds. The investigation is unrelated to incubation.)
Given the generally poor returns of the Putnam funds that did not emerge from incubation, Mr. Evans was not surprised that Putnam Research's overall performance was mediocre. But because he has no specific knowledge that Putnam Research pursued a different strategy after incubation, he does not know whether such a change might have played a role in the fund's poor post-incubation performance.
Steve Oristaglio, a senior managing director at Putnam Investments, said he objected to Mr. Evans's negative characterization of mutual fund incubation. While some fund companies may have abused the process, Mr. Oristaglio said, he believed that Putnam had used it to create better funds and to eliminate those that were not worthy. He said it was ''very important'' to incubate funds before bringing them to market. ''We believe we have a fiduciary responsibility to prove an investment concept'' before selling new funds based on it, he said.
Mr. Evans said that problems did not result from the incubation process itself but from the selective reporting of performance. He noted that some fund companies, including Fidelity Investments, have adopted a policy of not reporting any of their funds' track records that were produced while they were being incubated.
Mr. Evans says he doubts that fund companies' primary motivation when incubating funds is to come up with a few genuinely impressive strategies. If that were the case, he said, funds that emerged from incubation would perform well not only in incubation but also after being offered to the public. He said he had found little evidence of that.
Mr. Evans found that during its incubation, the average surviving fund outperformed a control group of other funds with similar characteristics and investment objectives by an average of nearly 8 percent a year. After incubation, though, the performance of the average surviving fund was indistinguishable from its control group.
FOR investors, the primary implication of Mr. Evans' research is to ignore the performance of a fund during incubation. But because there is no readily accessible database that shows when a given fund has emerged from incubation, the recommendation requires some legwork.
But Mr. Kinnel of Morningstar points to a sign in public databases that may help: a quick, sharp jump in assets. Incubator funds typically have few assets; in its incubation, for example, Putnam Research never had more than $15 million.
A big jump in assets may signal emergence from incubation because the increase typically coincides with the time the fund's owner starts promoting it aggressively. From less than $15 million in mid-1998, just before Putnam Investments began heavily promoting the fund, assets under management at Putnam Research soared, reaching a peak of nearly $2.5 billion in 2001.
STRATEGIES Mark Hulbert is editor of The Hulbert Financial Digest, a service of CBS MarketWatch. His column on investment strategies appears every other week. E-mail: strategy@nytimes.com.
