THE BEECHER SISTERS
By Barbara A. White.
Illustrated. 399 pp. New Haven:
Yale University Press. $35.
THE PASSIONATE BEECHERS
A Family Saga of Sanctity and Scandal
That Changed America.
By Samuel A. Schreiner Jr.
Illustrated. 373 pp. New York:
John Wiley &amp; Sons. $30.
IN 19th-century America there were few social causes untouched by the Beechers. Much like the Kennedys of the 20th century, the Calvinist patriarch Lyman Beecher and his 11 enterprising (and scandal-prone) offspring provided leadership on a range of social and political issues.
To compare the Beechers to the Kennedys, however, is not to suggest that theirs was a clan dominated by Jacks, Bobbys and Teddys. As Barbara A. White shows in her sympathetic study, ''The Beecher Sisters,'' three of the Beecher girls proved just as determined as their seven brothers to spread a liberal New England gospel. Catharine Beecher (1800-78) was the ''Martha Stewart and Doctor Spock'' of her day and a pioneer in female education. Harriet Beecher Stowe (1811-96) was an abolitionist author, whose ''Uncle Tom's Cabin'' (1852) galvanized the antislavery movement. Isabella Beecher Hooker (1822-1907), the youngest sister, was an outspoken suffragist who oversaw the passage of a women's property act in Connecticut. (A fourth sister, Mary Beecher Perkins, is excluded from this account, on the grounds that she ''remained solely a housewife and mother.'')
Certainly all three sisters shared their father's and brothers' desire to be of use. Trained from an early age to defend their positions at the family dinner table, they refused to be silenced by codes of female propriety upon entering the wider world. When the elderly Catharine, for example, was informed by the president of Cornell University that the school did not offer courses for women, she responded, ''Oh, that is quite all right . . . in fact I prefer to take it with men.'' Harriet demonstrated a similar resolve when confronted by the misogyny of the reviewers at The Nation. ''Rudeness &amp; heedless discourtesy . . . I think are just as much out of place in literary criticism as in a private parlor,'' she informed the magazine's editor.
Because Catharine and, especially, Harriet have received considerable critical attention elsewhere, White, a professor emeritus of women's studies at the University of New Hampshire, focuses most of her energies on Isabella, whose transformation from the retiring wife of a New England lawyer to a leading suffragist has never before been fully documented. Prettier, bolder and more impulsive than her older sisters, Isabella was nevertheless a latecomer to social activism. Only in her 40's did she succeed in overcoming a debilitating inferiority complex (''Everywhere I go -- I have to run on the credit of my relations,'' Isabella once complained to her husband, John Hooker). Once committed to the cause of suffrage, however, she clearly had found her métier. Stumping alongside Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton, Isabella proved a skilled defender of women's rights and was widely credited with lending a genteel and conciliatory quality to meetings of the National Woman Suffrage Association.
Isabella's choice was not entirely supported by her sisters. As White shows, Isabella's close connections with the suffrage association ultimately alienated her from Catharine and Harriet. Catharine flat-out rejected the idea of woman suffrage. Even Harriet, though sympathetic to women's political rights, could not resist parodying her youngest sister as ''Stella Cerulean'' in her novel ''My Wife and I.'' These fissures would come to a head during the Beecher-Tilton affair of 1872-75, in which the controversial feminist Victoria Woodhull charged Henry Ward Beecher, a Brooklyn clergyman, with conducting an extramarital affair with a parishioner. Catharine and Harriet immediately defended their brother against the accusations. Isabella, however, sided with Woodhull, in effect breaking a cardinal rule: ''When a man was accused of wrongdoing, the role of his wife/mother/sisters/daughters was to rush to his defense and deny his guilt, whether they suspected he was guilty or not.'' Henry was exonerated, but the rifts between the sisters never fully healed.
Each of these three women lobbied for a wider role for her sex, whether in the areas of education, activism or politics. (As White notes, ''They all had successful careers at a time when few women entered the public sphere.'') But, as White shows, unwittingly or no, in these endeavors the women were greatly assisted by their father, brothers and, in Isabella's case, husband. Though Lyman Beecher was opposed to women's entrance into the ministry (a ''greater evil, next to the loss of conscience and chastity, could not befall the female sex''), he encouraged his daughters to make an impact. What Lyman ''esteemed most,'' White argues, ''was excellence and achievement.'' John Hooker, meanwhile, ''wholeheartedly'' approved of his wife's political campaigning and helped her draft the Connecticut women's property bill. And Henry Ward Beecher wrote speeches in defense of women's political rights and served as president of the American Woman Suffrage Association.
In fact, a key if underdeveloped theme that emerges from ''The Beecher Sisters'' is that the sisters, and by extension the early women's movement, received considerable support from progressive-minded men. The bonds of sisterhood could be quite weak. Catharine, 22 years Isabella's senior, was off founding the Hartford Female Seminary while her baby sister was learning how to crawl. According to White, Catharine actually felt closest to her brother Edward, and Harriet to Henry.
Feminism, in other words, was less a sisterly value than a Beecher value -- one of the many causes embraced by a family that was also vehemently opposed to slavery and lobbied for improved treatment of the poor. As Samuel A. Schreiner Jr. shows in his more inclusive but uninspired book, ''The Passionate Beechers,'' family alliances ran clear across the sex divide, with Beecher brothers and sisters alike drawing on Christian doctrine to make a case for a more just America. Schreiner, a former editor at Reader's Digest, integrates Catharine's, Harriet's and Isabella's accomplishments into a general narrative of Beecher ''passions.'' Unfortunately, Schreiner's lazy approach to the subject matter -- he strings together anecdotes with little attempt at organization or interpretation -- makes one long for a more deft treatment of Beecher egalitarianism. Until such a book is written, White's partial account is far preferable to Schreiner's uncurious one.
Arianne Chernock is completing a study of the role of men in the creation of modern English feminism.
