Q: Your new film, ''Marie and Bruce,'' will have its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival next week, while your play ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' has just been revived in New York. What do you make of that?
I wasn't shocked to learn that one of my plays would be revived. I have been vain since birth. I expected other people to like what I did, although my vanity has definitely diminished over the years.
And what is your assessment of your work as an actor?
I never planned to be an actor. It turned out I could make a living doing it. I certainly couldn't make even a lowly bourgeois living writing plays. My plays have been strange from the beginning, and they never got unstrange.
How do you feel about being interviewed? In your art-house classic ''My Dinner With Andre,'' you play an intellectual who says very little and passively listens to a friend talk for nearly two hours.
I can answer questions as well.
Excellent. Do you follow Broadway theater?
No. I don't see that many plays, and for me, musicals are rarely pleasing. I feel the actors are being put through a kind of nightmarish labor. They're like animals being forced to pull heavy carts of vegetables at incredible speeds.
Can't you make an exception for ''Oklahoma'' or ''South Pacific''?
I saw ''South Pacific'' as a child and thought it was terrifying. But I love American popular songs in the cabaret tradition. I don't eat many hamburgers, and I am not really involved in football, but one of the things that I would definitely miss if I were to leave the United States would be those songs.
So you take some pride in American culture.
To be honest, I see myself as a citizen of the planet. Even as a child, I always found it mindless to root for your own team. I was puzzled by the fact that people said their own team was better than other teams simply because it was theirs.
But it would be even odder and potentially self-destructive if we assumed that our own team was inferior to other teams.
Well, there is a reason my brother and I are taking care of our own mother first, before we worry about your mother. It's great to love your own mother, but I sincerely believe that if Bush and Cheney recognized the full humanity of other people's mothers around the world, they wouldn't commit the crimes they commit.
Are you a pacifist? Do you oppose all war?
Not exactly, but I think that Jonathan Schell's book ''The Unconquerable World'' expresses brilliantly the dangers inherent in taking any position today that is not that of the extreme pacifist.
Your politics come across in your plays, which tend to be philosophical.
For me, a play is a form of writing which isn't complete until it is interpreted by actors. But it's still a form of writing. And so most of my time is spent thinking about how to write a sentence.
Perhaps you started writing plays because it was one kind of writing that was not published by The New Yorker, where your father, William Shawn, was a legendary editor.
Who knows? But it is true that theater was the one department of literature in which my father was not a recognized authority. He liked musicals. He even wrote one. But his idea of fun was not really to see a serious drama. When I was 13, I dragged him to see ''Long Day's Journey Into Night.'' He had to admit it was pretty great.
It sounds as if you were a teenage aesthete.
In an ideal world, people would be preoccupied with reading and writing poetry and having love affairs, as people were in the Japanese court in the 11th century, as described in ''The Tale of Genji.'' If people were involved in that type of life, maybe there would be no war.
But it wouldn't be great for sustaining marriages!
I was never married.
Don't you live with the writer Deborah Eisenberg?
Yes, we're having a love affair. If I wanted my personal life to be public, I would be married. Marriage is public. That's what it means.
Have you ever desired the comforts of marriage?
I would say it is hard enough to make a plan for how you are going to spend an evening with somebody else. So to make a plan for how you are going to behave in 25 years seems based on a view of life that is incomprehensible to me.
But you must have some hopes for yourself in the future.
We're in an emergency situation. The United States has become an absolutely terrifying country, and I would hope that I could participate in some way in stopping the horror and the brutality.
Deborah Solomon
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 01-11-04: QUESTIONS FOR WALLACE SHAWN
