THE AMATEUR MARRIAGE
By Anne Tyler.
306 pp. New York:
Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.
IN 1832, when Fanny Trollope published her travel book ''Domestic Manners of the Americans,'' one reviewer called it a ''spiteful, ill-considered and mischief-making book.'' One of our most notable explorers of current American domestic manners, Anne Tyler, though seldom if ever spiteful, is most certainly a mischief-maker -- and for proof one has only to offer her 40-year career of well-considered observations of family lives in Baltimore and its environs.
Tyler's last three novels have focused, even more than her best-known ones like ''Dinner at the Homesick Restaurant'' and ''The Accidental Tourist,'' on domestic dislocations. In ''Ladder of Years,'' Delia Grinstead, on what looks like a whim, leaves her husband and children, finding a new place and a new identity; Barnaby Gaitlin, the divorced father in ''A Patchwork Planet,'' has a whimsical indisposition to settle down anywhere; and Rebecca Davitch, the 53-year-old grandmother in ''Back When We Were Grownups,'' is introduced as ''a woman who discovered that she had turned into the wrong person.'' Tyler likes -- and wants us to like -- these slightly out-of-orbit people, who serve as both the object and, more often, the vehicle of her comic energies.
''The Amateur Marriage'' is a stronger book than these recent productions (all of which have fine things in them) and is also Tyler's most ambitious work, ranging over 60 years of American experience, from the attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 to the anniversary of that day in 2001. Jane Austen's comic novels end in marriage; Tyler's bittersweet one begins with the marriage of her two ''amateurs,'' Michael Anton and Pauline Barclay, who are thrown together when Pauline is brought into the Anton grocery store for treatment of a wound she's incurred jumping off a streetcar to join an enlistment parade. (''Watch out, Japs! Here come the Szapps!'' one banner reads.)
The grocery store is ''a dim, cram-packed cubbyhole with an L-shaped wooden counter and shelves that reached the low ceiling,'' where Michael's mother wraps up tins of peas for a customer while her son methodically stacks bars of Woodbury soap. Into this protected space, life suddenly erupts: a world conflict has gotten under way even as the domestic conflict that will be the novel's subject waits its turn. Michael enlists but is soon back home, the victim of a freak wounding by a fellow trainee. He and Pauline marry into what, in later reminiscence, will be ''those hard, sad war years,'' which were also ''oddly exhilarating.'' Tyler concludes her opening chapter with language that in its transparent unreality introduces the couple to their great expectations: ''They were taking their very first steps on the amazing journey of marriage, and wonderful adventures were about to unfold in front of them.''
Those adventures turn out, luckily for us, to be misadventures, the amazing journey of marriage a road strewn with obstacles over which Michael and Pauline stumble. There is potential for the novelist to stumble as well, by opting for a complacent patronizing of her hapless couple or a mean-spirited evisceration of their limitations. Tyler avoids these by adopting a detached, indirect, partly amused, partly distressed form of narration.
The 10 chapters into which the novel is evenly divided have oblique titles (''Dandelion Clock,'' ''Heidi's Grandfather,'' ''Whispering Hope'') whose import is initially unclear. Evan S. Connell did something similar in ''Mrs. Bridge,'' a novel I thought of more than once while reading ''The Amateur Marriage.'' Tyler's chapters feel like short stories that bear chronological and emotional relation, one to the next. In ''Dandelion Clock,'' Pauline, with her second child on the way, living uneasily with husband, baby and ''Mother'' Anton in an apartment above the store, discovers that Michael has commemorated her 23rd birthday by giving her a canning kettle. She chides him for being so unromantic, for having a ''stuffy pompous boring self-righteous self.'' Hurt and angry, Michael asks himself, ''Was it possible to dislike your own wife?'' When Pauline tries to apologize, he tells her he never should have married her. So things are off and running; in this case, reconciliation occurs, but in a way that looks ahead to the moment when it will not.
With three children and Michael's mother, the Antons move to a fancier locale, Elmview Acres, where Pauline decides they are ''mismatched'' and begins a flirtation with Alex, a recently divorced acquaintance who calls her up for cooking tips. She urges on him something called Meat Loaf Orientale (made, scarily, with chow mein noodles and canned chop suey vegetables), then, on the way home from a canasta party, stops at Alex's to see how he's doing. Over the meat loaf, kissing ensues, and Alex suggests they meet later that evening after Pauline's husband has gone to bed. ''You could say you want a breath of fresh air; you're going to take a stroll,'' he says.
Although Pauline isn't sure about this (''She had never in her life said she wanted a breath of fresh air''), she agrees and, arriving home late, tells Michael she's been at her mother's. What Michael doesn't tell her is that her mother has already called. When she calls a second time, Pauline realizes that Michael has silently registered her deception. The chapter ends, disturbingly, with Pauline wrapping her arms around Michael as he lies motionless in bed ''and his heart went on beating steadfastly beneath his smooth, unreadable skin.'' Aptly titled ''The Anxiety Committee,'' the chapter creates anxiety in the reader as well, through Tyler's perfect sense of pace and sly construction of implicating events.
An aspect of Tyler's slyness lies in her ability to write sentences that seem to present no resistance, that are perfectly clear in their direction, that don't send up metaphorical gestures by way of suggesting the inexpressibility of life. Yet such writing is beautifully accurate, more often than not with a glinting vein of humor. So the aging Pauline finds that ''the underside of her upper arms reminded her of their old Dodge's felt ceiling, which had somehow come unstuck from the roof and used to hang down in loose swags.'' The Antons' eldest and most rebellious daughter, Lindy -- before she runs away, has a child and disappears for years -- is seen as ''a jagged dark knife of a person sending out billows of discontent from her father's La-Z-Boy.'' When Lindy returns, decades later, to see her abandoned son, whom the Antons have adopted, her brother notes that she's the type who would wear ''heavy, nonprecious jewelry whose purchase benefited some disadvantaged tribal craftsmen.'' Pauline's mind is at one point described as ''a mischievous animal cavorting elsewhere.''
Tyler's grip on her characters and their pathos is similarly mischievous, but its focus is steady and unerring. The book also touches levels deeper than mischief, especially in its middle chapters, where Pauline and Michael, just returned from a family celebration of their 30th wedding anniversary, collaborate in one last quarrel, in which, taking up Pauline's challenge to leave if things are as awful as he says they've been, Michael walks out. Robert Frost's definition of tragedy -- something terrible happens and nobody's to blame -- fits the way their marital bond dissolves. Years previous to that moment, Michael had seen their discord in the larger context of all the ''young marrieds of the war years'' who ''started out in equal ignorance . . . marching down a city street, as people had on the day he enlisted. Then two by two they fell away, having grown wise and seasoned and comfortable in their roles, until only he and Pauline remained, as inexperienced as ever -- the last couple left in the amateurs' parade.'' Now even they have dropped out of the march.
It was bold of Tyler not to stop there, at this moment of poignant disruption, but rather to spend the last third of the novel demonstrating (as one of the chapter titles has it) that ''The World Won't End.'' Tragedy ends after the big mistake has been made and paid for, but comedy goes on its way, devoted to showing how everyone is necessarily mistaken. Late in the novel, Michael visits a hardware store and decides there's something ''reassuring'' about such places: ''We can help you deal with anything, was the message he drew from them. Drafty windows, icy sidewalks, mildew, moths, weeds. . . . We've seen it all! You'll be O.K.'' I take this to be analogous to the assurance Anne Tyler has been offering readers in her 16 novels, never more variously, satisfyingly and professionally than in ''The Amateur Marriage.''
William H. Pritchard teaches English at Amherst College. His most recent book is ''Shelf Life,'' a collection of essays and reviews.
