The Queen Mary, the British luxury liner that traversed the Atlantic from 1936 to 1967, was once called a beautiful ship with a hotel inside. But its 21st-century namesake, the Cunard Lines' Queen Mary 2, appears to be a beautiful ship that doubles as a sumptuous city.
The QM2, which begins her 14-day maiden voyage tomorrow, sailing from Southampton, England, to Fort Lauderdale, Fla., is afloat in superlatives. Cunard boasts that the ship is the largest, costliest and longest ocean liner ever: at 151,400 tons, it has room for 2,620 passengers, cost nearly $800 million and, at 1,132 feet, is more than twice as long as the Washington Monument is tall.
But it is the ship's generous amenities, many affiliated with familiar names, that most sets it apart from ocean liners past. Daniel Boulud is culinary advisor for the 10 places to dine, including 2 where meals are served on Wedgwood china and Waterford crystal. Canyon Ranch, the Arizona-based health center, operates the 20,000-square-foot fitness center and spa, with 24 treatment rooms. And guests can attend readings and acting classes with graduates of the Royal Academy of Dramatic Art or sign up for lectures and seminars overseen by Oxford University.
Guests can also spend time in boutiques, the casino, nightclubs, five indoor and outdoor pools or a full-size planetarium offering constellation shows and virtual-reality rides. The staterooms, starting at 194 square feet, are equipped with interactive TV. For well-heeled passengers, there are five lavish duplex apartments, each with with an exercise area, library and three bathrooms.
All has not been smooth sailing for the vessel. In November, a gangway collapsed while the ship was in dry dock in France, killing 12 people. But the ship reached Southampton, its home port, on Dec. 26 to prepare for its scheduled christening by Queen Elizabeth II last Thursday. And there has been no shortage of passengers: tomorrow's voyage sold out in September.
TERRY TRUCCO
TRAVEL ADVISORY
