BLOOMINGDALE'S, Nordstrom and Costco won't discuss it in public. Neither will Fortunoff or Target or Stew Leonard's.
Store security is an overwhelming concern of retailers, but it's one topic that management generally doesn't want to discuss.
One exception is Preston Turco, who sat one day not long ago surveying one of his two specialty grocery stores from a second-floor office that overlooks the produce department. He was unguarded and philosophical about shoplifters and other petty thieves.
''When you deal with 12,000 or 13,000 people a week in each store, there are always going to be people who are looking to steal,'' said Mr. Turco, 57, the owner of this store, Turco's Market, and another in Hartsdale.
Mr. Turco has elaborate security measures in each store, including hidden cameras, store detectives, specialized fraud detection software for cash registers and a handprint identification device to clock employees in and out.
Nearly every major retail store in Westchester County includes a complex web of similar security measures, most of which are nearly invisible to customers, except to those whose purpose is to overcome them.
Nationwide, retail stores lost a total of $31 billion to what is euphemistically called shrinkage in 2002, the latest year for which figures are available, said Daniel Butler, who is vice president of the National Retail Federation, a nonprofit trade association based in Washington. Shrinkage refers to all kinds of store theft, the largest proportion of which is caused not by shoplifters but rather by store employees.
Losses due to employee theft were about $15 billion, while $10 billion in losses resulted from shoplifting, according to a 2002 survey of 118 retailers in 22 markets nationwide conducted for the N.R.F. The rest is the product of administrative errors or vendor fraud, Mr. Butler said.
Most retailers will not discuss the topic of theft for publication, he said, ''because they don't want to educate thieves about having insufficient cameras or how many times they've been hit in the fine jewelry department.''
Experts also agreed that December is the high season for theft.
During the recent holiday season, theft and fraud were at a yearly high, according to John Nolan, director of client services for a security firm in Long Island. This time of year is ripe for what Mr. Nolan called opportunistic criminals.
Several local retailers declined to discuss the topic on the record, describing it as too sensitive. Mr. Turco was an exception. His stores, of which he is the sole owner, have annual gross revenues that he says top $40 million. The subject of theft is one that he faces daily.
One of his antitheft strategies, he said, is this: Hire carefully, and keep your staff happy and loyal over the long term.
''We don't have a lot of bad employees,'' said Mr. Turco, who employs about 300 people in both stores. He pointed out that his produce manager has worked for him for 27 years, the man's wife runs the cheese department and her parents make the store's mozzarella. When an employee turns bad, Mr. Turco has no qualms about prosecuting, he said.
A newly hired deli clerk tried to buy meat and fish in mid-December for much less than they were worth by replacing high price tags with lower ones and trying to bribe the cashier to look the other way, Mr. Turco recalled. The cashier told her manager, and the clerk is now ''locked up,'' Mr. Turco said.
''We know that's going to happen, especially around this time of year,'' Mr. Turco said, adding that it is almost always newly hired employees who steal.
Unlike Mr. Turco, most owners of retail establishments ''do not want to admit to employees' stealing, because it's a blow to everything that's holy,'' said Allan Schwartz, owner of Safeguards International, a security consulting firm in Yonkers.
Employees steal from cash registers, by not charging for items or charging too little, in a practice known as sweetheart clerking, said Mr. Schwartz, who has been in the retail security business for 30 years. Some employees also engage in backdoor theft, stealing inventory from loading docks or colluding with vendors who are making deliveries.
Shoplifters usually steal small items, like earrings, lipstick and blouses, but they will sometimes try to take larger objects.
AT the Turco's in Hartsdale, a security guard in plain clothes caught a man taking a very large, very expensive platter of fish that he had custom-ordered, simply by walking out of the store without to paying.
''I watched him walk out of the store and he got into an expensive car, and I got the license plate,'' said Tim Carroll, a police officer who moonlights 20 to 30 hours a month as a security guard at Turco's.
''I spoke to his wife and he came back and apologized and paid what he owed,'' said Mr. Carroll, who is often not so understanding.
''I'm here to protect the owner so people don't steal from the profits, whether it's an employee or a customer.''
Several years ago, Mr. Turco said, some employees were punching one another in but not showing up for work. Mr. Turco prosecuted them, and they spent time in jail and paid restitution for the unworked hours. Now, Mr. Turco uses a special palm reader that clocks employees in by recognizing their fingerprints, a sophisticated piece of equipment that Mr. Turco leases for $150 a month.
The most important measure that retailers can adopt to prevent employee theft, Mr. Schwartz said, is to conduct a background check before hiring. Large investigation companies will provide checks of past employment, motor vehicle, law enforcement and military records. In addition, employers use camera surveillance for shoplifters, as well as for cashiers and for receiving clerks and loading-dock workers, Mr. Schwartz said.
Finally, Mr. Schwartz said that almost all retail outlets, including grocery stores, now employ store detectives, ''to create an atmosphere of management knowing what's going on.''
In a Pathmark store in Newark, for example, all the detectives were black belts in karate, said Mr. Schwartz, who was a security consultant for the Pathmark chain. ''When they caught shoplifters, if anybody put up a fight, they beat 'em up,'' he said. ''It was like a Tom and Jerry cartoon.''
(A spokesman for the Pathmark division of Supermarkets General, the parent company, said the Newark store had no mandate to hire guards with martial arts expertise.)
Some stores offer employees a bonus of 25 percent of retrieved value for catching shoplifters, he Mr. Schwartz said, but such plans, too, can be subject to dishonesty. And once again, it often gets back to the question of hiring loyal and honest employees.
''A very entrepreneurial clerk piled clothes behind a column and then claimed that a perpetrator tried to steal it but dropped it and ran,'' Mr. Schwartz said. She had planted the merchandise so that she would receive the reward but was caught when she tried the scheme once too often.
IN BUSINESS
