Outside of a dog, a book is man's best friend. Inside of a dog, it's too dark to read.
Groucho Marx
NADIA STONE admits she could spend more of her time on the train working, but she prefers to read.
''This is my only alone-time,'' she said. ''It's my little heaven for two hours a day, because I have kids at home and work at work.''
For almost a year, Mrs. Stone of Darien has been making her way through the 12-volume ''History of Middle-Earth'' by J.R.R. Tolkien, who wrote ''The Lord of the Rings.''
''It's just fascinating stuff. I don't know what I'm going to do when I'm finished,'' she said, although she has taken breaks to read the latest Harry Potter book and ''God's Secretaries'' by Adam Nicolson, about the making of the King James Bible.
For some of us, this is the dirty little secret of commuting: While we may complain to our spouses and colleagues about all the time we spend on the train, we treasure the opportunity to read undisturbed.
My daily trip to Manhattan is usually spent reading the newspaper, but on the way home I turn to books. Sometimes in the late afternoon, when things have gone badly at work, I cheer myself with the thought that soon I'll be on the train, engrossed in a good novel.
I am far less methodical in my reading than Mrs. Stone. I generally stick with novels, though I'll occasionally read nonfiction, like ''Seabiscuit.'' I look forward to new detective novels by Ed McBain and Robert B. Parker, knowing they will keep me occupied for a couple of nights on the train.
My friend Rob Rooney, who switches between novels and The New Yorker, argues that many commuters, if they read at all, stick with what is popular.
''You can always tell what the hot book of the month is,'' he said. ''If I see another copy of 'The Da Vinci Code,' I'm going to vomit.''
To get a better idea of the reading tastes of commuters, I turned to Robert Fayder, the buyer for Posman Books in Grand Central Terminal, which sells about 250,000 books a year.
It turns out, we're fairly eclectic.
''Being at Grand Central, we have a tremendously wide demographic coming through, and the selection has to be broad,'' Mr. Fayder said. ''A store on the Upper East Side may take one kind of book, Shakespeare &amp; Company another. Very often, the publishers' representatives say that we are unique in carrying a bit of everything.''
Posman Books sells its share of best sellers, he said. ''Tom Clancy has a terrific following; James Patterson, those big commercial authors, they're very consistent for us.''
But we also read the classics.
''The literature section in the back of the store is always one of the top five selling sections of the store,'' Mr. Fayder said. ''I've always been gratified by its success. It tells me that people are buying the classic novels: 'Crime and Punishment,' 'Jane Eyre,' Émile Zola. That is a function of having regular buyers who are commuters.''
Mr. Fayder is sensitive to one issue that distinguishes his clientele from that of a mall bookstore.
''When I'm buying books, I look at the page count. I'm mindful of the fact that people are going to be carrying this on the train,'' he said. ''There's a new biography of F.D.R., and I actually think it's a little too big. People are looking at it and saying it's a little too much heft to carry.''
Nonetheless, more readers, including commuters, are opting for hardcover books, said Stuart Applebaum, a spokesman for Random House.
''Book-reading consumers are succumbing to the desire for instant gratification,'' he said. Ten years ago, he said, books like ''Jaws'' and ''The Firm'' would never have sold as many copies as ''The Da Vinci Code'' until they had come out in paperback.
For those reluctant to lay out $25 or more for a best seller and too disorganized to make it to the library, several railroad stations offer free books, usually provided by groups affiliated with the local library.
In Larchmont, for example, the Friends of the Library puts donated paperbacks on a cart, to be borrowed and returned.
''We look for things that are current, that are popular,'' said Diane Courtney, the library director. ''Obviously, we're not going to put up books of economics. Whatever we're picking seems to working because the rack needs to be replenished quite frequently.''
For Mrs. Stone, reading is such a valued part of her life that she still has all the books she owned as a child. And these days she is sharing them with her own children.
So, after a commute taken up with reading about Middle-Earth, she often ends her day reading books like ''James and the Giant Peach'' to her two sons.
COMMUTER'S JOURNAL
