GEN. Wesley K. Clark turned some heads when he announced a few weeks ago that his campaign had raised at least $10 million from October to December. It was less than the $12 million some aides predicted but enough to finance a serious challenge, and it was all engineered by a campaign created in a matter of weeks.
General Clark's late-blooming candidacy, which began in September, may have worked to his advantage when it comes to raising money.
The fourth quarter fund-raising, though traditionally slowed by the holidays, was the general's first full quarter of seeking money. While some other candidates struggled to produce numbers so low that many would not publicly announce them, General Clark was able to chase what is often called the ''easy money,'' contributions from donors who were naturally inclined to support him.
In many cases, these were celebrities in New York and Los Angeles drawn by the early buzz surrounding his campaign. ''This community responds to sizzle, charisma and newness,'' said Andy Spahn, an executive who handles political affairs for Steven Spielberg and DreamWorks SKG. ''He has all that.''
General Clark worked to capitalize on the interest, harnessing celebrities on both coasts as an instant network. In Los Angeles, he appeared with the Eagles, Jennifer Lopez and Ben Affleck. In New York, a one-night gala brought in $1 million. The campaign has also received backing from supporters of former President Bill Clinton, some drawn to the general's Arkansas roots.
Diana Rogalle, the campaign's 35-year-old finance director, said it had been far easier to raise money in the Clark campaign than in her years fund-raising for Senate Democrats. She said that in last few months, ''I would walk into work every day, and there would be a number of voice mails piled up from people who are major fund-raisers.''
Though Mr. Clark has the Internet to thank for about a third of his money, he has raised much of his money the old-fashioned way. He attended 28 fund-raisers in December alone, including events immediately before and after Christmas, Ms. Rogalle said. On a two-day swing through eight Southern states, he appeared at 11 small events.
Even a trip to Europe to testify at the war crimes tribunal trying Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president, offered a fund-raising opportunity. Upon returning, General Clark sent letters highlighting his role. Said Ms. Rogalle, ''Our fund-raising staff didn't have much of a holiday.''
