A Tradition of Sculpture
Among the New York City residents who moved to bucolic Closter in the 19th century was J. Massey Rhind, a sculptor who worked on Grant's Tomb. He set up a studio and sculpture yard in town in 1899. And he became the first of a series of sculptors who lived and worked in Closter.
The story of Rhind and other Closter sculptors is told in ''Civic Pride: A Sculptural History of Closter,'' an exhibition at the town's Abram Belskie Museum of Art. The museum is named for Abram Belskie, who in 1955 did the bas relief for the base of a flagpole near Manhattan's Battery Park honoring the first Jewish settlers in the United States. Belskie later became a leading creator of medallions and one of the nation's top medical illustrators.
Belskie studied with Robert Alexander Baillie, a master carver who created statues designed by the nation's leading sculptors. Baillie, shown in the 1920's at work in Closter, was an apprentice to Rhind.
The show also includes the story of Marcel Jovine, who in around 1960 created the toys with removable organs known as the Visible Man and the Visible Woman. He also designed the Olympic medals for the winter games in Lake Placid in 1980. Mr. Jovine died last January.
The exhibition runs through Jan. 25. (201)768-0286.
The Last Picture Show
Though the last movie house in Trenton closed in the 1970's, Kevin Williams has long dreamed of starting a film festival there.
''It was always a boyhood dream of mine to have a film festival in Trenton,'' said Mr. Williams, a 35-year-old filmmaker who grew up in Trenton and still lives there.
Mr. Williams has made short films and music videos and was a production assistant for ''A Beautiful Mind'' and ''Jersey Girl.'' Last year, he and several Trenton business people started the Trenton Film Society, which has sponsored showings at the New Jersey State Museum and other locations. It is planning to hold the first Trenton Film Festival from May 7 to 9.
This Friday at 8 p.m., the society is showing seven short films at the Trenton Marriott, all made by Trenton-area filmmakers, and all finalists for the society's Best Short Film Award, to be given at the festival. Information: (609)421-4000.
Bodies in Motion
Over the past year, Donna Scro Gentile, artistic director of Freespace Dance, a company based at Montclair State University, has been choreographing dances that explore the feelings that dancers and the rest of us have about our physical equipment. The result of her work will be on display on Jan. 31 at 8 p.m. in ''Images of the Body,'' a dance program at Montclair State University Memorial Auditorium. The performance is part of ''The Body Talks,'' a multidisciplinary project at the university that uses the arts to explore social issues.
To create one of the dances, ''A Supported Moment,'' Ms. Gentile asked her dancers to recall a part of their lives when they felt they were different. ''Even in the rehearsal process, it gets very emotional,'' Ms Gentile said.
Information: (973)655-4000.
Broadway Baby
Christine Andreas, who performed on Broadway most recently in ''The Scarlet Pimpernel,'' brings ''Here's to the Ladies,'' her tribute to Broadway divas, to the Community Theater in Morristown this Saturday at 8 p.m.
Ms. Andreas, who referred to a line from the musical ''Mame,'' and said she was between 40 and death, started developing her singing chops in Camden, where she lived until she was 13. She took her first voice lessons there and gave her first performances at church socials in St. Joseph Parish.
Information: (973)539-8008.
Margo Nash
