Beyond Do-Re-Mi
Wilma Machover's ''Focus on Pedagogy'' series at Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale may sound like dry stuff, but the free series, aimed at music teachers, bears directly on the legions of music students, both adults and children, in Westchester. One hot topic is ''music wellness,'' or the art of teaching students how to safeguard their hands, vocal cords and other parts of their bodies during the rigorous workouts of music practice and performance. ''From the time of Schumann no one paid attention to this problem,'' said Ms. Machover, director of artistic programs at Hoff-Barthelson. ''But if you use your body incorrectly, you end up with injuries.'' She said she is acquiring ''a full shelf of wellness material'' for teachers and students at the school.
Another focus of today's music teachers is on different learning styles, a subject that has spilled over from the area of general education. (Howard Gardner, who developed the notion of ''multiple intelligences'' and their impact on learning styles, will speak at the school next fall.) Caring about students' psychology as well as their scales is not new but has become increasingly important, Ms. Machover said. Teachers use psychology to help students overcome performance anxiety, to deal with perfectionists (who ''bottleneck themselves in the process of learning,'' and to find why a student enrolled for lessons in the first place.
William Komaiko, a Hoff-Barthelson piano teacher, will speak at the school on Jan. 21 at 1 p.m. on the innovative teaching principles of a legendary teacher, Abby Whiteside. Future talks will focus on games and strategies for teaching rhythm and reading; technical tools like sampling and burning CD's; and avant-garde teaching methods. Information: (914)723-1169.
Reading List From Hell
There is still time to read the two books that will be featured at the 11th annual all-day event sponsored by the Westchester Great Books Council on Jan. 24 from 9:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. at Briarcliff Manor Middle School. The books are Dante's ''Inferno'' and the best-selling novel it spawned, ''The Dante Club,'' by Matthew Pearl, below, who will speak at the event. Since Dante's description of Hell figures strongly in Mr. Pearl's murder mystery plot, a thorough reading of both books appears to be a must. Sally Scudo, a council board member, said each book would be discussed separately using the Great Books method of ''shared inquiry,'' in which nothing outside the text is considered relevant. Discussion groups of 10 to 12 people will be led by trained leaders, then everyone will gather at the end of the day for Mr. Pearl's talk, which will be followed by a question and answer session.
The author is a 1997 summa cum laude graduate of Harvard, who wrote the first draft of his novel while a student at Yale Law School. The Dante Society of America awarded him the Dante Prize for scholarly work in 1998.
The council is affiliated with the Great Books Foundation in Chicago. The admission fee of $55 includes the cost of the two books (they are mailed to participants), lunch and refreshments. For information: (914)762-6794.
No Good at Small Talk?
The Quiet Party is not the name of a play but a social event. Loud music and cell phones are not allowed at quiet parties, and in some places talking is not allowed either. The idea is to communicate by means of pencil and paper (3 by 5 note cards are distributed), preferably expressing yourself with stories, poems and drawings. Quiet parties, which hold some of the same mystery as Internet chat rooms -- you don't always know who a note is from -- are the brainstorm of Paul Rebi, a Manhattan artist, and Tony Noe, a singer songwriter. The two have sponsored quiet parties in Manhattan, Beijing and Washington.
Two quiet parties will be held this month in Westchester, presented by Mary Crescenzo, an Ossining resident who began running them as a business after attending one in Manhattan. (''I didn't know what to expect, but it was very refreshing,'' she said. ''They create an even playing field for people who are shy about talking. And they're not just for singles.'') The first is on Wednesday from 8 to 11 p.m. at Papillon Spirited Cafe in Ossining. Admission is $25 and includes two drinks and appetizers (914-941-9771). The second is on Jan. 31 from 8 to 11 p.m. at Westchester Baptist Church in Chappaqua. Admission is $20 and includes two soft drinks. Information: qpwestnys@juno.com.
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
E-mail: westarts@nytimes.com
