THE Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater can be a great boost for young choreographers, promising, if not fame or even steady work, at least rescue from relative obscurity. So several years ago the popular downtown artist Ben Munisteri asked Martin Wechsler, the Joyce's director of programming, when his time would come. ''He told me about '03 or '04,'' Mr. Munisteri said. ''It didn't make me very happy.''
The Brooklyn-born Mr. Munisteri and his troupe, Ben Munisteri Dance Projects, kept performing his visceral, finely constructed dances for small audiences at places like P.S. 122 and Danspace. Last May Mr. Munisteri, 38, finally got the good news. ''I thought Ben was ready now,'' Mr. Wechsler said.
Ready means, in part, being able to sell enough tickets at the 472-seat Joyce. Some of Mr. Munisteri's colleagues warned him that downtown dance snobs, who consider Joyce audiences irredeemably middlebrow, might ostracize him if they thought his choices for the festival were too safe. But he also feared alienating a new audience, so he did not propose, for instance, his 1992 work ''Stop For Five,'' which features spoken text from a book written for gay men in 1974 suggesting that to be happy they should be as sexually active as possible. ''I used it ironically,'' he said, ''but I'm not sure everyone would get that.''
Knowing that people like lots of turning and jumping, he chose ''Muse of Fire,'' to the mesmerizing soundtrack of ''Run Lola Run,'' to open the program his company will perform Wednesday and next Sunday, followed by the equally wild and vigorous ''Smash Through to Sunlight,'' danced by his guests, David Leventhal and Larry Keigwin, to a score by Evren Celimli.
In deference to the more sedate Joyce audience, Mr. Munisteri dropped the D.J. and narration from ''Late Night Sugar Flight,'' set to Donizetti, Satie and the Anglo-Indian pop composer Tjinder Singh, and will present only the work's 12-minute pure dance section, calling it ''Set Dance Piece.'' ''Talking works better in more intimate spaces,'' he said. ''Turbine Mines,'' a premiere (the title is an anagram of his name), is a dynamic dance ending in a passionate duet set to the soundtrack from ''Blade Runner.''
Mr. Munisteri asked Mr. Wechsler to help select the program, and got upset with his advice only once: when Mr. Wechsler strongly suggested leaving off ''Not Human,'' saying it was not Mr. Munisteri's best work. More austere than his other pieces, it is set to a dissonant, disturbing score by Brian Eno and others. ''I like it a lot,'' Mr. Munisteri said, ''but I took it off.'' He did include ''Earthly Perch,'' which had its premiere at the Whitney Museum of American Art last season, despite its difficult Benjamin Britten score and stiff, static movements.
''I'd like to strike a balance between David Parsons, who gets lots of work but often gets scorned by some critics for making accessible dances, and John Jasperse, who probably gets more accolades than bookings,'' he said. ''I'm just not sure how to do it.''
VALERIE GLADSTONE
DANCE: THIS WEEK
