THE most likely place to run into Dee Snider, the spooky shock-rocker and front man of the 1980's heavy metal band Twisted Sister, is at Dunkin Donuts, Home Depot or possibly the Smith Haven Mall, his four children in tow. With his six-foot-one linebacker frame, long blond curls and fangs for teeth, Mr. Snider is still instantly recognizable, even under a baseball cap or behind sunglasses. Drive past the gingerbread Victorian in Stony Brook where he lives, and he's likely to be cleaning out the gutters, sweeping the driveway or carrying out the garbage at the command of Suzette, his wife of 22 years.
''It's so normal you are going to be really disappointed,'' Mr. Snider said.
Despite the platinum albums and movie props on his home's lower level, music memorabilia cannot be found upstairs, as per Mrs. Snider's rules. Also hers is the mantra ''drop the 'tude, dude'' -- no acting cool in the house. The old drag queen feather boas, fishnet stockings and hot pants are stuffed in a box. While he hasn't quite moved beyond the outlandish rock-star persona, Mr. Snider, 48, is very much the suburban dad.
For the last decade Mr. Snider has been earning six figures as a raspy-sounding voiceover guy, lately for a Kit Kat candy bar commercial, previously as the MSNBC guy who announced, ''It's Hardball With Chris Matthews'' over and over again, and as a voice for New York Lotto and the Discovery Channel. Mr. Snider has a radio show, ''House of Hair,'' now in its sixth year. He broadcasts from his home studio to 155 cities. Five years ago, Celine Dion recorded ''God Bless Us Everyone,'' a sweet Christmas ballad Mr. Snider had written for his wife. Ten million copies sold. The following year Rosie O'Donnell and Ms. Dion redid the song as a duet on Ms. O'Donnell's Christmas album. In October Mr. Snider was the grand marshal of the first Dee Snider Bikers for Babies ride, which started at Eisenhower Park, wound around the South and North Shore and ended at Bald Hill, for the March of Dimes. Philanthropy is his new thing.
But come Friday, Mr. Snider will be back on stage with some of his ''heavy friends,'' touting the new sound system at the 1,200-seat Patchogue Theater and shilling for the nascent Long Island Music Hall of Fame and the Long Island Blues Society. This month, Twisted Sister is recording a 20th anniversary edition of ''Stay Hungry,'' its multiplatnium album. In March he will continue the reunion tour started last summer with Twisted Sister, the local band that found worldwide fame in the early 1980's with teased hair, exaggerated mascara and defiant metal anthems like ''We're Not Gonna Take It'' and ''I Wanna Rock.'' He last toured with his former bandmates -- Jay Jay French, Eddie Ojeda, Mark (The Animal) Mendoza and A.J. Pero -- in 1987.
The revived act hasn't lost the glam of yesteryear. ''As rockers grow older sometimes it is pitiful to see them on stage,'' said Dave Glicker, owner of the Downtown, a club in Farmingdale where Mr. Snider performed in a scaled-down bar band act called Bent Brother earlier this year. ''He is still able to go on stage, pull it off and not look ridiculous,'' Mr. Glicker said.. He is in good shape. His voice is still strong. He hasn't missed a beat. For someone who should be hanging it up, he's pulling it off with style and grace.''
Mr. Snider said Twister Sister's outrageous look was a way to capture attention for a band that played 2,000 gigs at clubs on the Island and in the tristate area before being signed in 1983 to its first record contract in England.
''Twisted Sister were five guys who refused to be ignored,'' said Mr. Snider, recalling how growing up in Baldwin and Freeport he never fit in. ''We wanted a reaction. The biggest way to do that was dress up, pick up something loud and obnoxious.''
But Mr. Snider said the drugs and alcohol, the sex and general wild living associated with the rock 'n' roll life were never part of his repertory.
''I never thought the lifestyle mattered,'' Mr. Snider said. ''I have been clean and sober my whole life, as has my wife.'' He said that while his bandmates would while away the night at post-concert parties, doing their best to live up to the debauched stereotype, he would have a bite, soak in a hot bath and get a full eight hours' sleep, then go out again the next night and be wild on stage.
''Here's this heavy-metal rock star, notorious for being the center of attention in Washington during the Senate hearing of the '80's and raising a family in the suburbs,'' Mr. Snider said, continually bewildered at the fuss. ''Everyone seems to think it's so interesting.''
Two years ago, VH1 made a docudrama about Mr. Snider's trip to Capitol Hill in 1985 to testify with John Denver and Frank Zappa. In front of senators and representatives who heeded Tipper Gore's crusade to sanitize rock 'n' roll lyrics, Mr. Snider defended his music.When Ms. Gore claimed that his song, ''Under the Blade,'' had lyrics encouraging sadomasochism and rape, Mr. Snider testified that she had misquoted and misinterpreted lyrics he wrote for his guitar player, Mr. Ojeda, who was apprehensive about undergoing throat surgery. Mr. Snider said the words ''Your hands are tied, your legs are strapped, a light shines in your eyes you faintly see a razor's edge'' showed the fear people have of operations and being helpless on a table.
''Much to their surprise, I spoke English fluently,'' Mr. Snider recalled. He also told them he was married, had a child, was born and raised a Christian, didn't smoke, drink or do drugs.
''I made them look like fools,'' he said, contending that they had misinterpreted his lyrics and his lifestyle.
What ultimately caused Twisted Sister's demise, he said, was that fans didn't understand.
''They thought it was an act,'' he said. ''It wasn't an act. It was part of the same person. To me rock 'n' roll has always been a cathartic thing, not only for the performer but for the fan as well. One of the purposes is to allow you to vent, to allow you to express your frustrations and your angers, things that you go through growing up.''
Mr. Snider said that as a teenager at Baldwin High School he was subtly rebellious. His domineering father, Bob, a retired New York state trooper and former Mineola court clerk, was the inspiration for many of his tunes like ''You Can't Stop Rock 'n' Roll.'' His mother, Marguerite, was as an art teacher. Dee Snider sang in the All Saints Episcopal Church choir in Baldwin until he was 19.
''It was a quiet war,'' Mr. Snider said, recalling how his father gave him a crew cut when he was 13 or 14. ''Dad wanted me to be a baseball player. Then I picked up the guitar and dropped the bat.''
Mr. Snider continues to follow his own drummer. In 1998 he wrote, co-produced and starred as a sadistic serial killer in ''Strangeland,'' a low-budget horror movie. Last Halloween he released his ''Van Helsing's Curse'' compact disc, with plans to film the 18-piece rock orchestra that mixes everything from Black Sabbath to Beethoven for a DVD, and to sign up franchise touring companies to perform it live. Soon Mr. Snider will become the host of a weekly biography program on the VH1 Classic cable channel.
''We're Not Gonna Take It,'' his trademark song, became the anthem of the Arnold Schwarzenegger campaign last fall. In one of the more bizarre gigs of his career, Mr. Snider sang it standing next to the candidate, surrounded by Republicans in suits, at a rally in Sacramento the day before Mr. Schwarzenegger was elected governor of California.
But music is no longer No. 1 on Mr. Snider's agenda. After Twisted Sister's demise, his attempts at new bands, Desperado and Widowmaker, flopped. Married with children, used to the expensive celebrity lifestyle, he scrambled.
''It was real tough,'' Mr. Snider said. ''The same egocentric, myopic vision and drive that got you where you were will not allow you to believe that it's over. The one thing that doesn't change was my notoriety.''
Rich L'Hommedieu, publisher of The Long Island Ear, a monthly entertainment magazine, is trying to establish the Long Island Music Hall of Fame. He said Mr. Snider and Twisted Sister defined the music of their era and were a huge musical influence on the Island. ''More than a bad boy of Long Island, he was one of the smart boys of Long Island,'' Mr. L'Hommedieu said. ''He learned early on that image is everything and he took that image and took it to the next step.''
Mr. Snider stressed the need to keep evolving.
''I have been developing myself as a personality,'' Mr. Snider said. ''I am proud of my days as Twisted Sister, never ashamed. I hope I am always known for them. But I hope eventually it is known as one of the things I've done, not the only thing that I did.''
LONG ISLAND JOURNAL E-mail: lijournal@nytimes.com
