Schumann's Eichendorff Lieder, Wolf's Mörike Lieder, Mahler's Rückert Lieder -- and now Phil Kline's Rumsfeld Lieder. The politically attuned Mr. Kline, a fixture on the downtown music scene best known for his work with multiple boom boxes and other electronic sources, has turned his attention to war and those who wage it in ''Zippo Songs: Airs of War and Lunacy,'' a CD due on Tuesday from Cantaloupe.
The Three Rumsfeld Songs set to music some famously inscrutable sayings drawn from Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld's Pentagon briefings over the last year. (''As we know,/ There are known knowns./ There are things we know we know.'' Etc.) Mr. Kline's basically sweet, light vocal treatments recall nothing so much as Virgil Thomson's poker-faced settings of nonsensical verses by Gertrude Stein.
But the centerpiece is the ''Zippo Songs'' themselves, using poems inscribed by G.I.'s on their cigarette lighters during the Vietnam War. The poems are necessarily terse, and their point -- in contrast to the Rumsfeld utterances -- is usually crystal clear, whether it involves, in Mr. Kline's words, ''getting bummed, getting high, getting horny, getting bored, dying, finding God.''
One pairing of verses covers several recurring themes:
We came because
We believe.
We leave because
We are disillusioned.
We come back because
We are lost.
We die because
We are committed.
We are the unwilling
Led by the unqualified
Doing the unnecessary
For the ungrateful.
Again, the settings are plain-spoken, with Theo Bleckmann's vocals backed by Mr. Kline on guitars, Todd Reynolds on violin and David Cossin on percussion.
The vocal material is rounded out by ''The Funeral of Jan Palach,'' to a poem by David Shapiro. Palach, a Czech student who committed suicide in 1969 to protest the Soviet-led invasion of his homeland, came back into the news last spring, when a half-dozen Czechs immolated themselves (four fatally); they apparently acted, at least partly, in reaction to the war in Iraq.
As prelude, interludes, postlude and general counterpoint, Mr. Kline supplies abrasive electronic-instrumental mélanges, sometimes with voice: ''Briefing,''  ''Incoming,''  ''Fever Dream'' and ''The End.'' It all makes for a confused, unsettling and often dizzying atmosphere, surely appropriate to the texts and the times.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
MUSIC: HIGH NOTES
