My 90-pound golden retriever killed a 4-pound Yorkshire terrier at a leash-free exercise area. I had just led my guy down from a polo field to avoid the horses, when a couple, unburdened by sense or judgment, released their pink-beribboned rag. They sent us a bill for $1,400 for replacement, cremation, burial urn, vet bills, etc. My wife says, ''Pay it.'' I say the laws of assumption of risk and contributory negligence favor us. What does ethics say?
C.L.S., Prospect, Ky.
Your dog kills another dog, and you quibble about legal liability and the wisdom of the other dog's owner? Your effort to avoid taking some responsibility is vigorous but unconvincing. Here's the ethical guideline you seek: If your dog behaves murderously when off the leash in public, then keep him on the leash and out of the dog run. As to the money, some might criticize (O.K., mock) laying on so lavish a funeral for a dog -- burial urn? -- but you are in no position to do so. Take your wife's advice: pay the bill.
The Yorky's owners may be a pair of airheads, but you should still treat them with generosity of spirit, something ethics encourages (one of its less appealing features, admittedly).
I pick up litter when I find it in my environs, but I maintain that biodegradable objects like apple cores not only can be thrown away in rustic settings; they should be. This cuts down on local waste and provides the ultimate recycling for local flora and fauna. As proof of my sincerity, I happily throw apple cores into the bushes in my backyard. My wife feels that litter is litter. You?
B.F.H., Branford, Conn.
If I understand correctly, you're O.K. with my dumping my apple cores in your backyard. And presumably my coffee grinds, eggshells, banana peels and fish heads (it's a family recipe: mmm) -- all biodegradable, all good fertilizer. In fact, so eager am I to embrace your philosophy, I'll have my neighbors bring their garbage too. (It's a little inconvenient, what with our living in Manhattan, but you make quite a case.)
Ah, the joys of sarcasm!
You may do what you like on your own property, as long as you don't injure your neighbors, violate the law or irk your wife: she lives there, too. But in public, you should adhere to the conventional definition of trash unless you wish to debate your theory with the cop who writes you a littering ticket.
When my girlfriend and I moved into a loft, we paid the outgoing tenant a fixture fee, dividing the cost 50-50. Now she is with another man, intends to move out and demands that I reimburse her for half. When I move, I will gladly give her half of what I get from the new tenant. I don't think I need to guarantee that she is reimbursed for her share when I have no such guarantee. What do you think?
P.R., Queens
In New York, apartment laws about such things vary, but in many cases fixture fees (money a departing rental tenant demands from the new tenant) are illegal. But where that doesn't apply, your ex has a point. Despite the uncertainties of the situation, you should buy out her half. When any partners in love and real estate separate, the one who remains behind faces an uncertain home-finance future: the price of the place might go up or down. And yet that couple should have the place assessed and settle up at current market value. Needless to say, such contingencies should have been clarified before you took the place. I won't say I told you so, because, well, I didn't.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 01-11-04: THE ETHICIST
