Writer's block, like insomnia, is a subject of keen interest to those who have it and great tedium to those who do not. In both cases, the near-hysterical pitch of self-pity, fed by panic and isolation, makes the sufferer hard to sympathize with even after you've tasted the same misery yourself. ''Sometimes it takes all my resolution and power of self-control to refrain from butting my head against the wall,'' Joseph Conrad wrote to a friend. ''I want to howl and foam at the mouth but I daren't.'' At least the insomniac's plight is medical; everyone must sleep. If you complain of not being able to write, you might be answered by the likes of Gore Vidal, who retorted to legions of sufferers: ''You're not meant to be doing this. Plenty more where you came from.''
Alice W. Flaherty, a neurologist at Massachusetts General Hospital and the author of ''The Midnight Disease: The Drive to Write, Writer's Block and the Creative Brain,'' wouldn't go so far as to label writer's block an illness, but she's interested in what causes it. Could there be a biochemical aspect to the problem? And if so, might there be a cure beyond the usual self-help nostrums? Flaherty is intrigued by the neurological dimensions of writing in general, not because she has endured writer's block (although she has) but because she has gone through episodes of its opposite: hypergraphia, or compulsive writing.
Just how much writing is too much remains a tricky question. Flaherty, who twice, under the influence of postpartum mood disorders, found herself scribbling obsessively, explains, ''My writing felt like a disease: I could not stop, and it sucked me away from my family and friends.'' Scientists studying the effects of temporal lobe epilepsy, for which hypergraphia is a symptom, tested for it by asking patients for letters describing their state of health. Most responded with answers under 100 words; those with hypergraphia sent back 5,000. Flaherty detects a ''general distrust of writers who are too productive'' whatever the cause, but varying according to genre. If you're a prolific popular writer like Stephen King or Isaac Asimov, people are far less likely to make nasty cracks about your output than if you're a literary novelist like Joyce Carol Oates. Entertainment may be allowed to flow like wine, but art is supposed to ooze forth slowly and painfully, like blood.
A little envy-tinged scorn is easy to take, though, compared with the horrors of the blank page. Flaherty believes ''there are perhaps only two types of writer's block, high energy and low energy.'' The low-energy type may be a symptom of treatable depression, which ''afflicts writers at a rate 8 to 10 times higher than the general population.'' High-energy block comes from an excess of anxiety, thereby demonstrating something called the Yerkes-Dodson law, which Flaherty describes as ''venerable,'' although it was a small revelation to me.
In a 1908 study, Robert M. Yerkes and John D. Dodson, who were doing research in comparative psychology at Harvard, found that ''both very low and very high levels of arousal interfere with performance.'' In other words, too much motivation, as well as too little, can trigger writer's block, and this explains why ''the bigger the project, the bigger the block.'' Coleridge may be the most famous example of this syndrome; he produced pages of essays, correspondence and journalism -- to the point of hypergraphia, in fact -- but when it came to the form that mattered most to him, poetry, he had a tendency to choke. The letter from Conrad quoted above goes on and on about his own inability to write.
A friend of mine once invented a ''cure'' for minor blocks that unwittingly jibed with Yerkes and Dodson's findings: to counteract a procrastination, create a bigger one. Think up a grand, long-term, world-changing project -- something like Mr. Casaubon's ''Key to All Mythologies'' from ''Middlemarch,'' or that old reliable, the Great American Novel -- and in your mind invest it with such life-defining importance that everything you do that doesn't contribute to realizing it becomes a waste of time. As long as meeting this week's deadline is a way of avoiding the really big thing that you ought to be doing instead, it becomes much easier. A pretty feeble ruse, perhaps, but it works.
Depressed or not, writers have been disappointingly unimaginative in their responses to writer's block. One exception is the tiny literary genre of books written to explain the nonexistence of other books. The genre is so tiny, in fact, that I know of only two worthwhile examples. The first is ''Why I Have Not Written Any of My Books,'' by Marcel Bénabou. For years I owned a copy but refrained from reading it because I knew the author was affiliated with Oulipo, the avant-garde literary movement. I feared that my love for the book's title would be tarnished if I discovered the book itself to be one of the group's typically lumbering and self-satisfied frolics. Also, not reading it seemed to be in the spirit of the enterprise.
Recently, I relented and discovered that ''Why I Have Not Written Any of My Books'' is a witty catalog of all the vanities, attitudes and delusions that writers employ to escape their work. Bénabou explains, for example, that he never attempted a first book because it could be only a rough sketch of a more fully realized book to come later, and what would be the point of writing something so premature? Also, ''you have to live'' before you write, a motto that loses some impact when Bénabou notes that ''it was of course by dint of purely literary references that I exhorted myself not to be snared too soon by the nets of literature.''
The second example is Geoff Dyer's ''Out of Sheer Rage: Wrestling With D. H. Lawrence,'' a painfully funny account of how Dyer came not to write his ''sober, academic study'' of the man ''who had made me want to become a writer,'' a project conceived as a way of putting off writing yet another book, a novel. In ''Out of Sheer Rage'' Dyer achieves a Cartesian state of procrastination, leading his readers through so many densely nested layers of avoidance as he travels the world visiting Lawrence's haunts that not writing about Lawrence becomes an end in itself. Ordinarily, I would not read a treatise on writer's block, or a travelogue, or, especially, a study of D. H. Lawrence, yet I relished ''Out of Sheer Rage.'' Whatever tortures produced it, that makes it art in my book.
THE LAST WORD
