MANY analysts have already said that 2004 will be a tough year for the bond market. But when investors hear what Bill Gross, the manager of the world's biggest bond mutual fund, has done, they may still wince. He has withdrawn his own money from his $73.9 billion Total Return fund, the flagship of the Pimco mutual fund family and a bellwether for bonds.
So where is his money now? He has moved it, he said, into closed-end municipal bond funds, commodities derivatives and Treasury inflation-protected securities, known as TIPS.
In shifting his money from the Total Return fund, Mr. Gross has taken on more risk. At the same time, he has positioned the Total Return fund more conservatively, compared with some other big bond funds.
Mr. Gross said he still thought that his fund would outperform the market this year. But he said he had moved his own money because he could do better in alternatives not open to his fund, like closed-end municipal bond funds or commodities or commodity derivatives. (The fund can buy TIPS, along with the usual array of government, agency, corporate and emerging market bonds.)
With a growing federal budget deficit, a falling dollar and Federal Reserve policy makers expected to begin raising their benchmark short-term interest rate, there are few safe places where bond investors can find passable returns.
Mr. Gross said in an interview last week that if the yield on the Treasury's 10-year note, which was at 4.08 percent on Friday, climbed to around 5 percent by year-end, the total return from his fund, before fees, was likely to be 2 percent to 3 percent. Last year, his fund's total return was 6.02 percent, before fees, nearly two full percentage points better than its benchmark. The fund returned 5.6 percent after fees.
''This is not a reflection of lack of confidence that the Total Return fund will outperform the market but a reflection of the fact that the bond market is on its heels,'' Mr. Gross said. With interest rates so low that there is nowhere to go but up, he said, a bond investor ''is pretty much backed into a corner.''
He said that he began taking what he calls ''my money -- money I can spend'' out of the Total Return fund six months ago. It is now in about 20 different closed-end municipal bond funds, which have a tax-exempt yield of around 6.5 percent, he said. He said he especially liked these funds because they could enhance their returns by borrowing at very low interest rates to buy more municipal bonds.
None of his 401(k) money is in the Total Return fund, either. Two-thirds of it is in Pimco's Commodity Real Return Strategy fund, which uses derivatives to capture the returns from the rising prices of commodities. The rest is in Pimco's Real Return fund, which puts most of its money in TIPS.
Closed-end municipal bond funds that borrow to buy more bonds had an average total return of 9.52 percent last year, according to Lipper Inc.
These funds are a good defensive investment when interest rates are expected to rise, Mr. Gross said. That is because local governments tend to reduce their issuance of new municipal bonds as rates climb, and the cut in supply helps restrain any drop in municipal bond prices. He also said that it was better to take advantage of current low interest rates by borrowing at 1 percent, which the closed-end muni bond funds can do, rather than earn 1 percent -- or less -- in a money market fund.
The Nuveen Premium Income Municipal Fund 2, a closed-end municipal bond fund, had a return of 7 percent last year, with 2.10 percentage points of that coming from the earnings on the bonds that the fund borrowed money to buy, according to Kathleen H. Cardoza, a spokeswoman for Nuveen. The fund, which had a tax-equivalent yield of 9.68 percent, had borrowed 35.5 percent of its net asset value of $981 million as of the end of last year.
But this leverage adds risk. If interest rates rise enough to push down municipal bond prices, those losses would be magnified by the borrowed bonds.
Early last year, tax-exempt yields on municipal bonds were very appealing when compared with taxable yields on Treasuries. In March, for example, the tax-exempt yield on a 10-year municipal bond was equal to that on a taxable 10-year Treasury note. But now the comparison is much less attractive.
Still, the tax-equivalent yield on a 10-year municipal bond is 5.34 percent, more than one full percentage point higher than the 10-year Treasury yield.
As for TIPS, they are a good investment when inflation expectations are rising and when overall rates are low, Mr. Gross said.
To readers of Mr. Gross's monthly market commentaries, the choices for his own money should not come as a complete surprise.
In December, Mr. Gross said that the theme of the next few years would be rising inflation, and he explained why. ''One percent short rates, a 10-percent-plus annual decline in the dollar, hundreds of billions of guns and butter, and Hummer and Humvee deficits are powerful medicine,'' he wrote. ''Investors need only imagine the inflationary impact of such events a few years hence to place the majority of their chips on the inflationary as opposed to the deflationary side of the table.''
He then listed his investment choices in order: commodities and tangible assets, foreign currencies, real estate, TIPS and global bonds and equities denominated in currencies other than dollars.
So while some investors may be worried that Mr. Gross does not have money in the fund he manages, he is, in fact, living up to what he is advising investors to do.
In the interview last week, Mr. Gross explained why he was going against the grain with his strategy for the Total Return fund in 2004.
Many market analysts argue that the way to get acceptable returns this year is to take on extra risk by adding lower-rated, triple-B investment-grade corporate bonds and some high-yield junk bonds to the portfolio. Mr. Gross disagrees.
''I think what we have now is a mini-bubble in the corporate bond market,'' he said. ''Investors have chased yields so low that the future risk is not worth what you are being paid.'' So his fund, based on December data, has only 5 percent of its money in triple-B corporate bonds and just 3 percent in junk bonds. ''We are set up for risk bonds and risk assets to underperform,'' he said.
THE Total Return fund did not have a lot of lower-rate corporate bonds and junk bonds in 2003, when these securities turned out to be the top performers in the fixed-income market. Although Mr. Gross's Total Return fund did well last year compared with its benchmark, it did not do as well as some competitors. According to Lipper, the institutional share class of his fund ranked 91st out of 426 in its category. The top return was 14.1 percent from the Metropolitan West Total Return Bond fund.
''By no means did we have the corporate exposure we should have had,'' he said. ''You can chalk that up to stupidity or inherent caution.''
