Reports that President Bush wants to plant permanent human settlements on the moon and to send a manned mission to Mars are reinvigorating business dreams inspired by the Apollo program of the 1960's and 1970's.
The most obviously enthusiastic companies about human space flight are the rocket-launching businesses: the Lockheed Martin Corporation and the Boeing Company. Lockheed Martin, manager of the space shuttle program, has a vested interest in seeing manned space flight continue. Boeing, which has been involved in the space program since its roots, was the lead contractor for the International Space Station and played a significant role in the Apollo moon program.
Both Boeing and Lockheed Martin would be contractors to the space program itself. Beyond that, however, space commerce experts are recalling that most efforts to send business into space have ended in costly disappointment.
''There have been many attempts to put together commercial projects in space that have been killed by bureaucratic incompetence and red tape,'' said Rick N. Tumlinson, founder of Space Frontier Foundations, a nonprofit group that runs an annual summer conference called ''Return to the Moon'' for entrepreneurs, researchers and others who want to move far beyond the Apollo program's brief data gathering visits by a handful of astronauts.
The most ambitious lunar business concepts call for transforming the moon into a mammoth power plant for the Earth's homes and factories. One way to do that would be to build vast fields of solar energy collectors on the moon, which could then beam the power to Earth using devices similar to those currently used to broadcast high-energy radio signals.
''This is basically producing glass, solar cells, microwave generators and radar,'' said David R. Criswell, director of the Institute for Space Systems Operations at the University of Houston. Dr. Criswell said that all of the materials necessary to assemble a solar power project on the moon have been found in lunar rocks and dust.
In testimony before a Senate subcommittee in November, Dr. Criswell said that solar power generated on the moon could become profitable by 2015 and grow to meet all the electricity needed on Earth by 2050.
Another proposal long bandied about would exploit the huge temperature differences between sunlit and shaded areas of the moon's surface to drive turbines. Generating power on the moon could support numerous ventures, including resorts for intrepid millionaires who might take advantage of the moon's low gravity to dabble in long distance golf or, after renting wings, self-propelled flight. Hilton Hotels and Shimizu, a Japanese construction company, are among the companies that disclosed interest during the 1990's in the potential for lunar tourism.
Local power sources might also make it economic for mining companies to retrieve and purify precious platinum from sites where asteroids have crashed into the moon. And satellite images of ice at the lunar poles suggest that manufacturers there could inexpensively make hydrogen fuel for communications satellites that orbit Earth. Eventually, it might be cheaper to make the satellites themselves on the moon.
''Because of its low gravity, it takes 22 times less energy to send a pound of stuff from the moon into orbit around the Earth than to lift it up from Earth,'' said Gregg Maryniak, executive director of the X-Prize Foundation, which has created a $10 million award for the first company to develop a way to launch people and goods into space more inexpensively and frequently.
There are, of course, plenty of risks in trying to exploit space's commercial potential. In addition to the engineering challenges, pioneers face uncertainty about their legal rights. Language in the 1967 treaty that governs space exploration bars any country from claiming any part of the moon as its own territory, but lawyers disagree about how the ban on ''appropriation'' applies to property rights, projects like harvesting solar energy, or mining, according to Pamela L. Meredith, a Washington lawyer who specializes in space law.
Advocates are also wary about how much control NASA and other government agencies will exercise.
''With NASA basically owning the space arena, it's been very difficult for private companies to do any business there,'' said David Gump, president of LunaCorp, a company based in Fairfax, Va., that has been involved in a number of ventures.
The best commercial returns from returning to the moon could be the technological spinoffs on Earth. Products that trace their invention in part to the Apollo program include medical diagnostic equipment that peer into the body like CAT scanners and MRI imaging devices, protective clothing used by racecar drivers and nuclear reactor technicians, and cordless power tools.
