SHAKESPEARE
FOR ALL TIME
By Stanley Wells.
Illustrated. 442 pp. New York:
Oxford University Press. $40.
SHAKESPEARE
By Michael Wood.
Illustrated. 352 pp. New York:
Basic Books. $29.95.
IMAGINING
SHAKESPEARE
A History of Texts and Visions.
By Stephen Orgel.
Illustrated. 172 pp. New York:
Palgrave Macmillan. $26.95.
IT is hard to imagine that even the most groveling of idolaters feels a need for more books on Shakespeare than are already on offer. And accepting, as we apparently must, that there is little prospect of a publishing moratorium, all, even the idolaters, must always be hoping to encounter something new or at least mildly surprising, something off the beaten track -- especially when they are expected yet once more to read the story of the poet's life.
Several full-length biographies have appeared over the last five years. They have their differences of emphasis, their particular interpretations; they may, occasionally, adduce a new scrap of information. They may even display a certain refreshing animus against their subject, as when Katherine Duncan-Jones, who titled her biography ''Ungentle Shakespeare'' (2001), dwells on the poet's questionable conduct in matters sexual and financial. She thinks it very doubtful that any Elizabethans, ''even Shakespeare, were what might now be called 'nice,' '' and is generally skeptical where others are credulous.
Still, whether one's attitude is reverent or cynical, the same basic body of fact (larger than many suppose) is available to every biographer and cannot be ignored. Originality lies in the manner of presentation. ''Shakespeare for All Time,'' by Stanley Wells, and ''Shakespeare,'' by Michael Wood, are essentially biographies, but each is presented in rather unusual packaging. Wells is an old hand, who should not mind being called the doyen of modern British Shakespeare scholarship. The 27 books and editions credited to him in this volume all concern Shakespeare or his contemporaries. They include the enormous and laborious Oxford edition of the complete works, an enterprise over which he presided for years. (He provides a modest account of its origin and development in the present volume; one day he might want to tell that tale in more exciting, less modest detail.)
Wells is the chairman of the Shakespeare Birthplace Trust, vice chairman of the Royal Shakespeare Theater, the man newspapers and television studios call first if they feel they need something authoritative on Shakespeare. He is a benign presence in what is not always a placid environment. Not everybody agrees with him about everything, but few will deny that he has an indisputable right to produce yet another book on Shakespeare whenever he feels like it.
Wood, whose book has Wells's blessing emblazoned on its jacket, is a different proposition altogether. He comes into the Shakespeare world from the outside, having achieved celebrity by making many successful film and television documentaries, largely on historical subjects. He has now brought his unusual talents for research and exposition to the subject of Shakespeare and his times. The primary purpose was a short series of television programs, and this book is a byproduct of that enterprise. Given that the aim of the author was to produce prime-time television, the results are bound to be more exciting, or at any rate more tendentious, than the kind of thing we could properly expect from Wells.
Wells's approach is nevertheless unusual in one respect: he devotes rather less than half his book to a run-through of the biography. The rest of it deals with the ''for all time'' part of the title, though he really means ''up to now'': the growth of the Shakespeare legend, the poet's reputation in the ages of Garrick and Romanticism, his ever-thriving career over the last two centuries and more, not only in Britain but pretty well everywhere. The subject calls for, and gets, abundant, handsome and instructive illustration. The book is therefore something of a hybrid, the biography amiable, the afterlife placidly illuminating and useful.
The main point on which Wells and Wood disagree as to interpretation of fact happens to be one that is at present exercising many other scholars. Very crudely, the question is this: Was Shakespeare a Catholic? His father was born about 1530, when no other option was available; he was later fined for recusancy (failure to attend the reformed church) and seems to have owned a copy of a devotional work (a ''Spiritual Testament'') distributed in England by Jesuit missionaries in the 1580's. Might such a man, and his Catholic wife, not have had a Catholic son? To Wood and others this is a matter of great importance. Wells takes a judicious look at the matter, pointing out that although John Shakespeare could well have been, as many others undoubtedly were, a ''crypto-Catholic,'' he had his children baptized and was himself buried according to the Anglican rite. He accepted public offices which were not open to Catholics, and, as an official of the Stratford community, oversaw the defacement of pre-Reformation images in the Guild Chapel and the sale of papistical copes and vestments. And Wells believes that the father's own explanation of nonattendance at church was the true one: he was afraid of exposing himself to arrest for debt.
Wells then goes on to deny that William was Catholic, finding nothing to suggest it in the writings. He therefore has no time for the consequences that some attach to the idea of young William as a fervent adherent of the old faith. These are just the kind of thing that Wood enjoys. Was the boy taken (possibly by a Jesuit missionary) to Lancashire (like Warwickshire, a county known for its Catholic sympathies) to become (perhaps under the alias William Shakeshafte) a tutor, perhaps an actor, in a great Catholic household? Might he have gone to London with his master's acting troupe? Is that the solution of the old problem of the ''Lost Years'' between Shakespeare's last appearance in Stratford, at the christening of his twins, and the first notice of his presence in London in 1592?
Wells will have none of this; Wood, though unusually cautious about William Shakeshafte, is convinced that Shakespeare's parents had remained Catholics. The connection of his mother, Mary Arden, with the important and certainly Catholic Arden family, though rather remote, suggests that the Shakespeare family belonged to a minority that might, as the Elizabethan anti-Catholic reign of terror developed, have caused them to be accused of treason. If Wood's book has a central theme it is this. Scraps of evidence, however flimsy and conjectural, are marshaled in its favor. The priest who baptized Shakespeare, though not a Catholic, had Catholic sympathies. Shakespeare's parents' marriage was celebrated with a nuptial Mass (but this was during the reign of the Catholic Queen Mary); and the poet's own virtually shotgun wedding was celebrated not at Stratford (where the vicar at the time was a strong Protestant) but at Temple Grafton, five miles from Stratford, where he just might have found a priest willing to offer a Roman Mass. There seems to be no reason whatever to believe this except the pressure of a keen desire for it to be true.
In the end such guesses and suppositions forfeit all credibility. Sentences beginning ''Is it too fanciful to imagine'' invite automatically skeptical responses. So do inferences palpably incorrect, as when a sentence of a certain William Bell is adduced as evidence of his Romanism, when it contains the pure Anglican proposition that the English church was founded by Joseph of Arimathea (and was therefore older as well as truer than the Roman). How does Wood answer the point that the earliest dramatic works of Shakespeare, as far as we know them, were strongly Protestant history plays? Not directly, but he does speak of 1592 as the date when ''the battle for the soul of old England was almost lost''; and that is the very year in which Shakespeare's presence in the London theater was first announced by his enemy Robert Greene.
Wood's medium is not one to encourage caution, and on such matters as the identity of the Fair Youth and of the Dark Lady of the sonnets he has to take a firm stand, choosing William Herbert and Emilia Lanier. Wells, as might be expected, is noncommittal on such issues. Not working for television, he did not need these certainties, and in any case would not want a discussion that trespassed on the second half of his book, the luxurious coffee-table account of the poet's posthumous career. Wood's is inevitably controlled by its televisual origin. It should be added that his account of the London of Shakespeare's day is excellently done and interestingly illustrated, sometimes with 19th-century photographs of Jacobean streets and buildings long since destroyed.
Stephen Orgel's ''Imagining Shakespeare,'' with its origins in a distinguished lecture series, is addressed to a scholarly audience. Orgel is celebrated for his work on the masques of the Stuart court and other visual aspects of Renaissance staging. These elegant and witty chapters return to those concerns but treat a considerable variety of different topics, nearly all lending themselves to vivid illustration. One chapter deals with the now familiar point that Elizabethan plays were necessarily the products of collaboration. More enlivening are a valuable study of the Shakespeare portraits and a brilliantly clever chapter on the sexual undertones of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream.'' A study of Shylock gives ample evidence of Orgel's highly individual scholarship (Shylock was a common English, not a Jewish name, and one might play him as ''one of the Puritan moneylenders of Shakespeare's London.'')
The oddest of these chapters is ''The Pornographic Ideal,'' a study of Giulio Romano, named by Shakespeare as the sculptor supposed to have made the statue of Hermione in ''The Winter's Tale,'' though, as every schoolchild knows, the artist of that name was not a sculptor. To this old problem Orgel brings not so much a new solution as a sort of collateral investigation of works actually produced by Giulio, principally the obscene drawings he made for the engravings that illustrated Pietro Aretino's pornographic poems on the sexual positions. Suppressed by papal order, copies of this famous book almost disappeared; but not quite, and Orgel is able to reproduce and discuss some of the engravings. It is not claimed that the Aretino illustrations have anything directly to do with ''The Winter's Tale,'' but they may be said to have their own interest; and it is certainly true that Orgel always writes well about art. His chapter on the ''pornographic ideal'' also contains an interesting excursus on the great art collections taking shape at the time, one of which, belonging to the Earl of Arundel, included drawings by Giulio, though apparently not the ones reproduced and studied in this book, for the interests of the earl and his lady lay elsewhere.
Frank Kermode's latest book is ''Pieces of My Mind.''
