At 51, with college still ahead for his two teenage children, Lee Hutchison had no intention of retiring from FedEx, where he had worked for 21 years. But a few months ago, that is just what he did.
''It was so far from my mind, early retirement,'' he said. ''I was in a department that wrote manuals for our aircraft engineers. We were very well respected. But when they made that retirement offer, they in effect defined a group of employees that they were saying, 'We need you to leave.' It took a little while for it to dawn on me that I was part of that group.''
So like thousands of others in recent months, Mr. Hutchison jumped at the opportunity to leave a good job and take his chances searching for work at a time when few jobs are being created. What little hiring there had been in recent months came to a halt in December, the Labor Department reported on Friday. Only 1,000 jobs were added last month, far short of the 150,000 forecasters had expected.
Fortified with big pension payouts and promises of health benefits, these early retirees are gambling on the devil they don't know rather than sticking with the devil they do.
Until a year or two ago, exit packages drew fewer takers. Now they are more carefully aimed at employees in operations that are shrinking. Although no national statistics are kept, companies that offer these packages say that the response is greater than they had anticipated.
''What people are doing more than in the past is laying themselves off if they get what amounts to a big enough package,'' said Deborah Hart, a principal at Towers Perrin, a consulting firm that designs exit packages for corporate clients.
At FedEx, 3,600 workers took an incentive package to leave in October, out of 14,000 who were eligible. Even more striking were the numbers at Verizon Communications a month later: 21,600 workers left their jobs, or 10 percent of the company's work force. Both companies said the responses achieved their goals.
Similar packages have been heavily subscribed recently at, among others, the State Street Corporation, a financial services company in Boston, and the Entergy Corporation, a network of utility operations with headquarters in New Orleans.
''We cannot underestimate the changing mind-set,'' Ms. Hart said. ''People are not viewing retirement incentives as an end to work.''
Employers are mindful that shrinking head counts with early retirement packages is more palatable, inside and outside the company, than layoffs. And they know that years of job insecurity have conditioned workers to fear the worst, thus raising the odds that workers will leave if the incentive is rich enough -- typically 40 to 50 percent of annual preretirement wages.
The workers taking early retirement often are in their early 50's and say they neither can afford to stop working nor want to. They embrace packages that give them full pensions years ahead of schedule, or severance equal to a year or more of full pay, or both. Although the current economic recovery is notable for an absence of robust hiring, these people are gambling they can get just enough work to make up the lost income. Above all, they are lured by the promise of continued health insurance, paid by the company.
''The incremental cost of these packages is not significantly greater than the cost of a layoff,'' said Ezra D. Singer, executive vice president for human resources at Verizon. ''It allows the company to get to the size it needs to get to, while minimizing or eliminating the demoralizing aspects of layoffs. If we had not done this, then over the next two or three years, we would have had a work force that was constantly worried about layoffs.''
Among most companies engaged in cutting labor costs, outright layoffs are still common. The elaborate retirement and buyout packages that Verizon and FedEx offered are just beginning to spread, according to management consultants who design them, and such packages put the companies at risk of losing employees they might prefer to retain.
When the package was offered to Mr. Hutchison, he felt vulnerable and ''apprehensive,'' as he put it, feelings that FedEx's retirement offer played on. Mr. Hutchison's division, no longer growing, would be pared down, the company said.
But FedEx was offering both health coverage and a full pension, which in Mr. Hutchison's case would replace nearly half his annual salary of more than $60,000. He otherwise would have had to work another 10 years to secure that sum.
''I'm not home free and I'm not asking to be, but I have a good enough safety net now,'' said Mr. Hutchison, who lives in Memphis, where FedEx is based. Including his wife's salary as a teacher, he figures, ''I can fall down a few times in another job and pick myself up, and my family won't starve.''
Like 5,600 other unionized employees at Verizon, Steven Carney, a field technician, took the plunge although he was protected from layoffs under the Communications Workers of America's contract with the company. But at 53, after 35 years at the company, he had begun to find the pressures intolerable, he said, with workloads rising for employees in Verizon's land-line operations as the company shifted its focus toward wireless.
Mr. Carney said that he had no expectation of landing a job that would replicate his $64,000-a-year salary, not counting overtime. But in preparation for his departure, he refinanced his mortgage to lower his payments by $400 a month and calculated that he could pocket $200,000 or more if he sold his home in Yorktown Heights, N.Y., moving with his wife to smaller quarters.
Her income from a teacher's pension is $11,000, and the severance part of his Verizon package will bring him $18,000 annually in monthly payments spread over four years. That is not enough, Mr. Carney said, not with a son in the first year of law school. (His other child, also a son, just graduated as a dentist.) Still, Mr. Carney developed a skill while at Verizon as a safety coordinator, and he hopes now to make money in that field as a consultant.
''With even a part-time job to offset some of the bills, I'll be all right,'' he said.
If work is scarce, however, he has his retirement settlement to fall back on. Like nearly everyone else who took the Verizon package, Mr. Carney elected a lump-sum payout. Verizon encouraged that choice, pointing out to employees that once interest rates rise from their present low levels, the pension plan will decline in value and lump sums will be lower in a future payout.
The payoff for the company is that it ended its pension obligations for more than 20,000 employees. For Mr. Carney, the lump sum came to more than $400,000. In a pinch, he said, the interest from investing that amount at, say, 5 percent would bring his total income to $42,000 a year, apart from his wife's pension.
''The thing that concerns me is that I am not a financial person,'' he said. ''I've worked with my hands all my life, and to a large degree, I am at the mercy of financial planners in my calculations.''
The writing on the wall at FedEx was too blunt to ignore for Bobbie Temple, 46, a senior representative in human resources at the company's overnight delivery operation, FedEx Express, where Mr. Hutchison also worked. The dot-com bust and the e-mail phenomenon have cut into demand for 24-hour delivery of documents and small packages, so FedEx is openly cutting costs.
''It was an offer I could not refuse,'' said Ms. Temple, who rose through hourly jobs to a final salary of more than $50,000 a year.
She was too young to qualify for early retirement or health coverage, but took a severance offer of roughly 18 months' pay. Without children and sharing a three-bedroom home with a significant other who brings in an income as an office furniture installer, she described her needs as more modest than those of most people leaving FedEx.
''Eventually I planned to do something different, and this made it sweeter to act now, and I did,'' Ms. Temple said. ''You don't want to become fearful of losing your job. I've never had that fear.''
Martha L. Reading of North Plainfield, N.J., said she harbored that fear, and it figured in her decision to retire early from Verizon.
She was a manager of employee research, asking employees about their needs and their views of the company. At 56, she had an annual salary of $90,000. And with 24 years of service, she qualified for a normal pension, which she took as a lump sum of nearly $400,000. The severance portion of the incentive package -- $94,000 in her case -- prompted her to retire years ahead of her internal schedule.
Ms. Reading and her husband, a teacher, have adopted five children, ages 10 to 14, and she says she must work at least another decade to help support them.
''I just did not feel that with all the risks at Verizon, all the downsizings, I would be able to stay there that many years,'' she said. ''I am not saying it would not be a possibility. I was not sure, and I thought if ever I was going to change careers, this would be the time. If I got into my 60's, it would be a lot harder.''
The world of adoption fascinates Ms. Reading, and she said the severance package had given her the opportunity to work with an adoption agency, conducting seminars for couples considering adoption.
She earns $200 to $300 for each family that signs up with the agency, which means she must successfully refer about 300 families a year to earn the $70,000 that she says she needs.
That much annual income is a long shot, and if she cannot earn it, then she will hunt for work, probably in market research -- behaving, in other words, no differently from someone who has been laid off involuntarily.
