ENSCONCED on a knoll overlooking the wooded hills of northern Westchester, Le Château is blissfully removed from the busy back-and-forthing of mere mortals on nearby Route 35. The original structure, a plus-size Tudor-style beauty with baronial interiors and a lovely garden, was built in 1907 by J.P. Morgan, and in the 30 years since it became a restaurant, it has provided the romantic backdrop for countless betrothals.
Le Château has also been the scene of many a wedding, bar mitzvah and gala fund-raiser, and there is the rub: On any given night, the restaurant might take reservations for 25 or 225. Andre Molle, hired in April 2002 as executive chef after a stint at the Hotel Carlyle in New York City, must have plenty of experience with big numbers, but the food at Le Château did not show the same polish when the kitchen was under pressure as it did on a slower night.
On my first visit, just after Christmas, my husband and I were seated in a small dining room adjacent to the bar. The décor was tres jolie, an ode to the French empire, with gilded sconces, silk swags and prints of birds in flight. Red ribbons, poinsettias and a crackling fire added festive warmth.
I was craving an antidote to fudge and eggnog, and the chef that night was an angel of mercy: the food was light and graceful, with pretty French flourishes. A wild mushroom terrine was paired with a tuft of micro greens, balsamic syrup and tiny toasted hazelnuts. Warm duck confit and frisée, dressed with a creamy mustard vinaigrette, were encircled by a dainty necklace of grape tomato pendants.
Sweet lobster meat and tender cockles had been gently poached in a fennel-scented broth. Roasted sea scallops glistened among ribbons of carrot and endive, the whole enveloped in a fragrant saffron sauce. The meal, accompanied by a creamy 1999 Chalk Hill chardonnay and ending with a Grand Marnier soufflé posing as a small cumulus cloud, was near perfection. I counted 24 diners in the restaurant.
On a second visit, with children in tow, I was dismayed to find that Le Château had morphed into a banquet hall. Giant twin tureens filled with mints and matchboxes had somehow escaped my attention the first time. We were ushered into one of two large rooms whose handsome features were lost among the legion of waiters and trays piled high with pallid rolls. We dined on a couple of so-so soups, and a ho-hum preparation of chicken; relief came in the form of good-humored service, an excellent rack of lamb and two winning desserts.
On my third visit, there was a wedding in full swing, with merrymakers smoking on the front steps, a drunken bridesmaid clutching wilted roses in the foyer, and a band throbbing in the background. Thankfully, my guests and I were seated far from the fray, and our dinners were in fact very good.
To start, we enjoyed garlicky escargots, silky pink foie gras, crab mousse spiked with lime and a salad of endive and Roquefort laced with walnut oil. Two fish entrees showed nice restraint: a plump piece of John Dory, jacketed with potato slices, was served with a red wine reduction, and red snapper, simply sautéed, was enlivened with garlic confit and Champagne vinegar. There was a flavorful veal chop with hints of black truffle and a beautiful Angus steak served with bordelaise sauce and a wedge of golden potato cake. Vegetables were familiar riffs: neatly trimmed carrots, layered discs of eggplant, zucchini and tomato, and thumb-size potatoes girded with bacon. Nearly flavorless sautéed salmon served with a mealy parsley timbale was the only entree that came up short.
The wine list is solid and well-balanced. With French Burgundies mostly out of reach, I stuck to a few reliable California wines: the Chalk Hill chardonnay ($80), a fruity 2001 Cakebread chardonnay, and a rich 1999 Jordan cabernet ($110) that tasted of blackberries and cassis. I also splurged on a glass of 1977 Croft vintage port ($27.50), smooth, raisiny and delicious.
A handful of the desserts were noteworthy: a gossamer chocolate soufflé, warm chocolate friand paired with a chilled chocolate parfait, and hazelnut pear roulade, dramatically topped with a whole poached pear, stem intact, sliced and twisted into a pretty spiral.
Le Château  Route 35 (near junction of Route 123), South Salem. (914)533-6631  VERY GOOD
ATMOSPHERE -- The premises spell old wealth and old Westchester. The main dining rooms feature burnished paneling and stone fireplaces; two smaller, prettier dining rooms offer greater intimacy. Men would do well to wear jackets.
SERVICE -- Smooth and unobtrusive; on one occasion, a little frosty.
RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Duck confit with frisée salad (special), foie gras terrine, wild mushroom terrine, escargots, crab mousse (special), endive salad with Roquefort, lobster and cockle fricassee, sautéed red snapper, roasted sea scallops, rack of lamb, Angus steak, veal chop with black truffle sauce (special), Grand Marnier and chocolate soufflés, pear roulade, duo of chocolate friand and parfait.
PRICES -- First courses, $6 to $18.50. Entrees, $19.50 to $35. Desserts, $9.75 to $11.25.
CREDIT CARDS -- All major.
HOURS -- Dinner, Tuesdays through Saturdays, 6 to 9 p.m., Sundays 4 to 9 p.m. Sunday brunch (beginning Jan. 18), noon to 2 p.m.
RESERVATIONS -- Suggested on weekends.
WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Ramp.
THE RATINGS -- Excellent. Very good. Good. Satisfactory. Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambience and service taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
REVIEW PUBLISHED -- Jan. 11, 2004
DINING OUT
