South Korean prosecutors said Saturday that they had arrested six lawmakers and the chairman of the vast SK business conglomerate as part of a widening inquiry into illegal campaign contributions and bribery.
The politicians under arrest include both opposition lawmakers and a major supporter of President Roh Moo Hyun.
''Six politicians and SK Group Chairman Son Kil Seung have been arrested,'' an official at South Korea's Supreme Public Prosecutor's Office said.
The politicians were charged either with violating contribution regulations during the 2002 presidential election campaign or with taking money from businesses in return for favors, the official said. Mr. Son was arrested late Friday night on charges of tax evasion and embezzling company funds.
Prosecutors started a comprehensive investigation after a former close aide to the president was accused last year of receiving about $1 million in bribes from the SK business group, which is among South Korea's largest conglomerates, with South Korea's largest oil refiner just one of its many units.
So far in the investigation, three presidential aides have been indicted on charges of campaign financing irregularities during the presidential election campaign.
The scandal has weakened Mr. Roh, who was elected in late 2002 on a populist platform that pledged to eradicate political corruption.
Among the lawmakers arrested this time was Chyung Dai Chul, who headed Mr. Roh's election campaign. Mr. Chyung is a senior member of the Uri Party, made up of politicians who support the president. He has been charged with receiving more than $500,000 from companies, including a construction affiliate of the failed Daewoo business group.
The former secretary general of the main opposition Grand National Party was also arrested, on charges of gathering millions of dollars in illegal campaign funds.
Mr. Roh has vowed to step down if his camp is found to have amassed more than a tenth of the illegal campaign funds his rival candidate had gathered before the election.
The main opposition candidate during the presidential elections, Lee Hoi Chang, has admitted to receiving about $42 million, in illegal donations during the race.
Neither Mr. Roh nor Mr. Lee has been charged with any wrongdoing.
