THE budget is not the only thing that seems to be soaring in New Jersey these days. So are the number complaints against the state police.
But experts say the increase is no surprise -- improving a system designed to handle complaints typically allows more grievances to get attention.
''It is not surprising that when you make it easier for citizens to complain about police behavior that more people are going to complain,'' said George L. Kelling, faculty chairman of the Police Institute at Rutgers University in Newark. ''Especially if the prior process was difficult and such that it discouraged citizens from submitting complaints.''
Still, for New Jersey troopers the experience seems to fall into the category of no good deed going unpunished. The department reformed an antiquated internal affairs system, only to reap the bad publicity that came with airing complaints unearthed by its new system.
The reaction to the complaints has been relatively minor, perhaps because the state is doing a better job at explaining the reasons for the increase. In fact, people not normally considered allies of the department have come forward to dispel the notion that troopers have suddenly gone bad.
''The increased numbers are because we made the system far more accessible to the public and have made people far more aware of their rights,'' said Senator William L. Gormley, who headed a series of tough legislative hearings into the conduct of the state police in 2000.
The New Jersey State Police restructured its internal affairs office in 2000 after state and a federal investigators uncovered evidence that troopers had improperly used race as a reason to stop motorists and search their vehicles. When the state police replaced the Internal Affairs Bureau with the Office of Professional Standards, the change represented more than just a new name: the office is four times larger than the old one, and its commander reports directly to the superintendent.
''They also established a policy that every complaint had to be taken and forwarded to the Office of Professional Standards,'' said Capt. Gordon E. Coleman, the unit's executive officer.
Last month, The Star-Ledger reported that the number of complaints against troopers topped 1,000 for the first time in 2003. It seemed to be more bad news for the state police, which has gone through several troubled years and short-lived superintendents.
But the high number also seemed to fly in the face of the agency's recent history. The state police, with a popular new superintendent, has instituted such procedures as in-car cameras to monitor troopers' behavior and discourage improper conduct.
Troopers were quick to say that the number of complaints reflects the new procedures rather than an increase in misbehaving officers. Sgt. First Class Kevin Rehmann, a department spokesman, said filing a complaint is much easier now than it was before the internal affairs shakeup. Now, civilians can complain over the phone, by mail, or on the Internet. Troopers patrolling the highways are required to keep at least three complaint forms in their vehicles and must hand them out to dissatisfied motorists.
''If someone says, 'I am not happy with this,' you have to tell them you can fill out this form,'' Sergeant Rehmann said.
He also said the number of complaints is small compared with the number of times the 2,724 members of the state police respond to calls for assistance. Troopers handle about 400,000 road stops, accidents and calls for help each year, and the number increases when other types of contact with the general public are added.
Col. Rick Fuentes, the superintendent, denied that any investigations under his command were biased.
''All incidents deemed to be misconduct are investigated thoroughly, fairly, and in a timely manner,'' Colonel Fuentes said in a statement issued through Sergeant Rehmann. ''To suggest otherwise is simply untrue and unfair.''
Captain Coleman said the bulk of complaints sent into the department are for administrative violations rather than actual misconduct. For some reason, people like to call and complain when they think troopers are driving too fast. Although the state police investigates those calls, they are considered an administrative violation.
Of the 1,062 complaints filed in 2003, 422 were classified as accusations of actual misconduct. The most common complaint, Captain Coleman said, involved troopers allegedly speaking in an abusive or a rude manner to civilians. Troopers on the road wear microphones, so those complaints are usually fairly easy to check by examining the tape from the vehicle camera.
On average, about 25 percent of accusations of misconduct are substantiated, Captain Coleman said, with the severity of the punishment ranging from a reprimand to criminal charges None were fired for misconduct.
The last complaint of the year came in at 5:50 p.m. on New Year's Eve, Captain Coleman said.
''A woman claimed the trooper spoke in a rude manner,'' he said. ''It is still under investigation. We will find out what happened.''
LAW AND ORDER
