ONE of Long Island's major commercial developers has purchased two large former military plants with plans to create new office and retail space. Because of their highly visible locations and oversized plots, the buildings are typical of many large industrial buildings once belonging to the military industry that have been upgraded in the past 25 years, realtors say.
In September, the Syosset-based Blumenfeld Development Group purchased a 750,000-square-foot complex on 80 acres in Deer Park for $22 million from the EDO Corporation, a Manhattan-based military contractor. It is about three miles from the Long Island Expressway on Commack Road, a major north-south thoroughfare.
Blumenfeld is planning to renovate the building for mixed use, including offices, retailing and some industrial space, said David Blumenfeld, a partner with his brother, Brad, and father, Edward, who founded the company in 1974.
This weekend, at another site 10 miles west in Syosset, adjacent to the Long Island Expressway, Blumenfeld moved into its new corporate headquarters in 23,250 square feet of a 205,000-square-foot building on 18.5 acres. The firm purchased the building in 2002 for $14 million from BAE Advanced Systems, a division of BAE Systems North America, which produces military communications and identification products. BAE has since moved to a 400,000-square-foot building in Greenlawn.
Blumenfeld is spending $30 million on renovations of the Syosset building, including its headquarters. The remaining portion of the building, is being marketed as ''flex space,'' suitable for offices and research laboratories, David Blumenfeld said.
Alan Yaffe, a partner at the Melville-based United Realty and the broker for Blumenfeld in the Syosset transaction, said: ''Many of Long Island's large former defense plants seem to be strategically located by major thoroughfares and on oversized parcels of land. Therefore, when these defense contractors determined their plants were surplus and they looked to sell these facilities, they found they can lend themselves to be developed for higher and better uses such as office and-or retail development.''
In the past 25 years, many of Long Island's large industrial buildings have been upgraded to office buildings, said William E. Greiner, president of Greiner-Maltz, a commercial brokerage with offices in Woodbury and New York City. The firm tracks industrial statistics for buildings 15,000 square feet and over.
''The motivation is economic,'' Mr. Greiner said. ''If the property has extra land for parking, it lends itself to upgrading. They have the land, the building and the location, and the lot has value.''
Blumenfeld, which also has an office in Jackson Heights, Queens, has been leasing 9,000 square feet of office space in the North Shore Atrium -- a 310,064-square-foot office park that had once been a military plant -- as its headquarters. Blumenfeld had redeveloped the office park in partnership with the Rechler family, according to Mr. Blumenfeld. It is now owned by the Reckson Associates Realty Corporation.
IN the past two years, Blumenfeld's Long Island projects included the development of Nicolls Plaza, which is two shopping centers on 55-acres in South Setauket in Suffolk County, and the rehabilitation of two five-story office buildings totaling 102,000 square feet in Jericho in Nassau County.
Blumenfeld's new headquarters, which is at the front of the former BAE building, was designed by Susan Blumenfeld Interiors, owned by David and Brad's mother. It includes a 25-by-25 foot dining area, a 40-by-45-foot basketball court, 26 office cubicles, 12 administration offices, seven executive offices and a conference room. There are also a gymnasium and locker rooms on a mezzanine level.
The building's dark gray stone exterior has been refurbished with an aluminum and glass curtain wall with tan limestone accents and white frame windows.
Inside, wood-timbered ceilings and brick walls accent the office areas to give it a ''New York City loft-y look,'' said Michael Dejoseph, Blumenfeld's architect.
A wooden truss system crisscrosses the ceiling of the 700-square-foot conference room, which has a restored doorway at its entrance from the lobby. This classic portal, which came from an old local estate house, is framed with columns and topped with an arched pediment.
A 600-foot-long central corridor with skylights runs the length of the building. Open community areas, like lounges and a putting green, will be placed at intervals along the corridor for all employees, Mr. Blumenfeld said.
Ceilings throughout the building have been restored to their original height of 18 feet, and partitions have been removed in the part of the building that will be leased, where supporting columns are 24 feet apart in one direction and 48 feet in another. This section will be custom built for two to six tenants, preferably ones who want blocks of 20,000 square feet or more, Mr. Blumenfeld said. Annual rents will be $19 per square foot plus taxes, which will be $3 a square foot, and utilities.
There will be a total of 1,100 parking spaces on the four sides of the building.
Farther east in Suffolk, the Deer Park complex, which was built during World War II, has always been owned by military contractors, Mr. Yaffe said.
EDO, which has 30 locations in the United States, including two on Long Island, has occupied the property since it merged with Airborne Instruments Laboratory, another longtime contractor, in 2000.
Since 1996, EDO's marine and aircraft division has been in 80,000 square feet of a 120,000-square-foot building in North Amityville, where it has a 15-year lease.
The defense and antenna products divisions are in approximately 350,000 square feet of the Deer Park complex, which includes a 700,000-square-foot building and several small buildings, said Philip Heilpern, first vice president at CB Richard Ellis, which is the broker for EDO.
BLUMENFELD has leased the building back to EDO for two years and will pay it an additional $8 million once it vacates, David Blumenfeld said.
According to Frank W. Otto, EDO's executive vice president, the company is hoping to keep the Deer Park divisions on Long Island. ''We are looking at several options,'' he said. ''One is to move the defense division to Amityville and antennas somewhere else. Or we may move somewhere else altogether, but we want to stay on Long Island. We could also combine the three divisions and build a new building in Amityville.''
''We still have about two months before we have to panic over a decision,'' he added.
Currently, there are about 2,500 industrial buildings on Long Island, a number that has not changed much over the years, since new buildings have been built and some renovated for office use, Mr. Greiner said.
''But the use has changed today,'' he said. ''It is primarily for offices and distribution rather than manufacturing.''
Such is the case with Polar Electro, a company based in Finland that makes heart rate monitors. In November, it leased 52,000 square feet for its new North American headquarters at I.park in Lake Success near the Queens border.
A 1.4-million-square-foot complex on 94 acres, I.park had been owned by a series of military contractors and is now primarily an office park. Annual asking rents are $24 a square foot for office space and $12 for warehouse space.
Polar Electro had been in 30,000 square feet of office and warehouse space in Woodbury, which is 15 miles east of Lake Success. It will use half of the I.park space for offices and half as a distribution center, said David Pennetta, a principal at Oxford &amp; Simpson Realty in Jericho, which represents Polar.
According to Jukka Jumisko, Polar's business controller, the company, which has 100 employees at the new location, has doubled its size in the past five years. ''We needed more space, and parking was an issue,'' he said. ''We also wanted to be closer to the city, so we could get some talented people from Manhattan and the boroughs.''
In the Region | Long Island
