TWO days before New Year's John Gregory Dunne, one of the shrewdest observers of Hollywood (and so much else), died suddenly in New York. John Dunne was my friend, but decades before I met him in life, I met him in print, through ''The Studio,'' a book about the movie business that's unlikely to be surpassed.
In the mid-1960's, John somehow persuaded Richard Zanuck, son and deputy to Darryl Zanuck, the titan of 20th Century Fox, to give him complete on-the-record access to the studio for a full year. It was not a great year. Drunk on the financial success of ''The Sound of Music,'' Fox rolled the dice on three break-the-bank musical star vehicles: ''Dr. Dolittle'' with Rex Harrison, ''Star!'' with Julie Andrews and ''Hello, Dolly!'' with Barbra Streisand. John's unblinking account of every last costly miscalculation on this road to fiscal madness, etched in wry deadpan, was published in 1969. Still in print today, ''The Studio'' is a permanent freeze frame of Hollywood on the brink of generational change, just before it was overrun by a new crop of young directors shaped by the 60's. The new wave that was on its way -- epitomized by films like ''Chinatown,'' ''The Godfather'' and ''Taxi Driver'' -- was as aesthetically removed from ''The Sound of Music,'' and its America, as it could be.
Little of the Hollywood in ''The Studio'' remains. What was 20th Century Fox is now but a small component of Fox, which itself is just one component of Rupert Murdoch's vast News Corporation. The idea that any reporter would be allowed to spend an afternoon, let alone a year, with full access to any studio is laughable. Much of what passes today for journalism about the film industry -- much, though not all of it, on TV -- is tightly policed by publicists. ''The disconnect between appearance, as it is presented in the media, and the reality of what actually occurs behind the scenes is as great in Hollywood as it is in Washington, if not greater,'' the journalist Peter Biskind writes in his new book, ''Down and Dirty Pictures: Miramax, Sundance, and the Rise of Independent Film,'' published this week.
Mr. Biskind's book has been anticipated in part because his previous ''Easy Riders, Raging Bulls'' was the definitive account of Hollywood in the 70's, indeed of the Coppola-Scorsese era that swept away the Hollywood of ''The Studio.'' In ''Down and Dirty Pictures'' Mr. Biskind takes on the movie industry of the 1990's and again gets the story, despite the lack of any Zanucks to give him the keys to the lot. In the process he adds perspective to our ongoing moment of cultural sea change much as John Dunne's book presaged a wild cultural shift almost 40 years ago.
''Down and Dirty Pictures'' was also anticipated because of pre-publication rumors of its unblinkered accounts of Miramax's Harvey Weinstein and Sundance's Robert Redford. The book does not stint in that respect, especially in the case of Mr. Weinstein and his partner in blood and commerce, Bob Weinstein.
''They have a reputation for brilliance, but also for malice and brutality,'' Mr. Biskind writes at the outset before going on to supply enough extravagant examples of both to keep readers sated for months to come. Miramax's brilliance is revealed in its ability to market idiosyncratic (and first-rate) movies from ''sex, lies and videotape'' to ''The Crying Game'' to ''Pulp Fiction,'' even if the movies or their creators are slapped around in the process.
As for malice, Mr. Biskind writes: ''Finesse was never part of Harvey's arsenal. He tore phones out of walls and hurled them. He slammed doors and overturned tables. Almost anything within reach could become a weapon.'' None of this is likely to surprise anyone -- and we are legion -- who has been on the receiving end of a Weinstein tirade.
But like Mr. Biskind's previous book, his new one celebrates a revolution in moviemaking even while refusing to sentimentalize the revolutionaries. Although 2003 was no more a watershed year for independent films than it was for studio blockbusters, that revolution is here to stay. Just as ''Down and Dirty Pictures'' was being shipped to bookstores, there were signs that today's show business establishment, for all its might, is not as impregnable as it often seems.
''Hollywood Asks: Has Pop Culture Pooped Out?'' read a front-page headline in Variety this week. The question was prompted by the final accounting of a movie year that, The Los Angeles Times reported, had the biggest decline in admissions in more than a decade. ''There are significant signs that the mainstream audience for movies may be drifting away in the same slow but relentless pattern that's afflicting broadcast television and music,'' writes Peter Bart, Variety's editor.
Even the stars who were supposed to ride to the rescue in the final reel lacked the audience mandates that turn holiday vehicles into runaway hits. ''The Last Samurai'' (Tom Cruise), ''Master and Commander'' (Russell Crowe), ''Mona Lisa Smile'' (Julia Roberts) and ''Paycheck'' (Ben Affleck) are all box-office disappointments, though the panaceas of DVD sales and foreign revenues may ultimately push some of them into profit.
In 2003 the films that went through the roof -- ''Finding Nemo,''  ''Pirates of the Caribbean'' and ''The Return of the King'' -- were all fantasies, set either in the briny deep or on Middle, as opposed to actual, Earth. Though there are sporadic exceptions (''Mystic River,'' any farce starring Steve Martin or Jack Nicholson), real people and real places are most likely to be found in movies from indies: actual independent film companies or the boutique subdivisions that major studios acquired or invented to mimic the genuine indies.
Surveying the splintered audience in Variety, Peter Bart writes longingly of once walking through a small town and finding every TV tuned to the same show. (''Alas, it was Lawrence Welk.'') He found ''a true comfort'' in his glimpse into the mainstream: ''It may have been boring, but it was unifying. A heartland America existed after all.'' That heartland, if it ever existed, long ago gave way to Nicheland. As James Poniewozik of Time concluded at year's end, ''the mass-media audience as we have known it'' is a distant memory. ''It is no longer possible to please most of the people most of the time.''
For those who cherish a vital pop culture this is good news. While 2003 was a year marked by the further consolidation of power by a handful of mega-media companies, the audience is not without some power to fight against them. The more we reject embarrassing big-ticket stunts like ''Charlie's Angels: Full Throttle'' and ''Coupling,'' the riskier it becomes to produce bloated would-be crowd-pleasers chasing after a theoretically homogeneous crowd. Vanity -- and perhaps the possibility of found money -- might even drive the media giants to bolster their output of more diversified, less costly and perhaps better products that speak to our various niches: movies like last year's ''Lost in Translation,'' ''Capturing the Friedmans,'' ''American Splendor,''  ''Monster,'' ''Thirteen,''  ''In America,''  ''Fog of War'' and ''Spellbound.''
The trouble for these monster corporations is that an America of niches doesn't always play to their strengths. Top-heavy conglomerates are geared up for producing mass-common-denominator products, but when that mass common denominator disperses, they can be flummoxed. In TV, where the networks' 2003 audience falloff has caused real panic to set in, NBC's Jeff Zucker has already pinned the year's flops on the ''too many people involved'' in the creative process, mainly his own network's executives.
It was the small corporate sibling of NBC, Bravo, that produced this season's hit, ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,'' in much the same way that the niche Disney Channel, with ''Lilo &amp; Stitch'' and ''Lizzie McGuire,'' upstaged Disney's broadcast giant, ABC. And that Fox Searchlight released ''In America'' and ''Thirteen'' in the year of Fox's ''Master and Commander'' and ''Stuck on You.'' The question for such niche divisions embedded in big corporations is whether they can co-exist indefinitely with their masters: in-house ''indies'' came to blows with their own studio siblings this fall over the issue of sending video ''screeners'' to Oscar voters. Nor is it certain that they can maintain the creative independence that makes their projects distinctive in the first place.
In this sense Harvey Weinstein becomes an almost -- I stress, almost -- poignant figure in ''Down and Dirty Pictures'' because he seems to have misplaced the meaning of his own success. His problem is not that he is a bully. As John Dunne writes in his other nonfiction account of the movie business, the 1997 ''Monster,'' there's a case to be made for the effectiveness of ''bully boy'' producers, from Otto Preminger to Don Simpson. The trouble comes when the bullies join the establishment, a process that arguably began for Miramax once it was bought by Disney in 1993.
As Mr. Biskind suggests, Miramax's ''Cold Mountain'' says more about that company today than whatever ashtrays Mr. Weinstein has thrown at his underlings. While by no means a terrible movie, it is indicative of how much a renegade operation built by gambling on onetime wild cards like Quentin Tarantino and Kevin Smith has bought into the big-studio mentality it once countered.
Yes, Miramax released some genuine indie movies this year, like ''The Station Agent,'' but ''Cold Mountain'' is Miramax's costliest investment yet (at least $80 million, by its account), and so it strains to appeal to a phantom heartland that may be as extinct as Lawrence Welk: its Civil War is stripped of its messy racial divisions, and its love story is so glossily executed that its hand-to-mouth heroine (Nicole Kidman) seems to have stepped onto Tobacco Road directly from an Armani showroom. Except for its ferocious battle scenes, this is a film that, in both its strengths and defects, could have been made by MGM in 1939, though in truth ''Gone With the Wind'' had more eroticism, grit and (dare I say it?) cognizance of slavery.
''Cold Mountain'' will no doubt be promoted, in ace Miramax fashion, into the Oscars sweepstakes. But this is a new era when even the Oscar show, no longer the automatic mass draw it once was, has had to switch its date and retool itself to fend off the Golden Globes. As John Dunne would be the first to point out, however, an Oscar was never an unalloyed blessing. After it hit the jackpot with ''Chicago'' last year, Miramax went out and acquired the rights to three more musicals (''Guys and Dolls,'' ''Pippin'' and ''Damn Yankees''), in uncanny, if presumably unconscious, emulation of the misguided Zanucks all those Hollywoods ago.
Frank Rich
