They used to call Dick Pretzinger the land baron of Hook Creek. For 43 years, he made his home in the canyon the creek flows through, raising his children and horses under towering pines to the sound of a rippling stream.
His 3,400-square-foot house was filled with so many mementos -- an $8,000 saddle with silver spurs, a music room full of instruments -- that his granddaughter named it the museum.
But when a wildfire roared through the San Bernardino Mountains in late October, Mr. Pretzinger's home and those of about 350 of his neighbors in and around Cedar Glen were obliterated, leaving this small community east of Los Angeles one of the most heavily damaged of all those hit by the blazes that raged across Southern California for 10 days.
Mr. Pretzinger's property, now fenced to ward off looters, resembles a blackened trash dump, full of twisted metal and broken objects lost to the flames. The rest of the canyon is no different, forever scarred.
''It looks like a nuclear bomb went off,'' said Charis Scanlon, a founder of Rebuilding Mountain Hearts and Lives, a new organization in neighboring Lake Arrowhead that is coordinating assistance for homeowners like Mr. Pretzinger.
More than two months after the fires, which destroyed 3,600 homes and burned nearly 740,000 acres across the state, residents of San Bernardino County and the eight other affected counties are growing increasingly anxious and frustrated. Many victims here are demanding to know why firefighters failed to reach the canyons to save their houses. Some are realizing, too late, that their properties were underinsured, while others are gearing up for a fight with building officials who are trying to enforce codes established long after their homes were built. In many cases, the new codes would sharply limit rebuilding in narrow canyons and on steep mountainsides.
''The whole thing is a bureaucratic boondoggle,'' said Mr. Pretzinger, 76, a retired civil engineer and surveyor who is leading the effort to get the county building codes relaxed. He is also trying to stave off proposed rules for mountain areas that would require new homes to have double-paned windows, nonflammable roofing and fire-resistant materials for walls and decks. Mr. Pretzinger and other residents fear the rules would make rebuilding too expensive.
''It's going to take us five or six years to get even close to where we were,'' said Camie Pretzinger, Mr. Pretzinger's daughter-in-law, who raised her three boys, now 15, 13 and 11, in a nearby house that was also burned to the ground.
She and other former residents of Hook Creek are furious that utility companies sent crews with heavy cranes into the canyon to remove damaged trees -- in the process, they say, further damaging the foundations of some houses. Without surviving foundations, residents fear, the county will declare the properties a complete loss, making it unlikely that they will be allowed to build new homes there. Adding to their anxiety, recent rains have swept acres of topsoil off the denuded hills, with the prospect of more rain as the wet season approaches.
''If those foundations are washed out we could be in big trouble,'' Mrs. Pretzinger said.
A few miles down the mountain, 14 people, some of them children, were killed when a storm sent mud cascading through Waterman Canyon on Christmas Day. In the next few days, San Bernardino County officials plan to send letters warning 75,000 property owners in a 31-mile fire-damaged area of the potential for more floods and mudslides.
The prospect of more disasters is hard to take in a county that lost almost 151,000 acres and 659 homes in the wildfires. Across Southern California, 22 people died, including one firefighter, and 260 people were injured. So far, insurance claims exceed $4 billion in the nine counties affected by the fires.
In the midst of the uncertainty over rebuilding, survivors of the fire face continuing deadlines for their paperwork. About 33,000 people have requested disaster assistance from the Federal Emergency Management Agency, many of them at an emergency assistance center at San Bernardino International Airport.
In San Diego County, the pace of reconstruction is not much faster than it is here, with only a dozen or so permits for rebuilding single-family houses issued so far. County officials say they are trying to speed up the permit review process while making it easier for those with mobile homes to find places to park. Victims have been scattered far and wide, many staying with friends and relatives or in hotels and rented apartments.
In Scripps Ranch, one of the most devastated communities in San Diego County, with 341 homes lost or damaged, neighbors are helping one another. About 300 volunteers have formed committees to help fire victims with everything from school car pools to house rebuilding.
''The biggest thing weighing on my mind is having to list all the things we lost,'' said Bob Younger, who had lived in Wildcat Canyon, northeast of San Diego, for just seven months before fleeing his home with his family as flames approached.
Unlike many other people, Mr. Younger said he was satisfied with his insurance company's response to his claim. ''Some people are finding out that they're only getting $81 a square foot in reconstruction costs, when the real cost is $200,'' he said. ''And, of course, some people have no insurance at all.''
In Lake Arrowhead, Terry Adams said she was feeling the weight of negotiating with adjustors. ''We are having nothing but problems with our insurance,'' said Mrs. Adams, a social worker at Mountains Community Hospital who has been living in a ''little rental'' since her home in Cedar Glen burned to the ground.
Her husband, Kurt Adams, had another target for his wrath. ''Our house could have been saved, so we have a lot of anger about that,'' said Mr. Adams, 51, who said he was semi-retired from the computer industry. ''The firefighters never went back there.''
Lake Arrowhead, a mountain resort town that gets most of its business from weekend travelers from Los Angeles and San Bernardino, was untouched by the fires, although its boundaries were singed.
''None of us have ever gone through anything like this,'' said Suzanne Kushner, the owner of Razzbearies' Cookies and Muffins, a coffee shop in the town's central square. Though her home was saved, she said, her business lost more than $25,000 in the days after the fire because the entire area had been evacuated. She was recently turned down for a Small Business Administration loan to see her through what she expects will be a rough winter because, she said, ''our financial condition looked so bleak that they didn't think we could pay it back.''
Business was already off long before the fires, she said, because potential visitors had been alarmed by reports that the mountains posed a fire danger, primarily as a result of infestations by pests that killed thousands of trees.
''The economy up here has just been devastated,'' Ms. Kushner said. ''Bark beetles, fires, the bad economy -- we've had it all. Even though the fire is out, we're not through this. If we have rain, we'll have mudslides and rock slides, and no business. It's going to be a challenging year.''
