WHEN the people remaking ''The Manchurian Candidate'' needed to recreate the Kuwaiti Desert, where the film is set in part, they found the ideal spot in New Jersey. Of course.
For eight days last month, the nearly 1,000-acre Sahara Sand of Eagleswood, a sand mine in Ocean County, became the Kuwaiti desert for Paramount Pictures' remake of the 1962 motion picture. The original, starring Frank Sinatra and Angela Lansbury, was a psychological thriller involving political intrigue and flashbacks to the Korean War. The remake, directed by Jonathan Demme, sets the flashbacks during 1991, and Operation Desert Storm.
In the new film, the New Jersey mine, which supplies sand for construction projects, is to appear in a battle scene as the ''Highway of Death,'' the road from Kuwait to Iraq. Filming, with a cast and crew of about 250, including one of the stars, Denzel Washington, took place from Dec. 1 to Dec. 9. The movie also stars Meryl Streep.
The sand, in some places 60 feet deep, was littered with burned-out tanks, cars, buses and luggage that set designers bought at Habitat Thrift Store in Eagleswood, run by Habitat for Humanity of Southern Ocean County. Leigh Levin, a volunteer at the store, said the film production people wanted luggage to go on top of a bus they were going to blow up and paid about $185 for two old steamer trunks.
The movie mayhem included explosions, gun fire, simulated burning oil wells and shots fired from a helicopter. Most of the scenes were shot at night, and it got pretty cold.
''I don't think it gets this cold in Arabia,'' said Dennis Seeley, a member of the Eagleswood Volunteer Fire Company No.1, which, along with the Great Bay Regional Emergency Medical Service, Stafford Township Police and state troopers, attended the filming in case of emergencies.
The movie makers and officials of the New Jersey Motion Picture and Television Commission were concerned about local reaction. ''We didn't want the perception to be to people in the area and to military bases that there was a terrorist attack,'' particularly since helicopters were being used in the scenes, said David Schoner Jr., production coordinator for the commission. As a result, the commission informed local authorities, including officials at McGuire Air Force Base in Wrightstown, about the project before filming began, he said.
When filming was over, the crew restored the mine to its former appearance, which included undoing the new dunes they had built to hide some nearby pine trees.
Why New Jersey? Mr. Schoner said the producers had looked throughout the United States for a setting for the Kuwaiti Desert scene before deciding on the Eagleswood site, and had rejected the idea of filming in the Middle East because of cost and security issues.
The Silvi Group, owner of the mine, is based in Fairless, Penn., and has other sand mines and concrete supply companies in New Jersey and Pennsylvania. Laurence J. Silvi, one of the owners, said Paramount paid a fee to use the mine, but he refused to disclose how much.
Paramount also donated money to the volunteer fire company and to the emergency medical service. Cliff Aguado, president of the fire company, would not say how large the donation was; Raymond Urezzio, a trustee of the medical service, said the donation to his group was ''over $10,000.''
Sahara Sand is one of the biggest employers in Eagleswood, a town of about 1,500, known for duck hunting and for the local artisans who make duck decoys. During the American Revolution, cannonballs were made there.
Among the cast were four camels -- two were standbys -- who came from Animal Actors Inc. in Glen Gardner. Steve McAuliff, president of the company, said it was the first time the animals had been anywhere that even resembled a desert.
