COMPANIES that want to polish their image by putting their employees in snappy uniforms often turn to Stan Herman, the influential designer.
Stan who?
Every morning, as corporate America suits up in business attire from the likes of Ralph Lauren and Calvin Klein, armies of blue-collar workers are dressing in Stan Herman. Mr. Herman, who in more than 30 years has outfitted hundreds of thousands of employees at airlines, hotels, casinos and companies like FedEx, McDonald's and Amtrak, may be the hottest designer you've never heard of.
But the FedEx couriers on the streets surrounding his Manhattan studio sure have. He is the fashion cop who chastises them for the slightest lapse into what he calls ''schleppy dress.''
''When El Exigente walks by, they make sure they look good,'' he said, comparing himself to the choosy taste-tester in an old coffee commercial. ''Who else has that wonderful ability to walk around the city and talk to people who are wearing his clothes but didn't buy them in Bloomingdale's or Macy's?''
Such encounters are valuable field research for Mr. Herman, who is designing new uniforms for up to 80,000 FedEx workers, the first major uniform change in almost 10 years, and who is also adding items to the employee wardrobe that he designed for JetBlue.
But he has his sights on more than just workplace garb. His sleepwear is in J.C. Penney and Nordstrom stores, and over the last decade he has sold more than 2.8 million sleepwear items, including gowns, pajamas and robes, on QVC, the home-shopping network.
In the garment industry, Mr. Herman is known as the longest-running president of the powerful Council of Fashion Designers of America. Ten years ago, he brought new weight to the unsalaried position by rallying New York designers to consolidate the twice-a-year Fashion Week shows into tents in Bryant Park. And the council's annual awards night gained stature as a gala, attracting Diana, Princess of Wales, and Hollywood notables.
The designer Michael Kors recalled an event at which Mr. Herman went onstage and, wielding a full-voiced high C from his opera training, burst into the Rodgers and Hart tune ''Johnny One Note.''
''At first I was amazed he'd be so gutsy in front of jaded fashion people who have seen it all,'' he said. ''But when he opened his mouth and was actually good, it was a double surprise.''
About 33 million American workers wear uniforms, says Bernard Lepper, executive director of the National Association of Uniform Manufacturers and Distributors in Manhattan. That is nearly one out of every four people in a work force of 136.5 million.
Even so, Mr. Herman said, they have never taken to uniforms the way Europeans have. Americans view them as an affront to their individuality, he said, and so they prefer outfits that don't call attention to themselves.
''In Paris, however, a sanitation worker in a spectacular blue uniform looks bigger than his job,'' Mr. Herman said. ''In Rome, a traffic cop, with his arms waving Fiats along, is impeccably uniformed in a way that only Europeans can be; it even helps direct traffic. But the aspiration of our country is not necessarily to get into a uniform; it's to get into cashmere.''
Indeed, Americans have a history of balking at wearing uniforms they associate with a lower social class, said Valerie Steele, director of the museum at the Fashion Institute of Technology in Manhattan. In the mid-19th century, New York police officers initially refused to wear their new uniforms, which they associated with ''liveried footmen,'' she said. ''Until they were finally persuaded that their uniforms were prestigious, like naval officers', police identified themselves only by wearing a star-shaped copper shield, hence the name 'cops.'''
They were not the only ones who needed convincing. At JetBlue, where more than 5,000 crew members will wear Stan Herman designs this year, ''we had pilots who wanted a double-breasted jacket -- but it doesn't look good on men unless they're tall and slim,'' said Amy Curtis-McIntyre, vice president for marketing and sales.
She said Mr. Herman persuaded their representative, a tall, handsome pilot who had flown for the Air Force, that the jacket would not flatter everyone.
''Stan, being of a certain 5-foot-4 stature himself, says, 'Whoa, looks good on you, Top Gun, Tom Cruise,' then puts the jacket on and says, 'Can I change your mind?''' Ms. Curtis-McIntyre recalled. ''It's beautiful diplomacy.''
Mr. Herman's first brush with ill-fitting uniforms came in the Army, in Germany during the Korean War. ''I was always at the end of the line because I was the shortest,'' he said. ''By the time they got to me, they had only larges and extra larges. I looked like Mickey Rooney wearing Rock Hudson's clothes.''
He successfully auditioned for a job drawing maps by sketching on a paper bag. ''I learned to draw maps within 10 minutes,'' he said. ''I wasn't a designer yet, but I could draw things to perspective and proportion.''
MR. Herman's early fashion education came from working Saturdays at one of the fabric stores owned by his father, Sidney Herman, in Passaic, N.J.
''I was selling Butterick and Vogue sewing patterns by age 9,'' he said. ''When I'm on QVC and want to show how long a shawl is, I still automatically raise my arms and measure one yard, two yards, three, without a yardstick. It took me till I was 13 to get the proper span because my arms were too short.'' He says he learned measuring from the master, his uncle Arnold, who had lost a hand to a grenade in World War I.
Mr. Herman made his foray into fashion in the 1960's with his Mr. Mort line of women's clothing. His call to uniforms came in 1971, when Avis asked him to revamp its rental agents' outfits.
What if he had carte blanche to design his heart's desire?''I'd give anything to design an Aston Martin,'' he said without hesitation. ''A car, like a beautifully fit suit, is the most creative message about how you produce style every year. When I see a car, I see a waistline, I see a belt line, I see the same proportions you see in a suit or dress. I see the slope of a windshield as the curve of a sleeve.''
If that's beauty, then are there any uniform bloopers to avoid?
''There are colors I would not do,'' he said. ''I guess I'm antibrown. Besides, U.P.S. is in brown. I'm a FedEx designer.''
Private Sector
