THE worst weather in decades, a stagnant economy and the uncertainty of the lingering Iraq war all combined to bring Connecticut's tourism industry fewer visitors and less money last summer.
A study released last month by the State Office of Tourism found that 10.3 million tourists visited the state last summer, down 9 percent from the year before, and the money spent by tourists fell to $890 million, down 13 percent.
But not all the news was negative.
''When people did come, they stayed a little longer, and they came back for multiple visits,'' said Edward Dombroskas, executive director of the tourism office. ''No part of the state did particularly well or badly. They all had ups and downs.''
Tourism is important, said Stanley McMillen, an economist at the University of Connecticut, because it has had a higher job growth rate than manufacturing and the finance, insurance and real estate sector and is second in output and sales growth. Tourism has been the source of more than $10 billion in annual revenues, including spin-off effects, he said. And more than 146,000 residents, almost 9 percent of the state's work force, owe their jobs to tourism.
Non-traditional attractions and ''those properties that offered a new experience did better than the traditional attractions,'' Mr. Dombroskas said. ''Consumers were definitely looking for something new and improved.'' Tourists were avoiding the major attractions,'' he added, ''and they were doing more wandering around, going to restaurants, spending at retail establishments, visiting historical sites, cultural sites, not necessarily the typical sites like Mystic Seaport or the aquariums.''
The attractions that could buck the overall trend and increase attendance and revenues ''paid closer attention to their customers and strategically went after the kinds of people most likely to come to Connecticut and to enjoy the attraction,'' said John Bourget, president of Witan Intelligence Strategies of Avon, the company that did the study both this year and last year. Several successful attractions targeted the New York-New Jersey metropolitan area, Connecticut's primary target, offering packages of activities and events in a distinct geographic area of the state geared to several specific demographic groups, Mr. Bourget explained. He said most single-focus attractions that offered little that was new saw their attendance decline.
The report shows that visitors to the state's main attractions from June through part of September averaged about three to a party and spent $653, about 9 percent less than the $721 each party spent in the summer of 2002. However, each party stayed longer -- 2.7 days per party on average -- with 46 percent staying overnight, 6 percent more than in 2002, and 14 percent staying about a week, a 34 percent increase.
Nationally, tourism suffered a ''huge'' decline, ''but we didn't get hit as hard as some of the other states,'' Mr. Bourget said.
Connecticut got off easier in part because it studies market details carefully, Mr. Bourget said. ''We can market more efficiently, because we understand better.''
Traffic at Mystic Aquarium, Mystic Seaport, and the Essex steam train did not live up to state expectations, Mr. Dombroskas said, unlike the New England Air Museum in Windsor Locks, Lake Compounce in Bristol, and Boats Books and Brushes with Taste, the annual three-day literary, art, maritime, and food festival at New London's waterfront in September.
The air museum, featuring hangars filled with historic military and nonmilitary aircraft, had a 4 percent gain in attendance after increases in each of the summer's three months, the only monitored attraction to do so.
Michael Speciale, the museum director, said one reason was the opening of a new building on June 1, a third hangar to show a B-29 Super Fortress, the biggest bomber of World War II.
''It's an impressive sight, and we tell a good story of how the airplane was used in the war in the Pacific,'' Mr. Speciale said. ''We got quite a bit of publicity from that.''
At Lake Compounce, business was up 14 percent for the summer season, with increases in every category, said Richard Bisi, the former marketing director, now a park consultant.
Group catering jumped 13 percent, Mr. Bisi said, with more than 350 companies visiting the park. Small-group business from summer camps, town recreation groups, and churches was up 10 percent. Math and science education-group business grew 16 percent.
''A former teacher put together six different educational programs for grades K-12, and we marketed this to teachers in Connecticut, New York, and Massachusetts,'' Mr. Bisi said.
The third annual Boats Books and Brushes with Taste festival, held Sept. 5, 6, and 7, brought in 110,000 to 120,000 visitors, Nancy Tyler, the event manager, said, up from 80,000 in September 2002 and 8,000 in 2001 just after Sept. 11.
It's a brand-new festival every year, she said. ''The only thing that stays the same is the harbor and the setting.''
What stays the same for the lodging and restaurant sectors of the summer tourism market is the uncertainty born on Sept. 11, 2001, and nurtured by the shaky, if improving, economy.
''Historically, Connecticut was sold out, but in the past couple of years, that's not the case,'' said Simon Flynn, executive director of the Connecticut Lodging Association as well as president of the Connecticut Restaurant Association. ''There is an awful lot of competition.''
The Madison Beach Hotel -- a 35-room shoreline landmark from the early 1800's, 20 miles north of New Haven on Long Island Sound -- has felt the competition, but not during the summer.
''In the summer we're all sold out, and that happens year after year,'' said Roben Bagdasarian, the co-owner. ''Our weekends used to be sold out from the first of May until the end of October, but this year it didn't sell out.'' Also, he said, the corporate conference business was off 50 percent since the Sept. 11 attacks.
''Hotel budgets are strained, and they have to look carefully as to whether they can hire or sustain some positions,'' Mr. Flynn said. ''And it affects the restaurants dramatically.''
What needs to be done, he said, ''is aggressive marketing, but unfortunately, the state has cut back on tourism marketing. So, making people aware of the value in Connecticut is an increasingly difficult battle.''
Because of Connecticut's state budget deficit, lawmakers have cut the Office of Tourism's budget from $4.22 million for fiscal year 2003 to $3.96 million for fiscal year 2004, which ends June 30. Also, the 11 regional tourism districts were consolidated into five, and their total promotions budget was cut in half.
''The return on investment is staggering,'' Mr. Bourget said. ''So if you're going to cut, you don't want to kill the goose that lays the golden egg.'' ''
Tourism spins off $51 for every $1 the state spends on marketing Connecticut, Mr. Dombroskas said.
The state will no longer advertise in the Boston and Philadelphia markets, Mr. Dombroskas said, although they recently began sending more tourists to Connecticut. Instead, he said, the state will concentrate on metropolitan New York.
One bright spot is evidence from British tour operators and airlines that British tourists will resume travel to Connecticut and the rest of New England next summer after largely abandoning the region in 2002.
The United States is ''on sale,'' said Paul Wade of London, a travel writer. ''The dollar is at an all-time low, and you get 25 percent more in dollars for a British pound than a year or so ago. At the same time, Europe has gone up in price.''
By the end of 2004, said Robert Haynes of the London-based tour operator America Direct, ''we are fairly confident that British visitor levels will be above what they were before 9/11.''
