Before Vlade Divac, Rik Smits and today's European big men arrived in the N.B.A., there was Swen Nater, a native of Den Helder, the Netherlands.
At 9, Nater moved to Long Beach, Calif., where he became known as the 6-foot-8 boy who couldn't play. Nater loved the game, but at Wilson High School, he was cut from the team.
''I think it was my physical education teacher who said he'd never seen anything work that hard and move that slow,'' Nater, 54, recalled in a telephone conversation last week. ''I couldn't jump, but I had a good set of hands and I could shoot. But nobody saw that or wanted to develop that, even though I was the tallest kid.''
Nater got his chance to play at Cypress College, a tiny junior college. After struggling his first season, a coach took Nater to the ghettos of Los Angeles to play in the summer.
''I got the stuffing kicked out of me a few times, but I kept coming back,'' Nater said. ''I went into the trenches and learned how to play.''
Nater became a junior-college all-American as a sophomore, then played for John Wooden at U.C.L.A., where he backed up Bill Walton.
In 1973, the 6-11 Nater was drafted by the Virginia Squires of the American Basketball Association and was sold to the San Antonio Spurs, the beginning of a productive 11-year career. With a reliable hook shot and a nose for the ball, he averaged a double-double in scoring and rebounding in seven seasons; in 1979-80, he led the N.B.A. in rebounding with 15 a game.
After playing one final season in Italy, Nater retired from basketball in 1985. He moved with his wife and two daughters to the San Diego area and built a basketball program at Christian Heritage College, leading the team to one National Christian College Athletic Association title in his nine seasons as coach, athletic director, trainer, algebra teacher and physical education teacher.
Ready to leave a job that was high on work and low on pay, Nater began working for Costco in 1995. He is now an assistant sporting goods buyer.
Since joining Costco, Nater and his wife of 30 years, Marlene, have lived in Enumclaw, Wash., a rural area in the Cascade Mountains about 40 minutes outside of Seattle. On their 10-acre ranch, they have three goats, two dogs and five cats.
Nater has produced three videos on post play. He also works at camps and is writing a book about the teaching techniques of Wooden, whom he speaks to regularly. Recently, several N.B.A. teams have contacted Nater about working with their big men. ''What I can do with big men, you wouldn't believe,'' he said.
Then and Now
