ONE of the only gay bars in the area, an establishment run by a heterosexual family, will be closing by Jan. 31.
The owner of Chetti's Roadhouse Café, at 182 Route 22, a remote strip just over the Westchester border in Putnam, said his lease was not being renewed because of disputes with his landlord involving money and the fact that the bar catered to a gay clientele.
Calls to the landlord, Jeff Butler and his lawyer, David Simon, were not returned.
Thomas Magliochetti, who worked 25 years as an underground lineman for Consolidated Edison, said he was searching for a new location so he can eventually reopen Chetti's. Until he does, Chetti's gay and lesbian customers say they will miss what has been a social lifeline, a place that caters directly to them in a suburban setting where little else does.
Kathi Meyerson, 51, who works as a bouncer at the bar, said she would miss the easygoing atmosphere of Chetti's, as well as her job, which hardly ever entailed breaking up fights. ''Maybe once or twice in three years,'' she said, ''and it was straight guys who didn't like the way someone was looking at their girlfriends.''
Mr. Magliochetti, who runs the bar with the help of his girlfriend, Barbara Merker, and his ex-wife Betty Healey, as well as his two daughters, says he knew nothing of gay life before opening the bar. He had worked second jobs at night in other people's bars, doing everything from bartending to table busing, but always wanted his own place. When the location on Route 22 became available, Mr. Magliochetti put all his savings into renting and renovating the bar before opening it in 1999.
When Brewster Station, a gay bar nearby in Brewster, closed, Mr. Magliochetti decided that it would make business sense to go after its client base. Through advertising and word of mouth, he made it known that Chetti's would be a gay bar. Although the decision shocked his family and caused some friends to ridicule him, Mr. Magliochetti said he thought the decision was smart, and also just.
''I'm a conservative guy,'' Mr. Magliochetti said, ''but everyone is a human being and everyone deserves a place to go.''
Liam Harvey and Jim Stake, partners who live in Bedford Hills, think of Chetti's as their ''gay Cheers.'' Robert, a 59-year-old from Connecticut who did not want to give his last name to preserve his privacy, said the bar was important for those who don't want to go to New York City all the time.
Ms. Meyerson said, ''It's just nice to have somewhere local to feel safe and comfortable and the guys are wonderful, though I always wanted to see a few more women here.''
The fight with the landlord is over, Mr. Magliochetti said, as he prepared to start packing up. ''I could get 30 more days but it would cost me another $1,500 in legal fees,'' he said. ''It's just not going to work.''
Mr. Magliochetti had just begun telling his patrons the bar was closing, something he had been hesitant to do while there was still hope. ''We've been afraid to let the cat out of the bag,'' Ms. Merker said. ''That's when they stop coming.''
They have been looking at sites in other towns, but aren't sure if they will find a fit, financially and emotionally. Mr. Magliochetti said his biggest worry was that even if he found a suitable site, it would probably be a year of legalities and renovation before he could reopen, and considering the vagaries of the bar business, he's not sure where his customer base will be.
He is sure of one thing. If he does open another bar, it will be in a building he owns.
''That's what I have to do,'' he said. ''Got to buy. No more mistakes.''
BUSINESS
