LITERARY OCCASIONS
Essays.
By V. S. Naipaul.
Edited by Pankaj Mishra.
202 pp. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. $24.
What a pleasure it is to read V. S. Naipaul's collection of personal and critical essays, variously published over almost 40 years and culminating in ''Two Worlds,'' his Nobel lecture of 2001. The essays themselves are largely meditations on writing and literature, evolving from Naipaul's own experience -- his background and history, his development as a writer and his observations as a reader. Quite often they overlap, the same subject matter turning up in two or three different places. And usually they do so to effect, shifting the perspective slightly, complicating the significance of the whole.
Here, for instance, is Naipaul on the subject of his early ambitions:
''The wish to be a writer didn't go with a wish or a need actually to write. It went only with the idea I had been given of the writer, a fantasy of nobility.''
''My father worshiped writing and writers. He made the vocation of the writer seem the noblest in the world; and I decided to be that noble thing.''
''I couldn't truly call myself a reader. I had never had the capacity to lose myself in a book; like my father, I could read only in little bits . . . I hadn't begun to think in any concrete way about what I might write. Yet I continued to think of myself as a writer.''
Naipaul's story itself is deeply rooted in the story of his father. In many ways, ''Literary Occasions'' is a testament to their shared love affair with language. Naipaul's father was a journalist. He also published a collection of short stories (''I read every new typescript my father made as the story grew. It was the greatest imaginative experience of my childhood''). Father and son also shared a sort of hysteria -- a nervous illness that in the father had shown up as a ''fear of extinction'' and in the son as ''a panic about failing to be what I should be'' (''I was eaten up with anxiety. It was the emotion I felt I had always known'').
In a sense, it was the circumscription of his father's life that fed Naipaul's own urgent need to escape Trinidad (''To become a writer, that noble thing, I had thought it necessary to leave. Actually to write, it was necessary to go back. It was the beginning of self-knowledge''). Again and again he considers the small escapes that his father made, the failures that followed, and the despair. He writes of the limitations of village life, of Trinidad's Indians and of the loss of India itself in the diaspora. He writes too of his grandparents, who came to Trinidad from India, of the sad history of Trinidad's aboriginal peoples and of the island's cruel colonial history. And to all this he brings an exacting eye and a sort of broad philosophical despair. But never does he descend to the odious singsong of the self-righteous. He is far too honest a man, too independent a thinker and too intelligent a writer for that sort of thing.
In many ways it is as if Naipaul cannot get over having left Trinidad in the first place, or having managed to stay afloat through all the years of struggle in London while he was establishing himself as a writer. The hard-won success that followed is not nearly as mysterious to him: it was worked for; it was earned. And this is clearly a matter of fierce pride. In book after book, Naipaul is described as having ''followed no other profession'' than that of writer (at least one unhappy stint in the academy notwithstanding). The essays in this volume go a long way toward explaining this pride and this refusal.
And yet never is the prose self-inflating. One of Naipaul's most endearing qualities is his unfailing impulse toward honesty. It is manifested in the intelligent candor with which he lays bare his subjects, never excepting himself. The writing itself is a wonder of clarity, complex ideas given shape in simple English, and achieving that most difficult of tasks -- having writer and reader seem simultaneously to be making the same journey. With consummate skill, Naipaul will introduce a character or a scene, leave it behind for 20 pages or so while he takes off in a different direction, return to it to add a few more brushstrokes, and then, somehow, after several such loops, arrive at the complete picture with the reader still at his side. It is a masterly game of cat's cradle.
Behind the work -- fueling it in a way -- is a quality of what one might call rage. It is the sort of impulse, the sort of uncompromising urge, to get at the truth through language that informs so much of what is excellent and enduring in literature. ''I could see the young Tolstoy moving, as if out of need, to the discovery of fiction: starting as a careful descriptive writer . . . and then, as though seeing an easier and a better way of dealing with the horrors of the Sebastopol siege, doing a simple fiction, setting characters in motion, and bringing the reality closer.''
Inevitably, some of the pieces in this volume shine less brightly. After the wonders of the prologue (''Reading and Writing, a Personal Account'') and Part 1 -- essays written largely around himself, his father, their history in Trinidad, their love affair with words -- Part 2, which contains literary essays on other subjects, seems to alter the tone and thrust of the collection. And yet there are gems to be found here, too. In a fraction of a paragraph on Kipling, for instance, Naipaul manages to distill what other writers would extrude into a full-length volume: ''The club-writer always needed the club, the common points of reference; he needed the legend, which perhaps his own stories had helped to create. . . . A story by Chekhov is complete in itself; a story by Kipling isn't.''
Two of the shorter essays in Part 1 (''Jasmine'' and ''East Indian'') contain subject matter that is more fully realized (rather than advanced) in ''Two Worlds,'' the beautiful and moving Nobel speech that reads rather like an elegy. And there are puzzles. In his essay on Conrad, for instance, which was published in 1974, Naipaul declares, ''The novel as a form no longer carries conviction'' -- an idea he reiterates elsewhere. And yet he himself continued to write and publish novels over the next 30 years. Why? One wishes that he would address this anomaly.
Still, these are all small quibbles, only able to be made by comparison with the ideal. No other living writer is able as brilliantly as V. S. Naipaul both to clarify and to enhance the mystery of writing. And yet ''Literary Occasions'' constitutes anything but a fairy tale of success. Rather, it is a complex testament not only to the struggle of one man against great odds to be ''that noble thing,'' but also to the place and purpose of the writer in the world: the ''triumph over darkness.''
Lynn Freed's most recent novel is ''House of Women.'' Her story collection, ''The Curse of the Appropriate Man,'' will be published this fall.
