Bring up ethnic identity in the Coury family and prepare to sit a while.
Joseph M. Coury IV most often refers to himself as Lebanese-American, even though, after two generations of intermarriage, he is one-quarter Lebanese.
His cousins, Mike and Bashir, first-generation American twin sons of an immigrant father, tend to call themselves simply Lebanese.
Cousin Rebecca readily extols the wisdom of using the term Arab American, because, she said, she believes that it is more politically powerful. Uncle David, whose Lebanese blood is mixed with Hungarian and German, has always simply referred to himself as white.
''I could easily conceal it,'' Mr. Coury, 20, said. ''No one would know I was Arab American if I didn't bring it up. But it's a whole identity thing. I have different ethnicities in me, but this is the one that feels tangible. It's important to me, and it's something I want people to know and understand about me.''
Last month, the Census Bureau released its first report on Americans of Arab ancestry, and Mr. Coury was among those thrilled to be counted. The population figures in the report, taken from the 2000 census, have been widely disputed. The bureau counted 1.2 million Arab Americans, roughly one-third of the more than three million estimated by most Arab American organizations.
The experience of the Coury family illustrates one facet of why characterizing such a diverse and fluid population is not easy. The ethnic umbrella of Arab Americans includes generations-old long-assimilated families, as well as continuing waves of new immigrants, all with varying religious, cultural and political traditions.
Because the ethnic group bears no official classification like the one used to count Hispanics, establishing ethnicity relies heavily on self-identification.
The Coury family traces its roots in America back four generations, to Joseph M. Coury, who in 1898 at the age of 12 left his small village near Sidon, a southern Lebanese port city, and stowed away on a boat to the United States, where he became a coal miner.
Over generations, through assimilation and intermarriage, the family's ties to its Lebanese ancestry have faded. Few people in the large Midwestern clan speak Arabic. Many no longer remember the meanings behind the Lebanese landscapes and Aramaic script painted in the ornately decorated sanctuary of the family's Maronite church. Some family members now identify generically as white.
Mr. Coury is among those in the younger generation of his family who are reasserting the family's ethnic identity.
When saying his family name, he uses a throaty Arabic pronunciation with a rolling ''r'' in the middle that sounds more like Khourry than the Anglicized pronunciation, Cory. As head of the Persian and Arab Students Association at Miami University of Ohio, where he is a junior, he led and won a push to have the university offer Arabic language courses. On forms and in student groups, he makes a point to characterize himself as Lebanese-American or Arab American.
His ethnic sensibility has become, perhaps, more acute, Mr. Coury said, since the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, altered the reality and perceptions of many Arab Americans. But he emphasized that his approach to identity formed in his youth after new immigrants joined his family.
It was a no-brainer, he said, to write ''Lebanese'' on his census form, along with Irish and Cherokee, reflecting his mother's background. It was only because he received the census long form, however, that his written response would be counted.
Although the 2000 census allowed respondents, for the first time, to choose more than one race in identifying themselves, the change did not provide a way for Arab Americans to distinguish themselves, because Americans of Arab ancestry -- whether Lebanese, Moroccan, Yemeni, Palestinian or any Arabic-speaking group -- are considered white and are counted only by race, not ethnicity.
Only the long form, which went to roughly one household in six -- Mr. Coury's being one of them -- included a question that let respondents write in their ethnic origins in a way that would be counted. That information became the source for the Census report.
Several trends documented in the report are easy to see in the Coury family. People with Lebanese roots made up the largest percentage of Arab Americans, accounting for 37 percent of the population.
Like Mr. Coury, 28 percent of those who listed Arab ancestry on the long form also listed a non-Arab ethnicity.
The Census Bureau report showed a 62 percent increase from 1990 in the number of people who identified themselves as Arab or Arabic, rather than by national origin, an indicator that a pan-ethnic identity may be taking shape.
Although the report documented significant increases in the Arab American population over the last 20 years, it did not detail reasons for the increase. A large factor, demographic experts have said, has been waves of immigration tied to social and political upheaval in Arab countries.
The Coury family received new immigrant members after the start of the war in Lebanon in 1975. Two of Mr. Coury's aunts married Lebanese immigrants who fled the fighting. They had children, and throughout the 1980's were joined in Ohio by more members of the extended family from Lebanon.
As a result, Mr. Coury was raised with first cousins who spoke Arabic, ate Lebanese food, listened to Lebanese music and kept up with Lebanese culture and politics.
When the first Joseph Coury came to the United States, immigrants were encouraged to become as generically American as possible, expressing their cultural traditions mainly within their own homes and enclaves. By the time the fourth Joe Coury grew up, the social and political environment had changed.
Mr. Coury's 38-year-old uncle, David Coury, remembers a burgeoning political sensibility in his family when he was growing up, especially in the 70's, around the start of war in Lebanon. But as a third-generation member of a family that by then was very assimilated into mainstream American culture, he was unmoved by the new sensibility.
''I never wanted to learn Arabic, never wanted to visit Lebanon,'' David Coury said. ''I kind of felt it was a culture that was forced on me.''
Mr. Coury, the nephew, by contrast, quickly sought out the Persian-Arab Students Association at Miami University, an organization that did not even exist when David Coury attended the school in the mid-80's.
And Mr. Coury was not alone in expressing his Arab identity. His cousins Mike and Bashir Faddoul, 18, whose father is a recent immigrant from Lebanon, joined the Middle Eastern Students Association this year as freshmen at Loyola University Chicago. Another cousin, Rebecca Abou-Chedid, 25, the daughter of another Lebanese newcomer, took a job with the Arab American Institute after graduating from Cornell in 2002.
''This is an incredible moment in history, where there is a real crystallization of Arab American identity,'' said Ms. Abou-Chedid, who jokes that she has become the ''professional Arab American'' in the family. ''It's a critical moment to define how we're seen and heard in the world.''
