The eagle has no place to land.
A huge cast-iron statue of a bald eagle that once graced the former Grand Central Depot cannot find a proper perch at the newly polished Grand Central Terminal.
Three years ago, the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, which owns the terminal, rescued the forgotten eagle from a monastery in Garrison, N.Y., hoping to return it home. After spending $70,000 to refurbish the statue, the agency moved it to the Croton-Harmon rail yard, where it has sat since.
An earlier plan called for the eagle to be installed inside the terminal, on the balcony that overlooks the main concourse. That fell through after the Michael Jordan's steakhouse there refused to give up 40 seats for the 1.5-ton statue, which has a 13-foot wingspan.
Then the mayor of Yonkers offered to adopt the eagle and place it atop the Metro-North station on Main Street. ''Although smaller in scale, this building parallels the splendor of the current Grand Central Terminal,'' John D. Spencer wrote in a letter to Metro-North Railroad in October.
The offer was respectfully rejected.
The eagle was part of a flock of 10 or more (no one knows the exact number) that adorned the depot's roofline and were scattered to the four winds when the old station was razed in 1910. One eagle was salvaged from a backyard in Bronxville, N.Y., and placed at the Lexington Avenue entrance to the Grand Central Market in 1999.
The transit authority is now seeking to install the Garrison eagle above the terminal's southwest entrance, at 42nd Street and Vanderbilt Avenue. The Landmarks Preservation Commission approved a temporary installation in November.
But some are objecting. ''This would be travesty,'' said David Morrison, a self-described eagle buff from Plainville, N.Y., who published a 32-page booklet, ''The Cast Iron Eagles of Grand Central Station.'' ''It would aversely affect the view of Grand Central that Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis fought so hard to preserve.''
Tom Kelly, the authority's spokesman, said that no final decision has been made and that other sites are being considered. But any site would probably raise concerns from preservationists.
''I would be curious to see where the eagle won't interfere with the architecture,'' said Frank E. Sanchis III, executive director of the Municipal Art Society. ''On the other hand, they might come up with a place.''
DENNY LEE
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: MIDTOWN  Correction:  January 18, 2004, Sunday  An article in the Neighborhood Report pages last Sunday about an eagle statue from the old Grand Central Depot misstated a proposal by the city of Yonkers to reinstall it. The site offered was in a park next to the Yonkers Metro-North station, not atop it.
