I BEGIN this story about Paris beauty with a photograph, taken 41 years ago, of three little girls seated at a picnic table on a summer afternoon in Ohio. I am the girl on the right, a tomboy in overalls with messy blond hair and a newspaper spread (upside down) before me, a pencil in my hand. The girl in the middle is Peggy Burris -- Margaret Burris, though she was a born Peggy -- and if you look closely, her nails are painted red. The girl on the left is Janie Timmons, the shyest among us, her face hidden by a doll.
The photograph, taken by my father when we were 5, stunningly revealed our destinies. Janie would look after the interests of children in public day care centers. Peggy would acquire even more polish as an airline stewardess before settling into married life. And I would enter the ink-stained world of newspapers, where, against the more permanent of my ideals, I became a fashion writer.
Because all of us carry some baggage from our past, I seldom arrive in Paris, where work takes me four or five times a year, without some feeling of being an ugly duckling or, at any rate, a small-town person. No doubt it is for this reason -- I can think of no other -- that I stay in the same hotel, in the same room, and consider the area around the Place Vendôme my neighborhood. One of my neighbors is Joel Rosenthal, a former New Yorker who owns a jewelry shop called JAR in a small passage nearby, and one day he mentioned a Mr. Ho who performed a magical pedicure. It astonished me that my friend, whose tweeds and corduroys give him the appearance of a New England professor, would know of such a person, much less go to him.
But then, Joel is a repository of information, his clients being worldly and well heeled and capable of discussing more than the price of rubies. Since he seemed up to the minute in the beauty department, I asked him if he also knew of a facialist named Joëlle Ciocco.
''Oh, yeah,'' he said quickly. ''Everybody goes to her.''
By now an article was forming in my mind along the lines of an old Confidential schlock feature: ''Inside Paris: Beauty Secrets Revealed!'' A telephone call to Fiona DaRin in the Paris office of Condé Nast confirmed that Ms. Ciocco and Jean Baptiste Ho were ''definitely on the cult list.'' What is more, she suggested that I add the name of a colorist, Christophe Robin. ''He does Deneuve's hair,'' she said.
Later I rang Joel's buzzer. ''Oh, yeah,'' he said. ''He's the guy in the Rue du Mont Thabor. Everybody goes to him.''
I went first to Mr. Robin, whose tiny salon is located in the courtyard of a building. A small jungle of plants framed the door, and inside were two sinks with two women's heads in them, a couple of chairs and a vanity with a lamp in the form of a French poodle and many photos stuck in the edge of the mirror. The place had the warm atmosphere of a kitchen, and Mr. Robin himself was funny and unpretentious. He has had the salon for seven years; and he does indeed do Catherine Deneuve's color, and Vanessa Paradis's, but he didn't dwell on this.
As he took me outside to look at my hair in natural light, I told him that I wanted the color to remain dark but that perhaps it was too dark, owing (cringe) to a box job at home. Mr. Robin, who speaks English, agreed that the color was hard but that it should stay dark. Then he took me inside and planted me at the vanity, where I buckled down to a copy of Hello! while he applied the color.
The place has an antifashion feel, and Mr. Robin says he is not interested in anything larger. ''Maybe when I start to get bored,'' he said with a laugh. I have to say that going to him was the most rewarding of the three beauty experiences I had in Paris. He worked lighter shades of brown into my hair -- but underneath, so the effect was natural. Mr. Robin, whose fees range from $312 to $500 (depending on the process), does only color, though he has people who will cut your hair, massage your feet or do a manicure.
In France, there is something called a medical pedicure, which Mr. Ho offers in an office on one of those racy streets off the Champs-Élysées. It is more thorough than a beauty pedicure and takes about an hour (no nail polish is used). Mr. Ho charges $185. As I boarded one of the biggest recliners I've ever seen, Mr. Ho took my feet gently in his hands and studied them. I asked him what he thought, expecting him to say that heavy instruments would be required. Instead he said, ''I know that you don't wear too many pointy shoes.'' This was true.
As Mr. Ho clipped my toenails and cleaned under them, I was impressed by the lightness of his touch. By comparison, a salon pedicure is painful. And instead of removing dead skin with clippers, he used a miniature scalpel to scrape around the nails. ''Clippers leave tiny holes that cause the skin to grow more hard,'' he said. He sanded the bottoms of my feet with a wooden paddle, putting some muscle into it, and then buffed the nails with a roll of chamois. He figured he had removed about four ounces of dead skin. I wiggled my immaculate toes. They felt about a pound lighter.
I was ready for my facial. Ms. Ciocco is an exuberant Frenchwoman who creates her own cleansers and says things like, ''My job is to be the Sherlock Holmes of your skin!'' She had come with high billing from people at Barneys, which sells her products, but I became dubious as she spread a creamy substance on my face, saying it was a blend of marshmallow and grapefruit.
''Marshmallow?'' I said.
''From the plant of a marshmallow,'' she reassured me.
''I didn't know marshmallows came from a plant,'' I murmured.
I've been to a number of facialists in my years in Paris. I went to one woman who used a vacuuming device to unclog my pores. It was powerful, too. But, at a cost of $560 for an initial two-hour visit with Ms. Ciocco (which, in my case, was interrupted by a receptionist saying that the chauffeur of the next client had phoned to see if she was running late), my natural skepticism was tested. Yes, my skin glowed afterward, but the small-town girl in me asked, ''At what price?''
If You Go
THESE are some of the popular spots among insiders in the fashion and beauty industry in Paris.
CHRISTOPHE ROBIN -- 7 Rue du Mont Thabor; (33-1) 42-60-99-15.  JEAN BAPTISTE HO -- 3 Rue Washington; (33-6) 81-49-36-65.  JOËLLE CIOCCO -- 8 Place de la Madeleine; (33-1) 42-60-58-80.
Other personal favorites include:
MASSATO -- 5 Rue Volney; (33-1) 42-96-10-04. Ask for Diego Dos Santos for hair; a cut and blow dry is $106. For a standard manicure, $31, ask for Laurence Manzano.
CARITA -- 11 Rue du Faubourg St.-Honoré; (33-1) 44-94-11-11; a full-service salon.
