SETON HALL 71, ST. JOHN'S 54
Seton Hall was dragged into playing the scrapping and grabbing style of basketball that St. John's clings to but that most teams try to avoid. Yet as yesterday's game wore on, Seton Hall became more comfortable, outrunning, outhustling and easing away from the Red Storm.
''They just play scrappy, grabbing, holding, pushing and they play hard; of course you are going to be forced to act the way they act and you do the same thing,'' Andre Barrett, Seton Hall's senior point guard, said.
It was the first Big East game this season for Seton Hall, which was 10-2 in nonconference play. The two losses were to ranked opponents.
Pounding away until St. John's surrendered, Seton Hall beat the Red Storm at its own game, winning, 71-54, at Madison Square Garden.
With the margin at 11 points with 6 minutes 37 seconds remaining, Seton Hall used offensive rebounds to score on five of its final seven possessions, crashing past St. John's, which had difficulty scoring.
''We felt that if we could get a couple more shots, they were ready to crumble,'' Marcus Toney-El, a Seton Hall senior forward, said. ''That's the mentality you've got to have. No disrespect to them, but if you feel as though you're steamrolling, you hope the next big play you make is the straw that's going to break the camel's back.''
It was easy for Seton Hall to see the light and for St. John's (4-8, 0-2) to see none.
The Pirates (11-2, 1-0) have won eight consecutive games. St. John's has had little go right this season, and its competitive fight withers when nothing seems to be going its way.
As a 10-point deficit (55-45) ballooned to 20 in the closing minutes, St. John's went more than seven minutes with only one field goal.
''It was new territory for our guys,'' Kevin Clark, St. John's interim coach, said. ''We've been five games of playing hard and scrapping to the end. You get beat on a few plays and your energy level does sink.''
Barrett, who seemed to single-handedly lift the Pirates out of this sluggish game, was the difference yesterday. Barrett finished with 21 points and shot 7 of 12 from the field, 4 of 6 from 3-point range.
In the first half, neither team seemed capable of mounting an offense. The Pirates converted 32.1 percent of their shots, which was better than St. John's, which hit 27 percent and was 0 for 8 from 3-point range.
The lone bright spot for the Red Storm was the play off the bench of the freshman Lamont Hamilton, who finished with 14 points and 8 rebounds in 25 minutes.
''Every time we've been in the Garden against St. John's, it's been a little bit of an ugly offensive game for us over the years,'' Seton Hall Coach Louis Orr said. ''I give our guys credit. Andre, he pretty much carried us offensively, especially in the stretch, where we separated ourselves. Defense and rebounding give us a chance to win the game. When we needed some buckets, when we needed to score, Andre made some big plays.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
