ONCE, you could rely on stereotypes, at least when it came to best picture awards. For years, the Los Angeles Film Critics Association would pick a sentimental movie or a special-effects spectacle like ''Crouching Tiger, Hidden Dragon.'' The National Society of Film Critics would choose a work seen by few people who were not themselves members of the National Society of Film Critics.
The New York Film Critics Circle, which took on airs of Camelot by adding the word Circle to its name in 1973, would out-snob everybody with a choice like ''Amarcord.'' The dependability of the exercise and the range of the results provided fairly reliable indicators of where the Academy Award for best picture was headed, thereby freeing the general public to concentrate on other matters, like how sheer is the material in Halle Berry's dress.
This year, the system seems to have fallen apart. It was weird enough that the New York critics chose ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' for best picture. On its face, the fantasy epic seems a bit too popular for those critics. But the real shocker came this week, when the Los Angeles critics -- perhaps sensing a chance to erase their reputation for choosing movies about space aliens who enjoy peanut butter candies or battle -- picked ''American Splendor.'' The film, also chosen by the National Society of Film Critics, is an adaptation of autobiographical works by a comic book author, and its theatrical distribution and box office take were significantly below that of ''Lord of the Rings.''
''Just because we're in Hollywood doesn't mean we just support the big Hollywood films,'' said Todd McCarthy, chief film critic for Variety. The outcome, he said, ''defies certain conventional thinking about the two groups,'' referring to East and West Coast critics.
Under the old system, the Los Angeles choice was a shoo-in for an Oscar nomination while the New York choice was often destined to lose. These are confusing times, and the whole pattern may have fallen to pieces, but Ms. Berry will probably still look fine.
MICHAEL BRICK
