BANK loan mutual funds gave investors much higher returns than money market funds last year, but the loan funds also carried a higher risk.
The bank loan funds, so called because they hold bank loans and other debt of less than investment grade, currently yield 3 to 4 percent, according to Morningstar Inc., versus less than 1 percent for money market funds. Over all, bank loan funds gave investors an average total return of 10.2 percent in 2003. Most of the gain resulted from improved credit quality of the fund's holdings, which led to an increase in their price. Money market funds returned an average of 0.56 percent in 2003.
Unlike money market funds, which can be cashed in throughout the day, some bank loan funds permit withdrawals only once a month or once a quarter. And there is a much greater possibility of a loss in these funds.
Bank loan funds offer some protection against interest rate declines because the rate of the corporate loans in their portfolios is generally reset every three to six months. As a result, these funds are sometimes called floating rate funds. Typically, a loan in a fund's portfolio has an interest rate 2.5 to 3.5 percentage points higher than a base interest rate, like the London interbank offer rate, or Libor. When the base interest rate rises, the loans' rate goes up.
When credit quality declines, impairing the value of the funds' holdings, they can lose money, although losses to date generally have been modest. In 2002, the Columbia Floating Rate fund declined 0.6 percent, according to Morningstar. But last year, it gained more than 15 percent.
Geoff Blyth, vice president and investment officer with the Genesee Valley Trust Company in Pittsford, N.Y., said he includes this category of mutual fund in some portfolios he manages. ''In 2001 and 2002, there was actual principal erosion'' in some funds, he said. ''But, they pay a hefty yield.''
Because the floating rate loans are to a large extent protected against interest rate increases, some portfolio managers and financial planners say the funds can help add balance. ''We use them in large portfolios as a hedge against rising interest rates,'' said Kevin Grimes, a certified financial analyst and certified financial planner in Westborough, Mass.
Scott Page, who manages floating rate funds for Eaton Vance, said that the funds were different from bond funds, which tend to have falling returns when interest rates rise. ''We're antibond,'' he said. ''When rates go up, we go up.''
Because the loans that make up the funds' underlying portfolios are not of investment grade, careful selection of securities is important, managers say. The loans are generally secured by collateral. If the company gets into trouble, fails to make loan payments and goes out of business, those with bank loans secured by collateral usually get the first chance at the assets of a company.
Christine McConnell, who manages the $890 million Fidelity Floating Rate High Income fund, says that ''senior ranking of the debt reduces the credit risk and maximizes recovery'' of the loan if the issuing company goes bankrupt.
Steven C. Miller, managing director of Standard &amp; Poor's LCD, a unit of the rating agency that monitors creditworthiness of floating rate loans, said default rates, a measure of how many companies have stopped paying interest, have been declining. He said that the rate stood at 2.3 percent in November, compared with 4.5 percent at the end of 2002. It reached a high of 7.3 percent at the end of 2000.
The Eaton Vance Prime Rate Reserves fund, which began in 1989, when bank loans were traded infrequently, is among the oldest in the field, according to Morningstar. It allows only quarterly redemptions of investments.
FUND managers at many of these funds have sometimes had difficulty pricing assets daily, which would lead to problems in selling securities if investors withdrew money abruptly.
But the market for the funds' underlying securities has expanded, and some relatively new funds, like Fidelity Floating Rate High Income, allow daily redemptions. So do some other Eaton Vance funds. Ms. McConnell, of the Fidelity fund, which started in 2000, said the fund tried to offer investors ''transparency and liquidity.'' Fidelity charges a fee of 1 percent on redemptions made within 60 days of purchase.
Over all, total expense ratios for the funds vary from 0.9 percent for Fidelity Floating Rate to 2.9 percent for Columbia Floating Rate Advantage C, according to Morningstar.
