He described himself as the warmup act, and a recovering politician, still ''on step nine,'' and for most of a packed political rally here Saturday, he stood in silent support. But when Al Gore spoke out on behalf of Howard Dean, standing beside him, he roared, and a welcoming crowd roared back.
''It is a feeling that is contagious, a feeling of empowerment,'' Mr. Gore told his audience at the University of Dubuque near the end of a two-day campaign swing through Iowa on behalf of the man who wants the job he came so close to getting. ''We the people still have the power, if we're willing to get involved.''
No one will ever confuse Mr. Gore with Harold Hill, the fast-talking salesman of ''The Music Man.'' But Mr. Gore spent this weekend stumping to beat the band for Dr. Dean in Dubuque, Des Moines, Davenport and other parts of Professor Hill's old Iowa territory, and having a fine time.
''Democracy is a team sport,'' Mr. Gore told a small crowd at South Woods High School in West Des Moines on Friday night, low-key and casual in a blazer, plaid shirt and slacks, his Tennessee drawl a bit thicker than it was in his Washington years, his smile a bit easier. ''And the Dean campaign has been successful because it has brought people into the fold and has correctly communicated the message that it is all about you.''
For a few bittersweet hours, though, it was also about Mr. Gore, who has returned to the presidential campaign trail in a supporting role after his own ill-fated star-turn four years ago, when he carried Iowa by 4,144 votes in the general election.
Old supporters hugged him and rushed to pose for pictures without the buffer of the Secret Service, and youthful Deaniacs cheered him for endorsing Dr. Dean last month.
In the rally here, Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who endorsed Dr. Dean on Friday, reminded the faithful that Mr. Gore ''got more Democratic votes than any Democrat that ever ran for president of the United States.'' It was a point lost on few of Mr. Gore's listeners.
''I always thought he was quite a gentleman,'' said Peggy Boyd, a self-employed artist and author in West Des Moines, who came with her husband, Mark, a sales engineer. They were Gore voters four years ago and support Dr. Dean this time because, Mr. Boyd said: ''We want a change in Washington. It's been a good old boy club. This time, the Democrats realize they're going to have to be a little tougher about it.''
Sherry Barrett, a career management consultant who originally hoped Mr. Gore would run again, came to hear him at the high school with her 17-year-old daughter, Alysse Henkel, in part because she was ''still on the fence'' about Dr. Dean. Mr. Gore's support made her sit up and listen, but she said, ''I still have some research to do.''
Mr. Gore and his small entourage went to commercial river cities in eastern Iowa like Burlington, where he did well in 2000 and past which he sailed on his campaign kickoff cruise after the Democratic Convention. He later joined Mr. Harkin and Dr. Dean here, and was to wind up at a rally with Dr. Dean in Mason City, near the Minnesota border, the hometown of the author of ''The Music Man,'' Meredith Willson.
Speaking Saturday morning to a crowd at Big Muddy's Bar and Grill, a restaurant in Burlington, Mr. Gore made fun of his changed status. ''I traveled eight years on Air Force Two and now I have to take off my shoes to get on an airplane,'' he said.
On the way from Burlington to Davenport, Mr. Gore made an impromptu stop for lunch at a Mexican restaurant in Muscatine, where the Dean campaign is working hard to organize Hispanic voters, who were a scant presence in the 2000 caucuses but have significantly increased in the state since.
On Friday night, Mr. Gore sounded much more sober themes.
''This country, in my opinion, cannot continue on the path that the Bush-Cheney administration has charted for America,'' he told his listeners in West Des Moines. ''When I say we need to take back our country it's not only taking it back from the special interests and the politics as usual, but also from the wrong-headed, misguided policies of the Bush-Cheney administration.''
Mr. Gore largely avoided exchanges with reporters. He did, however, respond to a question about whether Iowans would take offense at Dr. Dean's comments in a television interview four years ago in which he dismissed caucuses as dominated by special interests. Mr. Gore said that Senator Harkin's endorsement, with its declaration that Iowans preferred an occasional misstep to canned campaign oratory, would lay any concerns to rest.
Mr. Gore should know. He skipped the Iowa caucuses in his first presidential campaign in 1988, deriding the caucus system as ''madness.'' Twelve years later, he easily defeated former Senator Bill Bradley here.
''I'm a veteran of the '88 campaign, and Iowans know that when you get out here and find out what these caucuses are really about, you fall in love with them,'' Mr. Gore said Friday night.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER VICE PRESIDENT
