Tom Daschle, the Democratic leader of the Senate, says he has a motto for his campaigns: ''Only the paranoid survive.'' Now he is going to have to be more paranoid than ever.
Mr. Daschle is facing what could be the toughest campaign of his career, against John Thune, a former Republican member of the House and a close ally of President Bush, in South Dakota, where Mr. Bush is hugely popular. As Democratic leader, Mr. Daschle comes out swinging against the president every chance he gets.
With Mr. Thune's entry into the race this week, the question of how Mr. Daschle will juggle the conflicting jobs of Senate candidate and Senate leader has generated intense speculation on Capitol Hill.
Will he be more cautious, mindful that his attacks on the Bush administration might be used against him? Will he, as some Democrats fear, pay more attention to winning his race than unifying his caucus? Or will he, as some suggest, quietly cede some leadership responsibilities as he tends to matters at home?
Mr. Daschle insists not much will change.
''I've been involved in other races, and I have found it far less of a challenge than most people might think,'' he said, adding that he would neither shy away from criticizing the president when he felt it was warranted nor cede any leadership roles. ''What I have said to my people in South Dakota is that being the Democratic leader of the United States Senate allows me to put South Dakota's agenda on the national agenda.''
Senator Daschle did that rather adroitly on Wednesday, when he called a news conference to demand that the White House immediately require country-of-origin labeling for supermarket beef. The issue is important to South Dakota ranchers, and Mr. Daschle, by dint of his position as Democratic leader, drew a big crowd of reporters and made headlines on Thursday.
''The timing was perfect with mad cow disease,'' said Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana, who is retiring. ''Who else can do that?''
Yet both Republicans and Democrats agree that the candidacy of Mr. Thune, who lost to South Dakota's junior senator, Tim Johnson, by just 524 votes in 2002, puts Mr. Daschle in a difficult spot.
''A real challenge'' is how Mr. Breaux described it.
''A delicate balancing act,'' said Senator Trent Lott, the former Republican leader.
Rarely have party leaders faced such stiff competition at home. Speaker Tom Foley, Democrat of Washington, famously lost re-election in a 1994 House race. Senator Everett Dirksen of Illinois, the Republican leader, faced a tough challenge in 1962, but survived. The last time a sitting party leader in the Senate lost a bid for re-election was more than a half-century ago, in 1952, when Senator Ernest McFarland, the Democratic leader, lost to Barry M. Goldwater, the Arizona Republican.
Mr. Daschle, who at 56 has been Democratic leader since 1994, insists he is prepared. He has already raised $3.7 million -- Mr. Thune is starting from scratch -- and his aides say they intend to raise $10 million. He has run television ads since July, and assembled a team of 30 people who, he said, were ''very actively engaged'' in the campaign.
''I'm very confident of our ability to win this race, as I have been with every race we've undertaken,'' he said. ''Only the paranoid survive, but you've got to have this internal confidence and I do, because I believe that I have done a good job.''
There is every indication, though, that the race will be bruising, with Mr. Daschle's job performance the central issue. Long before Mr. Thune declared his candidacy, Republicans had tagged Mr. Daschle as ''obstructionist,'' complaining that the only time he used his power in Washington was to thwart Mr. Bush.
''You'll hear a lot of that coming from us,'' Dan Allen, a spokesman for the National Republican Senatorial Committee, said. ''President Bush won the state 60-38. He's hugely popular in South Dakota, and Daschle is the point man in the Senate in obstructing the president's agenda.''
Republicans intend to hit Mr. Daschle hard on the energy bill that failed in the Senate last year. Mr. Daschle backed the measure, and promoted a provision to expand the use of corn-based ethanol -- an issue of extreme importance to South Dakota's farmers. But many Democrats voted against the bill, and their leader did not try to stop them.
''He said that we should send him back because of his clout, but when it came to the energy bill and the ethanol that we really need in this state, he couldn't deliver one-third of his caucus,'' said Randy Frederick, chairman of the South Dakota Republican Party. ''And we're saying, 'What clout?' ''
Mr. Daschle sees it differently, noting that he supported the bill despite Democratic opposition. ''I had to make a choice,'' he said, ''and I made it without reservations.''
With his soft-spoken, almost gentle manner, Mr. Daschle is the rare politician who can go on the attack without seeming snappish; one word often used to describe him is ''decent.'' Yet there are times when his criticism of Mr. Bush has gotten him into trouble at home.
Last year, on the eve of the United States invasion of Iraq, the Democratic leader said he was saddened that Mr. Bush had ''failed so miserably at diplomacy that we're now forced to war.'' Republicans immediately criticized him, and even some South Dakota Democrats were chagrined. But Mr. Daschle said this week he stood by his remarks.
''To be honest,'' he said, ''I have no regrets about having done that.''
In the Senate, Mr. Lott said, Republicans will undoubtedly watch Mr. Daschle ''very closely and try to keep him from taking credit for things.'' But Democrats say they will rally around their leader, giving him the leeway to return home to campaign and take a lower profile on issues where the Democratic position conflicts with the interests of South Dakota voters.
''The caucus is with Tom,'' said Senator Jon Corzine of New Jersey, chairman of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee.
Mr. Daschle has survived tough races before. When he first won election to the House 25 years ago, he earned the ''Landslide Award'' from Speaker Thomas P. O'Neill. His margin of victory: 14 votes.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE SENATE
