BEING splattered by sweat and blood in the shadow of fighters is a long way from the genteel practice of medicine in Westchester, but from professional ringsides to the rotator cuffs of locals, Dr. Richard N. Weinstein bridges the two worlds.
Dr. Weinstein, who was recently named Sports Medicine Physician of the Year by the American Association for the Improvement of Boxing, has worked as a ringside doctor for the past six years, covering fights from Yonkers Raceway to the Mohegan Sun and Foxwoods Casino in Connecticut. He has worked a fight that included the former heavyweight champion Buster Douglas as well as bouts with more obscure pugilists than he can count, both men and women. His ringside work pays from $100 to $250 a night. Dr. Weinstein, a stocky and engaging Armonk father of two, also performs orthopedic surgery at White Plains Hospital Center and is the director of sports medicine at Bone and Joint Associates in White Plains.
Because Dr. Weinstein is sworn to protect and improve health, his decision to play a vital role in a violent sport is one not everyone understands. ''I've had some fellow doctors ask me why I'm involved,'' he said, speaking in his White Plains office beneath photos of him taken with boxers including Mike Tyson. ''If you are around boxing people, you know that they want doctors there. And if a law were passed for no more boxing, there would still be fights, but behind the scenes, with no doctors. The sport has been around since Greek times.
''There are deaths in other sports like football, too; it's the nature of the beast. I see more injuries in football and hockey. Percentage-wise, I see more in cheerleading than boxing.''
The American Medical Association, however, does not call for the banning of cheerleading, as it does for boxing. But the A.M.A. acknowledges the sport's existence by offering guidelines for ringside doctors. The thought, officials say, is that as long as the sport exists, a doctor is more capable of sustaining the health and welfare of the participants than a corner man with a towel and bagged ice.
''The A.M.A. is opposed to any sport where the primary interest is injuring another human being,'' said Dr. Peter W. Carmel, who is the chairman of neurological surgery at the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and a member of the A.M.A.'s board of trustees. ''On the other hand, boxing is legally sanctioned and as long as it exists, there should be a qualified medical professional looking out for the fighter's safety.''
From an ethical standpoint, said Dr. Jeremy Sugarman, the deputy director for medicine of the Phoebe R. Berman Bioethics Institute at Johns Hopkins University, such a position is sound and little could be gained from a doctor's boycott of the sport.
''We've gone well beyond the days of Marcus Welby, when doctors prescribe the daily activities of people's lives,'' Dr. Sugarman said. ''It would be hubris on the part of the medical profession to say that people don't have the right to make their own decisions'' or that a boycott of a sport by medical professionals would dissuade athletes from taking part.
Dr. Sugarman draws a parallel with battlefield medics. ''Does the doctor's presence make it O.K. for soldiers to go into battle?'' he said. ''No. But they are there to provide a check.''
There is no precise science to the check Dr. Weinstein provides, with plenty left open to interpretation and instinct. In professional fights in New York, Dr. Weinstein is helped by two other doctors . During prefight physicals, observation between rounds and the fight, the key, he said, is to determine whether the boxer is healthy enough to defend himself adequately.
Complicating matters, he said, are corner men, who sometimes make it hard to get close to the fighter; a good ring doctor has to be aggressive, Dr. Weinstein said.
The scene and the fanfare of professional boxing are what attracted Dr. Weinstein when he was introduced to the sport by a mentor when he was doing a fellowship at the University of Connecticut, and they are what keep him coming back. Asked how he would react if his sons were drawn to the sport, not as doctors but as boxers, Dr. Weinstein smiled.
''I would discourage it,'' he said. ''I think it's a great sport and if they wanted to spar to stay in shape, I think it would be great. If they wanted to go pro, I'm not sure I'd let them.''
FOR THE RECORD E-mail: Fuchs@nytimes.com
