North Korea declared Saturday that it had shown what it called a ''nuclear deterrent'' to an unofficial delegation of visiting Americans, but officials familiar with their visit to the North's main nuclear site said they had seen the facilities to produce bomb fuel rather than an actual weapon.
The members of the delegation, speaking in Beijing, declined to give a description of the facilities they inspected until they had a chance to brief the Bush administration, probably next week. But officials who have received sketchy reports say the tour was clearly intended to signal to the United States that President Bush's efforts to dissuade North Korea from moving forward with its nuclear program had failed, and that officials in Washington should accept the fact that North Korea is an undeclared nuclear power, much as it accepts that Pakistan and Israel are nuclear-weapons nations.
''This was all about saying, 'See, we've got it, so treat us with some respect,' '' said an official familiar with the trip to Yongbyon, the facility two hours north of Pyongyang, the capital.
It is at Yongbyon -- where international inspectors were ejected a year ago -- that North Korea has an extensive complex of nuclear reactors, a facility to reprocess spent nuclear fuel into bomb-grade fuel and a testing area to detonate the high explosives that would fit into a warhead.
The delegation included John W. Lewis, a Stanford University professor emeritus; Jack Pritchard, a former State Department official with long experience dealing with North Korea who resigned last year after he expressed his dissatisfaction with Mr. Bush's approach to the country; and Dr. Siegfried Hecker, a former director of Los Alamos Laboratory in New Mexico. Dr. Hecker has high-level security clearances and long experience with nuclear weapons, and it is his judgments that the administration wants to hear, officials in Washington said Saturday.
The Central Intelligence Agency has long concluded that North Korea obtained enough plutonium to build one or two nuclear weapons in the late 1980's or early 1990's, and it told Congress last summer that the North had the designs to build a reliable weapon even without conducting a test. But one of the mysteries has been how much bomb fuel the North produced in 2003, once inspectors were ejected and its plutonium reprocessing facilities were started up. The consensus of American intelligence officials is that the reprocessing is incomplete, but that the North probably made enough fuel last year for two or three more weapons.
''That's the issue that we hope Hecker will shed some light on,'' a senior official said.
But several experts have noted that even if the visitors had been shown the reprocessing facility, it would be difficult to determine how much material was reprocessed last year. The delegation did not have the kind of sophisticated equipment that the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations' nuclear monitoring agency, usually carries during full-fledged inspections.
Inviting the delegation appears to be part of North Korea's strategy in advance of another meeting with the United States, China, Japan, South Korea and Russia, which was to have taken place last month. It has been delayed, in part because North Korea and the United States could not agree on a proposal for a communiqué that would be issued after the meeting; the communiqué would point the way toward some combination of a nuclear freeze and gradual disarmament by the North, and diplomatic and economic benefits for the country from Washington and its allies.
''At this point, the Chinese have pretty much given up on holding a meeting with a pre-agreed outcome,'' said an Asian official involved in the process. ''They are now just trying to put a meeting together.''
In a statement issued on its official news service, the North Koreans, using the initials for Democratic People's Republic of Korea, said: ''As everybody knows, the United States compelled the D.P.R.K. to build a nuclear deterrent. We showed this to Lewis and his party this time.''
But the North Korean account did not describe what kind of ''deterrent'' it had shown them, and American officials said it appeared to involve something well short of an actual weapon. There is little doubt that the North has the ability to build the weapon, so the major issue is whether it now has access to a steady supply of fuel.
In Beijing as he returned from North Korea, Mr. Lewis said his group had met officials from North Korea's Foreign Ministry, along with those with scientific and economic portfolios. But he declined to identify them and added: ''We are a private delegation. We were not there to negotiate. We were not there to be inspectors.''
The North Korean statement said the visit had ensured ''transparency as speculative reports and ambiguous information about the D.P.R.K.'s nuclear activities are throwing hurdles in the way of settling the pending nuclear issue.'' On Friday, in a similar statement, North Korea declared that it would not follow the path of Libya, which recently agreed to dismantle its nuclear facilities and allow inspectors into the country, Still, at various moments North Korean officials have suggested that for the right price, they might do just that.
On Tuesday, for instance, North Korea announced that it would suspend testing or production of nuclear weapons and even stop operating its nuclear power industry, in exchange for energy aid and other concessions from the United States. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell called the statement ''positive,'' but other administration officials dismissed it as far short of what the United States needs: full disarmament and inspection rights all over North Korea.
In part, that inspection is necessary because North Korea is believed to have at least one more nuclear fuel-production facility, one that makes enriched uranium. But American officials are uncertain of its location, and the visiting delegation was not shown it.
