I DON'T know what it is about some restaurant locations. The new Belmare in New Canaan is a classic example. Located in a highly visible, venerable building (the former Veterans Hall) with towering entrance columns, directly across from town hall and next door to the firehouse, it should be an ideal spot for a restaurant, especially as it is on a street chockablock with places to eat. Yet this building has been a steady revolving door of restaurants, some very good, all better than average.
What gives? Maybe the problem is that the building is set back a few feet from the street and up several steps. Maybe because the building is such a longtime landmark of the town, people no longer ''see'' it.
In any case, the new Belmare, with the same ownership as Siena Ristorante in Stamford, is bravely accepting the location challenge with a mostly Italian menu whose emphasis is on seafood. Inside, the smallish dining room has been brightened up since the last occupancy, with yellow walls accented by bright assorted decorative plates. Unfortunately, the carpet that muffled sound for the previous tenant has disappeared and the wooden floor lends itself to a noisy clatter even when Belmare is only half-occupied.
A few tables in the front of the building, separated from the dining room by the bar, face the street. On a bright day, with sunshine pouring in, this area is my preferred choice for lunch.
The food, I discovered on two lunchtime and two dinner visits, can be pleasing, with attractive presentations and evidence of a deft professional touch in the kitchen. While few dishes elicited a ''Wow!'' reaction, many were well prepared and the net effect was one of satisfaction.
The major snag at Belmare is inconsistency. One night I ordered budino di pane bread pudding for dessert and it was everything I relish in this homey dish: light and loosely textured with good flavor, looped with caramel sauce and garnished with a scoop of vanilla ice cream. It was so delicious I recommended it to a friend at lunch a week later. To her surprise and my chagrin, the pudding was hard as a rock, impenetrably inedible. Someone in the kitchen should be paying more attention.
Attention was paid to a number of things, especially the very good country bread and foccacia, the white bean dip served gratis and a lentil soup, a special on a frosty December day.
A starter of squid grilled with lemongrass and olive oil was tender perfection. Tuna carpaccio was also a good choice, though I wish its accompanying julienne of carrots and beets hadn't been so teeth-chatteringly cold.
Also gratifying was grilled Portobello mushroom, fat and meaty slices served with lightly dressed arugula, grilled bread and goat cheese. On my visit, the goat cheese adornment consisted of two dime-size dabs. When we commented on this skimpiness, our obliging waitress brought a generous serving of the piquant cheese. Taken altogether, the mushroom, bread, arugula and cheese made a tangy appetite-tingler.
Belmare's problems are mostly those of omission and stinginess. Well-browned scallops with caponata came with a few greens but no caponata. Rabbit with olives, wine, tomatoes and garlic was aromatic, but lacked even a trace of sauce. My Belgian daughter-in-law, a lapin connoisseur, sniffed that the dish consisted of inferior parts a back and rib cage.
Salmon, a medium-small steak lightly sautéed with Dijon honey mustard, was sparse, served with only three al dente stalks of grilled asparagus.
There was nothing stingy, though, about the fish stew, a bountiful feast of giant prawns, squid, scallops, octopus, clams and mussels. Calling it a stew was a misnomer, however, because the ''spicy tomato broth,'' though yummy, was a mere spoonful at the bottom of the bowl.
Belmare's flaws are easily correctable. Even as is, this bright, cheery place is very welcoming on a cold winter evening. It will be just as appealing in warm weather when its outdoor dining area opens. I wish it well and hope it breaks its location jinx.
Belmare  62 Main Street, New Canaan. (203)966-4345.
Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Cheerful, compact dining room with banquettes, yellow walls, open configuration and wood floors.  NOISE LEVEL -- Can be noisy even when the restaurant is half-full.  SERVICE -- Friendly, but sometimes awkward, distracted and ill-informed.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Lentil soup, tuna carpaccio, grilled portobello mushroom , grilled squid, foccacia al prosciutto, fish stew, apple tart.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers $7-$12, entrees $14-$32, desserts $6.25-$8.  CREDIT CARDS -- American Express, Mastercard, Diners Club and Visa accepted.  HOURS -- Lunch: 12 to 2:30 p.m. Tuesday through Friday; Dinner: 5:30 to 10 p.m. Sunday and Tuesday through Thursday, 5:30 to 10:30 p.m. Friday and Saturday. Closed Monday.  RESERVATIONS -- Accepted.  Wheelchair accessibility: Street level; same for restrooms.
REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Jan. 11, 2004.
RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
