Lenin? Look Again
Q. At the brownstone apartment house at 11 West 73rd Street, two heads in relief sculpture overlook the front door. One is clearly Franklin D. Roosevelt, with cigarette holder. The other appears to be Lenin. What could those two figures have in common, and why would an apartment building honor them in this way?
A. If you go closer to the building, you can see at the base of the bearded gentleman's head the inscription ''Freud.'' Indeed, it is Dr. Sigmund himself -- casting a faintly ironic look at the four-term president of the United States.
The Landmarks Preservation Commission's description of the building, a charming town house built about a hundred years ago for Eddy Palmer, who owned a perfume business on Pearl Street, adds a few pieces of information. As the report notes, the building is a graceful ''combination of French Beaux-Arts details with more delicate neo-Federal motifs.'' As for Dr. Freud and F.D.R., they were added much later, bronze relief silhouettes set on marble medallions and encircled by brick headers.
But why those two men?
Dr. Joel Katz, a psychiatrist whose office is in the building now, says the sculptures were added in 1959 or 1960 by the building's owner at the time, Dr. Edward J. Hornick, who was also a psychiatrist. ''They were heroes of his,'' Dr. Katz explained. ''Of all of us, in fact.''
The Flower Hospital(s)
Q. I was born 90 years ago at the Flower Hospital in Manhattan. What was the location of the hospital then?
A. Longtime New Yorkers would say, ''Fifth Avenue and 106th Street, of course,'' thinking of Flower Fifth Avenue Hospital, which was taken over by the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York and renamed the Terence Cardinal Cooke Health Care Center in 1978.
If the reader who posed this question were about 20 years younger, that would be correct, because the original Flower Hospital merged with Fifth Avenue Hospital the 1930's. We need to go further back in the institution's history.
Flower Free Surgical Hospital, named for its chief financial backer, Roswell P. Flower, a businessman and prominent Democratic politician, was founded in 1890 by administrators of the Homoeopathic Medical College of New York, the forerunner of New York Medical College. At the time, and 90 years ago, the hospital was at 450 East 64th Street, east of First Avenue.
Mosaics Make Sense
Q. You recently answered several questions about mosaic artworks in the subway stations. Is there any particular reason that so many artists chose that medium for these works?
A. The choice of materials for most of the art sprinkled throughout the subway system is an entirely practical one.
''We have a lot of limitations on materials because of the nature of environment,'' said Sandra Bloodworth, director of the Arts for Transit program of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, for which the mosaics and other artworks are created. ''We have difficult durability issues. Mosaic and tile are wonderful materials to have in the subway. They hold up, and they are beautiful.''
GEORGE ROBINSON
F.Y.I. E-mail: fyi@nytimes.com
