WHEN the man Shari Boulanger was dating told her his kidneys were failing and he would probably need a transplant, she responded with loving concern, but in her typically laid-back style.
''Oh don't worry honey, I'll give you one of mine,'' she recalled telling Andrew Bombeck, whom she had known for little more than a year. But soon after the words had crossed her lips in early 2000, she realized the gravity of her offer.
''You're like, 'Uh-oh, what did I say?' '' recalled Ms. Boulanger, a slender, blond 50-year-old who works in graphics and marketing for Sun Sounds of Arizona, a reading service for the visually impaired in Tempe.
Mr. Bombeck, 48, an elementary school teacher in Phoenix, has polycystic kidney disease, a hereditary condition that ultimately led to the death of his mother, the humorist Erma Bombeck, in 1996, of complications after a transplant.
Ms. Boulanger first spotted Mr. Bombeck the way someone might spot a puppy -- through a window, in the control room at Sun Sounds, which was then in Phoenix, where Mr. Bombeck was doing a reading of children's stories. ''Shari was checking him out,'' recalled Jeannie Ost, a colleague.
In a way, Ms. Boulanger could not help noticing him. Mr. Bombeck, considered something of a character by his friends and family, was wearing apple green pants, ''like something you would get at the Gap 20 years ago,'' Ms. Boulanger remembered. Luckily for Mr. Bombeck, Ms. Boulanger, who is a painter, has a thing for color, too. Her wardrobe includes royal purples and bubble gum pinks, and she uses vivid hues in her work.
Mr. Bombeck, a lifelong bachelor, and Ms. Boulanger, who has been married and divorced twice, say humor is crucial to their relationship. Mr. Bombeck said if he learned anything from his mother, it was ''not to take yourself too seriously.''
His sister, Betsy Bombeck, recalled that their mother's work often included anecdotes about his penchant for doing crazy things, such as pouring Orange Crush into an overheated car radiator.
By Christmas 2002, Mr. Bombeck's need for a new kidney was urgent. His doctors had determined that Ms. Boulanger, with her universal blood type, O, and overall good health, was a perfect donor. And so the weight of her offer came back to rest squarely on her shoulders.
Ms. Boulanger, who said she always knew that they would be together for the long haul, agreed to go ahead with the laparoscopic removal of a kidney -- and she also agreed to Mr. Bombeck's formal proposal of marriage, which he delivered on Valentine's Day last year.
In April, doctors at Johns Hopkins Medical Center in Baltimore performed the double procedure. Ms. Boulanger said that she wasn't nervous until she was waiting to be wheeled into the operating room. ''I tend to be Pollyannaish about things,'' she said.
On Dec. 27, which was an uncharacteristically cold evening for central Arizona, the couple stood in a gazebo before Bill Linderman, an evangelical pastor, and 300 guests at the Corona Ranch in Laveen, just outside Phoenix, and shivered through the vows they had written. When Mr. Linderman asked the bride, who wore a ruby-colored velvet dress, if she would promise not to get angry when Mr. Bombeck watched ''Fear Factor'' while grading papers, she agreed. But when the bridegroom, dressed in a plum-colored velvet suit, was asked in turn to promise to stop firing Ms. Boulanger's gardeners, he turned down the request with a laugh.
(After the Dec. 27 ceremony, it was learned that Mr. Linderman is not an ordained minister and therefore was not legally empowered to marry Ms. Boulanger and Mr. Bombeck. The couple then revealed that they had been legally married on Dec. 21 by a minister in a small private ceremony at their home in Phoenix.)
Friends joke that Mr. Bombeck carries a piece of his wife with him wherever he goes, but when he talks about the transplant, he grows solemn.
''That someone would be willing to do this, it's unbelievable,'' he said. ''It's such a gift you can't even describe it.''
WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS
