MY father died of cancer when I was 11. We lived in Orange, N.J., and at that point, my mother decided to take me back to her native Austria. She had joined her husband in the States against her family's wishes.
Of course, losing my father was traumatic. I was an only child. But from the time my father died, my general theme in life has been to turn adversity into opportunity.
Going to Austria turned out to be a huge advantage for me. I learned to speak French and German quite well. At the American School in Vienna, I was junior all-Austria in basketball, probably the only place in the world I could have been all-anything. I studied clarinet at the Vienna Music Academy. I'm sure that being an applicant from the American School in Vienna helped get me into all seven colleges I applied to. I came to Harvard and Boston in the fall of 1967, sight unseen.
I was given some financial assistance and that meant I had to work. My freshman year, I washed dishes. But by my sophomore year, I went to work for the Harvard Student Agencies, a student-run enterprise that, among other things, publishes the ''Let's Go'' travel guide series. In the summer between my freshman and sophomore years, I became the editor for the Austria and Czechoslovakia editions.
While this was happening, I was an organic chemistry major and managed a C+ average. I realized that I wanted to do something I could be good at. So I switched to business, and after graduation I applied to the Harvard Business School.
I had thought about law school, but during my senior year, I took a constitutional law course from Paul Freund. He was a brilliant man and his course was supposed to be fascinating. I literally fell asleep in the first lecture. That, plus the fact that I did poorly on the law boards, helped me decide against law school.
At the Harvard Business School, I really felt I had gained the ability to resolve difficult issues. But I also felt that I wasn't in the mainstream with my fellow students. During job-hunting season, for example, everybody shaved their beards for interviews. I thought, ''This is crazy.'' So I grew a beard. My kids later found a picture of me then and hung it up, calling it the ''chairman of the board'' picture.
One of the people who most influenced me was Ben Shapiro, a marketing professor at the business school. He used to rant and rave and pound his fist: ''It's all about the customers!'' And he was right. He was also right that, at that time, retailing was devoid of really talented people; he urged me to go in that direction.
I interviewed at Jewel Companies in Chicago and thought it had a wonderful management philosophy. Teamwork was the most important aspect of managing the company. I spent a decade at Jewel, and my mother was incredibly offended that her son was trimming lettuce while learning how to help run the operation. She hadn't spent all that money sending me to Harvard so that I'd end up in the produce section.
On the Fourth of July weekend in 1985, my printer ribbon ran out, and I couldn't find a single place to buy a replacement. I envisioned a Toys ''R'' Us or Home Depot for office supplies. That's how Staples was born.
EXECUTIVE LIFE: THE BOSS
