THERE are a couple of questions that few people seem to be asking about the limited Medicare prescription drug law that goes into effect in 2006:
What impact will it have on pharmaceutical companies' programs that offer free drugs to low-income people, including those on Medicare?
Why does the law prohibit beneficiaries from buying private insurance to cover the considerable gaps in coverage?
The drug companies themselves are struggling with the first question, as is their trade group in Washington, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America. But one thing is clear: if the companies do not change their requirements by 2006, thousands of older low-income Americans will lose access to free or nearly free drugs. That's because participants in the programs generally must not have any drug coverage or access to it. Of course, they will have access to drug coverage in 2006 -- although with coverage gaps that could cost thousands of dollars a year.
The free-drug programs are crucial for many recipients, and the income limits are not that strict: in some cases, people earning up to $50,000 a year can qualify. The drugs are commonly dispensed through doctors or via discount cards; patients usually have to requalify regularly and apply separately to each company that makes the drugs they need.
Nancy Pekarek, a spokeswoman for GlaxoSmithKline, said her company had made no decisions yet about its free-drug program. ''We have to see what this new Medicare bill is really saying and how it will play out, or be amended,'' she said.
She said one possible option was for GlaxoSmithKline to change its requirements and allow free drugs to be offered to low-income people when they encounter gaps in the new benefit. One gap is the so-called doughnut hole, under which coverage stops after a person spends $2,250 in a given year, and does not pick up again until drug expenses reach $5,100. That means an outlay of $2,850, not to mention premiums, deductible and co-payments.
''We've had this program in place for a long time, recognizing there are people who fall between the cracks in the system and need some assistance,'' Ms. Pekarek added. ''My guess is there will still be people falling between the cracks after 2006.''
Rick Luftglass, director of United States philanthropy at Pfizer, said changes in Pfizer's program were ''up in the air and hard to answer at this point.''
Pfizer provided free or nearly free drugs through various programs to 1.7 million patients of all ages in 2002. To get free Pfizer drugs through a doctor, a patient must have an income of less than $16,000, or $24,000 for a couple. Pfizer also offers a discount card for low-income Medicare patients that gives them a 30-day prescription of a Pfizer drug for $15. The new Medicare law includes a discount card, to be available this spring, for discounts of 10 to 25 percent. What this will mean for the Pfizer card is unclear. ''We have made no decisions,'' said Mariann Caprino, a spokeswoman for Pfizer.
Robert M. Hayes, president of the Medicare Rights Center, a nonprofit group based in New York that helps people handle Medicare and Medicare H.M.O. problems, said he was concerned that ''the drug companies may decide to end their discount cards because of the Medicare discount card.''
Most of the drug companies explain their free drug programs on their Web sites. In addition, the Pharmaceutical Research and Manufacturers of America Web site (www.phrma.org), provides information on all the programs offered by its members.
THE prohibition against buying private insurance, meanwhile, will hit middle-income people the hardest. ''Many people will be forced to put out their own money, even if they want to buy insurance,'' Mr. Hayes said.
A report accompanying the final Medicare bill when it was passed last year said the insurance prohibition was to keep beneficiaries from becoming ''insensitive to costs.'' Well, if your mother needs a prescription, her ''sensitivity'' is not going to lessen her need, but the cost may lessen her ability to buy it. And why shouldn't she be allowed to buy private insurance to help if she wants to? By that logic, should we prohibit auto insurance to make people sensitive to high repair costs?
Some administration and Congressional officials argue that older Americans would consume less health care if they had to pay more for it, so the government would save money. Maybe, but what are the health consequences?
Deane Beebe, a spokeswoman for the Medicare Rights Center, said: ''The whole concept is based on the idea that people will use too much medication if they have coverage. We're really troubled by that.''
Mr. Hayes added, ''There is something very unrealistic about politicians who think that people will rush off to take prescription medication they don't need.''
The law, however, allows states to cover the gaps and deductibles for low-income people as long as no federal money is used.
''So the policy argument is that you want people to actually spend money to enjoy a benefit, but the bill is inconsistent in allowing states but not insurance companies to step in,'' Mr. Hayes said. ''But this will vary widely from state to state. It's a crazy quilt.''
He added: ''This insurance prohibition will hit a broad swath of the middle class. It will hurt more people than it will help.''
Mr. Hayes said he believed that the prohibition might be eliminated before 2006, partly because of pressure from insurance companies that want to sell the coverage.
''A lot of people who voted for this bill,'' he said, ''had no clue about this provision.''
SENIORITY Fred Brock is an editor at The Times. His column on the approach and arrival of retirement appears the second Sunday of each month. E-mail: fbrock@nytimes.com.
