LONG before inquiries into mutual fund trading abuses began in the United States, British authorities were investigating accusations of wrongdoing in a popular yet complex type of fund called a split-capital investment trust.
Mutual fund companies have suspended trading in more than 20 of these funds. Investors have lost billions of pounds, in many cases despite earlier assurances that the investments were relatively safe.
The Financial Services Authority, which regulates the British investment industry, announced in October that its investigation into the sale and management of split-caps, as the funds are usually called, had expanded to 21 firms from about a dozen. (The agency is separately investigating mutual fund trading practices, as are several other European authorities.) Split-caps have also been the subject of hearings by the Treasury Select Committee of Parliament. No charges have been filed.
Split-caps are closed-end funds traded on the London Stock Exchange. They are so called because their assets are divided into classes of shares created to generate either higher income or capital growth. The F.S.A. is trying to determine whether managers misled investors by not acquainting them with all the risks of the funds and whether there was collusion among managers to invest in one another's funds to prop up prices.
Misleading marketing practices or manipulation of share prices would amount to civil infractions, said Rob McIvor, a spokesman for the F.S.A. If it finds that collusion occurred with intent to enrich managers, whose fees are sometimes based on performance, the F.S.A. may turn over evidence to criminal-fraud investigators, he said.
American fund managers, including Fidelity, Templeton and J.P. Morgan Fleming, are major participants in the British fund market, as are British-American hybrids like Invesco and Gartmore. These firms have not been connected to the split-cap controversy.
An exception is Legg Mason of Baltimore, which ran two of the 19 split-caps for which trading has been suspended and a third fund of a slightly different type: a highly geared ordinary fund, in which managers may use more borrowed money to leverage performance than conventional funds do. That fund is one of six of its kind to be suspended by various companies.
Legg Mason acquired its split-caps in 1999, when it bought the British fund management firm Johnson Fry. The three funds engaged in both of the practices that drove many split-caps to fail and that other American managers are credited with avoiding: extensive borrowing and fund cross-ownership.
A Legg Mason representative in London said repeatedly that no one was available to comment on the funds' performance.
Mr. McIvor said that there was nothing improper about borrowing money to buy stocks or about buying other funds' shares, but that deliberately misleading investors would not be allowed. He said the F.S.A. began its inquiry in 2001 after an internal analysis raised concerns about the funds. The investigation began before the declines in fund prices accelerated.''The issue for us is not whether funds went up and down,'' he said. ''That's what happens to products linked to equity markets. It's whether there was actually collusion going on in the management of the trusts and between managers. The allegation is that some fund managers were buying shares in each other's companies simply to give the impression there was demand for those shares. Fund managers have to act in the best interests of investors.''
He added that because the F.S.A. never commented on the specifics of open investigations, he was unable to say which firms were being studied.
Mick Gilligan, associate director of fund research at Killik &amp; Company, a stockbroker in London, said the high borrowing and cross-shareholding emerged from an effort to satisfy increasingly demanding investors. ''In the late 1990's there was a greater willingness to take on risk, and at the same time there was still a big demand for yield,'' he said. To try to meet both aims, ''a number of houses decided it would make sense to issue funds with split-capital structures and to issue more bank debt so there was even more leverage than there historically had been,'' he said.
Before the suspension of the highly geared ordinary fund Legg Mason American, for instance, it had £2.1 million in assets and a £12 million bank loan, Mr. Gilligan said. The two suspended Legg Mason split-cap funds, Income and Growth and Strategic Assets, were less heavily leveraged.
ALL three funds also had large cross-shareholdings as of last year, he said. American was 100 percent invested in other closed-end funds, including split-caps, while 32 percent of Strategic Assets and 88 percent of Income and Growth were invested in closed-end funds.
Some split-caps were such large investors in one another that when they tried to cast off ballast, their sell orders swamped buy orders and prices plunged. Then banks called in loans, forcing further sales. A result is that assets of split-caps have fallen to £7.7 billion from £12.6 billion in early 2001, according to the Association of Investment Trust Companies, a trade group for managers of British closed-end funds.
Once the rout began, the industry was swift to acknowledge the problems and accept blame. ''The fact that you have products that turned out to fall apart in falling markets means the fault must lie with the products' creators,'' said Daniel Godfrey, director general of the association. ''We have said there was clearly a mismatch of understanding between customers and fund providers'' about risk.
As the investigation continues, it remains unclear whether the failures were mainly because of ineptitude or dishonesty. Nick Greenwood, manager of iimia Accelerated, a British mutual fund whose portfolio comprises investment trusts, has watched the split-cap troubles unfold. He said he was ''more an adherent of the cock-up theory than the fraud theory.'' Noting that many managers had large portions of their own wealth tied up in their funds, he added, ''If it had been a scam, these guys would have got off with the goodies instead of ending up vastly poorer than when they started.''
Mr. Godfrey has spoken of the industry's ''moral liability'' to investors, and he said the association had turned over ''evidence of wrongdoing'' to regulators. ''We believe we have seen compelling evidence that in some cases there was collusion'' in split-caps' cross-shareholdings, he said, ''but it was not endemic.''
