Coach Mike Eaves did not receive the attention and admiration showered upon Pete Carroll and Nick Saban recently. But the championship won by Eaves's team might have been more significant to his sport.
Carroll's Southern California Trojans and Saban's Louisiana State Tigers shared the nation's college football championship after winning bowl games. Eaves's United States team bested the world, going 6-0 to win the gold medal at the junior hockey championship in Helsinki, Finland.
With a third-period comeback and a 4-3 victory over Canada on Monday, the United States won its first title in the 28-year history of the tournament, which is for players 20 and under. The victory brought the optimism of youth to an American program that has relied for a decade on the same core group of aging professional players for Olympic and World Cup tournaments.
''I think this is one of those groups that is special,'' Eaves said Thursday in a conference call with reporters. The most valuable player of the tournament was Zach Parise, a first-round selection of the Devils in the N.H.L. draft last June.
Parise tied for the tournament lead with 11 points on 5 goals and 6 assists. Born in Minnesota, he plays in college for North Dakota and is the son of J. P. Parise, who played in the N.H.L. for the Islanders and the Minnesota North Stars.
''You could see it coming, but you didn't want to look too far ahead,'' Parise, 19, said of the first United States gold in the tournament. ''Three-quarters of the team had played together before.''
Other stars included defensemen Mark Stuart of Colorado College, who has been drafted by the Boston Bruins, and Ryan Suter of Wisconsin, drafted by the Nashville Predators. The goalie was Al Montoya of Michigan, who will be eligible for the draft this year.
''We'll be around for a long time,'' said Suter, 18, whose father, Bob, played for the 1980 Olympic team that won the gold medal at Lake Placid, N.Y. ''Whenever they call, I'm definitely going to be right there, waiting.'' Suter is also the nephew of Gary Suter, who played 17 seasons in the N.H.L.
Before this season, the United States national junior team had won one silver medal, in 1997, and two bronze medals, in 1986 and 1992. Canada and Russia have each won the tournament 10 times. The winning goal Monday came when Marc-André Fleury, the Canadian goalie who plays for the Pittsburgh Penguins, tried to clear a puck and accidentally bounced it into his net off one of his defensemen.
The nucleus of veteran N.H.L. stars -- Brian Leetch, Jeremy Roenick, Keith Tkachuk, Brett Hull, Mike Modano, Doug Weight, Bill Guerin and Derian Hatcher -- will probably still form the base of the roster when the United States plays late this summer in the second World Cup, a two-week tournament to be played in Europe and North America. All of them are in their 30's. They won the silver medal in the 2002 Olympics and the first World Cup in 1996.
But some of the younger stars, many of them developed at a special training center in Ann Arbor, Mich., could be part of the Winter Olympic team in Italy in 2006. ''This is one of those crops that are here right now,'' Eaves, a former N.H.L. player, said. ''They're all skilled and they have an ultimate competitive level that makes them special. How they impact the next Olympics or even the ones after that, only time will tell.''
The National Team Development Program was started in 1996 by USA Hockey, the sport's governing body in the United States. It is set up for about 45 elite players ages 16 and 17 each year. At a cost of about $2 million, the players board with families in Ann Arbor, attend school there and play together for nine months against Division I college, American junior and international teams. Fifteen of the 22 players on Eaves's roster came out of this program. In 2002, he led many of the same players to the gold medal in the under-18 tournament.
''They have had the opportunity to play in international competition, know what it's like to travel seven, eight time zones, eat different foods, have a different style of play, how the referees call the game,'' Eaves said. ''It's a real big boost for American hockey, especially for the program there in Ann Arbor. It gives that program validity. It's done what it was supposed to do. It helped develop the elite American hockey players.''
Although the majority of his players play for N.C.A.A. teams in the United States, Eaves did not emphasize this as the reason for the players' success. One of hockey's long-term debates is whether a young player develops best in college, with more practices and fewer games, or in Major Junior A, with fewer practices and more games.
Parise said he thought college hockey was the best route to a professional career, but added: ''Forty games a year is a drawback, but it's better hockey from top to bottom. You play against older players.''
Is Parise ready to turn pro with the Devils? ''That's the question everyone has been asking since I came back,'' he said.
Major Junior A dominates in Canada; college hockey is best in the United States. Players from both countries play in either level on both sides of the border. But Eaves said the Ann Arbor training center and previous international competition were more important to his team's development.
''There are many ways to the top of the mountain,'' Eaves said. ''That's what the program in Ann Arbor was all about. It was to help us elevate the level of our elite players, especially at the international level, and it did that.''
Could any of these players make the World Cup team this August? ''That's a tough question,'' Eaves said. ''That's another quantum leap. But, never say never.''
HOCKEY
