THE BROADWAY musical theater is self-obsessed, solipsistic and backward-looking. We knew that, right? Lately, however, Times Square has begun to resemble a hall of mirrors, with new musicals slyly quoting their elders and (sometimes) betters with campy abandon. The trend arguably began in 2001 with the arrival of ''The Producers,'' a cornucopia of references from Broadway's past. Other musicals have followed its gleefully self-conscious example, all honoring through irony the theatrical genre they are perpetuating.
This season one can laugh as ''Fiddler on the Roof'' is parodied at the St. James Theater, in ''The Producers,'' and the Virginia Theater, in ''Little Shop of Horrors,'' then visit the Minskoff to see the 1964 source material. (A revival starring Alfred Molina begins previews there on Jan. 23.) The same goes for ''Beauty and the Beast,''  ''Chicago'' and ''42nd Street'' -- all running on Broadway, all satirized on Broadway.
As for ''Gypsy'' -- if imitation is the sincerest form of flattery, then ''Rose's Turn,'' the self-dramatizing, self-pitying 11 o'clock number sung in that show by the monstrous stage mother Mama Rose, is the most relentlessly flattered song in Broadway history.
Here is a guide to some of the current winks and nods.
ROBERT SIMONSON
THE MUSICAL -- ''The Producers''
THE MUSICALS IT QUOTES -- ''Beauty and the Beast,''  ''Gypsy,''  ''42nd Street,''  ''Follies,'' ''Annie,'' among others
THE SPECIFICS -- The references are so legion they ricochet off the backstage walls. The opening number, ''The King of Broadway,'' is a klezmer-inflected ''Fiddler on the Roof'' takeoff. ''Along Came Bialy,'' the debauchery fantasy sung by the scheming producer Max Bialystock, is set in ''Little Old Lady Land,'' a frilly place just an aesthetic door down from the mythic ''Loveland'' of Stephen Sondheim's ''Follies.'' Carmen Ghia, the waspish assistant of the swishy director Roger DeBris, imitates the hard-boiled producer Julian Marsh in ''42nd Street'' by slapping a stage-shy DeBris and commanding, ''You're going out there a silly, hysterical screaming queen, and you're coming back a great, big passing-for-straight Broadway star!'' Take that, Peggy Sawyer!
THE JOKE -- For the creative team behind ''The Producers,'' musical comedy is one big inside joke. Mel Brooks, who based the show on his 1968 movie of the same name, provides a voiceover in the production (''Don't be stupid, be a smarty, come and join the Nazi Party'') that quotes from his own cameo role in the film. Even ''Annie,'' which was written by his co-librettist, Thomas Meehan, comes in for a ribbing when DeBris (who is played by Gary Beach, a member of the original ''Annie'' cast) dons a red wig reminiscent of the little orphan's frizzy coiffure. When Mr. Beach performs the part of the Führer in ''Springtime for Hitler,'' the show's musical-within-the-musical, he makes a splashy entrance by striking a pose evocative of Lumiere, the roguish candelabrum in ''Beauty and the Beast,'' another role Mr. Beach played on Broadway. Moments later, as Hitler, he calls himself the German Ethel Merman, and the orchestra answers with the opening notes from the overture of ''Gypsy,'' in which Merman starred.
Spontaneous asides have increased, now that the original stars of the show, Nathan Lane and Matthew Broderick, have returned. In an early scene in which Mr. Lane's Max explains the financial intricacies of producing to Mr. Broderick's Leo, Mr. Lane has been heard to deliver a line from the script, ''Never put your own money in a show,'' followed by ''It's taboo'': a dig at Rosie O'Donnell, the sole producer of the ailing Broadway musical ''Taboo,'' who is risking her initial investment of $10 million.
THE MUSICAL -- ''Urinetown''
THE MUSICALS IT QUOTES -- ''The Threepenny Opera,''  ''Les Misérables,''  ''West Side Story,''  ''Chicago''
THE SPECIFICS -- The entire production -- the air of social commentary, the presentational acting style, the dark-hued music and mordant lyrics -- is a pastiche of Bertolt Brecht and Kurt Weill's ''Threepenny Opera.'' Within this framework, the director John Rando and the choreographer John Carrafa find room to satirize Jerome Robbins's leaping street kids of ''West Side Story'' and Bob Fosse's swivel-hipped jazz babies of ''Chicago'' (both in the number ''Snuff That Girl''), as well as the marching student revolutionaries of ''Les Miz.''
THE JOKE -- In ''Urinetown'' -- which closes at the Henry Miller next Sunday -- the composer-lyricist Mark Hollmann and the lyricist-librettist Greg Kotis laugh both at and with musical theater. To this young, ironic creative team, the idea of a character suddenly bursting into song is itself absurd. The two men even found a way to send up ''Urinetown'' while ''Urinetown'' is being performed (the street urchin Little Sally's line early in the show: ''How about bad subject matter. Or a bad title, even? That could kill a show pretty good.'')
THE MUSICAL -- ''Hairspray''
THE MUSICAL IT QUOTES -- ''Gypsy''
THE SPECIFICS -- At the end of ''The Big Dollhouse,'' the prison number at the beginning of Act II, Harvey Fierstein, playing the repressed and obese housewife Edna Turnblad, belts out ''For Meeeeeee!,'' quoting the final line of Mama Rose's anthem of empowerment and regret, ''Rose's Turn.''
THE JOKE -- Harvey Fierstein is no less a diva than Ethel Merman, Angela Lansbury, Tyne Daly, Betty Buckley, Bernadette Peters or any other past or present ''Gypsy'' Mama.
THE MUSICAL -- ''Little Shop of Horrors''
THE MUSICAL IT QUOTES -- ''Fiddler on the Roof''
THE SPECIFICS -- Rob Bartlett, who plays Mushnik, the owner of the flower shop that unwittingly harbors the man-eating alien plant Audrey II, has a Tevye moment (''Yi, yi, yi,'' à la ''If I Were a Rich Man'') in the middle of his big number ''Mushnik &amp; Son.''
THE JOKE -- A riff created in rehearsals by Mr. Bartlett, showing Nathan Lane that he's not the only performer on Broadway who can channel Tevye.
THE MUSICAL -- ''Wicked''
THE MUSICAL IT QUOTES -- ''Evita''
THE SPECIFICS -- At the top of Act II, Kristin Chenoweth's Glinda, the triumphant if morally corrupt social queen of Oz, climbs a staircase, plants herself before a podium and strikes the arms-up pose made iconic by Patti LuPone in ''Evita.''
THE JOKE -- Every leading actress on Broadway, no matter how young, is just this far away from becoming a vainglorious tyrant.
THE MUSICAL -- ''Avenue Q''
THE MUSICALS IT QUOTES -- ''West Side Story'' and -- natch -- ''Gypsy''
THE SPECIFICS -- The puppet Princeton lifts lyrics from ''West Side Story'' (''Something's coming, something good'') for his solo ''Purpose.'' And Lucy the Slut, the boyfriend-stealing puppet, ends her big number ''Special'' by repeating ''For me! For me! For me!''
THE JOKE -- New musicals are no longer allowed on Broadway unless they quote ''Rose's Turn.''
THEATER
