Tug McGraw had 180 career saves, all before I started second grade. The last came on Aug. 2, 1982, and for the next two years he stayed with the Philadelphia Phillies, pitching infrequently.
But I loved him. So did every kid then who grew up around Philadelphia. How could you not? Mike Schmidt hit home runs. Steve Carlton struck people out. Pete Rose smacked singles. Tug McGraw smiled all the time.
By the end of his career, McGraw delighted you more than he thrilled you. But he was not far removed from his greatest moment -- the bases-loaded strikeout of Kansas City's Willie Wilson to clinch the 1980 World Series -- and it put a kind of halo above him for the rest of his life.
He was so easy to imitate. The victory leap in the World Series, the way he slapped his glove on his thigh when he bounded for the dugout, even the way he signed his name. He wrote a children's book called ''Lumpy,'' told from a baseball's point of view. He made you think that baseball really was a kid's game, after all.
McGraw had the kind of spirit that ought to be spread around. Philadelphia cherished him, and so did New York, where his rallying cry of ''Ya Gotta Believe'' -- a cheeky interpretation of a speech by the Mets chairman, M. Donald Grant -- inspired an unlikely pennant in 1973. Phillies fans loathe the Mets, but with McGraw -- and, later, Lenny Dykstra -- they gladly took a Flushing hand-me-down.
There was something so inviting about McGraw, something that made him seem like a friend to a 7-year-old who had never met him. My second-grade class had an assignment to write a letter to a famous person. A lot of kids wrote to President Reagan. I wrote to Tug McGraw.
I don't know what Reagan sent back, but I'm pretty sure he didn't sign his autograph with a smiley face and a personal notation -- ''All the best in school and sports, pal'' -- on a photo. McGraw also sent back and autographed my letter, in which I boldly invited him to my 8th birthday party. He didn't come, but I didn't hold it against him. He finally made it to my house a few years later.
I got to know McGraw as a teenager when I spent summer evenings at Veterans Stadium, interviewing players for a small baseball magazine my family published. McGraw was a local TV reporter, and we would talk casually. He asked about my college plans, and I mentioned Vanderbilt, in Nashville. He said he had a son there who was going to be a huge country music star.
McGraw's specialty on TV was the human-interest feature, and one day he decided to do a story on my family's magazine. He picked us up at school in his Porsche, and when you are 15 years old and sitting in the passenger seat of Tug McGraw's Porsche, it is about the coolest thing on earth.
He followed my mother's car home, and on the way he asked my brother if that was Joe ahead of us. Joe? ''Jo Mama,'' he said. The man knew his audience. He always did.
At Shea Stadium in 2000, McGraw made a rousing first pitch before Game 4 of the division series against the Giants. The Mets won the game and the series, and the game story, with McGraw in the lead, ran on Page A1. It was my first front-page byline for this paper, and I was glad to have McGraw out there with me.
The last time I talked with him was in March 2002, at the airport in Tampa, Fla., during spring training. I was picking up my parents, standing at the bottom of an escalator near the baggage claim. They descended into view together: my mother, my father and Tug McGraw.
They had taken the same flight from Philadelphia, McGraw arriving for a stint as a Phillies spring training instructor. Of course my parents reminded him about the Porsche and the visit, which he recalled vaguely. I was obviously startled to see them: Mom. Dad. Tug? ''It's all right,'' he said. ''Go hug your mom first.''
McGraw had brain surgery in Tampa last spring, and before a game with the Yankees in Clearwater, Fla., the Phillies asked fans to raise their beer cups to salute him. It was St. Patrick's Day, McGraw's favorite holiday, and it was the last one he lived to see.
After he died, on Monday at age 59, I found an article I had done on him in 1990. The topic was ''Scroogie,'' the comic strip he wrote in the 1970's about a goofy baseball team.
A typical strip went like this: Grumpy manager comes to mound after long home run. Pitcher declares, ''Baseball sure is a game of inches.'' Manager squawks, tells pitcher he's just given up 743-foot bomb. Pause. ''8,916 inches,'' pitcher replies.
It was silly stuff, a quick yuk, but from what I knew of McGraw, it was authentic to him. Simple, funny, anything for a smile.
But what made a pitcher moonlight as a cartoonist? It was the times, McGraw said. The players had formed an aggressive union, salaries were skyrocketing, fans were disillusioned. Tug to the rescue.
''Baseball was really under the gun, and I thought, you know, this isn't brain surgery,'' he said, in words that seem so poignant now. ''This is a fun game.''
It always seemed so to Tug McGraw, who knew how to make fans and keep them for life.
An Appreciation
