He survived a famously bloody street fight in Somalia that left 18 of his fellow soldiers dead, and more recently, three rounds of surgery for testicular cancer and resulting complications that left him looking skeletal. Yet relatives said it was typical of Aaron A. Weaver to insist on serving in Iraq, persuading the Army that he was well enough to ship out with the 82nd Airborne Division in October.
Mr. Weaver, 32, whose heroics in the ambush of American soldiers in Mogadishu, Somalia, won him the Bronze Star in 1994 for ''extreme courage'' and a mention in the best-selling book ''Black Hawk Down,'' was supposed to return home next month.
Instead, he died on Thursday with eight others when the Black Hawk military helicopter they were traveling in crashed near Falluja, Iraq. After a preliminary investigation, the military said on Saturday it had concluded that the helicopter had been shot down by guerrillas.
''He went to Somalia, made it through three surgeries for cancer, and chose to go to Iraq,'' his sister, Shannon Felicetta, 28, of Tarpon Springs, said on Saturday. She said that although he was devoted to his wife, Nancy, and their children, ''he chose to leave them'' to serve in Iraq. ''I think he felt if he didn't go, it wouldn't be who he is,'' she said.
Mr. Weaver, a chief warrant officer whose job in Iraq was to fly observation helicopters, monitoring the enemy and sending the information he gathered back to headquarters, was en route to a medical checkup when he died.
Military doctors in Baghdad were to examine Mr. Weaver to make sure his cancer was still in remission, his family said.
Mr. Weaver was assigned to C Troop, First Squadron, 17th Calvary Regiment, of the 82nd Airborne Division based at Fort Bragg, N.C. He flew an OH-58 Kiowa Warrior helicopter, and was only a few weeks short of returning to his family in Ft. Bragg, his father, Michael Weaver, said in a telephone interview on Saturday.
Now, his parents and seven siblings are gathering in the Tampa Bay area -- three of them arriving from military bases in Baghdad, Hawaii and Missouri -- to mourn him.
Funeral plans were pending on Saturday while the family awaited the arrival of Aaron Weaver's body, according to the elder Mr. Weaver, a former Marine, who works as a production manager at The Citrus County Chronicle in Inverness, about 75 miles north of Tampa.
Aaron Weaver talked frequently about the 1993 battle in Mogadishu. In addition to the 18 soldiers who died, more than 80 were wounded. The story of their struggle later became the subject of the author Mark Bowden's best seller, ''Black Hawk Down,'' and a movie based on the book.
''It scared him, he had bad dreams for years afterward, a lot of his friends were killed or severely wounded,'' Michael Weaver recalled. ''He was the only N.C.O. that wasn't killed or wounded in the attack. He was very lucky.''
Of the situation in Somalia, the younger Mr. Weaver had become disillusioned, and he ''was frustrated because he felt the powers that be ordered him into a situation that killed people needlessly,'' his father said. But he said that the book and the movie had helped his son come to terms with his feelings.
''It was a job well done for what they had to do.''
Aaron Weaver was the second son born to Kelly and Michael Weaver, who have since divorced.
He spent his youth roaming the woods near Floral City, Fla., where he attended middle school, and later was an accomplished student and athlete at Citrus High School, seven miles away, at Inverness. He earned an associate degree from Central Florida Community College.
He excelled at track, cross-country and soccer in high school and led an active life as an adult.
''Aaron was very active, always on the go, very athletic, everything he did, he finished; he's done so many things,'' Ms. Felicetta said. ''He had so many goals, he was an athlete, he did pretty much every sport you can think of. He never quit.''
More recently, he had taken on freshwater fishing as a hobby and would roam the North Carolina wilderness with his Army buddies, hauling fancy new rods and reels along on trips that lasted several days.
Mr. Weaver met his future wife, Nancy, through his father's office softball team, and their marriage four years ago proved to be a potent combination: ''She was as mean as he was -- they were a perfect match,'' his father chuckled.
Mr. Weaver took an interest in his stepson, Austin, from his wife's former marriage, and the two became inseparable, Ms. Felicetta said, adding that the couple also has a 13-month-old daughter, Savannah.
Ms. Felicetta's brother suffered testicular cancer and endured three operations fighting it and accompanying intestinal complications. He was treated at military hospitals for almost a year and a half, she said.
''It was tough; he almost didn't make it,'' Ms. Felicetta said. ''He had surgery, and he couldn't eat, couldn't do anything, had nose tubes, everything else. He got real thin, he was anorexic-looking, weighed in the low hundreds. He was a small guy, short, but all muscle. After the third surgery, he went back to work. He gained his weight back, and was able to go back to work.''
The Department of Defense identified the eight other soldiers who died with Mr. Weaver as Michael A. Diraimondo, 22, an Army specialist from Simi Valley, Calif.; Christopher A. Golby, 26, an Army specialist from Johnstown, Pa.; Sgt. First Class Gregory B. Hicks, 35, of Duff, Tenn.; Nathaniel H. Johnson, 22, an Army specialist from Augusta, Ga.; Staff Sgt. Craig Davis, 37, of Opelousas, La.; Philip A. Johnson Jr., 31, an Army chief warrant officer from Alabama; Ian D. Manuel, 23, an Army chief warrant officer from Florida; and Sgt. Jeffrey C. Walker from Havre de Grace, Md.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE FATALITIES
