AT the bar and restaurant J.T. McToole's here on a brisk afternoon last week, Geri Stanton said that she normally ordered the chicken special anyway, but that the mad cow scare had given her another reason to avoid beef.
''I don't feel like taking a chance if I don't have to,'' Ms. Stanton, a retired legal secretary from Maywood, said after having lunch in front of the gas-fired fireplace along with her husband, John, and a friend.
But scoffing at such fears were two big beef fans, John O'Donnell of Sicklerville in South Jersey and Daniel J. Collins of Mountainside, who nonetheless had just happened to order the chicken salad sandwich and the turkey club. ''I would eat beef, no problem,'' Mr. O'Donnell said. ''I had a big steak for dinner last night.''
Such are the considerations of New Jersey residents after the discovery of the first known case of mad cow disease in the United States, on Dec. 23 in a cow on a farm in Washington State.
''Do I feel safe eating beef?'' Ms. Stanton said, echoing a question on many people's minds as federal officials continue to investigate how and where the cow was infected and as the beef industry worries about domestic sales and exports. Then she answered it with the same ambivalence of the many people who cannot conceive of life without a good old-fashioned hamburger. ''To be honest, I'm not absolutely sure,'' she said. ''There's a little question there. I'm not sure.''
Federal and state agricultural officials have sought to reassure consumers that the nation's beef supply is safe to eat. In New Jersey, the agriculture commissioner, Charles Kuperus, said that infectious beef tissues had not entered the food supply and that New Jersey farmers and veterinarians were being urged to be extra vigilant.
New Jersey consumers get their beef from suppliers within the state and from around the country. New Jersey's cattle industry is small, with 46,000 head of cattle here worth $46.5 million on 1,600 farms, according to Clare Burger, a statistician for the New Jersey Agricultural Statistics Service. Some 13,000 of the 46,000 are grown to produce beef while most of the remainder produce milk, she said.
In 2003, state inspectors tested 348 New Jersey cattle for mad cow disease, and they tested negative, said Hope Gruzlovic, a spokeswoman for the state Department of Agriculture. Those tested were ''downers,'' animals that cannot walk because of injury or illness or that have shown neurological symptoms like changes in temperament, aggression, abnormal posture or rapid eye movement.
Dr. Nancy Halpern, the director of the division of animal health at the agriculture department, reiterated Commissioner Kuperus's stand on the beef supply, when she said in a telephone interview last week, ''I think this whole episode really points out the safety of the system that already exists.''
But consumer advocates contend that despite lessons to be learned from the outbreak of mad cow disease in Britain in the mid-1980's, testing in America is still flawed and unevenly conducted among the states. To date, 139 people in Britain have died from a disease that is thought to stem from eating infected beef and attacks the human brain in much the same way as mad cow attacks the bovine brain.
As recently as last fall, Dr. Stanley Prusiner, a 1997 Nobel Prize winner for his work on prions -- the misfolded proteins that are thought to cause the disease -- told the federal agriculture secretary, Ann M. Veneman, that the United States was vulnerable.
On Dec. 30, Ms. Veneman issued new rules that the beef industry had largely resisted. These include a ban on processing downer cows as food for humans and on using certain beef parts like brains, spinal cords and nerve tissues in foods like hamburger. The new rules also include speedier testing of animals suspected of being ill and restricting the sale of mechanically separated meat as food.
New Jersey has increased efforts to keep farmers and veterinarians up to date on mad cow disease, state officials say.
The state tests cattle 18 months and older -- those considered most at risk. Any animal showing signs of neurological disease must be reported to state officials within 48 hours, Dr. Halpern said. Officials also inspect cattle sold at weekly auctions in Hackettstown and Pilesgrove and 15 to 20 feed mills in the state. Since 1997 federal law has banned giving cattle any feed made from mammalian byproducts.
''We've been informing the farmers about everything that's been going on and not only through our office but through county extension agents,'' Dr. Halpern said about the state's recent actions. ''They're well aware of not only the clinical signs but what their responsibilities are in reporting and not feeding materials they're not allowed to feed.''
In 2002 New Jersey beef production amounted to 12.7 million pounds; some stays in New Jersey but much of it goes to markets along the East Coast, Ms. Gruzlovic said. By comparison, Texas, the No.1 supplier, produced 7.2 billion pounds. New York State produced 212 million pounds.
''Only five other states produce less than New Jersey,'' Ms. Gruzlovic said. They are Alaska, Delaware, Massachusetts, New Hampshire and Rhode Island.
American beef prices reached record highs last year but have dropped since foreign countries banned the import of beef from the United States after the discovery of the diseased cow in Washington State.
Richard Byma, 52, a Sussex Borough dairy farmer, says the market is a wait-and-see situation. He sold a cow at the Hackettstown auction last week for 20 cents a pound less than he had expected, and he attributed the price drop to fear of mad cow disease.
''Maybe people are shying away from beef,'' Mr. Byma said. ''We're confident our beef is O.K., but I know the prices were down 25 cents from different markets in Pennsylvania.''
Mr. Byma, who bought his farm 31 years ago next to the one he grew up on, makes a living with his 25-year-old son, Henry, selling milk from 300 cows. But he sells cows that no longer produce milk, and these go into the food supply, a good percentage for hamburger. He says such sales help to pay the bills for a way of life in which the profit margin is very small.
Now he thinks the mad cow scare cannot help but to cut into that cushion. ''It's going to hurt our bottom line,'' Mr. Byma added.
But maybe not.
At J.T. McToole's, a waitress, Denise McKay, said people were still ordering steaks and other low-carbohydrate, high-protein foods. ''They're more interested,'' Ms. McKay said, ''in the Atkins diet and the South Beach diet than mad cow disease.''
AGRICULTURE
