THE hundreds of animated figures and some 110,000 multi-colored lights that for 35 years brought thousands of visitors to rural Killingly will be cheering tourists a bit further north next holiday season.
Mervin R. Whipple, whose elaborate free display earned him the nickname ''Mr. Christmas,'' said he sold his entire collection of animated Santas, reindeer, cartoon characters and elves to a Massachusetts businessman who had read about Mr. Whipple's desire to sell it during a spate of holiday season news coverage.
The buyer, Kevin Meehan, said he planned to add Mr. Whipple's display to one he already has used to light up his 42-acre farm in the Worcester suburb of Millis.
''He had the most extensive Christmas collection I've ever seen,'' Mr. Meehan said of the display Mr. Whipple had annually expanded until he extinguished the lights on New Year's Day 2003. ''This will be a big addition for us. It will at least double the size. We have just 30 pieces of animation now.''
The larger display will continue to be free and open to the public, he said.
Neither man would disclose the sales price. Mr. Whipple said last month that he had offered to sell his collection to Killingly for $260,000.
Mr. Meehan last week began loading pieces of the display for the trip north. It could take him three or four weeks to transport the entire collection, he said.
After newspaper articles about Mr. Whipple's decision to halt his display appeared in late December, Mr. Meehan said he began calling Whipples listed in the Killingly telephone book.
''I had called three when that person said, 'I know Mervin, let me give you his number,''' Mr. Meehan said.
Mr. Whipple said he laughed at Mr. Meehan's first offer, but the two continued to negotiate.
''He didn't realize how much I had,'' Mr. Whipple said.
Mr. Whipple said that although it will be difficult to see the display he nurtured for so many years move out of Killingly, he was happy that Mr. Meehan will include information about the display's origin when it is lit at the farm on Thanksgiving.
''I hope he will spend Thanksgiving with us,'' Mr. Meehan said of Mr. Whipple. ''I think what we do with it will make him proud.''
UPDATE
