Last Monday night at Pastis in the meatpacking district, David Allyn, a young social scientist with an interest in embarrassment, was training his Harvard-trained eye at some sleek people by the bar.
''Look at her studied boredom,'' he said of one. ''She's not even doing it with style.''
''This guy in the suede cap has no affect,'' he added. ''He decided the only way to look good is not to smile. He won't risk embarrassment.''
A book by Mr. Allyn, out this month, is called ''I Can't Believe I Just Did That: How (Seemingly) Small Embarrassments Can Wreak Havoc in Your Life and What You Can Do to Put a Stop to Them.''
In a culture overpopulated with attention grabbers, midriff barers and superficial self-help gurus, what does Mr. Allyn have to offer? For one thing, he is a wicked observer of self-conscious people at their less than best. For another, his suggestions are meant to encourage both civic mindednesss and fun.
His credo? ''There is too much caution in the world.''
So what does he think you should do at a movie theater where a bunch of unruly teenagers are ruining everyone's viewing experience? ''Call them on it. Tell them to knock it off or they're out of there,'' he said. And if you see someone who looks interesting and bored on a bus? Take a chance of being rejected and say hello. This tactic led to the production of a play he wrote and a teaching position at Princeton.
Now a visiting scholar at Columbia, Mr. Allyn, 34, would like to see more strangers communing with one another. At gyms, single people look as if they are at work, when they could be flirting. In Laundromats, they could be networking. At bars, they stare into space.
''People are managing their images all the time,'' he said as he sat down for dinner at Matsuri, the cool new Japanese restaurant in Chelsea's Maritime Hotel. ''They're scared of making fools of themselves. I would rather you say something stupid than be too cautious. I'm all for embracing embarrassment.''
So in his better world, we would go right up to the famous in the supermarket and engage them? ''People aren't children,'' he said. ''If you embarrass them they will live.''
Where did Mr. Allyn's interest in embarrassment come from anyway? From a stepmother too much into his appearance as a child, he said. Then there was his stepfather, John Wallach, an editor for Hearst newspapers, who died in 2002. He would talk to anyone, and it embarrassed his stepson terribly.
''He'd go into a restaurant and ask people if what they were eating was good,'' Mr. Allyn said, ''and then he'd ask if he could taste it.''
Mr. Allyn did not do that while eating at Matsuri. But after remarking that the couple he was overhearing to his right seemed embarrassed to converse ''authentically,'' he turned his highly-tuned ear to the three men to his left.
At first, hearing them talk about women, the market and cars (''The three things men always talk about,'' he said) he surmised they would leave unfulfilled. Then, after seeing one toss a pill in foil across the table and hearing him say something about sex, he leaned toward the men with a grin.
''Is that Viagra?'' he asked.
''Levitra'' came the answer with a smile.
''How do you guys know each other?'' Mr. Allyn persisted, just as his stepfather might have.
''From summer camp,'' one said. ''There's comfort here.''
It was a little moment that brightened a dimly lighted room.
''My philosophy is that people want to connect,'' Mr. Allyn said after they had left.
As for his stepfather, once Mr. Allyn was old enough to see it, he realized that the man was absolutely democratic when talking to anyone, and he decided he wanted to be like him as an adult.
And when, in 1993, Mr. Wallach started Seeds of Peace, a world-renowned summer camp in Maine for Palestinian, Israeli and Egyptian children, Mr. Allyn marveled at how many people flocked in to help the cause. ''From donors to counselors to janitors, he knew everyone he needed to know,'' Mr. Allyn said proudly. ''It was beautiful.''
Moments later he returned from the men's room. ''The sociology of embarrassment at urinals,'' he said, ''is fascinating.''
THE AGE OF DISSONANCE
