LYNN'S arms are a map of addiction.
Her skin is pocked by needle marks, scored by more than a decade of abuse. Small knots of scar tissue cover the thin lines of her veins; a jagged patch of missing flesh marks a runaway infection and a surgeon's knife. A fresh needle track burns dead center, a glowing purple reminder of the drug that is the defining feature of her life.
''Nobody does this because it is fun,'' she said, hunching on a chair in a crowded counseling center here. ''It is not fun anymore.''
In New Jersey, every time an addict jabs a needle into his arm, he risks his life. As poisonous as heroin is, it does not compare with what might be lurking in every hypodermic syringe on the street. Dirty needles, shared between addicts, have become the primary source of new AIDS cases in the state.
According to the state Health Department, there are currently 61,698 people infected with the virus that causes AIDS and 45,256 people with full-blown AIDS.
Despite this, New Jersey is one of the few states that do not provide some type of access to clean syringes for drug users. For 10 years, public health groups have pushed laws that would make clean needles more accessible, but they have foundered in the Legislature because opponents have questioned whether the program could actually lead to more drug use. As recently as last fall Governor McGreevey and the Health Department threw their weight behind the latest proposal, which died in committee.
To Joseph F. Vitale, a Democrat from Woodbridge who sponsored the unsuccessful bill in the Senate, New Jersey is dancing on the edge of public health disaster.
''You have thousands of people who use needles regularly, and they share them with their friends,'' Mr. Vitale said. ''In the end, what happens is the spread of AIDS has reached critical levels.''
The Health Department estimates that nearly half of the state's intravenous drug abusers are already infected with H.I.V. and even more with the potentially deadly hepatitis C. Most addicts have seen friends die from AIDS, though they are afraid to name the disease out loud. Instead, they call it the package.
''If you are sharing a needle with someone, they will say, 'Do you have the package?''' said Lynn, who declined to give her full name. ''People are still sharing, but they are trying to be cautious about who they are sharing with.''
Assemblyman Reed Gusciora, a Democrat from Princeton, first proposed a bill to provide clean syringes in 1996 and has watched various incarnations die in nearly every legislative session since then. Mr. Gusciora, who also serves on the governor's AIDS council, said New Jersey had the fifth-highest rate of AIDS infection in the nation and was the only state in which the most common form of transmission was intravenous drug use. Still, he said, it has been impossible to push the measure through because many legislators are afraid to appear soft on crime or illegal drugs.
Opponents say it is not that simple. Some think it is wrong for the Legislature to take action that condones illegal drug use and are uncomfortable with the message that such a messure would send.
''I don't believe the government should encourage illegal behavior and I believe that is what this law would do,'' said Assemblyman Michael J. Doherty, a Republican from Warren County.
Others have questioned the effectiveness of the program.
''The goal of society should not be to allow a destructive behavior and do nothing to correct the illness,'' said Assemblyman Guy R. Gregg, a Republican from Flanders. ''It is society giving up on people, and I don't think that is a good message.''
Mr. Gregg said a better solution would be to try to make it harder -- not easier -- to use drugs. ''We should do our best to rehabilitate these individuals,'' he said.
While Mr. Gusciora agreed that treatment was the best solution, he said that in the short term, the state had to deal with an impending health crisis.
''We have 22,000 AIDS orphans that we have to take care of,'' he said. ''We have the highest percentage of women with AIDS in the country, and there is no end in sight. Doing nothing should not be an option.''
Dirty and Dull Needles
Jay Petillo sat in his office in a church basement in New Brunswick, explaining how a bleach kit can help drug users clean their needles. Noise from a television drifted in from the next room, where six ragged-looking men slouched on worn couches and chairs stared blankly at a videotape of ''Training Day,'' a movie about corrupt narcotics officers in Los Angeles.
But Mr. Petillo, who directs a drug outreach program, said the bleaching kits had their limits. For one thing, drug users fighting pangs of withdrawal might not take the time to clean their syringes very carefully. And bleach does not prevent the infections that come from repeatedly using a dull needle -- sometimes sharpened on the strike plate of a matchbook cover.
"The dull needles tear their skin," he said, resulting in ulcerations that lead to other infections and scarring.
The nonprofit program directed by Mr. Petillo, called the Chai Project (chai means life in Hebrew), was the last effort to conduct a needle exchange in New Jersey. The group handed out clean needles until the fall of 1998, when its director, Diana McCague, was arrested by an investigator for the Middlesex County prosecutor. These days, the group offers only counseling and hot meals to addicts.
If the state legalized needle exchanges, the Chai Project would quickly begin distributing clean syringes, Mr. Petillo said, because ''this is a very important issue for us.''
''So much of H.I.V. in New Jersey is preventable,'' he added.
Clifton R. Lacy, the state's health commissioner, agrees. Dr. Lacy and the governor have called for the state to legalize some form of access to clean needles, saying it was no longer a matter of condoning or condemning drug abuse but an urgent health problem.
''It is an extremely important public health measure,'' he said. ''We are not just talking about H.I.V., we are talking about all blood-borne diseases.''
And although the latest proposal was also defeated, the debate over free access to syringes carries on, with those on both sides of the argument offering scientific studies to bolster their positions.
Dr. Lacy said the consensus of the scientific community was that access to needles decreased the transmission of diseases while not increasing the number of drug addicts. A recent study conducted by the United States surgeon general backed up that contention.
The study, made public in March 2000, found that when a syringe exchange was part of an overall AIDS prevention program, it ''reduces transmission of H.I.V. and does not encourage the illegal use of drugs.''
In New Jersey, the state Health Department says about 153,000 people are in need of drug treatment, of whom about 36,700 use injected drugs like heroin. The department also estimates that 80 to 85 percent of people addicted to injected drugs were infected with some form of hepatitis.
Dr. Lacey said the governor has called for a pilot program for needle exchanges in connection with a hospital. And indeed, the measures proposed by Mr. Vitale and Mr. Gusciora would have allowed nonprofit groups or hospitals to run exchange programs under state supervision, and would have legalized the purchase of syringes without prescriptions at pharmacies.
''Perhaps the most important factor is the conduit to treatment, counseling and health care in general,'' he said. ''It provides a bridge to engage individuals in health care who might otherwise not have access to the system.''
University Hospital in Newark already runs a similar program, though without providing free needles. The hospital sends vans into Newark and the surrounding communities, offering free AIDS testing and health counseling.
Robert L. Johnson, chairman of the department of pediatrics at the New Jersey division of the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey and director of adolescent and young adult medicine at the hospital, said a similar outreach program would be an effective way to combat the spread of AIDS among drug users.
''It is a no-brainer,'' Dr. Johnson said.
University Hospital, in downtown Newark, has one of the country's largest adolescent AIDS units, so Dr. Johnson sees firsthand the effect of disease spread through drug use.
''Until this point, the leading cause of transmission of the disease has been intravenous drug use,'' he said. ''We are not going to win the battle without doing something about that. If we do nothing about needles, we are going to continue to have an epidemic in New Jersey.''
Robert Heimer, a professor of epidemiology and public health at the Yale Medical School, said federal studies conducted by the university showed a direct link between access to clean needles and declines in AIDS infections.
''You can dramatically change the nature of the epidemic,'' Dr. Heimer said.
One group of researchers followed needle exchange programs in New Haven, Bridgeport and Hartford for more than 10 years. In each of those cities, Dr. Heimer said, the infection rates among drug users showed substantial declines.
''What is distinctive about the drop in Connecticut is the percentage of cases among injectors dropped more precipitously than anything else,'' he said. ''When you look at the declines in injector-associated H.I.V. you also see those declines restricted to the cities that have needle exchanges and you don't see them to the same degree among the cities in the rest of the state.''
A more recent study conducted by Yale also found that an exchange program cut the number of old syringes just tossed on the street. Dr. Heimer said researchers had counted used syringes in neighborhoods in Hartford, which has a program, and compared that with the number of those discarded in Springfield, Mass., which does not.
Based on his experience, Dr. Heimer said that allowing infection rates to climb among drug users was a public health ''time bomb'' -- increasing the number of people with blood-borne diseases and making sick addicts susceptible to a variety of infections because of dirty and dull needles.
''They can spread this disease to their non-drug-using partners, to people they chance upon, to their children,'' he said. ''We will throw huge amounts of money at public health measures that don't work, and we are not willing to throw small amounts of money at programs that do work.''
But in New Jersey, Dr. Johnson, who is chairman of the governor's AIDS council, said making the case for access to free needless was much easier to do in scientific journals than in the halls of the Legislature.
''The political issues have interfered with it,'' he said. ''The health issue is very clear. You have a means of transmission; you end that and you end the problem.''
A Vigorous Opponent
Senator Ronald L. Rice does not agree. Mr. Rice, a Democrat who represents sections of Newark and Irvington, said that allowing free access to syringes would do little to help neighborhoods plagued with dealers and addicts. If anything, he said, it would aggravate the situation.
''If you give someone a free needle, the only thing you are giving them is an instrument that has air in it,'' he said. ''For the needle to be effective, you have to get the substance that goes in the needle. And that takes the people right back to the street corners of Newark, Paterson, Jersey City.''
Over the last 10 years, Senator Rice has been one of the most vigorous opponents of needle exchanges. He worries about the effect such programs can have in the inner -city, where ''the cry from homeowners and business people is please get these drug dealers off our street corners.''
''We feel imprisoned in our homes,'' he said. ''We can't do business.''
Moreover, Senator Rice disputes the statistics and the arguments put forth by health care workers that needle exchanges decrease infection rates without increasing drug use.
''If you go out on your own volition and talk to drug dealers, they will tell you that people will share a clean needle,'' he said. ''A clean needle will become a shared needle.''
Mr. Rice, a former police officer in Newark, also says he has a moral problem with turning a blind eye to illegal drug use. ''Under the auspices of health care,'' he said, ''we are encouraging people to go out and do something that is illegal.''
The problem, as Mr. Rice sees it, is that needle exchanges do nothing to decrease the drug problem in the cities. With a heavy dose of sarcasm, he said he would support needle exchange programs, but only in suburban towns.
''The key to addressing the H.I.V. problem is what government does not want to do,'' he said. ''We have got to put more money into prevention and education, into treatment facilities and into research.''
Other groups that have opposed the programs include the New Jersey State Association of Chiefs of Police. Michael Mastronardy, the organization's president and the police chief in Dover, said the group was concerned that easy access to needles would not only encourage drug use but make it difficult for officers to make arrests for possession of drug paraphernalia.
So far, the opponents have clearly held the field in the Legislature. Although one bill calling for needle exchange did make it out of the Senate Health, Human Services and Seniors Committee in 1998, no proposal has reached the floor for a vote.
''When you talk about why things are the way they are in New Jersey, part of it is no one has had the guts on a state political level to stand up and say we have a public health crisis,'' said Roseanne Scotti, director of the New Jersey Drug Policy Project, an advocacy group.
Ms. Scotti said New Jersey -- ''decades behind the curve'' because of its high rate of AIDS -- and Delaware were the only states that did not provide some sort of access to clean syringes.
For his part, Senator Robert W. Singer, a Republican from Monmouth County, is trying to change that. Mr. Singer, usually conservative in his political outlook, says opponents of needle access refuse to face a growing problem.
''I am certainly anti-drug and I understand the harm drugs cause,'' he said. "But I also understand what is being created by dirty needles. It is creating an epidemic in our state.''
Mr. Singer contended that access to clean needles was good public health policy and also made sense from a financial standpoint. He said the state spent hundreds of thousands of dollars a year to care for indigent AIDS patients -- money that could be saved by access to a 75-cent syringe.
''The belief that if you make it accessible, people are going to run out, buy needles and become drug addicts is ludicrous,'' he said.
At the end of the legislative session last year, Mr. Singer and Mr. Vitale co-sponsored a bill that would have allowed for state-supervised distribution programs, but it was sidetracked by an internal legislative conflict.
Rather than introduce the measure through the health committee, which Mr. Vitale heads, the senators sent it through the Commerce Committee. The two sponsors said it was a matter of expediency -- too many other bills were stacked up. But Senator Rice, also a member of the Health Committee, contended that they were maneuvering to avoid him.
In the end, Senator Vitale withdrew the bill rather than risk a public feud with Mr. Rice, a fellow Democrat. Still, he said he would resubmit the measure in the next legislative session.
''The simple and most important fact is that it will save lives,'' he said.
While saying he understood that Senator Rice ''honestly believes this will worsen a horrible problem,'' Mr. Vitale insisted that the continuing spread of disease through infected needles required an immediate solution.
As to whether he can convince a majority of his colleagues, who have historically opposed any sort of needle exchange, Mr. Vitale is less certain.
''The spread of AIDS has reached critical levels in New Jersey,'' he said. ''People are going to continue to die. That is just the sad reality.''
Correction:  February 1, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 11 about the spread of AIDS through drug users' use of dirty needles misstated the number of people in New Jersey infected with the AIDS virus, H.I.V., and the number of those with AIDS. Last June 30, according to the state Department of Health and Senior Services, 14,383 people, not 61,698, were infected, and 16,364 people, not 45,256, had AIDS. Since the beginning of the AIDS epidemic in the 1980's, according to the state, 61,698 cases of H.I.V. and AIDS have been reported; of those infected, 45,256 have died.
Correction:  February 29, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 11 about the spread of AIDS through drug addicts' use of dirty needles misstated the number of people in New Jersey who have died of AIDS. (The error was repeated in a correction in this space on Feb. 1.) Since the start of the epidemic in the 1980's, according to the State Department of Health and Senior Services, 61,698 cases of H.I.V. and AIDS have been reported, and 30,951 of those infected have died.
