MAYBE she staged her own death and is living it up in a secret tropical hideaway. Maybe Henri Paul, the chauffeur on the fateful night, was an agent for MI6, Britain's equivalent of the C.I.A., hired by the royal family to kill her (and himself -- oops!) as their Mercedes sped through a Parisian underpass.
Or, as the exasperated columnist Simon Hoggart of The Guardian wrote on Thursday, maybe Diana, Princess of Wales, died on Aug. 31, 1997, because ''Prince Charles, together with various gay courtiers, shot at the car from a stealth helicopter just as it entered the tunnel.''
You could speculate endlessly about Diana's death -- and 27 percent of the British public, by one poll, believe that it was murder -- but until last week you would have been hard-pressed to find a responsible public figure willing to entertain any of the conspiracy theories.
That all changed Tuesday. In an odd turn of events, Michael Burgess, the man presiding over the British inquests into the deaths of Diana and the boyfriend who died with her, Emad Mohamed al-Fayed, mysteriously refused to dismiss the murder hypotheses.
''I am aware that there is speculation that these deaths were not the result of a sad, but relatively straightforward, road traffic accident in Paris,'' Mr. Burgess said, before directing the Metropolitan Police to look into the matter and report back.
Mr. Burgess was hardly announcing a Warren Commission for modern times, but his astonishing request heartened proponents of the murder theory, as well as throwing a small crumb of legitimacy, perhaps, to those who believe that the 1969 lunar landing took place on a Hollywood back lot and that Elvis lives (with Diana, maybe!) in a Florida trailer park.
As far as Diana goes, most nonaccident theories have been discredited. In 1999, the French authorities concluded that the accident took place because Mr. Paul, the driver, was drunk and speeding out of control. On Thursday, Jean-Claude Mules, a senior police officer in that investigation, told The Daily Telegraph that the continued rumors of murder and coverup were ''absurd'' and that his team had already looked into the various ''hypotheses, theories and allegations'' swirling around the accident.
Yet the rumors persist, like niggling gnats. Some people might find them good conversation pieces, as ice-breaking as the English weather; others might be ''X-Files''-style enthusiasts, seeing second gunmen lurking behind every shrub and plots behind every unexplained detail; and others, said Cary Cooper, a professor of psychology and health at Lancaster University, simply take emotional comfort from them.
''People need explanations,'' Mr. Cooper said in an interview. ''Diana was attractive, young and a celebrity, and quite a lot of people can't understand it when a young person dies. They have to find some kind of theory, some kind of explanation behind it.''
Mr. Cooper said that some people find that believing in all-powerful government agencies, even secret and ruthless ones, is more palatable than accepting that death is unpredictable.
''If things can just happen to you randomly, it means you are vulnerable,'' he said. ''We'd rather think there was something behind it, because then we could, maybe, control it. If we can find someone who killed Kennedy, maybe we can find a way so that it doesn't happen again, not just to other Kennedys, but to other people.''
Meanwhile, Mr. Fayed's father, Mohamed al-Fayed, who owns Harrods department store and has said he is ''99 percent certain'' that the crash was not an accident, has been fanning the flames of the theories with a variety of lawsuits seeking, for instance, to force various governments to release their files on the crash.
Diana's own emotional fragility, her dependency on New Age healers and psychics and her tendency to share even off-the-wall, paranoid insights with a wide swath of friends, servants and therapists have also kept the theories alive. Now that she is dead, many of those the princess confided in have in turn confided to the tabloid press, which is always eager to seize on, and pay for, new Diana-related material.
Thus, The Daily Mirror reported on Wednesday that Diana had predicted her own death, reproducing a letter in her handwriting saying that ''my husband'' (Prince Charles) was plotting to have her killed in a car accident. The letter was provided by Paul Burrell, Diana's former butler, who has just published a tell-all book about the princess.
The next day, The Daily Mail unearthed another confidante, a therapist named Simone Simmons, who said she was hired by Diana in 1993 to rid Kensington Palace of ''negative energy.'' Ms. Simmons, who said she often spent up to 10 hours a day on the telephone with Diana, said that the princess generally felt vulnerable and persecuted, and not just by Charles.
Ms. Simmons said she had received similar letters from Diana, listing different people that the princess thought were out to get her. ''In 1994, she was convinced there was an Arab conspiracy, that the Saudi royal family wanted to kill her,'' Ms. Simmons told The Mail. ''Another time she thought the C.I.A. wanted to bump her off.''
Several years ago, James Hewitt, the cavalry officer who was Diana's lover, said in a television documentary that people connected to either the royal family or the secret services had warned him that if he did not break up with the princess, he would come to a bad end, like a former bodyguard and confidant of Diana's who died in a suspicious motorcycle accident in 1988. (Actually, Mr. Hewitt was last seen peddling a cache of Diana's private letters.)
Outside Kensington Palace on Thursday, Mark Jamieson, a 46-year-old handyman from Australia visiting London with his two daughters, said the conspiracy theories sounded as good as any explanation to him.
''It was probably a tragic accident,'' Mr. Jamieson said. Then he thought for a moment. ''But if there was a conspiracy, I wouldn't be surprised. Maybe Charles hinted to somebody that she'd be better off dead, and someone took it literally.''
''In fact, I'd like to think that Charles did it, because I don't like him at all,'' Mr. Jamieson said.
