FUNDS that owned small-company stocks and value stocks were among the biggest winners in the fourth quarter of 2003, but all major categories grew robustly, according to Morningstar Inc.
Managers of three of the top-performing actively managed funds that are open to new investors talked about what led to their strong results and about their outlook for 2004.
Steel Proves Its Strength
Steel and aluminum stocks helped the $52 million ICON Materials fund return 29.6 percent in the fourth quarter. The fund topped the list of actively managed funds that are open to new investors, taking second place among all diversified funds.
The manager, Derek N. Rollingson, 31, says he chooses the fund's 35 to 50 stocks from the Standard &amp; Poor's SuperComposite 1,500 index. He uses a valuation system that considers historical earnings, projected earnings, stock price volatility and other factors. The model, run daily, creates an intrinsic value per share for all 118 companies within 15 industries in the materials sector.
Steel stocks accounted for 16 percent of the fund's assets at the end of 2003, up from 9 percent a year earlier, Mr. Rollingson said. Aluminum stocks accounted for 12 percent of the fund's assets at the end of 2003, up from 2 percent a year earlier.
One of the fund's best performers was Allegheny Technologies, based in Pittsburgh, up more than 100 percent for the quarter. Allegheny is a large producer of specialty materials whose products include stainless steel, nickel-based and cobalt-based alloys, titanium, specialty steels and tungsten.
The fund also made money in Commonwealth Industries, based in Louisville, Ky., which makes flat rolled aluminum sheet and aluminum tubing as well as flexible aluminum conduits used in electrical systems. Shares of the company rose 112 percent for the quarter.
Another winner was OM Group in Cleveland, up 79 percent. OM produces specialty metals used in the auto, electrical and other industries.
Mr. Rollingson said that ICON's valuation model indicated continuing strength over all in the materials sector, where stocks still sell at attractive prices. At the moment, he said, ''we're starting to see a lot of value and strong performance in the commodity chemicals industry.'' That industry is still trading very cheaply and has plenty of room for a rally, he said.
Bargain Shopper
The stock market's strength at the end of the year helped some of the cheap stocks owned by the $97 million Tocqueville Small Cap Value fund rebound sharply. The fund returned 22.74 percent for the quarter.
The manager, Jean-Pierre Conreur, 66, calls himself a contrarian investor. He looks for companies whose stock prices are near their 12-month lows and whose price-to-sales multiples are near their historical lows over the last 5 or 10 years. Then he looks for strong financial statements, to help ensure that a company's short-term problems do not affect its long-term prospects.
Two of the portfolio companies that supply the automobile industry rebounded sharply at year-end. ''They were upgraded by practically every house on Wall Street,'' Mr. Conreur said, ''because the outlook for automotive productivity is improving.''
One was the Visteon Corporation, a global supplier of automotive systems, modules and components to vehicle manufacturers like General Motors, Toyota, DaimlerChrysler, Volkswagen, Honda, Renault, Nissan and BMW. Its stock rose 58 percent in the quarter. Another was Tower Automotive, based in Grand Rapids, Mich., up 52 percent. Tower makes structural components and assemblies used by automotive equipment manufacturers.
The fund also made money in the 3Com Corporation, based in Marlborough, Mass., which provides data and networking products, and support and maintenance services to commercial businesses and public sector organizations. The company's stock price rose 38 percent, partly because of the success of its joint venture in China to manufacture routers used in telecommunications equipment, Mr. Conreur said.
He plans to continue seeking companies with depressed stock prices, strong finances and improving business prospects. ''I'm sure that I will find some cheap stocks as we move forward,'' he said.
Value in Health and Utilities
The managers of the $52 million Berwyn fund say contrarian stock-picking helped them return 22.6 percent in the fourth quarter.
Robert E. Killen, 62, and Lee S. Grout, 32, the fund's co-managers, choose the fund's roughly 40 stocks from among companies with price-to-earnings ratios that are lower than the market average. They buy companies across all industries, but they said they were finding particular value in health care and utilities stocks.
One winner was the FPIC Insurance Group, based in Jacksonville, Fla., which specializes in liability insurance products and services for physicians, dentists and other health care providers, as well as for lawyers. FPIC's stock rose 66 percent in the quarter, Mr. Killen said.
Management changes and improving gross profit margins drove the fourth-quarter returns of the Quidel Corporation of San Diego. The company makes rapid diagnostic tests for use in physician's offices, hospitals and clinical laboratories. Its shares rose 61 percent.
The fund also made money in Drew Industries of White Plains, which makes parts for recreational vehicles and manufactured housing. The stock rose 50 percent in the quarter ''as the market began to believe in management's ability to grow revenues in spite of the lackluster industries they operate in,'' Mr. Grout said.
The managers say they are cautious about the stock market. The fund's cash stake is 11 percent, more than double the typical 5 percent. ''We're keeping a close eye on the strength of the dollar versus foreign currencies and potentially higher interest rates,'' Mr. Killen said.
