AARON KELLER says he has been trying to keep meetings on track at his brand development company, Capsule, since he founded it in 1999.
He passed out agendas and set time limits. He even tried having moderators for each session, to make sure no one veered off track.
But the meetings continued to drag. So he came up with a different idea: new furniture for the conference room. ''I bought the hardest, most uncomfortable chairs I could find,'' Mr. Keller said. ''Now nobody wants to sit on them, so people talk quickly.''
''We don't even have to keep time anymore,'' he said. Meetings at the company, which is based in Minneapolis, now last about 30 minutes, he said, rather than the hour or two they sometimes used to take.
With reduced work forces at many companies, there is more pressure on workers and executives to be efficient, said Patti Hathaway, the author of ''Untying the 'Nots' of Change,'' which gives advice about handling changes at work. ''Nobody can afford to waste time anymore sitting in a meeting that isn't productive,'' she said. ''And the reality is, most corporate meetings are a colossal waste of time.''
An April survey of 613 workers by Office Team, a temporary-staffing company in Menlo Park, Calif., indicated what workers think about the subject. On a list of workplace time wasters, ''meetings that last too long'' came in first, chosen by 27 percent of the respondents.
Brad Cooper, an author and time management expert based in Denver, said that business from corporate clients seeking help in shortening meetings has tripled in the past two years. ''It's the No.1 thing'' he is being asked about, he said. Mr. Cooper said he knew of several companies where corporate board meetings that used to last an entire day have been pared to one or two hours.
''There's a tremendous pressure to keep such sessions short,'' he said.
Ms. Hathaway says some executives have gone to desperate lengths to reduce meeting time. She said she recently visited one client company where the chief executive required employees to stand during meetings. She has also seen executives blow whistles and use stopwatches.
Gina Hall, a managing consultant in Orlando for DBM, a global human resources consulting firm, said that executives ''are looking for a way to exchange ideas in a way that doesn't monopolize people's time.'' She added: ''I see people get together every week because that's been the routine. But then when the meeting begins, everyone just sits around and looks at each other and says, 'Does anybody have anything to discuss?'''
That was the situation at Barnhart/CMI, a marketing and advertising firm based in Denver, before its new executive vice president, Cheryl Akright, joined the firm in September. Her first order of business was to cancel all of the company's regular meetings. ''It was ridiculous,'' Ms. Akright said. ''Every person in the company was in some type of meeting three to four times per day.''
Ms. Akright determined that Barnhart/CMI was losing thousands of dollars a week by holding unnecessary meetings. Because the firm generally bills clients for its employees' work by the hour, she said, each moment spent in meetings often directly affected the bottom line.
Now, Ms. Akright holds only a single one-hour meeting every three weeks, for senior employees to give presentations on various trends in the industry. Other discussions that had been carried out in meetings, she said, are now handled via e-mail, or quick one-on-one conversations.
THE chief executive of I.B.M., Samuel J. Palmisano, was concerned about how many meetings his company's sales representatives attended each week, said Peter Andino, vice president for sales operations and technical support. Specifically, he was concerned that more than 30,000 members of the company's sales force were spending six hours a week, on average, preparing for and attending meetings, Mr. Andino said.
In response, Mr. Palmisano in late 2002 ''told salespeople the only thing they had to do was meet with their manager once a week to get some coaching and mentoring,'' Mr. Andino reported. Now the company's sales representatives meet for 30 minutes on Monday mornings with their managers, and are freed up for their sales work the rest of the week.
The company is so serious about its new rule on meetings, Mr. Andino said, that top executives must approve any unscheduled sessions. Mr. Andino said that he himself had ''busted up'' unauthorized gatherings. He estimates that the I.B.M. sales force has doubled the time spent with customers as a result.
To determine whether a meeting is necessary, Ms. Hathaway suggests, executives should first look at the possible agenda. ''If the purpose of the meeting is simply to disseminate information,'' she said, ''consider whether you can send the information via e-mail instead.''
If a meeting must be held, Ms. Hathaway recommends inviting only those who have a specific role, or having ''revolving attendees'' who leave when a meeting moves to issues in which they are not involved.
One company that uses such tactics is Synygy, a company in Conshohocken, Pa., that provides software and services for employee compensation. When new executives are hired, Synygy puts them through a training course in holding effective meetings, said Anne Luongo, vice president for knowledge management at the company.
The training covers how to prepare for a meeting and how to handle topics that are not on the agenda. At the end of the training, executives are required to role-play various meeting situations to prove that they have grasped the concepts.
''The biggest thing we've found is that people have trouble keeping focused on what they're really trying to accomplish,'' Ms. Luongo said.
Other problems can occur, she said, when one person monopolizes discussion. In such cases, Ms. Hathaway recommends that the executive holding the meeting interrupt the monopolizer, ''try to summarize what he's saying in 10 words or less, and then move the discussion back.''
''If you've got a windbag in the room, you've got to shut him up fast,'' she said.
Executive Life
