When the Spirit rover finally rolls into action on Mars in the coming week, it will be off on a test drive of the scientific premise behind the $800 million mission: that the planet, now frigid and bone dry, once had water in abundance and a climate that just possibly could have supported some forms of life.
''We're thinking hypotheses,'' said Dr. Ray Arvidson of Washington University in St. Louis, deputy principal science investigator of the rover project.
A reasoned hypothesis is the motivation, organizing framework and first step in scientific exploration, especially of a world that in its current position is more than 100 million miles away. It has brought more than 150 scientists, mostly from the United States but also from Germany, Denmark and France, here to the Jet Propulsion Laboratory to see if Spirit and its twin -- Opportunity, to land on Jan. 24 -- prove them right.
The rovers' mission assumed more significance on Thursday, when Bush administration officials said that this coming week the president would propose manned flights to Mars. Among other things, hydrogen and oxygen in water close to the planet's surface would be an abundant source of fuel for a return flight, Dr. Bruce C. Murray, a former director of the laboratory, noted in an interview.
Since Spirit landed on Jan. 3, the mission's science team has found nothing in the striking panoramic pictures of the rock-strewn landscape to dispute the water hypothesis, and nothing to confirm it. But first impressions, team members say, are focusing plans for the rover's early travels over the plain in Gusev crater, near the Martian equator.
''It's a critical time right now,'' said Dr. Nathalie Cabrol, a geologist who helped select the landing site based on analysis of photography by spacecraft orbiting Mars showing that it appeared to be a lake bed connected to a river valley in a region of past glaciers and fresh gullies -- all dry now. Dr. Cabrol ''fell in love with Gusev'' 15 years ago, she said, and has devoted her career since, nearly all her adult life, to a detailed study of it.
''We're still getting acquainted with Gusev in the new pictures and a study of the color spectra of the rocks and soil,'' she added. ''We've identified several potential targets.''
A low hill about one mile southeast of the rover's base, for example, is an appealing destination. The hill could hold some of the oldest material in the four-billion-year-old Gusev basin, and erosion around it could have exposed outcrops revealing sedimentary layers from episodes of volcanic eruptions and water flooding there. The rover may be able to see in the sides of the hill the shoreline of the hypothesized lake.
''You bet we want to go there,'' said Dr. Steven W. Squyres of Cornell, the principal science investigator of the mission. But engineers say they will have to wait and see if Spirit is up to such a long journey.
Dr. Squyres is also looking for a large crater to explore. Pictures from orbit show a few in the region that are several hundred feet wide. The impacts from asteroids or comets could have gouged them out to depths of 75 or 100 feet, providing a window on the Martian subsurface.
The craters may be too steep and deep for the rover. But on the rims it may find rocks ejected from the depths, a prize for geologists.
A shallow circular depression, nicknamed Sleepy Hollow, was at first considered a tempting target, though several geologists now think its priority is slipping.
But Dr. Jim Bell of Cornell, the head of the panoramic camera team, continued to argue that Sleepy Hollow ''perhaps more than anything close to the rover may be the first place to start testing the hypothesis of water on Mars.''
The science team has its disagreements. Certainty about anything Martian is rare, and debate, team members say, is common and healthy. Dr. Cabrol noted: ''We're lively people not lacking in ideas. We don't have a team of people singing the same song at all times.''
No one disagrees with the plan for the rover's immediate assignments: to go to the nearest rock and examine its chemical and mineral properties. At the same time, engineers want to dig into the soil with the rover's wheels to determine the surface strength.
An infrared spectrometer on Spirit has already begun mineralogical tests of the reddish-brown soil and gray rocks from a distance. Geologists read into the mineral composition how and in what environment a rock formed.
Dr. Matt P. Golombek, a planetary geologist at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, is keenly interested in the presence of rounded, smooth rocks near Spirit. He was the leader of the science team for the Pathfinder spacecraft in 1997, and no such round rocks were found at its landing site.
''One way to make a round rock is water, but we don't want to jump to conclusions,'' Dr. Golombek said. ''We scientists like to get numbers, data, not just impressions.''
As Spirit traverses the site, its spectrometers, cameras and microscopes will conduct close-up studies of rocks of all sizes and shapes. From orbital pictures, the most common rock at the site, as it is on Earth, is probably basalt, which is formed by molten material welling up through the crust and solidifying on the surface.
In testing the water hypothesis, geologists will look for signs of ''bound water.'' Clay is a soil with water molecules added to its crystal structure. The rover's instruments will also search for salt crusts probably left by water evaporation or conglomerate rocks, which are a mix of many different minerals brought together usually in flowing water.
Geologists also have an eye out for carbonates like limestone, another rock that could be diagnostic of past water.
In remote-sensing with an infrared spectrometer on the orbiting Mars Global Surveyor, Dr. Philip R. Christensen of Arizona State University found few traces of what appeared to be carbonates on the planet. But similar searches in recent days with the rover produced carbonate signatures at Gusev, perhaps evidence in favor of the lake bed hypothesis.
''Finding carbonates would be a huge big deal,'' Dr. Golombek said.
Yet even the grains of dust and rock will have tales to tell. Large grains can settle out of water even when the water is moving; smaller ones form sediments where the water is still, as in most lakes. A rock with an assortment of grain sizes would suggest that it formed in a mudslide or a variable water current.
So is there any sign of past or present water on the landscape where Spirit is resting?
''So far, we're not doing too well,'' Dr. Golombek said. ''There's precious little in that scene that requires water.''
Looking at some of the first pictures, Dr. Arvidson shook his head at the pitted, jumbled terrain. ''This is not your typical lake bed, if it is a lake bed,'' he said.
Scientists were not discouraged, though. ''If this place was not complex,'' Dr. Cabrol said, ''I would be extremely surprised and disappointed.''
But Spirit's real work has yet to begin. At the current pace of preparations, the six-wheel rover the size of a golf cart is expected to roll off its landing base late Wednesday night to start three months of exploration. The other rover, Opportunity, is scheduled to land at a site on the opposite side of Mars.
Once the rovers start their travels, members of the science team will be watching every move, every picture, every bit of data from the control center here. For the last week they have been adjusting to working on Mars time. Daytime at Gusev is nighttime here.
