YOU can't judge someone until you've walked a mile in his shoes, and you can't fully understand the feeding patterns of a herd of humpback whales until you've swum on their backs and seen what they see.
That's the premise behind ''Crittercam,'' a new 13-part series on the National Geographic Channel that will have its premiere on Saturday with two episodes, at 8 and 8:30 p.m.
The series is named after a small camera developed by National Geographic that can be attached to a variety of animals for short periods of time, making the animals spies for science.
''The animals are a part of it,'' said Dr. Mike Heithaus, a goateed young marine biologist at Florida International University in Miami who is the gung-ho host of the series. ''We're seeing what they're seeing for the first time. This isn't distilled down.''
The Crittercam fits into a thermos-size cylinder on sea missions and an even smaller box on land. It has been affixed to whales in the Alaska seas by means of a suction cup; strapped to the back of a loggerhead turtle and the fin of a shark; and slung from a collar around a female lion in the African desert.
In each episode, a team of scientists led by Dr. Heithaus uses the Crittercam to investigate an elusive aspect of animal life. For humpback whales, it is their apparent team effort in feeding packs. The film confirms the scientists' hypothesis that the whales work together in specialized roles to herd schools of fish together, providing a meal for all.
For the lions, it is the question of whether the animals are trespassing on nearby cattle ranches -- a suspicion confirmed when the lions are seen creeping across a desert road in the dead of night.
In each case, the National Geographic engineers went to some lengths to design ways to attach the device without hurting the animal. The suction cup for each whale's camera includes a screw held in place with a dollop of magnesium, which dissolves in salt water. After a while, the screw loosens and breaks the suction's seal. The Crittercam floats to the service, and the whale is none the wiser.
''We're making sure this is as unobtrusive as possible,'' Dr. Heithaus said. ''We do this because we love the animals but also to have as little an impact as possible. If we're affecting the behavior of an animal, we're not really learning anything about them.''
But as serious as the science behind ''Crittercam'' may be, the show is no ''Mutual of Omaha's Wild Kingdom.'' Dr. Heithaus and his colleagues are very evidently having a blast on each adventure, laughing and joking about the difficulties of affixing a suction cup to the back of a 40-ton whale. And when the mission is accomplished -- by means of a long pole held out from the ship's edge during the brief moments the whales come up for air -- the scientists high-five like basketball players.
''I think the show portrays fairly accurately how field projects happen,'' Dr. Heithaus said. ''We're real people who like to enjoy our jobs. We're rigorous about the methods we apply, but that doesn't mean we can't have fun and enjoy ourselves while we're out there.''
---- Ben Sisario
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS
