AS the family and friends of Maxine Postal, the former presiding officer of the Suffolk County Legislature, attended a memorial service for her at a Dix Hills chapel last Sunday, news reports about her death created some confusion about its cause.
Ms. Postal, who was re-elected to the Legislature in November but resigned in December, died on Jan. 1 of the classic form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, a rare neurological disorder.
This should not be confused with variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, the fatal, brain-wasting human form of mad cow disease contracted by eating meat from an infected cow. There have been no known cases affecting humans in the United States, although a cow infected with mad cow disease was discovered in Washington State last month.
Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, an equally fatal ailment but separate from the variant form, is not linked to eating meat. In fact, Ms. Postal, 61, had been a vegetarian for years, said her companion, Elie Mystal, who was her chief of staff in the Suffolk County Legislature.
''She hadn't had meat in least 20 years or something,'' he said. ''She was not like someone who had beef in the last five years, and she has not been to England.''
Nearly 200,000 cows in Britain were infected with mad cow in recent years, and millions of Britons ate meat or used products derived from the animals. About 150 Europeans have died from the variant form of Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, named for two German doctors, Hans G. Creutzfeldt (pronounced KROITS-felt) and Alfons Jakob (pronounced YAH-cobe), who independently reported the first cases 75 years ago.
Researchers believe mad cow disease is caused by cattle feed that contained protein from rendered cattle. Such feed was banned in 1997. The disease is found in the brains, spinal cords and nervous systems of infected cows, and researchers believe it is triggered by abnormalities in proteins called prions.
Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, the variety that killed Ms. Postal, is also a prion disease, one that is exceedingly rare. Doctors say that it affects one person in a million each year. New York recorded 13 cases last year, 17 in 2002 and 26 in 2001. There was only one death from the disease on Long Island last year, in Nassau. In 2002, there were two deaths in Nassau and two in Suffolk, and in 2001, Suffolk had three deaths and Nassau had one.
Ms. Postal was diagnosed with what is called the sporadic or spontaneous form of the disease, meaning that it arose from no known cause. This form accounts for about 85 percent of cases, doctors say. About 15 percent of the cases are familial, meaning that the disease runs in families, and less than 1 percent are linked to accidental infection during brain surgery.
The disease begins when some of the prions found throughout the body take on an abnormal shape and infect normal prions. The abnormal prions accumulate in the brain, where they eat away at healthy tissue.
Classic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease occurs most commonly in people aged 65 through 69; it does not usually affect people younger than 30 or older than 75. Men and women are affected about equally. ''It is not associated with any food, and we don't know how it is transmitted,'' said Dr. Rahman Pourmand, a professor of neurology at Stony Brook University. ''It is confirmed that it is not from mad cow disease.''
Dr. Pourmand said that the classic form progressed quickly and could cause memory loss, balance problems and tremors or jerking motions within three to six months of onset. He said the variant form was likely to affect younger people and took a year to 18 months to run its course.
Ms. Postal took a hard fall on icy steps at her home two years ago and thought for a time that her subsequent medical problems, including spasms, were linked to head injuries from the fall, associates said. One aide said that Ms. Postal tended to ramble and repeat herself when speaking in public in the months that followed.
Mr. Mystal said that settling on a final diagnosis had been a process of eliminating other possible diseases. Most researchers say that only a highly invasive brain biopsy can confirm Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease, but Mr. Mystal said the couple decided against the procedure. He said the results of an M.R.I. done in Florida led to a diagnosis in early December by Dr. Michael D. Geschwind of the Memory and Aging Center at the University of California at San Francisco.
Dr. Geschwind called on Dec. 15, saying ''you have weeks, not months,'' Mr. Mystal said.
On Long Island, Dr. David G. Graham, the director of public health for the Suffolk County Department of Health Services, said there had been no reports of infected beef from the Washington State cow reaching New York.
A Department of Homeland Security official in Washington said last week that mad cow disease had never been studied at the Plum Island Animal Disease Center and that there were no plans for mad cow research at Plum Island in the future.
Alisa Harrison, the Agriculture Department's acting director for communications and the press secretary to the agriculture secretary, said the department tested for mad cow disease at its laboratory in Ames, Iowa. She said research into the disease inside the United States had been limited, in part because of a reluctance to import infectious prions. ''As far as collaboration over in Europe, I think there is some of that we are doing there,'' she said.
