Polio has spread to two more countries in West Africa, further jeopardizing the World Health Organization's goal of wiping out the crippling disease by next year, an official of the agency said Friday.
The health organization has come tantalizingly close to reaching its goal, having reduced the number of new polio cases to the lowest level since it began its program in 1988 to eliminate the disease. The W.H.O. said there were 667 paralytic cases in 2003, about 1 percent of the number in 1988.
But the spread of polio to Benin and Cameroon, which the Geneva-based United Nations agency is expected to announce this week, is a discouraging setback in its $4.6 billion effort to have polio join smallpox as the only diseases to be eliminated from the human population.
''It is a setback, and the situation is really very concerning,'' Dr. David L. Heymann, the epidemiologist in charge of the W.H.O. polio eradication program, said in telephone interviews. ''But we cannot let the effort fail. We have no choice -- we have to stop transmission this year.''
W.H.O. officials are placing the blame squarely with Nigeria, which is Africa's most populous nation and the home of 300 of the new polio cases in 2003, nearly half the world total.
The chief obstacle is opposition to polio immunization by some Islamic leaders in the state of Kano, in the northern part of the country. These opponents contend that the vaccine contains hormones that sterilize girls, Dr. Heymann said.
The W.H.O. strongly disputes the contention.
Ridding the world of its last cases of a disease is one of the most formidable challenges in public health. As long as one polio case exists anywhere, an infected traveler can export the disease to start outbreaks elsewhere in the world.
Nigeria and Niger were the only two West African countries that had never wiped out polio in their own population.
Nigeria has exported polio to at least six West African countries in recent months, Dr. Heymann said. His team is awaiting molecular tests to determine whether the viruses isolated from the Benin and Cameroon cases came from Nigeria or one of the seven neighboring countries that have reported cases. They are: Benin, Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Chad, Ghana, Niger and Togo.
''Fortunately, the imported cases have not led to great clusters of cases,'' fewer than 25 in total, Dr. Heymann said.
But the number of paralytic polio cases is a small fraction of the number of people infected with the polio virus and capable of transmitting it to other people who may become crippled.
Outside of West Africa, the five countries affected by polio and the number of cases are: India (214); Pakistan (96); Afghanistan (8); Egypt (1); Lebanon (1).
To prevent any further spread of the disease, the W.H.O. is taking two major steps.
One is to conduct what it calls ''mop-up campaigns'' to immunize all susceptible children in an area where a new case has occurred.
Cameroon and Benin are now conducting such campaigns in an effort to prevent the imported cases from spreading further. But the immunization campaigns are costly and put an added burden on countries that had previously eradicated polio because they take money from other important health programs, Dr. Heymann said.
In a second move, the W.H.O. has invited the health ministers from affected countries to discuss polio eradication at the agency's headquarters in Geneva on Thursday.
Nigeria's national health minister has made a commitment to attend the meeting, as has a representative of the state of Kano, where the opposition to polio vaccination programs is centered, Dr. Heymann said.
''The only solution is to get the countries that have not stopped transmission of polio to get rid of it,'' he said.
Dr. Heymann said he expected the ministers to sign a public commitment that their countries would do all they could to stop transmission of polio by the end of 2004.
In Kano, Muslim and political officials contend that tests performed there found that polio vaccine contains a dangerous level of the fertility hormone, estrogen, and that this would cause girls who receive the vaccine to become sterile, according to Agence France-Presse.
A Muslim doctor, Ibrahim Datti Ahmed, president of the Supreme Council for Shariah in Nigeria, was quoted by the news agency as saying: ''It's not contamination, it's adulteration. It's an attempt to control the population of the third world.''
But the W.H.O. says the vaccine contains only the Sabin polio virus that protects against the disease.
The Nigerian government appointed a panel of experts that sent the polio vaccine to two laboratories in the W.H.O. network for testing.
''These laboratories found no elements of family planning or any hormones or any infectious agents other than the Sabin polio virus,'' Dr. Heymann said. ''So it has become a real issue between the central government and the state government, and an issue that is very difficult to deal with.''
''The Nigerian government understands that our vaccines are provided by Unicef and that the vaccines are purchased from W.H.O.-approved manufacturers,'' Dr. Heymann said.
The Nigerian president, Olusegun Obasanjo, has announced that the polio vaccine is safe, Dr. Heymann said.
Earlier setbacks forced the W.H.O. to revise to 2005 its original goal of eradicating polio by 2000.
Dr. Jong Wook Lee, the W.H.O.'s director general, has pledged to meet that goal with the aid of Unicef, Rotary International, the United States and other partners. Rotary has contributed about $500 million, Dr. Heymann said.
The W.H.O. says it does not now intend to change the date again and that it fears that many donors and polio-free countries where imported cases are occurring will abandon the goal of eradication.
