FUNDS that invest in pint-sized stocks achieved supersized returns in 2003.
Small-capitalization stock funds, which typically limit their purchases to stocks with market caps of less than $2 billion, trounced funds that buy larger companies.
That wasn't surprising coming out of a bear market, many analysts say, but at this stage of an economic recovery, small companies may have used up the early advantage that comes from being light on their feet.
''They are more economically sensitive,'' said Russel Kinnel, director of fund analysis at Morningstar Inc. ''They are pretty lean companies to start with, so any pickup in sales can often boost them more than average.''
Small-cap funds averaged gains of better than 40 percent last year, while midcap funds rose more than 30 percent and large-cap funds were up more than 20 percent, on average.
Investor sentiment also plays a part in this cyclical pattern, said Stuart Schweitzer, global markets strategist at J.P. Morgan Fleming, the asset management arm of J.P. Morgan Chase. ''When investors are fearful and business conditions are tough -- as they certainly were a year ago -- then smaller companies tend to be hurt the most,'' Mr. Schweitzer said. That gives them more room for recovery, he said, when the economy surprises investors favorably.
He said smaller stocks would probably lag in 2004, perhaps rising a few percentage points, compared with high-single-digit returns for large stocks. ''It is shaping up to be a much tougher year for small caps,'' he said.
But there is little agreement about what size of company the market will favor next year. Mr. Kinnel said the largest companies, like those in the Dow Jones industrial average, were due to outperform. ''When I've seen that long stretch for small caps, I'm more inclined to go with megacap stocks,'' he said. ''They have underperformed for a couple of years.''
Mr. Schweitzer said trends would favor large stocks more broadly, including ''those S.&amp;P. stocks that are household names, but not necessarily megacaps.'' He said midsize companies might be worth a look.
The direction of interest rates may help answer the question. Smaller companies tend to be more sensitive than larger ones to interest rates, and many analysts expect rates to rise in 2004.
Clearly, low interest rates last year benefited smaller companies disproportionately, said Byron R. Wien, chief domestic strategist at Morgan Stanley. ''Some small caps got to be small caps because they were being priced as if they were not going to survive,'' he said. Easy credit allowed even troubled companies to get financing, Mr. Wien said.
But he predicted that rising rates in 2004 would not hurt these companies as much as lower rates helped them in 2003.
Mr. Wien also expects small-cap stocks to grow more slowly than large caps next year. ''A year ago, small caps were undervalued relative to large caps,'' he said. ''Now that price discrepancy isn't so great.''
Historically, however, small-cap stocks have been valued more richly than large caps because smaller companies generally tend to have better growth prospects, said Gerald M. Van Horn, co-portfolio manager of the Stratton Small-Cap Value fund. Although he does not expect the category to outperform the market to the same extent this year, he said, ''I wouldn't forecast a turn back toward large caps.''
''I look at the analyst earnings expectations, and I think there is still some room for upside surprises from many small caps,'' he added.
The Stratton fund was among the best-performing small-cap funds last year, returning 49.6 percent, even though it weighted technology stocks roughly in line with the Russell 2000 and did not own any biotechnology stocks. Those two categories were among the year's hottest.
''When things started to turn around for the health care sector, we saw that it was being led by biotech stocks,'' Mr. Van Horn said, ''but I can't imagine buying biotech in a value fund.'' Instead, he bought shares of smaller health care companies with earnings, like PacifiCare Health, a health insurance company based in Cypress, Calif. The fund owns about 30,000 shares at an average cost of $17. PacifiCare closed 2003 at $67.60.
Home builders also contributed to the fund's strong returns. The Standard &amp; Poor's Supercomposite Homebuilders index was up 97 percent in 2003, and the fund owns shares of 5 of the 10 largest companies in the category. Hovnanian, a Red Bank, N.J., builder, was the fund's largest holding until recently.
Over all, computer hardware and communications were the strongest segments of the small-capitalization market, rising about 80 percent; every sector except energy and utilities rose roughly 30 percent to 60 percent. The S.&amp;P. 500 index, which includes much larger companies, rose 26.4 percent in 2003.
Just as some analysts say 2004 may be a tougher year for small stocks relative to large stocks, it may also be more difficult for technology stocks within the small-stock category.
''I think industrial sectors will rise more gradually, but with less volatility than technology,'' said Boniface Zaino, portfolio manager of the Royce Opportunity fund, a small-cap value fund. ''Industrial products will probably do well because the weakness of the dollar is making our products more attractive overseas.''
Mr. Zaino said that this trend would also benefit agricultural equipment makers, chemical makers and shippers.
The Royce Opportunity fund holds about 500,000 shares of Aspen Technology, which makes software for the chemical processing industry, Mr. Zaino said. The fund bought shares at an average cost of $2.36; they closed 2003 at $10.26.
''The company had suffered with the general decline of spending in the chemical sector,'' Mr. Zaino said. But he said Aspen, based in Cambridge, Mass., was well positioned to benefit from the boom he expects in the industrial sector this year.
Royce Opportunity returned 72.6 percent in 2003, compared with 42.9 percent for small-cap value funds, on average, according to Morningstar.
Mr. Schweitzer, the J.P. Morgan strategist, suggested that many investors were likely to gravitate toward midsize stocks this year, driving up prices. ''These tend to be less liquid than large caps, so flows of money into midcaps might have a disproportionate effect,'' he said.
Michael Hershey, who manages the Henlopen fund, said that the median market capitalization of companies in the fund was likely to rise this year. Henlopen's median market cap is now about $400 million, down from about $700 million at the end of 1999.
Morningstar classifies Henlopen as a small-cap growth fund because most of its holdings are small or even microcap stocks. The portfolio, however, also includes companies as large as $10 billion. Henlopen returned 65 percent in 2003, compared with 45.2 percent for small-cap growth funds, on average.
''We are not bound by any style box,'' Mr. Hershey said. ''But over time, the preponderance of our holdings are always going to be small cap, because that's where you get the opportunities for growth.''
Mr. Hershey said he thought it was ''statistically unlikely'' that small-cap stocks would outperform the market by as much this year as they did in 2003. But he still expects the best growth opportunities in 2004 will be in smaller to midsize companies. ''I don't see small caps fading away,'' he said.
