WITH the Yonkers school district often standing on the brink of insolvency, even the young can be forgiven an old soul's cynicism for the ways of grown-ups. Taking a break from hitting a badminton birdie in the parking lot of the Hudson River Museum last weekend, Supriya Puri, 17, a junior at Gorton High School, spoke in tones that were equal parts impassioned and disheartened. The subject was what she had recently learned about how adults in charge conduct themselves in the real world -- or how they conduct themselves in Yonkers, at any rate.
''They told us that teachers we liked would be getting cut and that they'd stop sports and music and art,'' Supriya said, then paused. ''And then they all went and gave themselves big raises. The schools are depleted. And they decide to take money and put it in their own pockets.''
Teenagers, of course, love to make ogres of authority figures, but that is not Supriya's point here. Rather, she is a student of recent events in Yonkers. And the issue is one of some import: With the education of 27,000 students, many disadvantaged, in the balance, the fate of the Yonkers school district's balance sheet is one of the most consequential financial issues in Westchester.
The beginning of the story (the part before all those double-digit pay raises) has been told many times: the Yonkers school district, long encircled by financial trouble, decided to enter this school year more than $20 million shy of what it would need to complete the year. The result: before the school year was half over, 500 layoffs were announced, as well as the decimation of sports, art and music programs.
While students worried over what teachers and extracurricular activities they would be losing and parents were driven to distraction by the tumult in their children's education, state, city and school officials all blamed one another for not financing or managing the school adequately.
An 11th-hour agreement forestalled layoffs and cuts, but anyone who thinks the settlement will hold over the long haul is either willfully naïve or needs to go immediately to Accounting 101. When any deal involves a combination of borrowed money coupled with $7.5 million in funds from as yet unnamed sources, it doesn't take a green eyeshade to know what's coming next. That tableau of pink slips, cut programs, confused students and irate parents is as much a part of Yonkers' academic future as a part of its past.
If it were possible that such a bad situation could be made worse it was when, right after the settlement, shaky as it was, Angelo Petrone, the Yonkers schools superintendent, was granted a 22 percent salary increase, raising his annual take to $235,000. He was also given a retroactive raise of $43,000.
''I am staggered at the tin ear of that one,'' said State Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky. A spokeswoman for Mr. Petrone said he had no comment.
John D. Spencer, the Republican mayor who left office on New Year's Day, spent his final days at City Hall doling out $1.1 million in raises to commissioners and top staffers. They included his wife, Katherine Spring, who will stay on as chief of staff for the new mayor, Phil Amicone. Mr. Amicone received more than $44,000 in unused vacation and sick time as well as an $8,000 retroactive rise in salary. That was the first of his two raises.
In a specially scheduled meeting held right before New Year's, the City Council voted itself raises that ranged from 17 to 22.6 percent. The council president will make $65,543. Mr. Amicone's salary was increased 17 percent. At $156,100, his salary now makes him one of the nation's highest paid mayors. The mayor of Syracuse, by way of comparison, makes $84,388. The mayor of Buffalo makes $105,000. The mayors of Seattle, Baltimore and Boston all make less than Mr. Amicone.
From Supriya's vantage point, none of this looks very good. ''Basically, all adults are corrupt,'' she said. Like many Yonkers students, because of the financial difficulties, she hasn't been able to get a bus pass. Rain or snow, Supriya will walk a mile to school, with no sidewalks for much of the way. When it snows, she is forced to walk large stretches in the road. As any child knows, that's not safe.
COUNTY LINES
