I HAVE been going to Palm Beach several times a year for nearly two decades, and for the most part the dining options have been limited to upscale chains, attractive but forgettable waterside establishments, and sprawling seafood restaurants where the road to satisfaction is a steak.
It would be overstating it to say that there has been a dining renaissance in the region. In recent visits, however, I have come across a number of small chef-owned operations that focus more on tropical cuisine than Titanic margaritas. And even some of the big, splashy new outlets are aiming higher as diners become more demanding. Many of the restaurants can be found in popular new settings like West Palm Beach's impressive CityPlace, a three-year-old arts and entertainment development. Some are showing up in far less lofty environs.
Noteworthy mom-and-pop-style restaurants are becoming more visible, serving eclectic regional fare. And the buzz in dining circles this season is the arrival in the Brazilian Court Hotel of Daniel Boulud, whose New York restaurant, Daniel, is widely considered to be among the best in the country.
Here is a recent sampling, from T-shirt casual to competitive chic, in and around Palm Beach. (For this report, greater Palm Beach is defined as the area from Jupiter, an oceanside community about 20 minutes north of downtown, to Lake Worth, a short drive south.)
Little Moir's Food Shack
Concealed in the back of a strip mall along U.S. Highway 1 in Jupiter, two-year-old Little Moir's Food Shack looks as if a raucous Key West bar had been uprooted and trucked up north. Not only is this the coolest place I visited but it's also among the best, turning out terrific and creative local seafood with Caribbean and Asian accents.
The dining area is long and narrow, with a bamboo-canopied dining bar facing the small, frenzied kitchen; along the wall are fewer than a dozen colorfully hand-painted tables. The entire place is festooned with surfboards, life preservers, fishing tackle, tropical-themed paintings, photos of customers, and children's drawings. I sensed that the three of us having lunch that day were the only outsiders in the place, a suspicion confirmed when I asked our waitress. Little Moir's does not accept reservations; in fact, it's not even in the phone directory.
Young, cheerful waitresses wearing shorts and T-shirts run through the specials of the day, and one sounds better than the next. My favorite starters -- I had them three times in as many visits -- were deep-fried tuna-and-basil rolls in which the tuna's center remains virtually raw while the coating is golden and crisp. The sliced rolls nest on a tart green salad with spicy cubes of melon.
Don't miss the giant grouper cheeks -- perfectly deep fried with crackly crust almost like fried chicken. Nearly every dish here includes something sweet, but it's never overdone, as in a green salad with papaya, nectarine sections and grapes. You can order fish -- usually tuna, wahoo, dolphin, snapper and grouper -- with your choice of deep-fried crusts that include butternut squash, white sweet potato, celery root and crumbled tortillas. The crunchy seared celery root added nice textural contrast to a rich mahi-mahi steak.
More than 25 brands of beers are available, many from the region. My wife, Amy, ordered the Native Lager, a light, slightly bitter brew made in Orlando ($3.50) that seemed just right with this spicy-sweet food.
Weekend sailors who need extra ballast can take home a portion of the tasty if ineffably rich dessert called whoziwhatzit, a flourless chocolate cake the size of a small hatchet wedge.
Captain Charlie's Reef Grill
Similar in style is this casual, energetic spot nearby, with pine walls, small hand-painted tables, a long dining bar with multicolored stools and plastic palm trees. Servers are brisk and friendly, and their recommendations are usually on the mark.
Fried seafood is exceptionally good, like yellowtail snapper in a light coconut batter, and excellent ''crunchy dolphin,'' enclosed in a sweetish crust of slivered almonds and cornflakes. A challenge to finish, the big bowl of shellfish broth holding littleneck clams, chorizo, corn, capers and red peppers is worth the effort.
The wine list is large; however, beer seemed more appropriate with this laid-back fare.
Café L'Europe
If you want to mingle with the society swells of Palm Beach, stylish Café L'Europe is one of the places to go. For 15 years it held forth on tony Worth Avenue; in 1995 the owners packed up its wood-framed bistro mirrors, brass-railed bar and antique light fixtures and reproduced it two blocks south on South County Road.
Half of the main level of this 175-seat restaurant is turned over to a subdued brick-and-wood formal dining room where jackets are required; on the other is the more lively turn-of-the-century style bistro, my preference, where they say you do not have to dress up but nearly everybody does.
The amiable and attentive staff could not be more accommodating. The current chef, Jens Dahlmann, put in a five-year hitch at Le Cirque 2000 in New York before heading south. His cooking is contemporary and light, characterized by creative uses of grains and vegetables. Nearly everything on the menu sounds appealing -- with the exception of the prices, as most main courses are $30 to $40.
We began with an exceptionally concentrated yet light ''cappuccino'' of lobster bisque in which the chef employs an au courant technique of pouring the soup (or any liquid) into a seltzer dispenser, then shooting the aerated mixture back into the pot.
Crabmeat salad, often an overchilled bore, was a glistening dill-accented mound of lump crab set in a delightful consommé blending ripe tomatoes and grapes.
The bulky wine list presents an impressive inventory from Napa and Sonoma. French offerings are uneven, with few whites but a vast collection of Bordeaux and Burgundy, most at prices that could buy me a very fine suit. I chose a New Zealand sauvignon blanc, the bright and citric Brancot Reserve, for $32.
Most main courses were enjoyable, starting with a meaty Alaskan halibut gift-wrapped in paper-thin salty Serrano ham; the ham's saltiness seemed to accentuate the gentle flavors of the fish. Perfectly cooked red snapper was served over a Basque-style compote dominated by sweet peppers and fennel, and a tender loin of lamb encrusted with black olives was accompanied by a potato-goat cheese flan.
Appearing at the very bottom of the menu was a dish described as a Café L'Europe Classic: wiener schnitzel. As it was 80 degrees outside, I wasn't too keen on tackling it, but, I reasoned, why not? Unfortunately, it was rather greasy and bland.
Tsunami
Entering this year-old restaurant in West Palm Beach's CityPlace, with its stagy lighting, illuminated stairways, thrumming percussive music and a large cocktail lounge, I didn't know whether to dine or dance.
Aside from a spacious dining area, Tsunami also features a large sushi bar, adorned with giant Buddha statues.
The sizable Asian menu seems to be overly ambitious, for while some dishes soar, others could use divine intervention in the kitchen. If slippery ''live'' scallops make your day, you can sample a hefty specimen sliced in four and framed by a lavender honey sabayon, stippled with sweet caviar. Calamari was beautifully presented but greasy; better are the meaty Peking duck wontons over an Asian green salad.
Most of the black-bedecked servers look as if they have yet to take their second round of College Boards, yet they are well versed in the menu and are endlessly amiable. For wine, white is the way to go with this food, and a fine choice for the dollar is the 2001 King Estate pinot gris ($28).
Grilled fish is well executed: miso-marinated moonfish, also known as opah, is firm fleshed and full flavored, served with wilted black kale and a Port-sweetened sauce. A yucca-wasabi crust pepped up a mahi-mahi steak.
Café Boulud
The big restaurant news this season is the arrival of Daniel Boulud, who has settled into one of Palm Beach's more luxurious and historic hotels, the Brazilian Court (in the process of converting almost exclusively to condominiums).
Café Boulud, a 120-seat restaurant, is anything but cafelike -- a hushed, subdued room swathed in terra cotta, burgundy and golds. The space gets a much-needed splash of color from big, bold oil paintings that burst with blues, yellows and orange.
Mr. Boulud's chef in residence is Zach Bell, who has worked with his boss on and off for several years. In characteristic Boulud style, the food is both countrified and straightforward and sophisticated at the same time; Mr. Bell's creations are relatively spare, never showy, and not crowded with nonessential ingredients. One example is the superb al dente risotto infused with fresh rosemary, and the chilled carrot soup that receives a jump-start from ginger and lime.
If you have never tried an authentic lyonnaise salad, this is the real thing: greens tossed with duck confit, chicken livers, slab bacon and a poached egg.
When I was there, the wine selection had not yet been built up, although I found two outstanding bottles, both white: the floral, refreshing 2002 Martin Codax Albariño ($40), and the atypically light (for Australia at least) 2002 Trevor Jones ''Virgin'' Chardonnay ($50).
Again, the staff was just getting its sea legs, but presumably things have perked up by now.
Among main-course highlights were a charred salmon with an understated mustard sauce, black-eyed peas with bacon and caramelized onions, and a pan-roasted pork chop with a sweet red pepper foam. Desserts were lavish and uniformly delectable.
L'Escalier
I do not go out of my way to find substandard restaurants; generally, if a place does not measure up, I just move on. However, the following is an exception because of its legendary location.
What is a trip to Palm Beach without stopping in at the Breakers, the magnificent Italian Renaissance hotel dating back to the turn of the century? Last December it concluded a stunning $145 million decade-long renovation.
The luxurious restaurant, L'Escalier, is in the imposing main hall, with its soaring ceiling embellished with hand-painted murals, gold-leaf trim, Venetian chandeliers and massive marble columns. Unfortunately, that's where the enchantment ended for us.
Amy and I dressed up, looking forward to a special last evening in Florida. The first sign of trouble came in the form of two little giveaway shot glasses of what our white-gloved server described as a carrot and ginger emulsion. Amy sipped and grimaced; I could barely swallow, for it tasted like soapy dishwater.
Amy started the meal with an unappetizing vegetable-and-hazelnut cannelloni that looked as if it had been sitting under heating lamps for hours. A timbale of ''lump crabmeat'' was made mostly with less expensive shredded crab, and unseasoned at that. A tough terrine of foie gras and duck was equally insipid.
At that point, we wanted to leave, but it would have been noticed in this setting. So we hunkered down for a greasy overcooked fillet of pompano and a papery dry guinea fowl, accompanied by an old-tasting mushroom cannelloni. The service staff, however, was very well-intentioned and hospitable.
The weighty wine list is skewed toward vinous sequoias like La Tâche and the Domaine de la Romanée-Conti. Yet the high point of the evening was an outstanding bottle that I had never tried, called Chasselas, a bright, lively white found in both France's Alsace region and in Switzerland ($51).
We left hungry.
Bill of fare
These restaurants accept major credit cards except where noted. There is no smoking in Florida restaurants. Estimated prices are for dinner for two with a glass of wine each.
Café Boulud, the Brazilian Court, 301 Australian Avenue, Palm Beach; (561) 655-6060; www.daniel.nyc. Breakfast, lunch and dinner daily. About $140.
Café L'Europe, 331 South County Road (at Brazilian Avenue), Palm Beach; (561) 655-4020; www.cafeleurope.com. Dinner daily; lunch daily except Sunday. About $145.
L'Escalier, the Breakers Hotel, 1 South County Road, Palm Beach; (561) 659-8488; www.thebreakers.com. Prix fixe dinners are $80 (choices for three courses), $95 (choices for five courses) and $110 (chef's selection).
Little Moir's Food Shack, 103 U.S. Highway 1, Jupiter; (561) 741-3626. Lunch only on Monday; lunch and dinner Tuesday to Saturday. (No American Express.) About $70.
Captain Charlie's Reef Grill, 12846 U.S. Highway 1, Juno Beach; (561) 624-9924. Lunch Monday to Saturday; dinner daily. (No American Express.) About $125.
Tsunami, 651 Okeechobee Boulevard, West Palm Beach; (561) 835-9696; www.tusnamirestaurant.com. Dinnner daily. About $125.
WINTER IN THE SUN BRYAN MILLER, a frequent contributor to the Travel section, writes about food and wine.
Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  A listing of restaurants on Jan. 11 with the Choice Tables column, about the Palm Beach, Fla., area, misstated the price of a meal for two, with a glass of wine each, at Captain Charlie's Reef Grill in Juno Beach. It is about $60, not $125.
