RECENTLY, the intercepted chatter has surged to new levels -- not Al Qaeda cellphones, but conspiracy newsgroups online.
With the Mars rover, Spirit, on the ground and sending back color postcards as beautifully tinted as anything your grandmother received from friends visiting the Grand Canyon, the folks who believe the moon shot was a hoax are once again flaming (e-mailing insults) and thread hammering (overwhelming an online forum with verbose replies).
''I trust NASA will credit the CGI achievements of 'Lord of the Rings' for allowing them to pull off this great hoax?'' writes one correspondent, referring to computer-generated imagery, in a forum hosted by www.godlikeproductions.com.
Hollywood has come a long way since ''Capricorn One.'' That 1978 movie, about a fake space shot, unfortunately had to rely on the crudest CGI programs for its mise-en-scène, or cheesy improvisations like having its actors (including O.J. Simpson) walk very slowly over Arizona desert.
Yet, even its primitive effects sparked vanity-press books and bad documentaries claiming that Stanley Kubrick photographed Neil Armstrong's moon walk in the Southwest. There's probably a doctoral thesis in the correlation between the release of special-effects-heavy, otherworldly movies and spikes in the conspiracy chatter out there.
Judging from the recent debates, space paranoids share one trait with other members of the conspirator-American community: they profess a great deal of knowledge about an arcane subject (say, the science of visual perspective), while revealing ignorance of high-school science. Many posts, for example, fret about the improbability of parallel lines converging. Apparently these perspectivologists haven't stared down a train track.
But something is new this time around. There seems to be more chatter than usual among paranoids enraged that other paranoids are making stupid arguments. A commentator named ''doubting Thomas'' tossed out this proof: ''We've got friggin' surveillance cameras here in banks that take nothing but blurry photos -- we're supposed to believe that this robot ship flew to Mars and somehow took this high-resolution picture of itself? PUH-LEEZ!''
To which another disbeliever flamed: ''You think they're going to send a cheap CCTV camera on a multimillion-dollar interplanetary mission? Are you really as brain-dead as you sound?''
As much as one might want an answer, doubting Thomas was stung into virtual permanent silence.
The other threads of chatter seem to be complaints that NASA's pictures should be better fakes.
The conspiracy theorists are ticked off that the Houston geeks appear to be unaware of all the innovations in standard Photoshop software available on any old PC these days. There is much online criticism about the coloring of the pictures and the obviously stitched-together quality of the panoramic shots.
''I am sure they could get it to look a bit more realistic, yet after seeing the Mars photos, I guess not,'' wrote one doubter, more in sorrow than in anger. ''Four pictures, top left and bottom left match, as do top right and bottom right, but they don't seem to fit in the middle. Something to hide perhaps?''
Or, maybe, just the opposite. With NASA having confessed to so many landers crashing into the red planet and, now, with these pictures looking so pathetically undoctored by seamless ''Lord of the Rings'' technology, maybe the only explanation, even by a conspirator's logic, is that they're real.
Conspiracy Alert Jack Hitt is a contributing writer for The New York Times Magazine.
