AT 87, Milton Babbitt goes on being well served by his performers, and they are well served by him. On new collections of solo and chamber works from Bridge Records and Tzadik, his invitations to tease, enchant and express are enthusiastically accepted by musicians a generation or two younger. And the latest piece -- the reassuringly titled ''Swan Song No. 1,'' written last year -- is happy proof of his continuing vitality.
Probably the only reason he thought of writing a swan song in the first place was that he was commissioned by the namesake Cygnus Ensemble, a New York group comprising guitar, mandolin, violin, cello, flute and oboe. In any event the piece is less a swan song than a swan dance. As in Mr. Babbitt's music generally, he throws rhythms against the frame of a steady background pulse, imparting the energy of syncopation. If that style sounds familiar, a charming photograph in the Tzadik booklet, showing Milton Babbitt, boy saxophonist, provides a clue: this is a composer, three-quarters of a century later, with jazz still in his bones.
Working with six diverse instruments in ''Swan Song No. 1,'' he provides not only dance but conversation, distantly suggesting the kind of Renaissance ball at which a similarly mixed group might have served. The four string instruments begin the piece, all plucking at the moderate pace that prevails throughout. When the flute enters much faster, it quickly recognizes its mistake and tries to slip into the fabric. Mr. Babbitt plays similar games of compatibility under changing circumstances throughout.
Textural variety is just one feature ''Swan Song No. 1'' shares with its companions on these CD's. Other Babbittian trademarks include a continuous unfolding coupled with a seemingly impromptu recourse to repetitions of small figures or to incursions from the world of major and minor harmony. Mr. Babbitt happily acknowledges this world from a distance he has fully established, with no sense of anxiety.
The range here is as remarkable as the consistency. Three works written from 1993 to 1995 -- ''Quatrains'' and ''Manifold Music'' on Bridge, the Sixth String Quartet on Tzadik -- could hardly be more diverse. ''Quatrains'' has two clarinets bending close to a soprano singing a poem by John Hollander. The soprano here, Tony Arnold, beautifully gauges the fine cool of Mr. Babbitt's lyricism in this counterpoint of lines. In contrast, the Sixth Quartet is peppered with three-note motifs in agile maneuverings, and ''Manifold Music,'' for organ, is all ajitter with chords.
The quartet performance is a joy. With impeccable tuning, timing and precision of color and phrasing, the Sherry Quartet, four young players coached by the cellist Fred Sherry, shows the way through a labyrinth in which one essential melodic and harmonic idea is endlessly rediscovered in new forms. Near the start it sounds like Dvorak. More often, as the slide into overt tonality seems just about to happen, the work drifts into new textures (often with the violins in the glistening high treble) and new gestures of almost operatic emphasis.
Accompanying this marvelous performance on the Tzadik disc is a reissue of the Composers Quartet recording of Mr. Babbitt's Second Quartet, with its playful toccata music twice giving way to a slow aria. A recording fault near the beginning of the second half sends the music momentarily into the region of Mr. Babbitt's electronic music, which is officially represented in this album by ''Occasional Variations.'' With synthesized timbres covering the range from frog to celesta by way of a slamming door, the piece sounds like flickerings from a large, multifaceted object in slow rotation.
''Manifold Music'' is similar in this respect, written for that pre-electronic synthesizer, the organ. Gregory D'Agostino, at Madison Avenue Presbyterian Church, does it proud.
The alert guitarist William Anderson is heard on both CD's: in the solo Composition (Tzadik) and with colleagues in ''Soli e Duettini'' and the premature swan song (Bridge).
But nothing here is finer than Allen Blustine's sensitive, thoughtful and sure wander through the clarinet solo ''My Ends Are My Beginnings'' (Bridge). So they are in this performance: every phrase ends with a figure that swivels into the next, all along the course of a perfectly sustained 16-minute quasi-improvisation. This, too, is what the boy sax player was dreaming of.
MUSIC: RECORDINGS
