AARON COPLAND lived the last 30 years of his life here in a modest six-room ranch house on a secluded wooded hilltop, where only the walls, hung with pictures of himself with other musical giants, revealed his artistic stature. He composed on a wood plank set atop a sawhorse, and received prominent guests in a no-frills studio surrounded by trees.
Now the house that sheltered Copland until his death in 1990 is playing a major role in the lives of a new generation of American composers. For the past five years more than 40 composers from around the country have spent from one to two months alone in residencies here, working in Copland's studio at his timber desk, gazing out the windows at the same trees he saw, cooking dinners in his cheerful kitchen. ''I consider it the best place for a composer in America,'' said Yotam Haber, a 27-year old Israeli native who recently finished a two-month residency. ''There's nothing else quite like it.''
The composer-in-residence program is run by the nonprofit group Copland House, which began in 1994 as a grassroots movement to preserve the three-and-a-half acre property. Composers in genres ranging from traditional classical to jazz and electronic music have come here to work without uninterruption on a symphony, string quartet or band piece, or simply to explore new ideas. In a relatively short time the northern Westchester retreat has acquired a national reputation for the beauty of its surroundings and the sensitivity of board members to composers' needs. Volunteers stock the kitchen and then slip in unnoticed each week to leave grocery money. A car is provided for the composers' convenience, a housekeeper cleans regularly, and composers have no responsibilities except to their artistic goals.
Burton Goldstein, who was here for a month in the fall, said the ''big ocean of quiet that surrounds that house'' renewed his focus on serious composing. Mr. Goldstein, who lives in California, writes music for movie trailers to pay the bills, but he said he now gives his freshest energy to his personal music. ''I don't pick up my phone until after noon,'' he said, crediting the change to his time here. Mark Kilstofte, who worked for two months at the house in 1999, said having ''the run of the place'' was so liberating that his style of composition grew more expansive. ''Looking past the physical grounds and the countryside had that effect on me,'' said Mr. Kilstofte, who teaches composition and music theory at Furman University in Greenville, S.C. Now he is ''almost fearless'' about facing new musical challenges, he said.
Six to eight composers a year out of 100 applicants are selected for residencies by an independent panel of noted composers, including several Pulitzer Prize winners.
Michael Boriskin, artistic and executive director of Copland House, said residents were chosen solely for the artistic quality of their music, although they must be American citizens or legal permanent residents of the United States.
The organization also sponsors a resident chamber ensemble, Music From Copland House, which performs Copland's music as well as that of his peers and artistic heirs. Co-directed by Mr. Boriskin, a pianist, and Paul Lustig Dunkel, a flutist and music director of the Westchester Philharmonic, the ensemble recently recorded the first complete cycle of Copland's chamber music (which is far less known than mainstream works like ''Fanfare for a Common Man,'' ''Appalachian Spring'' or ''Rodeo''). The CD will be released early this year on the Arabesque label.
The ensemble also recently completed a residency at Princeton University and is currently in residence in the music department at Sarah Lawrence College in Bronxville. Copland House also conducts a workshop for young composers at Hoff Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale, and Mr. Boriskin said other education programs, both countywide and national in scope, were being planned.
The early volunteers did not immediately envision the place as a font of creativity. A group of neighbors here, led by Florence H. Stevens, the organization's founding president, simply did not think that the house should suffer the same fate as the homes of other major American composers, which were either destroyed, neglected or preserved with barely a plaque.
When the group heard that the house was for sale by the Copland Fund for Music, a trust established in Copland's will, they appealed to the Town of Cortlandt, which was ''immediately very responsive,'' Ms. Stevens said. Officials from the town negotiated with the trust, which agreed to lease the house to the town for $1 a year. The town, in turn, appointed the volunteers - who incorporated as a nonprofit organization -to manage the house. In 2002 the trust gave the house outright to the organization, which now owns it.
''For the first few years all we did was raise money to make repairs,'' Ms. Stevens said. ''We fixed the roof, added cast iron railings to the outside stairway and installed a new boiler.''
Once the residency program was established, a local car dealership donated a car for the composers' use, a paint company donated paint for the house and others contributed their professional services.
The restoration plan, which dovetailed with the group's limited budget, was to make the house as comfortable and unpretentious as when Copland lived there - as comfortable and unpretentious as the man himself, Mr. Boriskin said.
There is no general public access to the house, but those who contribute $50 a year or more to a friends group are invited to a yearly summer party, where they can sip cocktails on a spacious deck overlooking the terraced backyard with its flowering trees and hills (the grounds are maintained by volunteers from Cornell Cooperative Extension's master gardener program); tour the house with its collection of Copland memorabilia, and hear live chamber music performed in the studio. The house, which was recently listed on the National Register of Historic Places, can also be seen by private appointment between residencies (914-788-4659).
The organization's budget is now $160,000 a year, with fundraising a constant necessity, Mr. Boriskin said. The group is continuing to add to a collection of memorabilia that includes an autographed photograph from Stravinsky to Copland; photographs of Copland with Leonard Bernstein and other colleagues; the 1986 Congressional Medal; a National Medal of Arts presented to Copland by President Reagan; concert programs from world premieres of Copland's music, and his own books and journals.
''We want to make this a living tour of his life,'' Mr. Boriskin said.
Board members are adamant that the house is not meant to be a museum. ''The world doesn't need another museum,'' said Neil Jacobs of North Salem, the group's treasurer. He called the house ''a living, breathing entity that follows the vision Copland had,'' adding, ''People sense Copland's presence there, not in a twilight zone way but in an inspirational way.''
Former resident composers recount their experiences in the house with awe. ''I remember walking in and feeling I had just walked into a sacred space, as though I had just gone to the Temple Mount,'' said Lisa De Spain, a Manhattan-based jazz composer who writes crossover symphonic music. ''It leaves you a little bit breathless, feeling a responsibility to yourself to live every moment there to its fullest. It is a gift that is precious.''
Chester Biscardi, who heads the music department at Sarah Lawrence and worked at the house in 2002, described his initial feelings in his journal. ''This is daunting,'' he wrote. ''I go to sleep and wake up in Copland's bedroom, looking at a sketch of him on one wall, a photo on another, having read something about him or by him, and then I reflect on what I'm doing in my own life.''
Former residents can reapply after four years and Mr. Kilstofte, who will return this year, spoke of gaining energy by being alone in the house (although his new wife, Leslie Nash, a cellist, will join him next time). ''You can steep yourself in composing,'' he said, ''and then decompress, come to the surface, cook yourself dinner or open the mail, and then go back down to that depth.''
The solitude -- unbroken except for backyard visits from deer or an occasional invited guest -- distinguishes Copland House from other retreats, where artists work alone but gather for meals and social events. The board leaves the composers alone to work, but volunteers call now and then to see how things are going. They are also on hand to fix leaking septic systems, deliver prescriptions and keep life going smoothly for the artist.
That was a good thing for Akemi Naito, a Manhattan composer who was not used to living in a house, let alone a house in the woods. ''I have so many problems,'' said Ms. Naito, who is originally from Japan. ''Not able to close the windows in the house, or not close the garage door. Stupid things. Each time I asked someone to help, and they came.''
Mr. Goldstein, who was there with his wife, Cynthia Fruchtman, said people -- including his wife -- made a concerted effort not to bother him. ''There was a dead mouse in the living room, and normally I'd be the person to handle it,'' he said. ''But I didn't know about it until later. Even a dead mouse didn't distract me.''
Copland House residents have gone on to win other prestigious awards, fellowships and commissions, like the Rome Prize, the Whitaker Commission of the American Composers Orchestra and the Charles Ives Fellowship of the American Academy of Arts and Letters. (One composer was also nominated for a Grammy.)
Pieces composed partly or in full at the house have been performed in some concert halls, but ''it takes a while for the work to be completed and get out there,'' Mr. Boriskin said. After some soul-searching about its mission, the board recently deleted ''serious'' and ''classical'' from the definition of the music it supports.
''We're looking to broaden out,'' said Dr. Lawrence L. Faltz, senior vice president for medical affairs and the medical director at Phelps Memorial Hospital Center in Sleepy Hollow, who is the current president of Copland House. ''Copland listened to jazz and wrote jazzy pieces himself, which is why we have jazz and electronic composers coming now. We're still hoping to find the next Copland, but who knows who it will be?''
The Residents Of the House
Each year, dozens of composers apply for Copland House residencies. These are the musicians chosen for the program, including three guest composers who got special invitations to live and work at the house.
2003-2004 -- Fernando Benadon (California), Yotam Haber (New York), Mark Kilstofte (South Carolina), Jerome Kitzke (New York), Tom Lopez (Ohio), Doug Opel (Indiana), and Judith Lang Zaimont (Minnesota).
2002-2003 -- Greg d'Alessio (Ohio), Jeffery Cotton (New Jersey), Burton Goldstein (California), Derek Hurst (Massachusetts), John Anthony Lennon (Georgia), and Spencer H. Schedler (Connecticut).
2001-2002 -- Hayes Biggs and Chester Biscardi (New York), Anthony Gatto (Minnesota), James Grant (Delaware), Andrew Rindfleisch (Ohio). Guest composer: Henry Brant (California).
2000-2001 -- Lisa Bielawa and Lisa DeSpain (New York), Penka Kouneva (California), David McMullin (Massachusetts), Joanne Metcalf (Wisconsin), Robert Xavier Rodriguez (Texas). Guest composer: Richard Danielpour (New York).
1999-2000 -- Gordon Beeferman, Jason Roth and Eric Samuelson (New York), Ofer Ben-Amots (Colorado), Dan Coleman (Arizona), Pierre Jalbert (Texas), David Schober (Michigan). Guest composer: David Mallamud (Pennsylvania).
1998-1999 -- Carlos Carillo and Akemi Naito (New York), Robert Carl (Connecticut), Stephen Coxe (Maryland), Donald Crockett and Allan Shearer (California) and Mark Kilstofte (South Carolina).
