THOMAS R. SUOZZI, the Nassau county executive, likes to invoke what he calls the house-painting model of economic development.
''If you spend $100 to paint the front of your house, everyone sees it and says, 'What a difference, the place looks wonderful,''' he said in an interview on Monday. ''But if you spend $500 to fix the plumbing, nobody comes in and says, 'Hey, the toilets flush great' or 'you've got great drainage.'''
Although some small painting-type projects have been done, Mr. Suozzi said, the work he and his administration have put into economic development in these last two years is almost all about plumbing.
''We've been working on the plumbing so we can get to the house painting,'' he said. ''Do I hope for specific accomplishments as quickly as possible? Of course. But first we have to lay the groundwork.''
Mr. Suozzi laid out his economic development plan for the county more than a year ago and has spent the last year holding town-hall style meetings across the county to share his vision for ''a new suburbia'' with local community leaders and to talk about projects and goals specific to their communities. He carved the county into 35 economic development zones and has so far opened public discussions in 20 of those areas.
Now, roughly a year after he brought his message of economic revitalization to places like Elmont and Roosevelt, residents who initially received him with enthusiasm and thanked him for giving their communities some much-needed attention say they are frustrated and disappointed at how little progress has been made. They also expressed fears that plans will stay stalled indefinitely because Mr. Suozzi's deputy in charge of economic development, Peter Sylver, resigned last month amid charges that he misused federal grant money. With Mr. Sylver's actions being investigated by a hired auditor, the county comptroller, the county investigations commissioner, the federal government and the district attorney, the department is likely to remain under a cloud.
''Suozzi and his people came, and they talked a good game about our problems, but nothing has happened,'' said Patrick Nicolosi, president of the Elmont East Civic Association. ''We're not looking for miracles, but it looks like the hope he brought to this community was nothing more than the same old political lies.''
Illegal apartments and the overcrowding and parking problems that flow from them are among his community's biggest problems, Mr. Nicolosi said, but Mr. Suozzi's promise to work with Town of Hempstead officials to alleviate them has produced no visible change. ''I had hope that he would have a different approach to government, but we haven't seen it,'' he said.
Mr. Suozzi said that going out to survey the different economic development zones and meet with community leaders has itself been a major undertaking, and that everywhere he has gone he has stressed that the kind of change he envisions cannot be accomplished in one or two years. ''This is a 10-year or 20-year plan, and I specifically said that things would not happen in just a year or two,'' he said.
He said that he hoped to finish his tour of the economic development zones by late spring and that he would then be prepared to list specific projects and priorities. Aside from the Sylver scandal, Mr. Suozzi said his plans for economic development were right on track.
''When this is done and I take this plan from theory to implementation, it's going to be the next biggest thing to happen to Nassau County since Levittown,'' he said, explaining that he saw the county's history in three phases: the rural days before Levittown, suburban life up until now, and then new suburbia as he has envisioned it.
His vision, he said, is one that maintains the suburban quality of life but replaces the suburban zoning and planning mentality of the 1940's and 50's, when there was still plenty of open land in Nassau County, with one that recognizes that the county is essentially built out.
To bring new growth to the county, Mr. Suozzi said he planned to focus on expanding high-technology industries and tourism; on revitalizing four types of real estate: contaminated industrial sites called brownfields, aging downtown areas, minority neighborhoods and the Nassau Hub area in East Garden City and Uniondale; and on addressing the need for more mass transit and affordable housing. ''We have to do all these things if we want to preserve the suburban dream but create an economy for the long term,'' he said.
Everywhere Mr. Suozzi has taken his road show, he has sought ''house-painting'' projects that his administration could quickly tackle as a way of keeping residents on his side, but he has met with limited success.
In Elmont, for example, he promised to clean up a lot on a residential street that has been used as a dumping ground for broken and rusted construction equipment. Neighbors said that a few weeks after Mr. Suozzi toured the site last February, men came in trucks and hauled away about 75 percent of the wrecks on the lot. Last week, the lot appeared much tidier but was still littered with about a dozen construction vehicles.
Chris Rosado, president of the Elmont Chamber of Commerce, compared the lot to Mr. Suozzi's plan to make Belmont Park a more integral part of the community. ''There was some headway initially, but then it got bogged down for one reason or another,'' he said. ''I think party politics and the like have probably slowed him down, and maybe we did float off the radar a bit.''
In Roosevelt, residents complained that aside from some new streetlights on Nassau Boulevard, the community's main thoroughfare, and a new playground at the Washington Rose Elementary School, the hamlet is as neglected and forlorn as it ever was.
''Not to say that the playground wasn't needed, but what kind of impact does that have on the village?'' said Alfred Covington, a Roosevelt resident since 1971. ''Does it change the quality of life or the perception of the village? We all had optimistic hopes after they came down here, but to call the playground and the new streetlights significant would be degrading to us.''
Mr. Suozzi said that unlike New Cassel, where the county and officials from the Town of North Hempstead have worked closely on a plan to build a downtown essentially from a scratch, ''we haven't had as much cooperation with the town in Roosevelt.'' But Mike Deery, a spokesman for the Town of Hempstead, countered, ''Anything thing they've asked for, we've furnished.'' He added that in addition to the streetlights, the town had repaved some parking lots and increased its affordable homes program.
It is precisely this kind of political finger-pointing that residents hoped would finally end when Mr. Suozzi, a Democrat, joined with Republican town officials to develop a plan for Roosevelt in the spring of 2002, said Diana Coleman, a longtime community advocate in Roosevelt.
''I don't know if it was the economic times or the lack of commitment between the playmates, and we do need them to get together and play nice,'' she said. ''I don't want to blame Suozzi or the town, but there just hasn't been the real commitment and the real drive that's needed to make things happen.''
Patrick G. Duggan, executive director of Sustainable Long Island, the Huntington ''smart growth'' group hired by the town and county to develop a new vision for Roosevelt, said town and county officials could share blame for the lack of progress there. ''I guess, in the end, this is still Long Island, and politics is still politics,'' he said.
In New Cassel, though, where Mr. Duggan said ''the stars are all lined up,'' the Town of North Hempstead last week opened several developers' bids to create more than $37 million in new development on land owned by the town along Prospect Avenue. The effort to create a new downtown has been spearheaded by the town and local community leaders, but Jonathan Kaiman, the newly elected Democratic supervisor of the Town of Oyster Bay, said the county's help had been essential. ''It's been a good intermunicipal approach, where instead of any one entity taking credit, the philosophy has been that the county and the town will share it,'' he said.
The Rev. Lionel Harvey, president of the Unified New Cassel Community Revitalization Corporation, said that with town and county jurisdictions overlapping, the project could ''very easily get bogged down with the paralysis of analysis, but so far everybody has come together and been true to their word to do whatever they could to help New Cassel.''
Mr. Suozzi's critics say that aside from New Cassel's measured success, the county executive has little else to show in terms of economic development progress. ''There's a lot of talk and impressive images,'' said Peter Schmitt, leader of the Republican minority in the County Legislature. ''But in the end, there's very little substance, and I don't know if it's the scandal, but everything seems to be in stasis right now.''
Mr. Schmitt pointed to Mr. Suozzi's plan to consolidate the county's real estate portfolio as another example of an ambitious program that has not moved far since it was unveiled a year ago.
He point to the county's continued inability to take control of a 105-acre parcel at a former Grumman site in Bethpage as a major development failure. The parcel is now owned by the Navy, and the county has been in negotiations for the property for nearly a decade.
''The economic development listening tour is great, but the Grumman site is an issue that stands out like a big black eye,'' said Desmond M. Ryan, the executive director of the Association for a Better Long Island, a developers' group. The 105-acre parcel is industrially zoned, has its own power plant and railroad link and is surrounded by roads designed for heavy traffic. ''It's a perfect location, so what's holding it up?'' he said. The Suozzi administration wants to redevelop it as an industrial park.
Mr. Suozzi said his administration, like that of his predecessor, Thomas S. Gulotta, was negotiating with the Navy over environmental cleanup at the site. But Mr. Ryan noted that Grumman workers occupied the site when the Navy first started studying environmental remedies, ''so why can't somebody occupy it and develop it during the negotiations?''
Mr. Suozzi and his defenders say the need to negotiate with other levels of government is one of the biggest barriers to quick results in economic development. ''People have to realize that change is never an immediate thing, and you really have to keep plugging away at it,'' said Judy Jacobs, the Legislature's presiding officer. ''The other thing is our hands are tied a lot of the time because the county can't get involved in zoning or code enforcement because those things are handled by the towns and villages.''
Ms. Jacobs also said that despite the turmoil surrounding Mr. Sylver, Mr. Suozzi's economic development program had made some significant strides. ''There are problems in the department that need to be fixed, but there obviously are also good things that occurred through diligence and a lot of hard work,'' she said. The state housing agency, for example, had taken away Nassau County's oversight of its Section 8 housing program in late 2001 but has now restored the program to the county.
Lee E. Koppelman, the executive director of the Long Island Regional Planning Board, said the mere fact that Mr. Suozzi had taken on controversial issues like the Nassau Hub, the need for better public transportation and more affordable housing was significant. ''He has put a focus on some basic concerns that have always been political hot potatoes, and he has expended a lot of political capital in doing that,'' he said.
Mitchell H. Pally, the vice president for government affairs at the Long Island Association, said the business community recognized that it would take time for the seeds of economic development that Mr. Suozzi has planted to bear fruit. He said that in the next year, he hoped to see solid progress in the redevelopment of the Grumman site in Bethpage, in the planning process for the Nassau Hub and in the creation of new affordable housing.
''It's getting to the point now where actual implementation is important,'' he said. ''The good thing is that he recognizes that even if the county has no control over zoning or other local ordinances, the county can be the lead layer in a project just by providing the moral leadership. So far, I think he's doing his part.''
Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  Because of an editing error, an article on Jan. 11 about an economic development campaign by the Nassau county executive, Thomas R. Suozzi, misidentified the town for which Jonathan Kaiman is the new supervisor. It is North Hempstead, not Oyster Bay.
