THE financial scandal of the moment is about milk.
Parmalat, the giant Italian food company best known in this country as the maker of ubiquitous milk boxes, has acknowledged that a fraud of enormous proportions has taken place. Italian prosecutors have made several arrests in the case, and more developments are sure to come.
It's big. The company's founder and former chairman, Calisto Tanzi, has been accused of funneling about a billion dollars from the company to family-owned businesses, and Bank of America has said that documents appearing to certify a $4.2 billion account were forgeries.
(Note to self: rent that 1958 James Cagney movie, ''Never Steal Anything Small.'')
Milk? What's next? Corrupt air? If ever there was a symbol of something wholesome, it's milk. It's the cold half-pint sweating on the Formica tabletop of the elementary school cafeteria, and it's the psychic link back to our mother's breast. It protects us from the bitterness of our coffee and, by extension, our lives.
In the interest of even-handed reporting and fairness, even to rogues, I want to point out that we all make little mistakes with numbers now and then. You should have seen my banker's expression when I had to tell him that I wasn't actually worth $85.3 million. Priceless!
If this were just a matter of a few billion between friends, it might not be earth-shattering. But as any reader of business pages knows, scandals now go far beyond the lapses of any single company, and extend even into the mutual funds market, which also once enjoyed a wholesome reputation.
That's why the widening scandals involving the mutual fund industry are so troubling to so many investors. Mutual funds were supposed to be a wholesome alternative to the hucksterism and churn of stock-picking.
In the 1990's, funds offered an alternative to the sheer nuttiness of the technology market. Investors might not have deserved what they got in the dot-com crash, but many people probably had a sense that they were buying into a bubble when the business plans didn't make sense and the products were ephemeral and sometimes absurd. As they had done for decades, many investors sought the relative sanity of mutual funds, even high-tech mutual funds.
By putting the money into a basket, investors could rest easier, believing that somebody smart and straight was doing the thinking for them. All investors had to do was to pay the industry's fees, though these were sometimes high. But that was the price of trust and calm, and millions thought it was worth paying.
And how was this trust repaid? In favors for big customers that included late trading and market timing, for starters. Thanks, investors!
Love ya, babe!
Of course, not every mutual fund company has been drawn into the muck.
And even with those that have been accused of granting favors to big investors, it's hard to prove that smaller fish lost much money beyond what they might have lost in the general market buffeting of the last few years. For every business professor or prosecutor who whips out a calculator, there's somebody on the industry side who's whipped out his own. But this much needs no calculator to sum up: The dirty fund managers unfairly enriched their buddies, and themselves.
The investigations by Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, have shown one thing clearly: The system has been abused, and the game has been rigged.
Even as stocks begin their bounce back, it seems, there's always a new reminder that trust, the mother's milk of investing, has curdled. And it's up to the funds to prove to investors that they deserve our trust again.
