BY now, much of the world has heard of the claim: As George Harrison lay dying of cancer in a rented Staten Island house, so weakened he was not certain he could remember how to spell his name, his prominent doctor, Gilbert Lederman, allegedly bullied him into signing his young son's guitar, going so far as to spell out Mr. Harrison's name for him and guide his hand. Mr. Harrison's estate has filed a $10 million suit against the doctor. But in all the reporting, one detail has received scant attention -- before he signed, according to the lawsuit, Mr. Harrison was treated to a recital on said guitar by said son, Ariel Lederman.
The lawyer for the doctor, Wayne Roth, acting through the powerhouse public relations firm of Rubenstein Associates, issued a statement calling the allegations ''meritless.''
Addressing the red-hot issue of the autographed guitar, by now the vivid and unforgettable equivalent of the glove in the O. J. Simpson case or the cigar in the Lewinsky and Clinton affair, Mr. Roth has said the doctor had developed a ''close personal relationship with Mr. Harrison, who freely autographed his son's guitar.''
Asked later about 12-year-old Ariel Lederman's supposed guitar recital -- if it happened, and whose idea it might have been -- Mr. Roth, through his spokesman, declined to comment.
Paul V. LiCalsi, the lawyer representing the Harrison estate in the suit, says that a picture of Ariel with the signed guitar appeared in The National Enquirer. (An interesting photo, which showed a neatly groomed young man holding a guitar in the respectful, careful pose of a bar mitzvah portrait.) Mr. LiCalsi insisted that a guitar recitation took place and that it was ''definitely not requested by George Harrison.''
Mr. Harrison, trapped in his deathbed, the ultimate captive audience, unable to escape from what? A bedazzled admirer? A proud parent and his progeny? It may be left to a court to decide what actually happened in that room, but meanwhile there's an image sure to resonate: a star at the mercy of fans, kind of like James Caan starring as the writer shackled to his bed in ''Misery.'' How many prominent, accomplished people -- how many not so prominent, accomplished people -- have at one time or another been cornered by a proud parent, a cocky stranger?
Harvey Weinstein, a co-chairman of Miramax Films and a fellow of considerable professional and personal girth, not easily intimidated, was once getting into a hotel elevator at the Cannes Film Festival, when a man approached and said: ''Hi, I said hello to you at the film festival 10 years ago. Do you remember?'' Mr. Weinstein, who relayed this story through a press person, did not, but that didn't prevent the stranger from following him into the elevator with a script to pitch. The elevator was full, which meant many buttons were pushed, which meant the stranger had the time to finish his pitch and hand Mr. Weinstein an envelope with the script.
''Can you get back to me tomorrow?'' he said.
Ken Sunshine, a press agent to Barbra Streisand and Leonardo DiCaprio was once at a urinal in a men's room in Los Angeles, when the man beside him said, ''You work with Ben Affleck, don't you?'' and proceeded to tell him that a niece, or perhaps it was a nephew, had an action script for him, recounting it in detail. ''I never washed my hands so fast,'' Mr. Sunshine said.
Strictly Los Angeles behavior? Talk to Phyllis Newman, who with her late husband, the composer Adolph Green, got pitched by Santa Claus. They had taken their daughter to see him.
''This was years ago,'' Ms. Newman said. ''Amanda was tiny and sitting on Santa's lap.'' A Santa imitation here. '' 'What do you want little girl, HO, HO, HO.' Then he looks over and sees Adolph and me, and he breaks into'' -- unemployed actor imitation here, sung -- '' 'Be my loooove.' Big voice.''
Franni Franken, the wife of the political humorist Al Franken, in another tale from years back, was having a baby -- an unexpected, rare, natural breech birth.
''They've called in every available intern and doctor in the hospital to witness this,'' Ms. Franken said. ''They're telling them, 'You'll never see this again.' And as I'm writhing in agony delivering my beautiful daughter, one of the doctors looks up and says, 'Aren't you Al Franken?' '' ''They're all asking him questions about 'Saturday Night Live.' I said, 'Wait a minute! Pay attention to me. I'm having a baby here.' ''
Doctors, it turns out, figure regularly in celebrities' tales of being unceremoniously pitched. Who among us feels fully in power while in a partially open hospital gown? While one may happily entertain thoughts of being curt with that annoying parent of a child in your third grader's class, it's another matter to risk alienating the specialist with whom it took multiple introductions to get an appointment.
''I had a doctor who had to do some work on my eyes,'' Tony Roberts, the actor, recalled. ''Nothing to do with cosmetics,'' he added quickly, before one even had the time for a genuinely interested, Oh? ''I had a virus on my eyelids, which caused a lot of unpleasant procedures. I was very fearful, because you were sort of awake. Meanwhile, this man was trying to recruit me to participate in his son's debut album.''
''I believe a charity was involved,'' Mr. Roberts continued. ''It was not something venal. But I felt he was compromising my artistic standards in a way; why would I want to participate in his son's debut album? It was becoming a terrible problem for me. Finally I decided to discuss it with him. I said, 'I'm afraid that if I say no to you about your son's album, maybe you won't be as careful with the needle.' To his credit, he said he had never thought of it that way. He's still my doctor and he's wonderful.''
Likewise, Bernadette Peters, starring in ''Gypsy'' on Broadway, bears no ill will toward the girl who gave her a surprise performance when she was signing autographs outside the theater recently.
''I came out of the stage door, there was a father and daughter, I signed her Playbill,'' Ms. Peters said, in her kewpie doll voice. ''Then the father says, 'And now my little girl would like to sing to you.' I think she was 8 or 9. She sang only one chorus, which I thought was very nice. 'I Was Born To Entertain,' from 'Ruthless!,' which happens to be written by my musical director, Marvin Laird, who's the conductor of 'Gypsy.' The great thing about it, she sings it with a great big voice, the crowd bursts into applause.''
And then?
''That was it. They didn't say, 'Please call me, please give me a job.' ''
''She was a big success,'' Ms. Peters added. ''I think she's gonna have a big career.''
