BAD PUBLICITY
By Jeffrey Frank.
213 pp. New York:
Simon &amp; Schuster. $22.
It's 1987, a year when feminist viragoes roam the earth, and former Congressman Charlie Dingleman is about to commit a catastrophic miscalculation. Now a rainmaker at a prestigious Washington law firm, Charlie is enjoying the thrill of being considered for a White House appointment. He decides to perk up his day by taking one of his firm's attractive young associates to lunch and enjoying a harmless flirtation.
Bad call.
Jeffrey Frank's new novel, ''Bad Publicity,'' follows the disastrous consequences of Charlie's rash act, and his even more disastrous attempts to redeem himself. To describe this novel as darkly comic would be inadequate; it's funny, all right, but its vision isn't merely dark -- it is so bleak as to be almost Hobbesian. Satirists traditionally take a dim view of humanity, and Frank is gleefully, unapologetically in that mordant tradition. His characters aren't much more than the sum of their basest motives and their worst behavior.
Frank, a senior editor at The New Yorker and the author of a previous novel, ''The Columnist,'' certainly knows his Washington. He understands it is a city where the restless ambitions of its citizens are almost palpable, and he understands what distinguishes Washington from most other cities: since politics is the only game in town, everyone knows with altogether too much precision his or her position in the social hierarchy. There's little room for ambiguity, no space for the luxury of self-delusion. This is the sort of certainty that makes people feel very uncertain. It produces a level of personal unease that encourages crass careerism and desperate risk-taking.
Frank speaks Washingtonese and understands its gestural subtext. When Charlie has his first meeting at a powerful public relations firm called (rather too whimsically, perhaps) Big Tooth, we read: ''The size of the office made Charlie wonder whether his account was somehow less valuable than others.'' And Frank knows that Washington, like that other one-industry town, Los Angeles, can't tolerate failure. Consider this grim assessment offered by Charlie's first wife, Abigail: ''When people lose in this town it's like they die. But they don't get buried and rot like real dead people; they stick around, and everybody hopes they leave.''
Frank is good at the kind of content-free drivel that passes for wisdom when uttered by a reputed authority. Suzanne Smule is a fellow at a think tank bearing a more than passing resemblance to Brookings, a woman who once opined on television about the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan because the institute's actual experts were out of town at the time, and has ever since been regarded as a Soviet specialist, despite not speaking any Russian. When a character named Hank asks her about Gorbachev, we read: '' 'First of all, he's a Russian,' Suzanne Smule replied, looking intently at Hank. 'Secondly, he's the general secretary of the party. But I think that he may be a genuine reformer.' Hank felt privileged at having this private glimpse of her thoughts.''
Frank also tells us, when describing a character who claims to be in general sympathy with Ronald Reagan's philosophy, ''In Washington people used the word 'philosophy' to refer to any thoughts that seemed to connect to one another, however briefly.'' He understands the pathetic quadrille of deeply dull people seeking reflected glamour through their connection to other deeply dull people who happen to exercise power.
His jaundiced viewpoint isn't restricted to power relations. He's equally sardonic on sexual matters. There isn't a male character in the book who isn't sexually incompetent, gauche and obtuse, and few female characters who aren't rapaciously on the make, trading their availability for social or professional advancement. One doesn't wish for sentimentality here, but perhaps a little variety would have leavened things somewhat. After the third botched pass from the third inept would-be seducer, a certain sameness starts casting a pall over the proceedings.
Wisely, Frank eschews stand-alone jokes; even when funny in themselves, they can be the bane of sophisticated humor. Instead, he opts for a deadpan irony that wears well over the long haul. The law firm where Charlie works, for example, ''was near the corner of 17th and K Streets, in a 10-story building with a design so assertively mediocre that passers-by sometimes felt an inexplicable urge to cross the street.'' I believe I know that building. And consider this vivid cityscape: ''One bright April morning on Massachusetts Avenue Hank Morriday saw four men who looked like Dean Acheson.'' This is a sight as familiar to Washingtonians as the Lincoln Memorial.
Where the novel disappoints is in its narrative. Frank sets several promising plots in motion, but he refuses to explore their dramatic or comic potential. Charlie, his White House job in jeopardy, his marriage in tatters, retains P.R. representation, but we're never shown the P.R. campaign, or given any ironic payoff. He could, for all the wrong reasons, see his reputation not merely revived but enhanced, or alternately, the campaign could inadvertently lead to ever-deeper humiliation. There are any number of ways the story could go, but one does want it to go somewhere. Similarly, when Charlie is later arrested for urinating in his own front yard (he has accidentally locked himself out of his house), this additional disgrace is abandoned almost as soon as it has occurred. It is telling that, toward the end of the book, when Charlie is again under consideration for a White House position, his connection says, ''Your name came up again over here, and no one could remember why it all went south in the first place.'' Exactly.
Other examples: A character named Teresa begins an adulterous liaison with a local anchorman who seems headed toward a nervous breakdown. But his condition neither improves nor deteriorates, and Teresa, although vaguely aware of the problem, remains unaffected. And the associate who has blown the whistle on Charlie is promoted to partner and is pursued by two unlikely suitors, but there are no significant developments flowing directly from her action. Love affairs begin and end (unsatisfactorily in both cases), but without perceptible impact.
This isn't a trivial reservation, but ''Bad Publicity'' offers enough pleasures to outweigh it. Frank has painted an entertaining and very knowing portrait of Washington. Should this year's election produce a new administration, its incoming members would be well advised to read ''Bad Publicity'' before they relocate.
Erik Tarloff is the author of the Washington-based novel ''Face-Time.''
