The sharpest cold of the winter -- a bone-warping, mind-numbing arctic embrace that sent temperatures plunging far below zero in some places -- enveloped the New York region and a huge swath of New England and the mid-Atlantic states yesterday, shattering records and subduing weekend life for millions.
On a deceptively clear sunny day, a cold air mass a thousand miles wide swept down from Canada before dawn and turned a 14-state landscape from Maine to the Carolinas into a silent, frozen domain. It disrupted travel, drove heatless and homeless thousands to shelters and intimidated all but the hardiest skaters, skiers and football fans.
It was not the region's all-time coldest day -- 52 below zero was reported twice in New York State years ago -- but it was the largest and most frigid air mass since 1994, said Todd Miner, a meteorologist for Pennsylvania State University. With temperatures 20 degrees below normal highs for this time in January, it was awesome and dangerous, especially for the elderly, for young children and for those who had to be outdoors.
A National Weather Service observer reported 35 below zero at Saranac Lake, N.Y., in the Adirondacks, apparently the regional low for the day. It may have been even colder, but the observer stopped reporting before dawn. ''He probably said, 'Enough of this!' '' Mr. Miner said.
Records were broken in many locales, including Boston (3 below). Morrisville and Sherburne in central New York reported 23 below zero, while Syracuse had 16 below, Binghamton 14 below and Rochester 12 below, all records for the date. Buffalo, with 7 below, tied its record, but Albany, with 11 below, did not.
Low temperatures in Connecticut included Bridgeport's 2 below, a record. In New Jersey, it was 9 below in Mountain Creek and 8 below in Wantage, while Trenton set a record with 2 degrees and Atlantic City had 4 above.
In New York City, 2-degree temperatures set records at Kennedy International and La Guardia Airports. It was 1 degree in Central Park, not a record, but colder than at International Falls, Minn., often called the icebox of the nation, which had a relatively balmy 5 degrees. To put things in perspective, temperatures of more than 40 below zero were widespread in Ontario and Quebec, and in Siberia yesterday it was 53 below zero.
The cold delayed trains in New York and Massachusetts, said Dan Stessel, a spokesman for Amtrak. He said that some trains leaving Pennsylvania Station were delayed for up to an hour because the cold weather slowed the process of assembling trains in the yard. Four trains that were scheduled to run through the Empire corridor, which extends from Pennsylvania Station to Albany, and sometimes beyond to Niagara Falls, were canceled. Mr. Stessel said those trains did not run because there were signal problems between Rhinecliff and Schenectady, possibly caused by cold weather. Two trains that were set to depart from Boston were canceled because parts of their engines froze.
New York City health officials said several people had been hospitalized with hypothermia. But the police reported no deaths or serious injuries as a result of the cold snap, which began Thursday, hit its nadir yesterday with a high only in the teens, and was expected to continue today with slightly moderated highs in the 20's.
Carol Abrams, a spokeswoman for the Department of Housing Preservation and Development, said that from midnight until 7 p.m. yesterday, there had been 3,917 heat and hot water complaints. The record, 4,083 complaints, was set on Jan. 17, 2000, she said. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, at an afternoon news conference, said the city's 311 help line would probably answer 30,000 calls during the day, three times the normal volume. Aside from inadequate heat and hot water, other weather-related complaints included frozen water pipes or icicles dangling dangerously from buildings.
The city's shelters were all open and police officers were on the lookout for those who needed them. ''There's nobody that has to be out on the streets without shelter,'' the mayor said. The commissioner of the Department of Homeless Services, Linda I. Gibbs, said 200 people had sought shelter, bringing to 8,500 the number of single adults in the shelters.
About 400 traffic lights malfunctioned, but most were repaired by afternoon. ''These things happen when the weather goes below freezing,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''It's dangerously cold outside, but that doesn't mean you can't go out and enjoy the parks.''
The mayor urged people to bundle up and exercise caution. ''Cover up, that's the message more than anything else,'' he said. ''A number of layers, one on top of each other, provide more insulation than one thick layer. The bottom line is it's very dangerous out there. Exercise some common sense.''
Everywhere, people were buttoned to the eyes, padded like armadillos, breath smoking at nostrils, faces grimacing at the cold. Only a few dedicated skaters were gliding on the rink in Rockefeller Center, among them Margie Deroski, of Southold, N.Y. ''You feel it in your face,'' she said. ''It strikes you right in the face like a blade.''
Indeed, for almost everyone out yesterday, the cold was a torment. It touched the face like a flame and cut the unprotected hand. It caught the breath and fogged glasses and, after a while, dominated the mind. Dogs frolicked in Central Park, but their walkers seemed benumbed, like dolls staring down from the shelves of a shooting gallery.
At the Union Square farmers market just north of Greenwich Village, normally bustling on a Saturday morning, only half the vendors and a relative handful of shoppers turned out. Many vendors had portable heaters, but not Matt Fulton, 29, of Brooklyn, who was shivering as he sold Vermont maple syrup, honey and other countrified products.
He wore long johns, wool socks, a wool sweater, two sweatshirts and two scarves. ''And it's still not helping,'' he moaned. He said he had thought about staying home, but came out because he needed the money. ''Besides, people need their syrup,'' he said. ''The die-hard people are still coming out.''
On Long Island, the invisible cold was apparent everywhere: in Lido Beach, a mailman striding up a deserted street, only his eyes visible; in Hempstead, a soccer field normally crowded with children on a Saturday morning now deserted; and on the roof of a bank in Wantagh, pigeons that usually strut about like grumpy officers all hunkered down, trying to catch a touch of warmth from the pale winter sun.
The Hartford office of the AAA was in full battle mode, a small army of dispatchers working the phones, answering pleas from stranded motorists. The office received 300 calls for tows or jump-starts between 7 and 9 a.m., and expected 1,000 calls for the day. Emergencies are given priority. And when told the wait for a tow truck could be up to two hours, some clients got creative, said Steve Futterman, who drives a tow truck in Newington. ''Some people say they have a baby locked in the car,'' he said, ''but when you get there they're alone.''
James McPherson, an AAA spokesman who sometimes fills in as a dispatcher, recalled a whopper. ''One guy said he was transporting human organs,'' he said.
And how did he know it was phony?
''From his house in the suburbs?''
In Parsippany-Troy Hills, N.J., Jason Koellhoffer, 15, was playing hockey with a band of teenagers on a frozen Lake Parsippany. Was it solid enough? Ross Egan, 16, skated to the center to show how safe it was. But he noted that lake hockey was a kinder, gentler game. ''We don't really hit each other,'' he said.
At the Morristown National Historic Park where George Washington made his headquarters during the winter of 1779, Sau Swanger, 88, stood puffing and huffing, his eyes tearing and his nose dripping. He and his Australian sheepdog, Sheila, had just finished a third lap around the visitors' center. ''My dog is good for me,'' he said. ''She gets me up early. If I can stand this cold, I can last another 10 years.''
A park guide, Kim Watts, said that General Washington, too, had suffered in the cold. ''The winter of 1779 was the worst on record,'' she said. ''There were 20 snow storms that averaged four to six inches during that winter.''
