For the last four years, the stately halls of the Central Secretariat buildings, the two sandstone, hilltop colossuses that house India's government, could be relied on for a skeptical view of Pakistan's president and America's ally, Gen. Pervez Musharraf.
In 1999, India identified the general as the architect of an offensive in the disputed territory of Kashmir. The conflict nearly caused a fourth war between the nuclear-armed rivals and humiliated India's prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee.
In July 2001, Indian officials bitterly blamed his cockiness for the scuttling of a peacemaking effort in the Indian city of Agra. In December 2001, enraged leaders in New Delhi accused him of backing terrorist groups that carried out a brazen assault on India's national Parliament building, and mobilized for war.
In short, General Musharraf, who seized power in 1999, was dismissed as reckless, aggressive and, most of all, not to be trusted.
Yet in a breakthrough this week at a regional summit meeting in Islamabad, it was General Musharraf who agreed to resume talks with India, a move that has pushed Mr. Vajpayee's popularity to a high point.
In return for India agreeing to discuss all bilateral issues, including the two countries' half-century-old dispute over Kashmir, Pakistan agreed to not allow any terrorism to emanate from its soil. That is seen as an implicit promise to end its support for a 14-year separatist insurgency in the Indian-controlled portion of Kashmir.
India and Pakistan have fought two of their three wars over Kashmir. Each controls part of it. And for years, India has accused Pakistan of arming, training and financing separatist guerrillas and helping them cross into Indian-held Kashmir. Pakistan maintains that it supplies only political and moral support. Complicating the conflict, most Kashmiris appear to want simple independence.
Indian officials say they have witnessed a surprising transformation of the general.
The Indian foreign minister, Yashwant Sinha, said in an interview on Saturday: ''He's definitely changed. He was clearly more constructive'' at the Islamabad meeting.
A senior Indian official who attended both the failed 2001 summit meeting and the negotiations last week in Islamabad called the Pakistani leader ''a different man.'' ''There, he was a commando,'' the official said. ''Here, he has to rule the country.''
Indian officials gave varying reasons for why India now trusts General Musharraf's pledges.
First, they said, there is concrete evidence of a change in Pakistan's policy toward Kashmir. Also, after four years of rule, they said, the general appears more measured. They also credited China, noting that Pakistan's positions became far more flexible after General Musharraf visited Beijing in early November. The Chinese news media reported that he promised not to allow Uighurs, a Muslim ethnic group waging a separatist struggle in northwestern China, to be trained by militants in Pakistan.
Perhaps most important, the officials said, two assassination attempts may have convinced him to finally crack down on all militants, including those fighting in Kashmir.
General Musharraf sees change from India, too, with its agreement to seriously discuss Kashmir's status for the first time in years.
Mr. Vajpayee's peace foray is being hailed in New Delhi as another step in an visionary effort to transform India's foreign policy and global image. The agreement on new talks comes six months after Mr. Vajpayee and his diplomats made headway toward resolving a 45-year border dispute with China.
Officials close to Mr. Vajpayee, who faces re-election this year, say his goal is to strengthen India's already booming economy, to speed development and lessen poverty. Western observers say he is also strengthening the case for India to be seen as a mature regional power credibly bidding for a coveted permanent seat on the United Nations Security Council.
For now, the Indian leader appears to face little domestic political risk. Opinion polls in India show wide public support for peace with Pakistan. Last month, Mr. Vajpayee's Hindu nationalist Bharatiya Janata Party won sweeping victories in three of four state elections.
One Western observer said Mr. Vajpayee's political strength was at its highest point since he took office six years ago, calling his current position ''unassailable.''
But Mr. Vajpayee could not make peace alone.
Indian officials said some of the first indications of General Musharraf's shift came at the line that divides Kashmir into two portions, one controlled by Pakistan and one by India.
An Indian official who specializes in Kashmiri issues said infiltration by guerrillas from Pakistan's part of Kashmir into India's, as well as attacks, dropped sharply in October. In November, General Musharraf declared a cease-fire along the Kashmir dividing line.
The official said India had also intercepted radio messages from Pakistani officials urging militants not to cross into Indian-held Kashmir. In November and December, Pakistani forces detained two groups of militants trying to cross, the official said, and one complained that the Pakistani Army was discouraging them.
Indian officials said they would make their final judgment on General Musharraf in a few months, when the snow melts in Kashmir. That is when militants usually try to trek in over mountain passes.
As insurance, Indian officials say, they will continue the rapid construction of about 435 miles of fencing along the disputed border.
The two December assassination attempts, meanwhile, have halted Indian dismissals of General Musharraf's claims that many militants are not under his influence. ''There are elements that may not be within their control,'' Mr. Sinha, the Indian foreign minister, said.
One attempt was apparently carried out by men linked to an Islamic militant group fighting in Kashmir whose members see General Musharraf's moves toward peace as a betrayal.
The Indian government, which now now has a stake in the general's survival, is facing the real threat that he may be assassinated. Some Pakistani officials predict that a successor ''would not have the courage to proceed'' with peace talks, the senior Indian official said.
Mr. Sinha recounted a farewell phone conversation in Islamabad between Mr. Vajpayee and General Musharraf that seemed to reflect that fear. In a display of goodwill that could scarcely have been imagined six months ago, the Indian leader wished his once-bitter rival well.
''We would wish him a long life,'' Mr. Sinha said, ''and hope that nothing untoward will happen to him.''
