THE SETTING -- The lemon-yellow rooms of a brownstone on West 121st Street in Harlem, where dozens of literary sophisticates come and go while eating deviled eggs, the perfect setting . . . for murder.
THE BUZZ -- Not real murder, crime-novel murder. Or was it justifiable homicide? For the answer to that and other questions -- such as, what was playing on the jukebox at the Fat Man Bar on 155th Street in the summer of 1972? -- you will have to read ''The Viaduct'' by Grace F. Edwards. She and her recently published book were the reasons for the party, held last weekend by the Harlem Writers Guild.
''I'm a mystery reader,'' said Lenore Blackburn, a fan of Ms. Edwards who traveled from Clifton, Va., to find a seat at the party and balance a big plate of tuna salad on her knee. ''Her credibility is excellent. Until I found her books, I didn't know there was an African-American female mystery writer.''
Ms. Edwards is known for her textured descriptions of Harlem, the setting for each of her six books. McGraw-Hill published her first mystery in 1988, and Doubleday has published the last five. She does well. The average print run for her books is 39,000 copies, according to Doubleday.
The main character in ''The Viaduct'' is Marin Taylor, a Vietnam veteran who harbors tortured memories of the war. The action begins when Marin is attacked while walking home at night on the 155th Street viaduct. A man dies, and soon after, a child is stolen. The reader follows Marin through a violent world of ill intent that is piquantly strewn with cultural references to things like the Flip Wilson television show, ''chicken and waffles at Wells' Restaurant at three in the morning'' and Mayor John V. Lindsay's struggles with uptown urban renewal.
The gracious Ms. Edwards, who now lives in Crown Heights, Brooklyn, and who perhaps looked better than a 71-year-old woman has a right to look in a pair of burgundy leather pants, noted another slice of Harlemesque verisimilitude in her novels: suspicion of civic authority.
''Growing up in this area, I sort of have a problem with confidence regarding the police,'' she said. In her books, characters like Marin and Mali Anderson, a female private detective, do most of the sleuthing.
One partygoer, Jimmy Peterson, nodded in time to the cool jazz of a four-piece combo that featured the rumbling thrum of the jymba, a goatskin drum from Africa. He was happy to compliment Ms. Edwards, the little girl who lived down the block when he was growing up on 148th Street in central Harlem.
''She's the same person with the nice smile who is always glad to see you,'' he said. He also praised the familiarity of her fictional world: ''I really like her, because she writes about me.''
For those still wondering, the answer is ''You're So Fine'' by the Cats and the Fiddle, a rhythm and blues group. That's what was playing on the jukebox at the Fat Man before Marin Taylor walked out into the humid night and met fate on the viaduct.
JIM O'GRADY
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: HARLEM -- BUZZ
