SOMETIMES the good guys win.
The proposed Millennium Pipeline project may now be dead in the water, as a result of the decision by Commerce Secretary Donald Evans to uphold a New York State ruling that the pipeline's proposed crossing of the Hudson River at the environmentally sensitive Haverstraw Bay could harm that coastal zone. In 2001, when Briarcliff Manor parents first expressed concern that the Millennium Pipeline would run within 75 feet of our children's kindergarten playground, we heard, ''It's a done deal,'' from every elected official who would listen.
It took two and a half years of lobbying, rallying and protesting by parents and children from Mount Vernon to Briarcliff Manor to Croton to convince officials that Millennium wasn't right for Westchester, New York City, New York State or our times. The United States Department of Commerce based its decision purely on legal and environmental grounds, but Millennium's proposal changed the discussion on planning in the wake of the terrorist attacks of September 2001, especially when resource and infrastructure needs clash. New York City was more concerned about its water supply than Millennium's gas, as the pipeline would run within feet of the 90-year-old Catskill Aqueduct in Yonkers. Con Edison and the New York State Public Service Commission did not want Millennium to jeopardize electricity cables. Briarcliff Manor and Mount Vernon residents objected to the proximity to schools.
The cheapest alternative is no longer acceptable. Gov. George E. Pataki and Secretary Evans responded to the concerns of Westchester and County Executive Andrew J. Spano.
Because Westchester is the land link between New York City and the rest of the state, it will continue to play a major role in downstate infrastructure planning. The security and the safety of Westchester residents need to be placed before profits of energy companies. New energy sources will be required, but they will have to be sources without unnecessary risk. Natural gas can be transported from offshore deposits through the ocean, instead of through neighborhoods.
Mistakes must be recognized and corrected. If Indian Point were proposed today, it would not reach the starting block. Anyone who has tried to cross the Tappan Zee Bridge on a Friday afternoon knows that no evacuation plan can possibly work. Conservation and alternative sources, like Conjunction's proposal to run electric cables from Albany, can compensate for taking Indian Point offline. Millennium can cross the Hudson River to Indian Point where a gas-powered plant can be built.
Indian Point's owner, Entergy Corporation, has recently stated that the debate over Indian Point is over. They are wrong; it is just beginning. Entergy has managed to tap dance around a report from James Lee Witt, the former director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which declared the emergency response unworkable. As a result of Mr. Witt's report, New York and three of its counties refuse to certify the evacuation plans.
Defending the indefensible can be sustained for only so long. Stopping Millennium, which took years, was a much easier proposition than closing two online nuclear power plants. But with a dedicated and growing group working on Indian Point's closure and the likelihood that the issue will be on the hot stove for the 2006 gubernatorial election, Westchester's safety will not be taken for granted.
SOAPBOX Paul Wasserman is a resident of Briarcliff Manor.
