BY virtually all accounts, the mutual fund industry is suffering through its most serious crisis of faith in more than six decades. About a dozen fund companies have been tarnished to some degree by regulatory investigations into their trading practices, and more may be implicated.
Fund company executives and portfolio managers have been accused of allowing favored clients to trade often, and even after the market closed, at the expense of other customers. Longstanding chief executives of three fund companies have departed, several other executives and managers have quit or been dismissed, and one of the biggest fund companies has agreed to cut its fees to appease Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general.
Such a troubling series of events in an industry that had traded so successfully on a sterling reputation must have sent investors fleeing in droves, right? Not exactly.
In fact, the mutual fund business is thriving. Stock mutual funds took in more than $61 billion in the last three months of 2003, the first full months after Mr. Spitzer went public with his investigation into improper trading.
Investors are not ignoring the bad news altogether. Indeed, they have severely punished some companies, notably Putnam and Janus Capital, that allowed some customers to trade fund shares in ways that were discouraged or prohibited for long-term investors. In exchange, these preferred customers invested large sums with the fund companies or held out the promise of doing so. Critics contend that these arrangements hurt long-term investors by raising fund expenses and diluting their gains.
Putnam had a net outflow of $11.1 billion from its stock funds in November, while $2.2 billion was withdrawn from Janus Capital's stock funds, according to figures compiled by AMG Data Services in Arcata, Calif. It is not clear whether that bleeding accelerated or ebbed last month because neither company has reported its numbers for December yet.
But most of that money appears to have gone into stock funds managed by other big fund companies, like Fidelity Investments and Vanguard Group, rather than into bonds, cash or individual stocks. Evidence is scant that investors have lost their faith in actively managed funds.
Specialists in the behavior of investors cited several reasons for the muted reaction, but one stands out over all: the stock market has been on a tear.
''Behaviorists like me say it's not that individual investors never learn, it's just that they learn very, very slowly,'' said Hersh M. Shefrin, a professor of finance at Santa Clara University in California.
In a rising market, when the value of their holdings is growing, investors tend to focus on the positive and filter out negative news. Only when the market is swooning do they look for somebody, like a broker or fund manager, to blame for their misfortune, Mr. Shefrin said.
''It takes a down market to generate traction, when investors have a very strong need to feel that what's happened is not their fault,'' he said. ''That's when the issues involving impropriety gain traction.''
Mr. Spitzer's previous investigation into conflicts of interest among stock analysts employed by big investment banks resonated more loudly with investors, Mr. Shefrin said, because it occurred as they were reeling from the beating their portfolios had taken when the market bubble burst. He said he doubted that the analysts scandal would have drawn much attention during the boom.
IN the mutual fund scandal, most investors probably do not understand what the fuss is about because the accusations about trading abuses are somewhat esoteric, compared with, say, insider trading or ''cooking the books'' at a corporation, said Terrance Odean, an associate professor at the Haas School of Business, University of California at Berkeley, who studies investor behavior.
When Enron failed, many of its employees lost not only their jobs but also all of the wealth they had accumulated in company stock. By contrast, in the mutual fund cases, any losses that investors sustained from the rapid trading and late trading that have been uncovered were relatively small and spread across a large number of shareholders.
''The shock wasn't really in the amount of money but it was in the breach of trust,'' Mr. Odean said. ''They're not happy about the systematic small loss but they'd be more upset if someone was taking a little bit of money away from them in a down market than in an up market.''
No less an authority on the fund business than John C. Bogle, the founder of the Vanguard Group, concurs that mutual fund investors are more sensitive to ups and downs of the financial markets than to any other events.
The current flow of cash into stock funds ''reaffirms the eternal fact that market positions are the single most important thing affecting flows in this business,'' Mr. Bogle said.
Still, he said he was pleased to see that ''people are reacting fairly slowly but fairly surely'' to developments in the investigations by state and federal regulators. Money appears to be flowing out of companies ''that have betrayed the confidence of their investors,'' he said, to companies that have maintained reputations for being well managed and, in some cases, for holding down the costs and fees that eat into shareholders' gains.
''There definitely is some rational behavior occurring,'' he said.
Robert Adler, the president of AMG, said investors appeared to be distinguishing among fund companies based on their responses to improprieties. Though Bank of America was one of the original targets of Mr. Spitzer's campaign, he said, its actions appear to have limited the damage.
In September, Mr. Spitzer turned a spotlight on trading going on behind the scenes at big fund companies. He filed charges against Canary Capital Partners, a New York hedge fund managed by Edward J. Stern, a son of Leonard N. Stern, a wealthy developer. Mr. Spitzer contended that the Canary fund had struck deals to trade in and out of shares of some mutual funds run by Bank of America, Janus, Strong Financial and Bank One that had claimed to prohibit such frequent trading.
He also contended that Bank of America and another intermediary, the Security Trust Company, had allowed Mr. Stern to buy or sell shares of funds at a day's closing price long after the standard 4 p.m. deadline for placing such orders. Mr. Stern and his fund agreed to pay $40 million in penalties without admitting or denying wrongdoing. Federal regulators shut down Security Trust in late November, and Mr. Spitzer charged its top executives with grand larceny and fraud.
Bank of America was not charged in the case, but the bank dismissed several executives and Richard M. DeMartini, who oversaw the bank's asset-management and brokerage arm, said he would retire. Mr. Spitzer has vowed to bring charges against Richard S. Strong, who resigned a month ago as chairman and chief executive of Strong Financial, the Wisconsin-based company he founded, and put it up for sale.
Regulators have also filed suits against the Invesco Funds Group and Putnam, whose chief executive, Lawrence J. Lasser, resigned in early November. The founders of the PBHG funds, Gary Pilgrim and Harold Baxter, also resigned amid accusations from regulators of improper trading in their funds.
Alliance Capital agreed in mid-December to pay $250 million to compensate investors for improper trading in its funds and agreed to reduce the fees it charges individual investors for managing their money. Janus agreed the next day to repay $31.5 million to investors because of rapid trading it had allowed in and out of its funds.
Several other fund companies have either been sued by regulators or named in complaints and more may be implicated as investigators at the Securities and Exchange Commission in Washington and various state regulators dig into documents they have gathered from dozens of fund companies.
Still, the money continues to pour into mutual funds. Stock funds took in $23.2 billion in December, up from $14 billion in November, according to AMG. More than half of the new money went to the three biggest companies, Fidelity, Vanguard and American Funds, whose names have not surfaced in the investigations.
''The size of the flows as a whole tends to indicate that investors are not losing faith'' in actively managed funds, said Don Cassidy, senior research analyst at Lipper Inc.
MR. Cassidy said investors clearly were abandoning certain fund ''brands'' like Putnam and Janus but there was no sign that they were switching to index funds or other investment options. He attributed that pattern to investors' inertia, a perceived lack of viable alternatives and a fear of the unknown. Many Americans do their investing through their employers' 401(k) retirement savings plans, which offer primarily mutual funds, he said.
''Where else are they going to go?'' Mr. Cassidy said. ''People don't sell very easily; they buy a lot more easily. Plus, if you leave, will you be jumping into the next pot only to find you're in the same soup?''
A Widening Scandal  A number of companies have been caught up in the widening investigations into trading practices at mutual funds.
September
SEPT. 3 -- Eliot Spitzer, right, the New York attorney general, announces that Canary Capital, a hedge fund, has agreed to pay $40 million in fines and restitution, without admitting wrongdoing, relating to improper trading of mutual funds.
SEPT. 7 -- Janus Capital Group says it will make restitution to shareholders of funds in which market-timing trades occurred.
SEPT. 8 -- Bank of America says it will make restitution to shareholders in its funds.
SEPT. 16 -- Theodore C. Sihpol III, a former broker at Bank of America, is charged with larceny and securities fraud on suspicion of helping Canary trade after hours.
SEPT. 30 -- Alliance Capital Management says it has suspended two executives for allowing improper trading in its mutual funds.
October
OCT. 1 -- Prudential Securities says it has fired a dozen brokers and managers for aiding in market-timing trades.
OCT. 2 -- Steven B. Markovitz, a former trader at Millennium Partners, a hedge fund, pleads guilty to after-hours trading of fund shares.
OCT. 16 -- James Patrick Connelly Jr., an executive at Fred Alger Management, pleads guilty to evidence tampering after regulators began investigating market-timing trades at the fund company.
OCT. 28 -- Federal and state securities regulators file civil lawsuits against Putnam Investments and two of its former fund managers, accusing them of fraud.
November
NOV. 4 -- Five former brokers and two former managers at Prudential Securities are sued by regulators saying they were involved in improper trading of mutual funds. Lawrence J. Lasser, the chief executive of Putnam Investments, resigns.
NOV. 13 -- PBHG Funds ousts its founders, Harold J. Baxter and Gary L. Pilgrim, because Mr. Pilgrim invested in a partnership that was allowed to trade frequently in PBHG funds. Putnam Investments settles a securities fraud lawsuit brought by regulators, agreeing to restrict trading by its employees and improve oversight.
NOV. 17 -- MFS Investment Management says it has suspended its practice of directing brokerage commissions to firms that sell its funds or bring it new clients.
NOV. 20 -- Regulators accuse Mr. Baxter and Mr. Pilgrim of fraud.
NOV. 25 -- Security Trust, an important intermediary in the mutual fund trading business, is closed by regulators and three senior executives are charged with larceny and securities fraud.
December
DEC. 2 -- Under suspicion of trading in and out of his funds for profit, Richard S. Strong, right, gives up control of the fund company he founded. Regulators sue the Invesco Funds Group, accusing it of securities fraud by allowing market timing.
DEC. 18 -- Alliance Capital Management agrees to refund $250 million to investors and cut its fees by an estimated $350 million.
DEC. 19 -- Janus Capital agrees to refund $31.5 million to investors.
