LENNY BARBARO, who was running on a treadmill in North Haven Wednesday night, had a lot in common with Gov. John G. Rowland, who was making a speech on the television in front of him. Both men, it seemed, were exerting themselves. At least Mr. Barbaro was losing weight. The governor, as far as he was concerned, wasn't accomplishing anything.
''I'm just really disappointed,'' said Mr. Barbaro, speaking about the governor at the North Haven Health and Racquet Club. ''We put our trust in him and he let everybody down. It's just another example of politicians running crazy in Connecticut.''
Mr. Barbaro, a lifelong Connecticut resident from Clinton, voted for Mr. Rowland in the last election. He said the governor's speech was not going to change his disappointment over the governor.
''I think he was a little late in doing it,'' Mr. Barbaro said. ''It should have been done a lot sooner.''
During the six-minute speech, the governor admitted that he had lied about taking gifts for his vacation cottage from friends and contractors who have done business with the state. He said the people who gave him gifts did not receive any benefits in return. Federal investigators have subpoenaed documents relating to Mr. Rowland's cottage. With more than half of Connecticut residents calling for Rowland to resign, according to a Quinnipiac poll released Wednesday, the speech was a plea for forgiveness and patience.
''I can only appeal to your sense of fairness and process as I pledge to continue my full cooperation with this investigation and the full cooperation of my administration,'' Mr. Rowland said in the speech.
Over the past three weeks, public sentiment has shifted strongly against the governor, said Douglas J. Schwartz, the poll director at Quinnipiac. In a Dec. 17 poll, 44 percent of voters surveyed said they thought the governor should resign. In the poll released Wednesday, 56 percent of voters surveyed thought it was time for the governor to leave. Voters were more closely split on whether the governor should be impeached by the Legislature, with 42 percent favoring it and 46 percent against.
''The trends are clearly moving against Governor Rowland,'' Mr. Schwartz said. ''I think the more people know about the controversy, the worse it gets for the governor.''
Darryl McMiller, a political science professor at the University of Hartford, said the shift in public opinion has sent a signal to lawmakers who are considering impeachment.
''It's pretty loud what the legislators are hearing,'' he said. ''They can't argue that it's partisan. Public sentiment is strongly against this governor. It gives legislators a signal from their voters that they believe something is very wrong in the governor's mansion and there's a need for change. I think the Legislature has to respond in a way that reflects the way the public feels about the failings of this governor.''
To many Connecticut residents going through their Wednesday routines, the governor's sentiments lacked sincerity.
At the racquet club Wednesday night most of the seven wall-mounted televisions in the cardio room were tuned to the governor's speech, which was broadcast on all major networks in the state. The sound was turned off on the televisions, so the people exercising had to read the speech in subtitles running across the bottom of the screen. Some slowed their exercise routines or got off machines to watch his words, but most continued their workouts.
Over all, people said the governor's speech won't change anything.
''I'm certain that he's not apologetic,'' said Douglas Jones, a high school science teacher from New Haven. ''It's strictly a political move.''
Like many of the people in the fitness club, Mr. Jones voted for Mr. Rowland in the last election. And like many others around him, he said he thought it's time for a changing of the guard in the state. But before Mr. Rowland resigns, Mr. Jones has a special request.
''Before he resigns, he should do some groundbreaking things -- I know this is going to sound ridiculous -- like maybe selling the property in question and donating the proceeds back to the state,'' he said.
Mr. Rowland did have one supporter at the gym. Sandra Mattei of Hamden said she didn't think Mr. Rowland's entire career should be ruined by one indiscretion.
''As far as I'm concerned, it's not a big deal,'' she said. ''He's done so much good for the state. This is just minute.''
Ms. Mattei said she would vote for Mr. Rowland again if she had the opportunity.
A few hundred yards away from the health club, another group of residents were watching the speech on the two televisions at the On Broadway bar and restaurant. Again, the governor received a poor reception.
''All I was basically hearing was 'blah, blah, blah,''' said Susan Pace, who watched the speech at the bar. ''I probably registered the first few sentences and then I thought, 'Sorry, you're way too late on this.'
''It's after the fact,'' she added. ''You've already been caught in a lie. You can't say it didn't exist. His believability has hit rock-bottom.''
''He's a thief!'' shouted Anthony G. Copeland from the other end of the bar. ''I think they should impeach him and I'm a Republican. You can't steal from the public.''
