HABIB KOITÉ -- People seeking the birthplace of the blues have lately been heading for Mali, where the modal vamps of traditional songs remind American listeners of John Lee Hooker's one-chord blues boogies. But to my ear Malian music is still removed from the blues. The fingerpicking cross-rhythms are there, but music that was originally plucked on kora (harp) and tapped on balafon (marimba) doesn't have the bent notes -- the blue notes -- of American blues, and West African lyrics tend to speak for a community's conscience rather than individual travails. So don't listen to ''Foly!'' (World Village), the live album by Habib Koité and his band Bamada, for blues connections. Enjoy it instead for Mr. Koité's kindly, heartfelt singing, for the weightless patterns he shares with the band, for an easy cosmopolitanism that touches on rumba and rapping, and for songs that are free of studio gimmickry and time limits. The longer they go, the more mesmerizing they get.
DAVID BERKELEY -- Geographical song titles, from ''Chicago'' to ''Shiloh'' to ''Times Square,'' reveal David Berkeley's wanderlust on his second album, ''After the Wrecking Ships'' (Ten Good Records, available from www.cdbaby.com). Wherever he goes, what he sees inspires compassion and misgivings. ''This is the age of thieves, the age of misbelief,'' he sings in a lustrous, melancholy voice with shades of Tim Buckley and Nick Drake. As his melodies ascend to become benedictions and consolations, the music shimmers and peals. Download a few songs free from www.davidberkeley.com.
CAMERA OBSCURA -- Glasgow seems to breed serenely hard-headed, 1960's-loving folk-pop bands like Belle and Sebastian and now Camera Obscura. On ''Underachievers Please Try Harder'' (Merge), Tracyanne Campbell, Carey Lander and occasionally John Henderson sing diffidently about all the wounds romance can leave. ''He's the kind who will do you in,'' the women harmonize, nonchalant but not naïve.
MEKONS -- Jon Langford and Tom Greenhalgh were in the Mekons during the original British punk-rock explosion, and they're still in the Mekons. For the band's 25th-anniversary tour in 2002, they dug out their oldest songs. They couldn't escape becoming more musically competent, and they had to transpose some songs down from youthful shout to middle-aged growl. Nor did they turn back from their latter-day fondness for banjo and fiddle. But on ''Punk Rock'' (Quarter Stick) the Mekons still sound just as disgusted with the powerful, as sympathetic to outcasts and as full of questions as ever. And yes, they still rock.
CALIFONE -- Quiet never means calm to the enigma-loving band Califone. Its new album, ''Heron King Blues'' (Thrill Jockey), ambles through stereo-warped slide-guitar twangs and hall-of-mirrors funk as Tim Rutili contemplates apocalypse without raising his voice. In a seen-it-all moan, he confides, ''this city is wrecked a fistful of shake no where to collapse let it pass.''
HANNAH MARCUS -- For anyone who's ever wondered what the slowly gathering minimalist tempests of Godspeed You Black Emperor would sound like attached to vocals and lyrics -- there must be a handful of us -- Hannah Marcus has enlisted Godspeed's guitarist and bassist to back her songs on ''Desert Farmers'' (Bar/None). Her surreal travelogues are full of sudden transformations and unsettling close-ups. They inspire her accompanists to toy with jazz and soul vamps, to pick acoustic instruments in rustic quietude, to exult in unsullied grandeur and then to let loose their beloved distortion.
'CERTIFIED DOPE, VOL. 4: BABYLON'S BURNING' -- The spacious echoes and fog banks of sound that drifted over the leisurely beats of dub reggae have been set aside by dancehall's crisply digital vanguard. That leaves them for self-described undergrounders like the people behind Crooklyn Dub Outernational. They searched well beyond Brooklyn for their fourth compilation of bass-loving, slowly pulsating tracks like Systemwide's ''Eyupsultan,'' HIM's ''Disco Lips,'' Scotty Hard's ''Smoke Damage'' and DJ/Rupture's ''Pleasure Ruin Dub.'' Played end to end, ''Certified Dope, Vol. 4'' (WordSound, www.wordsound.com) evolves from familiar dub style to funk- and hip-hop-tinged abstractions that are ever more disorienting.
EISLEY -- This Texas band of three sisters, a brother and a friend couldn't wait to release an album. Instead it released two EP's in the middle and end of 2003, ''Laughing City'' and ''Marvelous Things'' (Reprise). They're fond of chiming arrangements and sweet harmonies -- part Cocteau Twins, part Kate Bush, with a touch of sea chantey -- and they sing fairy-tale visions of nature transformed and love conquering all. Like fellow Texans the Polyphonic Spree, Eisley finds innocent joy in pop's splendor, and while ''Laughing City'' is slightly better, both EP's have their charms.
THE COOPER TEMPLE CLAUSE -- Harried-sounding tenor voice? Check. Soaring melodies attacked by double-time beats and electronic noise? Check. Lyrics filled with malaise and recalcitrance? Check. Sure, half the bands in England wish they were Radiohead, but the Cooper Temple Clause comes closer than most on its second album, ''Kick Up the Fire, and Let the Flames Break Loose'' (Morning/BMG import, due for American release later this year), because it cherishes the disruptions as much as the anthems.
MUSIC: PLAYLIST
