Danfords Inn in Port Jefferson Plans to Open a New Lounge
The Aqua Bar, a new lounge at Danfords on the Sound, the inn in Port Jefferson, will open Jan. 30, Stewart Weiner, the general manager, said Wednesday.
The 3,700-square-foot lounge was designed by Dante Paganini, a Hicksville designer specializing in restaurants and nightclubs. It cost $500,000, Mr. Weiner said, and features hand-painted murals depicting yachting scenes.
The lounge is part of a $5 million renovation being undertaken by Oak Tree Capital Management of Manhattan, the inn's owner.
The inn's original waterfront building is more than 100 years old, and over the decades it has housed everything from an ice cream shop and social club to an artist's studio and boxing arena. In 1986 it was bought by Robert McNamara, the Port Jefferson auto dealer, and turned into an inn. After Mr. McNamara was charged with defrauding the General Motors Corporation, the property became part of a bankruptcy settlement and was acquired by Oak Tree in May 1998.
Named Vice Chairman
Harvey Auerbach, a director of the Long Island Financial Corporation (Nasdaq: LICB) of Islandia, has been elected vice chairman of the corporation, the parent company of the Long Island Commercial Bank. Douglas C. Manditch, the president and chief executive of the corporation, made the announcement on Tuesday.
Mr. Auerbach replaces Roy M. Kern Sr., who retired from the board on Jan. 1.
Mr. Auerbach, a founder of the bank, has served on its board since the bank's inception in 1990. He is the owner of the Brookwood Management Company, which owns and manages residential and commercial real estate.
Record Revenues Predicted
The flower and gift retailer 1-800-Flowers.com (Nasdaq: FLWS) of Westbury told analysts on Tuesday that it expected online sales growth to push revenues for the fiscal second quarter to a record $213 million.
The company said that it expected revenues to grow about 8 percent for the quarter, which ended Dec. 28. In the same quarter last year, the company said it recorded revenues of $197.4 million.
Online sales grew approximately 20 percent for the quarter, the company said.
Compiled by Warren Strugatch
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
