In long neat rows, as far as one can see, hundreds of American armored personnel carriers, artillery pieces, trucks and other machines of war are parked at this sprawling port, ready to load onto transport ships for the trip home from the conflict in Iraq.
To make room for their new cargo, each of the 900-foot vessels pulling into berths here must first disgorge more than 1,400 Bradley fighting vehicles, Humvees and other replacement equipment that will soon roll north.
More than 240,000 soldiers and marines are to move into and out of Iraq from now to May, testing the military's ability to handle a major logistical feat while battling the Iraqi insurgency. From remote camps in northern Iraq to the port here, this swapping of forces amounts to the United States military's largest troop rotation since World War II.
It is a movement of hundreds of convoys synchronized by computerized programs that monitor a two-way flow of tanks, trucks and other equipment. Remote sensors track the day-by-day progress of matériel from the moment it leaves bases in Iraq to the time it rolls into predetermined parking spaces aboard one of the giant seven-story cargo ships now arriving here -- as well as the other way around.
''It's kind of like a ballet with the Green Bay Packers,'' said Brig. Gen. Jack Stultz, a senior Army logistician here. He is responsible for orchestrating the movements of what will be as many as 3,000 vehicles a day along an 800-mile stretch into and out of Iraq.
During this rotation, about 110,000 fresh troops will flow into Iraq to replace 125,000 who have been there for about a year. The first 200 returning soldiers from the 101st Airborne Division arrived home this week in Fort Campbell, Ky. Soldiers from the 82nd Airborne Division were also heading home, to Fort Bragg, N.C.
At the peak period of overlapping forces, commanders will be able to capitalize on having as many as 200,000 troops in Iraq. But the rotation also poses new risks as American officials say they fully expect guerrillas to try to exploit the transition to new, less experienced troops.
''The shifting focus of their attacks is relentless,'' said Maj. Gen. Stephen M. Speakes, the senior Army officer here overseeing the troop rotation. ''But this will not be a period of vulnerability.''
As the logisticians wrestle with how to feed, house and transport all the troops on the move, combat commanders say they are preparing to ensure that the frontline-unit transition is seamless. That means transferring to incoming units information about the insurgents and their structure, as well as operational matters and the personal relationships with tribal and religious leaders that have been cultivated during the past months.
''These are three priorities that have to be transferred without a hiccup,'' said Brig. Gen. Martin E. Dempsey, commander of the First Armored Division in Baghdad, which will hand off much of its area to the First Cavalry Division, from Fort Hood, Tex.
''We're going to have to work very hard getting them spooled up on the personalities, the sheiks, the tribes, the bad guys, the cells, the infrastructure, the economic projects and the Iraqi security forces,'' said Maj. Gen. David H. Petraeus, commander of the 101st Airborne Division.
General Petraeus said there would also be an aggressive campaign in the Iraqi news media, including television call-in programs, to counter any efforts by the guerrillas to portray the troop rotation as the United States abandoning the Iraqi people.
For incoming units, the process will start at the Ash Shuaiba port, where as many as three or four 900-foot-long Navy transport ships may be unloading at any time. Troops will be flown in to drive their equipment to large staging camps in the desert. They will then spend several days training in the desert before pushing up into Iraq.
The process works in reverse for returning troops. The Army plans to leave about 15 percent of its equipment behind, notably high-priority vehicles like armored Humvees and some communications equipment. The rest will be driven south in armed convoys, washed off, inspected and loaded onto the ships, now empty.
The 101st Airborne is flying about 30 of its Apache gunships back to Fort Campbell on C-17 cargo planes, but most of the division's 250 helicopters will be flown from its headquarters in Mosul, Iraq, to Kuwait, taken apart, wrapped in plastic to avoid shipping damage and put on the vessels. The division has more than 6,000 vehicles and trailers heading home.
''The key to this whole operation is that no cargo stays in any situation longer than 12 hours, otherwise it's backing everything up,'' said Maj. Faris Williams, the Army's top operations officer at Ash Shuaiba, where nearly 100 cargo ships are to unload or pick up trucks, combat vehicles and other equipment over the next five months.
Incoming units have been brushing up on lessons that soldiers now in Iraq have passed along, from cultural sensitivity training to maintenance tips.
''It's about as complex an operation the Army has had in many, many years,'' Lt. Gen. Thomas Metz, the head of the III Corps, said in a telephone interview from his headquarters at Fort Hood.
General Metz is expected to arrive in Iraq later this month and will assume daily operational control of the mission, allowing Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, the senior American officer in Iraq now, to focus on strategic military and political issues.
The units going home include the First Armored Division, based in Germany; the 101st Airborne Division; and the Fourth Infantry Division, from Fort Hood.
Incoming units include the First Cavalry Division; the First Infantry Division, from Germany; and 25,000 marines from several bases. In addition, several thousand National Guard and Reserve forces will be flowing in.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE MILITARY
