A Florida appeals court panel ruled on Friday that the state could not appoint a guardian for the fetus of a retarded rape victim, dismissing what civil-liberties groups complained was an attack by Gov. Jeb Bush against abortion rights.
The ruling does not affect the woman because she gave birth in August. But lawyers who fought the state's effort said the decision would have a far-reaching impact, because it would keep the state from establishing legal protection for fetuses in the future.
Mr. Bush, a Republican, opposes abortion, and he drew national attention by intervening last spring in the case of the woman, who is identified in court papers as J. D. S. A circuit court judge had denied requests to appoint a guardian for the fetus, made by people who feared the woman's own court-appointed guardian would arrange for an abortion.
An Orlando woman seeking to be the fetus's guardian appealed that decision, and Mr. Bush intervened on her behalf in May. Some critics accused Mr. Bush of using the case to curry favor with conservatives, in part because his brother, President Bush, may need their support to win Florida in the 2004 election.
''When you set up a guardian for a fetus, you're creating a situation with the mother and the fetus having competing legal rights,'' said Howard Simon, executive director of the American Civil Liberties Union of Florida, which argued the case before the appeals panel. ''There was no masking that this was a crusade to change the law, to limit the rights of women and bring to the Supreme Court something that would overturn or alter Roe v. Wade.''
Jacob DiPietre, a spokesman for Mr. Bush, said Saturday that the governor was reviewing the decision. ''We continue to believe that protective guardianship for both mother and unborn child was necessary in this tragic case,'' Mr. DiPietre said.
In a somewhat similar case, Mr. Bush intervened in a dispute involving a brain-damaged woman whose husband won a judge's permission to disconnect her feeding tube. The Legislature passed a law last fall that allowed Mr. Bush to order the tube reinserted. The husband of the woman, Terri Schiavo, 40, has asked the courts to strike down the law.
In both cases, critics of Mr. Bush have accused him of trying to establish precedent for encroaching on the privacy of individuals. His supporters have applauded him for acting on his belief that ''innocent life'' should be maintained at any cost.
J. D. S., who was 22 and lived in a group home here at the time of her rape, was found by the courts to have the mental capacity of a 4- or 5-year-old. After her daughter was born Aug. 30, tests determined that the 75-year-old husband of the woman who ran the group home had raped her. The man has since been found mentally incompetent to stand trial.
In oral arguments before the three-member panel of the state's Fifth District Court of Appeal last August, days before J. D. S. gave birth, an assistant state attorney general said the guardian of J. D. S. could not be depended on to make the best decisions for the fetus.
Such decisions could range from whether to abort the fetus to what kind of prenatal care and childbirth the mother had, the state lawyer, George L. Waas, argued at the time.
But in a 2-to-1 decision, the Fifth District Court of Appeal panel found that under Florida law, a fetus would have to be defined as a person to be eligible for a guardian.
''We find no Florida statute or case law that has determined a fetus to be a person,'' Justice Emerson R. Thompson wrote.
In a concurring opinion, Justice Richard B. Orfinger wrote that ''taking control'' of a pregnant woman's body by appointing a guardian for her fetus would create a ''universe of troubling questions.''
''Should the state have the authority to prohibit a pregnant woman from smoking cigarettes or drinking alcohol?'' Justice Orfinger wrote.
While Governor Bush's administration argued that the case was only about J.D.S. and her fetus, Justice Orfinger wrote that ''viewing the problem through that narrow a lens distorts the real issue.''
''If a fetus has rights, then all fetuses have rights,'' he wrote.
In a dissenting opinion, Justice Robert J. Pleus Jr. said appointing a guardian for J.D.S.'s fetus would have been the only means to ensure that ''the state's compelling interest in the health, welfare and life of the unborn child'' was protected.
