JAPANESE animation has its elder statesman, Hayao Miyazaki, 63, whose ''Spirited Away'' won last year's Oscar for best animated feature.
And now a new generation is asserting itself, led by Satoshi Kon, 40, whose ''Millennium Actress'' was released in the United States in September, and whose latest creation, ''Tokyo Godfathers,'' opens on Friday.
If Mr. Miyazaki is Japan's Walt Disney -- a beloved cultural institution, who even has his own museum in Tokyo -- Mr. Kon has no obvious peers in American animation. He makes his movies for adults, using an intricate narrative style that weaves in and out of the past and the present, the subjective and the objective, the real and the imagined, as in ''Millennium Actress'' (available on DVD). In the film, an aging star being interviewed by a pair of television journalists recounts a century of filmmaking in Japan and, through the eras evoked by her films, 1,000 years of Japanese history. Mr. Kon's characters, though they may have the wide eyes and round faces of stock anime figures, are psychologically complex, even -- as in his first feature, the 1997 ''Perfect Blue'' -- to the point of schizophrenia.
''Tokyo Godfathers'' shows off Mr. Kon's graphic style at its subtlest and most evocative. Set in a fully imagined back-alley Tokyo on a snowy Christmas Eve, the film avoids the bright colors usually associated with animation in favor of muted tones of brown, green and yellow, punctuated by pools of darkness. His images are formally exquisite compositions designed with a depth of field unusual for anime; movement is added sparingly. His films have a hushed, melancholy atmosphere and end-of-the-day reflectiveness that are rare in anime.
His storytelling, however, is charged with action and incident. The heroine of ''Perfect Blue,'' a teenage pop sensation struggling to make the transition to a career as a dramatic actress, is possessed by multiple identities, including the ghost of her innocent pop idol persona and a violent stalker who may be the embodiment of her own self-loathing.
For Mr. Kon the fluid boundaries between dimensions simply reflect the world as we experience it.
''For instance, here I am talking with you,'' Mr. Kon said during a recent visit to New York to present ''Tokyo Godfathers'' at the 2003 Big Apple Anime Festival. ''But I am still able to think about a job back in Japan. And so actually I am in New York, but I am also in Japan, and this is reality. Human nature is multilayered inside, and this is a fact I love to bring into my work.''
Mr. Kon, who dresses entirely in black with tiny glasses and a goatee that give him a suspicious resemblance to the chief interviewer in ''Millennium Actress,'' said that his interest in anime came relatively late. A successful creator of manga, the black-and-white Japanese comic books that can run to dozens of volumes and thousands of pages, and an occasional designer for animated television series, he was asked by Masao Maruyama, the president of Japan's Mad House animation studio, to take over the direction of ''Perfect Blue.'' Mr. Kon agreed on the condition that he be allowed to rework the script. (The project had originally been planned as a live-action film.)
''This was my first director job,'' Mr. Kon said through a translator, ''and so I struggled and searched and finally decided to make something that I would really want to see.'' He and the screenwriter Sadayuki Murai devised a new plot and the idea of the layered narration, and in the end, Mr. Kon said, ''the only thing in common between the original story and my movie was the characters.''
Mr. Kon also collaborated with Mr. Murai on ''Millennium Actress,'' and although he began with a blank slate, he again chose an actress as his heroine. ''Actors and actresses always work both in reality and in fantasy,'' Mr. Kon said. ''And so I just thought it's the perfect situation for me to use an actress to create this kind of tricky world.''
Though Mr. Kon said that Chiyoko, the central figure of ''Millennium Actress,'' is based on no one in particular, she bears a strong resemblance to Setsuko Hara, the stoic, always smiling, always dutiful daughter of many of Yasujiro Ozu's films of the 50's and early 60's. Chiyoko becomes an actress hoping to attract the attention of the lost love of her youth, a painter and war protester who seems to have disappeared into the Japanese campaign in Manchuria. As her career progresses during and after World War II, she appears in films modeled on different Japanese genres, including the feudal adventure as practiced by Akira Kurosawa and the geisha melodramas of Kenji Mizoguchi and Mikio Naruse.
''I didn't watch movies in order to make 'Millennium Actress,' '' Mr. Kon said. ''In my life I have seen a lot of movies and television, and so I had some impressions of various movies and periods. And to me the impression was the most important.
''The most difficult aspect was animating the sequences that take place only 40 or 50 years ago. Then the Japanese wore Japanese costumes, and they did everything in the traditional way, which has been lost completely in modern culture. It was a total shock to realize that we didn't even know how they moved and how they lived. So we had to do a lot of research on behavior, learning how they stood up, for example, by looking at a book on good manners.''
''Tokyo Godfathers'' is set in present-day Tokyo and at first seems strikingly traditional with its more sentimental plotting and more affectionately drawn characters, almost as if Mr. Kon were treading on Mr. Miyazaki's more emotional territory. The story, about three homeless people (an alcoholic, a transvestite and a runaway girl) who find a baby in a heap of garbage bags on Christmas Eve, has been borrowed, Mr. Kon readily acknowledged, from John Ford's 1948 Western ''3 Godfathers.'' The storytelling is almost completely linear, fixed in space and time where Mr. Kon's other films float freely.
And yet Mr. Kon's themes are fully present: the transvestite, too, is a performer, inhabiting the zone between reality and fantasy; the alcoholic is haunted by his past as a champion bicycle racer; and the runaway, like the main character of ''Perfect Blue,'' is caught between childhood and adulthood. The Christmas setting, too, is typically multilayered. ''In Japan,'' Mr. Kon explained, ''the last week of December and the beginning of January represents a cross-culture of religions. Christmas is Christian, then, on Dec. 31, the Japanese listen to the end-of-the-year gongs. That's Buddhism. And Jan. 1 is a Shinto holiday. I tried to express this cross-religious culture in my movie, and how the Japanese look at this.''
Mr. Kon has already begun work on his new project, a television series set in a future world. Does he see a museum of his own, like Mr. Miyazaki's, in his future?
''Before I have a museum,'' Mr. Kon said, ''I would like to have my own house.''
FILM
