A ONCE-PROSPEROUS shopping area of Art Deco buildings here that included Bloomingdale's first suburban store is the focus of efforts to restore its commercial vitality, fueled by hopes that it will benefit from other new developments in the city.
Toward that end, merchants and other business owners in the 10-square-block area have formed a business improvement district and obtained financing and grants to revitalize dingy storefronts and convert vacant second and third floors into condominiums and apartments.
The area of stores, restaurants and businesses boomed in the late 1800's and the early part of the 1900's. It served both prosperous residents and second-home owners from Manhattan who were drawn to the community because of its location on Long Island Sound, according to Barbara Davis, New Rochelle's acting historian.
But many downtowns suffered economically during the second half of the 20th century, and New Rochelle was no exception. Main Street fell into decay as shoppers turned to malls and avoided what they considered to be crime-infested neighborhoods.
''Our image over the years had gotten quite dusty,'' said Ralph DiBart, executive director of the New Rochelle Business Improvement District, which started the downtown revitalization campaign by employing a full-time street cleaning crew and worked with City Hall to increase the police presence in the neighborhood. By state law, a nonprofit business improvement district can collect an assessment from business owners for improvement and promotion.
The expectation is that the image of New Rochelle's business improvement district will be helped by recent retail and residential construction. Four years ago, Cappelli Enterprises of Valhalla built New Roc City, a 1.2-million-square-foot family entertainment center on Main Street. And nearby on Huguenot Street, AvalonBay Communities built a 412-unit luxury apartment tower that has views of Long Island Sound.
In the business district last year, a limited partnership of developers, known as 554-560 Main Street Associates, invested close to $15 million to convert the five-story former Bloomingdale's to 72 market-rate work-live condominium lofts. As of last week, 60 units in Davenport-Lofts on Main, as the former 100,000 square-foot former department store is now being called, had been sold, with the first owners scheduled to take occupancy early this year. Units are selling for the high $200,000's for a one-bedroom to close $500,000 for a two-bedroom or large penthouse apartment.
SADIE McKEOWN, a senior vice president for the Community Preservation Corporation, a Manhattan-based nonprofit consortium of 94 banks and insurance companies, said that the recent larger-scale development appears to be triggering a revitalization of the smaller enterprises in downtown New Rochelle. They have struggled since Bloomingdale's left 25 years ago, she said.
The corporation, which specializes in financing low-, moderate- and middle-income housing throughout New York and New Jersey, provided 554-560 Main Street Associates an $11.1 million construction loan last year, at that time the largest ever issued by its Hudson Valley branch in Hawthorne. It is now issuing another $15 million in 30-year loans to business owners who want to upgrade smaller mixed-use properties in the neighborhood. Traditional banks often shy away from ''these smaller, quirkier deals,'' Ms. McKeown observed.
In addition to financing, the Community Preservation Corporation is also offering technical assistance to property owners like Barbara and Robert Kahn who want to convert space above their store to apartments. The owners of Diamond Glass for 30 years, the Kahns moved their business to Main Street 14 years ago, when the city began setting aside land for redevelopment by taking property elsewhere in New Rochelle by eminent domain. Among the property taken was their store on Division Street. A parking garage for the AvalonBay project now sits on that site.
Mr. Kahn and his wife purchased the three-story 85-year-old building they now occupy on Main Street, along with an adjacent lot, for $525,000 in 1990. At the time, the structure was empty, like many others on Main Street, and Mr. Kahn said, ''We knew we were buying at the right time, that it would be a good investment for the future.''
Their latest plan is to build a loft-style rental apartment on each of the two vacant floors above the glass and mirror store. Mr. Kahn, who is 60, said the couple would use the income for their retirement.
To encourage such downtown renovation, the city changed its zoning code in 2001 to allow residential and live-work lofts above first-floor businesses, explained Marc M. Jerome, chairman of the city's BID and a vice president of Monroe College. The four-year college, founded in 1933 in the Bronx, has 1,600 students in New Rochelle. It has renovated a 25,000-square-foot former hardware store here that had been vacant for three years and is building dormitories next door on two adjoining lots.
On another block in the business district, Albert Tarantino, a co-owner of the 75-year-old Talner's Jewelers, is also considering renovating the two upper floors of his three-story corner building.
''It's interesting how things go full circle,'' said Mr. Tarantino, who grew up in New Rochelle and remembers an old Schrafft's restaurant and a Fanny Farmer candy store in the downtown.
''In the 60's, people didn't want to live above a store,'' he said. ''Now we're looking at converting space for just that. It's become fashionable.''
Mr. Tarantino is also hoping the business improvement district will be successful in its application to the state for money to restore many of the Art Deco-style facades hiding behind the current store fronts. Talner's covered up its Art Deco molding in the 1960's. ''But what's old has become new again,'' he said. ''And now it's time to take it off.''
Also on Main Street, Bluegill Realty of Manhattan is building a $21 million, mixed-use development of 90 one- and two-bedroom condos on the site of Lillian Vernon's former headquarters. The first floor of the seven-story brick building will feature 6,000 square feet of retail space. Lillian Vernon, the mail-order specialty company, which had its corporate offices there for 10 years, moved to Rye about four years ago.
THE business improvement district, said Mr. DiBart, its executive director, is hoping to attract some nationally based chains like the Gap to complement the smaller businesses and draw foot traffic to this section of the city.
Elsewhere in the business improvement district, Metro Bicycle Stores, which has six stores in Manhattan, opened its first suburban shop late in the summer. A co-owner of the stores, Robert Denison, said he and his brother James searched throughout Westchester to find the right site for the seventh store. Communities like Larchmont and Mamaroneck were not quite large enough, he said, and White Plains was too big and too expensive.
''I watched as New Rochelle went downward,'' he said. ''I used to go to the movies here, and then I saw the theaters close. But I think the city's on the rebound now.''
Mr. Denison would not say how much Metro Bicycle had paid for the storefront, attached house and several smaller buildings on two lots in New Rochelle. But he noted that with the city's new zoning laws he has the option to expand. He added that he could not have afforded a similar package in White White Plains, which has 5.8 million square feet of Class A and B office space compared with 1 million in New Rochelle.
In Westchester's competitive retail landscape these days, New Rochelle is not just another destination for shoppers, Mr. DiBart said.
''It's a full-size city with a small hometown feel and personality, he said. ''And in today's world, that's special.''
In the Region | Westchester
