CELEBRATING the return of a Republican majority to the Southampton Town Board during its yearly organizational meeting on Monday, Councilwoman Linda Kabot described it as ''a new day'' for town government while Councilman Dennis Suskind, a Democrat, grumbled that ''there are those on Long Island who believe Southampton is run by cronyism, deceit and unethical practices.''
Politics as usual, to be sure; but the ''new day'' dawned under a cloud that has hung over Town Hall for a month, since a majority of the town ethics board resigned to protest what it described as the town supervisor's obstruction of a board investigation.
Last spring, Mr. Suskind filed a complaint with the ethics board alleging that the town supervisor, Patrick Heaney, strong-armed a candidate for town attorney by threatening to expose the lawyer's arrest record if he did not withdraw from consideration. Mr. Heaney, in an interview on Tuesday, denied making any threats, saying he only offered advice that the record could become known if the lawyer, John Shields, continued to pursue the job.
Town Justice Court records show Mr. Shields was charged on Jan. 9, 2003, with driving while intoxicated and refusing to take a sobriety test, both misdemeanors, and at the same time received a traffic ticket for driving outside his lane. The records also show that on Feb. 25, 2003, Justice Thomas DeMayo approved a settlement in which Mr. Shields's D.W.I. was reduced to a speeding ticket, for which he was fined $135, and the other two charges were dismissed.
In a March 27 letter, Mr. Shields, an assistant state attorney general, notified the board that he was withdrawing from consideration for the appointed town post. A copy of an aborted Town Board resolution approving Mr. Shields's appointment was co-sponsored by all the Town Board members except Mr. Heaney. In May, Stephen Brown was appointed to the post on a part-time basis at a $73,200 annual salary, and was reappointed on Monday with a full-time salary of $94,700.
On Dec. 8, five of the ethics board's six members resigned. Christine Merser, the board's former chairwoman, said members tried for several months to interview Mr. Heaney but were rebuffed.
''We really did have no choice but to resign,'' she said. ''It became about why the town should have an ethics board at all if it is going to be rendered completely useless.''
The board is empowered to advise town employees on ethical questions and to report to the Town Board on whether an allegation of impropriety has merit, deserves a full investigation, or should be referred to law enforcement.
Mr. Heaney called the resignations an empty gesture. ''One might speculate,'' he said, ''that a majority of the ethics board, at the time their departure occurred, knew they were not likely to be appointed.'' The terms of all six members were to have expired on Dec. 31. A new board was appointed last week.
The supervisor also contended that Mr. Suskind was trying to position himself for a run for town supervisor in two years. ''This was all about 'How can I embarrass my potential opponent?''' Mr. Heaney said. Mr. Suskind acknowledged that one of the resigned ethics board members, Ms. Merser, worked as a strategist on his campaign two years ago, and that another, Gail Davenport, is married to a town Democratic committeeman. But all three rebutted Mr. Heaney's charge of a partisan setup.
''We were so careful to not be political,'' Ms. Davenport said. ''We waited until after the election to resign, and we really tried to uphold the integrity of anyone who came before us.'' Citing confidentiality rules, none of the former members would comment publicly on the specifics of their inquiry.
Before the resignations, the board suggested that Mr. Suskind seek a criminal investigation by the district attorney's office. Last week, he said he was still considering it. He had filed a complaint with the D.A. months ago, but prosecutors said the matter could not be pursued because Mr. Shields declined to help. So Mr. Suskind went to the ethics board.
In his memo to the board, he alleged that because Mr. Heaney could not dissuade the four council members from appointing Mr. Shields, ''he threatened to ruin Mr. Shields's reputation, embarrass his family, and, if appointed, to not let him into the supervisor's office.''
The memo goes on to say that, when confronted in a closed-door meeting, Mr. Heaney admitted saying those things.
In asking for a determination on whether the supervisor violated either the town or state ethics codes, Mr. Suskind wrote, ''The issue is, I believe, whether his behavior was in excess of his authority, perhaps illegal, but clearly unacceptable behavior by an elected official.''
Mr. Heaney vehemently denied making any threats. He claimed Mr. Shields ''failed to disclose pertinent information.''
''My crime is that I stood my ground and could not possibly support this individual,'' he said of Mr. Shields. ''I only told him he was taking an extreme risk. I told him, 'I know more about you than you could ever want me to know, and you're a damned fool if you go forward with this.'''
The town attorney, Mr. Brown, wrote on Dec. 16 that he did not think Mr. Heaney had violated any law. Even if Mr. Suskind's allegations are true, he wrote, ''A 'threat' to disclose factual matters breaches neither ethical nor legal proscriptions.''
Mr. Shields, who was a deputy town attorney before joining the state attorney general's office, said he had become a political football.
''This is a dispute between two people,'' he said, referring to Mr. Heaney and Mr. Suskind, ''but I'm the one who's going to suffer from this. The ramifications for me are so far-reaching you can't even imagine.'' He declined further comment.
