OH, yeah, people say: Washington Irving High School is the one where kids threw a stool out the window last May and it hit a pregnant woman on the head. In other words, a bad school.
The city's Department of Education didn't appear to be disputing that assessment last week when it put Washington Irving, at East 17th Street and Irving Place in Manhattan, on its list of 12 of the city's most violent schools; the mayor has assigned a roving task force of 150 police officers to patrol the 12 and crack down on unruly behavior.
Washington Irving, the only school in Manhattan to make the list, occupies a handsome old gray brick building on the outskirts of Gramercy Park, a neighborhood most New Yorkers associate with the genteel rich. But local students have long since bailed out. Most of the 3,300 students are black or Hispanic (a mere 3 percent are white) and poor, and many have to show commitment, traveling long distances, just to get there.
Last week, as armed police officers descended on the school, a passer-by might have been forgiven for thinking a terrorist attack had occurred. Is Irving that bad? It depends on whom you talk to.
Yes, said Gregg Lundahl, a social studies teacher with a mane of gray hair who talked over coffee at the Barnes &amp; Noble in Union Square during his lunch break Wednesday. Mr. Lundahl, 47, was a process server until becoming a social studies teacher 14 years ago.
So far this school year, he said, a student had been found carrying a .22-caliber gun just outside the building, a girl's face was slashed, there was an attempted rape, five kids in ski masks robbed a student in a stairwell, and a teacher suffered a knee injury when he was crushed in a cafeteria line.
''It's shocking,'' said Mr. Lundahl, who is also a part-time dean of security and the teachers' union representative at the school. '''Boston Public' pales by comparison. There have been constant fights. Huge, huge fights. Stampeding groups of kids.''
Mr. Lundahl contends that the violence has gotten out of hand because of decisions made by the central bureaucracy. Over the last few years, he said, the school has absorbed about 600 students from other schools that were reorganized.
The number of security guards was cut to 9 from 16 at the beginning of the year, then raised again after complaints. Finally, Mr. Lundahl said, the chancellor's reorganization upset old systems for dealing with disruptive students. So when students were suspended, there was no place for them to go.
At one point this year, he said, Irving was warehousing 200 students in its auditorium, and some broke free and roamed the halls.
Despite all this, at least one of Mr. Lundahl's colleagues, a science teacher who asked not to be identified, said calling Irving a bad school was an oversimplification. This teacher moved to New York from Vermont four years ago so her husband could pursue his acting career. A petite, open-faced woman who rides her bike to work, she said the halls had been ''lovely'' since the police arrived a few days ago.
''The few percent of bad kids do drag down the behavior of the other kids too,'' she said. ''So even good kids have been a little slack.''
Would she send her own children to Irving? She does. Her son and daughter commute from Queens to an honors program focusing on science and math. Her daughter, a junior, is taking a double period of astrophysics and will take advanced placement courses next year.
''I have not felt like the environment at the school is so dangerous that I've been afraid to be there, or to have my kids there,'' the mother said.
Has she ever felt threatened? Well, yes. ''I have been involved in a number of fights, helping to break up fights, and that's a threatening situation,'' she said, ''like your heart gets racing and it's really terrible, to see kids pummeling each other.''
She has found that students respond best when they have a relationship with her. She doesn't like her students to wear do-rags. Maybe that's a prejudice, she concedes. But to her, ''the image is that you're not there as a student.'' When she asks her students to remove them, they usually do.
She doesn't like the rule banning cellphones. Maybe some students are running drugs, she said, but most just need to be able to call their parents.
But some kids fail every class, and she understands their frustration. ''When you keep getting faced with academic failure,'' she said, ''what do you do? Do you keep trying, or do you do something else to get attention?'' Like throwing a stool out the window.
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
