IN a conversation between the poets John Berryman and Philip Levine about what a good poet should look like, Mr. Berryman came down heavily in favor of homeliness.
''No poet worth his salt is going to be handsome,'' he counseled. ''If he or she is beautiful, there's no need to create the beautiful.''
While that may be true, few poets, or writers of any kind, have wanted to believe it. And fewer -- even if they were quite homely -- have wanted to look that way on a book jacket, one of the few arenas of personal glory open to lonely writers who have been holed up for years in their underwear, wrestling paragraphs to the page.
Fortunately, publishers also feel that way. And so, with the help of photographers, publicists and the occasional sad-eyed hunting dog, Siamese cat or other reliable writerly prop, the book-jacket photo came into being not long after book jackets came into common use after the turn of the last century.
These photographs have always inhabited a strange corner in the world of the celebrity portrait. While actors and other creative people exist to have their pictures taken, their image multiplied and immortalized, writers have often participated with a degree of awkwardness, distrusting the connection between literature and personality. A few -- like the reclusive English novelist Henry Green, who toward the end of his life would agree to have only the back of his head photographed -- hated the whole idea. Others probably liked it too much -- notably Truman Capote, whose doe-eyed, Ganymede-like pose on ''Other Voices, Other Rooms'' unsettled readers in the late 1940's.
Most writers are somewhere in the middle, however, and it is by and large these who stare out from the pages of ''Author Photo,'' a new book of more than 200 portraits of writers -- mostly literary ones -- taken over the last 19 years by Marion Ettlinger, who has become one of the best known and most widely used photographers in the field. (When you think of Raymond Carver or Cormac McCarthy, the image in your head is most likely one of Ms. Ettlinger's lush, almost inky black-and-white portraits, so textured they sometimes appear etched.)
Her subgenre is one that has never been given much attention in the world of art photography, in large part because of the straits in which book-jacket pictures must operate. A typical shot gets about 3 by 5 inches of space on the back flap and is given that much only because an attractive -- even raggedly attractive -- face can help sell books. But despite those constraints, Ms. Ettlinger and a few other photographers, like Jill Krementz and Christopher Felver, have attracted a wider audience with their work, which tries to strike a balance between commerce and art.
Ms. Ettlinger sees herself as an artist and realized early in her career -- when Esquire sent her to wander the country and shoot almost 50 famous writers for its 50th-anniversary issue in 1983 -- that writers were going to be her ''true subjects,'' she said. For years she has photographed them with all the ardor of a graduate lit student, devouring their books before she meets them and conducting her closed-door, one-on-one photo sessions with the privacy and discretion of a psychiatrist, though one who often serves wine and chocolate.
''It's what I feel compelled to do,'' she said in an interview, explaining that the compulsion is hard to explain. ''I think part of it is that I find writers to be incredibly courageous people.''
If her first experiences with them were to be any guide, she might have picked an easier subject. Capote, near the end of his life, yelled at her and refused to cooperate. His glare was so withering that she asked him to turn away for a profile, and that is the striking picture included in the book, of Capote with downturned mouth and upturned head, looking a little like Marlon Brando in ''Apocalypse Now.''
His ferocious portrait is one of the few exceptions in the book, published by Simon &amp; Schuster. Most are romantic images that, while they might not succeed in making many of the writers beautiful, make them all seem important and indelible, like art objects. Or, more precisely, like authors who have been ushered into the canon on a red carpet, even those whose reputations long ago failed to live up to their publishers' hopes.
Ms. Ettlinger's work has become so well known in literary circles that some writers have demanded Ettlinger portraits in discussions with publishing houses, and publishers, in turn, have sought Ms. Ettlinger when they want a new writer to be considered serious. Some writers now talk of the process of being ''Ettlingered,'' a verb that can be used with admiration or jealousy or sometimes to make fun of her marmoreal style. (One online critic complained recently that Ms. Ettlinger's style had progressed from ''creepy to grotesque'' and said that a portrait of Joyce Carol Oates made her look like ''the matron of the Addams family.'')
Outside the world of the book jacket, of course, the author photo has a long pedigree as high art, going back to Nadar's portraits of a fierce-looking Baudelaire. Julia Margaret Cameron's pictures of her neighbor and friend Alfred Lord Tennyson and other eminent Victorian writers and thinkers are considered masterpieces, and Berenice Abbott made her reputation with her pictures of James Joyce, André Gide and Edna St. Vincent Millay.
Colin Westerbeck, a former curator of photography at the Art Institute of Chicago, said he believed it was much harder for photographers whose work was primarily made for jackets to transcend their limits.
''In one way or another there's a stereotype being served,'' said Mr. Westerbeck, who has written extensively about Irving Penn. ''It's a very formulaic kind of assignment.''
BUT he added that Ansel Adams, for one, who shot book jacket pictures simply to make money, produced portraits of Western writers that can stand alongside his other work. ''Ninety percent of the interesting portraiture that has been done is done by people who may know each other but usually are meeting for the first time and come together for the purpose of something commercial,'' he said. ''So book jacket portraits are not excluded by nature just because they have a commercial purpose.''
Whether or not Ms. Ettlinger's portraits will endure, several have shaped the public's perception of writers. The reclusive Mr. McCarthy, contrary to popular belief, had been photographed several times over the years for his book jackets. But Ms. Ettlinger's portrait for ''All the Pretty Horses,'' in which he comes off looking like a rancher who has just returned from stringing a mile of barbed-wire fence, is the image that most readers associate with him. It is no accident that the photo dominates the first page of Ms. Ettlinger's book.
While her pictures have a consistently writerly feel -- pale natural light, intensely serious gazes and many settings that look like idealized writers' lofts -- Ms. Ettlinger has avoided many of the stereotypes of the genre. There are no writers posed next to typewriters or book-filled shelves in ''Author Photo.'' There are only a few in the gratuitous hand-on-chin pose and only a few smoking cigarettes. (Thomas McGuane, it is true, appears with a couple of hunting dogs. And Ken Kesey and Robert Hughes pose with parrots. There are, however, no cats.)
Ms. Ettlinger, curled up on a couch in her Chelsea studio on an overcast day recently -- ''Overcast is my favorite weather,'' she said -- explained that she has very few hard and fast rules about what she is looking for when she works. She does admit, however, that she hates it when her subjects insist on smiling.
''If somebody wants a really kind of happy, smiling, affable, bland photo,'' she says, ''I'd say I'm not the gal for them.'' She also adds that she is an unabashed romantic whose artistic goal -- happily coinciding with the goal of publishers -- is to make her subjects look as timeless and serious and beautiful as possible, ''and there's the occasional person who is not comfortable with that, I guess.''
But most of her subjects are and think Ms. Ettlinger has found a way to make the book-jacket picture legitimate in its own right, existing somewhere between fashion and art photography.
''Her photographs are not really realistic portraits,'' said Russell Banks, who has posed for her a few times. ''They're stylized to such a degree that she almost makes an icon out of your face.'' His portrait in the book shows him leaning forward, his brows arched seriously and his beard blending like an architectural detail with the battered wall behind him.
''I don't believe that's what I look like or what my friends think I look like, but that's what the author of that book should look like, I think,'' he said, adding, ''Her pictures are of the public person, not the private person, and I like her for that.''
Mary Karr, another subject of Ms. Ettlinger, said that she so hated having her picture taken she almost swore off for good after a session with a fashion photographer for Harper's Bazaar.
''I had a hair person, a makeup person, a clothes person, a shoe person and then a variety of people who just stood around and looked very worried at me,'' she said. ''They had a whole agenda that had nothing to do with reading and writing. And I said never again.'' (Interestingly, Ms. Ettlinger will allow only self-portraits of herself to be used because she also hates having her photo taken.)
In part Ms. Karr believes writers are uncomfortable with the whole process because they do tend to be, by nature, rather unphotogenic, she said, adding, ''You go to the National Book Awards, and it's not a pretty sight.''
But Ms. Karr said Ms. Ettlinger is hard for writers to resist because she is, in some sense, the ideal reader, who will try hard to make them look like the reader's idea of a writer.
''She reads your books,'' Ms. Karr said. ''She read my books of poems, and I've slept with people who haven't done that.''
ART
