NEW JERSEY'S industrial real estate market has traditionally been robust, but it wilted a bit during the past two years of national economic stress. In 2004, though, analysts and brokers predict New Jersey will be among the first markets in the country to fully regain fighting trim.
The ProLogis Research Group of Denver identified four places in a national survey of warehouse-distribution markets where recovery is expected to be speedy: the Los Angeles Basin, Reno, Las Vegas and the state of New Jersey. The report took into account the inventory of existing buildings, new construction starts, asking rents, vacancy rates and other relevant factors.
New Jersey industrial real estate specialists also sound sanguine about the new year.
Cushman &amp; Wakefield of New Jersey reports the overall vacancy rate for industrial property in the state fell to 5.4 percent in the fourth quarter of 2003, a 1.1 percentage point decline from the corresponding period in 2002. In central New Jersey, Middlesex County, which is by far the state's largest industrial locale, with 217 million square feet, the vacancy rate in the fourth quarter was just 4.6 percent, according to Cushman.
In adjacent Mercer County, where there is more than 24 million square feet of warehouse and distribution property, the vacancy rate hovers at 10.5 percent. But various market analysts said this is not an unhealthy statistic, at least from a real estate broker's point of view.
''The amount of inventory out there is a good thing,'' said Stanley B. Danzig, an industrial specialist with Cushman. ''The best situation is a good balance of available inventory and demand. If you have a lot of demand and no place to make deals, prices go up, but sales activity drops -- or else price drops, but you still can't get rid of the space because it's not what a particular company needs.''
Cushman and CB Richard Ellis, another large real estate company, note in their year-end reports that the overall amount of available space continues to drop. ''Each of the last several years has exceeded the previous in terms of absorption of available space,'' Mr. Danzig said. ''There are a lot of big tenants running around right now'' looking for space, he continued -- without naming any of them -- ''and '04 could exceed '03 again.''
A nearly complete 330,000-square-foot building in the Meadowlands, constructed on speculation as a joint venture of Rreef and Orix, is ''actually generating a tremendous amount of interest,'' according to Mr. Danzig.
Another positive sign cited by brokers is Mercedes-Benz's recent announcement that it will enter the New Jersey industrial market, with plans to build a 650,000-square-foot distribution facility in Washington Township, at Exit 7A off the New Jersey Turnpike.
THE Turnpike corridor continues to be the most highly desirable industrial location, brokers said. And while the Turnpike Exit 8A has long been the center of industrial development, many developers are looking one or two exits south, to Exit 7 and Exit 7A, noted Frank Caccavo, also an industrial broker with Cushman.
Companies generally remain in a cycle of consolidation and contraction, said Mr. Caccavo, and the pattern of leasing reflects this, he said. ''More than a dozen leases for more than 100,000 square feet were made in the last two quarters,'' Mr. Caccavo said. ''Most of those involved are companies relocating within New Jersey.''
But he and other brokers noted that the need for modern, up-to-date logistical capabilities at warehouse-distribution centers continues to drive real estate activity. In addition, interest rates remain low, Mr. Danzig said, adding that asking rents -- which dropped and then held steady during the recession -- are beginning to inch upward, creating ''opportunistic urgency'' for companies wanting to expand or contract.''
During the lower-rent period, he observed, the garment industry seized opportunities, with many smaller companies taking advantage of decreased pricing to upgrade from Class B to Class A buildings, gaining better logistics or better locations or both.
There are a number of large vacant buildings currently on the market, some of them new and built on spec, like the Rreef-Orix center in Carlstadt, and others ''second generation'' -- as brokers refer to buildings whose previous tenants have decamped -- like the former Fleming Foods distribution center at Exit 8A.
''Spec buildings are still taking a little longer to fill, with more companies wanting build-to-suit,'' Mr. Danzig said, ''but a modern distribution center will always find a tenant in New Jersey.''
TWO of the biggest build-to-suit deals at the end of 2003 involved W. W. Grainger's purchase of a new 435,945-square-foot warehouse-distribution center in Washington Township, and Home Depot U.S.A. Inc.'s 12-year commitment to occupy a 771,853-square-foot structure under construction on 87 acres in Cranbury, Mr. Caccavo said.
Keystone Property Trust, which developed the Cranbury property at Exit 8A, will retain ownership of the Home Depot building, and when completed, it will expand Keystone's industrial portfolio in New Jersey to more than 10 million square feet and its 8A portfolio to nearly 4.4 million square feet.
The Home Depot structure will have 32-foot-high ceilings, 150 dock doors, 238 car parking spaces and 426 trailer parking spaces -- with room to expand by an additional 150,000 square feet.
In a smaller deal at 8A in Cranbury, the Ford Motor Company recently committed to a 300,000-square-foot warehouse that is being built to suit it. That transaction was brokered by CB Richard Ellis, whose industrial services group is based in Paramus.
In Monroe, another town accessible from Exit 8A, Trammell Crow brokers recently closed a long-term lease renewal for Staples, the office supplies store, which has occupied a 204,369-square-foot distribution center there for several years.
MEANWHILE, at 7A, the Cranbury-based Matrix Development Group closed last month on a 135,000-square-foot build-to-suit sale with the Sleepy's Mattress Company at the Northeast Business Park in Washington Township. The mattress retailer will use the building as a regional distribution center.
With the Exit 7A submarket heating up, several brokers noted, Washington Township planners are moving to put in place this year the same sort of streamlined development approval process that the town of Cranbury used effectively over the years to position Exit 8A as the premier industrial real estate site.
Several spec-built projects, which were already in the works when the market turned sluggish, will be completed or will be substantially under way in coming months, and are now being marketed, brokers said. They include Keystone's Greenville Yards in Jersey City, a two-building 525,000-square-foot industrial center at the former train yard, with 36-foot ceilings and immediate rail access. One building is to have 24 truck bays, and the other 48 bays.
Keystone is also building the 500,000-square-foot second phase of its Cranbury East development at Exit 8A.
The KOR Companies, in partnership with Cushman, is building 1.65 million square feet of warehouse or distribution space at Central Crossings Business Park in Bordentown, off Turnpike Exit 7. Construction on that project began in June.
''We expect speculative development activity to increase in 2004,'' Mr. Caccavo said, ''as the inventory of Class A distribution space continues to decline.''
Andrew J. Merin, an investment specialist with Cushman, said he expected the number of industrial property sales to continue to rise in the stronghold of central New Jersey, so long as interest rates remain low. Sales volume in 2003 was about 50 percent more than the year before, said Mr. Merin, although year-end statistics are not yet available.
In the Region | New Jersey
