Gov. James E. McGreevey plans to use his annual address to the Legislature on Tuesday to announce a statewide after-school program modeled on the ambitious privately administered one that George Soros started in New York, the governor's aides said Friday.
The program would keep some elementary schools open from 3 to 6 p.m. for activities run by community organizations like the Y.M.C.A. The goal is to enroll 20,000 pupils, kindergarten through eighth grade, for the 2004-05 school year.
The governor's aides said the plan would be one of four or so main proposals in his State of the State address. They would not disclose the others.
They also would not estimate the initial costs to the state of the after-school program. The plan, they said, was to establish a nonprofit corporation that would use state seed money to raise funds from private sources and distribute them to community organizations, which would submit applications to individual schools.
The proposal does not require legislative approval because the governor plans to establish the administering corporation by executive order. Board members could be appointed within a few weeks, the aides said.
New York's after-school program was begun in 1998 by Mr. Soros, the billionaire philanthropist, and is run by the After School Corporation, which matches schools and community organizations, providing money and training for the local programs. Last year about $90 million -- much of it from foundations but some of it public money -- went to local organizations that provide academic, arts and recreation programs. About 50,000 students are enrolled at almost 200 schools in New York City and 56 elsewhere in the state, most of which are in low-income areas.
Lucy Friedman, the president of the After School Corporation, said it was able to grant only one of every four or five requests for money it received. The demand for organized after-school activity is so great, she said, ''that in polls, people have actually said they would pay increased taxes for it.''
Across the nation, such programs are growing fast, refashioning the school day for working parents in many communities. Some programs have restored arts instruction and sports cut from school budgets; most have an academic component, offering tutoring or providing time for homework. About 1.4 million children in the United States participate in regular after-school programs (as distinguished from club meetings or extracurricular sports), according to the Afterschool Alliance, a coalition of foundations, businesses and government groups.
Some cities have big enrollments -- in Chicago, for example, all but a handful of elementary schools have programs -- but Ms. Friedman said she believed New Jersey would be the first state in which the government set up a corporation to coordinate and finance the programs.
Like all states, New Jersey receives limited federal money for after-school programs in poor districts. The governor's aides said the new programs would not be concentrated in low-income areas or limited to low-performing schools.
They said that in rural areas, which may lack community organizations like a Y.M.C.A., the corporation would help recruit smaller, less conventional providers. In New York, these have included settlement houses, Girl Scout councils, university education departments and arts organizations like the Dance Theater of Harlem.
It is not clear where the governor will find state money for new after-school programs, even if he only wants enough to organize a corporation to seek private money. Some money from youth programs in various departments may be available, but any new appropriations from the general fund would require legislative action.
As he addresses the Legislature, which will convene after its new members are sworn in Tuesday, the governor faces serious budget constraints. For the last two years, state aid to municipalities and school districts, with the exception of court-ordered increases to urban districts, has been frozen.
