EACH day at 4 a.m., as the lights come on in the back of Nino International Bakery, Robinson Plasencia begins another day. After fleeing from Peru 15 years ago when vandals destroyed his family's business there, Mr. Plasencia struggled to make his way in a new country, first in Queens and later in this bustling village of 28,000 people on Long Island Sound.
In the early days, when he was new to the United States, he barely eked out a living. But now, his business is thriving. One recent morning, as customers streamed in to buy coffee and pastries like alfores (Peruvian cookies) and turron de donas (Portuguese rolls), Mr. Plasencia greeted them with the confidence of a successful businessman. ''Everything is fresh,'' he told visitors. ''Try some!''
Mr. Plasencia's story is a new one, and yet an old one here. For more than a century, Port Chester has served as a magnet to immigrants, first Irish and Italian. Now, over the past two decades, Port Chester has turned into something of an Ellis Island for Hispanic immigrants, a place of first refuge for people who are lured not just by the harbor it has given to their friends and relatives, but also by the village's proximity to affluent communities like Greenwich, Rye and Harrison, where jobs are plentiful working on gardens and properties and caring for children.
In this way, the new Port Chester has drawn immigrant families into the service economy, much as the village offered manufacturing jobs from the 1920's until the 1960's in factories like the one here that made BeechNut LifeSavers, which offered work to several generations of immigrants.
Looking out of the plate-glass window in the front of his new quarters on Poningo Street, Mr. Plasencia, who became a United States citizen in 1995, pointed across the way to several recent immigrants from Central and South America. ''When I first came here, I was lonely too, like they are,'' he said.
Close to half of the village's population is now Hispanic, according to the 2000 United States Census. And advocacy groups suggest that the percentage is higher because the census likely missed illegal immigrants.
In some regards, Mr. Plasencia and others who were drawn to Port Chester in the late 1980's have been more fortunate than the newer arrivals from Ecuador, Peru, Guatemala and Mexico. Many of the earlier Latino immigrants were able to obtain legal papers and steady employment, and they have set down roots, raised families and found good jobs.
It is a far different, and less hopeful, story for the newcomers, many of them here illegally. Mayor Gerald Logan recently estimated that 3,500 undocumented Latinos live here, a 2.5-square-mile village next to the Byram River. Crossing the Mexican border illegally, they make their way to Port Chester, meeting up with relatives and friends who settled here earlier.
Since the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks two years ago, United States immigration laws have become more strict, and most of the recent group of undocumented immigrants from Central and South America are unlikely to ever obtain legal papers, said Ann Blanchfield, a lawyer at the Westchester Hispanic Coalition, a nonprofit social services organization in White Plains.
''If they stay, they'll have to live under the radar forever,'' she said. ''They'll cobble a life together working in restaurants, hotels, country clubs, wherever they can. But if they get injured or sick, they're not eligible for any benefits, so they're sort of stuck in a no-man's land.''
That could change, however, if President Bush's proposal on Monday to overhaul the nation's immigration laws is adopted by Congress. Under the proposal, an undocumented worker could apply for temporary worker status in the United States, with employee benefits, like minimum wage and due process, accorded to those legally employed.
Ms. Blanchfield said the Hispanic Coalition helps immigrants get United States taxpayer identification numbers and pay taxes, even if they are undocumented. ''It's a goodwill gesture on their part,'' she said. ''It shows they want to comply with the system.''
Although there have been complaints in other Westchester communities where Latinos have settled, like Mount Kisco and Tarrytown, Ms. Blanchfield said she had heard few objections to the presence of illegal immigrants in Port Chester. ''Mostly, employers and others call up to see what they can do to help,'' she said.
Ms. Blanchfield said that although employers undoubtedly take a risk in hiring undocumented immigrants, they constitute the only available labor force willing to take the lowest-paying jobs.
ESPECIALLY vulnerable are day workers like Miguel, 26, a recent immigrant from Guatemala City who spoke on condition of anonymity, saying he feared that giving his name would make it easy for immigration authorities to find him. Ms. Blanchfield said Miguel and other day workers are sometimes prey to employers who hire them but fail to pay them.
''It's happened to many of my friends,'' said Miguel, who was waiting for work recently outside of Our Lady of the Rosary Church. While he decides whether to stay or return to his country, Miguel spends his days at the Don Bosco Center, a soup kitchen and job placement center for immigrants sponsored by the church, a religious and social services institution in the village.
When the weather is good, Miguel and the other men wait outside for work. When it rains, they go inside, playing dominos at one of the long cafeteria-style tables in the center, socializing with the other men and participating in the English as a Second Language classes offered by the church.
Inside the church offices one recent afternoon, the Rev. Timothy Ploch, a priest from the Salesian order, a Roman Catholic group dedicated chiefly to education and missionary work, mused on Port Chester as a small Ellis Island.
''The main difference is that at Ellis Island, the immigrants are legal,'' Father Ploch said. ''In our village these days, most of the new arrivals cross without papers.''
The immigrants rely on the church not only for work placement but also for social services, some food and supplies like diapers. ''They trust the church,'' Father Ploch said, ''because they're sure we would never turn them in.''
Our Lady of the Rosary Church also runs clothing drives for the needier immigrants and holds group showers several times a year for expectant mothers, most of them Latinos, who cannot afford to buy supplies for their infants.
Before the church's Don Bosco Center offered sanctuary to the day workers, many of them waited for employment on street corners throughout the village. But Port Chester officials, church workers and representatives of the Westchester Hispanic Coalition decided several years ago that it would be more effective to acknowledge the illegal immigrants' presence and their need for work by establishing a central hiring location, said Gerald Logan, the village's mayor.
''If you go by the letter of the law, they really shouldn't be hired at all, but if they don't get work, they'll become homeless,'' said Mr. Logan, 66, a former financial executive who is in his second two-year term.
Mayor Logan is also concerned about many of the immigrants' living conditions. ''They stay in overcrowded apartments and pay high rents just to plant their feet on the ground here,'' he said. ''What money they have left, they send home.'' Immigrants who were interviewed for this article said they had no alternative but to pay the rents the landlords demanded, and not to complain about the often run-down conditions.
Joseph P. Cannavo, president of Great American Development, an owner and developer of real estate here, said, ''It's not the landlords, it's the tenants who bring in the extra people.''
Mr. Cannavo said landlords often don't know that additional people are living in the units, and when they suspect that might be the case and inquire, the tenants claim that relatives are temporarily visiting. Mr. Cannavo also said he charged market rates for apartments and it was not true that overcrowding was caused by exorbitant rents.
When Port Chester's police chief, Joseph Krzeminski, was growing up here in the 1950's and 60's, the vast majority of the newcomers were Polish, Italian and Irish, he said.
''The village has always been a place for immigrants,'' said Mr. Krzeminski, who as a boy lived in a five-family house owned by his Italian grandfather.
Like other immigrants of that time, Mr. Krzeminski's grandfather purchased a house and rented out apartments to relatives and friends from Europe. Because the rents were low, the newer residents were able to save money and buy their own houses, in turn.
Now, though, most of Port Chester's multifamily houses are owned by absentee landlords who charge high rents, the police chief said. Troubled by fire and health hazards created by overcrowding in the apartments, Mr. Krzeminski reports the worst cases to the Port Chester Building Department.
The police chief said he is also concerned with the drunkenness that occurs at night and on weekends among some of the newer immigrants, most of whom are here alone, away from their families. Mr. Krzeminski said some immigrants have been attacked at night when they are out alone. According to the police department, Port Chester recorded 57 robbery-assault cases in 2002. Of those, 54 involved Latinos and took place on the street. In 2003, there were 49 robbery-assaults with 44 involving Latinos and 34 taking place on the street.
Lt. Jeff Hartrey of the Port Chester police said the perpetrators of such crimes against Latinos know that their victims often don't put their money in the bank and carry their cash with them.
Chief Krzeminski said assailants also know that illegal immigrants are unlikely to file a formal complaint.
Mr. Krzeminski said some changes in the village since he was a boy have not been for the better, a sentiment shared by Frances C. Nugent, who is the city clerk for Rye.
Born 83 years ago in Port Chester, which is part of Rye, Mrs. Nugent said she misses walking at night with her children to the downtown area for ice cream cones. Fretting about the impersonality of the large chain discount stores about to be built in that section of the village, she said: ''Whether the new plans will be good for Port Chester remains to be seen. I liked it better when all the shopkeepers knew our names.''
Other things have changed, too.
The bakery is on one of this village's many side streets, where small businesses like coin laundries and bodegas share working-class neighborhoods with modest multifamily homes. Nino International Bakery moved last year from Port Chester's more densely populated downtown section, where a $140 million urban redevelopment project is under way. A 15-screen movie theater, a Super Stop &amp; Shop, and several big-box retailers, among other businesses, are scheduled to open in the downtown area in the next 18 months.
Gregg Wasser, a principal with the Bethpage, Long Island-based G&amp;S Investors, said his company's plans for The Waterfront, as the project is known, will benefit the village, which he described as a ''region that is under-retailed.''
But plans for The Waterfront are proceeding slowly and not without controversy. Since the warehouse club retailer Costco built a 140,000-square-foot store more than a year ago alongside the river, no new retail construction has taken place.
Some residents, like the mayor, who welcome new development, said they were worried the developer wouldn't finish the project.
Mr. Wasser said that he first had to complete relocation efforts for displaced businesses and deal with legal opposition to eminent domain efforts associated with The Waterfront. The state Court of Appeals refused to hear appeals last summer by four merchants whose buildings were acquired for the project by Port Chester two years ago, and the demolition phase is almost finished. Mr. Wasser said construction is to begin shortly, with some retailers expected to open for business as early as this summer.
IN response to critics like Mrs. Nugent, the city clerk, who fear the loss of the village's character, Mr. Wasser said some old storefronts from the first half of the 20th century will be retained. ''We're not razing all of the old,'' he said. ''When something is there for 60 or 70 years, you don't throw it all away, because you can't duplicate it.''
At the local public schools, administrators said they must tailor their instruction to address the needs of the children from legal and illegal immigrants. In the latter group, fewer children speak or read English well, and there are more health problems.
Of the 3,527 students enrolled in the district's six schools (four elementary schools for grades kindergarten through 5, a middle school for grades 6 though 8, and a high school), 65.3 percent are Hispanic, said Dr. Charles Coletti, superintendent of schools. Ten percent are African American, 23.9 percent are white, and 0.8 percent are Asian.
Dr. Ellen Santiago, principal of Edison Elementary School, said that one-third of the students at the grade schools need assistance with English. In two of the elementary schools, as much as 80 percent of the students receive free or reduced-price lunches, which ''indicates the high level of economic need in the community,'' she said.Because many parents work long hours and hold several jobs, the schools open at 7:35 a.m. and offer special-help classes until 6 p.m., Dr. Santiago said.
Dr. Coletti said that despite the challenges, 95 percent of 4th graders were at or above the competency level for math on state mandated performance tests last year, as were 91 percent of 8th graders.
English language scores, though not as high, showed that 85 percent of 4th graders and 70 percent of 8th graders were at competency level or above, he said. Of the 214 students in last year's high school graduating class, 83 percent went on to college, half of those to four-year institutions and the other half to two-year community colleges.
''Many of our students can't afford a four-year college, so they go to Westchester Community College and then transfer on,'' Dr. Coletti said. ''They're often the first generation in their family to attend college.
''But then that has been the American way for succeeding waves of immigrants. Higher education always has been the fastest route up the economic and social ladder. In the early 20th century, it was Eastern Europeans. These days, it's the Latinos.''
Wampum Came First
Port Chester Timeline, Since European Settlers Arrived
1660: John Coe, Peter Disbrow and Thomas Studwell purchase land on Manursing Island from the Siwanoy American Indians, for 8 coats, 7 shirts and 15 fathom of wampum.
1663: First group of settlers moves onto the mainland, some going to Poningo Neck (now in the city of Rye), and others to Saw Pit (which was named for its saw pits, where logs for the shipping industry were cut. Saw Pit later became Port Chester.) Over time, the American Indians are forced off the land by the settlers.
1798: The merchant Jared Peck operates a brisk shipping trade along the Byram River, transporting local grain and crops to New York City, establishing several mills in Saw Pit.
1837: Saw Pit becomes the village of Port Chester, officially being incorporated 31 years later.
1879: First regular steamboat is placed in service, making three trips a week to New York City.
1884: Port Chester Water Company establishes supply system for village.
Early 1900's: Waves of European immigrants, drawn by manufacturing industry, begin to arrive.
1950's: Among Port Chester's major manufacturers: the Ernest Simons Manufacturing Company, which made sheets and pillow cases; the Russell Burdsall and Ward Bolt and Nut Company; Fruit of the Loom, Abendroth Brothers, which manufactured stoves and furnaces; Beech-Nut LifeSavers; Arnold Bakers; and the Empire Brush Company.
1970's: Many of Port Chester's factories begin to move south or west; the downtown retail sector struggles.
1984: LifeSavers shuts down its North Main Street factory after 64 years, the last major manufacturer to leave the village.
Late 1990's: The developer Gregg Wasser develops plans for the Waterfront at Port Chester, a shopping area of big-box discount retailers along the Byram River. Meanwhile, Latino-owned stores and restaurants open along the struggling Main Street.
By Elsa Brenner and ''The History of the Town of Rye,'' compiled in 1960 by Louis C.A. Lewin and Warren J. Lewin.
Westchester
