USUALLY, it's union organizers who declare themselves to be the voice of disenfranchised workers, while management counters that the workers have been misinformed and misled.
But this fall, after the failure of a rival union's campaign to recruit the work force of North Hills Office Services in Woodbury, one of Long Island's biggest commercial cleaning companies, the roles were reversed.
Long Island is the latest battleground in a long-running national recruitment drive by the Service Employees International Union, the parent union of Local 32BJ in Manhattan, which represents about 70,000 cleaning workers in the metropolitan area. But on Long Island, the local represents only 1,000 workers, about a tenth of the people working full time as janitors in Nassau and Suffolk, according to the State Labor Department.
In 2003, 32BJ picketed several of the buildings North Hills cleans, distributed pamphlets, called on North Hills janitors at their homes, and gave away T-shirts emblazoned with the local's name.
In September, the 400 workers at North Hills allowed a federal deadline to pass without changing their union representation. As a result, they will continue to be represented by the National Organization of Industrial Trade Unions.
Despite the workers' choice, Michael P. Fishman, the president of Local 32BJ, said that his union would continue ''all legal actions'' to achieve its goal of representing North Hills workers.
''We plan to make more efforts to represent them,'' he said. ''If we are going to protect wages in New York, we have to organize workers on Long Island. Throughout the area, contractors will compete against each other. They use one union against each other, and it drives wages down. The way for workers to have power is for us to take wages out of competition.''
Paul Kaplan, the founder of North Hills, disputed Mr. Fishman's interpretation. ''The workers already have their union, and they're happy with it,'' he said. ''If they wanted to join the other union, they would.''
Daniel Lasky, an official of the National Organization of Industrial Trade Unions, which represents North Hills workers, said: ''32BJ came after us. We fight back. We never initiated these raids, and we are not a company union.'' Mr. Lasky said that the union, based in Jamaica, Queens, had about 10,000 members, 4,000 of them on Long Island.
Local 32BJ says it offers workers a better deal. Workers covered by its contracts earn $11 an hour, according to John Hamill, its spokesman, and they qualify for health-care benefits after working 27 1/2 hours a week for at least 30 days. Family benefits are worth $585 a month, paid for by the employers, Mr. Hamill said.
At North Hills, workers earn $7 to $7.50 an hour, based on seniority, Mr. Lasky said.
Local 32BJ made health-care benefits a major issue in the campaign, claiming that the National Organization of Industrial Trade Unions, which is self-insured, skimps in this regard. Mr. Fishman said of North Hills workers: ''We are trying to get them decent pay and some benefits. The owners want low wages and no benefits. What you see is like something out of the Depression, with Dust Bowl migrants working alongside their children.''
Mr. Lasky disputed Mr. Fishman's contention. ''The union offers major medical, P.P.O., hospitalization, free eyeglasses and life insurance,'' he said, ''so what is he talking about?''
He added that North Hills workers received health-care benefits, paid by the company, that are worth $375 a month. They can buy additional coverage for family members if they choose to, he said.
Mr. Fishman said he hoped to triple Long Island representation in his local over the next several years, bringing Nassau and Suffolk cleaners' pay and benefits closer to parity with the rest of the metropolitan region.
Murray Portnoy, a consultant who helps companies, including North Hills, manage relations with unions, disputed Mr. Fishman's claims and said that Mr. Fishman sought primarily to eliminate competition to his union. Mr. Portnoy, a founder of Portnoy, Messenger, Pearl &amp; Associates in Syosset, said that the local's failure at North Hills effectively discredited its claims. ''They flooded the building and the streets with organizers, but the workers refused to sign cards,'' he said, describing 32BJ's attempt last summer to organize a building owned by the Tilles Companies. ''They failed miserably. Then they began guerrilla warfare, trying to get the Tilles organization to fire North Hills.''
That failed, too, he said. ''They don't want to have anybody interfere with their monopoly. What this is is racketeering.''
Mr. Fishman disagreed, saying that North Hills intimidated workers in an effort to keep them from choosing 32BJ. The company fired five people who supported his union's organizing efforts, he said.
Just before Thanksgiving, the local organized a rally in front of a Stewart Avenue office building in East Garden City to publicize claims that North Hills had punished workers for supporting 32BJ.
According to a statement on the union's Web site, North Hills fired Esmeralda Leon and Julio Jimenez, from jobs at that building ''in relation for their union-related activity.'' The union contends the dismissals violate Federal labor law, and Mr. Fishman said that he said he had filed 26 charges with the National Labor Relations Board in Washington in connection with the organizing efforts last year.
''It is outrageous that North Hills fired me,'' Ms. Leon says on the Web site. ''I have never had a complaint about my work, but since I began organizing with S.E.I.U. Local 32BJ, North Hills has been harassing me.''
Speaking for North Hills, Mr. Portnoy acknowledged that five workers were fired last year, including Ms. Leon and Mr. Jimenez. He said that Ms. Leon and Mr. Jimenez were fired because a customer complained; both were offered jobs at other buildings but refused them, he said.
Underlying the organizing efforts of Local 32BJ is a national organizing drive known as Justice for Janitors, begun in 1990 by the Service Employees International Union. The campaign seeks to unite religious, labor, civic and left-leaning political organizations, depicting labor issues in human rights terms and portraying janitors -- who are predominantly immigrants, campaign organizers say -- as victims of social injustice.
The union has been instrumental in building support on Long Island for a chapter of Justice for Janitors, said David Spritzen, a founder of the Long Island Progressive Coalition who serves as the chapter's secretary. Mr. Spritzen said the Long Island chapter was scheduled to open this spring, in space shared with the Progressive Coalition's headquarters in Massapequa.
Roger Tilles, a director of the Tilles Companies, described himself as a landlord who valued good relations with unions but said he had become disenchanted with Local 32BJ's strategies and practices in trying to expand its grip on Long Island.
''Many companies that do cleaning on Long Island are not unionized, and a union has the legal right to try to organize,'' he said. ''To me the real question is, are they improving the lot of the workers, or improving the lot of 32BJ?''
L.I. @ WORK
