Since their mighty collapse of 2002, the Knicks have been considered beyond repair, a team locked in mediocrity because of an outlandish payroll and a roster of supposedly unmovable players. That was the thinking for two years as the team's president and general manager, Scott Layden, toiled fruitlessly in his quest to keep the Knicks relevant.
But in less time than it took him to skitter upcourt during his playing days, Isiah Thomas blew that theory to bits, trading players with unfavorable contracts (Clarence Weatherspoon and Howard Eisley) and landing the superstar (Stephon Marbury) the Knicks were supposed to be incapable of getting.
Why was Thomas, who was named the Knicks' president of basketball operations on Dec. 22 after Layden was fired, able to do in two weeks what Layden could not pull off in two years?
Several league officials who have dealt with both men said last week that Thomas's aggressive and persuasive personality was a key to his ability to pry Marbury, Penny Hardaway and Cezary Trybanski away from Phoenix last week for Eisley, Antonio McDyess, Charlie Ward, Maciej Lampe, the rights to Milos Vujanic, two first-round draft picks and $3 million.
Most believe the deal should immediately turn the Knicks into contenders for the Eastern Conference championship, a notion that seemed ridiculous just seven days ago.
''I think the personality of Isiah is much different than the personality of Scott,'' said one Eastern Conference official, speaking on condition of anonymity. ''I think when Dolan said he wants to cut payroll, Layden took it at face value and couldn't sell whatever he was trying to sell. Isiah, in his dealings with ownership, has a much stronger personality, and he was able to sell his deal to Dolan. He came in, made moves right away, and ownership liked that he stepped right in the breach and said, 'We need to do this.' ''
The official was referring to James L. Dolan, the chairman of Madison Square Garden. A clear example of Thomas's influence with Dolan was his pursuit of the troubled players Eddie Griffin and Leon Smith, as well as his current quest to trade for Portland's Rasheed Wallace.
With Layden in charge, Dolan stood firm in his desire to have only players of unquestioned character, even pushing Layden to trade Latrell Sprewell. But Thomas obviously has the leeway to sign whomever he wants.
While applauding Thomas's ingenuity and boldness in the Marbury deal, some general managers said it was fairly simple to pull off such a trade when there are no financial constraints. Phoenix had long been looking to move Hardaway's onerous contract. In acquiring Marbury, who is owed $90 million over the next five seasons, and Hardaway, who will make $30 million over the next two seasons, the Knicks assured themselves of having a league-high payroll near $100 million for several years.
''Isiah made a good deal, but if money is no object, you can make deals like that because some team is always looking to get under the cap,'' another Eastern Conference official said. ''No other general manager in America could make that trade because of the financial constraints.''
Did Dolan loosen his financial reins for Thomas?
A Knicks official said no, adding that Layden had the same financial freedom as Thomas. As evidence, he cited Dolan's allowing Layden to add $105 million in salary when acquiring Eisley, Shandon Anderson and Weatherspoon, all reserves. That's not to mention Allan Houston's $100.4 million contract.
Every official interviewed said Layden's work ethic was solid. On the other hand, Layden was known for making lopsided offers that were almost insulting to other teams. For instance, last season he made Seattle laugh by offering Kurt Thomas and Ward for Gary Payton. For the past two years, Layden called Phoenix every month to inquire about Marbury, but the talks never went anywhere.
Two Knicks officials and some of the executives with other teams said Layden had developed allegiances to certain players that might have kept him from trading them. No one seemed to think Layden would have traded McDyess, because he had become Layden's pet project, the deal that would make or break him in New York, and one of the Knicks officials said Layden would not have even traded Eisley, whom he had been close to since their days together in Utah.
''I think Isiah correctly sees that while he can't make the perfect trade, he can get the guy he wants,'' said Donnie Walsh, the Indiana Pacers' chief executive, who hired Thomas to coach the Pacers in 2000. ''He didn't think, 'I'm not going to give up this guy.' He said, 'If I can get what I want, I'll give up what I have to,' within certain parameters. Sometimes that's the advantage of coming in fresh -- you don't have allegiances to guys.''
Daly Plans to Stay Home
Speculation that Chuck Daly was on Isiah Thomas's list of coaching candidates for the Knicks job drew laughter from at least one knowledgeable person: Daly himself. Daly said last week that he was too old at 73 to take on a team.
''I don't even buy green bananas these days,'' he said after playing nine holes of golf near his Florida home. ''Honestly, Isiah's going at his own pace. I was under the impression that he was going to stay with the coach.''
Daly said he spoke with Thomas soon after he took the Knicks job, and said on Friday that Thomas had called him earlier last week but that the two had not spoken.
Injuries Slow Lakers
When the Los Angeles Lakers won 18 of their first 21 games, it became clear that only injuries or boredom could stop them from regaining the N.B.A. title. Well, injuries, and hence a losing streak, have struck.
The 40-year-old Karl Malone is beginning to show his age, sitting out since Dec. 21 with a strained medial collateral ligament in his right knee. Malone, who missed just six games because of injury or illness in his previous 18 seasons, went on the injured list for the first time in his career. He is expected to be out at least another week, and the Lakers are 2-6 since he was sidelined.
''Missing seven, eight, nine games in one spell when I haven't missed that many in 18 years is discouraging,'' Malone told reporters after a practice on Dec. 31. ''I feel like I'm letting people down.''
Malone's importance to the team was underscored by the fact that, even with Shaquille O'Neal, Kobe Bryant and Gary Payton in the lineup, the Lakers (22-11) lost two of their first three games without Malone. When O'Neal strained his right calf muscle early in a loss to Seattle on Jan. 2, the Lakers lost their next four games.
Alarms are not going off around the league because O'Neal and Malone are not expected to miss an extended period of time. On Thursday, a magnetic resonance imaging test on O'Neal's calf was negative, and he could return later this week. But with O'Neal's history of nagging injuries and Malone's age, the sense is that the Lakers might not be the title locks they appeared to be earlier in the season.
For their part, the Lakers are not panicking.
''May and June are more important than December and January,'' Malone said.
Pacers Support Artest
Ever since Ron Artest was benched during the second half of Indiana's loss to the Nets on Dec. 27, rumors about a trade have been flying around the league. But inquiring clubs find out quickly that the speculation is hogwash.
''We're not trading Artest,'' Donnie Walsh said. ''I don't know why people think that. Every day, there's a kid that talks back to a coach in this league. When Artest does it, he becomes a national story.''
Artest, who exchanged words with Coach Rick Carlisle during halftime of the Nets game, has actually been on good behavior for most of the season. The flare-ups that led to his being suspended so often last season have been nonexistent, and after chatting with Walsh, Carlisle and the team's president, Larry Bird, on Dec. 29, Artest and the Pacers have been rolling.
With Artest scoring 20 points a game, Indiana won its next seven games after the Nets loss. With Artest playing so well and for the most part controlling his temper, the Pacers chalked up his incident with Carlisle as his competitive nature getting the best of him.
''Last year, he had a lot of incidents, but I just think this one has been overblown,'' Walsh said. ''He hasn't done anything this year. Right now, he's playing as good as any perimeter player in the East.''
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
