THERE are far fewer of them these days and they cater to flush businessmen more than to boys clutching dollars in their fists, but baseball card stores, once the prime place to spend an allowance, still persevere.
The handful that survive in the state may not be easily recognizable to the now-graying childhood collector who fondly recalls cards clipped to bicycle spokes and bundles of cards held together by rubber bands. Those stores that have stayed alive have either strayed from marketing to children or have chased trends like fantasy and role-playing game cards.
''There aren't too many card shops left,'' said Dave Rock, who owns Rock's Sports Cards in Bristol. ''When I first started here in the early 90's, there were five in Bristol alone. Now it's only me.''
It is a trend not limited to Bristol. Among many of the empty storefronts in downtown New Britain is Brian's All Star Sports Cards, and within the past two years, stores selling mainly sports cards have closed in Vernon, South Windsor and Old Saybrook.
Like many of the survivors, Mr. Rock said he has been able to stay in business because he has realized where the money is: using the Internet to sell products, catering to adults looking for vintage cards as memories of their childhood, and selling to collectors buying as an investment rather than as a hobby. He also hasn't moved out sports cards for whatever the current fad happens to be, despite the fact that the sheer amount of products and the quality of them have driven younger collectors away from the sports cards.
For example, only 15 years ago, there were four major card companies producing baseball card sets: Topps, the first company to popularize trading cards, in 1952, Donruss, Fleer and Upper Deck, which in 1989 began to change the hobby by introducing a higher-quality, glossy product. Aside from those, there were several other fringe brands, but over all, collectors had less than a dozen sets to choose from, and all sold packs for under $1.
Today, there are more than 50 products to choose from, ranging from chrome and platinum-coated sets to cards with game-worn jersey pieces sewn on to cards limited to press runs of five, making their worth stratospheric. Packs of some of these brands, with only five or six cards each, can run as high as $170.
No wonder some shop owners have reluctantly waved goodbye to the sight of children coming in and buying a stack of their favorite team's cards.
''The kids aren't into collecting as much anymore; it's more of an adult thing now,'' said Jack Rial, who owns the First Base card shop in Wallingford. ''And it's the prices. The kids can't afford them. They want these high-end cards worth hundreds of dollars. But you can only get those in $20 packs.''
Mr. Rial has debated making more room in his densely packed shop of autographed baseballs and for products children are buying: animated Japanese trading cards like Pokemón and Yu-Gi-Oh! and games based more on fantasy and comics than sports. As it stands now, the tiny corner of First Base's counter with these products is like a toothpick in the ocean, in a store with thousands of baseball card boxes crammed into every usable inch of space.
In addition, stores like First Base must also deal with competition from large retail giants like Target, Wal-Mart and even CVS, all of which devote shelf space to sports and gaming cards. Some of these stores even strike special deals with manufacturers to carry exclusive, discounted versions of certain sets. Add this to the already shrinking market for some of the family-owned shops, and surviving becomes even harder.
But why are children neglecting baseball, football, basketball and hockey cards for the other products?
''Many parents take no interest in teaching their kids how to have fun with the hobby,'' he said. ''I can't tell you how many moms and dads I've seen just hand their kid a $5 bill and wait in the car. That's no good, because it's such a great hobby, with so many ways to collect.''
Topps, still the most successful trading card company, realizes this, too. In an effort to keep children involved in the hobby, it produces sets that retail for less than $1 per pack, but even that has not been enough for the company to keep children interested.
''We've seen the same things the shops are,'' said Clay Luraschi, a spokesman for the Topps Company. ''They had to change, and we had to as well. Sports cards are still very much in demand, but it's just that in any kind of environment where you're catering to kids, you have to be able to diversify.''
That's why Topps recently purchased a company called WizKids, which produces a wildly popular game called HeroClix that puts comic book characters into a role-playing strategy game played with dice and numbers. With this company, Topps will put out a baseball-themed version of the game, Major League Baseball SportsClix, this spring.
''For 50 years, we've chronicled pop culture and sports, and as long as we're doing that consistently, we'll be able to cater to what kids like,'' Mr. Luraschi said. ''It's just that there are a lot of things out there capturing kids' attention.''
At Mac's Cards in Vernon, business was already healthy a half hour after doors had opened on a recent weekday. Gail McEldowney, the owner, was helping one customer fill a list of various single cards needed to fill complete sets, while another regular, Brett Laidlaw, lent a hand by checking in a shipment.
''People are in it for different reasons,'' Mr. Laidlaw said. ''Some are dealers, the guys who buy low, sell high and carry around wads of cash. But some people just love the rush of opening packs and pulling a great card.''
Many people who fit the former description have turned to Internet auction sites like eBay, where a card can be posted for anyone in the world to buy as long as that person is willing to risk paying money for a card without seeing it first, or without knowing the seller on the other side is trustworthy.
''I find more people are selling their stuff on the Net,'' said Ms. McEldowney, noting that the amount of cards she purchases directly off collectors looking to clear their attics has decreased. ''You can get more money selling it yourself than coming to me, so why not?''
Down in Oxford, one shop owner said that he still sees the benefit of coming into your neighborhood baseball card store as opposed to searching eBay.
''We have to sell all our cards at 50 percent to compete with the Net,'' said Rick Cleri, who runs Ernie's Baseball Cards. ''And people still say, 'You know what? I want to go and look at cards in my hand before I buy them.'''
That's the aspect keeping the brick-and-mortar baseball card shops alive in the face of the Internet and the loss of younger collectors, according to the editor of the preeminent hobby publication.
''It's not necessarily about dollar value for everyone,'' said Mike Payne, managing editor of Beckett Publications, publisher of hobby price guides for sports cards since 1984. ''There's value, nonetheless, for a kid pulling a card of his favorite player out of a $2.50 pack. So I don't think it'll ever be a lost cause for companies and stores trying to get kids back into the hobby.''
The days when children carried shoeboxes overflowing with dog-eared cornered cards from trade to trade may be long gone. That doesn't mean the idea of trading your cards instead of putting them up for auction has died too.
Ken Asal, owner of Ken's Cards and Collectibles in Berlin, holds trading sessions at his shop once a month, and he said the events have brought back a sense of fun over the fiscal bottom line to the people who attend.
''Some people don't appreciate cards for what they are for: collecting,'' said Mr. Asal. ''Too many people care about value. It's something I try to tell my traders. There's more than just the book value of your favorite card.''
Of course, his next comment threw into doubt if the hobby despite everyone's best efforts will ever approach the time when your favorite card was determined by the face on the front, not the jeweler's condition grade given to it, or the price it's going for on eBay.
''But every time the extremely expensive packs come out, they're the first things to sell,'' Mr. Asal said. ''So who knows?''
