ON film, the screen goddess Anna May Wong was fond of saying, she died a thousand deaths. As Lotus Flower, an innocent Hong Kong girl abandoned by her feckless American lover, she threw herself into the roiling ocean; as Shosho, the London flapper and ''Chinese Dancing Wonder,'' she was shot in the chest by a jealous suitor; as Taou Yuen, an exquisite Qing Dynasty princess transported to humdrum Victorian Bristol, she ate opium while arrayed in spectacular Peking Opera costume.
Once in a while, her characters survived. In Josef von Sternberg's ''Shanghai Express'' (1932) she plays Hui Fei, an inordinately graceful Confucian courtesan with nerves of steel (and traveling companion to Marlene Dietrich's notorious prostitute Shanghai Lily), who disappears from a crowded train platform amid the flashes of news photographers after collecting her reward for murdering a brutal Chinese warlord. But that was rare. Her faithless servants, gangsters' molls and dragon ladies -- the parts Hollywood tended to reserve for her -- generally came to no good.
Though glamorous and alluring, did Wong merely embody the racist stereotypes of a studio system that still has trouble imagining a positive role for Asians? Riding a wave of interest in early cinema and all things Asian, two recent biographies -- Anthony B. Chan's ''Perpetually Cool: The Many Lives of Anna May Wong'' and Graham Russell Gao Hodges's ''Anna May Wong: From Laundryman's Daughter to Hollywood Legend'' -- argue otherwise. Wong, these authors contend, worked hard to make even her smallest roles as Chinese as possible, using authentic hairstyles and costumes (frequently drawn from her own extensive collection.) Generations later, only a handful of Asian or Asian-American actresses -- Nancy Kwan, Maggie Cheung, Lucy Liu -- have even begun to approach Wong's success in the West.
Now, long after being relegated to the precincts of camp and the margins of film history, Wong is being celebrated: with a five-film retrospective sponsored by the Museum of Modern Art at the Gramercy Theater in New York (Jan. 22-25), and with the national rerelease of her erotic triumph as Shosho in the 1929 British silent ''Picadilly'' (at Anthology Film Archives in New York, Jan. 23-29). Her eclectic elegance, both on and off screen, is also exerting a renewed influence on fashion. The American couture designer Maggie Norris cites Wong's dazzling fusion of classical Chinese dress and 1930's Hollywood chic as inspiration for her spring 2004 collection. And the two new biographies, along with the filmography ''Anna May Wong,'' by Philip Leibfried and Chei Mi Lane, attempt to sort out Wong's baffling mixture of proto-feminist strengths and come-hither exoticism.
Born Wong Liu Tsong (or Frosted Yellow Willow) in 1905, above her family's Chinese laundry in Los Angeles, Wong caught the movie bug early. She became known as the ''curious Chinese child'' who hung around the set whenever films were shot in Chinatown. At 17 she captured her first starring role, in the 1922 silent ''Toll of the Sea'' (included in the Modern's retrospective). The screenwriter Frances Marion stole the plot of ''Madame Butterfly'' for this tale of an American washed up on Chinese shores who seduces and deserts a virginal young woman. In a touching performance, Wong's quiet dignity and her expressive use of Chinese dress and gesture brought substance to her role as Lotus Flower.
Her big break came one year later, when Hollywood's golden boy, Douglas Fairbanks, cast her in his over-the-top Orientalist extravaganza, ''The Thief of Baghdad'' (1924), also screening at the Gramercy. Wong's bikini-clad Mongol slave girl betrays her mistress, a wan Persian princess and Fairbanks's love interest, by spying for a Mongol prince. The scene-stealing Wong shudders and writhes before Fairbanks's knife sensationally.
That epic brought her international renown, but at home she soon found her talents consigned to supporting parts adding ''Oriental intrigue'' or local color, while Caucasian actors made up in ''yellow face'' (like the Swedish-born Warner Oland, who starred in the Charlie Chan detective series) were routinely cast in leading roles as Asians. Taboos against mixed-race love prevented Wong from playing romantic leads, since she couldn't kiss her co-stars, or doomed her seductresses to death.
Frustrated with instructing ''yellow face'' performers like Myrna Loy in the use of chopsticks, in 1928 Wong left Hollywood for Europe, where she led the cosmopolitan life, starring in film, theater and opera and hobnobbing with the cultural elite in three languages. A photograph taken by Alfred Eisenstadt at the Berlin Press Ball of 1929 shows Wong, Marlene Dietrich and Leni Riefenstahl: three young actresses looking for a break, before the political cataclysm that would divide their world.
In ''Picadilly,'' directed by E. A. Dupont and filmed in London, she upstaged Gilda Gray, the ''Queen of Shimmy,'' as Shosho, the scullery maid who catches the eye of Gray's lover, a nightclub impresario; he puts her onstage as a dancer, and she becomes an overnight sensation. Perhaps it had something to do with her costume -- a scanty, gilded interpretation of a vaguely Indonesian warrior outfit, purchased (at Shosho's insistence) in Limehouse, London's Chinatown. More likely it's Wong's intensity, toughness and vibrant sensuality, showcased in a film that played off the fears and temptations of miscegenation.
''Her movies are almost always a representation of social fears about interracial sex, and her own inner turmoil on the subject,'' said the Wong biographer Graham Russell Gao Hodges, a professor of history at Colgate University. In 1932, he notes, she wrote a remarkably frank article for the French periodical Revue Mondiale on the problems involved in mixed-race marriages. Wong never wed, though gossip linked her romantically with several Caucasian directors and (most scandalously) with Dietrich, whose sexual appetites were legendary. (In the 1930's, as Wong continued to shuttle between Europe and Hollywood, she told fan magazines that she hoped to marry a traditional Chinese scholar, though her radical independence made the likelihood of such a union remote.)
In 1936, seeking to increase the authenticity of her depictions of Chinese women and hoping to find her spiritual homeland, Wong set off on an 11-month visit to China. (The retrospective includes newsreel scenes shot by the renowned Chinese-American cinematographer James Wong Howe of her strolling through the streets of Shanghai.)
Though officially she was received with full honors, her reception was mixed. Chinese critics had long castigated the roles she accepted (often women of loose morals) as insulting to the national character; the fact that she frequently performed bare-legged was itself cause for scandal. Nevertheless, Wong's two biographers emphasize her tireless activity on behalf of Chinese causes in the years leading up to and during World War II. In 1956 her home movies of her visit to her family's ancestral village in China were shown on American television; her commentary cited the trip as her most satisfying achievement.
Like many actors of her generation, Wong ended her professional life in the infant medium of television. Briefly she starred in ''The Gallery of Madame Liu Tsong,'' about a Chinese picture dealer and detective who becomes embroiled in international art world intrigue. Her final publicity still, from ''Portrait in Black'' (1960), the film she hoped would revive her career, shows her clutching a Siamese cat in her role as a maid; her face, though still beautiful, displays the ravages of the liver disease that would kill her one year later.
She had made more than 60 films. My favorite (among those I've seen) is ''Java Head,'' an obscure 1934 British production and a resolutely B-effort by the director J. Walter Ruben. (Wong loved it, perhaps because it was the one film in which her co-star kissed her.) It's saved by her extraordinary performance as Taou Yuen, a Manchu princess who marries the son of a Bristol shipping magnate (John Loder) and accompanies him back to England. As she arrives by surprise in his family's salon, elaborately made-up, bejewelled and coiffed in a chrysanthemum headdress, his prim Victorian relations gape as if confronted with a creature from another planet. Little did they know that this splendid personage came from a world that she alone inhabited.
FILM Leslie Camhi writes from New York about film, books and art.
Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 11 about the actress Anna May Wong misidentified the cameraman who shot scenes of her visit to Shanghai in 1936. He was the Chinese photojournalist and newsreel photographer H. S. Wong, not the Chinese-American cinematographer James Wong Howe.
