SHOOTING THE SUN
By Max Byrd.
306 pp. New York:
Bantam Books. $23.95.
IT'S hard to imagine a more exciting time to have been an explorer in the American West than the early 1840's. True, Lewis and Clark's indefatigable Corps of Discovery had already ventured up the Missouri River and across the Continental Divide to the Pacific Northwest. Farther south, Zebulon Pike had discovered the Rocky Mountain peak that bears his name. But in 1840 huge tracts of the West were still blank spaces on the best maps of the day.
That's when Selena Cott, the beautiful young astronomer and pioneer photographer at the center of Max Byrd's entertaining and informative new novel, ''Shooting the Sun,'' strikes out with the Somerville-Babbage Expedition for ''the vast, fabulous, and unexplored deserts beyond the borders of the Independent Republic of Texas'' to photograph a total eclipse of the sun.
As Selena quickly discovers, her fellow expeditionaries are a singularly unpleasant and ill-assorted group. There's an explorer with vast experience in Africa who believes that women are ''altogether too fragile physically and mentally to endure'' the rigors of such a journey; a sardonic landscape painter who has no use for science or scientists; an insufferably pompous Harvard professor; and a wagonmaster who is an acolyte of the vegetarian inventor of Graham crackers. And foremost there is the hard-driving leader of the party, William Henshaw Pryce, who is dedicated to the proposition that the great theme of the 19th century is the ''triumph of money . . . over everything.''
As if these men didn't put enough obstacles in her path, there's an added difficulty: Selena knows that even though she'll be using the most sophisticated instruments of the day to guide her to the eclipse, she may ''still miss the area of maximum shadow by as much as 40 miles.''
In fact, the success of the expedition may depend on the accuracy of a primitive computer called the Difference Engine, an invention of the real-life British mathematical genius Charles Babbage. The trouble is that hardly anyone but Babbage, the astronomer Mary Somerville and a small circle of their friends has the slightest faith in this strange machine -- or even believes that a total eclipse is ''going to happen at all.''
Raised in Paris, Selena is the daughter of an expatriate American sea captain, from whom she believes she has inherited ''an indisputably New England directness.'' At the same time, she's aware of -- and rather amused by -- another aspect of her character, a ''cheerful French self'' interested in the latest fashions and even, possibly, in romance. Above all, though, Selena takes pride in being a scientist, possessed of ''the remarkable gift, present since childhood, of responding to abstract ideas with her whole physical being.''
After extensive preparations in Washington, the expedition heads west by train, stagecoach, steamboat and, eventually, covered wagon. Besides the standard perils of the Santa Fe Trail -- swollen rivers, quicksand, drought, prairie fires, rattlesnakes, wagon wrecks and hostile Indians -- Byrd introduces an intriguing mystery involving Charles Babbage's enormously wealthy great-uncle, Richard, a utopian-minded eccentric fleeing ''European corruption and effeteness'' who has taken up residence with a band of Kiowa Indians near Taos, N.M.
Occasionally, Byrd jolts his readers out of the world of his novel with an observation better suited for a popular history than a work of fiction. He introduces his vivid account of the 900-mile Santa Fe Trail, for example, by remarking that ''a tourist today can cover the entire distance in a leisurely two- or three-day automobile trip.'' For the most part, though, the historical and scientific details and anecdotes with which ''Shooting the Sun'' abounds -- from the critical role of the discovery of the element iodine in the development of photography to the precise difference between a Kiowa riding and walking moccasin -- are woven skillfully into the story.
Byrd, who is also the author of historical novels about Jefferson, Jackson and Grant, clearly loves the West. Like the painter who joins the expedition, he has an eye for telling images: a wrecked steamboat painted to resemble a gigantic serpent; red buttes like ''huge fixed sails in a great stone armada''; and a line of Conestoga wagons ''drawn up in the dim morning light like a school of sleeping fish.''
As the explorers work their way closer to Mexico and the day of the eclipse, Byrd ratchets up the dramatic tension with several ingenious surprises, including a truly Dantean fate for some of the least savory individuals west of the Mississippi. And what of Selena Cott, for whom it is ''easier to calculate the attractions and repulsions of the planets . . . than the attractions and repulsions of human beings''? There are a few surprises in store for her as well. Most satisfyingly, they will confound and delight both the New England and the Parisian sides of her nature.
Howard Frank Mosher's latest novel is ''The True Account: A Novel of the Lewis and Clark and Kinneson Expeditions.''
