The sign in the cramped basement of El Gran Pan de Queso, near the employee lockers and sacks of hominy grits, reads: ''Please put trash in its place.''
If only it were that easy.
The trash's place in this small Colombian restaurant in Corona, Queens, used to be in a sidewalk Dumpster. But now, workers lug 8 to 10 dripping plastic bags of garbage a day down the stairs and leave them a few feet from those same lockers and grits. Each night, the bags go up through the dining room to the sidewalk.
A year ago this month, the Department of Sanitation began enforcing laws citywide that prohibit storing Dumpsters on sidewalks. Some advocates say the program, Operation Dumpster, is a success. ''Sidewalks are for walking,'' said John Kaehny, executive director of the advocacy group Transportation Alternatives, ''and the Department of Sanitation has done something to clear more space for pedestrians.''
Carlos Aldana, owner of El Gran Pan de Queso, disagrees. ''It's an economic problem,'' he said. ''It's a hygienic problem. It's an atmosphere problem.''
Mr. Aldana said his garbage collection costs had more than tripled since last year. His restaurant used to pay about $200 a month for a carting company to make twice-weekly Dumpster pickups. His latest bill, for six-day-a-week bag pickups in November, came to $623.70, an increase of about $5,000 a year.
Eduardo Giraldo, president of the Queens Hispanic Chamber of Commerce, said he had received complaints from many restaurant and supermarket owners. ''The amount of garbage they have to keep in the basement, that brings mice,'' he said. ''That brings cockroaches.''
John Doherty, the city's sanitation commissioner, said the program had been a success. ''I get very few complaints anymore about sidewalks being blocked by smelly, dirty Dumpsters,'' he said. ''Nobody likes to change, but we have to adjust.''
Queens, with its high concentration of immigrant restaurants in cramped spaces, may be particularly affected by the new enforcement, but businesses in other boroughs are also feeling the pinch. Jack Alaio, manager of Patricia's, an Italian restaurant in Throgs Neck, the Bronx, said his carting fees were up 35 percent from a year ago.
Some restaurant owners, like Mr. Alaio and Mr. Aldana, believe that permanent Dumpsters are more sanitary than trash bags left on the street. The workers at El Gran Pan de Queso end up cleaning the sidewalk any morning that rats or the homeless rip into exposed garbage bags.
SETH KUGEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CORONA
