FORGET about camellias if you winter in T-shirts with the thermostat set at 79. Camellias are for people who prefer heavy sweaters over balmy temperatures and happily keep the thermostat low enough to promote rosy, flushed cheeks.
In my case, cold became a way of life during a fuel shortage in the 1970's, and the habit stuck. At night my begonias and members of the African violet family huddle with the cat in the relatively warm bathroom while the rest of the house plummets to 55 degrees. During the day, I crank the heat up to 60; houseguests complain, but when they see the blossoms on my camellias, they begin to understand.
The big, beautiful flowers on camellias rival roses. As for stature, camellia shrubs put rose bushes to shame: the foliage is shiny and tidy, the stems are woody and the silhouette graceful. Of the two most popular hybrid groups, the sasanqua types are an autumn happening with small leaves, an open, broad branching habit reminiscent of the poetic Japanese maple and slightly downsized flowers. Aside from the very late bloomers, like the Santa-red, single-flowering Yuletide, sasanquas usually come and go before the winter holidays.
From January onward, we're into Camellia japonica season. This variety, with its low light demands, is the ideal indoor plant, and if you're stocked with early-, midseason- and late-blooming varieties, flowers can be had through mid-April, each blossom a masterpiece of tissue-thin petals that glow when hit by sunbeams. Colors don't stray much beyond white, pink, salmon and red (the first yellow hybrid appeared in 1989, but it remains rare). Although the palette is limited, all kinds of variations occur in color combinations (streaked, mottled, banded and spotted) and petal configurations (single, semi-double, formal double, rose-form, peony-form and anemone-form). They're all gorgeous in the dead of winter, when a big fluffy flower holds the seduction of a stolen kiss.
Of all the camellia converts I know, my neighbors Jack and June Dunbar may have the biggest obsession. They have 37 varieties, most in pots a foot or larger across, branches stretching three feet and upward. The love affair began 20 years ago, when Mr. Dunbar first laid eyes on Adolphe Audusson, a semi-double blooming japonica infused with shocking red. The couple shivered through winter in their Upper East Side apartment as the plants overtook floor space until they finally planted the overflow in the garden behind their apartment building. The sasanquas faltered, but the japonicas did just fine.
Eight years ago the Dunbars bought a house in Connecticut, and their infatuation grew. Eventually, to accommodate their collection, they built a 15-by-25-foot addition dedicated to camellias.
In the summer they park them outdoors, the japonicas in full shade, the sasanquas in partial shade. They apply a slow release fertilizer for acid-loving plants in June, with regular applications of water-soluble fertilizer for acid-loving plants throughout winter, when the plants move into their brightly lit south-facing camellia room.
Byron Martin, president of Logee's Greenhouses in Danielson, Conn., adopts a different fertilizing regimen, saying that regular fertilization can cause salt buildup, especially when light levels are low. To nourish his camellias, which sit in gallon or larger pots, he applies a teaspoon of cottonseed meal in spring and another dose in summer, and that's it.
Choose between these two approaches, depending on the amount of light your camellias receive. In any event, always water a few hours before fertilizing to avoid applying food to dry soil.
Speaking of water, camellia roots fan out rather than plunge down, so it's best to use shallow pots. Because the roots gather on the surface, judging watering needs is a challenge. Overwatering in winter can cause root rot. But when camellias are making new growth in late winter, early spring and summer, they can literally die of thirst. My solution is to periodically give them bigger pots, with more surface soil .
Camellias are so sensitive to orientation that rotating a pot can cause buds to drop. The Dunbars put markers on their pots so that they always face south, indoors or out.
And don't forget to watch the thermostat. Although cool temperatures are most critical at night, camellias can respond by dropping due to hot, dry air even during the day. (Japonicas are more insistent on this than are sasanquas.)
Camellias' propensities bring to mind the fuel frugality of a weekend house, where temperatures typically fall to 40. Other options include scantily heated breezeways, enclosed porches and spare rooms. Or you can always turn the heat down to 60 and throw on a sweater.
The American Camellia Society answers questions at its Web site, www.camellias-acs.com. Sources for camellias include Nuccio's Nurseries, 3555 Chaney Trail, Altadena, Calif. 91001 (626)794-3383; Camellia Forest Nursery, 9701 Carrie Road, Chapel Hill, N.C. 27516 (919-968-0504 or www.camforest.com); and Gene's Nursery, 8706 Whitfield, Savannah, Ga. 31406 (912-335-7361 or www.genesnursery.com).
CUTTINGS
