When I was married last spring, my friend Elaine Shannon sent me a stack of wonderful old Southern cookbooks, which prompted a lively e-mail correspondence about the food we each grew up eating. In one of her dispatches, Elaine, who is from Georgia, reported that her grandmother had two biases about food: roast beef had to be cooked until it fell apart, and she couldn't abide collard greens. To her, Elaine wrote, ''collards were worse than useless, and any house where they had been cooked had to be burned to the ground. She was a turnip-greens woman.''
I didn't know it at the time, but my own mother, until recently, was one, too. (She grew up in Nashville, a place described in ''Nashville: Personality of a City'' as ''the turnip-greens and hog-jowl center of the universe.'' Alfred Leland Crabb writes, ''These two were used in fitting combination . . . by 1810, and the townspeople's appetite for them has not waned.'') I discovered her allegiance this year when I was appointed cook for Thanksgiving and called her from the produce aisle to ask how many people were coming so I'd be sure to get enough collards. ''Collards?'' she roared with such disgust I almost dropped my cellphone. ''They are tough and, well, just awful.'' I responded that I had recently eaten some of my friend Robert Carter's braised collards at the superlative Peninsula Grill in Charleston, S.C., and that they were some of the most delicious things I had ever tasted. She was unimpressed and told me that I had best bring home some turnip and mustard greens too.
I had no idea there were such passionate greens factions. I guess since the South lost the war, its residents have to find things to argue about among themselves. I managed to negotiate a peace in my own family by quietly going on and making Carter's collards anyway, and now everybody's a convert. I'm not so sure I could have convinced Elaine's grandmother, but at least she wouldn't have had to burn down the house.
In her day the only way people cooked greens was to boil them with a hamhock or a piece of slab bacon for hours until the house smelled so sour that it was indeed almost uninhabitable. Since collards are thicker than mustards or turnips, they cooked the longest, and the stench was the worst. But in Carter's recipe, they aren't boiled to death, but braised for just 15 minutes or so in degreased ham stock. Not only is there no stench, but you get the great pork flavor that is such a compliment to greens without the fat.
In ''The Gift of Southern Cooking,'' Scott Peacock writes that he grew up in Alabama, where they were ''segregationists,'' favoring turnip greens over all others, while his co-author, Edna Lewis, who hails from Virginia, took the more democratic approach of mixing lots of greens up in one pot. Their recipe follows her tradition, cooking such ''Southern'' greens as mustard and turnip with more widely grown varieties like watercress, escarole, kale and chard. They boil theirs, but, like Carter, they do it in degreased pork stock and only for 15 to 20 minutes.
Inspired by her Jeffersonian attitude, I made that recipe the day after Thanksgiving, and I don't think I've ever seen my father so happy. Any time he gets to eat greens -- of any kind -- two days in a row, he considers himself extremely lucky, and he is not alone. In 1984, at the annual Collard Festival in Ayden, N.C., a man named C. Mort Horst set a world record by eating seven and a half pounds of collard greens in 30 minutes. (However, it was reported that he kept them down just long enough to claim his prize.) A year later, a woman named Colleen Bunting contributed to an anthology devoted to collards called ''Leaves of Greens: The Collard Poems.'' In one the poems, she addresses Elaine's grandmother's prejudice: ''Some say collards don't smell so nice,/ But eat them once, and you'll eat them twice.''
An earlier poet named Cotton Noe wrote in 1912 that ''I have never tasted meat/Nor cabbage, corn nor beans/Nor fluid food one half as sweet/As that first mess of greens.'' The great Tony Joe White had a hit song in the late 60's called ''Polk Salad Annie.'' Poke sallet is a wild green and hard to come by these days, but the song remains a personal favorite because of its chorus, which includes the immortal phrase '' 'cause her mama was working on a chain gang.''
All of these writers would have been referring to greens cooked the old-fashioned way and served with the classic accompaniments of pepper and cornbread, which is useful for dipping into the much-prized pot liquor. Pot liquor has plenty of nutrients; some people have been known to eat bowls of it by itself as a sort of soup. It also came in handy to Senator Huey P. Long as filibuster material. In David Leon Chandler's ''Natural Superiority of Southern Politicians,'' the author quotes from some of Long's more memorable rants devoted to blocking various pieces of legislation from the Roosevelt White House. At one point, the senator, who hailed, of course, from Louisiana, dictated the recipe for pot liquor into the Congressional Record: ''First let me tell the senators what pot liquor is. Pot liquor is the residue that remains from the commingling, heating and evaporation . . . anyway it is in the bottom of the pot.'' He went on to hold up a wastebasket to demonstrate how to properly put turnip greens into a pot, and followed up with instructions on how to make a Sazerac cocktail and oysters Rockefeller.
Pot liquor is full of nutrients because the greens themselves are. Collards and their close relatives mustard greens and kale are excellent sources of calcium, iron and vitamins A and C. (Mustards are also rich in thiamine and riboflavin, and the peak season for all three is now through March or April.) Chard, a member of the beet family, has many of the same nutrients as its cruciferous cousins, plus lots of phosphorus. It also has a less pronounced flavor, so it's good to mix it with other, more peppery greens like mustards or watercress, and the French like to use it in gratins with eggs and milk and sometimes Gruyère or Parmesan. (See Daniel Boulud's wonderful gratin of chard with finely chopped mushrooms and his Swiss chard strudel in ''Cooking With Daniel Boulud.'')
Greens also have almost no calories, so without the addition of the pork they are the perfect diet food. My best friend, Jessica Brent, has come up with a healthy way to prepare them that is so good it satisfies even die-hard traditionalists like my father. She puts three or four bunches of cleaned and stemmed mustard greens in a big pot with a half cup of olive oil and two cups of dry white wine (and salt to taste) and steams them until they are tender, about 20 minutes. The vegetarian chef Deborah Madison braises collards or turnip greens in brown butter and does a wonderful recipe of 12 cups of mixed greens sautéed in olive oil with garlic, a cup of chopped parsley, a cup of chopped cilantro and two teaspoons each of paprika and ground cumin.
Some people, though, really miss their pork. In Afghanistan, I met an American aid worker who grew kale in her garden there, and all she could talk about was how much better it would be if she could only get her hands on some bacon. For folks like her, I offer two recipes: Robert Carter's collards with country ham, and one for mustards braised with bacon from Donald Link at New Orleans's very fine Herbsaint. Kale could be used successfully in both.
Robert Carter's Braised Collard Greens  1 pound collard greens, cleaned and stemmed  2 tablespoons olive oil
1/4 cup (about  3/4 ounce) country ham, cut in thin strips  2 tablespoons minced shallots
1/3 cup aged sherry vinegar
1/3 cup tupelo honey
1/2 cup Smoked Pork Stock (recipe below)  Salt and freshly ground pepper to taste
1/4 cup butter.
1. Cut collard greens into chiffonade about  1/2-inch wide and blanch in salted boiling water for 10 seconds. Drain, refresh in ice water and squeeze dry.
2. Heat oil in a large sauté pan over medium heat. Sauté ham and shallots. Deglaze pan with sherry vinegar and stir in honey. Add stock and bring to a simmer.
3. Add collard greens and cook at a healthy simmer until tender, 10 to 15 minutes. Remove greens to a bowl using a slotted spoon. Heat cooking liquid and boil until reduced to about  1/4 cup. Taste and adjust seasonings. (You may want to add a little more honey or vinegar.) Add butter, stirring constantly until it melts. Return greens to pan and toss to coat.
Yield: 6 servings.
Note: Tupelo honey is available at Gourmet Garage and Dean &amp; DeLuca.
Smoked Pork Stock  2 pounds hamhocks or a 2-pound piece of Smithfield ham or other cured country ham.
1. Rinse the hamhocks or ham, and set in a large stockpot. Add 1 gallon of water. Cook, covered, at a full simmer for at least 2 hours, or until stock develops a strong flavor. Strain and discard the meat. (Or use the meat to make ham salad or to flavor soups or beans.)
2. Cool stock completely and skim off all the fat. (Hamhocks will produce more fat.) Stock may be refrigerated for up to a week or frozen for six months.
Yield: About 9 cups.
Bacon-Braised Mustard Greens  (adapted from Donald Link,  Herbsaint Restaurant)  2 or 3 bunches of mustard greens (about 3 3/4 pounds total; 16 cups trimmed)  8 ounces thickly sliced lean slab bacon, diced  1 large onion, diced (2 cups)  1 teaspoon chopped garlic  1 teaspoon hot red-pepper flakes  3 tablespoons sugar
1/2 cup apple-cider vinegar
1/2 cup chicken stock  Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste.
1. Rinse greens well. Cut out stems and thick veins; tear leaves into 4- or 5-inch pieces.
2. Cook bacon in a large sauté pan until fat starts to render and bacon begins to brown. Add onion, garlic and pepper flakes and sauté until onion is soft, about 7 minutes. Add sugar, vinegar and chicken stock. Heat to boiling, add greens and cook slowly, stirring often as the greens begin to release their own liquid.
3. Reduce heat and simmer greens until tender, 10 to 20 minutes, stirring occasionally. Season with salt and pepper.
Yield: 4 to 6 servings.
FOOD
