FROM Milan to Frankfurt and New York, the Parmalat affair has quickly escalated into a global scandal, one that may implicate a leading American accounting firm and several of the world's mightiest banks, including Citigroup Inc. and Deutsche Bank.
In Parma, however, the biggest jolt last week was the ouster of Stefano Tanzi, the 35-year-old son of Parmalat's jailed founder, Calisto Tanzi, as president of the company's soccer team, Parma A.C.
Stefano Tanzi put up a fierce fight, according to people close to the matter. But the company's new administrator, Enrico Bondi, was unyielding in his resolve to sever all ties to Calisto Tanzi, who founded Parmalat, the giant food and dairy company, four decades ago in a village outside this ancient Roman city.
In the vast larder of companies assembled by Mr. Tanzi, the soccer team holds pride of place. Winner of several European and Italian championship cups and a perennial power in the Italian league, Parma A.C. symbolized both the Tanzi family's spectacular success and its enduring ties to its hometown.
The cashiering of Stefano, a shy, unprepossessing man who many people here doubt was privy to all of Parmalat's schemes, ruptures one of the deepest bonds between the city and its first family. ''The soccer team has been sort of a calling card for Parma,'' said the mayor, Elvio Ubaldi. ''They had great success and brought along the name of Parma. But there was a double game.''
That double game -- an epic accounting fraud that may have siphoned more than $10 billion out of Parmalat -- has brought ruin to one of Italy's most ambitious, yet least well-known, family dynasties. For people here, the fall of the house of Tanzi, not the scandal's international repercussions, is the real drama.
It is a profoundly local story -- rooted in the clannish folkways and complicated personal dynamics of a family that, for all its far-reaching ambition, never left Parma.
''It's difficult to say if they are a typical Italian family, but there are elements that suggest they are,'' said Fabio Belloni, who is Calisto Tanzi's lawyer. ''They are strongly rooted to geography, to one place, maybe too much so.''
A city of 180,000, Parma is steeped in history and redolent with the smell of its famous exports, Parmesan cheese and Parma ham. Calisto Tanzi, who was born and raised here and single-handedly built Parmalat into the most famous local company, had the status of a latter-day Duke of Parma. ''A Tanzi in Parma is like an Agnelli in Turin,'' said a woman here who knows Stefano's family socially.
Unlike the Agnellis, who control the Fiat empire, or other wealthy Italian clans, the Tanzis have not cut a wide swath through the country's political or social circles. Calisto Tanzi and his wife live in an unimposing villa with a red tile roof, hidden behind lime trees in a misty field outside the city. While the Tanzi children traveled with bodyguards in the 1970's and 80's -- when Red Brigade terrorist attacks on industrialists were common -- they rarely appear in the gossip pages.
COMPARED with the Barillas, the town's other big family, which owns the Barilla pasta empire and whose members are society fixtures, the Tanzis are almost reclusive. They are known for one social event: an annual ''Swordfish Lunch'' at their villa, when fresh fish is flown in from Sicily.
Now, as Mr. Tanzi, 65, languishes in a Milan jail and investigators sort through Parmalat's tangled books, the intense pressure is starting to sunder this private family, according to lawyers and investigators.
Stefano Tanzi, they said, no longer speaks to his father. The elder Mr. Tanzi's brother, Giovanni, who was on the board of Parmalat, has also broken off contact, as has his niece, Paola Visconti, who in previous months resigned from the board after a dispute with Calisto Tanzi. Of the children, only the eldest daughter, Francesca, is said to be in touch with her father, having visited him at San Vittore prison in Milan, noted for its harsh conditions.
The youngest Tanzi, Laura, 30, works during the mornings at a local pharmacy owned by the family of her mother. Neither she nor her mother, Anita, have any connection to the Tanzifamily business. ''At this moment, there are very real and strong tensions within the family,'' Mr. Belloni said in an interview.
Other people, however, warn that some of the strains between Calisto Tanzi and his relatives may be manufactured by the family's legal advisers to put distance between the patriarch and other family members and, thus, protect them.
Still, the conventional wisdom, among townspeople as well as officials involved in the investigation, is that the younger Tanzis were peripheral figures at Parmalat, despite their board seats. A senior investigator said that they felt as duped as people outside the company, and added that they blamed their father.
Of Stefano, the investigator said: ''He feels betrayed. He was given jobs and now he has to answer'' for his father's actions. The family friend who compared the Tanzis to the Agnellis said Stefano was reluctant from the start to go into the family business but probably felt that as the only son, he had no other choice.
Other people question how, in a family company, the younger Tanzis could not have had at least an inkling of the chicanery, which has extended for more than a decade and which prosecutors believe involved creating a web of offshore entities that contained bogus assets used to offset Parmalat's mushrooming debts.
They note that Stefano accompanied his father and Parmalat's chief financial officer, Luciano Del Soldato, to a meeting on Dec. 9 with executives from the Blackstone Group, the New York private equity firm, to discuss a possible buyout. The session came a day after Parmalat disclosed that it had not recovered a payment of $589.9 million from a hedge fund based in the Cayman Islands.
Under questioning by Italian prosecutors, Mr. Del Soldato contended that Stefano Tanzi was aware of the existence of Bonlat, a Cayman Islands affiliate which investigators say was used to invent assets. ''Stefano Tanzi knew about the fact that Bonlat did not have assets, and in general about the counterfeiting of balance sheets,'' Mr. Del Soldato said, according to an account of his testimony in his arrest warrant. The full extent of Parmalat's problems surfaced on Dec. 19, when the company admitted that it had forged documents claiming that Bonlat had $4.9 billion in an account at the Bank of America.
The role of Francesca Tanzi, the 37-year-old daughter, is similarly shrouded in mystery. She oversaw the family's private tourism business, Parmatour, which consists of travel agencies, hotels and resorts. Calisto Tanzi told investigators he funneled 500 million euros ($638 million) from Parmalat to the unit, which has heavy debt and has suffered along with the rest of the travel industry. Italian press reports, which the company denies, say the total amount diverted to Parmatour could reach 2.5 billion euros.
Last year, Ms. Tanzi sketched out plans to double the capacity of Parmatour's hotels. The company owns Club Vacanze, which has nine beach resorts and four resorts in the Italian Alps. In recent years, Parmatour also carved out a niche handling the travel requirements of Italy's soccer clubs, including Juventus, A.C. Milan, and, of course, her brother's club, Parma.
Travel executives say Ms. Tanzi became a figure in the Italian tourism industry because of her status as an owner-operator. But they are mystified about how Parmatour could have needed 500 million euros, or more, to shore up its operations, even in a bleak environment.
''It's true that in the last two years we have had difficulty in the tourism industry, after Sept. 11,'' said Antonio Tozzi, the president of the Italian Federation of Travel Agencies and Tourism. ''But, when you talk about billions, it seems unrealistic that they could lose so much money.''
With the dearth of information about what really happened, Italian newspapers have devoted front-page articles to descriptions of how Francesca Tanzi dissolved into tears after being pursued by reporters.
ALL in all, it has been a raucous, undignified ending to one of postwar Italy's most impressive and unlikely business successes. Mr. Tanzi started building Parmalat in 1961 after he dropped out of college to take over the family's preserved-meat business, after the death of his father, Melchiorre. He quickly switched the company's focus to milk, setting up a pasteurization plant on Parma's outskirts.
Parma was, and is, one of Italy's food capitals. But Mr. Tanzi was more intrigued by the possibilities of selling milk and other dairy products. In particular, he spied a new market in selling milk that could be kept fresh for up to six months in storage. Using technology from a Swedish company, Tetra Pak, Mr. Tanzi sterilized the milk by heating it to extremely high temperatures and sealing it in Tetra Pak's cartons. He put the Parmalat name on the cartons, turning an agricultural commodity into a brand.
Parmalat burnished its brand name by sponsoring sports events like Formula One auto racing -- backing the Austrian driver Niki Lauda -- and the 1975 Alpine ski championships. The soccer team, which Parmalat acquired in 1990, was the capstone of this strategy.
Mr. Tanzi expanded at a breakneck pace in the 1990's, after taking Parmalat public at the beginning of the decade. The company, in which the Tanzi family owns a 51 percent stake, acquired operations in the United States, Germany, France, Brazil and South Africa.
With 36,000 employees around the world, Parmalat became one of the world's largest food businesses. Recently, it broke ground on a sprawling new corporate headquarters not far from its old offices in the village of Collecchio.
Yet, even as Mr. Tanzi extended his reach around the globe, he kept running Parmalat with a cadre of people from his hometown. In this, he is very different from the Barilla family, which recruited executives from companies like Nestlé and Procter &amp; Gamble to plan its overseas expansion.
Local pride aside, some people here trace the roots of Parmalat's downfall to its parochial culture. ''Most of the senior staff were locals from Collecchio,'' Mayor Ubaldi said. ''Maybe they were too much so. Usually a multinational company has international management.''
The cronyism extended outside the company. One of Mr. Tanzi's closest advisers, Luciano Silingardi, was appointed the head of a local bank that later made significant loans to Parmalat. Mr. Tanzi told prosecutors that he severed ties to Mr. Silingardi after he joined the bank, Cassa di Risparmio di Parma. But Mr. Silingardi subsequently joined Parmalat's board. Mr. Silingardi was one of at least two Tanzi associates placed in charge of local banks.
Mr. Tanzi ''found money; the banks were his friends,'' said Luigi Derlindati, a former official at a local industrial association who went to school with Mr. Tanzi. Like others, Mr. Derlindati contends that Mr. Tanzi was ill-served by his advisers.
For all his wealth and business acumen, the picture that emerges of Mr. Tanzi is of a man out of his league -- overwhelmed by events and no longer able to master the far-flung empire he built. ''He's a human being who was good to everyone who surrounded him,'' said Nino Zappimbulso, the proprietor of a rustic restaurant where Mr. Tanzi stopped regularly for meals. ''This happened because he was unable to save everything. The empire was too big.''
Like other Italian industrialists, Mr. Tanzi labored to find a place for his children in his world. In addition to serving on the Parmalat board and as the soccer team president, Stefano joined the board of the local newspaper, Gazzetta di Parma. (The chairman is Guido Barilla.) Stefano Tanzi's name remains on the masthead, even as the paper printed a photograph of him, looking haggard, in the prosecutor's office.
As Calisto Tanzi sits behind bars, the protective walls he built for his children are crumbling. They have endured harsh questioning and a hostile board meeting of the soccer club.
EVEN Mr. Tanzi's beloved city is distancing itself from him. Mayor Ubaldi said that the scandal had hit Parma like a ''punch in the stomach,'' and that people here were offended by the brazenness of the fraud. Despite calling Mr. Tanzi a friend, Mayor Ubaldi likened him to a Dr. Jekyll and Mr. Hyde figure.
The mayor is subtly revising other parts of the Tanzi legend. Mr. Tanzi is credited with paying to restore the magnificent frescoes in Parma's cathedral. Yet Mr. Ubaldi says his charity has been exaggerated. ''He never shocked us with his generosity,'' the mayor said. ''Even I asked him to do more.''
In another rebuke to the company, Mayor Ubaldi notes that the bulk of the milk used by Parmalat does not come from Parma. ''The milk from our cows is generally used to make Parmesan,'' he said.
But in a city that sees a family drama as much as a financial scandal, many people still struggle to understand how the Tanzis, who seemed to have everything, could fall from grace so swiftly.
''This Parmalat story is like a Greek tragedy,'' Mr. Derlindati said.
''He challenged the gods. He was too lucky. And at the end, he used bad advice, the money of somebody else, and so the gods put things in order.''
A Giant's Downfall
Nov. 11, '03 -- Parmalat Finanziaria's auditor, Deloitte &amp; Touche, questions a $135 million gain from a currency derivative contract.
Dec. 8-10 -- The Italian Stock Exchange suspends trading of Parmalat stocks and bonds. The company discloses that it did not recover a $589.9 million payment  from a hedge fund based in the Cayman Islands, while its debt is mounting.
Dec. 15 -- Parmalat's chief executive and founder, Calisto Tanzi, resigns as the company's finances unravel and it struggles to make loan payments. Mr. Tanzi also resigns from the board, as does his brother Giovanni Tanzi. The company  appoints Enrico Bondi to run its operations.
Dec. 19 -- Parmalat discloses that an account in the Cayman Islands supposedly worth nearly $5 billion is fake.
Dec. 20 -- Italy's prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, says that the government will not allow the bankruptcy of Parmalat.
Dec. 23 -- Italian investigators say that Parmalat engaged in a tangled scheme involving dozens of offshore front companies to invent assets to offset perhaps as much as $11 billion in liabilities over more than a decade.
Dec. 24 -- Parmalat files for bankruptcy court protection under a new government decree that allows it to reorganize.
Dec. 27 -- The Italian police detain Calisto Tanzi as they investigate other members of the Tanzi family and current and former employees on suspicion of fraud.
Dec. 29 -- The Securities and Exchange Commission sues Parmalat, saying the company induced investors in the United States to buy more than $1.5 billion  worth of bonds and other securities.
Dec. 31 -- Seven more executives and advisers are detained in the investigation.
Jan. 7, '04 -- Italian prosecutors widen the investigation to include Italian  and foreign banks that they suspect helped Parmalat's senior executives in its schemes.
