FIRST things first. The actress Jennifer Beals claims she had no idea that the off-the-shoulder sweatshirt she immortalized in the 1983 cult classic ''Flashdance'' is now as ubiquitous as Ugg boots.
''I honestly hadn't noticed,'' said Ms. Beals, who was sitting atop a horse named Spirit on a dirt trail in Griffith Park overlooking Hollywood last Monday. ''But then I've only been to Fred Segal maybe three times in the last 10 years.''
After her turn as an alluring steelworker cum exotic dancer in ''Flashdance,'' Ms. Beals studied American literature at Yale and starred in several small films. Now, at 40, she is likely to win back the public gaze with ''The L Word,'' Showtime's racy new drama about a group of glamorous and sexy lesbians in Los Angeles. The show, which is already drawing heated media attention, makes its debut next Sunday.
On ''The L Word,'' a gay ''Friends'' meets ''Melrose Place'' (there's even a coffee shop, called the Planet, where they all hang out), Ms. Beals plays Bette Porter, a high-powered museum curator trying to find a sperm donor for her girlfriend.
''Doing the sex scenes with women isn't really any different than with men,'' Ms. Beals said. ''They're both about levels of intimacy.'' Ms. Beals was decked out in a black rabbit fur cowboy hat and an alpaca poncho that she picked up on a recent trip to Patagonia with her husband and friends.
On Monday evening, Ms. Beals had decided to go on an ambitious five-hour horseback trek from the Sunset Trail Ranch in Hollywood, over the hills and under the freeway, to a restaurant in Burbank and back again. It was her way of relaxing before the premiere party for ''The L Word'' at the Los Angeles County Museum of Art the next night. (She had invited other cast members, but they opted out of the ride.)
At 7 p.m., Ms. Beals and a friend, Isabel Snyder, and two trail guides rode up to the Viva Fresh Mexican Restaurant and tied the horses to a chain-link fence the guides kept calling a hitching post.
''Luckily, I did yoga this morning, so my hips are open,'' Ms. Beals said as she climbed out of the Western saddle.
Inside Viva Fresh, Ms. Beals ordered mineral water and a vegetarian burrito. A few minutes later three of the ''L Word'' cast members pulled up in a car. ''Horses are lovely but I don't want to get on one,'' said Mia Kirshner, who plays the token straight girl confused about her sexuality.
''I was getting my eyebrows waxed,'' said Katherine Moennig, who said she channeled Warren Beatty in ''Shampoo'' for her character as a carousing hairdresser.
As Ms. Beals's co-stars sipped margaritas, the conversation turned to the research required to pull off the steamy sex scenes. (Only one of the actresses on the show, Leisha Hailey, is a lesbian in real life, Ms. Beals said.) The producers gave them dozens of clips from movies like ''Bound,'' in which Gina Gershon and Jennifer Tilly had a notoriously explicit affair.
''We all wanted to make sure the sex scenes didn't come out looking like lady-touching,'' Ms. Kirshner said.
Ms. Beals, Ms. Moennig and Erin Daniels, another cast member, rolled their eyes. ''It's a myth that lesbian sex is all gentle and sweet,'' Ms. Beals remarked.
Ms. Daniels started giggling about her boyfriend, whom she's dated for a month. ''He's happy I'm having sex scenes with women and not men,'' she said. ''It's a very primal thing. Women can't get each other pregnant; so men on a deep biological level aren't threatened. But then again, he hasn't seen the show.''
Ms. Beals said she had recently seen Jennifer Lopez's video in homage to her Maniac dance in ''Flashdance.''
''After the premiere of 'Flashdance,' I remember going into the bathroom and crying because I knew people thought the character was really me,'' Ms. Beals said, breaking into a smile. ''Now I'll never be able to compliment a woman on her skirt again without her thinking I want to have sex with her.''
A Night Out With
