NICK D'ERRICO'S prized possessions are stored in plastic tubes normally used to stack coins, but his treasures are anything but nickel and dime: with thousands of samples from around the globe, he has mastered the art and science of sand collecting.
Mr. D'Errico, 55, of North Haven, is president of the International Sand Collectors Society, a group formed in 1969 by Bill Diefenbach, who lived in Old Greenwich. When Mr. Diefenbach died in 1996, Mr. D'Errico, then a professional drummer and antique corkscrew collector, agreed to take over.
Mr. D'Errico no longer plays the drums. His corkscrew collecting has ground to a halt.
Sand is his full-time job.
''I've just been one of those guys who become fascinated in what seems like a simple subject,'' said Mr. D'Errico, a balding man with a salt-and-pepper beard and wire-rimmed glasses. ''I don't laugh at any mundane subject or hobby.''
Since the 1970's, when he began collecting sand on vacations with his wife, Florence, Mr. D'Errico's collection has grown to more than 13,000 samples. He has sand from almost every country in the world (exceptions include North Korea, El Salvador, Uzbekistan and several African nations). The collection weighs more than half a ton.
The D'Erricos' modest home could be described as a sand collector's paradise or a housekeeper's nightmare. Sand is everywhere - on the floor, on tables, on shelves, in plastic crates, in a utility room, in the bedroom, in the basement. He is looking for storage space elsewhere to organize his mammoth collection.
Mr. D'Errico is not alone in his passion for sand. Beginning with a handful of members, the sand society has grown to roughly 200 ''arenophiles,'' a term derived from arenite, the scientific name for sand. Ten of the members are from Connecticut, including Alan Hershey, 46, a Westport investment banker who displays 1,000 samples in his basement office, known to his family as the ''nerdatorium.'' Another member, Edward Ruszczyk, a retired earth science teacher from Monroe, gave students extra credit for bringing back sand from family vacations. Other members are geologists, sand sculptors, building conservationists and hobbyists from 34 states and 13 other countries. Under Mr. Diefenbach, the society operated as sort of a Saturday night poker club for geeks -- a place to talk sand, trade sand and covet sand with people who would not fault you for it.
For many years, Mr. Diefenbach charged no membership fees. He sent the society's quarterly newsletter, the Sand Paper, as a chain letter. The paper, signed with personal notes from the founder, sometimes took months to circulate to the few dozen society members.
When Mr. D'Errico became president, he decided he was not satisfied with the modest aspirations of his predecessor. Today, the 200 members pay $12 a year in dues. Mr. D'Errico created a Web site, www.sandcollectors.org, and is contemplating registering the society as a nonprofit group. He writes the Quarterly Sand Paper, including an annual State of the Pile address, and plans a biannual gathering for the group.
Mr. D'Errico said that since there is no formal international sand repository, he has become the de facto source for sand information. In the past, a lung researcher from Bethesda, Md., studying Gulf War syndrome requested Mr. D'Errico's samples from the Middle East. The University of Michigan physics department used his sand for research on a phenomenon known as sonorous, or singing, sand.
Stephen P. Leatherman, 56, director for the Laboratory for Coastal Science at Florida International University in Miami, has been a society member for more than a decade. Each year, Mr. Leatherman, known as Dr. Beach, publishes rankings of America's top 10 beaches, based in part on the color and softness of the sand.
He called Mr. D'Errico a sand enthusiast par excellence.
''It's a wonder he doesn't eat the stuff, he loves it so much,'' Mr. Leatherman said. ''He's the glue that binds the sandies together.''
For Mr. D'Errico, collecting sand serves two purposes. It provides a tangible link to vacation spots, historical sites like the battlefield at Gettysburg and hard-to-reach places like Antarctica.
''It's just the imagination, where it takes you,'' he said. ''Like holding sand from the Great Wall or Timbuktu, places I'll probably never visit.''
Mr. D'Errico said collecting sand also serves as a great education in subjects like science, geography and historical preservation.
These days, Mr. D'Errico searches for sand with special physical properties. One sample from New Zealand is the mineral garnet; sand from an island off the coast of Okinawa is made of tiny, star-shaped fossils. A sample from Knollwood Beach in Old Saybrook is purple. He still hopes to get his hands on some moon dust, which is the Holy Grail in the world of sand collecting.
Whatever the size, shape or composition, Mr. D'Errico treats each grain with respect.
''Dirt is a four-letter word to a sand collector,'' he said. As society president, Mr. D'Errico also keeps tabs on current sand events (like the 2001 anthrax scare, which put a dent in sand trading by mail). He has written 700 pages of a sand book but has never had the time to finish it.
He said he earns a very modest living exhibiting ''display'' sands in classrooms and at museums. The samples range from the ominous -- radioactive sands from nuclear testing sites, with red warning labels (''They're very low radiation,'' he said) -- to the whimsical, such as black sand from a nude beach in Puna, Hawaii, and sand from the site of the original McDonald's restaurant in Des Plaines, Ill.
Mr. D'Errico and Dave Douglass, a geology professor at Pasadena City College in California, have shipped out more than 180 educational kits to classrooms across the world.
These days, Mr. D'Errico is busy organizing this summer's Sandfest, an event held every two years where members come to mingle and peruse each other's collections. Previous gatherings, which took place over a long weekend, were so successful he is thinking of adding a few days to this summer's event, at the Indiana Dunes State Park in Chesterton, Ind.
One day, he said, he hopes to open a sand museum. He has tried to associate the sand society with a university or nonprofit group. It is a difficult task.
''Sand is a tough sell,'' he said.
