AT the turn of the millennium, as party planners were wringing their hands over whether there would be a glut or a dearth of Champagne, the French writer and editor Anne Bony was readying ''Les Années 90 d'Anne Bony,'' the latest of her cult compendiums of visual culture, for publication. And she was torn over the cover.
It was a fitting quandary, choosing a single image that would convey as much as possible about the 1990's. Even as a child, Ms. Bony never loved dolls or building blocks as much as she loved books -- specifically, books with wonderful covers; and even more specifically, books with beautiful spines. ''I used to love to look at the bookshelf and see them all lined up, the different heights, the colors,'' she said, likening the sight to the magic of a city skyline. The covers of her rarefied decade digests -- nine of them now, packed with what Ms. Bony deemed the salient moments in art, fashion, design and such -- are no slouches in that regard: the spines punctuate stylish bookshelves around the world, the numerals of each decade in varied eye-catching typefaces.
For les années 90, Ms. Bony finally chose a stark image of a 1991 performance art piece by Felix Gonzales-Torres, which starred a bronzed, crew-cut youth go-go dancing in blue satin briefs in a mint-green room. With it, she hit a host of 90's themes: minimalism, male eroticism and the artist as style and pop-culture seer.
To congratulate herself once the book was done, Ms. Bony ran out and bought something she thinks of as even more emblematic of the decade: an intriguing guest bed designed in 1995 by the French designer Matali Crasset. The pillar-shaped fold-out manages to hold a lot more than a skinny foam mattress. Its silhouette (74.5 by 13.5 by 13.5 inches folded) is a neat token of the simplicity so central to the 90's, Ms. Bony said. And nicely for her, it looks a lot like the spine of a book. The innovative materials -- the plastic housing, the heat-sensitive foam rubber -- and neutral colors are both very 90's, she said, as is its clever design, the decade having ushered in a kind of kindergarten esprit in industrial design, if not in fashion. To wit, the bed also functions (via two attachments) as a whimsical grandfather clock and floor lamp, which turn into an alarm clock and reading lamp when the bed is unrolled.
Indeed, Ms. Crasset's playful and protean style recalls the heyday of the high-90's magazine Wallpaper, and its cheeky attitude toward design. The guest bed, Ms. Bony observed, was a perfect crash pad for Wallpaper's favorite creature, the global nomad.
But the 90's nomad, it seemed, most often stayed in the latest boutique hotel and would have preferred a bed-pillar in a Louis Vuitton pattern. This is a fact of which Ms. Bony says she is painfully aware: that the decade's ethos of inconspicuous consumption was taken up, paradoxically but predictably, by traders in luxury. ''I think this represents more like what I wish the 90's was,'' she said, a bit wistfully.
But then, that decade was nothing if not rich in irony, when grunge met cashmere and a nylon knapsack became the height of chic. Likewise, Ms. Bony cheerily acknowledges that no out-of-towner has ever slept on the bed, which can be bought for $865 from www.domeauperes.com.
''My son Henri used it once when he had some friends over,'' she said. ''He liked it.''
POSSESSED
