ANYONE who has ever laughed at the image of Tony Blair as George W. Bush's poodle will be especially delighted by ''MI-5,'' the politically astute, sleekly produced BBC spy drama about the British secret service. (The first season has just arrived on DVD, while the second continues in reruns on A&amp;E.) Focusing on a counterterrorism unit, the series began filming in November 2001, and is so swift in its action, so pointed about post-9/11 threats, that it is easily the best suspense show around. And its subtext adds a witty edge: the theme of Anglo-American relations, a global-political version of intense sibling rivalry. As the countries compete with and often resent each other while jointly fighting the war on terror, there's no question which of them plays the bullying older sibling.
The lopsided rivalry is evident from the first episode, in which a middle-aged American woman with a soft Southern accent arrives in Liverpool, bound to teach her British counterparts how to bomb and kill doctors who perform abortions. Her husband is on death row in Florida, scheduled to be executed in three days for carrying out a similar anti-abortion assassination, and the MI-5 agents have to stop her from commemorating his death with a new attack.
Beneath the down-to-the-wire action is a more politically sophisticated tussle. It is British policy not to extradite people to face the death penalty, but the Americans pressure them to do just that and send the anti-abortionist, Mary Kane, back to Florida. Christine Dale (Megan Dodds), the beautiful, arrogant C.I.A. liaison in London, tells a top MI-5 agent, Tom Quinn (Matthew MacFadyen, the series's star): ''America wants Mary back, and America's going to get her. We want our Kodak moment.''
Tom says, ''I thought we were equal partners,'' but Christine clears things up.
She says, ''We are,'' which means that the British ''have to get off your butt sometimes and do exactly what we tell you.''
Her dialogue here is over the top, but it becomes less clumsy as the series goes on. And the Anglo-American tension is handled with such good humor (Tom and Christine eventually end up in bed, the squabbling Tracy and Hepburn of spydom) that it is engaging even for Americans, much like the scene in ''Love Actually'' in which Hugh Grant, as the British prime minister, stands next to the womanizing, browbeating United States president (an amalgam of Clinton and Bush clichés) and announces to the press that he's tired of the president ''taking exactly what he wants.''
In that film of romantic fantasies, we see television viewers and even reporters respond jubilantly to a political fantasy. The exaggerated national characteristics -- the buttonholing Americans demanding exactly what they want, and the heroic, resistant British -- suggest how cleverly these two entertainments have mined the English mood, with a tone that is acerbic but not nasty. They acknowledge the well-known truth that our countries seem bound for life, like family.
And you get to tell off your own family, at least on screen. ''MI-5,'' called ''Spooks'' in England, depicts the Bush administration as shadowy and manipulative, but is just as hard on the British government, too. The show is chilling in its awareness that imagery and spin are the ultimate rulers. Tom is a patriotic idealist, which doesn't prevent him from spreading disinformation to the press. He claims that the anti-abortion bomber used a leftover World War II device, not a high-tech gadget operated by cellphone. (No need to alarm the ordinary folks.) His boss, Harry (Peter Firth), is just as dedicated but more of a realist. ''Politicians are conniving, wheeling-dealing scum,'' he says, even as he prepares to give in to their expediency for the sake of the country's long-term security.
However resentful the British characters, the show's creators acknowledge (in the otherwise useless DVD commentary) their own affection for American dramas. The influences are everywhere. ''MI-5,'' like ''The West Wing,'' has a shrewd sense of political horse-trading. Like ''Law &amp; Order,'' each episode concerns a single topical case: there's the former member of Parliament who's threatening to publish his memoirs, exposing the treachery of a highly placed government minister; there's the British cabinet member working for the C.I.A. And the show is as swift and harsh as ''24.'' Tom watches as another MI-5 agent becomes a human French fry, her head stuck in a vat of boiling oil. But ''24,'' now in its third season, has become strained, bound by the its real-time conceit, while ''MI-5'' gets even better as it goes along. The experienced Tessa (Jenny Agutter), who at first seems the wisest of agents, comes to reveal an intriguing darker side.
The DVD has six episodes, the first season shown in Britain. Last summer A&amp;E showed 16 episodes (the BBC's Seasons 1 and 2), and is now running some of them again at the preposterous time of 3 p.m. Saturday (although this week's installment is preempted by a movie). The smashing final episode, scheduled for Feb. 21, has an irresistible open ending, which keeps you guessing which familiar MI-5 agent is betraying whom -- could Tom or Harry possibly have gone bad? -- and whether the C.I.A. is involved. The series ended its second season at the height of its power and its characters' paranoia, only to leave viewers hanging for a good long time. The BBC's third season is still in the works.
The DVD's menu has a spy in a ski mask lethargically directing you to choose features. This hokey waste of time is out of sync with a series so savvy that a former gunrunner, recognizing how the world has changed, wistfully recalls the early 90's and says, ''Illegal arms sales in my day was relatively innocent.''
TELEVISION
