FEE MITROPOLOUS was sitting in his dinghy on New Year's Day, watching wistfully as the other boats left the dock. As commodore of the Manhasset Bay Yacht Club's ''frostbite'' racing series, he was ineligible to sail in the annual past commodores' race, held every New Year's Day. ''Next year, I'll be out there,'' he said.
For frostbite sailors, ''out there'' often means freezing winds, icy spray, the occasional drenching wave coming into the cockpit and the chance for an unscheduled swim in water cold enough to turn limbs numb in a few minutes.
''My hair froze,'' said Andrea Watson, 57, of Port Washington, remembering a race from years past. Now she plays a drier, warmer role as the race committee's record keeper, compiling official results for the event, a 73-year annual tradition on the Island's sailing calendar.
The first New Year's Day Frostbite Regatta was sailed here in 1932 in rain, hail and snow. William Taylor, the yachting correspondent for The New York Herald, covered the event and captured a spirit that seems to have persisted down the years. ''The idea of Frostbite Regatta,'' he wrote, ''is to prove that some people are crazier than others and those who are craziest sail races in 11-foot boats in the middle of snowstorms -- and enjoy it.''
Mr. Mitropoulos, 46, an architect who lives in Douglaston, Queens, and works in Manhattan, said he would rather spend the winter sailing Long Island Sound in a tubby little dinghy than cruising the balmy Caribbean in far greater style, not to mention comfort. ''They're 10-minute races. They go very fast,'' he said. ''When you're out there, everything goes away. You say to yourself, 'What project?' You forget your worries. It's an adrenaline rush.''
As a brisk northwest wind of 8 to 12 knots blew in the first day of 2004, 14 like-minded sailors sacrificed the warmth of the Manhasset Bay Yacht Club to race open dinghies with two-person crews in the frigid waters off Port Washington. After a day off so past commodores and race officials could thaw out, 13 races over the weekend would determine the regatta champion.
Mr. Mitropolous continued cleaning his boat and fiddling with its rigging, getting ready for the weekend. His boat, built in 1954, was one of the oldest in the Manhasset Bay fleet. ''The fleet contacted a local casket manufacturer and asked them to make some I.C. dinghies,'' he said, referring to the vessel by its class name, Interclub. ''This is one of them.''
Steve Moore, who was frostbite commodore in 1984, started this type of sailing in 1955 when his father insisted that he learn how to handle a boat. ''When I was growing up, child abuse was having to go sailing with my father,'' said Mr. Moore, 57, a sailmaker who lives in Port Washington and works at Quantum Sails, a local manufacturer. ''You take racing seriously but you can't take it too seriously because you're nuts to be out there in Long Island Sound in winter, freezing your butt off.''
Mr. Mitropoulos was serious enough about the weekend contests to have spent the morning rigging his dinghy with a new $600 sail. And the races actually attract some serious talent: Steve Benjamin, a professional sailor and dinghy-racing specialist who won a sailing silver medal for the United States in the 1984 Olympics, was entered in Saturday's races.
Snow was not an issue this New Year's Day. The air temperature was 44 degrees, water temperature 38. Still, the contestants would be spending a winter afternoon in unstable fiberglass tubs, getting doused with icy seawater. It's the kind of experience that keeps frostbite racing a notch or two below island-hopping the Aegean in the esteem of most sailing enthusiasts.
But frostbite sailing on Long Island Sound and the Great South Bay is surprisingly popular. Races are sponsored by the Seawanhaka Corinthian Yacht Club in Centre Island and across the Sound at the Larchmont Yacht Club. On the South Shore, the Narrasketuck Yacht Club's frostbiters sail out of Amityville, and every Sunday at noon, about 20 frostbiters launch from the lawn of the Snapper Inn on the Connetquot River and race in the Great South Bay. But the New Year's regatta on Manhasset Bay is the highlight of Long Island's frostbite season.
After the hoisting of a powder blue flag emblazoned with a polar bear on a flagpole on the back lawn of the yacht club, Mr. Moore and his crewman, Jerry Morea, set sail from the dock along with six other dinghies. Three motorboats only slightly longer carried six members of the race committee to a barge permanently moored about half a mile offshore. It would serve as the start-finish mark, and the motorboats would cruise the course as rescue craft.
Despite the race organizers' careful attention to safety, the term ''frostbiting'' is no joke. Recreation can become survival in a matter of seconds if a dinghy capsizes or a sailor falls overboard. Life jackets are mandatory. Drysuits, however, are optional. Race organizers adhere to a ''20/20'' rule: If the wind is blowing at 20 knots or more, or the temperature is 20 degrees or lower, the race is canceled.
''A few years ago, the water froze on the deck and we were sliding around,'' said Ralph Heinzerling of Port Washington, who sailed his first frostbite race in 1947 and now, at age 80, mans a rescue boat.
Other great moments in Frostbite Regatta history were retold above the sound of the motorboat's outboard engine: the race when 16 boats capsized in three minutes, or the day when fog rolled in and some of the sailors got lost. After the blizzard of 2001, competitors had to push their boats through snow and ice to get started.
As the members of the race committee transferred from the rescue boat to the deck of the barge, a wooden container went with them. It held two bottles of rum, one each of Scotch, gin and vodka and a large bottle of Bloody Mary mix. ''Liquid libation is the most important part of frostbiting,'' said Herb Schmidt, 75, of Glen Head, the race committee chairman.
For the New Year's Day race, the seven past commodores and their crews would race from the barge to an orange buoy that marked the windward end of the quarter-mile course, round it, then head back to the buoy marking the far end of the start-finish line. One more lap of the short course and the race would be over.
The Moore-Morea boat was rounding the top mark in second place when the mainsheet, the rope with which Mr. Moore controlled his 72-square-foot sail, snapped. Mr. Moore, who was not wearing a drysuit, fell backward into the water as Pedro Lorson, 42, of Port Washington, the frostbite commodore in 1994, sailed away to victory.
''He held onto the gunwale,'' Mr. Morea, 54, a yacht broker from Port Washington, said of his skipper. ''The rescue boats came in seconds.''
Mr. Moore was blasé about his swim. ''Almost every other time I've capsized, there's been ice,'' he said. ''Compared to those, the water was relatively warm and definitely not as cold as I expected.'' Undeterred, he was back two days later for the weekend regatta, having replaced the old mainsheet.
Open to anyone who was game and could put an Interclub dinghy into the water, the weekend regatta drew 12 boats, a smaller number than in previous years when as many as 60 boats came from as far away as Massachusetts. ''I'm disappointed to see so few boats,'' said Dick Field, 75, a retired dentist from Manhasset who was on the race committee.
Mr. Moore said the dwindling numbers reflected changes in work patterns that were cutting into the amount of time people have to sail. ''If you look at leisure time, the average person has half the spare time they used to and people work longer hours,'' he said.
Saturday's water temperature had dropped one degree to 37, but the air was a balmy 48, with a light breeze out of the southwest at 4 to 6 knots. ''I wish it was blowing like stink,'' Ms. Watson said. ''It's a lot more fun.''
After Mr. Schmidt blasted the starting horn, the stillness of the bay was broken by gunshots. The Port Washington Yacht Club, just up the bay, was holding a skeet shooting event.
''I hope they don't hit the sailors,'' Ms. Watson said.
''Well, we can hope,'' Dr. Field said. ''There's not enough wind for our boats to get close enough to where they're shooting.''
He asked if anyone had brought the first-aid kit. After the wooden container had been located, he suggested, ''Let's test the Band-Aids.'' Bloody Marys were served all around.
''This isn't exactly the adrenaline rush I was talking about,'' Mr. Mitropoulos called out as his dinghy glided serenely past the barge. Despite the light breeze, the dinghies were still tricky. When Mr. Moore invited a reporter to crew during one of the last races, she learned firsthand how the slightest weight shift caused the dinghy to come close to tipping over, and how tacks and jibes required as much attention to balance as to tiller and trim.
''These races are fantastic for sharpening your skills and keeping yourself fresh. There are lots of races and lots of starts,'' said Mr. Benjamin, 48, of Norwalk, Conn. He won all seven races on Saturday, but prior commitments prevented him from competing on Sunday. After winning the Past Commodore's Regatta on New Year's Day, Mr. Lorson came in a close second to Mr. Benjamin on Saturday and took the trophy for the entire weekend regatta.
''The most exciting part of the race was beating Steve Benjamin in three out of four races on the first day,'' Mr. Lorson said referring to some informal contests on New Year's Day. ''I got him in a tacking duel and his boat filled with water.''
Mr. Mitropoulos inducted Mr. Moore into the Supreme Order of the Loon for his overboard adventure. ''Life has pain and life has fun,'' Mr. Moore said. ''The goal is to minimize the pain and maximize the fun.
''Sailing is the most fun you can have with your clothes on,'' he continued. ''Watching the flow of snow around your sail is also pretty neat.''
Long Island
