JUROR NO. 7 stared blankly at the floor. Juror No. 11 put down his notepad and seemed on the verge of nodding off. The rest of the jurors in Courtroom No. 1324 at the State Supreme Court in Manhattan looked ready to go home.
Their attention -- or perhaps more accurately, inattention -- was focused on Tammy Cross, a soft-spoken former secretary at Tyco International, who took the stand last week in the trial of her onetime boss, L. Dennis Kozlowski. She was being grilled about how, in 1997, she had been instructed to be ''discreet'' about his use of the corporate jets and the conversations she might overhear while aboard.
It was hardly riveting testimony.
She was the 33rd witness -- and the third former secretary -- to take the stand in the seemingly never-ending trial, which has now dragged on into its fourth month. While the other two secretaries testified that they had carried on affairs with Mr. Kozlowski, Ms. Cross offered little in the way of drama as she answered questions from Kenneth Chalifoux, the Manhattan assistant district attorney in charge of the prosecution.
At times during her testimony, she seemed utterly lost -- and so, too, has the jury for much of this media-saturated trial.
The supposedly open-and-shut case against Mr. Kozlowski, the first big-name executive from the recent financial scandals to face his accusers in open court, may not be such a snap after all. The infamous video of his multimillion-dollar birthday party in Sardinia for his second wife, the $6,000 shower curtain and the sexual dalliances may have captured tabloid headlines, but legal experts now suggest that inside the courtroom, prosecutors, for the most part, have failed to make their case nearly as compelling.
''It seems the government's case has wandered all over the lot,'' said Robert A. Mintz, a former federal prosecutor and now a partner at McCarter &amp; English, a law firm in Newark. ''There have been a lot of sideshows on issues that completely mystify the jury. The government seems to have taken the approach of throwing everything at the jury and seeing what sticks.''
INDEED, prosecutors have charged Mr. Kozlowski, Tyco's former chairman and chief executive, and his lieutenant, Mark H. Swartz, the former chief financial officer, with 35 separate counts that run the gamut from falsification of business records to securities fraud to ''enterprise corruption,'' a charge often used in Mafia cases. The authorities accuse Mr. Kozlowski and Mr. Swartz of stealing $170 million from the company itself and reaping $430 million more by covertly selling Tyco stock after artificially inflating its value. They are also said to have used the money to pay for an apartment on Park Avenue, homes in Boca Raton, Fla., and jewelry from Harry Winston and Tiffany's, among other things. If found guilty, the men could each face up to 30 years in prison.
Almost no one is anticipating that either Mr. Kozlowski or Mr. Swartz will get off scot-free. But a number of legal experts say that they may end up beating more of the charges than anyone would have predicted six months ago.
The state prosecutors' complex, often plodding case is unfolding as the federal government prepares for a raft of corporate criminal trials. They include the obstruction-of-justice case against Martha Stewart (for which jury selection began last week); the corporate theft case next month against members of the Rigas family, the founders of Adelphia Communications; and the securities fraud case that also begins next month against Scott D. Sullivan, the former chief financial officer of WorldCom. While federal prosecutors in Manhattan have more experience with such cases than those at the state level, the Tyco trial suggests the challenges the government may face in winning over juries and proving criminal wrongdoing.
''Corporate greed sounds terrible, something that should be prosecuted,'' said John J. Fahy, a former federal and New Jersey prosecutor. ''But when you begin to dig, it's much harder than you'd think. There's a fine line between corporate civil fraud and criminal fraud.''
Even the judge, Michael Obus, seems frustrated with the way the Tyco trial is going. He commented at one point in court that the prosecutors needed to focus their case more on the facts than on repeating salacious details of Mr. Kozlowski's spending. ''I'm much more interested in hearing from former directors than decorators,'' he said during a discussion about scheduled witnesses.
Inside the Manhattan district attorney's office, several staff members conceded that some lawyers in the department were becoming concerned about the outcome of the trial. ''We know, it's a problem,'' one said.
Mr. Chalifoux declined to comment on the trial's progress. Mr. Kozlowski and Mr. Swartz would also not comment, though one defense lawyer was overheard giddily whispering to another lawyer during a break last month: ''Those guys are doing our jobs for us.''
The differences in the styles -- and preparedness -- of the prosecution and the defense are stark. While Stephen W. Foss, the former chairman of Tyco's compensation committee, was testifying last month, Mr. Chalifoux rambled through his questioning, often interrupting himself to check his notes or to confer with his colleagues. Mr. Foss testified, in fits and starts, that Tyco's board never authorized tens of millions of dollars in bonuses that were paid to Mr. Kozlowski and Mr. Swartz.
But when the defense questioned Mr. Foss on cross-examination, a Perry Mason-like inquisition began.  Mr. Swartz's lawyer, Charles Stillman, started a series of rapid-fire questions, producing the minutes from a compensation committee meeting in 2001 -- signed by Mr. Foss -- that included references to some of the same bonuses he had indignantly said a day earlier were never approved.
FLASHING more documents on a big screen across from the jury box, Mr. Stillman moved on to discredit other testimony that Mr. Foss had given a day earlier, in which he said he never knew that executives were ''grossing up'' their bonuses -- or increasing them to make up for what they would pay in taxes -- one of the many ways prosecutors say the company was looted.
But there on the screen was Mr. Swartz's retention agreement from 2001, complete with a passage about providing a ''gross up'' for bonuses. ''I signed the contract,'' Mr. Foss said. ''I must have read it.''
Then Austin Campriello, a lawyer for Mr. Kozlowski, lit into Mr. Foss, questioning the motives behind his testimony and quizzing him about the many lawsuits filed against him and other former Tyco directors that accuse them of negligence.
Mr. Campriello repeatedly asked Mr. Foss if it would ''hurt'' his own case if he testified that Mr. Kozlowski's compensation had actually been approved. After dancing around that question several times, Mr. Foss responded, ''I don't know that answer, sir.''
Testimony like that may help sow seeds of reasonable doubt in the minds of the jurors.
''He's got a defense, even if you thought he was a pig,'' said Mr. Fahy, the former prosecutor. ''What he did at the company was open and notorious. He wasn't hiding anything -- even the ridiculous birthday party.''
To be sure, the prosecution has also had its fair share of scores. Mr. Chalifoux made mincemeat out of the defense's contention that the birthday party in Sardinia was a business event in part because a board meeting for one of the company's subsidiaries took place there. Under questioning, Barbara Jacques, a Tyco event planner and former secretary who also had an affair with Mr. Kozlowski in the 1980's, testified that a speakerphone was required for the meeting because most of the board members had not been invited to Sardinia.
And just last week, the prosecution appeared to notch another victory when Frank E. Walsh Jr., a former Tyco director who pleaded guilty to fraud for accepting a secret $20 million payment from the company, testified that the board never authorized Mr. Kozlowski to alter the company's loan program or forgive tens of million of dollars in loans, another way prosecutors contend that the executives stole from the company.
While those small victories may help the prosecution convict Mr. Kozlowski and Mr. Swartz on some of the charges, other testimony appears to have simply confounded the jury. For example, the prosecution has questioned witnesses ad nauseam about Mr. Kozlowski's reputation as a big tipper -- often with company funds -- though this does not appear to be central to any of the charges.
AT one point, the prosecution drew Linda Auger, a Tyco accountant, into a lengthy discussion about how a Tyco intern had violated company policy by expensing his haircuts.
''If jurors perceive that the length of a trial and the case is unfocused and sloppy, that can have a backlash against the government,'' said Mr. Mintz, who is not involved in the case. ''If jurors begin to question the sideshow, they may begin to question the main show.''
For the moment, the best guess is that the trial will continue through the end of February, with the prosecution resting its case by the end of this month. The defense is expected to make its case much more briefly.
As for the jurors, who had originally been told the trial was likely to be over by Christmas, their lengthy service will be rewarded. All of them have been given an exemption so that they will not have to endure sitting in a jury box for another eight years.
