A judge sentenced two French journalists to six months in prison on Saturday for violating visa restrictions by traveling to an area near the border with Afghanistan without permission.
The journalists, Marc Epstein and Jean-Paul Guilloteau, who work for the French weekly L'Express, along with a Pakistani colleague, Khawar Mehdi Rizvi, were arrested here on Dec. 16 after completing a report on Taliban groups operating along the border with Afghanistan.
Mr. Rizvi has been held at an unknown location since that time. Abdur Rauf Chaudry, a spokesman for the Interior Ministry, said by telephone on Saturday that ''he is with the security agencies and he is being interrogated.'' He said that Mr. Rizvi would be produced before a court ''when it is essential,'' and that it would be ''premature'' to say which agencies were interrogating him.
The sentence was immediately suspended for one week, and the reporters were allowed to return to their hotel, where they have been under house arrest. Their lawyer entered an appeal that will be heard on Monday. Mr. Chaudry said it was possible that the higher court would not press the case, ''and they will be free to go. We are trying this.''
The judge, Nuzhat Ara Hakvi, sentenced each of the two French journalists to six months in prison and a fine of $1,750 for traveling without permission to the Quetta region, in western Pakistan. Last year, the government began restricting foreigners' travel to the areas around Quetta and Peshawar.
State-run news organizations have said the journalists were planning a report on how Taliban rebels had set up training camps inside Pakistan near Quetta, which lies about 30 miles from Afghanistan, The Associated Press reported.
Pakistani officials have accused the journalists of staging their film of Taliban activities. ''All the Taliban were fake, it was all managed, there were no Taliban,'' Mr. Chaudry said.
The press-freedom group Reporters Without Borders warned that this case could act as a deterrent.
''If the authorities want to warn the international press that it is forbidden to investigate the situation on the border with Afghanistan, they couldn't have done it better,'' Robert Ménard, the organization's secretary general, wrote in a letter to the Pakistani foreign minister, Mian Khursheed Mehmood Kasuri.
Reporters Without Borders said interviews on state television that were meant to show that the three journalists had fabricated their report were themselves fabricated.
