THERE is something about being far from home that can short-circuit rational judgment, particularly when it comes to engaging in leisure activities that would normally inspire the response, ''Are you nuts?''
That phenomenon occurred to me most recently when considering a $3 parasailing ride on a beach in Mexico -- a plan aborted after the owner of a nearby resort graphically described various accidents he'd witnessed involving landings that weren't exactly soft.
But one activity I have so far managed to pass up without much persuasion is learning how to scuba dive. Not that I haven't flirted with the idea, but it's always come up as the equivalent of a grocery-store impulse purchase. And a sport that involves breathing underwater with the aid of a tank of compressed air seemed to merit a bit more forethought.
That said, plenty of people learn to scuba dive on vacation, particularly with the proliferation of introductory lessons offered in many resort towns. So how do you know if a dive shop or instructor is reputable, and what should you ask before you take the plunge?
''Do some research first,'' advised Alison Matherly, marketing manager for the National Association of Underwater Instructors (NAUI), one of several organizations that certify divers and instructors around the world. ''This is your life. There are risks associated with the sport of scuba diving, and you want to make sure your instructor is competent.''
What to Ask
For someone new to diving, how to gauge an instructor's skill is not necessarily obvious, but one question to start with is whether he or she has teaching credentials from an organization like NAUI, the Professional Association of Diving Instructors (PADI) or Scuba Schools International (SSI), three of the leading groups that certify diving instructors. ''To be an instructor with any of those agencies, you have to go through some rigorous training,'' Ms. Matherly said.
You can check with one of those organizations before your trip to see if there is a certified dive shop or instructor at your destination, and get details about the courses offered.
But even if you do some research ahead of time, experienced divers recommend waiting until you arrive at your destination to commit to a program. ''Don't take a course until you get a chance to meet the instructor,'' advised Kirsty Doig, an American who works as a dive master in Roatán, Honduras. ''Instructors all have different styles, and they fit with different people.'' She also recommended asking to see the boats, docks and gear. ''You may not know what it is supposed to look like,'' she said, ''but if the shop is at all dodgy they won't want to show you.''
A key concern, of course, is safety -- ask whether the boat has a radio in case of emergency and what kind of first-aid equipment is on board. ''We like to suggest that the dive boat have some oxygen,'' said Jeff Myers, vice president for training at the Divers Alert Network, a nonprofit medical organization that operates a 24-hour emergency hot line and offers members accident and evacuation insurance. Membership costs $29 a year ($44 for a family), which includes evacuation coverage; additional dive accident insurance is available for $25 to $70 a year, with varying levels of benefits.
Check with your health insurance provider to see what kind of coverage it offers -- and whether you're covered traveling abroad. Mr. Myers recommended finding out what kind of medical assistance is available nearby. Facilities may be limited in some resort areas, particularly in foreign countries. According to the Divers Alert Network, deaths from recreational scuba diving in United States, Canadian and Caribbean waters have been in the mid-80's each year for the past several years.
Josh Kranz, a lawyer in New York,  witnessed just what can go wrong when he took a scuba diving certification course in Thailand a couple of years ago. On the third day of the course, he and two other students were practicing skills underwater, under the supervision of two instructors, when one of the students inadvertently hit her friend on the head with a tank, knocking her unconscious. Although the instructors were initially able to revive her, she lost consciousness again on the boat, leading to a scramble to call an ambulance once they were onshore.
''I never actually found out whether she made it,'' Mr. Kranz said, although he tried to contact the dive shop to find out. But despite what turned out to be a frightening experience, he said he felt the instructors were very competent. ''If it wasn't for these guys' lifesaving skills, this woman would've died on the boat.''
Varied Levels of Instruction
Mr. Kranz chose a certification course -- a comprehensive program that certifies an individual to dive without being accompanied by an instructor. The requirements of those courses vary depending on whether the program adheres to PADI, NAUI or another organization's guidelines, but certification programs typically last several days and involve several hours of onshore instruction, some training in a pool or shallow water and at least four dives in open water.
But many resorts and dive shops also offer introductory diving programs, often called resort courses, that give a taste of the sport through a daylong program. They typically include an onshore class, further instruction in a pool or shallow water, then a dive in open water under an instructor's supervision. There is no certification given at the end, although some resorts allow students who have completed these courses to do additional supervised dives on subsequent days of their stay.
The proliferation of resort courses of this sort is somewhat controversial among scuba experts: there are those who find teaching and safety standards lax; others argue that they offer a taste of the sport without the investment of a lot of time or money. (Certification courses usually cost $300 to $400, whereas resort courses can cost $100 or less.)
''We feel there's a place for them because a lot of people don't have the time to go through the whole certification process or they're not sure they're going to like the sport,'' said Malene Thompson, a spokeswoman for PADI Americas. PADI offers a Discover Scuba Diving program, and Ms. Thompson said outfits that offer that program follow specific training standards, though she did note that ''there are resorts that kind of make up their own program.''
It's impossible to generalize about the quality of all resort courses, so the best advice may be to research thoroughly whatever program or instructor you're considering, and take into account your own comfort level with the risks of the sport.
''For my own sake, I wanted to learn as much about this as possible,'' said Steve Kerr, a New Yorker who chose to take a certification course in New York rather than an introductory program. ''You're in the hands of the instructor, but in the end, you're the one who is under 40 feet of water breathing through this complicated equipment. You want to make sure that if something happens, you don't freak out.''
PRACTICAL TRAVELER E-mail: stellin@nytimes.com
