IF value investing has a capital city, it may well be Omaha, mainly because that is where Warren E. Buffett and his company, Berkshire Hathaway, make their home.
Omaha is also the headquarters of another canny, although less well-known, value investor: Wally Weitz, the manager of the $4.12 billion Weitz Value fund.
At a shareholder meeting in May that honored Mr. Weitz for his 20 years at the helm of his investment firm, Mr. Buffett made an impromptu appearance and paid homage to him by wearing a plaid shirt, Mr. Weitz's trademark.
Mr. Weitz's own admiration of Mr. Buffett is evident in his purchases of Berkshire Hathaway stock, the biggest holding in the fund. And in discussing investing and the stock market, Mr. Weitz often peppers his remarks with quotations from Mr. Buffett.
Mr. Weitz, who runs Wallace R. Weitz &amp; Company, plays down direct comparisons to Mr. Buffett. ''I'm not trying to follow what he does, or make any pretense of comparison, because he is the one and only, and we coincidentally have similar labels and live in the same town,'' Mr. Weitz said.
Berkshire Hathaway represented 6.6 percent of the Weitz Value fund's assets at the end of December, but Mr. Weitz's other investment picks have also tended to perform well. The fund's average annual return over the five years through December was 9.1 percent, handily beating the -2.8 percent annualized return of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index during that period.
With the help of an investment staff of six, Mr. Weitz runs a fairly concentrated portfolio, holding 43 percent of it in his 10 largest positions. He also favors financial and media companies.
He seeks to buy stocks at a substantial discount, ideally 30 to 50 percent of their value, which he measures by estimating how much a well-informed private buyer would pay for the company in question. In that calculation, Mr. Weitz said, he looks for growing companies at a good price. For that reason, Mr. Weitz said, he does not believe in dividing stocks into growth and value camps.
''The difference between value investing and growth-stock investing is really about mind-set; it's not really two separate universes of investments,'' he said.
Sometimes, he finds himself justifying purchases like his stake in Costco, which many people regard as a growth stock. He says that he views the growth rate of cash flow as one more factor to consider, but that he is careful not to overpay.
''The quality companies that you're proud to be seen with tend to sell at a higher price,'' he said.
So he and his team often stalk companies, waiting for prices to slip. With Costco, earnings growth slowed a bit in 2003 and the company announced that its medical and labor costs had increased. On that news, the price dipped, and Mr. Weitz bought that stock at an average price of $29.29 last year. The stock ended 2003 at $37.18. .
Temporary rough patches at companies represent opportunity to him. He will take advantage of sell-offs if he has studied a company, understands its business and competitive position and feels that he can trust management. ''So many investors are so demanding of predictability that when something surprising happens, there's a tendency to sell first and ask questions later,'' he said.
His willingness to go where he sees opportunity, instead of trying to mirror a benchmark, can sometimes make his portfolio look lopsided. At the end of June, by Morningstar's tally, financial stocks accounted for 42 percent of the fund's assets, far more than in most midcap value funds.
Its major holdings included Washington Mutual and Countrywide Financial, in addition to Berkshire. Mr. Weitz has also been dipping into mortgage- and housing-related businesses through Freddie Mac and Fannie Mae and real estate investment trusts including the Redwood Trust.
Mr. Weitz says he diversifies his assets among financial companies that primarily have interest rate risk and credit risk and, to a lesser extent, liquidity risk.
''You can get a lot of counteracting forces going among a group of stocks that look on the surface very similar,'' he said. Although interest rates are likely to rise, rate increases alone are not inherently dangerous to financial companies, he said. Companies that can plan ahead will match their assets against liabilities, anticipating a rate climb.
''People should realize all financial stocks are not the same,'' Mr. Weitz said. ''What works for us is a majority of investors either misunderstanding the business dynamics of financial companies, and other kinds, too, and/or having a shorter-term mind-set.''
He is not afraid to go against the grain. In fact, while Morningstar classifies his fund in the midcap value category, Mr. Weitz also scoops up small- and large-company stocks.
This flexibility means that the fund rarely resembles any particular index, said Christopher J. Traulsen, a senior fund analyst at Morningstar. Mr. Traulsen also noted that Mr. Weitz's hefty cash position in 2003 -- around 23 percent of the fund's assets by year-end -- has dragged a bit on returns.
''He's a value-oriented investor who has trimmed stocks when they get overvalued,'' Mr. Traulsen said. ''That can cost him in the short run as well as the overly concentrated positions, but I certainly wouldn't fault him for it.''
The fund's cash stake shows a defensive move to take some of the profits from his top holdings, Mr. Weitz said. He said that he would prefer to be fully invested, but that he considered it imprudent to let top positions swell to even larger percentages of the fund. At the same time, unappealing valuations have restrained new purchases.
''The truth is, we're not today finding a lot of stocks at prices that excite us,'' he said.
ON occasion, straying from the pack has led to error. In 2002, the fund fell by 17.1 percent. Its holdings then included Adelphia Communications, which filed for bankruptcy protection, and Qwest Communications, which was having financial problems.
''This is absolutely art, not science,'' he said.
In the Adelphia case, he said, the stock collapsed because of a company-specific problem, ''and it's really hard to completely avoid that.'' (Former executives at the company have been accused of wrongdoing.) ''That's unfortunate, expensive and embarrassing,'' he said. But, he added, ''you can't beat yourself up too much on that score.''
Past successful investments in the cable business also made him overly complacent about the debt levels of many cable companies, he said. ''More insidious is, over the course of time, if you get rewarded either because of or in spite of taking on too much risk, you can start mistaking that, either thinking it's not as much risk, or thinking you're smart and you can handle more risk,'' he said.
Dr. William R. Hamsa, 70, who retired from private practice two years ago as an orthopedic surgeon based in Omaha, is one of the fund's investors. Dr. Hamsa said he appreciated Mr. Weitz's candor.
''In the Midwest, what you see is what you get,'' Dr. Hamsa said.
