THE cruise was a dream trip -- nine days on a 116-passenger ship sailing on the South China Sea from Hanoi to Saigon. I eagerly signed on. However, since all the cabins were doubles, as an unattached female I was told I must share or be slapped with the Single Supplement penalty, a misanthropic invention of the travel industry that results in two options for the single traveler -- bankruptcy or insanity. I chose insanity.
''Congratulations!'' trills a tour organizer over the phone about three weeks before the trip. ''We've found you a roommate! She's a retired psychiatrist from Texas.''
Mercy.
At San Francisco Airport I hide in the ladies' room, postponing the moment of greeting approximately 80 complete strangers who are to be my intimate traveling companions through Vietnam and, even more life-threatening, of meeting my roommate (hereafter identified as R.M.). Stride out with name tag round my neck like a doctor on E.R., ready to intubate. First viewing of R.M. not propitious -- a rather large woman of a certain age, with loose gray clothing and hair in a bun. Return to ladies' room to consider options. None. Emerge and shake hands glumly. She wastes no time in telling me she has been on cruises where cabins are vacant and if we complain enough about each other they might split us up. I grasp at this straw but feel at the same time insulted. (She doesn't want to share with me?)
We board the ship in Haiphong Harbor. R.M. and I find our cabin. It is small. Tiny, actually. The beds are very close together. We unpack in silence, averting our eyes from the sleeping arrangements. I take the lower drawers so she won't have to stoop down. She sees my pile of books and offers me the bookshelf. We are careful with each other, a good sign.
The tour operators send a delegation to tell us we may split up if we pay the extra fare. ''Otherwise it would be unfair to the other single passengers in the group who have paid the full supplement.'' R.M. and I exchange glances and shake our heads. We are going to stick together. A bond is forged.
I go to the lounge for a drink before dinner. There are 84 people in the group, of whom 90 percent are couples. The other 10 percent are women. (''Not usually quite this bad a ratio,'' one of the single women tells me consolingly.) Most couples are already ensconced on banquettes, drinking and talking. Nobody sits next to me. I nurse my drink and saunter into the dining room. Worse. Most tables, as is customary, are set in multiples of two. Plunk myself down, leaving a gaping reproach of a seat beside me? No thanks. Choose instead one of the few large tables, empty. Nobody sits next to me. I am a leper. R.M. suddenly appears and joins me. Feel like kissing her. We chat self-consciously, testing each other out -- her work as a shrink, mine as a writer. We discover we are both European by birth. Another bond.
By the second day we have found a rhythm for bathroom and dressing routines in our cabin. It's rather like sharing a room with a man you don't want to sleep with: keep flesh sightings to a minimum, avoid physical contact and don't get drunk. She likes early, I like late. We never collide. Occasionally our laundry trysts immodestly on the line over the tub, hers large and beige, mine small and floral. She goes to bed early, sleeps soundly and snorelessly. When I come in late and read, she does not stir. Impressive. Unnerved at first to discover she habitually rises at 5.30, later I thank her, as many of our shore trips involve very early departures, and she acts as my wake-up call.
On a full day at sea, the ship pitches and rolls. Passengers turn green and disappear. R.M. is unperturbed. I admire her more and more. (A seasick roommate, like an insomniac, doesn't bear contemplating.) She leaves the cabin when she sees I am trying to write. I leave the cabin when she wants to take a nap. We complain about the food and the rest of the group. I feel comfortable enough to break out my private supply of rum and offer her a swig. She is grateful, and we have our first intimate talk about marriage, love, children and old age. Afterward, we hastily return to our default mode of polite distance. A close call.
We continue to release anecdotes when appropriate, always monitoring any signs of personal trespass. We both know about the experiments where animals in a cage square off against each other, establishing their territory. The same thing has happened to us. We understand the cliché of the modern relationship -- ''I need my space!'' -- and our territorial moves work remarkably smoothly.
AT the end of the trip we settle our shared expenses, show and tell our Vietnamese purchases, and embrace in a rush of affectionate, if relieved, farewells. A few months later we exchange a brief note enclosing a photograph we had taken of each other. Hers is of me smiling at a lotus flower in a Saigon garden; mine shows her waving at the bottom of some temple steps in Hue. We shall probably never meet again.
Postscript: Friends thought I was mad to take this trip. I was single, I knew no one, and most hair-raising of all, I was committed to sharing a cabin for nine days with a complete stranger. Looking back, I agree with them. Being cooped up in a tiny space with an unknown female -- what a crazy risk! She could have been a snoring, seasick motor mouth. An alcoholic. A sex addict. A Goth. And the cabin was really small.
But I did not jump over the ship's rail. I realize now how extraordinarily lucky I was. R.M. and I created a peaceable kingdom in our little space. In one sense the share had to work, otherwise the trip would have been a disaster. We both knew that. But to our credit, and perhaps thanks in part to our peculiar professional skills, we succeeded beyond expectation.
Would I do it again? Maybe. Maybe not. Some single travelers make lifelong companions this way. I prefer the suggestion of a friend that the tour organizers should pay me extra, rather than penalize me, for taking such a wild gamble.
CAROLINE SEEBOHM writes frequently about travel.
