THE holiday shopping season was covered much like the college Bowl Championship Series.
There was extensive pregame analysis, as economists and retail analysts tossed out their forecasts on national television. (The National Retail Foundation boldly predicted that sales would rise 5.7 percent.) There was a frenzy of activity surrounding the kickoff, as camera crews flocked to Wal-Marts on the Friday after Thanksgiving. As the action heated up, reporters filed blow-by-blow reports from malls nationwide. And at every twist and turn viewers were bombarded with statistics.
Now that both seasons are over, we may pose the question to the holiday shopping season that is asked about some of the football games, especially the also-rans like the Continental Tire Bowl and the Diamond Walnut San Francisco Bowl. Do the results matter to anyone but the participants?
Other than shareholders of the retailers, which ring up nearly a quarter of their annual sales during the five-week season, who should care that sales rose 4.2 percent, as the International Council of Shopping Centers and UBS reported last week. Do the sales tell us something about the state of, or, more important, the direction of the economy?
''Holiday season sales matter because they have implications for the subsequent year,'' said Michael Niemira, chief economist and director of research at the International Council of Shopping Centers in New York. ''The fact is that a good Christmas is often followed by strong consumer spending.''
Two years ago, Mr. Niemira, who compiles the International Council of Shopping Centers-UBS chain store sales report (formerly the Bank of Tokyo-Mitsubishi chain store sales report), analyzed figures on holiday sales and economic growth from 1989 to 2000. He concluded that a model that used holiday sales to predict the next year's growth in gross domestic product and consumer spending was usually accurate.
So that 4.2 percent gain in 2003 sales bodes well for 2004, right?
Not necessarily. In the last few years, holiday retail sales have misfired as a leading indicator. In 2001, sales rose a solid 5.6 percent, but economic growth in 2002 was disappointingly weak. In 2002, retailers tallied their worst holiday season in more than a decade, as sales rose a measly 2.2 percent. Yet in the 12 months that followed, economic growth surged.
There were extenuating circumstances in each of these instances. In 2001, the post-Sept. 11 surge of patriotic shopping that saved that year's holiday shopping season might have masked underlying weakness in the economy that persisted through 2002. And if the economy shifts gears in the middle of the year -- as it probably did in 2003 -- holiday season sales can be more of a reflection on previous months than an indicator of future economic performance.
''This year, the holidays came at a good time because the economy was picking up momentum in the third quarter,'' said Rosalind Wells, chief economist at the National Retail Federation in Washington.
The stimulus created by higher government spending and tax cuts, the stock market's climb and the stabilized job market ''put a lot more discretionary income into consumers' pockets,'' Ms. Wells added.
So what do the latest sales results tell us? On the one hand, holiday season sales grew at almost double the rate they did in 2002. But given the wind at the economy's back going into the fourth quarter, the figure may be viewed as less than impressive.
IN addition, rather than signaling broader future economic growth, an increase in holiday sales could indicate that consumers are cramming more of their annual purchases into the holiday season. But, the added hype over holiday shopping hasn't led consumers to do so in recent years. According to the National Retail Foundation, the percentage of annual sales rung up by retailers during the 2002 holiday season was the same as the 1993 level: 22.7 percent.
Besides, some economic forecasters warn that at this stage, the spending decisions of businesses may have more impact on the economy than the spending decisions of retail shoppers.
''Don't forget that consumer demand has been strong all year long,'' said Saul Hymans, professor of economics and director of economic forecasting at the University of Michigan. ''It's not going to be the consumer that pushes the economy into a higher plane in 2004.''
After carrying the ball for so many years, consumers are still trying to hand it off to the business sector, which has watched from the sidelines for far too long.
ECONOMIC VIEW Daniel Gross writes the ''Moneybox'' column for Slate.
