NO traces of the wisecracking, loud-mouthed Moe Moskowitz are apparent in the thoughtful, gentle first impressions of his creator, Robert Kaplow.
As played by Mr. Kaplow, Mr. Moskowitz is a tireless show-business hustler who periodically barges in on the National Public Radio program ''Morning Edition'' with his impossible ideas and get-rich-quick schemes.
In a recent novel, ''Me and Orson Welles'' (MacAdam/Cage, $18.50), Mr. Kaplow's creativity seems more closely aligned with his own character.
The story, set in November 1937, follows a 17-year-old boy through a week in which he falls in love, meets Mr. Welles and wins a part in his production of ''Julius Caesar'' at the Mercury Theater in New York.
The book is replete with cultural relics from the radio days of the 1930's, as is Mr. Kaplow's home in Metuchen, which was built in that era from a Sears Catalog kit. He has filled it with vintage sheet music, movie posters, books and other artifacts from the 30's, including the Crosley Grandfather Clock Radio on which his father listened to Mr. Welles perform his radio play ''War of the Worlds,'' a mock newscast of an invasion from Mars, in 1938.
''I guess it seems like a lost time to me,'' Mr. Kaplow, 49, said in a recent interview, his narrow frame clad in jeans and a cable-knit sweater. ''In one sense, it was a really brutal time, with the Depression, and at the same time there was this explosion of theater and film.''
''Me and Orson Welles,'' which Mr. Kaplow drafted in his microscopic longhand, has been termed by Kirkus Reviews ''one of the best depictions of male adolescent yearning ever to hit the page.'' It has been in bookstores three months. Penguin bought the rights to publish the book in paperback in 2005.
Growing up in Westfield in the 1960's, Mr. Kaplow was drawn to radio drama and captivated by audio actors' ability to exploit the boundaries of sound.
He spent the late hours of many evenings with his ear jammed against the speaker of his living room radio, sneaking a listen to Peter Sellers in the British Broadcasting Corporation's ''The Goon Show.'' He said he was mesmerized by WOR's nightly broadcasts of Jean Shepherd, the radio legend known for marathon monologues that covered everything from auto racing to childhood reminiscences of Indiana.
''What got to me was just that storytelling unadorned could be so gripping and so powerful and so intimate,'' Mr. Kaplow said. ''It really felt like he was talking to you.''
Mr. Kaplow acted on that inspiration at an early age. He started sending short stories off to publishers and literary journals when he was 16, and he recorded his first satirical sketches as a student at Westfield High School. In 1979, when he was two years out of Rutgers University, Houghton Mifflin published his first young adult novel, ''Two in the City,'' when he was only 25.
He kept writing even as he settled into a teaching job at Summit High School. He published three more young adult novels, ''Alex Icicle: A Romance in 10 Torrid Chapters'' (Houghton Mifflin) in 1984, ''Alessandra in Love'' (Harper &amp; Row) in 1989 and ''Alessandra In Between'' (Harper Collins) in 1992.
Mr. Kaplow's Moe Moskowitz character took the national stage in 1984. On a whim, Mr. Kaplow sent NPR a copy of a satirical song, ''Steven Spielberg, Give Me Some of Your Money,'' which he had recorded with his college band ''The Punsters.''
The song included monologues from Moe Moskowitz imploring Mr. Spielberg, from a phone booth in Times Square, to hear his story pitches. The chorus was: ''Hey Mr. Spielberg, what do you say?/Help me open up my I.R.A..''
The song impressed Jay Kernis, who was then the senior producer of ''Morning Edition.''
''What was clear then was that Robert was hysterical,'' said Mr. Kernis, who is now senior vice president for programming at NPR. ''He could not only parody the songwriting style and the syntax of a specific musician or lyricist, but his orchestration could also do that. Over the years, the different shows received a lot of musical parodies over the transom, but his were smart. And I felt that his would immediately be interesting and funny to the audience of public radio.''
But attempting comedy sketches with NPR's audience was somewhat risky. While comical guests had been interviewed on its news programs, NPR was not in the habit of producing comedy itself.
''Over the past 30 or so years, we've been known pretty much as a comedy-impaired media organization,'' Mr. Kernis said. ''The public radio audience has such high standards when you don't meet them they immediately cry: 'Foul, not funny. How dare you.'''
Since 1984, Mr. Kaplow has written more than three hours of sketches for NPR under the Moe Moskowitz guise. The subjects of his satires have varied widely, from psychoanalysis (his ''Jiffy Shrink, America's Favorite Quick Fix Psychotherapy Centers'' promised listeners just ''20 minutes from the couch to the car'') to public radio itself.
In ''Alex and Friends,'' Moe Moskowitz suggested turning ''Morning Edition'' into a Warner Brothers-esque cartoon, in a scheme to make $1 million, and end the annual fund drives. It included an NPR senior news analyst, Cokie Roberts, singing and dancing her reporting to ''The Hokey Pokey.'' (''Put your right wingers in, you throw your left wingers out, you put some centrists in.'')
''For a long time, Robert has been able to do very funny stuff,'' Mr. Kernis said. ''In a way that great comedy does, it delighted a lot of people and it offended a lot of people. But even when people were offended, he was funny, and we knew we were on to something.''
In 2001, New Millennium Audio published a collection of Moe Moskowitz sketches called ''Cancel My Subscription: The Worst of NPR.'' The president of the audio company's parent, New Millennium Entertainment, Michael Viner, enamored of Mr. Kaplow's work, commissioned him to do a fifth book, ''The Cat Who Killed Lilian Jackson Braun,'' a parody of Ms. Braun's popular ''Cat Who'' mysteries. It was published in February.
Mr. Kaplow's imaginative spirit seems to have served him well over the course of his 25-year-career at Summit High School, where he teaches creative writing, film studies and advanced placement English. He may be the only English teacher there with an upright piano in his classroom; he says it comes in handy for his song lyric unit, and for the students who are inevitably inspired to compose a song as a class project.
''He's just tireless in his inventiveness,'' said Anthony Akey, assistant principal at the Union County school. ''The projects he comes up with for the kids, the quality and the level of work he's able to get out of the kids is just remarkable.''
Mr. Kaplow's efforts to interest students in his favorite radio dramas, however, have had only limited success.
''I've found that if I play them a tape of Jean Shepherd or Firesign Theater'' -- the free-associative group that was a fixture on many public and college radio stations in the late 60's and the 70's -- ''and all they have to do is listen, in about five minutes they have this overwhelming desire to clean out their backpack, comb their hair or go to the bathroom,'' he said. ''It really makes them uncomfortable that they're just sitting there and not doing something.''
Nevertheless, Mr. Kaplow covets his interests and the way of life they inform, even if they are what colleagues and students might fondly label old-fashioned.
He spends much of his free time reading and playing the piano, and with his longtime companion, Lynn Lauber, a novelist. A good day in the tree-lined neighborhood where Mr. Kaplow lives is one that doesn't require him to get into a car. He prefers to write in ruled notebooks, and he wakes every Tuesday at 5:15 a.m. -- even when school is on winter break -- to listen to old broadcasts of Mr. Shepherd broadcast on WBAI.
Last month, while browsing through a used bookstore on Main Street in Metuchen, Mr. Kaplow stumbled upon a November 1937 issue of Modern Screen magazine with Marlene Dietrich on the cover. He instinctively grabbed it and bought it. It wasn't until he walked out the door that he realized, with ''Me and Orson Welles'' complete he did not need such an item as a research tool anymore.
''But I couldn't help it,'' he said. ''I feel like that's my period.''
IN PERSON
