IT has been a century since the Church of Our Lady of the Rosary began ministering to successive waves of immigrant groups in this village. The first parishioners, who were working-class Italians unable to afford a professional builder, began erecting the church by dint of their own labor in 1903. That year they finished the basement, where the first Masses were held, and two years after that, they put the finishing touches on the altar and the remainder of the structure.
From its perch near the Byram River, the original brick structure still stands -- albeit with some renovations and improvements - monitoring the constantly changing village.
Over the years, priests from the Salesians of Don Bosco order have addressed more than the just the spiritual needs of Italian, Irish and now Hispanic immigrants. At first, they tended to a predominantly Italian community that drew its living from the factories along the river. Now that most of those businesses have left, the most recent wave of immigrants from Central and South America looks for jobs in the households of wealthy property owners in neighboring communities, and with the construction crews that build their houses.
As the Rev. Timothy Ploch, a Salesian priest like those before him at the Our Lady of the Rosary, observed, ''The real story of the church is not the original laying of bricks, but rather the work that has since taken place inside the building.'' It is the mission of the Salesian order, founded in Turin, Italy, in the late 1800's, to give to children and the poor, he explained. Most of the current parishioners, he said, have come across borders illegally from towns and cities where ''life is difficult and there's a real desperation.''
The Salesians' mission in Port Chester begins before the children are born, with a church-sponsored program called Special Delivery. At group baby showers for needy and unwed mothers, pregnant women are given a crib, stroller, blankets, diapers and a bag of baby clothes to get them started, said Maria Massa, an outreach coordinator at Our Lady of the Rosary.
Many of the women seeking services from the church live in overcrowded quarters with their spouses and children, and sometimes become the victims of domestic violence, Ms. Massa said.
''We bring in doctors, immigration lawyers, and workers from My Sister's Place to empower them,'' she said, referring to a shelter for battered women and their children. ''Many of the women are undocumented, but we don't ask, so officially we don't know. But even when they are documented and have a Social Security number, it's still tough for them to get a job.''
The church also runs a food pantry twice a week a week, on Tuesday and Saturday mornings, supplementing parishioners with bags of canned goods, cereals, pasta and rice. At the Don Bosco Center next door, the Westchester Hispanic Coalition operates a hiring site that offers free breakfasts and lunches, along with advocacy for wage settlements and work-skills training.
Youth prayer groups are held in the Don Bosco Center in Spanish on Fridays at 8 p.m. and in Portuguese at 8:30 p.m. Adult prayer groups are held in the church hall in Spanish on Saturdays at 8 p.m. and in Portuguese on Thursdays at 8 p.m.
On weekends, there are 10 Masses, some in English, some in Spanish and one in Portuguese for Port Chester's growing Brazilian population, Father Ploch said.
