American soldiers killed two Iraqi police officers and detained a third man in a gun battle on Friday night in the volatile northern city of Kirkuk, military officials said Saturday.
The soldiers did not realize they were firing on police officers, said Maj. Gordon Tate, a spokesman for the Fourth Infantry Division, which controls much of the area. It is the second time in three weeks that American soldiers have killed Iraqi police officers in the area.
In the southern town of Amara on Saturday, the Iraqi police fired into a crowd of stone-throwing protesters angry over the lack of jobs, killing 6 and wounding 11, witnesses said. They said British troops then arrived to disperse the protesters.
Danish troops said Saturday they had found dozens of buried mortar rounds that initial tests showed might contain blister gas, The Associated Press reported. Saddam Hussein had said he had destroyed the country's supply of the gas, which was used during the Iran-Iraq war in the 1980's. According to the report, the mortar shells had been buried for at least a decade.
The firefight in Kirkuk began at 8:30 p.m. on Friday, when soldiers from the 173rd Airborne Brigade, which is stationed at a base at the edge of Kirkuk, went to a home in the city to check a report that two families in the area were fighting, Major Tate said. The soldiers saw two men in long coats shooting at a house. The men ran and the soldiers chased them, Major Tate said.
When the soldiers caught up to the two men and a third ''unidentified individual,'' Major Tate said, they told the men to stop and fired warning shots. The men refused to obey, and soldiers took up ''defensive positions,'' he added. The soldiers fired on the men, killing one, wounding a second and capturing the third. The wounded man died on the way to a hospital.
On Dec. 20, American soldiers killed three members of the Iraqi police and wounded two others at 2 a.m. outside Kirkuk, Agence France-Presse reported. The soldiers had apparently mistaken the officers for guerrilla fighters.
The 173rd Airborne has stepped up patrols in Kirkuk after a recent flare-up in ethnic tensions. On Dec. 31, a protest by Arabs and Turkmens against Kurdish demands to fold Kirkuk into the autonomous Kurdish region in the north turned violent.
The Kurdish demand for autonomy and government control of Kirkuk, which is rich in oil and agricultural land, has become one of the most divisive political issues in Iraq.
Nushirwan Mustafa, the deputy to Jalal Talabani, who represents the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan on the Iraqi Governing Council, recently urged Kurdish members of the council to quit if the American and Iraqi ruling authorities do not grant broad autonomy to the Kurdish region, according to a report on Saturday in Azzaman, a prominent Arab newspaper.
The report cited an essay written by Mr. Mustafa called ''The Kurds and the Law of Governing the Iraqi State in the Interim Period.'' Mr. Mustafa could not be reached for comment.
In another development on Saturday, the United States military said it had concluded after a preliminary investigation that the Black Hawk helicopter that crashed in central Iraq two days ago killing all nine soldiers on board had been shot down by guerrillas.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE OCCUPATION
