FEW people are aware of it, but nestled atop behind a woodsy screen along Route 9W, right at the cusp of that imaginary line where New York becomes New Jersey, lies the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory, a division of Columbia University.
Lamont, as all the insiders shorthand it, is chartered with the portfolio of studying everything between the core of the earth and the upper levels of its atmosphere. Its areas of interest are broad: they vary from the composition of the skeletons of microscopic sea creatures that perished tens of millions of years ago, to the question of how human life can avoid being extinguished if the level of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere should continue to rise.
Speaking from an office perched at the edge of the Palisades, with the rain-washed Hudson over his shoulder, Dr. Michael Purdy, Lamont's director, laid out the themes that connect the labors of more than 130 Ph.D.-level researchers and the approximately 350 projects they are conducting. ''First is the climate system,'' he said. ''There's a whole group of phenomena that we're studying, El Nino and other systems that change our climate in subtle ways, to the steady and substantial increase of CO2 in the atmosphere.
''Second is the dynamics of the solid earth. The earth is moving always, at different rates and speeds, generating earthquakes. The best work on understanding how earthquakes actually function is done here.
''The third theme is earth surface processes -- the interaction between the climate and the rest of the earth. The Hudson River, for example, is one such surface. It's remarkable how little is known.''
Dr. Purdy, who now lives in Nanuet, is a native of Britain, and he still speaks with an accent that any character actor who aspires to be cast in a Harry Potter movie would happily copy. He utters that last phrase not with exhaustion, but with excitement.
Dr. Purdy clearly loves his science; in the first part of his career, as a postdoctoral scholar at the Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution studying the earth's crust beneath the ocean, he was part of so many research expeditions that he spent, all told, more than three years at sea. ''The reason why this business is so wonderful,'' he said, investing the word with inspirational conviction, ''the reason why everybody here is in a state of constant joy about everything we do, is because it is a very young science. So there are just beautiful plums waiting to be discovered. This isn't high energy physics, a very mature science that's been picked at by lots of brilliant people for many decades. There's a lot of basic physics that we're just discovering. We're constantly learning how things really work.''
The Earth Observatory sits on Torrey Cliff, just south of Harriman State Park, and offers the same steep slopes and splendid views and a sense of seclusion. The campus is dotted with a number of fairly anonymous one- and two-story buildings of the 1960's and 1970's that house Lamont's divisions, with their offices and labs; there is little doubt that the money here is supporting science, not architecture. Torrey Cliff was once the weekend estate of Florence Lamont, the widow of Thomas W. Lamont, the chairman of J.P. Morgan. In 1948, she donated the land to Columbia, and the property might have had a rather ordinary fate had not the Geology Department been so eager to get its sensitive seismological equipment away from the I.R.T. local. Two decades later, a grant endowing the faculty from the Henry L. and Grace Doherty Foundation brought their name into the title.
One of the earliest and continuing projects that researchers undertook was crossing the globe in a research vessels, boring holes in the floors of the seas, and collecting core samples of the earth below. Lamont has a warehouse containing about 18,000 of these samples.
On one tour recently, a visitor asked about a dark smudge, thinner than a pencil-width, three inches from the tip of a core taken from the Mediterranean.
''That's Vesuvius,'' the guide replied.
The science can often seem dauntingly esoteric. ''We work very hard at making what we do here sound boring,'' Dr. Purdy said dryly. ''It's another of our great skills.'' But Lamont's work is deeply practical.
The observatory is part of Columbia's Earth Institute, a relatively new interdisciplinary group that connects political scientists, public health specialists, other social scientists and economics at the university to the researchers at Lamont. This effort stems from the recognition that increasingly, the problems of the earth are too complex to be addressed with one approach.
''For example, it is possible to say that there is a very high chance of a magnitude 7 earthquake occurring within 10 miles of the center of Istanbul within the next 30 years,'' Dr. Purdy said. ''We're really pretty good at being able to say that. But the real question is what's the mayor of Istanbul supposed to do? One of the really important things we're trying to do is make that step between defining a hazard, the economically feasible ways of mitigating them and the steps one needs to take politically to achieve them.''
Take global warming, for instance. ''We have to start thinking about it,'' Dr. Purdy said. ''We don't believe we can change industry on a global scale in a few decades so that everybody stops burning fossil fuel. We feel we've almost got to accept the fact there's going to be this vast increase in the amount of CO2 in the atmosphere. So what are we going to do about it?
''The biggest fear is that it's going to cause a perturbation in the climate system that would flip us into some different climate state, which would be disastrous. So what we're beginning to think about here is doing something proactive, and that involves removing CO2 from the atmosphere. Can we do that? Maybe; the world authority on thinking about how to get CO2 out of the atmosphere is here. But if we could, where would you put it? Perhaps you could drill deep holes into the earth, and pump the CO2 into the earth, and fill the pore spaces between the rocks, and over time, have it chemically change with the rock into something inert. We have the leading experts in drilling and measuring very deep holes in the bottom of the ocean, kilometers into the earth, so we're seeing if this can be done.''
Lamont feels it has a serious obligation to take its work before the community. Every October it is host to an open house, with exhibitions for children and lay people; more than 4,000 people attended last fall's event. Lamont is also host to a public lecture series in the spring, where some of its scientists discuss their work and its ramifications. Information about this year's series, which will begin in late March, will soon be posted on the observatory's Web site (www.ldeo.columbia.edu).
''Educating the public, improving the quality of basic science education -- we take our role in that very seriously,'' Dr. Purdy said. ''It's going to be really important for folks to understand much more about the environment than currently, so they can make good decisions about their future.''
RESEARCH
