BEFORE I joined the Weight Watchers staff in 1997, I was a member. I know every single emotion the members are feeling -- I've been there.
Once I held a fashion show at a meeting. I told everyone to wear their ''before'' and ''after'' clothes, and I played ''Pretty Woman'' on a cassette player as they paraded down the aisle. One woman in her 50's took off her ''before'' outfit to reveal her wedding gown underneath. She was so happy: her goal had been to feel like a bride again. The other members gave her a standing ovation.
Another member was traveling to the Amish country in Lancaster, Pa., where they have family-style dinners. She asked me for some tips before she left. All week she told her friends, ''Elaine told me this,'' and ''Elaine said that.'' On the last day, one friend told her she had made dinner reservations for five people. The woman was puzzled and asked her friend, ''Why five when we're only four?'' Her friend responded, ''Isn't Elaine joining us tonight?''
One woman was having a difficult time staying on the program. She called me for support one day, but I wasn't home. When I pulled in that evening, there was a car outside my house. It was this woman. She said she had called because she wanted to eat an entire box of cookies, and when I wasn't home she thought that if she just sat in front of my house, she'd be O.K. I asked if she wanted to come in for a minute but she said no, she was fine; she just wanted to sit there a little longer.
Another member said she had tried other programs, but every time she had hit the 60-pound mark in lost weight, she would get a little overconfident and put the weight back on. She didn't know what she would do this time. She joked that she might have to move in with me. When she had lost 60 pounds, I gave her a set of sheets and told her that was as close as she was going to get to my spare room. She made it over the hump.
When I became a territory manager last year, I had to give up leading a few meetings. One morning, as I was taking my daily walk around the neighborhood, I heard my name being called over a megaphone. I turned around and saw a school bus driver from a group I had given up. ''Elaine, you'd be so proud of me,'' she said. ''I hit my goal.'' I was glad there wasn't a cop around to see her talking to me when she was supposed to be driving.
One group I led met at a strip mall and walked around the perimeter. A gentleman in his 60's told me he had a plan. If he walked behind the pretty girls, it would make him walk faster, to try to catch up with them. He knew that a woman in this group was determined to lose 50 pounds by a certain date. That day, he came to the meeting with flowers for her. They were probably only wildflowers from a lot next to the strip mall, but she was as touched as if they were orchids. She's now lost 62 pounds, and he's lost 30.
MY JOB
