VICTORIA SIZER stood on a long block of Merrick Boulevard on a wintry Saturday morning last month and pondered a mildly impertinent question: Why on earth had she just spent $90 to ride 10 hours on an overnight bus from Rochester with 53 other passengers to shop in downtown Jamaica, Queens? The neighborhood's 12-square-block commercial core, centered at the intersection of 164th Street and Jamaica Avenue, has no modern consumer amenities. It has no food courts, chain stores or climate control -- only roti joints and local stores like ABC Wigs and the Nubian Heritage Superstore rising in riotous confusion along the disheveled streets of a downtown long past its heyday.
''It's kind of like a safari,'' Ms. Sizer said of the daylong hunt for bargains that she and her friends Diane Darby and Carolyn Patterson were embarked upon. The three women had just stashed their first round of purchases into the bin of their charter bus.
''It's a mini-vacation for me,'' said Ms. Darby, a mother of three, her tone suggesting that she was glad to escape the obligations of home.
During a brief break in their shopping, the women nibbled beef and goat curry rotis. But soon Ms. Patterson's eyes were darting toward Cookies, a 38,000-square-foot discount store that was their next destination. Hundreds of passengers from 30 other buses swarmed the neighborhood, and some of them were at Cookies. They had journeyed from Delaware, Rhode Island and other far-flung places. Some of them might even now be pawing at an item that Ms. Patterson could use.
Boston. Pittsburgh. Buffalo. Detroit. Those are some of the other places that people come from by long-haul bus to shop in Jamaica -- at least 10,000 a year, according to the Jamaica Center Improvement Association -- a trend that has grown in recent years. More than 50 companies send buses to the area. Many are hired by churches, community groups, fraternities and sororities and charge $30 to $120 per rider, depending on whether the trip is for one day or two.
By many accounts, downtown Jamaica has become the most popular shopping destination of the million-footed masses of the Northeast, and that may be the biggest upset in recent New York retailing history. The busiest seasons are the winter holidays, Easter and the weeks before school reopens in the fall. But more and more buses are arriving throughout the year to disgorge their bargain-hungry hordes into the jammed bazaar that is downtown Jamaica.
The main reasons for this phenomenon are the two C's: competition and cachet. Jamaica's 300 independent stores compete ruthlessly to offer the lowest prices, allowing savvy shoppers to hunt for good deals. Riders attest that it is not hard to find enough bargains to justify the cost of a long-distance ticket.
Later that Saturday, Christina Roman of Rochester stood by her bus and announced she had just spent $500 on six bags of presents for her four children. Lonnesha Johnson topped her. ''I spent $750,'' she bragged. ''That's half my rent. I'm broke.''
Ms. Johnson went on to rave about her finds. ''I got my daughter some Rocawear jeans for $30,'' she said.
''Whoa!'' Ms. Roman replied. ''In Rochester, that's $60.''
Jamaica does not have the beaches of that other Jamaica, but among its customers -- mainly African-Americans, Caribbean-Americans and Latinos -- the district has cachet. It is near Hollis, a cradle of hip-hop that has produced the rap acts LL Cool J, Run-DMC and Ja Rule, and the popular clothing line Fubu. As an incubator of inner-city culture, Jamaica is seen by shoppers, a lot of them New Yorkers transplanted to the suburbs, as the place to go for the latest styles in clothing, jewelry, footwear, hairstyles and makeup.
Tionna Watson, 18, can find a sampling of the brands she likes -- Ecko, Baby Phat, Kangol -- back home in Salisbury, Md. ''But here they have more, and it's better,'' she said, adding a low-cut JLo shirt to the pile of clothes she would carry to a dressing room at Hot Point, a store on Jamaica Avenue that serenades its customers with remixed reggae hits.
Her friend Tykeria Jarmon agreed. ''The things they have up here, they don't have in Salisbury,'' she said, holding up a pair of Brazilian-cut jeans for her friend's consideration.
''That's a good price,'' Ms. Watson said. ''Did you try them on?''
Jamaica's previous golden age of shopping lasted from roughly 1940 to 1960. Residents from throughout the borough took a trolley or the elevated J train to shop at stately emporiums like Macy's. Janet Barkan, a Queens native and the executive director of the Jamaica Center Improvement Association, celebrated her junior high school graduation by making a shopping trip with her mother to the imposing Gertz department store on Jamaica Avenue, where they tried on dresses and lunched at the Long Island Room, an elegant in-store restaurant. ''It was a big deal,'' she said.
Like many downtowns throughout the Northeast and beyond, Jamaica declined as the car, the suburbs and urban decay became prevalent. Yet, 40 years later, that hard-knock history adds luster to the neighborhood's current appeal as an anti-mall. (Bus-riding shoppers tend to ignore a new mall, One Jamaica Plaza, at the fringe of downtown because it is a long walk from where the buses park and it feels like the malls back home.)
''PEOPLE like the street experience,'' said Sam Samuels, a spokesman for the business improvement group, who works with Ms. Barkan to promote local shopping. During the busy seasons, they arrange for the buses to be met by an official greeter who answers riders' questions and hands out large yellow plastic shopping bags and a fistful of discount coupons. But enticements are hardly needed because the passengers climb off the buses primed to spend. ''They're don't come in here to mess around,'' said Marvin Falack, the owner of Cookies.
Most drop soon after they shop, according to Ernest L. Lawson, a bus driver who has plied the Rochester-to-Jamaica route for 14 years. ''They sleep most of the way home,'' he said.
Then, gesturing at the buses jammed as far they eye could see down Merrick Boulevard, he added: ''Sometimes you can't even get a spot on this whole street.''
URBAN TACTICS
