JANET HAYS and her husband, David, were each 51 years old when they moved to New York City in 1980. Both had been married before -- he had three children, she had five.They'd had big houses in the suburbs, hers outside Boston and his near Buffalo.
He was a pioneer in computational linguistics; she had a degree in social work but had never worked outside her home. After they wed, they lived near Buffalo; he was a professor at SUNY, but he was feeling restless.
Manhattan -- Chapter Two in their lives together -- was a bit of a lark. As Ms. Hays tells it, she felt a kind of gut certainty one day -- let's move to the city -- and suddenly they were here.
Ms. Hays, now 74, is as nimble a soul as you could find. ''For major decisions, the sequence that works best for me is to pay attention to my heart first to know what I really want,'' she writes in her book, ''Retire in New York City -- Even If You're Not Rich,'' published last year by Bonus Books. ''Then ask the practical questions.''
They had arrived with their huge gas stove, thinking they'd find a bargain -- a stoveless apartment. They had to ditch the stove, but they did find the bargain, a rent-regulated one-bedroom in a nondescript 1940's apartment house just across from Fort Tryon Park in upper Manhattan. A broker painted a romantic picture of poetry readings in the courtyard, delivered by the building's Russian émigré tenants, a nice image that never materialized (neither did the tenants).
Many of the neighborhood's mid-20th-century settlers from Ireland and Germany -- it is Dr. Ruth's neighborhood, and was once Henry Kissinger's -- are no longer there. Now it's mostly Dominican families, and grocery shopping is in Spanish. It is true that the apartment is more than 100 blocks from the center of Manhattan, but its rent is $860 a month; in 1981, it was just $375.
''The idea,'' Ms. Hays said, ''was to find something that we would always be able to afford, even if one or both of us wasn't working.''
Ah, but ''not working'' wasn't an option. Not yet. He began teaching, consulting and writing. And Ms. Hays? Imagine: You are a middle-aged mother of five, fresh from upstate. You have never worked. You are all at once living in New York City, and you'd like to make a living. You have a degree in social work, but after five children, you'd rather find labor in which no one is dependent on you.
''I was really scared,'' she said. But with what sounds like characteristic good humor and determination, and at the suggestion of one of her daughters, she began temping -- a few weeks in the E-Z Wider cigarette-paper offices. ''That was fun,'' she said. ''They always had a party on Friday afternoon.''
A few weeks in the marketing department of an architectural firm. ''It was very lush, remember this was 1981,'' she said. ''I was dazzled.'' The dazzle attracted, and a three-month gig turned into a marketing career.
Chapter Two was a long one, rich, varied and lively. At 62, Ms. Hays took up ballet. (You'll remember she's very nimble.) She despaired of getting Mr. Hays to go dancing with her.
HE was ''tall and striking, with a big beard, and he'd say, 'I'm not very good, people will look at me,' '' she said. ''And I said, 'Well, when they see you're no good, they'll stop looking.' But he wasn't having any of that, so I thought I'd try dancing that I could do on my own.''
The first plié at the barre, she said, was ''just thrilling.'' Thrilling like her first time on skis, she said, or writing a perfect sentence.
In 1995, the day before Ms. Hays's 66th birthday, Mr. Hays died of lung cancer. Chapter Two was finished.
''Our life together had always been in part changeable, with more to come,'' Ms. Hays wrote a year later, in an essay that was never published. ''Now it was complete. Dave's life was chiseled in granite and buried at Mount Pleasant. I'd never had to deal with anything so intractable before.''
She missed her husband, but she wasn't lonely. ''I don't mind being alone,'' she said. ''What I missed were his reactions to things. I wanted to tell him we now use MetroCards at the subway, or if I had a bad day, or a wonderful one, and hear what he'd say.''
One day, a revelation came. ''I have good health, I have lots of energy, and for the first time, I have no responsibilities other than myself,'' she said. ''I realized, this is precious time. Who knows how long it will last? As soon as that thought hit me, I knew I didn't want to spend my time in an office anymore. I wanted to make time for me, for my own writing, my own interests. And the home I have here supports my life. I'm paying for what's outside my walls, not what's inside.''
With these thoughts, this life plan, came the idea for her book. Her own delight in the city, undiminished since her husband's death, was the inspiration for a lovely truth: New York is a great place to retire. You don't have to drive. You're not ostracized if you're single. You're not segregated because you're old. There are more classes, more volunteer opportunities, more things to look at and go to and think about than just about anywhere, if you're a city person.
Why not collect the stories of older New Yorkers into a book, an aspirational how-to guide for retirees? And she did: There is the former union organizer now leading tours of the Cathedral Church of St. John the Divine; the social worker now in show business as a promoter and manager; the retired salesman in love with cooking school.
And best of all there is Ms. Hays, rocketing on the A train down to Union Square, to her ballet classes and a morning in the Greenmarket, to used-book stores in Brooklyn, to Ellis Island with her grandchildren (she has 15, and they tend to visit one or two at a time).
''In New York I can be myself,'' she writes. ''Better yet, I can continue to become myself.''
ON the second day of the new year, Ms. Hays showed off the home she rockets back to, its 700-plus square feet a neat theorem of efficient, modern design. The living from, for instance, is also the dining room, office and guest bedroom. Mr. and Ms. Hays designed it together, in the late 80's.
That emerald-colored velvet sofa sleeps two (there are even inflatable beds stowed in the bedroom, in a white laminate headrest made deep enough for storing everything from Kleenex to, well, inflatable beds). There are white laminate built-ins for books, and made into an adjustable desk, as well as a secretary-in-a-bookshelf that doubles as a sideboard.
Four ergonomic office chairs with casters covered in garnet red velvet -- snappy-looking but otherworldly, like robots in black tie -- make the room finally as flexible as a Broadway set. You can sit around the table on these chairs, you can roll over to the couch and make what the decorating shows call a ''seating group,'' as the members of Ms. Hays's book group do, and you can roll one over to the desk and turn the whole space into your office for the day, as Ms. Hays does three days a week for her own writing.
Her tiny kitchen has a window onto the building's courtyard, and the Arno: a young artist, Luigi Cicala, made a mural of Florence at Ms. Hays's direction (she asked him to move the Duomo from its normal spot to one closer to the Ponte Vecchio).
There's an even more exotic view from her bedroom windows, which look directly across Nagle Avenue to the rocky cliffs of Fort Tryon Park. Or under them, as Ms. Hays likes to say.
''I always thought it would be wonderful to lie in bed and look at a mountain,'' she writes, remembering reading ''Heidi'' as a child, ''but not until I moved to New York City could I do that. It's not the Alps, but from a supine position, who can tell?''
Habitats | Upper Manhattan
