AS a nation of immigrants, the United States is full of ethnic organizations devoted to the memory of distant homelands. Often staffed by volunteers, and reliant on donations, these groups keep cultural ties alive, fostering a sense of community in what must sometimes seem a baffling new home.
So it is with the American Hungarian Foundation, whose headquarters is a fairly brutal-looking yellow concrete building on New Brunswick's downtown fringe. Here the group supports student and scholar exchanges, publications and academic programs, and holds exhibitions in a musty if well-appointed gallery at the far end of the building.
This month, the gallery is host to a show of about 70 19th- and early 20th-century Hungarian paintings, and a few works on paper, from the collection of Nicholas Salgo, a former United States ambassador to Hungary. The collection is part of the Salgo Trust for Education, located in an old mansion near Port Washington, Long Island.
The exhibition's title, ''Everywhere a Foreigner and Yet Nowhere a Stranger,'' is drawn from the diary of the 19th-century Hungarian painter Baron Laszlo Mednyanszky. It reflects the show's central theme: that Hungarian art of the late 19th century was different from, and yet a part of, wider currents of European art.
The dual character of Hungarian art is most apparent in the landscape paintings, which account for almost half the show. Looking at the works, you find the artists seeking formal inspiration in the artistic styles of Western Europe, while maintaining some identification with their local landscape, cultural customs and the ambience of Eastern Europe.
Karoly Ferenczy, Jozsef Rippl-Ronai and Geza Farago, for instance, adapted the high-keyed palette and stylistic traits of French Impressionism and Post-Impressionism to the Hungarian landscape. Farago's ''Sunny Day,'' circa 1910, a charmingly poetic, light-filled rural scene, owes much to Claude Monet, and, going a little further back, Camille Corot.
''Sunny Day'' more or less sets the pattern for early modern painting in Hungary; the artists did it well, but late. Rippl-Ronai's bright and lyrical ''The House at Kortvelyes,'' circa 1910, reveals the artist dabbling in Post-Impressionism, while the colors of Bela Kadar's undated ''Untitled Landscape'' are reminiscent of the Fauvists.
Among the more academic painters of the period, Mihaly Munkacsy, whose original name was Michael Lieb, stands out. Born in 1844, a member of Hungary's German-speaking minority, he traveled to Düsseldorf and then Munich in the 1860's where he learned to paint in the prevailing realist-naturalist style. In 1872, he moved to Paris, where he married a titled widow and painted religious and historical subjects.
''Hay Harvest,'' circa 1886-87, ranks among Munkacsy's more folkloric works. It depicts a typical rural scene -- indentured peasants harvesting hay; the women, their white kerchief's untied for ventilation, raking the hay into bundles; the men loading it onto a horse-drawn cart. A well-dressed, aristocratic lady supervises the peasants, while keeping an eye on her two children cavorting in a nearby mound of hay.
No doubt a private commission, ''Hay Harvest'' reflects the aristocratic patronage at the heart of the cultural revival in Hungary in the 19th century. This was also a period of great economic prosperity and political power, with Hungary an equal partner in the Habsburg Empire. It was a revival that was to be abruptly halted with the outbreak of World War I, after which Hungary was forced to cede much of its territory.
Aside from landscape painting, portraiture was Hungary's other main art tradition. This is not reflected in the show, which contains a few figure studies and half a dozen pleasant but mostly derivative portraits.
The exception is Pal Szinyei-Merse's ''Mother with Two Children'' (1868). A gifted piece of plein-air painting, it shows a young mother in a taffeta dress sitting on a picnic blanket with a baby, her elder daughter readying to present a hatful of flowers. Although reminiscent of 18th-century pastoral painting, it has an idle charm that pleases. It is an image of a world long gone.
''Everywhere a Foreigner and Yet Nowhere a Stranger'' is at the American Hungarian Foundation, 300 Somerset Street, New Brunswick, through April 25. Information (732)846-5777.
ART REVIEW
