THE last quarter of 2003 turned out to be much better for mutual funds than many investors might have thought.
As September wound down, some market strategists worried about the damage being done to investor confidence by the spreading mutual fund scandal. Others focused on equity valuations, which, they said, were so high that the market was ready for a correction.
Instead of falling, though, stocks rallied in October. And November. And again in December. The gains were not limited to a narrow group of stocks. The entire market rose, ending 2003 with its first yearly gain since 1999.
The Value Line Index of 1,667 equally weighted stocks rose 7.7 percent in October. It was up an additional 3.1 percent in November. And it gained 3.9 percent in December.
Fund investors shared in those gains nearly across the board.
The average domestic stock fund posted a return of about 12 percent in the fourth quarter, according to Morningstar Inc., and ended the year up 32 percent. International stock funds did even better, with an average return of a bit more than 15 percent for the quarter and more than 39 percent for the year.
Indeed, of the 33 equity fund categories tracked by Morningstar, only one -- bear market funds -- posted a negative return for the quarter.
''The market continued to surprise people right through the end of the year,'' said Thomas McManus, chief investment strategist at Banc of America Securities.
The list of those implicated in the mutual fund scandal, meanwhile, continued to grow. Investors reacted by pulling money out of some fund families that have been tarred by the scandal. But by no means did they turn their backs on funds as an investment vehicle.
In fact, inflows into equity funds in the fourth quarter exceeded $61 billion, the largest of the year, according to AMG Data Services in Arcata, Calif. ''The inflows have been going to those fund groups that have either not been charged at all or not charged in an egregious way,'' said Robert Adler, president of AMG.
Mr. Adler said that more than half of the equity fund inflows had been received by three fund families that have not been connected with the scandal: American Funds, Vanguard and Fidelity Investments.
A poll in December by UBS and the Gallup Organization found that of the more than 800 investors nationwide who participated, 65 percent said that the scandals had not affected their mutual fund investment decisions. Seventy-three percent said they did not plan to shift assets out of mutual funds in the near future. But 75 percent said they would shift assets out of a mutual fund that admits wrongdoing.
''I am a little surprised that flows were as good as they were,'' said Russel Kinnel, director of fund research at Morningstar Inc. ''My guess as to why people are not that affected is that the scandal relating to market timing and other arrangements did a fairly small amount of damage to the funds themselves.''
For many investors, the stock market's performance may have helped to ease the scandal's sting.
Underlying economic fundamentals certainly provided a positive framework for stocks during the quarter. News about the strength of the economy was particularly encouraging, especially a report from the Commerce Department in late October that the gross domestic product had grown at an eye-popping 8.2 percent rate in the third quarter. ''That was a real jolt,'' Mr. McManus said.
There was other good news as well.
Corporate earnings reports released in the quarter were strong. Rising commodity prices helped natural resources companies. And the decline in the value of the dollar on foreign exchange markets helped investors in international funds, which turned in a stellar performance.
On average, international stock funds posted a return of just over 15 percent for the quarter, according to Morningstar data.
Some regional funds did much better than that.
Emerging-market funds were up by more than 18 percent. And Latin American stock funds generated a return of more than 20 percent in the quarter.
THE bang-up performance by Latin markets had more to do with commodity prices' strength than the dollar's weakness.
''Brazil was the driver for the quarter and the year as well,'' said Will Landers, co-manager of the Merrill Lynch Latin America fund, which rose 22 percent in the quarter and more than 68 percent for the year.
Thanks to surging commodity prices and strong demand from China, Brazil recorded a trade surplus of around $25 billion in 2003, Mr. Landers said. ''China was definitely the source of most of the growth we saw in Latin America in 2003,'' he said.
Over the course of last year, ''during meetings with Latin companies I watched my watch to see how long it would take for the subject of China to come up,'' Mr. Landers added.
A trip to Asia in the fourth quarter prompted Harry W. Lange, manager of the $4.5 billion Fidelity Capital Appreciation fund, to begin a major portfolio readjustment.
At the beginning of 2003, Mr. Lange said, 45 percent to 47 percent of the fund's assets were invested in technology stocks. In Asia, though, he said, ''seeing the massive demand for commodities started to make me think about commodity prices and inflation as being things we ought to start to think about.''
Over the last three months, he said, the fund has lopped its exposure to technology back to 12 to 15 percent of the overall portfolio, and increased its exposure to commodity-based companies, industrials and ''some Big Pharma companies that didn't perform well last year.''
The fund returned more than 51 percent for all of 2003.
Even though stocks performed well and the economy grew vigorously -- two factors that are normally not associated with positive developments in the fixed-income markets -- bond funds managed to have positive returns in the quarter.
Taxable bond funds returned 1.93 percent, according to Morningstar, while municipal bond funds returned 1.4 percent.
Given the current level of interest rates, bond funds will be challenged to post positive returns in 2004, analysts said. And it will probably be more difficult to make good money in stocks.
''This year could be tougher,'' said Bill Miller, manager of the $14 billion Legg Mason Value Trust, which in 2003 outperformed the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index for the 13th consecutive year. ''Last year, it was clear to us that you wanted to take on risk, which people had been fleeing for three years. Now, things are more evenly balanced.''
Mr. Kinnel of Morningstar recommended caution. ''There doesn't appear to be any area that is particularly attractive,'' he said.
''Diversify,'' he advised. ''And don't get carried away based on a fund's performance last year. People who were chasing performance in the late 1990's have hopefully learned a painful enough lesson that they won't repeat it again soon.''
