Senator Edward M. Kennedy was shaking his hips and pumping his fists to the beat. ''Love Train'' was playing, 600 hepped-up Democrats had packed a convention hall, and Senator John Kerry was at his side, watching a master whip up a crowd.
''People have enthusiasm!'' Mr. Kennedy shouted. ''People have life! People are ready to goooooooo in Dubuque!''
Following Mr. Kennedy to the microphone, Mr. Kerry gamely did his best. ''I was standing out there, and I was asked, is it hard to live in the shadow of a great senator like Ted Kennedy?'' he said. ''Is it upsetting to you personally to know that you will never have a legislative record as dazzling as Ted Kennedy? Are you jealous of the fact that you have to live with a living legend like him?
''And,'' Mr. Kerry added, ''it was Teddy asking me the question.''
In one way or another, it has ever been thus for Mr. Kerry: he came of age enthralled with the Kennedy brothers, still quotes John or Robert at almost every stop, and remembers working on Ted Kennedy's first Senate race in 1962, when the candidate did not even know his name.
But now, here in Iowa, Mr. Kerry, eclipsed for years by the senior senator from Massachusetts, has Mr. Kennedy barnstorming with him from Davenport to Dubuque to Cedar Rapids, nine days before the caucuses. And it is Mr. Kerry who gets the rock-star treatment.
As Mr. Kennedy rested behind a curtain after joking and declaiming to 500 people packed in a snowed-over Davenport fairgrounds Saturday, there was Mr. Kerry out front, lingering in his supporters' embrace for half an hour, autographing posters, touching and thanking everyone he could feel or see.
Moments earlier, Mr. Kennedy, the lion of the Senate, had lionized his colleague. What fleshed out his appreciation of Mr. Kerry, he roared, was how this Vietnam hero-turned-antiwar leader took on as a senator the unpopular cause of reconciliation with Vietnam and saw it through.
''There, behind that story, are the kinds of quality of character which we need in a nominee,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''They're steadfastness. They're continuity. They're doing what you say you're going to do. And you keep at it, and struggle at it, and keep at it till it gets done.''
That Mr. Kennedy, 71, is working so hard for Mr. Kerry, 60, speaks volumes about how far their relationship has come, their advisers and associates say.
''You could argue that Senator Kerry was seeking, for a big piece of his career, Senator Kennedy's approval, like a foster son to a father,'' said one Massachusetts Democrat who knows the two men well. ''And in this campaign, you see Senator Kennedy saying: 'O.K., I'm with you now. This is your time.' But there's always been a clear wanting the approval, wanting the blessing -- and in this case getting it.''
To junior senators from the same party, senior senators can be mentors or tormentors. And for Mr. Kerry, elected in 1984, the shadow his elder colleague cast could easily have seemed a prison.
It did not, Mr. Kerry said, though it helped that his natural inclinations led him into foreign affairs and the environment, and not health care, education and civil rights, the Kennedy spheres of influence. ''Staffs sometimes have a tendency to be a little competitive,'' Mr. Kerry said in an interview on his plane. ''But Teddy and I have always talked, always worked things through.''
That staff-level competition could be fierce: Kennedy aides once alerted newspapers after spotting Mr. Kerry's car in what was believed to be a parking spot for the handicapped. But the flare-ups between the principals were mainly out of public view, though Mr. Kennedy, in an interview, confirmed one account that a Kerry aide had denied, of a closed-door conflict over Mr. Kennedy's efforts to raise the minimum wage in 1995.
Mr. Kerry had voiced some doubts, Adam Clymer, a retired correspondent for The New York Times, wrote in ''Edward M. Kennedy: A Biography,'' and Mr. Kennedy erupted. ''If you're not for raising the minimum wage,'' he said, ''you don't deserve to call yourself a Democrat.''
Mr. Kennedy recalled the incident. ''That popped up,'' he said.
Though Mr. Kerry has come all the way around on the minimum wage -- in Davenport he spoke of ''a living wage'' -- the two have diverged elsewhere on policy: Mr. Kerry was quicker to embrace fiscal discipline and free trade. And Mr. Kennedy opposed the Iraq war resolution. He told reporters Saturday that he and Mr. Kerry both sought the same outcome in Iraq, and that both had been misled by the president.
But over the years, the two have come to each other's aid, and say they are closer than is widely known. In 1994, when Mr. Kennedy faced a tough challenge from Mitt Romney, now the governor of Massachusetts, Mr. Kerry stumped for him so much ''it was like having a second candidate,'' an adviser recalled. And in 1996, when Mr. Kerry was in a re-election fight with William F. Weld, Mr. Kennedy returned the favor.
Mr. Kennedy endorsed Al Gore fairly late in his 2000 race with Bill Bradley for the Democratic nomination, and worked considerably less on behalf of Paul Tsongas in 1992 than he has for Mr. Kerry. This time, he endorsed Mr. Kerry early, had Mr. Kerry to his home to meet labor leaders, raised money for him and provided a steady diet of advice.
When Mr. Kerry's campaign hit bottom in a staff shake-up in November, it was no surprise that he turned to Mr. Kennedy for help and brought in two Kennedy protégés to overhaul it. Mr. Kennedy said he had urged Mr. Kerry to make a change because he seemed not to have a comfort level with those around him.
Mr. Kennedy said he had counseled Mr. Kerry, among other things, to break down the distance between him and listeners: ''He does so well when he's moving around and mixing in a room,'' Mr. Kennedy said. ''He'd give a terrific talk, but there'd still be the distance. He does so much better when he's up close.
''John has an element of shyness about him,'' Mr. Kennedy added. ''It's counterintuitive to being a good politician. Some of that is perceived as standoffish. But people are getting to kind of understand him better. They're beginning to listen to him, rather than look at him.''
Mr. Kennedy's biggest contribution, though, has been on the stump.
''I saw John Kerry a little while ago, we were visiting,'' he told the crowd in Dubuque. ''And I said to John, 'Did you ever think when you were a young man, you'd grow up to be a hero in Vietnam, get elected to the United States Senate, and be a candidate for the presidency of the United States, a winning candidate?' And he said 'No, aren't I lucky.' And John said to me, 'When you were young, did you ever think you'd grow up to be the uncle-in-law of an Austrian bodybuilder Republican governor of Kah-Lee-For-Nee-Ah?' And I said, 'No, aren't I lucky?' ''
Mr. Kennedy recalled campaigning in Iowa for both his brothers, and again in 1980, when he lost badly to Jimmy Carter here. ''Now we're back, we're back here for John Kerry, and I want to ask of you, you know, you can have three out of four!'' he shouted. ''1960, 1968, give a pass in 1980 -- are you going to do it for John Kerry?''
Perhaps only an outsider with so much history here could get away with ribbing Iowans the way Mr. Kennedy does.
''Are you really glad to see me?'' he teased. ''Well, I'd feel a lot better. Because tonight the New England Patriots are playing the Titans, and to see who's going to be the Super Bowl champion. It may take another game or two, but tonight's going to be the key. But I said, 'Oh, noooo. I want to be in Dubuque, Iowa! I want to be in Dubuque, Iowa!''
Dubuque, Iowa, was laughing along.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
