I AM sitting in an empty room on the second story of an 1832 house in Greenport. Out the window, across the street, is an enchanting ginger-breaded B&amp;B, the Victorian Lady. Just a bit farther off lies Long Island Sound, studded with masts even though it is winter. This scene pleases me. This small town is my safe harbor now. I am, you see, a recent refugee from paradise, otherwise known as the Hamptons.
I lived in Sagaponack for 15 years, my house just minutes from the ocean. As a Stony Brook professor and artist, I couldn't afford a McMansion nor, honestly, ever wanted one. Instead, my wife and I created a comfortable and, I daresay, stylish home: The living room was swathed in Crayola Grasshopper Green; the Ikea kitchen testified to the wonders of the power screwdriver; the media room with sound that astounded visitors and, finally, breathtaking art throughout. Cloud Nine on a budget.
Nevertheless, a growing malaise began gripping us in our parcel of heaven. The quality of life in the summer nose-dived as the population increased; especially on weekends, when we took to our house as if it was a Berlin bunker. It's the old story all us year-rounders know: choked, impassable roads, including the back ones that only the natives knew until they were published in one of those clever summer Baedeker's.
It worsened when the weekenders figured out that for $100 per person, they could ''copter in'' with their buddies from New York and triumphantly leave the frustrated thousands below and behind them. The increased air traffic altered the previous flight patterns, with my house now in the approach to the East Hampton Airport. Sipping a perfect martini on one's deck at the end of a long summer day becomes considerably less than perfect when a low-flying helicopter or business jet penetrates your precious two-thirds acre of air space.
Simultaneously, the forested properties around us became the hosts of loud, late-night parties instead of the cows, partridge families, foxes and other better-behaved inhabitants we had grown used to. All the while, real estate companies were peppering us with shameless invitations to sell and reap great profit.
Gradually we realized that Ayn Rand was alive and well and living in the Hamptons. She, Howard Rourke and the centeredness philosophy of Objectivism thrived as the nouveaux riches demanded and received attention at the expense of all others. What made me uncomfortable? Was it watching a woman in Radio Shack approach hysterics demanding that her out-of-warranty videocassette recorder be repaired in two days for her weekend dinner party? Or was it the man in Twice Upon a Bagel who walked to the head of the long Sunday morning line expecting and demanding that he be served immediately because he had money in his pocket? Locals rolled out goings-on like these as if in a contest called ''Can You Top This?''
To some these incidents might be public piffle. To me, raised on ''Thank You'' notes and the like, the worm was in paradise and voraciously gnawing away.
And so we sold our modest home at an embarrassingly Rand price, bought this old Victorian lady with twice the space and bade farewell to the Hamptons, or ''Southside'' as it is called here.
Ingrid and I, not unlike Newman and Redford, leaped off the cliff into the unknowns of the North Fork. We landed in a different country where the natives are friendly and immediately extended a warm welcome to us. Within a week of our arrival, Maria and David, the B&amp;B people across the street, came over with a bottle of North Fork wine to welcome us; Colin, our contractor, after advising me to move my car off the street before a heavy snowfall, cleared our driveway the next day when he was plowing the roadways; another professor emeritus, like myself, lives down our street and owns Ternhaven Cellars Wines; the local library asked us to join their Film Committee. And, imagine, all the time people even say ''thank you.''
It's been a few months now. We're still living out of cartons and the varnish fumes make us flee to the local movie theater, seven minutes away by foot. But soon enough, the electricians will be gone, the power roller will be called to action, the art work will arise onto the walls and we'll have an open house to reciprocate the kindness extended to us. This village is slowly becoming ours, our safe anchorage for a long time to come.
Paradise, I suspect like beauty, lies in the eye of the beholder and is as much a mystery.
SOAPBOX Michael Edelson lives in Greenport.
