Devils forward Brian Gionta was sandwiched by two Maple Leafs defensemen with little hope of breaking in alone on the Toronto goal. But the 175-pound Gionta pushed back, spun around and spied Jay Pandolfo streaking to an open patch of ice.
That time down the ice, Maple Leafs goalie Ed Belfour thwarted Pandolfo, but the play served as evidence that the Devils had returned to using the type of grit Coach Pat Burns said his team had lacked in recent games.
Playing Saturday night against a Toronto club that was missing five regulars, including the former Devils forward Alexander Mogilny and Owen Nolan, Toronto's second-leading scorer, the Devils skated to a 1-0 victory. They snapped a two-game losing streak and placated Burns, who compared the game's atmosphere to that of the playoffs.
''It had that intensity,'' Burns said. ''There were two teams going in that were in a little bit of a funk, and you really couldn't fault their work ethic tonight, either.''
As has become customary when the Devils have skidded, goaltender Martin Brodeur elevated his level of play. He easily turned aside routine shots and made several dazzling saves en route to his league-leading ninth shutout of the season and the 73rd of his career.
Brodeur, who stopped 25 Toronto shots, moved into a tie with the former Montreal Maroons goaltender Lorne Chabot for eighth in shutouts on the N.H.L. list.
''It's a record for one reason: because it's hard to get,'' said Brodeur, who also recorded his league-high 20th victory of the season. ''For us, it was a big relief after the past few games.''
Brodeur acknowledged that he was lucky, too. Midway through the second period, with the Devils penned in their own end, Toronto forward Mikael Renberg received a pass and, standing 15 feet away from the net, had a chance to score with Brodeur sprawled on the other side of the crease. Renberg shot the puck high over the net.
''I was getting ready to take the puck out of the net,'' Brodeur said. ''He had the whole net to shoot at.''
The Devils were playing their second successive game without their captain, Scott Stevens, who has the flu. Defenseman Scott Niedermayer said the game plan had been to weather the home team's attack, resist taking penalties and capitalize on turnovers by the Maple Leafs (23-10-8-3).
''We wanted to play a simple game and try to get the puck out of harm's way,'' Niedermayer said.
The Devils (21-10-9-1) scored in the final minute of the first period on a four-on-three rush. Pandolfo carried the puck over the Toronto blue line and made a drop pass to Niedermayer, whose shot appeared to deflect off Maple Leafs defenseman Ric Jackman. The puck wound up in front of Gionta, who snapped it past Belfour for his eighth goal. Belfour finished with 32 saves.
HOCKEY
