When their games start feeling like a tightrope walk, the Carolina Panthers do a funny thing. They get comfortable.
As hard as the St. Louis Rams' fans tried to fill the Edward Jones Dome with something resembling thunder for four hours Saturday, the Panthers would not be rattled. Their playoff game with the Rams dragged them through a season's worth of ups and downs, yet the Panthers entered the second overtime of the biggest game of the season by simply gathering in the huddle as if they were running a drill in training camp.
The play, named X-clown, drew a smile from receiver Steve Smith because of what he suspected would follow. He grabbed a pass across the middle and raced 69 yards for a touchdown to cap the wildest and strangest playoff game he or any of his teammates had seen, a 29-23 victory 10 seconds into the second overtime of their National Football Conference divisional matchup. The game had seemed won and lost many times before it finally was.
''The biggest thing is, we stayed calm,'' Carolina quarterback Jake Delhomme said, sweat still dripping from his eyebrow an hour later. ''We've been through it before. We just look at each other and think, 'Let's get it done.' ''
Delhomme said he looked around the huddle between the first and second overtimes and saw none of his teammates breathing hard. He said he never had to repeat the plays, no matter how loud the crowd.
This is what happens when a team cobbled together out of blue-collar players and with a no-nonsense former defensive coordinator as coach wins a string of close, ugly games during the regular season and enters the playoffs with so little fanfare that few people outside of Charlotte, N.C., paid them much mind.
Their quarterback was pulled off a free-agency scrap heap. Their star running back was a castoff from the woeful Redskins. Their defense could be stifling, but it never managed anything the least bit flashy.
Against the star-studded Rams, who had not lost at home in their previous 14 games, who were trying to resurrect the high-flying style that won them the Super Bowl in 2000, Carolina seemed nothing more than a nuisance. The Rams had receivers like Torry Holt and Isaac Bruce, who make defenses quiver.
But it is Carolina that is heading to the N.F.C. championship game, and only a game with Philadelphia or Green Bay next weekend stands between the Panthers and a Super Bowl berth.
''What it shows is we have a great team, a championship-caliber football team,'' safety Mike Minter said. ''Might as well keep playing. We'll go to two, three, four overtimes. It doesn't matter. We'll play until we win. We showed everybody we've got the heart of a champion.''
For most of the game, the Panthers were busy writing a modern N.F.L. version of the tortoise and the hare fable. They were grinding out their usual game plan, depending on the running of Stephen Davis until he left with a pulled quadriceps, and then on his backup, DeShaun Foster.
The defense kept holding St. Louis to field goals. With 43 seconds left in the third, the Panthers held the lead, 16-12. They scored a touchdown in the fourth to extend their margin to 23-12, when the hare came back.
The Rams drove for a 1-yard touchdown by Marshall Faulk with 2 minutes 39 seconds remaining in regulation and got a 2-point conversion pass from Marc Bulger to Dane Looker, then place-kicker Jeff Wilkins recovered his own onside kick. The Rams drove into field-goal range, but Coach Mike Martz made a curious decision: he let 25 seconds tick off the clock. Instead of using the momentum to try for a touchdown, Martz ran down the clock, called a timeout with three seconds left, and sent in Wilkins to kick a 33-yard field goal to tie the score.
''They were satisfied going into overtime,'' Minter said. ''They didn't want to make a mistake. I'm sure they felt like it was destiny for them to win it in overtime.''
With that, Minter smiled. Close games, overtime games; those are seemingly the Panthers' destiny. They won their second game of the season by blocking an extra point to force overtime. They took four games to overtime, losing one of them. Seven victories came by 3 points or fewer. They looked ready to make it eight on their first drive in overtime. John Kasay made a 40-yard field goal and the Panthers ran on the field to celebrate. But the field goal was waved off because of a delay-of-game penalty. Three plays later, Kasay missed from 45 yards.
''I have never seen a game quite like that,'' Carolina Coach John Fox said, still trying to catch his breath.
And it was far from over. The Rams still had their moments, driving for a 53-yard field-goal attempt that Wilkins missed. The Rams were driving again when Bulger was intercepted by Ricky Manning Jr.
That set up Carolina's final drive, interrupted only by the break at the end of the first overtime.
In that break, Fox shifted the play from one side of the field to the other, so Smith would have to beat only Rams safety Jason Sehorn. It worked, Delhomme lofting the perfect pass, Smith catching it in stride and sailing toward the end zone.
Even before he got there, his teammates began their second celebration of the day.
When Fox was asked about the winning play, he asked, ''Which one?'' and smiled. ''I think we were all pretty drained by that point.''
The Panthers headed home to watch Sunday's Philadelphia-Green Bay game, their opponent and game site still undecided.
The Rams walked off the field dazed, their season ended with so many questions and only one answer. They were the hare and, according to form, they lost.
''We have known all along that this is what they are,'' Martz said of the Panthers. ''Tough football team. They deserve the right to move on.''
Calmly, they will.
PRO FOOTBALL
