RUTGERS 65, PROVIDENCE 64
After having just about nothing go their way for most of Saturday night's game against Providence, Rutgers's players needed everything to go exactly right in the final 10 seconds.
Trailing by 5 in a game that should not have been that close, the Scarlet Knights needed Herve Lamizana to make a desperation 3-pointer with 10.5 seconds remaining, which he did, after double-clutching the shot and banking it off the backboard.
Then Rutgers needed Providence's Donnie McGrath, a 75 percent free-throw shooter, to miss two free throws with 5.7 seconds left, which he did, giving the Scarlet Knights one last shot.
When Lamizana hit the game's final shot, a 22-foot heave while falling out of bounds with four-tenths of a second left, the capacity crowd at the Louis Brown Athletic Center went into a frenzy and Rutgers had a 65-64 victory over No. 25 Providence.
''I told the guys that no matter what, we were going to find a way to win this game,'' Lamizana said. ''The first shot was just luck, the second one was more than that.'
It was a particularly devastating loss for the Friars (8-3), who had lost on Monday to Texas in similar fashion, giving up a last-second shot.
''It's tough when it happens to you twice in five days, but that's the way it is,'' Providence Coach Tim Welsh said.
There are few big games in January, but for Rutgers (8-4), Saturday's game qualified as one.
Losers of three straight games, including a 1-point loss to Connecticut on Tuesday night, the Scarlet Knights came into the game 0-2 in the Big East with a game at unbeaten Pittsburgh looming next weekend.
This was a game Rutgers had no business winning. The Scarlet Knights trailed by 10 at the half and never led in the second half until the final seconds. Two free throws by Ricky Shields cut the deficit to 53-49 with 6 minutes 49 seconds left, and his 3-pointer from the right corner a minute later cut the Providence lead to a point.
But Ryan Gomes, the Friars' leading scorer, responded. Gomes, who missed his first four attempts from behind the 3-point line, drilled his fifth one, extending the lead to 4. Moments later, he took the ball in the low post and beat Rutgers's Adrian Hill for a layup. He was fouled on the play, and his free throw pushed the lead back to 6. Gomes finished with a game-high 27 points, and his free throws with 19 seconds left gave the Friars a seemingly unbeatable 5-point lead.
Providence, playing in its conference opener, dominated the paint and the tempo from the outset. Friars center Marcus Douthit scored 11 points in the first half, but he may have made the biggest impact on the defensive end. Anchoring the middle of an extended zone defense, Douthit, a 6-foot-10 senior, blocked three shots and altered several others before the break.
Two more rejections early in the second half turned Rutgers into a jump-shooting team. But it turned out that jump shots, and two jump shots in particular, were all the Scarlet Knights needed.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
