Three times this season, the Rangers have played the Islanders, with whom they share a long and fierce rivalry. And three times, the Rangers have elevated their game and defeated the Islanders. On Saturday afternoon at Nassau Coliseum, they held off the Islanders, 3-2.
The Rangers' success against the Islanders raises the question of why they cannot play the same way against other teams.
''It seems when we play this game, there's a lot more concentration,'' Rangers Coach Glen Sather said. ''And we've been trying all year to get these guys to concentrate on every game like it's an Islander game.''
Because the Rangers have not been able to do that, they still trail the Islanders by 2 points for the eighth and final playoff berth in the Eastern Conference.
The Rangers raced to a 3-0 lead in the opening 7 minutes 41 seconds Saturday. They also played well in the third period, and center Bobby Holik agreed that the team had to start turning in the same kind of performance consistently, beginning with Sunday's game against the Tampa Bay Lightning at Madison Square Garden.
''Today was a step in the right direction,'' Holik said. ''But we don't want to take a step forward and then two steps back tomorrow night.''
Islanders Coach Steve Stirling would settle for a better start against the Rangers when the teams meet again Tuesday at the Garden. In their three meetings this season, the Rangers have taken leads of 3-0, 2-0 and 3-0.
On Saturday, the Rangers took their lead on goals by Eric Lindros, Chris Simon and Martin Rucinsky in a span of 1:38. Stirling pulled goaltender Garth Snow after Rucinsky's goal at 7:41.
''I think we played the first minute good and then the next 19 we played intimidated,'' Stirling said. ''It was more mental than physical, but it was a combination of the two.''
Snow stopped just four of the seven shots he faced. Rick DiPietro, who replaced him, shut out the Rangers, stopping 27 shots.
Still, the Rangers were able to continue their strange dominance over the Islanders. Over their last 14 games at Nassau Coliseum, the Rangers are 11-2-1-0. Since the Rangers obtained goaltender Mike Dunham on Dec. 12, 2002, the Rangers have not lost in seven meetings against the Islanders, with Dunham going 5-0-2 in that span. Dunham made 28 saves Saturday.
For the season, however, the Rangers are 17-16-5-3. The Islanders are 20-18-3-1.
The Islanders dominated the second period and pulled to 3-2 when Justin Papineau and Mattias Weinhandl (on the power play) scored 2:41 apart midway through the period. But the Rangers played a solid third period defensively to hold on for the victory.
Dunham, who had been pulled in two of his previous four starts, said, ''Today, I felt like my old self.''
SLAP SHOTS
The Rangers were furious that Islanders goalie RICK DiPIETRO left his stick on the goal line to protect an empty net in the game's final minute before skating to the bench to give the Islanders an extra attacker. Referee PAUL DEVORSKI did not call a penalty and instead retrieved the stick and took it to the Islanders' bench. ''I've seen Snowy do it once or twice,'' DiPietro said, referring to Islanders goaltender GARTH SNOW. ''Next time, it might be a yard sale. Maybe the helmet and glove.'' . . . Rangers defenseman GREG DE VRIES, who will miss four to six weeks with a sprained knee, had his consecutive-games streak end at 223, the sixth longest among active N.H.L. players.
HOCKEY
