The queen of American figure skating is still the queen.
Michelle Kwan, at 23 the doyenne of the sport, turned back the challenge of 19-year-old Sasha Cohen on Saturday night with an inspired and joyful performance in the free skate that had fans on their feet long before her program ended.
It was Kwan's seventh straight victory at the United States figure skating championships and her eighth in nine years. It was also the 11th straight time she finished as a medalist in the nationals.
No other American woman has won seven straight. The only man to do it is Dick Button (1946 to 1952). Next year, Kwan can tie Maribel Vinson's record of nine American titles.
The men's winner was 19-year-old Johnny Weir of Newark, Del., who had to qualify from the Eastern sectionals rather then get here on a pass. A sign hanging from the mezzanine of Philips Arena on Saturday afternoon read, ''Johnny Be Good.'' As it turned out, he was great.
In 2000, Cohen won the women's short program, only to have Kwan pass her in the free skate. It happened again Saturday, mainly because Cohen tired late in her program.
The blind draw made Cohen the first of the six leaders to skate (Kwan was fourth). Cohen quickly reeled off three triple-double combinations. She was doing fine until she fell on a triple toe loop, the simplest of the triple jumps, and landed unsteadily on a triple salchow.
Still, her scores were glowing: 5.6 to 5.8 for technical merit, 5.8 to an astonishing 6.0 (given her slip-ups) for artistic impression, the first perfect score of her career.
But Kwan did six triples, all cleanly. Her skating was flawless. With 30 seconds left, she was grinning madly, racing around the rink as if on a victory lap. When it ended, she was in tears, almost disbelieving how well she had done.
The judges removed all doubts. They gave her 5.8's and 5.9's for technical merit, two 5.9's and seven 6.0's for performance (she now has 35 6.0's).
''I knew in the warm-ups I was on,'' Kwan said. ''I had so much energy. I felt solid.''
All Kwan had to do to win the title was to win the free skate, which counts for two-thirds of the final score. She did it, relegating Cohen to second. Jennifer Kirk finished third.
Cohen's problem was an old one.
''I was getting a little tired,'' she said. ''On the toe loop where I fell, my arms were going faster than my legs did. It's an easy jump for me, but when your legs are tired, it's not easy.''
Weir, the new men's champion, won the world junior title three years ago, but he had never won a major senior title. On Thursday, he won the short program, with Michael Weiss, 27, the defending champion, fourth. Weiss needed breakdowns by all three skaters ahead of him to have a chance at winning, but no one broke down.
Weir skated last and Weiss next to last. Weiss decided against trying one or two quadruple jumps. ''They didn't feel right in the warm-up,'' he said.
Still, Weiss got through nine triples (only the first eight counted), and his scores ranged from 5.6 to 5.9 for technical merit and 5.7 to 5.8 for artistic impression.
That left room for Weir, who decided against a quad (no one landed one) and played it safe. He did eight clean triples, seemed in control from the start, and won. His scores were 5.8's and 5.9's for technical merit, and 5.7 to a 6.0 for presentation.
Seven of the nine judges voted Weir first in the free skate, with two judges favoring Weiss. In the final standing, Weiss was second and Matt Savoie was third.
''Amazing,'' Weir said of his performance. ''I think I was being very tentative so I wouldn't make a mistake.''
Weir was previously best known for his disastrous performance at last year's nationals, where his skate blade stuck in the boards on the side of the rink, twisting his back. He was allowed to restart, only to fall on a triple axel, land on his left knee, and injure it. At that point, he withdrew.
This victory appeared to be vindication.
''I think so,'' he said. ''I was so embarrassed. I'm happy I've been able to come back and shut everyone up.''
FIGURE EIGHTS
The skating attracted 9,773 spectators in the afternoon for the men and 13,787 in the evening for the women. . . . KIMBERLY MEISSNER of Bel Air, Md., who won the novice title last year, won the national junior championship.
FIGURE SKATING
