Before April 29, 1996, there was nothing out of the ordinary about Maria Ramirez's pregnancy.
But when she returned home from a prenatal appointment, the unthinkable happened.
''Something ruptured,'' she said, making a noise like a water balloon bursting.
Ms. Ramirez, now 39, was rushed to Bellevue Hospital Center, where an emergency Caesarean section was performed.
''She was born with no oxygen to her head,'' Ms. Ramirez said of her daughter, Victoria Samalot, who was born weighing 2 pounds 12 ounces. ''It took them 5 to 10 minutes to revive her.''
Victoria was born six weeks early with cerebral palsy. Ms. Ramirez says her daughter will probably be like a baby for her entire life.
Ms. Ramirez's dedication to her daughter is apparent to everyone she meets. It is also evident to her other children -- Anthony Fernandez, 16, and Wilfredo Samalot Jr., 12 -- as well as her two nephews who live with her, Victor Figueroa, 13, and Axel Velasquez, 17.
Ms. Ramirez started taking care of Victor in July 1998 when his mother, her sister, was taken to a hospital for drug treatment.
''He said he wanted to come home to live with his aunt,'' Ms. Ramirez said of Victor's request to the police and children's services. She adopted him two years later. ''I love him just the same. It's as if he was my son.''
Her other nephew, Axel, visits his mother in the Bronx, who is limited by arthritis.
It has not been easy for Ms. Ramirez to raise five children by herself. She pays $461 a month for their three-bedroom apartment in the Jacob Riis Apartment Complex on the Lower East Side. Ms. Ramirez has been on public assistance since 1996, when she left her job as a counselor because she was pregnant with Victoria. Since then, she has dedicated herself to caring for her daughter.
Each month she receives $575 for Victoria, $575 for Anthony and $230 from public assistance. But the money does not stretch far.
''There's a lot of mouths to feed in this house and I have to provide for them,'' she explained.
The children's fathers do not make many financial contributions.
''I went to college,'' Ms. Ramirez said. ''I have bachelor's and associate's degrees. I always wanted to be a lawyer. But then things happen.''
Now, Ms. Ramirez is determined to see to it that her children don't get sidetracked from their own hopes and dreams. ''I just want all these kids to be successful,'' she said.
A lot of the hope that Ms. Ramirez has centers on the education of her children. She attends PTA meetings and has found books and materials for them at local school board conferences.
She boasts of her son Wilfredo's accomplishments. ''He was never late, never sick,'' she said. ''They honored him when he graduated from elementary school. They gave me a bouquet of flowers.''
Victoria gets physical and occupational therapy every day at a city program for disabled children at Public School 138 in Manhattan.
But there is never a shortage of challenges to meet.
Anthony, in particular, has had a difficult beginning in life. He was found to have attention deficit disorder when he was 5 and stayed at Bellevue until he was 7.
''He's had a personality that people don't understand,'' Ms. Ramirez said of Anthony. ''He was 5 years old and I took him to an appointment, and they found him to be suicidal.''
Doctors have given Anthony Zoloft, lithium and Ritalin, but Ms. Ramirez said she thought that the best medication for him was the two years he had spent at the Astor Home for Children, a residential facility in Rhinebeck, N.Y. There he was taken off his medication and received counseling. He has since returned to live with his mother.
''He's doing much better,'' she said, pointing to a display case in the living room filled with his basketball trophies.
Then there are basic financial needs. In January, for example, the boys needed new beds when the wooden undersides cracked under their weight. Anthony's doctor at Bellevue referred her to the New Alternatives for Children in 2000, a beneficiary agency of the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. Her caseworker at New Alternatives, Stephanie O'Brien, secured $775 of Neediest Cases money to help buy new beds.
The state Office of Mental Health's Intensive Case Management Program, which counsels Anthony, also provided $250 for the beds. ''It was a very big help,'' she said. ''Victor sleeps on top, Anthony on the bottom, and Wilfredo is on the small bed.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,688,556.64  Recorded Thursday: 13,321.00
Total: $6,701,877.64
Last year to date: $7,157,040.35
