The buzzer sounded, not like an alarm this time, but more like a momentary sigh of relief for Don Chaney.
As time ran out on the frenetic game, enabling the Knicks to preserve a determined 94-88 victory over the Milwaukee Bucks, the assistant coach Brendan Malone pumped Chaney's hand and offered hearty congratulations.
Chaney smiled thinly. Only Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president, could reassure him, and Thomas was extending lukewarm confidence.
''As long as we're losing,'' Thomas said before the game, ''I'm not satisfied.''
The night was at least joyful for some of the Knicks. Point guard Stephon Marbury notched his first victory as a Knick last night in Madison Square Garden, delivering 11 assists and combining with Allan Houston, who hit the game-winner, to score 40 points.
All night, Marbury spun the Bucks silly on the pick-and-roll with Kurt Thomas, who had a game-high 28 points and 16 rebounds.
Without forward Keith Van Horn, who hyperextended his right knee at the beginning of the second half, the Knicks' defense still stymied the Bucks in the final three minutes.
This was the kind of gutsy result Isiah Thomas wanted and Chaney so desperately needed to save his job. The Knicks snapped a four-game losing streak, but it was one victory. That is not enough, as Thomas said before the game and Chaney said afterward.
''No, I've said this before, we have to get to the playoffs and win games,'' Chaney said. ''One win or loss should not make a difference.''
The Knicks improved to 15-23, and Thomas's evaluation will continue.
The Knicks were coming off a 111-79 rout at home to Houston on Thursday, and Thomas was asked before last night's game how long he would be patient with Chaney. His nonanswer was answer enough.
''To answer that fairly and correctly, our responsibility is to try to be the best and to keep moving to be the best,'' he said. ''And Don, Don's confident that he can do that. The players have confidence in him. And my job is to sit back and evaluate and see where that process is going.''
Thomas's omission about his own confidence in Chaney was glaring. He had to be prompted to say he had confidence in him. ''Yes, I do, and I've said that before,'' Thomas said. Thomas immediately added that in his job, he should not be judged on what he said previously.
''I'm not happy,'' he said. ''My job is to try to make sure we get to a point where we're winning and not thinking that we're winning, but really winning.''
Thomas called Thursday's loss one of the ''embarrassing moments'' in a period of change. He heard the Garden crowd chanting, ''Fire Chaney.''
Last night, the fans were chanting, ''Let's Go Knicks'' instead, and everything was right, for the moment.
Marbury and Houston ignited the Knicks to a 14-point first-quarter lead, falling into sync as the team shot 60 percent.
The Knicks never trailed again, but the Bucks came back to tie three times. Penny Hardaway, the throw-in to the Marbury trade, hit two crucial jumpers and scored 7 of his 14 points in the fourth quarter. After the Bucks' Joe Smith tied the game with 3 minutes 11 seconds to play, Houston sank a 14-footer with 2:19 left to make it 90-88.
With 32.7 seconds remaining, Milwaukee's Tim Thomas missed a shot and Houston came up with the ball. Hardaway was fouled on the other end and his free throws with 11.3 seconds left sealed the victory.
Asked if the players saved Chaney's job, Kurt Thomas said, ''We can't really look at it as if one game was going to do that.''
Houston supported Chaney. ''When we won four straight, nobody gave him credit,'' he said. ''But when we lose, everybody wants to give him credit. That's not fair.''
Chaney has had to coach a team that Isiah Thomas has aggressively recreated around Marbury, and until last night, the players have not been in sync with one another. Thomas was both preaching patience and indicating that he might not be patient too long with Chaney.
''When I took the job we all talked about a four-, five-year process,'' he said. ''We make one trade and you say we got to get in the playoffs this year. We never said that. I think everyone's excited that we got started. But this deal is a long process.''
But when James L. Dolan, the Madison Square Garden chairman, hired Thomas on Dec. 22, Dolan said, ''We need to and must make the playoffs.''
Thomas's goal with the Marbury trade was clearly to win now, because he gave Phoenix two first-round draft picks in the deal. Thomas is not done, and according to two Eastern Conference officials, he is still actively pursuing a trade with Portland for Rasheed Wallace.
But rather than offering Van Horn, Thomas is believed to be offering Kurt Thomas as the centerpiece, with at least three others included. Dallas is pursuing Wallace, too.
Isiah Thomas does not like to lose any more than he likes to be threatened. He showed such toughness during Thursday's game when he confronted a fan who verbally attacked him for trading Charlie Ward. Thomas, according to two witnesses, shouted back to him. As the fan was taken away by security, Thomas followed before being restrained.
''If you're a fan and you pay your money to get in the game, you can do whatever you want, but you do not have the right to come in my face and verbally abuse me,'' Thomas said.
''Where I come from, hey, you talk to me like that, something's going to happen.''
REBOUNDS
KEITH VAN HORN, who had 6 points in 22 minutes, was taken to a hospital after the game for a magnetic resonance imaging exam. Results will be available today.
PRO BASKETBALL
