JUST before halftime, the sound system tried to trick people by playing Frank Sinatra's mellow classic, ''Summer Wind,'' evoking the live-forever feel of a breeze on a park bench at midnight, with crickets chirping.
Nice try. The home fans, who can describe varying states of cold the way Icelanders categorize snow, believed this weather was to the advantage of their Patriots.
In the coldest home game ever played by the team from New England, where winters come early and stay late, the Patriots held off Tennessee, 17-14, on a 46-yard field goal by Adam Vinatieri with 4 minutes 6 seconds left.
The Patriots have now won the four coldest home games in their history, in four different decades.
The halftime temperature was 3 degrees and a wind chill of minus 12, if you believe in the concept. The fans came early and stayed late, in their pullover hats and parkas and thick gloves and nose-warmers and ear-warmers and double socks.
''It helps, it really does, to have everybody screaming in zero degrees,'' said Tom Brady, the Patriots' quarterback, who played with only one glove, à la Michael Jackson.
The fans had been convinced that last night's playoff was inevitable at 8:15 p.m. on a Saturday, what with the history of the 16-13 victory over the Raiders in a divisional playoff game two seasons ago.
The National Football League and its television partners, in their infinite wisdom, did indeed put the game in the coldest climate in the latest of the four starting times this weekend.
Greg Aiello, the league's vice president for public relations, said the placement was mostly coincidence; CBS had assigned that slot for the top-seeded American Conference team before the Patriots clinched the spot.
Since the fans were not complaining, it hardly makes sense for a writer in a heated press box to whine. The fans know how to have a good time. Layers. That was the mantra.
''Just like skiing,'' said Bill Neifert, a ticket-holder from Waltham, Mass. ''Long underwear, a layer of fleece, another layer, and then a wind- and-waterproof layer.''
They all talk about the ''snowball game'' on Dec. 7, when fans fought through a heavy snowstorm to reach this frigid outpost. The fans made it joyous by moving excess snow into empty rows and tossing missiles into the air to the beat of the music on the sound system.
''Rhythmic snowballs,'' said Jack Starr, making it sound like an Olympic event. ''The most fun I've had in 40 years,'' added Starr, whose family has had tickets to Patriots games for four decades.
Last night's game was not played in a driving snowstorm, like the memorable contest against the Raiders two years ago. ''It actually was balmy and comfortable that night,'' said Mark Starr, a cousin of Jack's and a correspondent for Newsweek, who was at the Boston Patriots' first preseason game in Harvard Stadium in 1960.
There were reports last night of a couple of heart attacks, which is considered normal for a crowd of 67,000 here. A few cases of frostbite were also treated.
The N.F.L. may stop a game because of lightning, but it has never canceled a game because of cold or snow or rain or fog.
The coldest game on record was in Green Bay, Wis., on Dec. 31, 1967, when the Packers defeated Dallas, 21-17. The temperature was minus 13, with a wind chill of minus 60. ''When we held a contest for the greatest game in the history of the league, that Ice Bowl game won,'' Aiello said.
For a conference championship game in Cincinnati on Jan. 10, 1982, when the Bengals defeated San Diego, 27-7, the temperature was minus 9 and the wind chill was listed as minus 59.
''Is there a point where it would be declared unsafe?'' Aiello said. ''Certainly. Minus 20 or minus 30 temperatures would be declared a health factor. But it's not even close.''
The cold did not dampen the festive air last night. Robert Kraft, the Patriots' owner, displayed the trophy from Super Bowl XXXVI in his private suite, where he entertained the basic A-List guests with names like Dershowitz, Karmazin, Weill and Trump.
Almost every seat was filled by fans who had their game plans for staying reasonably warm:
Mark Degon, the news director at WRNI-FM in Providence, R.I., said: ''I think twice about beverages. That line at the stadium can be awfully long.''
Tom Kogut, a news producer at WRNI and a ticket-holder, said: ''I've discovered that a beer can will stick to a plastic table in cold weather. We're not going to tailgate this time. We're going to have our chowder inside the Jeep.''
Traffic jams are legendary at the stadium along Route 1, so many fans arrived early and watched the afternoon playoff game on television, many of them perched outdoors on camp chairs, as they would during a friendly summer wind.
Neifert had rented a propane heater for $50, bought propane for $30 and rented a generator for $30 to power up the 19-inch television. His group also served a tailgate meal of steak tips and Buffalo wings.
A native of Iowa, Neifert believes that his childhood team, the Minnesota Vikings, had a huge advantage outdoors in the old Met Stadium, particularly in playoff games in which they wore short-sleeved jerseys and no gloves.
''It's all about your state of mind,'' Neifert said. ''If you're home, you can hear the commentary, see the replays, but the adrenaline starts going when you walk to the stadium. If your team is playing well, you don't feel a thing. If we start losing, all of a sudden you're cold, despite the technology.''
The fans took a positive approach. The Patriots made them feel like a night on the front porch, warmed by a summer wind.
Sports of The Times  Correction:  January 13, 2004, Tuesday  A Sports of The Times column on Sunday about the New England Patriots fans who endured single-digit temperatures during the playoff game against the Tennessee Titans on Saturday referred imprecisely in some copies to a game played at Harvard Stadium in 1960. It was the first preseason game in team history, not the first official game.
