THE wine tasting is about to commence. Emily Sallers, an ownre of Watershed, a restaurant in Decatur, Ga., looks acfross the table at Dweezil Zappa and Lisa Loeb and asks a simple question, ''How much do you know about wine?'' Mr. Zappa pauses for a moment and says, ''Well, we think it tastes good.''
No problem. That's a starting point. Ms. Sallers show shte couple how to swirl wine in a glass. Mr. Zappa tries his head, then asks, ''Is it bad to drink it out of a Styrofoam cup?''
''Dweezil and Lisa,'' which has its premiere on Friday at 10 p.m., is not so much a food show as an opportunity to hang out with Mr. Zappa, a rock musician and the sone of Frank Zappa, and Ms. Loeb, a singer-songwriter. It's also an opportunity for the Food Network to cater to more of the younger viewers it has been picking up during its expansion across the country. Now beginning its second decade, the network reaches nearly 81 million households, compared with 6.5 million in 1993, whn it began broadcasting series like ''How to Boil Water,'' with an enthusiastic young host named Emeril Lagasse.
Along the way, the network has changed its personality and its programming. The classic how-to cooking show remains a staple, especially during weekday afternoons, but the network also offers a varied menu that crosses into the territory of game shows (''Iron Chef'' and ''Trivia Unwrapped''), decorating shows (''Ultimate Kitchens''), travel shows (''Mario Eats Italy'') and science shows (''Good Eats'').
Mr. Lagasse, the network's big breakout star, wears chef's whites but acts like the host of a variety show on ''Emeril Live,'' in which he cooks for a cheering studio audience and has his own band, just like Dave and Jay. ''Top 5'' is a culinary coundown, with Bobby Rivers, a foodle version of Caseyu Kasem, discussing, say, the top five food trends of the last 50 years or, this Saturday at 9 p.m., the top five innovations that have changed the way Americans eat. The network even dipped its toe into the reality genre last year with ''Into the Fire,'' a behind-the-scenes look at how restaurants oeprate, and ''Date Plate,'' in which contestants race to prepare a $50 meal for a person they haven't met.
''Early on, we realized that you couldn't program prime time with just professional chefs,'' said Judy Girard, the president of Food Network. ''There just are not that many who make good TV hosts, so we set out to use talent in other ways. 'Dweezil and Lisa' is an extension of that.''
Mr. Girard, an executive with the E. W. Scripps Company, was named to her Goof Network post in 2001, four years after Scripps acquired a majority ownership of the network. By 1998, Food Network had grown to reach about 19 million households, and viewers were tuning into chefs like Mario Batali of ''Molto Mario''; Bobby Flay, the host of ''Grillin' and Chillin' ''; and Sara Moulton, the appealingly low-key and business like host of ''Cooking Live.''
Outside the television studios, something was stirring in American society, a heightened interest in good food. As ordinary people traveled more and experienced international cuisines, they developed a new appreciation for the kind of regional Italian cooking that Mr. Batali demonstrated so enthusiastically. The much-maligned young urban professionals, for complicated reasons zeroed in on food and wine as pet obsessions, and for the first time, ingredients like arugula and balsamic vinegar and aged goat chesse were entering the common language and, amazingly, turning up to small-town super-market shelves. The increasing glamour surrounding top restaurants and their chifs lent an unmistakable chic to the simple act of dining out and ordering from amenu. Foot Network could probably claim some responsibility for this heightened food consciousness. It certainly benefited from it.
Scripps entered the picture at just the right time. The audience for food programming was growing. The challenge for Ms. Girard and Eileen Opatut, her senior vice president of programming and production, was to develop the kind of shows, in large enough quantities, to keep them watching. ''It's difficult television to do,'' said Ms. Girard, ''because you have to balance information and entertainment.'' Making matters more difficult was the changing nature of the network's audience. ''This started out as a big-city network, reaching viewers from 25 to 54,'' Ms. Girard said. ''As we got bigger, we brought in the extremes.'' Viewers between 18 and 34 are now the network's fastest-growing audience.
Hence ''Dweezil and Lisa.'' The show is clearly, a sta. No one at the network knows, with any certainty, what younger, notoriously fickle viewers want out of a food show. Judging by the first episode of the series, in which the two stars wander around Atlanta eating, shopping and playing a little music, Mr. Zappa and Ms. Loeb aren't too sure either. Strolling through a farmers' market, they act like two people who havenever actually shopped before. Ms. Loeb spies a heap of watermelons. ''I love watermelons,'' she says. Watermelons are cool. She and Mr. Zappa head toward a fantastic meat counter. The mood darkens. Ms. Loeb is a vegetarian. She flees, clutching her watermelon and a bag of peanuts. Later, at Watershed, Mr. Zappa tries to help the chef, Scott Peacock, make his famous carrot cake. He ruins it. Mr. Peacock tries to smile, but if the cameras hand't been rolling, one senses that events ould have taken an ugly turn.
Ms. Girard does not mind rolling the dice. Some ideas work brilliantly; some don't. The audience lets you know which is which. The network's first forays into reality television were not very successful. In ''Food Fight,'' two wildly incompatible teams, like soccer moms and Hell's Angels, competed to turn out a meal int two hours, working with a $20 budget. An interesting idea, but not a winner. Ditto for ''Date Place,'' which could not hold audiences mesmerized by ''The Bachelor'' or ''Joe Millionaire.''
There's always Emeril. Viewers who love him can rest assured that the Food Network will be serving up heaping helpings of the Bam! man, who recently signed a five-year deal for 90 new episodes a year of ''Emeril Live!,'' 26 episodes of ''Essence of Emeril'' and untold specials.
Within the last year, the network also added four new daytime series to its lineup. In ''Everyday Italian,'' Giada DeLaurentiis shows how to make the homey dishes she grew up with. Two of Rosie O'Donnell's former producers, Christina Deyo and Janette Barber, take some fo the fat out of popular recipes in ''Lighten Up,'' and Donna Dooher takes viewers into a cooking school for a lesson in techniques in ''Cookworks.'' Finally, lest anyone imagine that the explosion of cooking shows has produced a nation of professional-level home chefs, Frederic Van Coopernolle and Jack Hourigan are now co-hosts of a revived ''How to Boil Water.'' Those 20-year-olds need help.  COVER STORY
