Stuart Appleby has already enjoyed a wonderful week, playing quality golf in 80-degree Hawaiian weather.
But if Appleby can finish the weekend with a victory at the Mercedes Championships, the PGA Tour's season-opening event, he will take his stay in paradise to a new level. The first-place check of $1.06 million would represent the biggest payday of Appleby's career, and he would also receive the new Mercedes-Benz that goes to the winner.
Those are the possibilities that Appleby slept on Saturday night, but all week, he has looked serene. Shooting his third round in the 60's, Appleby took a two-stroke lead over Vijay Singh into Sunday's final round. Appleby was 20 under par for the tournament, at 199, five ahead of Retief Goosen and seven ahead of Tiger Woods.
A 32-year-old Australian, Appleby qualified for the Mercedes by winning the Las Vegas Invitational in October, and he has played strong golf ever since.
On Saturday, Appleby relinquished the lead after overtaking Singh, who started the third round with a one-stroke lead. Appleby made a 16-foot birdie putt on the first hole to tie Singh, and Singh lost the lead at No. 2, when he three-putted for bogey.
Appleby's largest lead was three strokes, after his birdie at No. 13, during a round that included eight birdies and only one bogey. Appleby and Singh will play together again in Sunday's final group, and they were threatening to turn this 30-player tournament into a two-player race for the trophy. For anyone else to have a chance, Appleby and Singh would have to slow down, and neither player showed any sign of doing so.
''I like the way my game's feeling at the moment,'' said Appleby, seeking his fifth career Tour victory. ''The ball is rolling good on the greens. A lot of guys of found them tricky, and they are tricky, but if you can just roll a couple, you can get on a bit of a roll. When you putt well, there's really not a great deal of thought process going on. When you're struggling, you see grain too much, you see too much hill. But I'm feeling very comfortable over the ball.''
Singh, who has finished no worse than sixth in his past eight starts, was not ready to concede anything. HIs putting let him down Saturday, and he twice three-putted for bogey. But his ball-striking remained solid, and he was optimistic about his chances.
''I made six birdies out there, and I didn't play badly at all,'' said Singh, coming off his strong 2003, when he won the money title for the first time in his career. ''There are a lot of birdie opportunities out there if you just hit half-decent shots. I'm looking forward to tomorrow. I'm playing well, I'm hitting the ball well. I just need that putter to get hot like it did yesterday.''
Woods acknowledged that he would need a spectacular round Sunday to win.
''I think I need to probably shoot 62 or 63, and have a little help,'' he said, after his first round in the 60's this year. ''The guys at the top are making birdies. The way Stu and Vijay are playing, a solid front nine tomorrow and they put it out of reach for most of us. I just need to get on a roll to have a chance. All the guys coming from behind, we need the wind to blow. That's the only way we can possibly have a chance.''
Both Appleby and Singh closed strongly, with birdies on three of the final four holes. Goosen had the best round of the day, and he equaled Singh's 64 on Friday for the best round of the tournament. One of the world's best putters, Goosen had that part of his game working.
''You're not going to shoot 64 and putt poorly,'' he said. ''I felt very comfortable with my putting today, and saw the lines pretty easily.''
But Goosen entered Sunday chasing both Appleby and Singh, with Appleby holding the lead, and a chance to secure the biggest payday of his career.
CHIP SHOTS
The defending champion, ERNIE ELS, set a 72-hole PGA Tour scoring record at the Mercedes last year, finishing 31 under par. He was struggling heading into the final round, tied for 23rd place. Among other notables, DAVIS LOVE III and JIM FURYK were tied for eighth at 10 under, but Furyk made a costly double bogey on the final hole. MIKE WEIR was tied for 21st place, and the reigning British Open champion, BEN CURTIS, was in last place at four over.
GOLF
