On the night before kickoff, the Kansas City Chiefs' offensive linemen are given a 40-question take-home test about tactics and nuances in their game plan. Before kickoff, the tests are graded.
''I used to get red marks all over mine,'' guard Brian Waters said. ''But now I rarely miss a question. All of us rarely do. It's unacceptable.''
Unacceptable and accountable are words often used by the Chiefs' offensive linemen. The line -- from left to right: tackle Willie Roaf, Waters, center Casey Wiegmann, guard Will Shields and tackle John Tait -- will make its 33rd consecutive start as a group when Kansas City (13-3) plays Indianapolis (13-4) in a playoff game at Arrowhead Stadium on Sunday.
The line has helped the Chiefs lead the league in scoring the last two seasons. It helped the Chiefs score 40 or more points in five games this season. It helped running back Priest Holmes set a single-season National Football League record with 27 rushing touchdowns. It helped the Chiefs win their last 13 games at Arrowhead by an average score of 33-14. It features Shields and his nine consecutive Pro Bowl appearances, and Roaf and his nine Pro Bowl appearances over all.
It is the axis on which the Chiefs spin.
It is a mixture of experience, mobility, intelligence and toughness. The Chiefs' playbook includes more than 1,000 plays; the Chiefs' offensive line blocks in more than 1,000 ways.
When Coach Dick Vermeil showed his team a tape called ''Let's Get Physical,'' less than 24 hours before playing the Colts, the biggest hits from the Chiefs' season were highlighted. Vermeil's offensive linemen figured prominently in the mix, mauling opponents in the trenches and on the perimeter.
And that is the Chiefs' identity on offense -- stretching teams horizontally in the running game and vertically in the passing game to force defenses to cover the entire field. They take advantage of their line's mobility with a variety of plays where linemen pull and sweep or where they roam from the backfield down the field on screen passes. The linemen excel at blocking in open spaces. They are crafty at using angles and timing to gain an edge in their matchups.
They have become so familiar with one another, so interlocking in their play, that sometimes a nod, a wink or a tap on the shoulder is the only communication they need to make adjustments. They usually arrive at 7:30 a.m. for work and put in 12 to 13 hours. They often meet alone, push one another mercilessly and follow the direction of their line coach, Mike Solari, often offering him ideas.
''The right side of our line even battles the left side of the line for best performance,'' Shields said. ''Casey, in the middle, is the pendulum.''
Roaf is the most athletic among them, and he is fearless. Waters is the strongest; he can bench-press 600 pounds. Wiegmann is the smartest and makes all of the line calls. Shields is the consummate professional and has made a team-record 175 consecutive starts. Tait is the most intense, harder on himself than most players.
They are a special blend of power at guard and flexibility at tackle. They are great in some blocking techniques and good in the rest.
''Those kids are very bright,'' Vermeil said. ''If you could sit in on some of their sessions with Mike Solari at the board and hear some of the discussions they have, it's unbelievable. They have a level of detailed conversation about their craft that you would only hear among coaches. They have gradually become pros.''
And they gradually helped lift the Chiefs to Super Bowl quality.
''They've got their own little circle and environment, but they've helped this team to bond,'' receiver and kick returner Dante Hall said. ''I'm a former running back; I know the value of an offensive line. They are always joking and lightening things up in the locker room. I wish all of them were on the kick-return team with me.''
A pro personnel executive from a team in the Chiefs' division, speaking on condition of anonymity, made this assessment of the offensive line: ''They stomped us pretty good. Roaf killed us. Tait has finally stepped it up. Shields has always been good and he's a marvel. Wiegmann and Waters, you'd think you can do better than that, but they turned some heads this year and bumped it up. They put credence in the idea that offensive linemen may be the smartest guys on pro a football team.
''I kind of look at them like the Tampa Bay defense last year. Individually, except for a player or two, they're O.K. Integrated, they are exceptional. And Trent Green at quarterback for them helps because he's able to move around and gets rid of the ball quickly.''
During the regular season, the linemen fined one another for penalties, for missed assignments and for conducting too many interviews with the news media. The fines were usually for $10, and they added up; by season's end, there was $5,000 in the kitty. So, during their bye week before Sunday's game, the linemen used the money to hold a party at a bowling alley. More than 35 players attended. Roaf and Shields offered to pay for any teammate who wanted to travel to Honolulu for the Pro Bowl on Feb. 8.
''The Chiefs have a tradition of special offensive line play and contribution, and we are trying to follow that,'' said Waters, who was a tight end and defensive lineman in college at North Texas, then began his N.F.L. career as a fullback with the Cowboys in 1999 before the Chiefs converted him to guard in 2000.
''We try to make defenses one-dimensional,'' Waters said. ''If they try and play scared and keep the ball in front of them all the time, we want to chew 'em up. If they come with blitzes all the time, we'll take the big play. Counter and dictate. Once we know how they try to play it, we respond.''
Look for Kansas City to try to surprise the Colts by running directly at them.
''Sometimes we are asked to handle difficult situations and sometimes we are not put in the best positions to have success,'' Tait said. ''But we accept that as part of reaching our goals. We're not Superman. But we try.''
The group never uses injuries as excuses and during its streak of starts, the line has played with bumps, bruises and worse. Continuity among offensive linemen in the N.F.L. is a precious, elusive achievement because of their constant banging, which makes them prone to injuries. This group makes sacrifices.
''No one wants to be the one that breaks the streak,'' said Roaf, whose clash with Indianapolis defensive end Dwight Freeney will be a signature matchup of the postseason. ''We like the competition. We like getting big plays. Indianapolis really comes after you. You want to pop a defense like that. Everyone is talking about Freeney and me. I'm anxious to see how that matchup goes, too. If we set the tempo, the game takes care of itself.''
Television cameras and fans usually follow the ball. The offensive line is one of the few in the league worth monitoring on entire plays.
''When you've got two nine-time Pro Bowlers, the rest of the line wants to play to that level,'' Wiegmann said. ''Not only do our guys not miss games, we don't miss practices. Some of the great offensive lines in recent years have been in Dallas and San Francisco and Pittsburgh. Maybe 10 years from now they'll be talking about us like that.''
Maybe sooner.
PRO FOOTBALL
