The lawyer for five correction officers on administrative leave because of their association with the Outlaws Motorcycle Club said she was prepared to go to court if further disciplinary action were taken by the state.
The five men, three of whom work at the Northern Correction Institution in Somers, and two of whom are stationed at the Webster Correctional Institute in Cheshire, all have long tenures with the department. They were reassigned at different times this fall, pending the results of a department investigation.
The men are James Kight, Gary Piscottano, Randy Sabettini, Mark Vincenzo and Walter Scappini.
''If there is a decision to terminate, or otherwise discipline them, we will immediately go into court and seek a temporary injunction in federal court on First Amendments grounds,'' said Kathleen Eldergill of Manchester, their lawyer. ''What you're really doing is preventing people from exercising their right to free association.''
Brian Garnett, executive director of external affairs for the State Department of Correction, would not comment other than to confirm the five workers have been reassigned with pay and are under investigation. He said no charges had been brought against the officers.
Ms. Eldergill said some of workers were former members of the Outlaws and the others have associated with the club, which is an international organization.
However, she said they were told by supervisors that associating with the club was not a problem unless the Outlaws were involved in criminal activity.
''The Outlaws in Connecticut have been tied to nothing, as far as I can tell,'' Ms. Eldergill said.
Although the State Police would not say if it was investigating the club, members from around the world have been arrested in the past on charges including attempted murder and drug trafficking.
The union representing the officers, the American Federation of State County and Municipal Employees, said it was also ready to take action if the men were disciplined further.
JEFF HOLTZ
WORTH NOTING
