Jeff Wilkins was second-guessing himself, wondering why he had not hit the ball just a little cleaner, how he missed on what would have been the game-winning 53-yard field goal in overtime against the Carolina Panthers.
Wilkins was short on his attempt, and so were the rest of the St. Louis Rams, who fell to the Panthers, 29-23, in double overtime in their National Football Conference divisional playoff game Saturday at the Edward Jones Dome.
The Panthers (13-5) move on to the N.F.C. championship game next Sunday against the winner of Sunday's game between Philadelphia and Green Bay.
The Rams (12-5) move on to the off-season.
Wilkins was kicking himself, but Rams Coach Mike Martz refused to do the same after giving up a chance for what could have been the winning touchdown in regulation. St. Louis had rallied from a 23-12 deficit in the closing minutes of regulation, pulling to 23-20 on a 1-yard touchdown run by Marshall Faulk and a 2-point conversion with 2 minutes 39 seconds remaining.
After Wilkins recovered his own onside kick, the Rams moved to the Carolina 15-yard line with 42 seconds left. But instead of allowing quarterback Marc Bulger to attempt a pass or two into the end zone, Martz let the clock run down to three seconds. Wilkins trotted out and kicked a 33-yard field goal to tie the score at 23-23 and send the game into overtime.
It is a decision that is likely to be debated around St. Louis for some time.
''We had just overcome a pretty substantial deficit, and I was concerned about, we had a protection issue last time that we were down there,'' Martz said. ''I didn't want Marc to get bumped or a ball tipped. I wanted our guys to continue to play that game. I knew the field goal would be good with Jeff. To me, that's the right thing to do at that point in the game.
''To come back like we had and get in that position, I just felt like the risk wasn't necessary. I felt like if we got into overtime that we'd win that game, and that's why we did that.''
Bulger, who was booed after throwing two interceptions in the fourth quarter, did not question Martz's decision.
''We trust Coach Martz with that,'' said Bulger, who was 27 of 46 for 332 yards, no touchdowns and three interceptions. ''I'm sure it was the right decision. He had to make that decision real quick. For us to come back like we did, I think that maybe he didn't want to take a chance.''
Martz might have planned to win in overtime, but it didn't work out that way. After the Panthers' John Kasay missed a 45-yard field goal on the opening drive of overtime, the Rams moved the ball to the Carolina 35. Wilkins, who had kicked five field goals without a miss in regulation, was given the shot to win it at 6:52 of the first overtime. He was a few yards short on the 53-yard attempt.
Bulger's final interception led to the Panthers' winning drive in the second overtime.
''Fifty-three yards, right around there is my cut-off point,'' Wilkins told reporters. ''I felt that if I hit it solid it would have went. I just think I didn't hit it and I must have gotten under a little bit.
''I wish I could feel good, but it doesn't matter if I went 10 for 11. That one kick will eat at me because we are not playing next week.''
Of course, some around St. Louis might argue that it never should have come to that.
PRO FOOTBALL
