When the Patriots last were hosts for a playoff game here, a blizzard blanketed the field. On Saturday, the night was dry but bitter cold. The Patriots' hero, however, was the same.
Adam Vinatieri, who kicked two field goals in the so-called Snow Game two years ago, blasted a 46-yard field goal with 4 minutes 6 seconds remaining to give the Patriots a 17-14 victory over the Titans, sending the Patriots to the American Football Conference championship game next Sunday for the second time in three years.
It was the third time in his career that Vinatieri had kicked a field goal to give the Patriots a lead in the playoffs, and the omen is good for the Patriots. In 2002, Vinatieri's two field goals against Oakland put the Patriots in the A.F.C. championship game. Then Vinatieri kicked a field goal as time expired to win the Super Bowl. Now, after an inconsistent regular season, Vinatieri, kicking a ball made heavier by the cold, assured that the Patriots will be host to either the Indianapolis Colts or the Kansas City Chiefs next Sunday.
''The balls weren't real soft, but the nice thing about it was I couldn't feel my feet,'' Vinatieri said.
Still, for the Patriots to prevail, it took one final defensive stand in a game that was very much about defense after the first quarter. Led by the hobbling quarterback Steve McNair, the Titans drove into Patriots territory in the waning minutes of the game. But on fourth-and-12 from the 42, McNair, under pressure from a heavy blitz, launched a moon shot of a pass down the field. Receiver Drew Bennett was the intended receiver, and he leaped for it. But the ball bounced off his hands, and Patriots cornerback Asante Samuel swatted it away, preserving the Patriots' victory.
''I think it was everything we expected in the game,'' Patriots Coach Bill Belichick said. ''We came out with a couple more plays than Tennessee did today. It was a whale of a football game.''
That the game was so close at the end was predictable for teams that have two of the league's best defenses. But after a start in which the Patriots' offense was nearly unstoppable, the game tightened -- a testament to how the Titans' defense rebounded.
After the Patriots took a 14-7 lead early in the second quarter, the Titans shut them out into the fourth quarter, forcing punt after punt, turning what looked like a blowout into a tense game as the game dwindled away with the score tied.
The two most important defensive stands belonged to Belichick's defense. The Titans began the drive backed up on their 7-yard line, and ended up only on the 17. When they punted, the Patriots got the ball at the Titans' 39, the first time all night a team had started a drive in the opponent's territory.
It was the small opening the Patriots needed. Quarterback Tom Brady (21 for 41, 201 yards, one touchdown) completed a 4-yard pass on fourth-and-3 from the Titans' 33 to keep the drive going and move the Patriots into better field position for Vinatieri.
Finally, when Daniel Graham dropped a pass that was in his hands as he dived near the end zone, the Patriots thrust Vinatieri into his familiar role. Vinatieri, who had missed a 44-yard field goal earlier in the game, did his part, but then it was up to the defense to save the game.
In their last six home games of the regular season, the Patriots had allowed just one touchdown, so this game must have felt strangely like a shootout to them.
The temperature was 4 degrees at kickoff -- the coldest game either of these teams have played; Patriots tackle Tom Ashworth said he felt as if he were breathing fire. But in the first quarter, the Patriots' offense staged an offensive display more reminiscent of a balmy day in September.
Brady wore just one glove, eschewing the one on his throwing hand so he would have the best possible grip on a slick ball. On the first drive, he completed two flawless long passes, both on third down. On third-and-5 from the Patriots' 36, Brady, operating from the shotgun, hit Kevin Faulk for a short pass over the middle that he then ran for a 19-yard gain. Then, on third-and-6 from their own 41, Brady saw Tennessee safety Lance Schulters trying to run with Bethel Johnson, the fleet rookie receiver. That was a mismatch, and Johnson quickly got behind Schulters. With Johnson streaking down on an inside post route, Brady launched a perfect pass that hit Johnson in stride, leaving two Tennessee defenders looking at each other as Johnson crossed the goal line to give the Patriots a 7-0 lead.
''It's tough to run with Bethel,'' Brady said. ''I don't care if you're Carl Lewis, it's tough to run with Bethel. One thing we've done a good job of, we've scored on opening drives. With our defense, we get the jump on the lead and it forces opposing offenses into a tough spot.''
One effect of the cold: kicks didn't fly far, and the Titans started their next drive on their own 39. McNair hit receiver Derrick Mason over the middle for a 15-yard gain on first down. McNair then hit Bennett for a short pass that Bennett took for a long run down the left sideline for a 24-yard gain.
Titans running back Eddie George, playing with a dislocated shoulder, struggled for yardage all night (18 yards in the first half), but he powered for 4 yards on the next play. That put the Titans at the 18-yard line, and McNair's next pass was nearly intercepted by Roman Phifer. On the play, the Pro Bowl defensive lineman Richard Seymour threw McNair to the ground, landing with his full weight on him and drawing a roughing-the-passer penalty. That penalty propelled the Titans to first-and-goal from the 9. Running back Chris Brown ran twice to give the Titans a touchdown that tied the score, 7-7.
That was the extent of the Titans' output until the second half. And in the end, what the Patriots needed most was Vinatieri.
PRO FOOTBALL
