The Mets' dalliance with Vladimir Guerrero lasted about as long as their days in contention last season. Two days after making their initial bid, the Mets found themselves out of the running yesterday.
The Mets' late attempt to nab Guerrero in a depressed market ended with his agents declining the offer after a third team entered negotiations Thursday. Last night, Guerrero, baseball's premier free agent this off-season, was prepared to accept the team's multiyear offer, believed to be for up to five years. Two people in baseball said the team was not the Baltimore Orioles. Baltimore was the only other team known to have made an offer to Guerrero, but the Orioles' offer deferred too much money.
The Mets' offer to Guerrero guaranteed him three years and $30 million, with incentives based on plate appearances and vesting options pushing the potential value of the deal to $71 million. But the guaranteed money was only a fraction of Baltimore's latest offer of five years and $67.5 million.
Mets General Manager Jim Duquette said that Mets doctors, after reviewing the results of an examination on Guerrero's back, advised the team to limit its offer to three years. Guerrero missed seven weeks last season with a herniated disk.
Duquette said on a conference call with reporters last night that the Mets and Guerrero's representatives did not exchange proposals other than the Mets' first and only offer.
''I understand the disappointment of the fans,'' Duquette said of the backlash the Mets were expecting. ''The organization is disappointed, too. We made a serious run at him.''
Arn Tellem, one of the agents representing Guerrero, said the Mets made ''a very good-faith attempt.''
''The Mets did make a competitive offer, but right now his focus is on a couple other teams,'' he said in a telephone interview. In discussing the Mets' offer, Tellem added: ''In total dollars, they made a competitive offer. I had extremely positive conversations with them, but right now he's focused elsewhere.''
Guerrero has received only two official offers -- from the Mets and the Orioles. The Florida Marlins, who had considered pursuing Guerrero, and the Detroit Tigers, with money to spend, had not made offers as of last night, two people said. The Los Angeles Dodgers have shown interest, and they had their starting right fielder, Shawn Green, begin working out at first base Friday in what could be viewed as preparation for an offer to Guerrero. Tellem would not comment on any team besides the Mets.
The Mets told Guerrero's agents early this off-season that they would monitor his negotiations with other teams. When Guerrero remained unsigned into the new year, Tellem asked the Mets to make a bid, wanting to give Guerrero every possible option. Tellem said in a telephone interview last night that at the time the Mets made their offer, the third team had not entered serious negotiations, and he denied that he lured the Mets into bidding to spur a third team to act.
Reaching out to Guerrero invigorated Mets fans, who flooded radio talk shows and Internet message boards with news updates and public cries for the team's ownership to acquire him at any cost. The Mets' interest in Guerrero had seemingly made them relevant again in the New York sports scene, but they were willing to go only so far.
Guerrero hit .353 with 17 home runs after his return from the disabled list, and his agents have told teams that a back specialist has given him a clean bill of health.
''I thought we were making a pretty daring offer, the one we made, because there was always a risk he got hurt in the first year and we were on the line for the rest of the deal,'' Duquette said.
The Mets' offer was predicated on the idea that they could capitalize on the lack of interest in Guerrero. The Orioles had offered Guerrero a five-year contract for $65 million in December and increased that offer Friday to $67.5 million, The Baltimore Sun reported yesterday.
Guerrero's agents gave the Orioles a seven-year, $105 million counteroffer last month. He could be reluctant to sign with the Orioles while they offer him less than the six-year, $72 million contract shortstop Miguel Tejada signed last month.
BASEBALL
