TWO years after he brought the Pontiac Solstice concept car to the North American International Auto Show, Bob Lutz fulfilled a promise he made then. Here last week, at the 2004 show, he delivered a nearly production-ready version of that car, which is due to go on sale next year.
But to make the design work, Mr. Lutz, who is in charge of product development at General Motors, had to do something that may be unprecedented in the modern auto industry: he invented a whole new ''platform,'' which is industryspeak for a car's basic structure, comprising the chassis and running gear.
In the auto business, this is big news of the ''man bites dog'' variety: designer creates platform. Usually, engineers determine what platforms are developed, and designers are told to create forms to fit them. The Solstice, which will arrive on a new platform known within G.M. as the Kappa architecture, is the best example yet of how auto designers -- they were once somewhat derisively called stylists -- have gained power and prominence.
The creation of Kappa, in turn, meant more work for designers: the expensive new platform would not be financially feasible, and the Solstice would have to be priced far higher than its $20,000 target, unless Mr. Lutz could use it as the basis for other new cars.
So G.M. designers came up with two new concept cars with the same foundation, the Chevrolet Nomad sport wagon and the Saturn Curve coupe. Even G.M.'s Vauxhall subsidiary in Europe may offer a Kappa car.
All this is gratifying, the Solstice's designer, Franz von Holzhausen, conceded as he stood admiring the wild red Concept T at the Volkswagen display. A sort of futuristic, deconstructed dune buggy, the Concept T was created by Derek Jenkins of VW's studio in Simi Valley, Calif. The car's flowing lines suggested the rugged gone sporty, with a roadster's sensuous, flowing lines applied over rugged running gear.
This was a theme visible in several places around the show.
A striking example was from Land Rover, of all places. Michael Mauer of Saab (who also worked on one of the Kappa concepts, the Saturn Curve), said he was impressed by Land Rover's first concept vehicle, the Range Stormer, which many other designers also cited as a favorite.
Designed by Geoff Upex, the Range Stormer may be the designer's design of the show. It offers such over-the-top features as split doors, with one half folding down and the other half swinging up. Like VW's Concept T, the Range Stormer is all about bringing more lush lines and a sportier feeling to the S.U.V.
Unlike the Porsche Cayenne, according to Mr. Upex, Land Rover's design chief, the Range Stormer does not wear a sporty face but shifts boxy Range Rover proportions to look longer and lower and sportier.
Designers loved the Range Stormer's fuel gauge, with a liquid level display instead of a needle, and the novel if wildly unlikely seats of dark saddle leather wrapped on aluminum in a shape inspired by a Möbius strip.
Japanese companies emphasized trucks this year, and their design studies -- some of them certain to be production models within a couple of years -- were not shy.
Toyota's FTX pickup seemed immense, riding on impossibly large 37-inch wheels. Honda's S.U.T. pickup offered as little truck as a truck can offer, with a cargo box tacked onto a sport utility cabin almost as an afterthought. Honda seemed clearly aware that most Americans who buy pickups use them primarily as cars.
Sport met truck at Mitsubishi, whose sport truck concept had overtones of the old Chevy El Camino (or the new Subaru Baja), which also had flowing lines over hard-working mechanicals. But that design study was overshadowed by a car, the Mitsubishi Eclipse Concept E, which may be a preview of a new version of the company's signature sporty car.
Sport met high design with the Ford Bronco, whose logo of a kicking horse serves as a counterpoint to Ford's galloping Mustang. The Bronco began as a basic box on high wheels, a virtual copy of the old International Scout. But the new Bronco wore a heavily machined look.
A similar heaviness -- the weight of awe, perhaps -- pervades the Ford Shelby Cobra concept, which replaces the shell-like lightness of the original 1960's Cobra with thickness. ''Purposeful'' is the word used around Ford for this heaviness, which is accompanied by big knobs and switches.
The word was also applied to the Jeep Rescue concept, which like the Bronco seemed a response to the overstated but successful designs from Hummer.
The concept vehicles also illustrated the power of design to clarify and renew lagging brands. Dodge looked to a DaimlerChrysler sibling, Smart, for underlying pieces of its wonderfully detailed Sling Shot, which suggested a way of turning the Smart Roadster from Europe into a small sports car driven by a three-cylinder engine.
The Mark X convertible showed that Lincoln was still struggling to invent a clear vision for its future of the sort that is now helping to revive Cadillac. Still, the Aviator concept hinted at elements of a possible new look for Lincoln.
The Subaru B9SC and R1e are important less for their hybrid and electric power plants than for their suggestions of the new design language being developed by the company's new and first design chief, Andreas Zapatinas. The keys are a grille with wings and central jet-engine-like aperture said to express the Subaru's aircraft heritage.
The 2005 Ford Five Hundred sedan has Audi-like lines. ''You can never look too much like an Audi, can you?'' asked J Mays, Ford's chief of design who was once also responsible for Audi styling. But future Audis won't look like current Audis, to judge from the company's LeMans Quattro concept, a sports car that builds on the new look with an oversize grille that is being evolved from those on previous design studies.
For pure dream-car beauty, the star of the show was the Chrysler ME Four-Twelve, by Brian Nielander with an interior by Mark Walters, who created the wild Tomahawk motorcycle shown last year.
The ME's body is all metal and mesh, with surfaces of aluminum and carbon fiber playing off each other, as do the car's angles and curves. There is a touch of elegance in the chrome strip on the doors, which subtly evokes Chrysler's ''machine'' design idiom.
If produced, the ME would take Chrysler where it has never been, and the company has little heritage to justify building a superfast, ultra-expensive sports car. Still, the chief of Chrysler design, Trevor Creed, was not too modest to claim the best-in-show title for his team's car.
''Everyone is talking about design now,'' said Mr. Creed as he walked the show floor. ''But many companies act as if design is just a knob you turn up. It's more complicated than that. You have to have an idea. You have to have proportions. The lines have to go somewhere.''
Too often, Mr. Creed said, companies rush to endorse the fleeting concepts of young designers. ''You can have fresh ideas from designers who have been around 30 years,'' he said.
One company that is turning toward increased emphasis on design is Hyundai, whose striking HCD8 concept is the first car to come out of its new studio in Irvine, Calif. Joel Piaskowski, chief of the center, cited ''determination'' as the central theme of the bright yellow car.
At Johnson Controls, the leading supplier of interior parts, concept cars naturally work from the inside out. The company's 3E is conceived for hybrid drive, but its main innovations are a strikingly flexible rear seat with places for cargo, children and normal adults, and a refreshingly simple dashboard.
Show Floor News
