April may be the cruelest month, but in the restaurant world January gets that distinction. Oh, the stomachs of city dwellers still growl, but holiday credit card bills growl louder, and many New Yorkers tend to pare their gastronomic excursions until the shock of the previous month's spending wears off.
''I've been in the business for 30 years, and January is historically the slowest month,'' said Nick Valenti, the chief executive of Restaurant Associates, one of the largest restaurant and food service companies in Manhattan. ''A lot of New Yorkers travel to warm weather in January and February, and most people visit the city in warmer months, so tourism dies down.''
Ann Nickinson, a co-owner of Kitchenette, on West Broadway and on Amsterdam Avenue between 122nd and 123rd Streets, agreed. ''It's a month that you wait to get through,'' she said.
Ms. Nickinson and her business partner, Lisa Hall, opened Kitchenette uptown two years ago, and it follows the theme of its downtown counterpart, serving soul-nourishing foods like turkey meatloaf and macaroni and cheese in a down-home atmosphere. Of course, there are differences: Both restaurants serve breakfast, lunch and dinner (prices run from $5.50 for breakfast to $16 for dinner), but downtown, where Wall Street executives mingle with TriBeCa trendsetters, ''You can't even wave a tablespoon of cream across a soup bowl,'' said Ms. Nickinson. ''Uptown, you just keep pouring the fat.''
And trimming it. Because though downtown usually gets a steady flow of customers year round, uptown faces a double whammy come January, when the Columbia University traffic -- a mainstay the rest of the year -- is on hiatus. ''When school's not in session, our business drops off 25 percent,'' Ms. Nickinson said.
Unlike many restaurant owners who cope with the January blahs by mailing out coupons and fliers or offering two-for-one specials, Ms. Nickinson, 49, and Ms. Hall, 42, refuse. ''You can't change everything you do,'' Ms. Nickinson said. ''It always seems like a sellout, those two-for-ones. Unless you increase your inventory triple-fold you're really cutting off your noses. It almost seems a desperate action, and the bottom line is we're still looking to make money. If you have to give it away, there's a problem.''
Which means that you have to find other ways to compensate and to lure customers into your establishment. ''You're careful about ordering, you're careful about staffing,'' Ms. Nickinson said. ''You look at every element in order not to incur any extra charges. During holiday time, you don't care if you have two extra cases of butter in a walk-in, or extra hands, but at this time you cut that fat. During the heavier months we might have two bakers on all the time, but we wouldn't during these months. We're very conscious about keeping our staff, but we might cut a waiter a couple of shifts. January is a coasting month; you don't do anything, and you hope and pray that two refrigerators don't break.''
This season, to entice families living in the neighborhood, Kitchenette is serving old-fashioned pancake suppers, replete with stacks of plain or fruited silver-dollar pancakes smothered in syrup. ''When I was growing up outside of Boston you'd have pancake suppers on Wednesday nights. No one does that here. We serve breakfast all day long and we just thought about doing it for dinner,'' Ms. Nickinson said.
''We've never tried to reinvent the wheel,'' she said. ''We've stayed true to who we are. You know when you have a black skirt in your wardrobe you wear it a lot? We're that kind of everyday in-and-out kind of thing, like a gray flannel suit. Food definitely coincides with people's emotional needs. Even if they can't afford lunch they can always afford a small treat.
''Fortunately, there's enough base for what we do that we can stay treading water. People liked meatloaf and mashed potatoes 20 years ago, and they still like it today.''
HOME FRONT This column about the local economy appears every other week. E-mail address: homefront@nytimes.com
