The morning of last year's Super Bowl in San Diego, Donovan McNabb solemnly boarded a plane and left town.
He had been in San Diego for a week, making appearances on behalf of the N.F.L. But as the kickoff drew closer, McNabb's pain became greater. His Philadelphia Eagles had fallen one victory short of the Super Bowl for the second consecutive year.
If he couldn't play in the big game, McNabb, the Eagles' electrifying quarterback, couldn't watch it.
''It hurt me,'' he said recently in an interview in Philadelphia, referring to the Eagles' 27-10 loss last year to Tampa Bay in the National Football Conference championship game. ''I didn't want to talk about the Super Bowl. I didn't want to talk about Tampa Bay. I didn't want to talk about the Oakland Raiders. I wanted to play, and I couldn't. But I used it for fuel this year. We all did.''
Which brings McNabb to his latest challenge, the divisional playoff game today against the Green Bay Packers in Philadelphia. After past playoff disappointments, McNabb and his teammates have something to prove, and they will collide with the inspired Packers, a hot team riding the emotion of Brett Favre, their own talented quarterback. Favre's father, Irvin, died Dec. 21, after he had either a stroke or a heart attack before running his pickup truck off the road.
The next night, Favre had one of the best games of his career, throwing for 399 yards and 4 touchdowns in a 41-7 victory against the Raiders. Favre was superb again last Sunday, throwing for 319 yards and one touchdown, helping the Packers defeat the Seattle Seahawks, 33-27, in overtime in a wild-card playoff game.
Favre is a quarterback who has everything McNabb wants: Hall of Fame credentials, the unconditional love of his hometown fans and, most important, a Super Bowl ring.
Having made the Pro Bowl for four consecutive years and having established himself as one of the league's best players at 27, McNabb knows that winning the Super Bowl remains the missing piece of his career.
In a town passionate about sports, one that hasn't celebrated a major sports championship since 1983, when the Philadelphia 76ers won the N.B.A. title, McNabb is eager to end the frustration, just like the legion of fans who flock to Eagles games wearing his No. 5 jersey.
''Sooner or later we're going to break through, and hopefully it's this year,'' he said. ''We don't want to go down in history like the Buffalo Bills, or the Boston Red Sox, teams that came close but didn't win.
''I'm excited. Who would have thought we'd be here after the 0-2 start? A lot of teams who were expected to be here aren't, and we still are. We have another chance. Now we have to take advantage.''
After losing their first two games, McNabb and the Eagles caught fire, finishing the regular season 12-4 and clinching home-field advantage throughout the N.F.C. playoffs.
For McNabb, it was his most challenging season. Both he and and his teammates played terribly in their first two games, losses to Tampa Bay and New England.
Then on Sept. 28, McNabb was criticized on the air by Rush Limbaugh, an ESPN analyst at the time, who said in part: ''The media has been very desirous that a black quarterback do well -- black coaches and black quarterbacks doing well. There is a little hope invested in McNabb, and he got a lot of credit for the performance of this team that he didn't deserve.''
Limbaugh resigned from ESPN several days later, and McNabb was left to deal with the fallout, and with a reeling team. As usual, McNabb didn't lose his cool. He handled questions about Limbaugh eloquently during his next news conference, saying he was more concerned about how the controversy would hurt others, not himself.
''I don't think he was the only one that felt that way, and I'm sure there are a lot of people that feel the same way and are afraid to say it,'' McNabb later told Carolina reporters before the Eagles beat the Panthers. ''You have mixed emotions; some people backed me, some people stayed quiet.
''Again, I'm not worried about it. My job is to be the best quarterback that I can possibly be and to lead this team to where we want to go and that's what I'm continuing to stay focused on.''
No longer feeling the need to defend him, his teammates rallied around him.
''Donovan stood up and handled that situation with class,'' Eagles tight end Chad Lewis said. ''It's one thing to handle a problem in your own living room, where only your family knows. It's a whole different thing to face difficulties and obstacles in front of the whole world. Rush came after him. He didn't come after anyone else. He came after Donovan, and Donovan handled it.''
Coincidentally or not, the Eagles won 10 of 11 games after Limbaugh's comments, including nine in a row, and won their third consecutive N.F.C. East title. McNabb has never played better than he did in the second half of the season. In the season finale against Washington, McNabb passed for three touchdowns, ran for another and completed 23 of 32 pass attempts in a 31-7 victory.
It was another example of McNabb's winning with his arm, his legs, his leadership and his mind. He completed 57.5 percent of his passes this season, throwing for 16 touchdowns with 11 interceptions, but statistics don't tell his full story.
More than a pure passer, McNabb is a playmaker. He has the arm strength to whip completions into tight areas. He has the foot speed to make huge plays when he runs. At 6 feet 2 and 240 pounds, he has the strength to ward off pass rushers when a sack appears evident. With a firm command of Philadelphia's offense, McNabb spreads the wealth, having hit nine teammates for touchdown passes this season.
McNabb is also the Eagles' unquestioned leader: their highest-paid player, their best player, their biggest star, yet one of the most popular inside the locker room. That can be a hard combination to pull off, yet teammates don't seem jealous of him, because he remains one of the guys.
''He doesn't put himself up on a pedestal, even though he's one of the most marketable guys in the league,'' said Bobby Taylor, Philadelphia's veteran cornerback. ''He's just a good guy. He's open, he comes in here kidding, joking, laughing all the time. Guys feed off that. It sets a good tone for us.''
McNabb attended Mount Carmel High School in Chicago, which has a rich athletic tradition. McNabb's football teammates included Simeon Rice, who went on to be a defensive end with Tampa Bay, and his basketball teammates included Antoine Walker, who went on to be a forward with the Dallas Mavericks. Despite heavy competition, McNabb emerged as the starting quarterback by his junior year and led Mount Carmel to the city championship his senior year. His coach, Frank Lenti, said McNabb was always a leader.
''You can't play football here unless you're a pretty tough kid,'' Lenti said. ''Donovan had a lot of talent, he played with other talented athletes, and he learned early that team sports aren't a one-man show.
''The thing I remember is how focused he was, even so young. And he has a knack for making people comfortable. If I sensed the team was too tight, I'd tell him to start cutting up, loosen guys up. But when it was time to tighten the reins, he could do that, too.''
Asked where he got his leadership qualities, McNabb credited his parents, Samuel and Wilma McNabb. His mother is often seen at Eagles games, cheering enthusiastically, feeling the highs and lows of every play.
''She had on her game face, too,'' McNabb said of his mother's demeanor before a late-season loss to San Francisco. ''She was like, 'You should be focusing, too.' I'm like: 'Excuse me? Is somebody tackling you today, too?' ''
It's not unusual to see McNabb showing that sense of humor when walking through the Eagles' practice facility, conversing easily with whomever he walks by. He does impersonations of teammates and coaches, including the head coach, Andy Reid, and the defensive coordinator, Jimmy Johnson.
But McNabb's clowning hides a tougher side that has served him well. Being a starting quarterback in Philadelphia isn't easy any time, but McNabb had an unusually hard start to his N.F.L. career after an outstanding collegiate career at Syracuse. At the 1999 N.F.L. draft, McNabb was booed resoundingly by Eagles fans in attendance after the Eagles picked him No. 2 over all. Irate Eagles fans wanted the team to draft running back Ricky Williams, who wound up with the New Orleans Saints at No. 5, and when McNabb's name was called, Eagles fans welcomed him to the podium -- rudely.
''You have to be able to put negative things like that behind you and focus on the job,'' McNabb said. ''Playing quarterback, you're going to face criticism. Unfortunately, it hit me here before I ever played a down. But that might have prepared me a little for what was ahead. I like turning boos to cheers. Not just myself, but this team, has been able to do that.''
Now the Eagles are back in the playoffs, seeking another shot at the Super Bowl. After the early-season adversity that he and his teammates overcame, McNabb says he feels ready for the challenge.
''My mom and dad instilled many things in me, but one is to stay humble, and two is to keep your head up,'' he said. ''This year, I've had to do both. But it's been an exciting year. And hopefully this time, better things are ahead.''
PRO FOOTBALL
