In a brazen morning attack yesterday in Ozone Park, Queens, a man shot and killed his ex-girlfriend's new boyfriend behind the wheel of a minivan, then grabbed his 5-year-old daughter from the van and ran away, the police said.
The shooting and abduction led to a sweeping dragnet that ended early last night when the suspect, Jeffrey Mitchell, 46, was arrested on the platform of a Greenwich Village subway station, according to the police.
The girl, Destiny Mitchell, was taken from him after he was approached by officers on the platform. She was described as unharmed last night by Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly.
The girl was reunited with her mother, who the police identified as Hope Perkins, 29. She lives with her daughter on 103rd Avenue in Jamaica.
The dead man was identified as James Young, 40, who lived in the basement of a friend's house nearby, at 105-59 130th Street. He was a handyman and had been seeing Ms. Perkins for about two months, a friend said.
The shooting took place shortly after 9 a.m. at 103rd Avenue and 130th Street, the police said, where Mr. Mitchell, on foot, approached the Nissan Quest driven by Mr. Young and carrying Ms. Perkins and Destiny. Mr. Mitchell shot Mr. Young in the face, the police said. The minivan lurched into a parked livery cab, but it was unclear whether that occurred before or after the shooting.
Mr. Mitchell than fled with the girl, the police said. Ms. Perkins ran down the block to the Evolution Unisex salon.
''She came in screaming like crazy that somebody shot somebody,'' said Ana Jerez, 23, a cosmetologist, who said she considered turning the hysterical woman away until she screamed, ''And he's got my baby.'' The women pulled the gate down in front of the salon and Ms. Perkins called 911, Ms. Jerez said.
Officers combed the neighborhood of single-family homes and small, tidy yards yesterday, as authorities issued an Amber Alert to intensify the search for the girl. The Amber Alert system enlists the public's help to find missing children.
At a news conference last night, Mr. Kelly said that investigators learned that Mr. Mitchell and the girl were at the West Fourth Street station while they were interviewing a cousin of Mr. Mitchell's at a Queens homeless shelter.
Mr. Kelly said the cousin received a telephone call during the interview, and the caller turned out to be Mr. Mitchell.
With the cousin still on the line, the investigators coached him with gestures and instructed him to determine from where Mr. Mitchell was calling.
Officers in Greenwich Village were immediately notified, and about 8 p.m. three officers in the subway station spotted a man fitting Mr. Mitchell's description. He was holding a young girl in his arms, investigators said.
The officers approached Mr. Mitchell, and, without addressing him, asked Destiny her name. It was Mr. Mitchell who responded, saying the girl was named Destiny, the police said.
At that point, one of the officers, Keith Ferguson, took the girl from Mr. Mitchell's arms. Mr. Mitchell then dropped a plastic bag containing a loaded pistol on the platform, the police said.
Officer Ferguson recalled the confrontation at the news conference last night. ''It felt great getting the child back to her mother,'' he said, adding that Destiny ''seemed stunned and little nervous'' when she was taken from her father.
Accompanied by her mother, Destiny, was taken to St. Vincent's Manhattan Hospital for observation, but, Mr. Kelly said, ''the child is fine.''
Mr. Mitchell was charged with murder, and other charges were pending last night, the police said.
Earlier yesterday, Ms. Perkins's mother, who lives on 103rd Avenue, said the police were questioning her daughter about Mr. Mitchell.
''I don't know him,'' she said. ''You know how your children get hooked up with people you don't know anything about.''
Mr. Mitchell at one time lived with Ms. Perkins, but at some point moved to North Carolina, according to the police, who did not disclose his address yesterday. A man who said he was a friend of both Mr. Mitchell and the victim said Mr. Mitchell moved away last summer. He traveled to New York City last week by bus, the police said. Residents in the neighborhood said he had been seen before the shooting pacing nervously at a bodega on a nearby corner.
