From Train (Aaron Williams) to Twin (Jason Collins) to Veal (Brian Scalabrine), the Nets have as many nicknames on their team as most rap groups.
Kenyon Martin is sporting the newest moniker. In the days since he threw a combination of punches at the Clippers' Corey Maggette, the Nets have started referring to K-Mart as Slugger.
When Martin heard his new nickname, he shook his head. Even though he lashed out at Maggette last week and nearly brawled with Alonzo Mourning earlier this season, Martin insists he has come a long way from his first two seasons, which were marred by a handful of such altercations. He does not want anyone to think he has reverted to his instigating old form.
''This was different,'' Martin said. ''I didn't start it. I was just protecting myself.''
No matter what replays showed, the Nets unanimously agreed. Lucious Harris said he thought the incident was an aberration and suggested that Martin might have fouled Maggette harder in the past. Jason Kidd practically endorsed Martin's actions and said any other player would have reacted the same way. The Nets are convinced the league office will not have to place Martin back on its speed dial anytime soon.
Even though Martin is not taking his two-game suspension all that seriously -- ''I'm going to get laid off,'' he said -- he understands how fragile his reputation has become and acknowledges the severity of the punishment. Usually, players are suspended one game for fighting, but Martin had to sit out Friday's game at Philadelphia and will also miss Wednesday's game against Washington.
Two seasons ago, Martin was called names worse than Slugger. In 2001-2, he was suspended for seven games, racked up six flagrant fouls and incurred more than $347,000 in fines. He was booed by opposing fans, singled out by officials and called the dirtiest player in the N.B.A.
In the past season and a half, however, Martin has hardly been issued a demerit. He was called for only two flagrant fouls last season, one of which was rescinded. Martin played his usual role as the Nets' enforcer but finally became better known for his well-rounded game than his well-noted mean streak.
So when Martin shoved Maggette in the throat last Tuesday, threw a left hook at his head and came back with a right hand, some people immediately wondered whether Martin's true character was revealing itself. Maggette called Martin a hothead, and Clippers Coach Mike Dunleavy said, ''That's Kenyon; he has a history.''
After Nets Coach Byron Scott read those remarks, he became almost as furious as his blossoming power forward. Scott has seen Martin mellow and resents when anyone brings up his past. Martin views himself as an integral part of the Nets' loose and laid-back personality, joking with coaches and laughing with teammates during practices and before games.
''Kenyon is a lot like me,'' Scott said. ''You see him giggling and having fun now -- he didn't do that before. If you saw him in his rookie year and second year, he was also a little tense. He has lightened up just like I have. That's the biggest difference between his first day and now.''
Not that Martin, 26, is some big softie. He still glowers at officials and barks at reporters on a regular basis. Some teammates say Martin plays best when angry. For the past couple of seasons, he has managed to toe the line between slightly agitated and fully enraged that he so often crossed as a rookie.
Since Martin will become a restricted free agent in the summer, his behavior will most likely be monitored for the rest of this season. Once again, the Slugger has to prove he can resist the urge to hit back.
REBOUNDS
ROD THORN, the Nets' president, said yesterday that JASON KIDD had sprained his left middle finger in the loss at Philadelphia on Friday. Kidd will not have more tests and expects to play Wednesday against Washington.
PRO BASKETBALL
