Now it was the New England defense's turn. Patriots safety Rodney Harrison pumped his fists twice after he broke from the huddle, as if everyone should scrounge up even more energy.
New England had taken a 17-14 lead over Tennessee on Saturday night with 4 minutes 6 seconds remaining, and the Titans had been forced to punt on their previous two possessions. The Patriots needed to buckle down just one more time.
''That was our season right there,'' Harrison said after the Patriots had held on dearly for a 3-point victory. ''We let them go up and down the field and enough is enough. We said, 'We've got to challenge these guys.' ''
Tennessee quarterback Steve McNair completed passes for 11 and 13 yards, then scrambled for 12 yards and another first down. The Patriots were backing up more than buckling down.
But they protected the lead, with the help of several critically timed mistakes by the Titans, and the 3-point lead somehow held up. Now New England will play the winner of Sunday's game between Kansas City and Indianapolis for the American Football Conference title.
''We have our work cut out for us,'' New England Coach Bill Belichick said of next Sunday's game.
The Patriots had enough work to do Saturday night against the Titans.
The play that seemed to make all the difference was made by New England middle linebacker Tedy Bruschi, whose last name Patriots fans love to chant after he makes a tackle. Bruschi flung himself at McNair as he prepared to throw a pass.
McNair never had time to spot his receivers, and he had to throw the ball out of bounds. The 10-yard intentional-grounding penalty was followed by a 10-yard holding penalty, and Tennessee suddenly faced a third-and-23.
''That's a pressure that we make,'' Bruschi said. ''I had to make a move on the offensive lineman to get there. I don't think McNair expected me to get there so fast.''
McNair got about half of that yardage back by completing a pass to receiver Drew Bennett along the left sideline. McNair tried Bennett again. He threw a jump-ball pass to the 6-foot-5 Bennett well past the first-down marker.
''It felt like it was in the air for 20 hours,'' Harrison said.
Bennett was in perfect position. New England cornerback Tyrone Poole had stumbled behind him. The ball hit Bennett's right hand. Then it glanced off his left fingertips. Then Patriots cornerback Asante Samuel knocked Bennett away.
The Patriots celebrated. The capacity crowd at Gillette Stadium jumped up and down. Belichick silently walked down the sideline. It was not exactly a calm finish, but it was satisfactory.
It seemed as if the Tennessee defense would be celebrating a victory because it found a way to shut down New England quarterback Tom Brady. The Patriots had two touchdowns and a missed field goal on their first three drives, but they slowed down.
The Titans' offense, and McNair in particular, seemed to gain momentum as the game progressed. McNair polished off an 11-play, 70-yard touchdown drive with an 11-yard pass to Derrick Mason.
Mason's touchdown tied the score, 14-14, and New England tight end Daniel Graham lost a fumble on the Patriots' next possession. The stadium was quiet. New England seemed to be reeling. The 12-game winning streak was in jeopardy.
The timing was right for a gadget play for the Titans. McNair threw a pass behind the line of scrimmage to Tennessee tight end Frank Wycheck. But New England outside linebacker Willie McGinest read the play.
He smothered Wycheck for a 10-yard loss before Wycheck had a chance to look for any receivers downfield. The Titans were backed into a second-and-20 and had to punt three plays later.
''Obviously, a nice play by Willie reading the screen and fouling it up,'' Belichick said.
New England had to punt on its next possession. The Patriots' defense gave up one first down on Tennessee's next possession, but there would not be another. McNair lost 3 yards when he was tripped by one of his linemen, and the Titans had to punt again.
The Patriots took over at the Tennessee 40. They gained only 13 yards on their next seven plays. That would be enough. Adam Vinatieri kicked a 46-yard field goal, and the Patriots moved on. It was unsteady at times, but it counted anyway.
''We had better timing on it in the fourth quarter,'' Belichick said of his team's defensive effort.
PRO FOOTBALL
