Curt Schilling's midnight blue T-shirt with yellow lettering was hanging in front of his locker, as visible as a neon sign to anyone who entered the clubhouse at the Boston Red Sox' minor league facility. The message on the shirt was pointed: ''You have the right to remain silent. Anything you say will be misquoted, and then used against you.''
Schilling, who was acquired in November and has been more outspoken than any Red Sox player during the off-season, smiled and said a friend had given him the shirt.
Still, by leaving the shirt in such a conspicuous spot, Schilling was clearly sending some type of message.
Once Schilling finished his workout and put on a Walter Payton throwback jersey, he spoke giddily about the opportunity to return to the Red Sox organization, to be a central part of its quest for a World Series and, of course, to be a part of its ferocious rivalry with the Yankees.
''I don't know that this rivalry has ever been at the intensity level that it's at now, and we haven't played a game yet,'' Schilling said. ''We haven't even had a workout yet. That's exciting for me.''
The Yankees were interested in acquiring Schilling, 37, from the Arizona Diamondbacks, but they retreated because of Arizona's lofty trade demands. The Red Sox desperately wanted Alex Rodriguez and spent weeks trying to obtain him from the Texas Rangers, but in the end Boston bailed out on its attempt because it did not want to pay about $15 million.
One American League official said that Rodriguez called Schilling while the Red Sox were negotiating with the Rangers. But now Rodriguez is with the Yankees, a team Schilling and the Red Sox will face 19 times this season. Schilling responded to the first question he heard about Rodriguez by saying, ''A-Rod got traded?''
After admitting that he had thought about having Rodriguez as a teammate, Schilling said he always figured the Red Sox would end up in a good situation: they would retain Nomar Garciaparra and Manny Ramirez, or they would replace them with Rodriguez and Magglio Ordóñez. While the swiftness of the Yankees' move shocked Schilling, and he said he was disappointed that Rodriguez would now be playing in the Bronx, he did not dwell on it.
''It's one of those things you wish hadn't happened,'' he said. ''I firmly believe that if one guy is going to stop us from winning it all, then this team is not put together right, and I don't believe that.''
When the Red Sox acquired Schilling, it was viewed as a powerful punch at the Yankees because he and Pedro Martínez will make a formidable 1-2 tandem. But by closing out a hectic off-season with the addition of Rodriguez, the Yankees have forced the Red Sox to spend the rest of the year discussing the player they did not acquire.
''People are fickle enough that the focus is going to change on a daily basis anyway,'' Schilling said.
John Henry, the Red Sox owner, was so agitated about the Yankees' getting Rodriguez that he said on Wednesday that baseball's economic system was ''totally out of whack.'' On Friday, Schilling praised George Steinbrenner and came close to criticizing his own owner.
''First of all, it's hard being on one of the haves,'' Schilling said. ''We're sitting on about a $130 million payroll here so, you know, to moan about somebody spending a lot for their team is kind of . . . I don't know if it's the right or the wrong thing to do.''
Schilling said he did not blame Steinbrenner for using the resources he has, but added that there was a problem when one team has 10 times as much capital as some of its competitors. Schilling said he thought that revenue sharing would help solve the imbalance, then added, ''Maybe they should put two more teams in New York.''
Manager Terry Francona, in his first season with the Red Sox, said he did not expect Boston's attempts to unload Garciaparra and Ramirez to have an impact on how they will play for the Red Sox. Schilling has been working out with Garciaparra in Arizona for the last six weeks and said he felt that Garciaparra -- the shortstop Boston did not want but still has -- would produce.
''He's a grown man,'' Schilling said. ''I think he understands. I'm sure he wasn't happy with how some of it played out. But Nomar is going to show up, he's going to be in fantastic shape, he's going to hit .340 and people are going to stop dwelling on January and start worrying about what really matters, which is now.''
Schilling apparently likes sending messages through his T-shirts because he wore a black one with white lettering Friday, during his first workout as a Boston player since he was a minor leaguer in the Red Sox system. The message on that T-shirt could have been an exchange between Steinbrenner and Henry, or any conversation between a Yankee fan and a Red Sox fan.
''Your lips keep moving . . . but all I hear is blah, blah, blah.''
BASEBALL
