Sweet, jovial, warm and lovable are probably not the first adjectives that many Americans would apply to Jeffrey Skilling, the former Enron chief executive who was indicted Thursday on charges of masterminding a ''massive conspiracy'' of securities fraud and insider trading.
All of those words and more like them crop up, however, when people in Chicago talk about the city's most popular weatherman, Tom Skilling, who is Jeffrey's older brother.
Tom Skilling's detailed weather reports take up almost a page in every day's Chicago Tribune. He also appears twice a day on WGN-TV, the Chicago superstation that reaches more than 50 million homes across the United States.
After 25 years as a regular guest in the homes of countless Chicagoans, Tom Skilling has reached iconic status here. A public opinion poll would probably show him to be every bit as beloved as his brother is reviled.
''As you can tell from watching him on TV, he's one of these guys with a sunny personality who never has a bad thing to say about anything or anybody,'' said Laura Washington, a Chicago journalist and news commentator. ''Lots of people on TV are really phony, but there's nothing phony about him. Every time I've seen him in public, he's always being approached by people, especially old ladies, and he always takes time for them. When I first found out who his brother is, given the public image he has, I was really quite surprised.''
Tom Skilling is larger and heavier than his brother, who at his arraignment pleaded not guilty to all 35 counts against him. On television he conveys a friendly, roly-poly image, with his rimless glasses adding a touch of authoritative seriousness.
The closest Tom Skilling has come to controversy was in 1975, while he was working at a television station in Milwaukee. The American Meteorological Society reprimanded him for using a puppet named Albert to help him deliver weather reports, but thousands of people wrote to the station on the puppet's behalf. Albert was transferred to the sports desk and later sent into retirement.
In his weather report on Thursday evening, Mr. Skilling seemed as passionately engaged as ever. When he reported that temperatures in St. Louis had reached 70 degrees, he sounded every bit as thrilled as the sports correspondent who had just breathlessly reviewed the Chicago Cubs' promising pitching staff. A moment later, his voice turned grave as he described blizzards that were enveloping Nova Scotia.
Tom Skilling declined through a spokeswoman to comment on his brother's indictment. Last year, however, he spoke about the developing case against his brother, who many Americans see as a personification of corporate criminality. He said that his father had lost a considerable amount of money that he had invested in Enron stock and that his mother's health had deteriorated as the Enron scandal spread.
''It is the most horrible thing that has ever happened in my life,'' he told The Tribune.
Speaking of his brother, he said: ''What his life must be like as he gets up in the morning and faces the world, I can't imagine. But I can't even describe to you what this has done to this family. I know it's hurt a lot of people, but let me assure people, his life has been devastated.''
Tom Skilling is known for his obsession with weather. He has described himself as a ''weather geek,'' and says he is ''devastated'' when he gets a forecast wrong.
''He's about the nicest guy you're ever going to meet, and there's nobody on the planet that eats, drinks and breathes weather the way he does,'' said Dan Dobrowolski, a former Chicago weatherman who now owns a hotel in Wisconsin. ''I've never met his brother, and of course he's innocent until proven guilty, but my impression from watching some of his testimony on TV is that the two are total opposites. They don't even talk alike. Maybe that's the way it goes in families.''
''I think this really hurts Tom because of the kind of person he is,'' Mr. Dobrowolski said. ''He's as white as the blown snow, as straight as an arrow and enraptured by what he does. I'm venturing a guess to say that he and his brother are direct opposites.''
