The owner of the nation's oldest nuclear power plant -- Oyster Creek, in New Jersey -- plans to seek a license renewal to operate the plant through 2029.
The decision by the company, AmerGen Energy, comes as anxieties and complaints about Oyster Creek's age, safety, and vulnerability to terrorism are mounting. For years after it began operating in 1969, Oyster Creek enjoyed something of a benign co-existence with residents and government officials in Ocean County, where it is situated. Traditionally, it has attracted far less hostility than the Indian Point nuclear plant in New York State's Westchester County.
But in recent weeks, as the time for Oyster Creek's license-renewal decision grew nearer, several communities have passed resolutions expressing varying degrees of concern about the plant and its continued operation after its current 40-year license expires in 2009. Four towns have called for an immediate closing of the plant. Five others oppose renewal of the license, and six more have expressed various concerns about Oyster Creek.
Last Friday, the state's environmental commissioner, Bradley M. Campbell, publicly added the McGreevey administration's voice to the criticism. In a letter to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which will review the renewal application, Mr. Campbell said Oyster Creek was ''not a model facility.'' Mr. Campbell said yesterday that the administration's biggest concerns were safety, security, and staffing. ''We will oppose relicensing unless those issues are fully addressed, and we are not yet persuaded they can be addressed.''
Also yesterday, a day after AmerGen announced its plans, a New Jersey senator, Leonard T. Connors, a Republican whose legislative office is about two miles from Oyster Creek, said he opposed a new 20-year license for the plant in favor of one for 5 or 10 years. ''The older it gets, the more vulnerable it gets,'' Senator Connors said. He also said he opposed a new license of any length unless a nuclear experts, independent of the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, were allowed to assess the plant's safety.
A critic of Oyster Creek, the New Jersey Public Interest Research Group, said in a statement that it opposed license renewal. ''At its current age, the plant is an unnecessary risk to public safety,'' the group said.
Officials in Lacey Township, a community of about 26,000 where Oyster Creek is located, say they are happy with the plant. ''Of course we want it,'' the town clerk, Veronica Laureigh, said yesterday. ''We definitely want that plant operating as long as it's safe.'' Ms. Laureigh said Oyster Creek has paid about $3.8 million in property taxes each year to help finance the town's annual budget of about $20 million. In addition, she said, Lacey Township receives $11.4 million a year from a state energy tax because the generating station is within its borders.
A vice president of AmerGen Energy, Bud Swenson, defended the plant, which has a generating capacity of 636 megawatts, when he announced the company's plans for the application on Thursday. ''Oyster Creek is a clean, safe and reliable source of electricity for New Jersey,'' Mr. Swenson said in a statement. ''It's a major economic engine for Ocean County. We want those contributions to continue, and we will do it in a safe, efficient, environmentally sensitive way or we won't do it at all.'' The company said it planned to submit its renewal application in mid-2005. The current license expires in April 2009.
Customarily, nuclear plants submit renewal applications to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission five years before licenses expire. AmerGen Energy will miss that timetable by about a year. Plants that give the commission less than five years to review an application risk being ordered shut by the commission if it does not approve a new license by the expiration date of the old one.
A spokesman for AmerGen Energy, Craig Nesbit, said the company would miss the five-year timetable because it did not decide until late last year to seek renewal. He said the applications seek precise information and will take over a year to prepare. A spokesman for the regulatory commission, Neil Sheehan, said the plant had satisfied all safety requirements. Mr. Sheehan said two of the commission's inspectors were at Oyster Creek, observing operations on a continual basis, as they do at all nuclear power plants.
''If the plant wasn't safe to operate, we wouldn't allow it to continue to run,'' Mr. Sheehan said. ''They're under our microscope all the time.''
