Contract talks between the Bloomberg administration and District Council 37, New York City's largest municipal union, accelerated this week after the union's leaders said they might agree to a less generous pension plan for future city workers, union officials said.
One of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's main negotiating goals is to create a lower pension tier for all future city workers, and he says it could save the city nearly $10 billion over the next two decades.
One District Council 37 leader said the union hoped that by accepting a less generous pension plan for future workers, it would persuade the mayor to grant pay raises for current workers. Mr. Bloomberg has repeatedly said he would not grant raises to municipal workers unless labor leaders agreed to offsetting savings.
Two of District Council 37's leaders said that largely because of the promising discussions on pensions, the negotiations had gathered so much momentum that an overall agreement was possible over the next few weeks. But other officials warned that snags could easily develop on pensions or other matters and delay an accord.
If Mr. Bloomberg and District Council 37 reach an agreement soon, the contract will be the first he signs with an individual union in the new round of bargaining. Such an accord could establish a pattern for dozens of other city unions.
On Wednesday, James F. Hanley, the city labor commissioner, held a four-hour bargaining session with the district council's leaders, including Lillian Roberts, its executive director. He is scheduled to negotiate with the union again on Monday. Its contract expired 20 months ago.
One district council official who attended the talks on Wednesday said, ''Hanley said the one thing the city really wanted was something on the pension stuff.''
Asked about the idea of a new pension tier, Mr. Hanley said: ''It's something we're taking a look at. Anything that would help decrease our costs, we're certainly willing to look at.''
Clifford Koppelman, the secretary of District Council 37, which represents 121,000 workers, said a new pension tier was one subject on the bargaining table, but he declined to say more about it.
For the union, the prospect of a lower pension tier for new workers is somewhat attractive, given the alternatives, because it would not harm current union members. For the city, a less generous pension plan would mean it could contribute less each year to its pension fund.
Diana Fortuna, president of the Citizens Budget Commission, a business-backed research group, said it was important that the largest municipal union would consider a lower pension tier. ''This is terrific,'' she said. ''It's one of those classic issues that need to be tackled. It's hard for mayors to take the heat on because the savings are so far down the road.''
City Hall estimates that a new pension tier would save the city no money in the 2005 fiscal year, which begins July 1, and $50 million in 2006. But the savings would steadily grow, to about $200 million a year in five years, to more than $400 million a year in 10 years and to $952 million a year in 2025.
City Hall officials said they hoped all city unions would eventually agree to the lower tier.
But Randi Weingarten, the teachers' union president and chairwoman of the Municipal Labor Committee, said most municipal unions oppose accepting a lower pension tier. "We're not looking at other changes in the pension system,'' she said. ''This is one thing we've traditionally done citywide, so for D.C. 37 to do something like this after many unions said they adamantly opposed it would be quite surprising and would be the death knell to pattern bargaining.''
The city already has four separate pension programs, each less generous than the previous one, and the newest one, a so-called fifth tier, would be the least generous.
The Bloomberg administration said a new tier should not include cost-of-living adjustments for retirees and should require city employees to contribute to their pensions while they are working. His administration also wants to increase the age and service requirements for pensions to help defray the costs from increased life expectancy.
Testifying before the Legislature last month, Mr. Bloomberg said, ''For future employees, this new tier would establish pensions at reasonable levels, competitive with the private sector, where most city taxpayers work.''
He added, ''Because this reform would only cover future, not current, employees, it would take many years to realize significant savings from it. But the longer we wait, the worse the problem will become. Over time, the savings would be substantial.''
In Wednesday's talks, the union called for raises of 4 percent a year over three years. In previous sessions, Mr. Hanley said the city would grant a total of 2 percent in raises over a two-year contract, but only if the union agreed to a 40-hour workweek for its members. Most of the union's members, who include accountants, secretaries, pothole-fillers and secretaries, now work 35 hours a week.
Mr. Koppelman, the union's secretary, said Mr. Hanley did not push for a 40-hour week on Wednesday.
Several union leaders said Ms. Roberts was eager to reach a deal that includes raises because she might soon have to make painful decisions regarding the union's welfare fund, which faces a deficit of more than $40 million. The fund finances prescriptions and dental services.
To balance the fund's budget, she may have to cut benefits or increase co-payments for drugs and dental visits.
Asked to comment on the negotiations, Donna Silberberg, Ms. Roberts's spokeswoman, said, ''We do not negotiate in the press.''
