The education of hundreds of homeless children in Suffolk County is being illegally disrupted because welfare programs often move them and schools resist enrolling and busing them, advocates said yesterday in a class-action suit.
The suit, filed in United States District Court in Central Islip, N.Y., cited the case of a child, identified by the initials S.P., who has missed classes more than two months.
''S.P., who is a special-needs students, has suffered the anguish of falling behind in her studies and being separated from her friends, making her depressed and angry,'' the suit said. ''She feels like she is being punished for being homeless.''
The advocates contend that the children are being denied their constitutional right to an education and that school and welfare officials are violating state and federal laws specifically requiring that homeless children be educated.
Denial of education ''threatens to deprive these children of a chance for a better future,'' said Maria Foscarinis, a founder of the National Law Center on Homelessness and Poverty, a nonprofit group in Washington sponsoring the case.
The suit seeks compliance, not monetary damages. The state receives millions of dollars in federal aid to educate the homeless, the advocates said.
Four parents and eight children are listed in the suit. But their lawyer, Jeffrey A. Simes, estimated that the problem affects many of the 1,400 children whose families are temporarily housed in shelters and motels.
The suit was filed by Ms. Foscarinis's group and Mr. Simes's law firm, Goodwin Procter in Manhattan, in cooperation with the Long Island Advocacy Center in Hauppauge.
The defendants are the State Education Department, which oversees schools; the Suffolk Social Services Department, which places the homeless; and 13 school districts: Amityville, Bay Shore, Brentwood, Central Islip, Copiague, Hampton Bays, Longwood, Medford, Middle Country, North Babylon, Riverhead, South Country and South Huntington.
A state spokesman said it does not comment on litigation, and a county spokesman said Suffolk officials had just received the suit.
According to the suit, schooling was disrupted by frequent shifts from one shelter or motel to another, schools demanding proof of a permanent address and refusals to provide transportation.
Welfare workers, who were supposed to help, threatened to remove children because of the lapsed schooling, the suit said. Parents said their calls for help had been bounced around agencies or unanswered.
