Does Douglas Faneuil have better friends than Martha Stewart has?
The theme of friendship featured prominently in the Martha Stewart trial over the last two days as Mariana Pasternak, a self-described close friend of Ms. Stewart, testified against her, while two friends of Mr. Faneuil bolstered his credibility in court. Mr. Faneuil had previously testified that he passed improper information to Ms. Stewart, prompting her to sell her shares of ImClone Systems before they plunged, and that he was forced to lie about it by his boss, Peter E. Bacanovic, who is Ms. Stewart's co-defendant.
It is not unusual for the government to call as witnesses a defendant's close friends, colleagues and confidants, and those who are called have little choice about complying.
In the case of the Enron prosecutions, for example, Michael J. Kopper was quick to implicate his close friend and former boss, Andrew S. Fastow, who pleaded guilty to federal charges last month. Mr. Fastow is now cooperating with investigators in the prosecution of Jeffrey K. Skilling, the former Enron chief executive who was indicted on Thursday.
''If you walk around that courthouse on any given day, you'll see best friends testifying against each other,'' said Joel M. Cohen, a former federal prosecutor now at Greenberg Traurig.
Friends who have fallen out are frequently the source of information in criminal cases and the threat of a criminal case will sometimes shatter even the closest friendships. (Mr. Faneuil said early in the trial that he did not consider Mr. Bacanovic a friend, though ''we did things socially, as well.'')
But sometimes, such prosecution witnesses also give favorable information to the defense during cross- examination, said Mark J. Biros, a partner at Proskauer Rose in Washington. That is because such a witness ''needs to be truthful and wants to be helpful at the same time,'' he said.
Yesterday, Ms. Pasternak confessed to some memory problems that might help her old friend -- or at least may reduce the damage Ms. Pasternak did on Thursday. That was when she recalled Ms. Stewart saying, ''Isn't it nice to have brokers who tell you those things.''
Under cross-examination by Robert G. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Ms. Pasternak said that perhaps those words had simply crossed her own mind, rather than coming from Ms. Stewart's lips.
''I do not know if Martha said that, or it's me who thought those words,'' she said.
Ms. Pasternak did not explain why those words might have occurred to her (although she later indicated that she believed that Ms. Stewart had, in fact, said them), nor did she back off from her earlier assertions that Ms. Stewart told her the news that Dr. Waksal, the founder of ImClone, and his family were trying to sell their stakes in the company.
Ms. Stewart, who has remained stone-faced throughout the trial, did not react to the testimony of her friend. After Ms. Pasternak left the stand, Ms. Stewart's son-in-law John Cuti, who is also one of her lawyers, patted her on the back.
The testimony from Mr. Faneuil's friends was far less emotionally fraught. Mr. Faneuil is the former assistant of Mr. Bacanovic. Zeva Bellel, who went to college with Mr. Faneuil, recounted a conversation she said occurred in January 2002, in which her friend said his boss told him to call Ms. Stewart and give her the tip that Dr. Waksal was selling his shares. Echoing Mr. Faneuil's own testimony, she said that when he asked whether he could do that, Mr. Bacanovic said, ''It's not a question of whether or not you can do it or not, just do it.''
And when Mr. Bacanovic later insisted that there had been nothing wrong with Ms. Stewart's sale, Ms. Bellel said, Mr. Faneuil ''felt totally abused, betrayed and frightened.''
Another friend, Eden Werring, described a dinner party in April 2002 at which Mr. Faneuil was ''very stressed out.'' He told her, she said, that he had to lie for his boss.
Friendship has been a theme throughout the trial in other ways. Friends of Ms. Stewart's have appeared in the courtroom to lend their support. Some old friends, like Susan Warburg and Memrie Lewis have been there many days; Gary Nardilla, a cinematographer who has long worked with Ms. Stewart, turned up two days last week.
And Ms. Pasternak told the court that Ms. Stewart sounded regretful when she said she sold her ImClone shares, as if, Ms. Pasternak said, ''it was a question of loyalty to her friend.''
