President Bush on Friday used a weeklong Congressional recess to install William H. Pryor Jr., the Alabama attorney general, in a federal appeals court seat to get around a Democratic filibuster that had blocked the nomination.
It was the second time in the last five weeks that Mr. Bush used a president's power to make appointments when Congress is not in session to name judges directly to the bench and thus skirt the Senate confirmation process. In January, Mr. Bush named Charles W. Pickering Sr., whose nomination had also been blocked by Senate Democrats, to another appeals court seat.
There was little dispute that Mr. Bush's actions in both cases were a calculated act of defiance of the Democrats with whom he has been engaged in an increasingly hostile battle over his judicial choices. Republican Senate officials suggested Friday that there may be more such recess appointments as a response to the Democrats' tactic of using filibusters or the threat of extended debates to block confirmation of the president's judicial nominees.
''A minority of Democratic senators has been using unprecedented obstructionist tactics to prevent him and other qualified nominees from receiving up-or-down votes,'' Mr. Bush said in a statement. ''Their tactics are inconsistent with the Senate's constitutional responsibility and are hurting our judicial system.''
Unless he is confirmed by the Senate, Mr. Pryor will have to leave the bench sometime late next year.
As a state official in Alabama, Mr. Pryor, 41, gained prominence as an outspoken opponent of legalized abortion and as an advocate for a greater Christian influence in government. Democrats said that his fervent advocacy on those and other issues demonstrated that he could not be trusted to separate his personal views from the law if he were confirmed. But the president and other Republicans disputed Mr. Pryor's critics. The Senate majority leader, Bill Frist of Tennessee, said Friday that Mr. Pryor ''is a man of integrity committed to the rule of law, not making law from the bench. I am confident he will impartially interpret the law and uphold justice.''
Democrats countered that it was Mr. Bush and the Republicans who were using the appointments process to advance a political agenda.
''The president is on shaky ground with the hard right and is using this questionably legal and politically shabby technique to bolster himself,'' Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York, a Judiciary Committee member, said on Friday. ''Regularly circumventing the advise-and-consent process is not the way to change the tone in Washington. It's shabby and the motivation is political more than anything else.''
Under the Constitution, Mr. Pryor will be able to serve on the United States Court of Appeals for the 11th Circuit, based in Atlanta, until the end of the next session of Congress -- meaning sometime in the fall of 2005. Judge Pickering, who was given a recess appointment before the current session of Congress, must give up his seat on the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, in New Orleans, in the fall of this year.
The debate in the Judiciary Committee last year over the Pryor nomination was perhaps the most contentious and abrasive in years. Democrats complained that their Republican counterparts were complicit in efforts to paint their opposition as anti-Catholic.
The Democrats assailed a television campaign by a group supporting the Pryor nomination that showed a locked courthouse door with a sign reading, ''Catholics need not apply.'' The advertisements were run by the Committee for Justice, a group led by C. Boyden Gray, White House counsel to the first President Bush.
Senator Patrick J. Leahy of Vermont, the ranking committee Democrat on the Judiciary Committee, said the commercials were a despicable smear. But Senator Jeff Sessions, an Alabama Republican and Mr. Pryor's principal supporter, called him ''this solid Catholic individual'' and said that his opposition to abortion, for example, in cases of rape and incest, was good Catholic doctrine. Therefore, he said, if someone is opposed for holding that position, ''Are we not saying that good Catholics need not apply?''
Mr. Pryor is also known for defending the right of high school athletes to pray ''spontaneously.'' And, in a brief before the Supreme Court, he argued that if a law in Texas outlawing sex between homosexuals was overturned, it would open the way for legalized ''prostitution, adultery, necrophilia, bestiality, possession of child pornography and even incest and pedophilia.''
Democrats also raised the issue of Mr. Pryor's role as a founder in 1999 of the Republican Attorneys General Association, a fund-raising arm of the Republican National Committee. In testimony before the Judiciary Committee, Mr. Pryor said he was unaware that any companies he solicited for donations did business in Alabama and would therefore come under his jurisdiction as the state's chief law enforcement official.
But the Democrats cited documents that appeared to show that Mr. Pryor had solicited donations from companies that do business in Alabama, including the International Paper Corporation and the United States Steel Corporation. Republicans said the documents were stolen from the attorneys general group by a disgruntled employee and should not be used by the committee.
The 11th Circuit has 12 active judges, five of whom were appointed by Democratic presidents and now, with Mr. Pryor's appointment, seven by Republican presidents.
There have been more than 300 judicial recess appointments in the nation's history, though the Congressional Research Service says few have occurred in recent years. In the final days of his term, President Bill Clinton used the process to name Roger Gregory, a black lawyer, to the appeals court in Richmond, Va., saying that Republicans had blocked his efforts to give that court its first African-American judge. Three Supreme Court justices were also initially put on the court in modern times as recess appointments.
