Some of Ralph Nader's best friends are desperately trying to persuade him not to run for president this year.
The left-leaning Nation magazine has pleaded in an open letter, ''Don't Run.'' And yesterday Senator John Kerry's campaign delivered a not-so-subtle statement: ''It is important that we remain united in November and rally behind the Democratic nominee, whoever that may be.''
The Kerry campaign's appeal was just one in another frenzy of calls yesterday for Mr. Nader to sit this one out, prompted by the announcement by a Nader aide that he would reveal his intentions Sunday.
Terry McAuliffe, the chairman of the Democratic National Committee, said he had met with Mr. Nader several times to ask him not to run. ''I'm urging everybody to talk to Ralph Nader,'' he said in a television interview Friday on CNN.
Ever since Mr. Nader set up a presidential exploratory committee a couple of months ago, Democrats have reacted viscerally to the idea. Many contend that if he had not run in 2000 Al Gore would be president, and that Mr. Nader could get in the way of a Democratic victory this year as well.
In January Mr. Nader said that he would make a run only if he were convinced that he had enough money and volunteers to be credible. But close associates of Mr. Nader said they feared that despite so much outcry against a run - there is even a liberal Web site called RalphDontRun.net - he may just make one.
''As I said in 2000, he's one of the most stubborn men in America,'' said Joan Claybrook, a close friend of his and head of Public Citizen, a group that Mr. Nader founded.
Mark Green, the former New York City public advocate and an early disciple of Mr. Nader's consumer advocacy, said he was fairly certain that Mr. Nader would run. Mr. Green, who remains close to Mr. Nader, was an early supporter of Mr. Kerry.
''I'm among the army of Nader friends who have implored him not to run,'' Mr. Green said. ''I appreciate, though, that Ralph Nader is uniquely willful, brilliant, and independent-minded, and he simply disagrees with so many of his friends like me.''
Mr. Green said that during several conversations in the past year, Mr. Nader told him that he did not have huge problems with Mr. Kerry's record.
But Mr. Green said that Mr. Nader ''believes that he'll bring out new voters who will help Democrats win the Senate and House and that he can make a case against Bush like no one else and pull the Democratic nominee toward a more populist position.''
Mr. Green said that he, in turn, told Mr. Nader that during a talk Mr. Green recently gave about his new critique of Mr. Bush, ''The Book on Bush,'' 93 of 100 audience members who said they voted for Mr. Nader in 2000 said they would not do so again. ''I relayed that as a way to say, a) It may hurt Kerry and help re-elect Bush and b) It won't help you given how much more you have to contribute.''
Representative Bernie Sanders, the liberal independent from Vermont, made a similar argument in a statement released last night, which said Mr. Nader ''should not help re-elect George Bush by splitting the vote with the Democratic candidate.''
Despite their statement, aides to Mr. Kerry sought to downplay fears about Mr. Nader last night, arguing that Mr. Nader would likely not be able to draw as much support in 2004 as he did in 2000 - when he drew 2.8 percent of the popular vote. Because Democrats are so focused on defeating Mr. Bush, they said, liberal voters would be less likely to file protest votes.
Mr. Kerry's rival, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, used the speculation as an opportunity to get in a dig at his opponent, saying ''If we have candidates at the top of the ticket who would appeal to the kind of independents who would vote for Nader, we'll be fine.''
Mr. Nader declined to put all of this to rest last night. A spokeswoman for Mr. Nader, Linda Schade, said everybody would have to wait until he appears Sunday on NBC's ''Meet the Press'' In the meantime, she added, ''this is pure speculation.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE ACTIVIST  Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  An article on Saturday about Democrats' appeals to Ralph Nader to refrain from seeking the presidency, a run they said could help re-elect President Bush, truncated the title of a book by one such Democrat, Mark Green, and omitted the name of his co-author. The title is ''The Book on Bush: How George W. (Mis)Leads America'' (Viking Penguin, 2004). The co-author was Eric Alterman.
