Other Stanley Cup contenders are using trades to provide a late-season shake-up. The Devils are using Coach Pat Burns.
As his team headed into a busy weekend, with afternoon games against the Rangers and the Calgary Flames, Burns had a message for his players at practice Friday.
''We'd better get the fear of losing back in us a little more,'' he said later. ''Sometimes it makes you a little bit better. Makes you a little bit jumpier.''
The Devils (30-17-11-1) would seem to have little to worry about, especially compared with the Rangers (22-27-7-4), who enter their game Saturday at Madison Square Garden 11 points out of a playoff berth with 22 games to play. On Sunday, the Devils face Calgary, which will play its third road game in four days.
But the Devils' malaise is what seems to worry Burns. Since a 2-1 victory Feb. 3 over the Ottawa Senators, the Devils are 2-4-1-0 and have lost 5 points to the Atlantic Division-leading Philadelphia Flyers, a team beset by injuries.
''There's been a lot of hockey, a lot of games, and guys are tired mentally,'' Devils center Sergei Brylin said. ''We just need some kind of shake-up, a kind of boost. That's what Pat's trying to address.''
While the Flyers were losing Thursday to Boston, the Devils played a flat game against the Washington Capitals, an Eastern Conference also-ran that had traded the popular wing Peter Bondra to Ottawa a day earlier. The Devils lost, 3-1.
''Sometimes we go for a point a game,'' Brylin said. ''We go in there thinking, 'We should beat these guys,' and we lose.''
The Devils took 44 shots against Washington, and Burns brusquely brushed off a question Friday that his team might be coasting. ''Coasting is not an option here,'' he said.
But the Devils, the defending Stanley Cup champions, are not building any momentum heading into the playoffs, either.
''I think we need a little more desperation, a little more second effort,'' right wing Brian Gionta said. ''We can't be content with getting 40 shots on net. We've got to worry about winning games. We've got to figure out a way to get out of this. It's time for that stretch run.''
Last season, the Devils were 15-8-7-2 after the All-Star Game break. They have won only two of six games since the break this season.
Even the Rangers are no longer a reprieve. The Devils had a 21-1-13-1 run against the Rangers until a 3-1 loss Feb. 11. The Rangers are coming off one of their best games of the season, a 6-2 victory over the Islanders on Thursday.
''If we get inconsistent going into the playoffs, it'll be a short stay, that's for sure,'' Devils center John Madden said.
Goaltender Martin Brodeur had 10 shutouts in the Devils' first 47 games but has not had one since. With defenseman Scott Stevens unable to clear defenders from the crease -- he is out indefinitely with a concussion -- Brodeur has been so erratic recently, allowing four goals in three of his last six games, that he has had to squash speculation that he is injured.
Scott Clemmensen was in goal Thursday, and Brodeur missed practice Friday. Burns said that Brodeur's absence was for ''just personal reasons'' and that he would be in goal Saturday.
Corey Schwab, Brodeur's backup, started 3 of the Devils' final 17 games last season, providing Brodeur an opportunity to rest before the playoffs. But Schwab is out with a recurring groin injury, leaving the job to Clemmensen, a rookie.
''He'll get more games,'' Burns said of Clemmensen.
General Manager Lou Lamoriello has until March 9 to make a trade, and he has pulled off last-minute surprises before, including the acquisition of Joe Nieuwendyk and Jamie Langenbrunner from Dallas two years ago.
Until then, and perhaps longer, the Devils have Burns to prod them.
''None of us can have a night off,'' Madden said. ''We all have to be accountable.''
HOCKEY
