Federal regulators are contemplating a rule change that could steer trades away from the New York Stock Exchange and to its electronic rivals, according to people who have been briefed on the discussions.
The proposal, which will be part of a broader package of market structure measures under consideration by the Securities and Exchange Commission, would give investors the ability to choose speed of execution over the best possible price.
The change is a radical one in that it cuts to the core of the Big Board's 211-year-old trading model, which relies on its specialist traders to act as referees, bringing buyers and sellers together with the ultimate goal of receiving the best price. But some investors favor faster, more anonymous trades, which they can obtain on electronic exchanges. Allowing them to do so could cut into the Big Board's 80 percent share of the trades in its listed stocks.
In testimony before a House subcommittee yesterday, John A. Thain, the chief executive of the exchange, defended the idea of best price as a core value of the Big Board, warning against rule changes that could disadvantage investors.
If adopted, such a change could result in more trades being completed at competing electronic exchanges, though the shift could be mitigated if the Big Board's electronic trading initiative is a success.
The crux of the day's testimony centered on whether Congress or the S.E.C. should vote to amend or abolish what is known as the trade-through rule, which ensures that broker-dealers execute trades at the best possible price for their customers, regardless of the exchange.
The rule has been criticized by the Big Board's electronic competitors like Archipelago, Instinet and Nasdaq as an outdated provision that perpetuates the monopoly of the exchange by forcibly directing market orders there. Given the sums of money involved, the electronic exchanges say the Big Board's dominance threatens their ability to compete.
The debate has always been passionate and tensions boiled over yesterday at the hearing by the House subcommittee on capital markets, which was held in New York.
Crowded together at a small table, Mr. Thain; Gerald D. Putnam, the chief executive of Archipelago; Edward J. Nicoll, the chief executive of Instinet; and Robert Greifeld, the chief executive of Nasdaq, acted more like children in a schoolyard than executives -- interrupting testimony and calling one another names.
At one point, Mr. Nicoll referred to Mr. Thain, who during his years at Goldman Sachs accumulated a fortune of more than $300 million, as a bureaucrat.
Finally, Representative Gary L. Ackerman, a Democrat from Queens who is a member of the House panel, had to step in.
''Let's have some decorum,'' he said. ''It's a good thing we are not having lunch or we would have had a food fight.''
The hearing was led by Richard H. Baker, a Republican from Louisiana, who has spoken openly about the need for dropping the trade-through rule.
During his first month on the job, Mr. Thain has made a concerted effort to press the Big Board's case in Washington.
He has met with all the members of the S.E.C. and has hired as a consultant Kathleen Shanahan, a longtime political strategist who has served as the chief of staff for Vice President Dick Cheney, and more recently, for Gov. Jeb Bush of Florida.
Many of the changes Mr. Thain has made in the last month -- like making it easier for investors to trade with greater speed on the exchange's electronic system -- have been enacted with the aim of preserving the trade-through rule.
On Tuesday, the S.E.C. will formally put up for discussion several ways to change the rule. A discussion period will last for 60 to 90 days, and then the S.E.C. commissioners will vote.
One proposal is that all markets that are classified as fast, including the electronic exchanges and Nasdaq, would have to adhere to the trade-through rule, according to people who have been involved in the discussions.
In addition, investors, either retail or institutional, would have the opportunity to opt out of the trade-through rule by telling their brokers that they prefer a speedy, anonymous trade even if they do not receive the best price.
