Senator John Edwards returned to New York on Friday for the second of five straight days of campaigning in the state, and pressed the themes of job loss and economic despair while stepping up his push for a fresh series of debates before the Super Tuesday primaries, on March 2.
''I am proposing that we schedule four debates as soon as possible in different locations that work for all of us,'' Mr. Edwards said in a letter to Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination.
In his letter, Mr. Edwards dropped his insistence on a one-to-one format, after Mr. Kerry's campaign agreed Thursday to a debate next week in Los Angeles on the condition that it include the other remaining candidates: Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio and the Rev. Al Sharpton. But that debate, in only one of the 10 Super Tuesday states, is not enough, Mr. Edwards said. ''I ask that we also give people in places like New York and Ohio the chance to see where we stand on the issues,'' he said.
Later in the day, though, Mr. Kerry's campaign issued a statement saying he preferred to spend the time before Super Tuesday ''crisscrossing the country talking to as many voters as possible.''
''We don't know where John Edwards has been, but we've had a real debate on the real issues facing Americans each and every day of this campaign,'' the Kerry statement said. ''We're not sure what John Edwards is going to say now that he had the opportunity to say in 18 debates.''
Mr. Edwards tried to play down a need for him to win New York -- or indeed any of the states voting on March 2 -- although he acknowledged that time for him to mount a comeback was growing short: Mr. Kerry has won 15 of 17 primaries and caucuses. Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, has only one victory, in South Carolina, though a close second-place finish in Wisconsin on Tuesday gave his campaign new impetus.
Mr. Edwards has decided to make a stand in those parts of the most populous Super Tuesday states that have suffered economically during the Bush administration. He has pointed to New York, Maryland, Georgia, Ohio and California as states in which he expects to do well.
On Friday, he was clearly running hard and sticking firmly to his script. He gave essentially the same speech, portraying himself as the Democrats' most passionate advocate for the struggling, at a morning rally in downtown Savannah, Ga.; to a raucous, overflow crowd of more than 400 at Prince George's Community College in Largo, Md.; and at the Polish Cadets Hall here in Buffalo, where more people showed up than the sweltering main auditorium could accommodate, forcing organizers to pipe the speech to an additional 200 people downstairs.
In an effort to draw a distinction between himself and Mr. Kerry, Mr. Edwards has recently been emphasizing his goal of overhauling the nation's trade policies. At the Savannah rally on Friday, he said of his campaign: ''Just so you know, there's going to be a fight here. It's not going to be easy. There are a lot of people on Wall Street who like it just the way it is.''
And in Maryland, he again pointed to his own small-town working-class background, saying it was why he wanted to make the problems of ''working middle-class families'' the centerpiece of his presidency. ''This is part of who I am,'' he said.
But Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who has endorsed Mr. Kerry since abandoning his own campaign, told reporters in a conference call Friday that he was surprised that Mr. Edwards had criticized Mr. Kerry's Senate vote for the North American Free Trade Agreement. In reality, Mr. Gephardt said, the two men have similar positions on trade policy: that any further accords include enforceable labor standards and environmental protections that would be required of the nation's trading partners.
''What they're both saying they want to do is exactly the same thing,'' Mr. Gephardt said.
Here in New York, the latest Marist College poll shows Mr. Kerry with a considerable lead among the state's likely Democratic primary voters. He draws the support of 66 percent, compared with 14 percent for Mr. Edwards, 7 percent for Mr. Sharpton and 3 percent for Mr. Kucinich. (Ten percent remain undecided.)
But the survey also found that some support was quite soft: 22 percent of those polled said they might well change their minds before primary day.
The poll, of 404 likely voters, was conducted from Tuesday through Thursday of this week and had a margin of sampling error of plus or minus five percentage points.
Mr. Edwards's campaign took several steps Friday to portray itself as national in scope, hoping to blunt accusations that he had been picking and choosing among primary targets while the front-runner, Mr. Kerry, waged a national campaign. In two such steps, the Edwards organization announced the opening of its first campaign office in one Super Tuesday state, Minnesota, and named a state campaign director for another, Connecticut. It also said it would begin running television advertisements in Ohio and Georgia on Sunday.
In Georgia on Friday morning, William McLaughlin, business manager for Local 508 of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, stood in the middle of Johnson Park in downtown Savannah, watching Mr. Edwards march down palm-lined Bull Street at the head of a group of cheering young people.
It did not bother Mr. McLaughlin that on Thursday, the A.F.L.-C.I.O. endorsed Mr. Kerry. ''We're hoping Edwards and Kerry are going to gang up together, one for president and one for vice president,'' he said. ''If they do, they're unbeatable.''
Mr. Edwards took pains, as he always does when campaigning in the South, to point to his regional roots and promise that he would not let President Bush beat him ''in my backyard.''
But would it really be possible for a Democratic ticket of Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards to beat President Bush in conservative Georgia?
''It's going to be very close,'' Mr. McLaughlin said. ''But it can be done.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
