When the trading deadline finally passed, the Knicks who were on the block and off it exhaled, knowing that this was the roster that would head into the playoff stretch run.
But last night in Madison Square Garden, the Knicks did not resemble a team; they were more like a collection of flimsy but expensive cardboard cutouts wearing name tags on their jerseys.
They were so relaxed that they watched the Utah Jazz hustle from the opening tip and humiliate them in every facet of the game. The Knicks tumbled to a 92-78 loss that drew the first real Garden boos in more than a month.
''We didn't come out tonight,'' said Penny Hardaway, one of the recently acquired Knicks. ''I guess we just expected everything to go well because it had been. We struggled tonight because we weren't familiar with each other. You can always play hard, but we didn't do that.''
The confusion among the new players aside, this game turned on effort -- or the lack of it -- and the Jazz pounced on the Knicks' carelessness.
''We can't lose games like that at home,'' Hardaway said. ''No matter what, you have to play hard. I think we just came out way too soft from the beginning. They took us from the beginning and they never looked back.''
With Allan Houston still out while he rehabilitates his knees, the players assembled by Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president of basketball operations, could not shoot last night. They could not even score standing still, missing 12 of their 38 free throws.
The Knicks turned the ball over 17 times, resulting in 23 Jazz points. Utah outrebounded the Knicks by 16.
Stephon Marbury scored 21 points to lead the Knicks, but he went to the bench with two fouls with 8 minutes 13 seconds to play in the first quarter. The Knicks stalled from there. In the third quarter, when the Knicks missed 8 of 16 free throws, Marbury was 5 for 10 from the line. He found nothing positive about the game, which fell on his 27th birthday.
''We played hard in spurts,'' Marbury said with a shrug and a smile, then added, ''I have to make something up.''
The newest Knicks, Tim Thomas and Nazr Mohammed, were poor substitutes for Keith Van Horn, still trying to remember the plays while fitting into the action on the floor.
Michael Doleac, whom the Knicks traded to the Hawks on Sunday, was claimed off waivers last night by the Nuggets. And last night the Knicks' power off the bench disappeared.
''We can make the excuses about new guys, but just playing hard, that effort will get you the rebounds,'' Hardaway said.
Hardaway was not immune to the lack of effort; instead, he symbolized it. In the second quarter, he had a chance to dunk on a breakaway but instead opted for a layup and missed.
''I was going to dunk the ball,'' Hardaway said. ''For some reason I just relaxed. I just tried to lay it in and I missed. And that's something that's not me, especially on an open break.''
On Tuesday, the Knicks beat the Detroit Pistons when Marbury and Hardaway were clicking. Last night the Knicks had no one else to bail them out, and Coach Lenny Wilkens had no answers on the sideline.
''The first half it was like we were playing in sand,'' he said. ''We came out very flat.''
He knew that with the addition of Thomas and Mohammed on Monday, the team would struggle at times.
''I didn't think we would drop that far,'' Wilkens said. ''We dropped way back in executing and decision-making.''
The Jazz had lost three straight games on the road and had just seven victories on the road this season. By the time the third quarter ended, the Jazz led by 17 points and the Knicks had scored just 50.
Utah's Andrei Kirilenko had a game-high 23 points, and Jazz players were routinely open under the basket.
The Knicks scored just 11 points in the first quarter, when Kurt Thomas shot 1 for 6 and Tim Thomas was 2 for 6.
''It's just one of those games, every team goes through it, hopefully it's out the window for us for the rest of the season,'' Tim Thomas said.
Shandon Anderson was one of the trade candidates, but he remained with the team and is starting in Houston's place. ''This is the team that we're going to finish the year with,'' said Anderson, who had 11 points. ''We have to start getting used to each other.''
And fast.
REBOUNDS
At the trading deadline, San Antonio proposed a deal to trade MALIK ROSE for KURT THOMAS. According to a person close to the negotiations, the teams had made an oral agreement, but the Knicks decided not to complete the deal. The San Antonio News Express reported yesterday that negotiations had broken down. Rose has five years and about $32 million on his contract, and Thomas has said he will opt out of his contract this summer. ''At the end of the day, I thought it was much more important to keep him,'' ISIAH THOMAS said of Kurt Thomas last night. ''No disrespect to anybody, it just wasn't right for us.''
PRO BASKETBALL
