Conrad M. Black, the embattled newspaper magnate, testified on Friday that he was duped, coerced and ultimately threatened by the independent directors of Hollinger International into agreeing to resign as its chief executive last November and to repay millions of dollars in payments that it considered improper.
But in testifying for the first time during a trial that is intended to determine whether he can proceed with plans to sell his controlling interest in the company, Lord Black conceded that he signed regulatory documents in recent years that might have misled shareholders about the size of those payments and the circumstances under which they were obtained.
Though ordinarily an outspoken figure -- he boasted outside a book signing last year that the value of his shares was skyrocketing as the company's controversies grew -- Lord Black was strikingly subdued in nearly six hours of testimony in Chancery Court here in Delaware, where Hollinger International is chartered.
Hunching his broad shoulders over the witness stand and occasionally closing his eyes tightly to consider his answers, Lord Black was instructed at least three times by Vice Chancellor Leo Strine to move a microphone closer to his mouth so his voice could be heard.
For Lord Black, a Canadian who transformed a small mining company into an operator of more than 100 newspapers, including The Daily Telegraph of London and The Jerusalem Post, the proceedings stood in stark contrast to the life he has cultivated for several decades: that of a worldly and sophisticated entrepreneur who renounced his Canadian citizenship to become a British lord and a fixture in political and social circles on both sides of the Atlantic.
''I have been horribly defamed and, in fact, I've been characterized and stigmatized as an embezzler,'' he told the court, which was crammed with reporters and lawyers, some of them arbitragers, who had begun lining up two hours before the courtroom doors opened. ''I am trying, apart from the direct legal proceeding, to retrieve my reputation as an honest man.''
Aside from whatever fascination there is with Lord Black, the case here is being closely followed by corporate governance experts because it pits his rights as a controlling shareholder of a public company -- one who holds about 30 percent of the company's stock, but controls 70 percent of its vote -- against the rights of a board responsible for representing all shareholders.
The independent board members of Hollinger, who have been operating the company since Lord Black agreed to resign as chief executive in November, have asked the court to in effect block the sale of his controlling stake to David and Frederick Barclay, a pair of British entrepreneurs, so that the board might seek to sell the company's assets in an orderly fashion. The board members contend that the sale of those assets, including perhaps The Telegraph, The Post and The Chicago Sun-Times, would benefit all shareholders, as opposed to only Lord Black.
Lord Black has filed a countersuit here, arguing that as the controlling shareholder he has the right to amend the company's bylaws as he did last month to preclude the asset sales. He has also asked the court to invalidate a so-called poison pill provision that the board adopted last month, which would create so many new shares in the company that the Barclays' voting majority, in the event they bought his stake, would disappear.
Vice Chancellor Strine, who concluded the three-day trial after Lord Black finished his testimony late Friday, has said he will rule in the case by next Friday.
A critical document in the case is the memorandum that Lord Black signed in November, in which he promised to support a sale of assets by the board and not to sell his own stake -- held by a separate company called Hollinger Inc. -- unless the holding company was on the brink of ''material default or insolvency.''
Earlier Friday, Peter White, the co-chief operating officer of Hollinger Inc., testified that the holding company was indeed nearing insolvency. If that were the case, Lord Black might be found to have the right to sell his controlling stake to the Barclays.
But upon cross-examination, Mr. White acknowledged that the holding company's most pressing financial obligation, a $7 million interest payment due March 1, could essentially be met by asking Lord Black and his associates to repay personal loans made by the company. Moreover, Mr. White confirmed that the parent company's assets were vast, including more than $400 million worth of stock in Hollinger International.
Lord Black has also asked the court to effectively negate the November agreement in its entirety, because, he testified Friday, the independent board members had misled him into signing it. In the agreement, he acknowledged he had received payments of about $7 million in recent years ostensibly tied to noncompete agreements that were either unauthorized or inadequately disclosed.
But Lord Black maintained on Friday that he had not been given enough time in November to review all relevant documents before signing the agreement. Indeed, he said his lawyers had recently unearthed documents suggesting that some of those payments were authorized by at least some board members.
Those documents, he said, created enough doubt in his mind that he began to question his ''moral or legal'' obligation to keep the promise that he would repay that money. For this reason, Lord Black testified, he had ignored a deadline at the end of last year to pay back a first installment of about $800,000.
But during two hours of tense cross-examination by Martin Flumenbaum, a lawyer representing Hollinger International, Lord Black said he could not be sure whether three of those payments were indeed described accurately in regulatory filings made by the company in 2001 and 2002, filings that were signed by him, among others.
For example, in a 2001 filing made to the Securities and Exchange Commission, the company said that Lord Black had received $2.6 million for a noncompete agreement related to the sale of some of its assets to American Publishing. Not only is that company a subsidiary of Hollinger International, meaning Lord Black would be agreeing not to compete with himself, but a document supporting that agreement has yet to be produced, he acknowledged in his testimony.
Asked where that document and others, were, Lord Black repeatedly and wearily responded, ''I'm not sure.''
''A number of these matters,'' he told the court, ''are the subject of intensive research by all of us.''
