As state officials investigate the death of two cosmetic surgery patients treated at a hospital on the Upper East Side of Manhattan, surgeons around the city who handle elective operations say the cases have them hard at work calming jittery clients.
On Monday, a woman in her 50's died at Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat Hospital, five weeks after the author Olivia Goldsmith died under similar circumstances. In each case, State Health Department officials say, the hospital reported that the patient, about to undergo plastic surgery, appeared to have a fatal reaction to anesthesia.
''I had three patients cancel elective cosmetic surgery because after hearing about the Goldsmith case, they didn't want general anesthesia,'' said Dr. Robert T. Grant, acting chief of plastic surgery at New York-Presbyterian Hospital. ''I've had a lot of calls today from patients who are scheduled for surgery, and I'm sure some of them are going to be canceling.''
In addition, ''We're getting a lot more questions about anesthesia,'' he said. ''People are asking specifics they never used to get into, about levels of consciousness, and whether they'll be breathing on their own.''
An orthopedic surgeon in Nassau County said, ''My patients have developed a sudden interest in knee surgery under local or spinal blocks, rather than general anesthesia, even though I try to explain to them that the risk of complications is the same.''
Robert C. Kenny, a spokesman for the state Department of Health, said it had begun an investigation into the latest death, which was first reported yesterday by The New York Post. He said the department is still investigating the death of Ms. Goldsmith -- the pen name of Justine Rendal -- who wrote ''The First Wives Club'' and other novels. He said a small team of investigators will ''go on-site, we review medical records, we interview staff and possibly patients, we observe day-to-day operations.''
Ann B. Silverman, a spokeswoman for Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat, said the hospital had asked a consultant, the American Medical Foundation, to conduct its own investigation. ''All hospital protocols and procedures appear to have been followed in these cases, and we believe at this point that these cases were separate and distinct, and the timing appears to have been coincidence,'' she said.
She refused to name the surgeon or the anesthesiologist in either case, saying that those were matters of patient privacy. Mr. Kenny, from the Health Department, said he did not know if the same doctors treated both patients.
But a department official said the two investigations were overlapping, to determine whether there were any common threads.
Manhattan Eye, Ear and Throat, on East 64th Street between Second and Third Avenues, is one of the city's most specialized hospitals, and one of the smallest, at 30 beds. Far more than most hospitals, its business consists of elective surgery, from laser vision correction to neck tucks, often with the patient going home the same day or the next. U. S. News and World Report's annual issue on the country's best hospitals recently listed it as among the best for eye care.
But not long ago, the hospital faced financial troubles so serious that its future was in grave doubt. In 1999, it agreed to sell most of its facilities to Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, but that deal was opposed in court by medical residents and by the state attorney general, Eliot L. Spitzer. Instead, the hospital was acquired in 2000 by Lenox Hill Hospital, allowing it to stay in business.
A medical safety expert said that deaths due to anesthesia are rare enough that the two cases strain the bounds of coincidence. ''Lightning striking twice in the same place in a short time certainly should make you suspicious that there's a systemic problem,'' said Dr. Robert M. Wachter, chief of the medical service at the University of California, San Francisco, Medical Center, and co-author of a new book on medical errors, ''Internal Bleeding.''
He and other experts say that anesthesia has made great strides in safety in the last generation. Studies say that the chance of death due to anesthesia is about 1 in 200,000.
But some doctors think such ratios understate the risk, because they leave out cases of anesthesia being a secondary factor, or one of many contributors, to a patient's death. And the consensus among doctors is that the risk is much higher for elderly or very sick patients, or those with certain underlying medical conditions, which are often easy to miss.
Some people also react more strongly to drugs. ''We don't yet have a good way of predicting those differences,'' said Dr. Kathryn McGoldrick, director of anesthesiology at Westchester Medical Center, and chairman of anesthesiology at New York Medical College. ''We have bell-shaped curves, and we do encounter outliers.''
