The talents of Seiji Ozawa were almost beside the point on Wednesday night as the Vienna Philharmonic barreled through Richard Strauss's ''Don Juan'' at Carnegie Hall. What an extraordinary performance, and how it seemed to emanate from the soul of the orchestra itself. Mr. Ozawa -- a subtle conductor and a master of preparation -- made all the right gestures, but he was as much a spectator as the rest of us.
The Vienna Philharmonic was at the start of its annual visit to New York. (It performed three concerts on consecutive evenings.) Think of this orchestra as a walled city of moderate size. Inside those walls the repertory is limited but pursued with unusual penetration and spiritual energy. Think of Vienna as the same walled city in macrocosm, as a place preoccupied with its own psychic forces. For all the Viennese know, just outside those walls lies China.
But the outside world does drop in. Mr. Ozawa, newly eased from his long tenure at the Boston Symphony, is Vienna's newest foreign adoptee, his main job being in the pit of the Vienna State Opera house. And the Vienna Philharmonic's presence in the United States is vital to its reputation and fiscal health. It chooses its touring conductors with care.
Mr. Ozawa, respected in this country but perhaps more highly thought of in Europe, made some small incursions into the orchestra's conservatism (Schoenberg on Wednesday, Stravinsky scheduled for last night). The rest of the programs were largely home-cooked fare, including Beethoven's ''Eroica'' Symphony, which was to end the third concert.
To be fair, Vienna's musical establishment has made an effort to repatriate Schoenberg, outbidding several American universities for his archives and changing the ''oe'' of his name, the spelling proudly adopted when he fled to the United States, back to the ''ö'' of his Viennese-Jewish origins. No one points out that had he remained Arnold Schönberg in Vienna he might not have lived to 76, as he did in Los Angeles.
''Pelleas und Melisande,'' dating from 1903, comes just before Schoenberg's fateful leap into music beyond tonality. It is one of his most satisfying pieces, but it was not placed in the best of hands on Wednesday. The orchestra suffused its seething and often delicate inner workings with luxurious sound. Much was lost. Mr. Ozawa is best with big pieces, and when they are not necessarily big, he makes them so.
This ''Pelleas'' was a bit too spectacular for its own good. Explosive climaxes one after another dulled expectations. Schoenberg's musical meditation on the doomed lovers of Maurice Maeterlinck's play sounded more like the Fourth of July.
Bruckner's Second Symphony on Thursday catered to the best instincts of all parties. (I did not hear last night's concert.) Here Bruckner's vocabulary is fully formed: the patient exposition, the long chains of near-symmetrical patterns, the great booming brass choirs and the echoing silences reminiscent of the composer's origins as a big-church organist. It was a splendid piece, splendidly led and performed.
Schubert's ''Unfinished'' Symphony preceded it, oozing with languid charm.
On Wednesday night Thomas Hampson sang Mahler's ''Rückert Lieder.'' His baritone did not behave well: the top was rough and uncertain, the big passages forced and strident. A bad cold or a bad night? Given the distinction and continued promise of his career, one can only hope so.
MUSIC REVIEW
