Jon Lieber spotted Tommy John at the Yankees' spring training camp the other day, and he had to talk with him. Lieber has John's name figuratively tattooed across his right elbow.
It is the familiar scar from Tommy John surgery, the once-radical procedure that saved John's career in the mid-1970's and has become increasingly common since. The Yankees are relying on it to restore Lieber to being the pitcher he was in 2001, when he won 20 games and made the National League All-Star team for the Chicago Cubs.
Lieber is the Yankees' fifth starter, and while they have looked into signing a veteran like Orlando Hernández or John Burkett, they do not have an experienced backup in camp. They need Lieber to be ready, and they are confident he is.
''From everybody I've talked to, he has absolutely no ifs on his résumé at this point,'' Manager Joe Torre said.
John, a spring training coach who will manage the Class A Staten Island Yankees, is a believer. He raved about Lieber after watching him in workouts.
''I'm really, really impressed with his stuff,'' John said. ''I told him if he needs an agent, I'll be his agent, because he's got a quick arm and the ball just explodes out of it.''
John was the first player to have the kind of reconstructive surgery Lieber had on Aug. 8, 2002. The procedure replaces a damaged elbow ligament with a tendon from the wrist or forearm, and when John had it in 1974, his surgeon, Frank Jobe, told him he had a 3 percent chance of recovery.
Now the estimate for a full recovery is 90 percent or better. When Lieber talked with John, he listened closely to the tales of the pioneer.
''It was quite wild,'' Lieber said. ''It was quite a conversation. It was good stuff, just listening to the changes. He was in a cast. Nowadays they don't ever do that. We're rehabbing the next day, doing something. It was just amazing what he had to go through.''
Lieber, who will be 34 in April, was nearing the end of his eighth and best major league season when he threw a complete-game three-hitter in Houston on Aug. 15, 2001. He woke up sore the next morning, but pitchers are always sore. This soreness was different, troublesome.
There was a ''funny feeling'' in his elbow, Lieber said, and while he was not in pain, he was limited. He had a 5.37 earned run average in his last nine starts, but won his final two to reach 20 victories.
''The difficult thing for him was it was his first opportunity ever to win 20 games, and he really wanted it,'' said Joe Girardi, the Yankee nonroster catcher who was then with the Cubs. ''He didn't want to miss any starts. But he was sore, and we couldn't use the slider as much, only when we had to, just trying to get the 20th win without hurting him.''
That winter, Lieber rested his arm for three months. He figured he had simply weathered a dead-arm phase, and that by spring he would be fine. Instead, he had stretched his ligament so much that the pain worsened. When he felt himself trying to compensate with his shoulder in August 2002, he shut himself down.
''He was hurt from Day 1,'' Girardi said. ''But he tried to suck it up and pitch, because the thing about Jon is he really thinks about the team first. He kept telling me he didn't want to let the team down. I kept telling him: 'Liebs, if you're hurt, you're hurt. You've got to get it taken care of.' ''
The operation can have a recovery period of 18 months, and the Cubs declined the option year on Lieber's contract. It was miserable timing for Lieber, who went 6-8 before the injury and could not cash in on his 2001 breakout year. The Yankees signed him for two years and $3.5 million, offering him the chance to start in 2004 if he worked his way back in Tampa in 2003.
''It was probably the most trying time in my career,'' Lieber said. ''I've never been in a situation like that. You're used to the habit of coming in, working out, breaking camp with the team, playing the season and going home to rest. Now it was, 'You've got to stay put.' ''
Lieber, who lives in Mobile, Ala., brought his family to Tampa, where he went through spring training with the Yankees, then reported to the minor league complex six days a week for about five hours a day through the end of August. He made three minor league starts and was not recalled in September.
General Manager Brian Cashman said Lieber was healthy enough to pitch, but he would not have started and the Yankees did not want to alter his role. When the Yankees tried to re-sign David Wells in the winter, it threatened Lieber's status in the rotation. But Wells bolted for San Diego, and Cashman did not really mind. He had promised Lieber a spot and believes he is up to it.
''We're still going to be careful with him, but he's 100 percent,'' Cashman said. ''He's further ahead than most, if not all of the other pitchers right now.''
Other players who had the surgery told Lieber he would feel as if he had a new arm, and he said that was true. But he has not faced major league hitters, and he expects to have an adjustment period before he is comfortable.
John said: ''The hardest thing you have to do is learn how to pitch again, because you haven't pitched in 19 months. You have to learn how to get batters out again with less than your best stuff.''
Lieber has heard that some pitchers throw harder after the operation, because the elbow joint is stable again. But more important to Lieber is his command. His fastball averages 89 to 91 miles an hour, he has a sharp slider and he works quickly. In each of his last five full seasons, Lieber recorded at least 98 more strikeouts than walks.
''He doesn't throw a lot of balls,'' Girardi said. ''That's the one thing people say he should do: throw a few balls so the hitters won't be too comfortable.''
If that is the biggest drawback to Lieber, the Yankees will take it. They are happy to have him, and he is eager to finally join them. Lieber has never been to Yankee Stadium, and he has played for only one winning team in his career. The injury brought him to the Yankees, a loaded team that could afford to let him work his way back.
''I could have cussed the world out, but I totally believe everything happens for a reason,'' Lieber said. ''That's why I'm here in New York.''
BASEBALL
