While Democrats were hunting votes in Iowa and New Hampshire, President Bush raised $12.8 million in January, closing out the month with more than $104 million in the bank, campaign finance reports show.
Senators John Kerry and John Edwards, meanwhile, have spent the last few weeks scrambling between Democratic primary contests to raise money, which is quickly spent as they compete to capture their party's presidential nomination.
Mr. Bush has raised $143.6 million over all, a bankroll that is a driving force in this election. Democrats fear that the president will spend millions on television commercials and other efforts to tar their prospective nominee in the months before the summer convention.
''It can be unbelievably damaging,'' said Steve Jarding, a former Edwards fund-raiser who is now a fellow at the Institute of Politics at Harvard. ''The danger is that the race is effectively over before it starts.''
Mr. Bush's campaign posted an ad-styled video attacking Mr. Kerry for his ties to special interests on its Web page last week and sent e-mail messages to six million supporters offering a link to the page.
Though he has yet to run television spots, Mr. Bush paid his team at Maverick Media about $892,000 for production costs in January, according to PoliticalMoneyLine, which tracks campaign finance.
The advertisements are coming, the Bush campaign says. ''That is going to take place when we get to a two-person race,'' Scott Stanzel, a campaign spokesman, said. ''We're rapidly nearing that time.''
For Democrats, a lot will depend on how fast the winner can raise money after securing the nomination, as fund-raisers and organizations rally around the candidate. Both campaigns have ambitious fund-raising schedules in March, with Mr. Kerry visiting at least 20 cities and Mr. Edwards about 15, campaign aides said. For now, though, aides in both camps say they remain focused on the primaries.
In January, Mr. Edwards raised about $2 million and took in another $3.4 million in public financing, according to reports. He spent about $5.9 million and closed out the month with about $500,000 in the bank and $383,000 in debt.
This month, he raised roughly $3.2 million more and is expecting a public-finance payment in March of almost $1 million, his campaign manager, Nick Baldick, said. ''We are in a lot better shape than when we planned this thing out,'' he said.
Mr. Kerry's January report was not available, but the campaign has said it has raised roughly $9 million since the start of the year.
Mr. Bush and Mr. Kerry have declined public financing, freeing them to raise and spend without limits in the primaries. After the conventions this summer, both parties' nominees are expected to accept public financing for the general election, about $75 million each.
The general-election candidates can also count on help from party committees and advocacy groups, which have raised money for months. So far, Republican Party committees have out-raised their Democratic counterparts.
Mr. Bush spent about $7.6 million in January and roughly $41.2 million over all, reports show. Expenditures last month included more than $2 million for postage and mailings and more than $987,000 for staff and consultants, PoliticalMoneyLine said.
On the revenue side, most of Mr. Bush's money was brought in the old-fashioned way: face to face. Mr. Bush, Vice President Dick Cheney and their wives, as well as the cabinet secretaries, have attended more than 100 fund-raisers around the country. Those efforts were helped by a network of 416 fund-raisers in 45 states, each of whom has raised at least $100,000, sometimes far more.
The events accounted for more than three-quarters of the money raised through January, according to the campaign, and the remainder was brought in through mail and telephone solicitations.
Mr. Bush has not been as effective as Democrats at raising money over the Internet. Despite a list of more than a half-million donors -- 80 percent of whom gave less than $200 -- Mr. Bush has raised just $3.5 million online, his campaign said.
Mr. Kerry raised almost $4.5 million over the Internet this year and Mr. Edwards raised $2.2 million since a few days before the Iowa caucuses, campaign aides said.
The Bush campaign has sent about 100 e-mail letters to supporters, but few were appeals for money, Mr. Stanzel said. Instead, most were aimed at mobilizing volunteers and other grass roots activities.
As Max Fose, a Internet consultant, put it, ''the Bush campaign doesn't have to raise money online.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: FINANCIAL REPORTS
