In the last 28 innings he pitched last season, including October, Yankees closer Mariano Rivera allowed one earned run. He was as dominant as ever, and the confidence has carried over to spring training.
Rivera, 34, wants the Yankees to give him a three-year contract extension. He will earn just under $10 million this season, in the final year of his contract, and he said Friday that he would like to pitch through 2007.
''I want to play three more years after this and finish with the Yankees,'' Rivera said.
General Manager Brian Cashman said he wanted to keep Rivera but had no meetings scheduled with Rivera's agent, Fern Cuza. But Cuza lives in nearby Sarasota, Fla., and Rivera wants to get a deal done soon.
''When they're ready, I'll be ready,'' Rivera said. ''If it was up to me, I would do it right now. But it takes time. We have to wait.''
Torre Still Mulling Future
George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, invited Manager Joe Torre to dinner on Thursday, another indication that Steinbrenner values Torre's opinions. Torre, who is unsigned past this season, said the two did not discuss his future because Torre had told Steinbrenner he needed time to decide.
''I can't envision myself not managing next year,'' Torre said. ''But let's get into a little work and see how I feel.''
Rodriguez to Arrive Early
Alex Rodriguez will arrive at Legends Field on Saturday and address reporters under a tent set up last year for Hideki Matsui's first news conference. Rodriguez, the Yankees' new third baseman, will show up a day before position players report on Sunday.
Brown and Black and Blue
Joe Torre said Mike Mussina would probably be the Yankees' opening day starter, but Kevin Brown has made a strong early impression. Torre said Brown ''seems to be in a very good mood,'' even if he could not find a teammate to warm up with. The late movement on Brown's sinker makes him painful for right-handers to catch.
''You have to have a left-handed person play catch with him,'' Torre said. ''Otherwise, he'll kill somebody's thumb.''
Burkett May Stay Home
The Yankees have tried to bring starter John Burkett to spring training as insurance against an injury to their rotation, offering him a nonroster spot with a chance to make more than $3 million. But Burkett, 39, is not sure he wants to keep pitching.
''At this point, it really is up to John,'' said Burkett's agent, Tommy Tanzer, ''and if he continues to take the same position he's taking, there's nothing anybody can do.''
Contreras Draws Response
On Thursday, pitcher José Contreras angrily accused the Cuban government of punishing him by denying his wife and two daughters exit visas to leave the island. Contreras, who defected from Cuba 16 months ago, even charged that the Cuban government had twice arrested his wife on trumped-up charges.
On Friday, Lazaro Herrera Martínez, the first secretary of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington, responded to Contreras's remarks and said that his wife was not being harassed. As for the inability of Contreras's family to leave Cuba, Martínez said that ''that's an immigration matter,'' and that Contreras should ''take it up'' with Cuban immigration authorities.
BASEBALL: YANKEES NOTEBOOK
