For just the first two months alone of what could be an extended legal process relating to the Staten Island ferry accident, the city owes more than $650,000 in fees to outside law firms for their help, city documents show. In the weeks after the Oct. 15 accident that killed 11 people, the city hired three firms to help it prepare for a criminal inquiry and to represent it in possible civil suits.
''Although the legal bills the city is incurring are substantial, they are justified by the large number of claims brought against the city and the scope of the United States attorney's investigation,'' Michael A. Cardozo, the city's corporation counsel, said in a statement. ''The city has a responsibility to protect the interests of city taxpayers and employees.''
John S. Martin Jr., a former federal judge and United States attorney in Manhattan, was hired to coordinate the city's response to federal grand jury subpoenas that have been issued. Prosecutors from the office of the United States attorney in Brooklyn, Roslynn R. Mauskopf, are still weighing criminal charges.
Mr. Martin's firm, Debevoise &amp; Plimpton, billed the city for almost $420,000 for a long list of services in November and December, including providing strategic and tactical advice, collecting and reviewing documents relating to subpoenas from a federal grand jury, legal research and communicating with city department of transportation employees.
The firm Freehill, Hogan &amp; Mahar, which specializes in admiralty law, was hired soon after the accident to represent the city in potential civil lawsuits. Among its first actions was to file papers, under a maritime statute that turns on whether or not the city knew of any negligence, to cap the city's liability in the crash to $14 million, or the cost of the ferry itself. For its work, the firm billed the city more than $227,000, records show.
Finally, John S. Siffert, a respected former prosecutor and member of the firm Lankler Siffert &amp; Wohl, was retained by the city to advise ferry employees testifying before the grand jury who were not targets of the criminal inquiry. His firm billed the city just under $8,000 in November and December, documents show. A spokeswoman for the Corporation Counsel's office, Kate O'Brien Ahlers, said the bill was low because the bulk of Mr. Siffert's work occurred in 2004.
Mr. Siffert's work has drawn criticism from prosecutors, law enforcement officials have said, because the prosecutors questioned whether he might have an interest in protecting the city from liability. . City officials later agreed to allow ferry employees to choose from other lawyers.
