Iran held parliamentary elections on Friday with more significance being placed on voter turnout than on the results, as religious conservatives were certain to take back control of the Parliament.
The reformist movement urged Iranians to boycott the election after more than 2,000 of their candidates, including 87 deputies in the 290-seat body, were disqualified from running by a watchdog council controlled by the hard-liners.
But conservatives urged people to vote, suggesting as they have for much of the past 25 years that a huge turnout would sting the enemies of the Islamic revolution.
''The turnout will indicate whether people are giving their approval to this regime or not,'' said Abbas Amanat, a history professor and the director of the Middle East Center at Yale University. ''If the turnout is low, it is an obvious sign of frustration.''
No results were released Friday. State-run radio and television said polls were kept open for an extra four hours because there had been such a high turnout among the 46 million eligible voters.
That happens in virtually every Iranian election, however, and it was possible to find evidence that neither side had entirely succeeded. Polling stations were far less crowded than during the previous parliamentary and presidential elections, which saw major victories for those promising greater social freedom and less autocratic rule. While vegetable markets in northern Tehran and the ski slopes were packed, the polling stations were doing a slow trade, witnesses said.
Still, they were not entirely empty, and there was reportedly a greater turnout in southern Tehran and in the provinces, where the conservatives traditionally do better.
The two sides have been jockeying for the heart and soul of Iranian voters for the better part of a decade. But it seemed that the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, had been able to manipulate the organizations he controls -- including the parliamentary watchdog groups, the judiciary, the security services and the state-run news organizations -- to undermine the movement that sought to challenge his absolute power.
Ayatollah Khamenei, whose opinion carries the weight of religious law, was among the first voters in Tehran early Friday morning.
''You see how those who are against the Iranian nation and the revolution are trying so hard to prevent people from going to the polls,'' he said on state television. ''I do not think these enthusiastic young people will be prevented from fulfilling their duty.''
The continuous election coverage featured voters echoing their leaders' remarks. ''We want to tell our enemies that we are here, and we will defend our revolution,'' said one young man interviewed on television.
But there were plenty of people on the streets who said they were not voting.
One man said he was not going to vote because he was disillusioned by the reform-leaning president, Mohammad Khatami.
''The results are already decided, and there is no need for my vote,'' said Ashgar, 56, who would only give his first name. ''Khatami, who seemed to be the best of them, did not fulfill his promises. How can we trust the other ones now?''
Some Iranians were even refusing go outdoors, saying they were tired of the government's habit of counting huge numbers of people taking part in the polls -- regardless of how they voted -- as a seal of approval for the Islamic system.
''I will not even go as far as the grocery today because they will claim tomorrow that people came out to support the system,'' Parvin Ziaee said.
The Los Angeles-based satellite television stations run by Iranian exile groups, which in the last year have succeeded in orchestrating street protests in Tehran, were urging people not to vote and fielding phone calls from people around Iran who said they were boycotting.
Mr. Khatami, although he had earlier called the election unfair, still urged people to vote. The conservatives shuttered two liberal newspapers this week and sealed the headquarters of the main organization calling for reform, which was run by the president's younger brother, a lawmaker banned from running.
''Whatever the result of the election, we must accept it,'' Mr. Khatami said at his polling place.
He had trouble getting his agenda adopted when he controlled a majority in the Parliament, which is relatively weak. So he is expected to face a year, until the 2005 presidential elections, as a lame duck.
It is difficult to predict what the consequences of a conservative-controlled Parliament will be. Last year, voters stayed away from the municipal elections in large numbers, allowing Ayatollah Khamenei's camp to retake Tehran's city government. Many analysts saw that as a possible model.
The conservatives have rolled up some liberalization pushed by their opponents. Culture centers that once held film festivals and art exhibits were converted to prayer halls, for example, and the city recently announced that advertisements featuring foreign sports stars like David Beckham would be banned. Still, there was no wholesale reversal of the generally less restrictive atmosphere that Mr. Khatami and his allies have fostered since he first came to power in 1997.
