In a scorching opinion, a federal judge in Brooklyn said this week that Swiss banks had been stonewalling in a landmark case concerning their conduct during the Nazi era and were perpetrating a ''big lie'' by continuing to deny wrongdoing in their handling of Holocaust victims' accounts over many decades.
The opinion, by Judge Edward R. Korman of Federal District Court, was the latest development in a battle over how to implement a $1.25 billion settlement the Swiss banks reached in 1998 to resolve a huge class-action suit.
Recent moves by the Swiss banks have created roadblocks to the settlement and ''bring to mind the theory that if you tell a lie big enough and keep repeating it, people will eventually come to believe it,'' Judge Korman wrote in the decision, which was released on Thursday.
''The 'big lie' for the Swiss banks,'' the judge continued, ''is that during the Nazi era and its wake, the banks never engaged in substantial wrongdoing.'' Although Judge Korman's decision did not explain it, the ''big lie'' was a classic theory of Nazi propaganda. The class-action suit claimed that the banks had helped facilitate the transfer of Holocaust victims' accounts to Nazi authorities, misled the accountholders' survivors and routinely destroyed bank records for decades.
The Brooklyn case has drawn international attention as an example of attempts by American courts to compensate victims of global calamities. Until Judge Korman's ruling on Thursday, the complex process of trying to sort through aging bank records that are often shielded by Swiss bank secrecy laws, though difficult, had appeared to be proceeding with cordiality.
A lawyer for the Swiss banks, Roger M. Witten, declined yesterday to respond in detail to the judge's comments. ''While we disagree with many of Judge Korman's statements,'' he said in a prepared statement from Zurich, ''we hope the focus going forward will be on the prompt distribution of the settlement funds and on full reconciliation for all concerned."
Mr. Witten said that what was important was that the Swiss banks accepted the factual findings of historical inquiries into their conduct during the Nazi era, paid the $1.25 billion and ''met every obligation'' imposed on them by the settlement.
But Judge Korman cited historical studies, including one commissioned by the Swiss government, in saying that the banks ''continually distort and obscure the truth.'' He said the studies showed that they acted to maximize profits in ways that sometimes violated their obligations to their depositors, including routinely hiding assets from heirs of Holocaust victims.
The ruling brought into the open what has been a simmering behind-the-scenes battle in the effort to implement the settlement.
So far, the Brooklyn court has approved payments of $150.6 million to 1,934 people who filed claims in the case. Under the settlement, $800 million was earmarked to make restitution for lost accounts, with the balance to be used to compensate other Holocaust victims.
But court officials have said that the process of uncovering the lost accounts has been hampered by the Swiss banks' resistance. Among other things, the officials have sought access to information about more than 4.1 million Nazi-era accounts.
In October, Judah Gribetz, a prominent Manhattan lawyer who was appointed by Judge Korman to supervise the compensation process, said Swiss banks had cited bank secrecy laws when restricting information about the accounts.
Judge Korman's decision on Thursday rejected the banks' arguments against increasing access to information about those accounts, saying it was ''just the latest attempt to delay justice and prevent access to the truth.''
But the judge stopped short of directing the Swiss banks to increase their cooperation. It is expected that lawyers for the Holocaust survivors will seek such an order soon, which is likely to begin a new legal battle.
The judge also agreed with Mr. Gribetz's recommendation that a list of the names of 15,000 accountholders who investigators have said were ''possibly'' Nazi victims should be published to give people around the world information they could use to file claims.
The banks have said that because there is so little information linking the accounts to victims, it would be confusing to the public and ''unfair to the banks'' to publish such a list.
''I suggest,'' Judge Korman wrote, ''that the banks stop being so concerned about what would be fair to them and start thinking about what would be fair to their clients and their heirs.''
