When John Daly is in contention, people pay attention.
Even as Mike Weir tied the Nissan Open 36-hole tournament record (130) Friday, and as Briny Baird shot a nine-under-par 62, the buzz at Riviera Country Club was about Daly, who shot 64 and finished two strokes off the lead. For the first time in his turbulent career, Daly is threatening to win back-to-back tournaments; he was the surprise winner of the Buick Invitational last week.
Even Daly's peers, while trying to beat him, were eager to see how this latest Daly renaissance played out.
''How could you root against him?'' Baird said. ''Or not think it's great for golf? It's not good for golf, it's great for golf.''
Daly figures to be in the hunt this weekend, with a huge gallery in his corner. Entering Saturday's play, Weir and Shigeki Maruyama were tied for the lead at 12-under par, one stroke ahead of Baird and Scott McCarron. Tiger Woods was eight strokes off the lead, after a second-round 66.
Weir, the defending Nissan champion, is hoping to become the sixth back-to-back winner at Riviera, joining Mac Smith (1928-29), Ben Hogan (1947-48), Paul Harney (1964-65), Arnold Palmer (1966-67) and Corey Pavin (1994-95). But while Weir's solid play was hardly surprising, Daly continued to stun those who figured he had squandered his best days. Before last weekend, Daly had not won on the Tour since the 1995 British Open.
Go figure. Better yet, don't try, not with Daly. Even he could not fully explain what was going on.
''I think everybody is still in shock from last week,'' he said. ''All of my friends are.''
But with the confidence he gained last week, and the talent he has long possessed, Daly has never looked better. Through Friday, he had hit 26 of 36 greens in regulation, and he was nine under par on Riviera's back nine. He almost made it look easy, and he admitted it felt that way.
''It's probably one of the best ball-striking rounds I had in a long time,'' said Daly, who had eight birdies and one bogey.
''I didn't really mishit a golf shot. It could have been a lot lower. I'm just tickled at how solid I'm hitting the golf ball.''
Not only was Daly in good form, he was in good humor. As he claimed to have lost 47 pounds since Christmas, a clap of thunder sounded outside the media center. Daly looked skyward.
''I didn't lie,'' Daly said, still looking up, as reporters erupted in laughter.
After his round, Daly said he planned to wash his customized motor home with help from one of his friends, the actor Joe Pesci.
''I let him do the lower part, because he is not tall enough to do the upper part,'' Daly said.
Later, Daly talked about his dislike for flying, the main reason he acquired his motor home, which he drives from tournament to tournament.
''I have always been afraid of them,'' Daly said of airplanes. ''You get in the plane, it stinks. There is food everywhere. You get a little Diet Coke with a half plastic cup. I can't stand it. And you can't smoke. And you pay to go through all of that misery.''
As Daly's comedy routine in the media center ended, the 5-foot-9 Weir walked in and sat on Daly's spacious lap.
Weir, who tied the 36-hole tournament record set by Davis Love III in 1992, looked as if he were a child visiting Santa Claus.
''What do you want for Christmas?'' Daly said, looking at Weir, who didn't answer.
But Daly knows what he wants: another victory. At age 37, after spending time in alcohol rehabilitation, working on his fourth marriage and still working on his game and his life, Daly hopes he has learned enough to handle success, no matter what happens on the course this weekend.
''My goal is not to make the same stupid mistakes that I made, and not trust some of the people that I have trusted in the past,'' Daly said. ''It's life. You learn. It's just taken me a lot longer than most people.''
CHIP SHOTS
ERNIE ELS, the world's No. 3-ranked player, has withdrawn from next week's Accenture Match Play Championship in Carlsbad, Calif., electing to stay home because his daughter will begin her first day of school in London next week. JIM FURYK (wrist injury) and KIRK TRIPLETT (personal reasons) had already withdrawn. JOHN ROLLINS will be added to the 64-player field to replace Els.
GOLF
