City Councilman Allan W. Jennings Jr., whom two former aides have accused of sexual harassment, is facing another complaint, this time from a colleague who said that he threatened her, according to a Council memorandum.
Councilwoman Sara Gonzalez of Brooklyn reported that Mr. Jennings had made the threat in a conversation earlier this month, in which Mr. Jennings read her a passage from the Bible, according to a memo dated Feb. 12 that was written by Forrest R. Taylor, the chief of staff for the Council speaker, Gifford Miller. The memo, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, was addressed to members of the Standards and Ethics Committee.
Mr. Jennings acknowledged by telephone last night that he read the passage, the First Psalm, to Ms. Gonzalez, a fellow Democrat, but denied he had made any threats. He was responding, he said, to statements Ms. Gonzalez made in late January at a council session that he considered ''disparaging'' to him.
''Based upon the language of the passage itself and the way it was read to her, Council Member Gonzalez believed that Council Member Jennings was making a personal threat,'' the memo said.
Mr. Jennings said that in reading the passage, he was trying to tell Ms. Gonzalez ''the things you said weren't true. You should do the right thing all the time.''
The last portion of the passage that Mr. Jennings said he read states ''the way of the ungodly shall perish.''
''That was the end of our conversation,'' he added. ''No shouting. No arguing.''
A telephone call to the office of Ms. Gonzalez last night went unanswered.
Stephen Sigmund, a spokesman for Council Speaker Miller, said: ''Council member Jennings has a history of erratic behavior and we are concerned by this.''
Mr. Jennings has been accused of sexual harassment and misconduct by two of his former aides and city officials are investigating the claims. Another blow came in January, when he was removed as the chairman of the Civil Service and Labor Committee, a decision he has disputed.
He said Mr. Taylor brought up the exchange with Ms. Gonzalez in a recent phone call. He has not, he said, spoken to Ms. Gonzalez since reading the passage to her.
''All I did was read the bible to her,'' he said. ''How could the bible be a threat to anybody?''
