On Monday night, as the hour reaches midnight, some 2,000 volunteers will spread out across New York City for the second annual census of the homeless. This year, volunteers will go beyond Manhattan's byways and subway stations and will attempt to count people living on the streets of Brooklyn and Staten Island as well.
Volunteers will not actually survey all of this territory, but will instead comb much smaller areas on foot, and the number of people they find will serve as the basis of an estimate for the whole population. Because of this unscientific guesswork and because volunteers will not be looking in abandoned buildings or subway cars, nonprofit groups that advocate on behalf of the homeless say they believe the survey will undercount the street homeless.
''We continue to feel that the flawed methodology serves to mislead the public on the true scope of the problem,'' said Patrick Markee, a senior policy analyst for the Coalition for the Homeless.
But Linda I. Gibbs, the commissioner of the city's Department of Homeless Services, says understanding as much as possible about the extent and location of the street homeless is key to reducing their numbers. ''What you measure is what you manage,'' she said, ''and it is critical to repeat the count so we can understand how strategies that we adopted in response to the knowledge gained last year are having the effect of reducing the number of people on the street.''
Ms. Gibbs said that last year's survey, for example, which identified 1,763 people living on the streets of Manhattan, taught the department that the homeless do not congregate more densely in high-traffic areas like Pennsylvania Station and Union Square Park, as the city had thought. As a result, she said, the city has advised its homeless outreach teams to make their efforts more widespread and to check less-populated places.
Attempting to track street homeless in the other boroughs poses different challenges than in Manhattan, said Jim Anderson, the spokesman for the Department of Homeless Services, because they include more parkland and more single-family dwellings, and as a result are expected to have different patterns of street living. Staten Island, for example, has tent camps in wooded areas.
