When the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra tackled Ornette Coleman on Thursday night, as it will again tonight, every piece in the program was from Mr. Coleman's first great recording period, 1958 to 1960, and the orchestra mostly stuck by one rule: don't emulate the essences of that small-group music.
This is where jazz repertory, even in Lincoln Center's liberal refashioning of the idea, gets complicated. In playing Mr. Coleman's music, less is not necessarily more: the stark, exotic poignancy of those pianoless quartet records can't be improved upon. The jazz orchestra's solution was to use his propulsive, bouncing melodies and build upward and outward from them, to write new lines and counterlines where there were none. Not to reproduce the looseness of pitch and harmony and rhythm that his old quartets did in playing the Coleman lines, but to use the originals only as suggestions.
The bad news, I suppose, was that Mr. Coleman, 73, didn't play his saxophone. He took it in from the audience in Alice Tully Hall, and his old colleague Dewey Redman was guest soloist with the 15-piece orchestra. The good news was that much of what we heard was new music -- all kinds of it, in all sizes and styles.
Wynton Marsalis's arrangement of ''Ramblin','' for example, was really about six arrangements. It started with some free improvising by the orchestra's new pianist, Eric Lewis, who made thrashing, wavelike gestures over the keyboard and scratched the strings inside the piano. (I heard a lot of nervous giggles and ''What's he doing?'' Shades of Mr. Coleman's shocking opening at the Five Spot in 1959.)
That led into a strong vamp with close-chorded dissonances over a groove made of Herlin Riley's cymbal rhythm and Carlos Henriquez's bass thrums. Then the band vaulted in and dealt with the tune's Dixieland-like internal crisscrossing of lines, making a dense matrix even denser. When the reeds and brass dropped out and the tune opened up, suddenly it became clearer that ''Ramblin' '' is a blues: Mr. Redman played an abstract, dark-midnight blues solo.
You would expect the construction work to stop there and yield to the inevitable string of solos. No. Mr. Redman's solo was followed by a passing channel of thematic material, weirdly scored for two bass clarinets and three regular clarinets, a short solo by the trumpeter Marcus Printup over only bass drum and finally Mr. Lewis returning percussively (on a tune that originally and famously contained no piano) over tambourine. None of this had much to do with ''Ramblin' '' as you know it except for its groove and for the mandate from Mr. Coleman's music to look at old things in a fresh way, and this certainly did.
There were other surprises, some that worked and a few that didn't. Baritone saxophone, flute and clarinet turning out rich colors in ''Una Muy Bonita.'' (Worked.) Swing rhythm and Ellingtonian harmonies for four saxophones in the middle of ''Lonely Woman.'' (Didn't.) ''W.R.U.'' as a duet for soprano saxophone and bass. (Not really.) A version of ''T. &amp; T.,'' with piccolo and march rhythm, suggesting a connection between Mr. Coleman's earthy art and folk traditions of the south. (Also worked.)
Finally, there were two pieces I want to hear again. First was ''Free,'' with equal parts of wild free-for-all and melodious structure. For those who keep score, Mr. Marsalis has in the past been known to be uninterested in free improvisation; here, as arranger of the tune and one of its main soloists, he got past his ready store of twitchy effects and long glissandos and found a way to play outside of tonality with heart. Then there was Ted Nash's arrangement of ''Kaleidoscope,'' a piece that moved like car-chase music. Racing drums and simmering, tonally ambiguous piano -- like another layer of ride cymbal -- lay underneath the wild lines on top. What a lot of work it all was, but on a tough assignment they shot for extra credit.
JAZZ REVIEW
