In September 1994, Ruth Lovelace walked into the office of Frank Mickens, the principal of Boys and Girls High School in Brooklyn. Mickens was juggling a variety of tasks at his desk, the phone cradled to his ear as he pointed to a stack of résumés.
''Go through these and tell me who the best three candidates are,'' Lovelace recalls Mickens telling her.
Lovelace was beginning her second year as a teacher, and the boys' basketball team needed a coach. Boys and Girls High, which has adorned the city's basketball tapestry with legendary players like Lenny Wilkens, Connie Hawkins and Pearl Washington, had fallen on hard times, and Mickens was looking for the right person to restore the tradition.
Over the next two weeks, Lovelace, who had also been a star at Boys and Girls, spoke with Mickens often. They talked about coaching philosophies, strategies and styles of play. Lovelace was still sifting through credentials when she heard Mickens's voice on the public-address system.
''Congratulations; Ruth Lovelace is the new boys' basketball coach,'' he said.
''I was in shock,'' Lovelace said, laughing, earlier this month. ''The whole school had the same reaction.''
As it turns out, Mickens was not really looking for a coach in that stack of résumés; he wanted Lovelace all along.
''He was interviewing me the whole time and I didn't even know it,'' said Lovelace, who is the only female coach of a boys' basketball team in the Public Schools Athletic League.
That first season, she led the Boys and Girls team to an 18-5 record and a berth in the P.S.A.L. playoffs. Her best player, Nolan Johnson, initially thought it was a joke that a woman would be his coach. When he later received a scholarship to play at Oklahoma, he called to thank her.
Lovelace has led her current team into the second round of the P.S.A.L. playoffs, compiling a 22-6 record; the Kangaroos will play Bayside on Tuesday night at Lehman College. The Kangaroos upset nationally ranked Lincoln, led by Sebastian Telfair, in the Brooklyn borough semifinals last month.
The Kangaroos reached the semifinals of the P.S.A.L. playoffs the past two seasons. Lovelace said she believed that her team, led by guards Carlos Collazo and Tyrell Cruz, both four-year varsity players, has the athletic ability, leadership and experience to make another run at a city championship.
''We've been to the last two final fours,'' Cruz said. ''Now that we've been there, it's time to get to the Garden.''
Lovelace's basketball career began when she was 11 and playing kickball at P.S. 335 in Crown Heights. A group of teenage boys playing basketball after school invited her to play one day when they were missing a player. At first, she refused, she said, because ''I didn't know how to play and they told me to just play defense.''
But she decided to play; she ran up and down the court, passing immediately whenever the ball landed in her hands. Eventually, she had an open look at the basket, and she took her first shot.
''It went in, and from that day on, I played ball,'' she said.
As a sophomore at Boys and Girls, she averaged 25 points and went on to earn all-city accolades as a junior and a senior. After two all-American seasons in junior college, Lovelace took her talents to Seton Hall in 1988.
''Ruth was one of the best players in the country when we got her,'' said Phyllis Mangina, who has coached Seton Hall since 1985. ''She was the type of player that everyone wanted to play with.''
Mangina said the coaches marveled at her work ethic and the value she placed on education. But Lovelace's career was derailed by knee injuries.
''When she was hurt, she would be pulling players aside to teach, and they paid attention,'' Mangina said. ''She understood the game and was able to get that across to other athletes.''
Lovelace strives for excellence on the court and in the classroom. Her players learn that unexcused absences, late assignments and questionable behavior will result in their sitting out games, whether the player is an all-American or the 12th man.
Jaime Kilburn, a senior forward at Brown, said he felt prepared during his freshman year in college because of what he learned from her in high school.
''She's one of my greatest inspirations,'' he said. ''Coach put a high value on succeeding in the classroom, and that helped me tremendously with my time management skills.''
Many of Lovelace's former players seek advice from her.
''She's never going to tell me what I want to hear,'' said Lee Church, a junior guard at Clarion University in Pennsylvania, a Division II program. ''If I'm wrong, she gives it to me straight, and she'll definitely chew me out.''
Although she said she was proud of her coaching success, Lovelace gets more excited when talking about opportunities to teach her players, what she calls ''teachable moments,'' than she does discussing winning and losing. Because of her experience, she knows how quickly the game can be taken away and she wants her players to understand that each game could be their last. If Boys and Girls makes it to Madison Square Garden for the city championship and one of her star players is late with an assignment, Lovelace said she would not hesitate to teach him a lesson.
''One day, these guys are going to have to be husbands and fathers to someone,'' she said. ''It doesn't make any sense to be able to dunk a basketball backwards and not pass a class.''
HIGH SCHOOL BASKETBALL
