Investigators looking into the collapse of Parmalat, the Italian dairy and food giant, are devoting more attention to the role that its outside law firm, Zini &amp; Associates, may have played in questionable transactions conducted by the company.
Former employees of Zini say that in December numerous boxes of documents were removed from the firm's New York office at 460 Park Avenue. They also say that the firm moved most of its electronic documents to a second computer server, one that did not allow access to most employees. These steps, the former employees say, were all completed before government investigators first searched the offices on Dec. 31; the former employees said they did not know whether documents that were provided to government investigators in recent weeks included those that were moved.
Documents provided to The New York Times suggest that the law firm was more deeply involved in Parmalat's business dealings than has previously been reported. Investigators have said suspected accounting fraud at the company involved as much as 10 billion euros, while estimates by some analysts have put the amount at 13 billion euros.
In addition to reviewing the complex financial transactions used by Parmalat, its largest client, the law firm, according to former employees, set up offshore companies for Parmalat and had its employees serve on an offshore entity's board. Documents show that on at least one occasion, the firm served as the point of contact for an investment bank contemplating a complex transaction that would have provided financing to the company on more favorable terms than a loan.
The former employees said that the law firm was closely involved in setting up two of Parmalat's offshore entities that appear to have figured significantly in Parmalat's troubles. One is Epicurum, a Cayman Islands investment fund in which Parmalat invested about 500 million euros, very little of which appears to be left; the other is Bonlat Financing, also based in the Cayman Islands, which now appears to have had virtually no genuine assets. Former Zini employees say that the law firm's office manager transferred funds among the different companies on behalf of Parmalat.
Having a law firm move money around for a big corporation may be odd, said Anthony E. Davis, a lawyer at Hinshaw &amp; Culbertson who advises other law firms. But ''it's not per se improper by any means,'' Mr. Davis said. ''That's why lawyers have trust accounts.''
The lawyer representing Zini &amp; Associates, Robert I. Bodian of Mintz, Levin, Cohn, Ferris, Glovsky &amp; Popeo, declined to discuss the matter, except to say that some former Zini employees probably bear a grudge against the firm. Asked specifically about the claim that Zini played a role in transferring money, he said, ''I don't know that to be the case.''
Mr. Bodian said that Zini was in the process of winding down its business. The firm's principal, Gian Paolo Zini, was arrested in Italy in December in connection with an investigation by prosecutors there of possible fraud at Parmalat. Mr. Zini has denied any wrongdoing, according to news accounts.
Mr. Bodian said at a court hearing last week that Zini &amp; Associates had already turned over hundreds of boxes of documents -- including some found in a Manhattan Mini Storage outlet on the Upper East Side -- to the office of the Manhattan district attorney. The hearing was requested by the plaintiffs in a lawsuit against Parmalat; the Zini firm; and two accounting firms, Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu and Grant Thornton, that had been Parmalat's auditors. The plaintiffs asked the judge in the case to allow them to question two Zini employees about the removal of documents.
The judge, Lewis A. Kaplan of Federal District Court, declined to allow such questioning, noting that it was already illegal to hide documents and any further action by him would probably not deter such acts; he essentially accused the lawyers for the plaintiffs of grandstanding for the media and wasting his time.
Some of the documents provided to The Times describe complex financial transactions with investment banks that appear to have been intended to extend credit to Parmalat, but not in the form of a loan.
One was a type of deal known as a collared swap, to be conducted with Deutsche Bank. According to the documents, which appear to be a draft, Deutsche Bank was to pay a Parmalat-related company called Newport 20 million euros (about $25 million) in exchange for seven million shares of Parmalat stock. Deutsche Bank would also buy a call option giving it the right to buy Parmalat stock, while Newport would buy a put option, or the right to sell Parmalat stock.
The deal set a date in the future when the whole arrangement would be reversed: Newport would get the shares back and return the 20 million euros. If Parmalat's stock had risen or fallen very much in the meantime, one of the two options would be in the money -- that is, profitable to exercise -- and the party holding it would reimburse the other side for its value. In the meantime, though, Newport would pay Deutsche Bank an annual fee for maintaining the arrangement.
The effect of all this complexity would be to mimic the effects of a stock-secured loan of 20 million euros, with the cost to Parmalat dependent to some extent on how its stock performed. Deutsche Bank and Parmalat entered into a version of this deal, but it was not indicated in the documents what the final terms were. It is unclear whether or how Parmalat disclosed the transaction to investors.
Another transaction described in the documents was proposed to Parmalat last March by Goldman Sachs. A spokesman for Goldman said that the transaction, of a type known as an extinguishing swap, was never executed.
Its effect would have been to provide Parmalat with 7 million euros (about $9 million) upfront and a much larger sum, 500 million euros (about $635 million), five years later; in exchange, Parmalat would pay Goldman 10 million euros (about $12.7 million) annually for about 25 years, and then repay the 500 million euros. The deal would have given Parmalat eventual access to financing on relatively favorable terms -- financing that may not have shown up as debt on the company's balance sheet.
In a way, Goldman was betting that if Parmalat managed to get through the next five years without defaulting on its obligations, it would be able to repay the 500 million euros in 2028. On the other hand, if Parmalat did default before 2008, Goldman would escape the obligation to supply the 500 million euros, but would still have the benefit of the 10 million euros in annual fees for several years, after putting up only 7 million euros of its own.
As events turned out, the deal might have been a good one for Goldman.
The documents offer a revealing glimpse into some of the steps both the Zini firm and Parmalat were considering in an effort to save the company last fall. For example, in November, the law firm apparently was asked to prepare a memo on the possible sale of Parmalat's soccer team, AC Parma. It also explored the possibility of Parmalat's retaining a prominent law firm, Boies, Schiller &amp; Flexner, which has been involved in the Tyco, Qwest and Adelphia cases in the United States.
''I think it makes sense for us to discuss whether we can offer Parmalat some advice and representation as you deal with the issues facing Parmalat,'' Philip C. Korologos, a lawyer at Boies, Schiller, wrote in November. ''Please give me a call.''
