Jill, an alias for an undercover C.I.A. officer, was on temporary duty in Europe when she was the alleged victim of an attempted rape and beating by another C.I.A. officer.
Jill and her husband, who also worked for the Central Intelligence Agency, reported the incident to C.I.A. headquarters and demanded that the case be turned over to the Justice Department for criminal prosecution. But, according to a new book about the difficulties facing C.I.A. employees who seek legal action against the agency, the two were soon pushed into menial jobs. Eventually, they received an out-of-court settlement and resigned.
That is just one of the things disclosed in a recent book by a former C.I.A. officer who now is a Washington lawyer specializing in representing current and former agency employees. The book, ''Piercing the Veil of Secrecy'' (Carolina Academic Press) by Janine M. Brookner, discusses the obstacles C.I.A. employees face in pursuing cases against an agency where even personnel records are classified.
An agency spokesman declined to comment on the book.
Ms. Brookner, who once had her own legal dispute with the C.I.A., argues in her book that the C.I.A. and other intelligence agencies hold an unfair legal advantage in workplace disputes. Lawyers representing C.I.A. employees must obtain security clearances to read and discuss personnel files and related documents. But they must receive those clearances from the C.I.A. -- giving the agency inordinate control over the lawyers representing their employees, the book argues.
As soon as C.I.A. employees decide to sue the agency, Ms. Brookner writes, ''they are confronted with the C.I.A.'s exploitation of security in an effort to exert control over the entire legal process, including their choice of counsel.''
The C.I.A.'s office of general counsel keeps a list of ''cleared'' lawyers for employees. ''But being on the C.I.A.'s list of cleared attorneys creates a potential conflict of interest for lawyers,'' Ms. Brookner writes. ''It gives an attorney an opening to a new client base, but may jeopardize the lawyer's willingness to litigate zealously against the agency.''
The C.I.A.'s rules state that officers in the agency's clandestine spy service are not even permitted to speak with a lawyer, or disclose their true names to a lawyer, until the attorney is cleared, Ms. Brookner writes.
The C.I.A. also employs arcane legal devices to keep evidence away from its employees and their lawyers, she says. ''The C.I.A. controls virtually all the evidence,'' she writes. ''It is notorious for over-classification of information, and perfunctorily classifies just about every piece of paper which it produces.''
Increasingly, the C.I.A. has also been invoking the ''state secrets privilege'' to deny information to opposing lawyers, even in normal employment discrimination cases, Ms. Brookner writes.
Once the state secrets privilege is invoked by the C.I.A. director, the judge rules -- without the plaintiff or plaintiff's lawyer present -- on whether to exclude the information. ''The courts have refused to second-guess the C.I.A. director's assertion of the privilege,'' Ms. Brookner writes. ''If abused, it is tantamount to granting the agency and its employees absolute immunity from suit, even where their activities are illegal and or discriminatory. This is dangerous precedent indeed.''
Ms. Brookner argues that these rules are excessively rigid, and that most lawsuits can be handled by lawyers without security clearances. She says aliases are often used in lawsuits, and specific locations of C.I.A. stations do not have to be mentioned in court documents.
Ms. Brookner argues that a male-dominated culture of secrecy has also led in some cases to false allegations against female officers who report wrongdoing. ''Employees, especially women, of the C.I.A. who report wrongdoing or file grievances may find themselves subjected to false accusations of sexual promiscuity, homosexuality and alcoholism.'' She adds that ''C.I.A. employees are well aware that reporting wrongdoing internally can result in career suicide.''
Ms. Brookner was involved in a bitter sexual discrimination lawsuit against the C.I.A. before leaving in 1994 to become an lawyer representing other agency employees, and she discusses the case in her book. The dispute began after Ms. Brookner, the first female C.I.A. station chief in Latin America, accused her deputy of battering his wife. The deputy then made complaints about Ms. Brookner that led to an investigation of her by the C.I.A.'s inspector general.
Filed under the alias Jane Doe Thompson, her case rocked the C.I.A. when it became public in the early 1990's. It ended when she received a settlement of more than $400,000.
