Steering his wooden skiff between thick clumps of reeds, Kadum Abdullah took one hand off his pole and held it up for a visitor to see.
Two fingers were bent in unnatural positions, broken years ago in a Baghdad prison by torturers who accused him of conspiring against the government, he said.
''I left the marshes in 1992 and went to prison the same year,'' Mr. Abdullah, 40, said as he stood barefoot in his boat. ''Some of my friends were executed, some released, some spent years in prison.''
That is just a sampling of the fates met by the displaced dwellers of these marshes in southern Iraq, once among the largest wetland ecosystems in the world. In the early 1990's, in a move that transformed the very face of nature in this country, Saddam Hussein ordered the 7,700-square-mile area drained and its residents attacked to force out Shiite Arabs he suspected of resisting his rule.
Last spring, local engineers began breaking dams and levees upriver to reflood the area, and Mr. Abdullah says he now uses his twisted hand again for what it was meant to do -- poling his boat, cutting reeds and casting fishing nets.
But what seemed a simple matter of reflooding the marshes has turned into an endeavor as tangled as the aquatic plants taking root here. In the largest and most complex wetlands restoration project being undertaken by the American government, scientists and engineers are grappling with problems ranging from dismal water quality and an absence of health care to uncertainty over whether residents here can sustain themselves through fishing and the selling of reeds and dairy products.
The dam-breaking last spring brought some early success. The swamp is teeming with renewed life. Water buffalo lumber through floating algae, and ducks paddle along the surface.
It is an environment in which Mr. Abdullah's people, known as the Marsh Arabs, have been living for 5,000 years, since the dawn of Sumerian civilization between the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers.
''It was like a street here after the marshes were drained,'' Mr. Abdullah said while a neighbor carrying a duck-hunting rifle floated by in a small boat. ''We need more water. Our lives are connected to the water. If we get more, we'll be content.''
The United States Agency for International Development has budgeted $4 million for the restoration effort. This month, dozens of Iraqi and foreign scientists met in southern Iraq to begin putting together a plan, looking at everything from medical needs to the types of fish re-entering the ecosystem.
The central concern is how to reintegrate the Marsh Arabs into the wetlands environment. In June and July, researchers counted 83 settlements, or about 73,000 people, in the marshes, down significantly from estimates of up to 250,000 in 1991, but more than recent tallies of 40,000 or so, said Peter Reiss, a social anthropologist leading the team. Since that survey, thousands of people have returned from all over Iraq and from refugee camps in Iran, where some still remain.
Noble savages they are not. Many clamor for electricity and paved roads, and some say they prefer concrete or brick homes to the primitive arched reed houses scattered throughout the marshes. Some of the families who stayed in the area through the 1990's say they would like to hold on to the dry-land farming they have developed rather than return to an existence dependent on fishing and water buffalo.
Local engineers have slowed the reflooding for fear of displacing those families. Many homes were submerged by the destruction of dams and levees over the summer.
''The original situation will be almost impossible to recreate,'' said Jonathan Greenham, the agricultural officer with Usaid in Iraq. ''In terms of preserving the culture, I think that is probably a forlorn hope.''
One of the biggest complaints voiced by the Marsh Arabs is over the poor quality of the water. They regularly beseech visitors for bottles of mineral water or soda. Mr. Reiss said almost everyone here suffered from diarrhea. Many carry giardia, a waterborne parasite.
Water purity plummeted during the draining, and scientists are now trying to determine whether the reflooding has brought in too much salt.
''We can't drink this water,'' Zael Hashim, 42, said as she stood near a reed home her family had recently built. ''I think the Euphrates side has too much salt. Before we left, the water was good, but now it's too salty.''
From 1991 to 1997, government engineering projects drained more than 80 percent of the marshes. After American-led forces ousted Mr. Hussein last April, Marsh Arabs went to the irrigation departments of nearby cities to ask them to reflood the region.
In this western marsh area, engineers from the city of Nasiriya used bulldozers to break a dam blocking the Garaf River, a tributary of the Tigris. Then they increased water flow from a nearby dam blocking the Euphrates. But the engineers slowed the reflooding in December after realizing that 200 homes in the area would be swept away, said Ali Shaheen, director of the irrigation department in Nasiriya.
''These people are farming for grains and wheat,'' Mr. Shaheen said. ''We're asking organizations affiliated with the United Nations to build simple homes or complexes for them on higher areas.''
But those residents who have readapted to the traditional way of life here are demanding more water.
''We need water in our marshes in Fahood,'' Thuraya Khalaf, a mother of 11, said to a water engineer showing visitors around Kirmashiya Marsh, part of the larger Hammar Marsh. ''We are suffering. Saddam just destroyed us, then he left.''
Small water buffalo wandered around outside Ms. Khalaf's two reed homes, built here just five days ago. Ever since the old government drained the nearby Fahood Marsh, the family has moved from marsh to marsh every few months in search of grazing areas for their 10 water buffalo, she said.
''If we have water, we can have stability,'' Ms. Khalaf said. ''Without water, that's impossible.''
But many of the 200 local farming families live in Fahood Marsh, making it impossible to reflood the area immediately, said Badr Muhsen, the water engineer.
Most of the water in the reflooded areas is now one-and-a-half to six-and-a-half feet deep, he said. The variety of fish has begun to increase. The main economic question is whether the marshes can be restored to a degree that would allow residents to sustain themselves.
Along a road leading to Adil Marsh, also within Hammar Marsh, grimy children stand next to small sacks of six-inch silver fish, hoping to sell the tiny catches. Residents pour water buffalo milk into containers on the back of trucks that make the rounds of local markets. Some people estimate that the marshes once provided 60 percent of the fish on tables in Iraq and 70 percent of the dairy products, said Mr. Reiss, the anthropologist.
But how much of the marshes can be restored might be out of Iraqi hands. All but one of the rivers that feed this area are now controlled by dams in neighboring Turkey, Syria and Iran. The struggle for water in this desiccated part of the world has only increased the dam-building.
In Kirmashiya Marsh, those concerns remain distant for residents. As Mr. Abdullah poled his boat through the water, he pointed to the stands of green reeds.
''I collect these and sell them in the markets,'' he said. ''Now it's spring, and the reeds will be thicker and better. If there's more water, then conditions will improve. This is what we call a rebirth.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: ENVIRONMENT
