The Bush administration, seeing little hope for an early accord on Iraq's future government, is likely to ask for more help from a special United Nations envoy to solidify a consensus on how Iraq will be run after June 30, administration and United Nations officials said Friday.
The officials said that Lakhdar Brahimi, the special envoy, is likely to return to Iraq next month to meet with the fractious Iraqi Governing Council and with Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani to try to reach an agreement.
Iraq is scheduled to have its sovereignty returned by June 30, a date fixed last year by the United States and its chosen Iraqi leaders.
Mr. Brahimi, a former Algerian foreign minister, came back from Iraq this week after performing one task that the Bush administration wanted from him: determining definitively that a full election would not be practical for the government that is to take office by June 30.
Another proposal that Mr. Brahimi declared impractical was the American-backed idea of a system of elaborate caucuses to choose the interim government. Although many administration officials had conceded that the caucus idea was not possible, the Brahimi mission amounted to a formal burial.
American officials said there had been an expectation that Mr. Brahimi would join with Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, to recommend an alternative to the caucus system. But Mr. Annan and others scotched that idea, saying they did not want that responsibility.
''It is crucial that we not give the impression that Iraq's fate could be decided over the heads of its people,'' Mr. Annan said Thursday. He added that the United Nations would work with the United States ''to find a mechanism to create the caretaker government.''
Diplomats at the United Nations say that Mr. Annan and Mr. Brahimi want to avoid having their independence and neutrality compromised by appearing too close to the American occupation.
Among the options that the United States is considering for Iraq are keeping the existing Iraqi Governing Council, but expanding it to include more members from other parts of Iraqi society, or setting up a large assembly of Iraqis similar to the grand councils convened in Afghanistan.
Mr. Brahimi said he would discourage another idea floating in Baghdad, to hold ''partial elections,'' with voting conducted in more secure areas of the country, including Kurdish and Shiite sectors, but not in the ''Sunni triangle,'' where an anti-American insurgency is spreading.
The American and United Nations officials who outlined the latest plans were in effect formulating a new strategy. The original plan last year called for a constitution to be written before any transfer of power would take place, probably in late 2004 or 2005.
The second plan, promulgated last November, called for plans adopted for Iraqi self-rule to be adopted by Feb. 28 and sovereignty to be returned by June 30.
Now the Feb. 28 deadline is being allowed to slip, and with it the idea that Iraqis and occupation officials would make the decision.
A senior American official said the United Nations was playing the role of ''trusted adviser'' in getting Iraqis to agree on a plan among themselves. Others described the United Nations as more than that, a mediator brokering an accord that was beyond the power of the United States to bring about.
In Iraq, Ayatollah Sistani, who refuses to meet with American representatives, indicated through intermediaries that he would only accept an interim Iraqi authority that had little power.
Any interim government, he told Der Spiegel magazine of Germany, ''should not be able to take political decisions that affect the future of our country.''
''Such decisions should only be taken by a government formed from free elections,'' he was quoted as saying.
American officials say they are sympathetic to that idea but that, once Iraq has full sovereignty, its government is likely to be seen as responsible for many big decisions, including any authorization for American troops to respond to emergencies or crush the insurgency.
Many expect the insurgency to get worse after June 30 because dissident Iraqis will probably want to topple whatever government is set up by the United States and the United Nations.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: IRAQI SELF-RULE
