Bridge is so much a matter of partnership that identifying the world's best player with any certainty is not possible. The four Italians, Norberto Bocchi, Giorgio Duboin, Lorenzo Laurie and Alfredo Versace, who have for many years been dominant in European and world play, would each be a strong contender.
In North America the Player of the Year race is a good indicator. It is based on performance in major national championships, and the 2003 winner was Michael Rosenberg of New Rochelle, N.Y. He won the Spingold Knockout, partnering Zia Mahmood, who was the P.O.Y. runner-up, and had another win and two second-place finishes.
Rosenberg, 49, learned his bridge in Scotland, then spent 20 years as an options trader in Manhattan. He has retired from that occupation and now focuses happily on bridge. He has a good claim to be considered the world's best technical player of difficult problems, and he proved it in 1998. Playing in Lille, France, he won the Jean Besse Par Contest ahead of 35 of the world's best. This was a pure test of skill in dealing with complex situations, unaffected by partners or opponents.
An important facet of dummy-play expertise is the ability to set problems for the defense. An example is the diagramed deal from the 2003 Summer Nationals in Long Beach, Calif. Rosenberg, South, landed in four hearts after his partner had doubled a one-spade overcall to show three-card heart support.
The diamond eight was led, and ducking in dummy would have succeeded. But the declarer, fearing a singleton, put up dummy's ace, seeing chances of endplaying West in some circumstances. South cashed the king and ace of clubs, then followed with a club ruff. Next he tabled the heart queen, which held, and continued with the king. West took his ace, and led his remaining diamond to his partner's king.
East could have given his partner a diamond ruff, but that would have fatally endplayed West. East did much better by shifting to the spade deuce, and South, in trouble, resorted to a clever deception. He put up the spade queen, and when this was covered with the king, he won with dummy's ace. Declarer cashed the heart nine, ruffed a club, and took his diamond jack, reaching this simple position and setting the trap:
South led a low spade, and West went astray by playing the nine. East had to win and unhappily surrender the last trick to dummy's diamond queen.
Should West have made the winning play of the spade jack, a crocodile coup to swallow the 10? Probably. East's lead of the spade deuce suggested that he held an honor. And if South had held the 10 he would no doubt have played it on the deuce or led toward it at the 10th trick, giving himself a legitimate chance.
The Grand National Teams Flights A and C will begin tomorrow at Honors Club, 115 East 57th Street in Manhattan. Play is at 11 a.m. and 4 p.m., and winners will continue.
BRIDGE
