Louise Arbour, a Canadian Supreme Court justice who as a war crimes prosecutor indicted the former Yugoslav president Slobodan Milosevic, was named Friday by Secretary General Kofi Annan as United Nations high commissioner for human rights.
Ms. Arbour, 57, a criminal lawyer from Montreal, will retire in late June after five years on Canada's highest court to take up her new post in Geneva, said Mr. Annan's spokesman, Fred Eckhard.
Her appointment requires approval by the General Assembly, but no opposition is expected, and human rights groups immediately hailed the choice.
She succeeds Sergio Vieira de Mello of Brazil, who served as Mr. Annan's envoy to Iraq and was one of the 22 people killed on Aug. 19 when the United Nations office in Baghdad was bombed.
In the interim, the office has been run by Bertrand Ramcharan of Guyana, Mr. Vieira de Mello's deputy, and he will continue to run it until Ms. Arbour takes over, Mr. Eckhard said.
''The high commissioner for human rights plays a key role on the world scene,'' Ms. Arbour, currently attending a law conference in Australia, said in a statement issued in Ottawa. ''I will devote all my energies to this extraordinary challenge.''
She achieved prominence as the chief United Nations prosecutor trying crimes committed during the Balkan wars of the 1990's and bringing cases against the main perpetrators of the mass killings in Rwanda in 1994. Mr. Milosevic was one of a number of leading Serbian and Yugoslav officials whom she indicted for crimes against humanity.
''This is someone who has shown by indicting Milosevic that she can stand up to bullies,'' said Reed Brody, special counsel to Human Rights Watch. ''But she has also shown she has the diplomatic skills to make democratic governments do the right thing, the way she did when she persuaded NATO to arrest war criminals in the former Yugoslavia.''
Irene Kahn, secretary general of Amnesty International, said, ''Louise Arbour's broad human rights background, distinguished legal career and service as U.N. prosecutor give her the experience to be both bold and creative in promoting and protecting human rights.''
Ms. Arbour becomes the second Canadian woman now in a high-profile United Nations job. Louise Frèchette, a former Canadian ambassador to the United Nations, was named in 1998 to the new post of deputy secretary general.
