''Raising Waylon,'' which has its premiere Sunday, might inspire Hollywood writers who cherish the old fantasy: a one-line pitch -- ''Unlikely godparents end up with custody of a child,'' for example -- can get a movie made.
Performing that pitch, to the tune of dum-doodle-dum music, pretty Poppy Montgomery (as Julia) and forgettable Thomas Gibson (as Reg) do their best to squabble with each other and be touched by a precocious sweetheart orphan (Waylon, played by Jeremy Bergman).
In a hasty and unsentimental flashback, viewers learn that Julia and Reg were once hip singles when Waylon's parents chose them as his godparents. The parents then died in an unspecified accident, leaving the hip ones, now enemies, to raise Waylon. Eyes bug. How in heck are two bantering people with daring, expressive jobs -- baker, photographer -- ever going to form a family?
The usual way: they'll get it together and fall in love. Modish details are forced on this hideous cliché. Reg is a modelizer; Julia eats only takeout. Both must set boundaries for little Waylon, and fight the starchy enemies of their spontaneous and innocent style of child-rearing.
Maybe along the way they'll learn a little about life.
Oh, bother. This is corn and partially hydrogenated sap, and it's almost insulting that it's being passed off as a movie. The actors' mugging, the shave-and-a-haircut soundtrack and the showdowns with obvious killjoys stand in for levity and conflict.
''Raising Waylon'' tries to make the case for what the boy's kindly great aunt (gamely played by Doris Roberts) calls ''love, freedom and imagination'' as the virtues of Reg and Julia. Instead it makes the case for full-on schlock of the most abject kind, which -- not yet driven out by television's better makers -- is clearly still welcome in network primetime.
RAISING WAYLON  CBS, Sunday at 9 p.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.
Directed by Sam Pillsbury; Dan Wigutow, executive producer; Steve Sachs, producer; Neena Beber and Laura Brownson, co-producers; written by Ms. Beber. Produced by Sony Pictures Television.
WITH: Thomas Gibson (Reg), Poppy Montgomery (Julia), Jeremy Bergman (Waylon) and Doris Roberts (Great Aunt Marie).
TELEVISION REVIEW
