HUGH COSMAN has a busy day ahead of him, what with the big event on Sunday. He has to pick up some corn husks for the tamales, buy a few cases of beer, make a run to the hardware store and manage the New York City campaign for a presidential candidate. Which means that one of the two phones at headquarters occasionally rings.
''Kucinich,'' he answers, with an inflection suggesting that he could be answering a question, or posing one.
The tone is apt, given that Dennis A. Kucinich, the congressman from Ohio and a long, long, long shot, will not be at that big fund-raising event for his campaign on Sunday; he has an appearance to make at a televised debate in California. Then again, the candidate is not expected to visit the city at all before the New York Democratic primary on March 2, though you never know.
Mr. Cosman carries on nevertheless, along with others who consider themselves the New York City Friends of Kucinich. They wear their ''Fear Ends; Hope Begins'' buttons, put up their posters, and work on making the Kucinich surname roll a little easier off the New York tongue.
''Kucinich,'' Mr. Cosman says again into the phone, holding his head with his free hand. ''Yes. Yes. Uh-huh. Yeah.''
To find the headquarters for the New York City Friends of Kucinich Committee, you ascend 31 stories of an old building in Lower Manhattan and walk through another organization's office to an overheated back room of maybe 250 square feet, for which the rent is $500 a month. There the campaign manager sits, amid the usual campaign clutter.
Mr. Cosman closed his metalworking business in the summer -- rent increases, business complications, don't ask -- which means that he has a lot of time for the Kucinich campaign. He is a volunteer, but so is everyone else.
Michael Locker, the committee's chairman, sits down, and soon the two men are discussing how the highly motivated Kucinich campaign has delegates running in most of the state's 29 Congressional districts. They say that Mr. Kucinich is the best candidate in the pack, the only one to vote his conscience and oppose the war, a genuinely nice guy, and a vegan.
On those rare occasions when Mr. Kucinich is in New York, the staff makes sure that he is fed food from a shop whose walnut-and-lentil pâté is so good, Mr. Cosman confides, ''you'd swear it was liver pâté.''
As the two men talk about running a local campaign with little money and, essentially, without a candidate, they volunteer that they harbor no illusions: they know that Mr. Kucinich will not get the Democratic nomination. Their hope now is to send a few delegates to the party's convention and have influence on the party platform.
And if the New York primary is not a success, at least they will have Sunday's benefit at the Synod House of the Cathedral of St. John the Divine, the main feature of which is the silent auction of donated artwork -- some of which is stacked among the campaign literature, ensconced in bubble wrap.
The tamales are for the event, and so is the beer, though Mr. Cosman is trying to convince himself that 10 cases are enough. ''It's a Sunday afternoon,'' he says. ''And it's not the Allman Brothers.''
MR. COSMAN emphasizes that the event is largely due to the work of three women, Katherine Arnoldi, Judy Richheimer and Jane Whitehill. But Ms. Arnoldi leaves a telephone message later in the day to ensure that due credit is given.
''I don't want it to be another case where the women do all the work and the man takes the credit,'' Ms. Arnoldi's message says. She adds: ''We don't want to be nameless. This has to stop somewhere, and it's a long tradition in political campaigns.''
After hanging up, Ms. Arnoldi calls again to reiterate her point: ''I really am determined that the men don't take the credit in this and that the women do get the credit.''
Consider it done.
All in all, the New York City Friends of Kucinich seem to be just that: friends. Volunteers saunter in to collect more campaign literature, or to chat about next week's rallies, including a march through Harlem and a motorcade through Staten Island.
A tall man with a bicycle helmet appears at the door to pick up Kucinich literature with which to festoon SoHo. His name is George Millenbach, and he is concerned.
''He's got to show up once before March 2,'' Mr. Millenbach says.
''We're doing the best we can,'' Mr. Locker responds.
The volunteer nods, but still... ''He's going to Massachusetts!'' he says. ''You know?''
About New York
