In the end, the dream for the Chicago Cubs is for Greg Maddux, the newly signed free agent now in his twilight as a twirler, to improve on that foul ball.
The notorious foul ball, that is, that inspired the newspaper cartoon several months ago of Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein hunkered in a cave alongside a young man wearing a baseball cap, with bin Laden looking quizzically at the guy, and Hussein explaining, ''He's that Cubs fan.''
It was that Cubs fan, Steve Bartman, who was shamelessly reviled by his fellow Cubs rooters when he grabbed at a foul ball that might have otherwise been caught by left fielder Moises Alou, and wasn't, in the eighth inning of the sixth game of the National League Championship Series last October, and led to a big rally by the Florida Marlins, and the collapse of the Cubs. The Cubs fell one game short of the World Series, after having led the Marlins, three games to one. The Cubs haven't been in a World Series since about the time the United States declared victory over Japan. As for the last time the Cubs won the World Series, we're talking closer to the Civil War.
Many feel that given the Cubs' history, they just can't reach baseball heaven. It would be alien to nature. The planet would stop spinning on its axis. A cow would jump over the moon.
But so much for the gloom-and-doomers.
One foul ball doesn't make a season, of course, but one sagacious, potent and experienced pitcher, especially one who set a record last season by winning 15 or more games for the 16th consecutive season, may well be a different story. Even if he's 38 and entering his 19th season in the major leagues.
''Thirty-seven,'' Maddux said yesterday in the Cubs' training facility here, where he has rejoined the team he pitched for in the first seven seasons of his career. He smiled that ironic, impish smile. ''I've got time to be 38.'' Yes, April 14.
''Well, there's always a question when a pitcher's 38 -- or 37,'' said Billy Williams, a hitting instructor and Hall of Fame outfielder for the Cubs. ''But he has been such an intelligent pitcher -- and he's not a guy who tries to blow everything by hitters -- that he's preserved his arm.''
Steve Stone, a Cubs television analyst and former Cy Young award winner, said: ''I remember watching a game on television some time ago and Maddux got a first strike on 23 consecutive batters. That means he was ahead in the count right away, and had the hitters hitting his pitches, instead of struggling.''
''Now,'' Maddux said, ''people ask me, 'Why didn't I have a better year last year?' Well, I won 16 games. So what they say goes in one ear and out the other.''
He added that Roger Clemens, for example, at age 41, ''throws hard, but he used to throw harder; you make your adjustments, you adapt.'' And 41-year-old Jamie Moyer, who throws more with brains than BB's, as does Maddux, won 21 games for Seattle last season.
Is he, though, the same pitcher he was before the 1996 World Series, when Yankees Manager Joe Torre said: ''Greg Maddux is an artist. When you swing at one of his pitches, it's a ball, and when you don't, it's a strike.''
True, Maddux had a 16-11 record last season, and he also had a 3.89 earned run average, his highest since 1987, when he was 6-14 with a 5.61 E.R.A. in his first full season with the Cubs. Though he was never a power pitcher, he had such good control that, as Matt Clement, one of the Cubs' current starters said: ''He never makes a mistake with a ball over the plate. It's amazing. It's always on the corners. He was that way last season, too.''
Maddux -- who still looks in some ways like ''your friendly neighborhood paper boy,'' a phrase that Paul Sullivan of The Chicago Tribune used to describe him when he was a 20-year-old rookie in 1986 -- pondered the Torre remark.
''Maybe not as often,'' he said. ''But I've got stuff to work on this spring. And if you do the right things mechanically, the ball will go where you're aiming it. It has to.''
The Cubs have one of the most formidable pitching staffs in major league baseball, and this was before the arrival of Maddux. With the team's young, talented arms, particularly those of Kerry Wood and Mark Prior -- the two who started the Cubs' last two losing games of last season -- Maddux is expected to be a strong, steadying and educational influence.
''But I came here to pitch, not necessarily to coach,'' Maddux said. Still, he is known for his generosity in sharing his knowledge with young pitchers. It was said that when Maddux was with the Braves for the past 11 seasons it was impossible to drive through Atlanta without learning how to throw a changeup.
To these eyes, Maddux has been the Larry Bird of baseball, unprepossessing-appearing until you had to go one-on-one with him, and then there was no bottom to his bag of wiles and talents.
The fans perched on those rooftops across from Wrigley Field, among others in Chicago, can hardly wait for this season and its great expectations.
Yes, optimism, and the inevitable shipwreck, have been the hallmarks for Cubs fans for much of the last century, But now, in the dreams of many, the cow indeed appears poised to make that leap over the moon.
Sports of The Times
