Minnesota and Wisconsin will ask other states to join them in screening online drugstores in Canada in a move to counter warnings from the pharmaceutical industry and the Food and Drug Administration that imported prescription drugs could be unsafe.
Gov. Tim Pawlenty of Minnesota and Gov. James E. Doyle of Wisconsin will raise the issue of state inspections of online pharmacies at a meeting of governors on Tuesday in Washington.
After the two governors met this week, Governor Pawlenty said in a statement, ''It makes sense that we should look for ways to work together and cooperate, particularly when it comes to monitoring and inspecting the safety of Canadian pharmacies on our Web sites.''
Officials from Minnesota and Wisconsin have already begun inspecting online pharmacies in Canada, and Minnesota earlier this month posted the names of two approved suppliers in Calgary and Vancouver on a state Web site that informs consumers about low-cost medications.
Wisconsin plans to have a Web site of its own operating in the next week or two, said Helene Nelson, the state's health and family services secretary, who led visits to three drugstores in Canada this week. While the federal government is trying to undercut the idea that Canada's less expensive drugs are safe and effective, Ms. Nelson said, her visit had been reassuring. ''We felt really good about what we saw in general,'' she said.
Many drugs are considerably cheaper in Canada, because the government controls the prices. Importation of prescription drugs into the United States is illegal, but until recently the Food and Drug Administration turned a blind eye to imports of small amounts for personal use.
According to a recent Ipsos-Insight survey, about 2 percent of Americans buy their prescription drugs in Canada or Mexico. The trade with Canada is estimated at about $700 million a year.
The F.D.A. commissioner, Dr. Mark B. McClellan, told the Canadian government this month that the United States had ''very real patient safety concerns'' about online pharmacies.
''We very much need your assistance in assuring that appropriate inspections of these pharmacies are conducted and that enforcement actions are taken, to prevent the growth of unsafe practices,'' Dr. McClellan said in a letter to Diane Gorman, a senior health official in Ottawa.
Jirina Vlk, a spokeswoman for Canada's federal health agency, Health Canada, said the department was still reviewing Dr. McClellan's request. The Canadians so far have brushed aside the F.D.A.'s concerns, saying no evidence of unsafe practices or drugs, or lax regulation had been presented.
But in his latest letter, Dr. McClellan cited 32 shortcomings uncovered by Minnesota's inspections of eight online drugstores in Canada. While endorsing the two pharmacies in Calgary and Vancouver, the Minnesota report, which was made public, said that at other locations, for example, labels were not properly attached to containers, a technician rather than a pharmacist was allowed to enter prescriptions into a computer, and child-resistant caps were not used.
Peter Wyckoff, executive director of the Minnesota Senior Federation's metropolitan region in St. Paul, described the shortcomings as insignificant. The federation, a nonprofit organization, began a program last year to help older people buy drugs from Canada.
''It's not like the drug is contaminated or illicit or counterfeit,'' Mr. Wyckoff said. ''Nothing like that came up.''
Instead, Mr. Wyckoff said, ''The trust we need to have in the F.D.A. to look after the interests of American consumers rather than the profits of the drug industry has been badly jeopardized by this whole hassle.''
Andy Troszok, a vice president at Total Care Pharmacy in Calgary, one of the online drugstores recommended by Minnesota, said that over the last two years the pharmacies in Canada had proposed that the F.D.A. do its own inspections.
''The F.D.A. cannot cite a single incident of an American patient being harmed by coming to Canada,'' Mr. Troszok said. He added that the Wisconsin inspection group, which included pharmacists and lawyers, spent four hours on Total Care's premises this week.
Ms. Nelson, the Wisconsin health secretary, raised the possibility of using a service like the Internet Mailorder Pharmacy Accreditation Commission, a group set up a year ago in Manchester, Vt. For a fee of $21,000, the commission will measure an online pharmacy's performance against 92 criteria.
Dana Noble, the commission's executive director, said that one pharmacy - CanadaDrugs.com of Winnipeg - had so far been accredited, and that another four applications were in the pipeline.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
