Amid the crowded field of Republicans vying for a seat in the Senate here, Jim Oberweis seems a most unlikely insurgent. He is a wealthy supporter of President Bush who favors pinstriped suits, tax cuts and a constitutional amendment blocking same-sex marriage.
But in recent weeks, Mr. Oberweis, a plainspoken dairy owner, has become a leader in a widening conservative revolt against the president's sweeping plan to grant temporary legal status to millions of illegal immigrants.
''The president's plan is just plain wrong,'' Mr. Oberweis says in a radio advertisement and at public appearances that have drawn hundreds of supporters to his campaign. ''I want to be the voice for Illinois voters to tell the president we think illegal immigration cannot be rewarded with amnesty.''
Mr. Oberweis is a symbol of a simmering conservative uprising against one of the president's biggest initiatives. One month after Mr. Bush promised the most comprehensive overhaul of immigration law in nearly two decades, opposition to his plan is mounting among conservative Republicans vying for votes in House and Senate races in Illinois, North Carolina, California, Kansas and elsewhere.
With his plan, Mr. Bush hopes to revamp an immigration system widely viewed as broken and to re-establish his credentials as a compassionate conservative -- particularly with Hispanic and swing voters -- at the start of an election year. But in debates, campaign stops and interviews, some Republican candidates have sharply criticized his position as they seek to tap into conservative anxiety over the proposal.
The plan has left the party divided, much like the growing deficit has. Some Republicans -- backed by some Hispanic constituents -- praise the president for trying to make it easier for businesses to employ illegal immigrants for low-wage jobs that Americans are reluctant to take. Others argue that the plan is tantamount to an amnesty for lawbreakers. The issue is so complicated and divisive that Republicans in Congress now say it is unlikely that legislation supporting the president's plan will be introduced this year.
Senator Saxby Chambliss, the Georgia Republican who is chairman of the Senate subcommittee on immigration, said he believed Congress would make headway this session on other proposals guiding the hiring of foreign farm workers. He said he hoped consensus on Mr. Bush's plan could be reached ''within the next couple of calendar years.''
But Mr. Chambliss, who supports Mr. Bush's broad proposal, acknowledged that the plan had already become a lightning rod in some Republican contests around the country. ''I've seen it in the Georgia primary,'' he said in a telephone interview this week. ''The candidates there are critical of the president on this issue.
''You've seen a lot of the Republican base has gotten all excited and all negative toward the president's proposal for the wrong reason,'' Mr. Chambliss said. ''They really need to read what the president said. The president does not favor amnesty. He's been very clear on that.''
In a Senate hearing last week, Bush administration officials said that illegal immigrants living in the country as of Jan. 7 -- a group estimated at about eight million or more -- would be eligible for temporary work permits for an initial period of three years, if they can show they have jobs and if their employers certify that Americans cannot be found for the jobs.
The officials said the permits could be renewed several times and that the workers could apply for permanent residency without leaving the United States. By legalizing the status of millions of immigrants who officials say are peaceful and hard working, immigration agents will be able to focus on foreigners who pose terrorist or criminal threats.
Mr. Bush has also promised to stiffen enforcement of immigration laws and to increase the number of people who can obtain permanent residency status.
Vernon Robinson, a Republican contender for a House seat in North Carolina, said that smelled like amnesty. He said his supporters wanted illegal immigrants deported and American troops stationed on the border with Mexico, particularly after the 9/11 attacks.
''There's a major disconnect between rank-and-file Walmart-Kmart Republicans and the party leadership on this issue,'' said Mr. Robinson, who has raised more money than any other Republican in his race.
Numbers USA, a policy group that favors reducing immigration, has identified about a dozen races where immigration is an important campaign issue among Republican contenders. Many Hispanic leaders have also criticized Mr. Bush's plan for not going far enough. It is unclear whether the issue will be a deciding factor for voters or whether it will dampen enthusiasm for Mr. Bush among conservatives.
Terry Holt, a spokesman for Mr. Bush's re-election campaign, said he believed conservatives would recognize that the president has remained faithful to his key beliefs. ''Though there are debates about one issue or the other, on balance the president has stayed true to conservative principles and conservatives respect the president for leading on principle and attacking serious problems whatever they might be,'' he said.
Mark Krikorian, of the Center for Immigration Studies, which seeks to limit immigration, countered that conservative voters, already doubtful about the president's commitment to fiscal austerity, might stay home on Election Day or vote for lawmakers opposed to Mr. Bush's plan.
The debate is boiling in conservative circles. In January, National Review magazine ran a cover story on the president's plan titled: ''Amnesty, Again.''
This month, The Wall Street Journal published dueling pieces on its opinion pages. Fifteen Republicans including Grover Norquist, Newt Gingrich and Jack Kemp hailed the president's plan as ''a humane, orderly, and economically sensible approach to migration.''
Nine conservative stalwarts, including David Keene, Paul Weyrich and Phyllis Schlafly, responded, ''Everyone with any common sense knows that it will only encourage a new wave of illegal aliens.''
In California, where Republican candidates have opposed the plan in two races, the Republican Party chairman, Duf Sundheim, said he believed the president would ultimately bring people around.
Kris Kobach, a former Justice Department official campaigning for a House seat in Kansas, is doubtful. He says the 9/11 attacks left Republicans more concerned about immigration than in the 1990's when Patrick J. Buchanan criticized immigration to improve his presidential prospects. ''When Buchanan was pushing this issue, it had a nativist and protectionist flavor,'' said Mr. Kobach, who developed the federal program that required Arab and Muslim visitors to register with the government. ''Today it's about national security and law enforcement.''
Here in Illinois, Mr. Oberweis is the only Republican candidate in his race who has made opposition to the president's plan a prominent part of his message. That stance, he says, has cost him some support.
In 2002, House Speaker J. Dennis Hastert, Republican of Illinois, supported Mr. Oberweis's unsuccessful bid for the Senate. This time around, Mr. Hastert declined to endorse him, saying he ran a poorly managed campaign two years ago. Mr. Hastert also criticized Mr. Oberweis's decision to challenge the immigration plan.
That has not stopped Mr. Oberweis from calling for a crackdown on illegal immigration. Next week, he plans to release a television advertisement on the subject.
''I've always had a tendency to say what's on my mind,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: HOUSE AND SENATE RACES
