In a day of courtroom histrionics, a central witness for the prosecution in the Martha Stewart trial yesterday apparently reversed her earlier testimony about Ms. Stewart, and then made a partial reversal of that. By the day's end, weary prosecutors rested their case and defense lawyers began presenting witnesses of their own.
The witness, Mariana Pasternak, testified Thursday that while they were traveling in Mexico in late 2001, Ms. Stewart had told her about sales of shares in ImClone Systems by members of the Waksal family and later said, ''Isn't it nice to have brokers who tell you those things?''
But yesterday, Ms. Pasternak caused a stir by admitting during questioning by Ms. Stewart's lawyer that Ms. Stewart might not have uttered the words about brokers.
''I do not know whether that statement was made by Martha or was a thought in my mind,'' she told the court. She described the memory as ''a string of words that I recall.'' Later, however, when questioned further by a prosecutor, she said she believed ''that Martha said it.''
Ms. Pasternak's initial story appeared to support the testimony of the government's chief witness, Douglas Faneuil, a former stockbroker's assistant, who says he told Ms. Stewart about the Waksals moments before she sold nearly 4,000 ImClone shares.
Ms. Stewart is being tried with her former Merrill Lynch stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic, on charges of conspiracy and obstruction of justice. She is separately charged with false statements and securities fraud, while he faces charges of false statements, false documents and perjury. It is not clear whether either of the defendants will testify.
Mr. Faneuil, whose testimony concluded nearly two weeks ago, continued to haunt the proceedings as two of his friends testified that he was ''upset'' in January 2002, a few days after Ms. Stewart's ImClone trade, and that he had told them about the circumstances of her trade.
''He had been contacted by the S.E.C. about a sale that had taken place at the end of the year,'' one of the friends, Zeva Bellel, told the jury. After being ''bombarded by calls'' on the day of the trade, ''he succeeded in getting his boss on the phone.'' He was told, ''Please get Martha Stewart on the phone and tell her about the Waksals selling their shares,'' Ms. Bellel said.
That was on Jan. 4, Ms. Bellel testified. A day or two later, before she flew home to Paris, she said she spoke with Mr. Faneuil again. ''He felt totally abandoned,'' she said, adding that he believed that he was being pushed to tell a story to investigators ''that was totally inaccurate.''
Putting their first witness on the stand, Mr. Bacanovic's lawyers elicited testimony about his style as a stockbroker from one of his major clients, Kenneth Raiman. Mr. Raiman, a medical instruments executive from Piedmont, Calif., told the court that he had known Mr. Bacanovic for more than 10 years and considered him ''always available, even when he was out of town.'' Mr. Raiman said he typically got upset with his brokers, but added: ''I've never been upset with him.''
And in a statement that was elicited to support the way that Ms. Stewart's ImClone trade was handled, Mr. Raiman also said that he ''never gave Peter discretion to sell on his own,'' requiring him instead to telephone him before taking any action.
Ms. Stewart has said that she and Mr. Bacanovic agreed to sell her ImClone shares if the price fell below $60 a share, and he has told investigators that he agreed to ''watch the stock'' for her. On the day she sold her shares, he told Mr. Faneuil to telephone her, Mr. Faneuil has said. Mr. Faneuil eventually spoke to Ms. Stewart before her trade. Merrill Lynch executives have told the court that such informal trading arrangements were not permitted.
Both sides argued for more than an hour yesterday over the way the charges will be presented to the jury after the defense concludes its portion of the case, particularly the securities fraud charge against Ms. Stewart. The judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, kept the jury out of the courtroom while lawyers tried to show whether there had been enough evidence presented on that crime and others. The arguments took place after the prosecution's final witness left the courtroom.
Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, insisted that even if, theoretically, Ms. Stewart had lied about the reasons for her stock trade, she did not lie about whether she received information about ImClone from Samuel D. Waksal, then the company's chief executive, who was also a close friend. The prosecution contends that in proclaiming her innocence, she was trying to prop up the price of shares in her own company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia.
Alluding to public statements made by Ms. Stewart in June 2002, Mr. Morvillo told the judge: ''The issue was not whether Martha Stewart had had a $60 agreement with Peter Bacanovic. The issue was, Did she trade on insider information because Sam Waksal tipped her? The primary thrust of the statement she makes on June 12 is, I was not tipped by Sam Waksal.''
Judge Cedarbaum seemed to have a hard time accepting that theory. ''I would like you to give me a single case that says a corroborating lie is not material,'' she told him.
Mr. Morvillo also argued that when Ms. Stewart made those statements about the ImClone trade, she was ''on the horns of a dilemma.'' An industry conference on June 19, 2002, made it impossible for her not to both discuss her company's business and assert that her trade was ''entirely lawful,'' something that Mr. Morvillo said she had to do, or ''invidious inferences would have been drawn in the media.''
Judge Cedarbaum said she would rule next week on the motions to dismiss all or part of some of the charges.
Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  An article in Business Day on Saturday about the trial of Martha Stewart and her former stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic, misspelled the surname of a defense witness, a client of Mr. Bacanovic. He is Kenneth Rainin, not Raiman.
