Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said yesterday that Senator John Edwards was wrong when he suggested on Thursday that Republicans were holding their convention in New York to exploit the Sept. 11 tragedy, and that the city's economy was a shambles.
But Mayor Bloomberg, a Republican, also softened his earlier criticism of Senator Edwards, a Democratic presidential candidate from North Carolina, saying that his comments were ''just political verbiage'' and that he did not hold them against the senator.
''I guess I'd say cut the guy some slack,'' the mayor said. ''It was just the normal political talk that nobody takes very seriously. The truth of the matter is, he was wrong. The city is doing very well.''
Mayor Bloomberg, speaking on his weekly radio program on WABC-AM, cited the city's low commercial vacancy rate, and escalating real estate prices in all five boroughs as evidence of its economic resurgence. He also noted that Battery Park City, which is near the World Trade Center site, is almost fully occupied.
Still, the mayor noted that as someone who has been in the political spotlight himself, he could sympathize with Mr. Edwards and other candidates who end up saying things that are ''probably not well thought out and planned.''
''You just say them, you have to say something,'' he said. ''I'm sympathetic to that. I've done that myself. I don't think he really meant anything bad about New York City. The fact of the matter is that 9/11 is part of our heritage now and you cannot escape the fact that this war started here on the streets.''
But just a day earlier, when asked by reporters to respond to Mr. Edwards's comments, Mayor Bloomberg had described them as ''preposterous.''
''New York is the world's second home and for anybody to say that, I guess he just hasn't been here,'' he said of Mr. Edwards. ''We'd love to have him come here and spend some money and see just what goes on in the streets of New York where crime is down, welfare rolls are down, jobs are coming in, people are building.''
Mayor Bloomberg, who was a Democrat until he switched parties to run for mayor in 2001, said that Democratic leaders had also expressed interest in holding their convention in the city but ''wanted an exclusive.'' He said that he told the Democrats, as well as the Republicans, that the city was not going to turn down any business.
''I actually thought we would get both of them,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''But it's a little bit disingenuous to say that the Republicans are exploiting New York. The Republicans are here because it's a great venue to get a message out, to pull people together, and I think the Democrats would have been wise to come here and do exactly the same thing.''
