A federal judge on Friday acquitted a 29-year-old American who had been accused of participating in a Virginia ''jihad network'' and asserted that prosecutors had failed to produce sufficient evidence of wrongdoing during two weeks of trial.
The ruling by the judge, Leonie M. Brinkema, which came after the prosecution rested, freed a jubilant Caliph Basha Ibn Abdur-Raheem, a onetime office clerk from Falls Church who had been charged with participating in a paramilitary training group linked to Lashkar-e-Taiba.
Lashkar-e-Taiba, which has been designated a terrorist organization by the United States, is dedicated to fighting for Muslim control of Kashmir, the region disputed by India and Pakistan.
''Even drawing inferences in favor of the government, I find it is insufficient'' evidence, Judge Brinkema said as she dismissed all charges against Mr. Abdur-Raheem.
Judge Brinkema also dismissed some charges against the other three defendants on trial in the case. But she left terrorism-related and weapons charges against them. Still, defense lawyers said her actions raised questions about the strength of the prosecution's evidence.
''I think the government thought they had uncovered a very large-scale terrorist cell when they first announced the indictments,'' Christopher Amolsch, Mr. Abdur-Raheem's lawyer, said. ''I think it's turning out to be weaker than what they thought.''
Gordon D. Kromberg, an assistant United States attorney who has been a lead prosecutor on the case, declined to comment.
Eleven men, nine of them Americans, were indicted in the case last June, when Paul J. McNulty, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of Virginia, said that they had ''met, plotted and recruited for violent jihad'' in suburban Washington.
Six men pleaded guilty last year and are cooperating with prosecutors. The four defendants who have been on trial in Alexandria waived their rights to a jury trial, arguing that an impartial panel could not be found in the region. In addition to Mr. Abdur-Raheem, the defendants are Hammad Abdur-Raheem (no relation), Seifullah Chapman and Masoud Ahmad Khan. The 11th and final defendant, Sabri Benkhal, is scheduled for trial next month.
The defendants have argued they were victims of anti-Muslim fervor after the 2001 terrorist attacks.
Prosecutors asserted that the defendants played paintball in the Fredericksburg area to prepare for combat against Indian forces in Kashmir. Some of the defendants have been charged under a law that bars Americans from waging war against countries that are at peace with the United States. The men are also charged with hoarding weapons and ammunition as part of what the prosecutors said was a conspiracy.
The prosecution has produced evidence that Mr. Khan and Mr. Chapman, as well as some of the men who pleaded guilty, visited Lashkar training camps in Pakistan. But defense lawyers say Mr. Khan and Mr. Chapman never made it to Kashmir.
Judge Brinkema, who was appointed by President Clinton, said evidence against Mr. Abdur-Raheem suggested he had a tangential role at most. She said there was no evidence that he had taught others to use firearms, had tried to recruit fighters or had done much of anything ''to further the goals of the conspiracy.''
''He's just an ordinary run-of-the-mill paintball player,'' Judge Brinkema said.
Mr. Kromberg disagreed, arguing that Mr. Abdur-Raheem trained actively with the group and was at meetings where plans to fight with Lashkar were discussed. ''He wasn't a mere bystander,'' he said.
After his acquittal, Mr. Abdur-Raheem was hugged by tearful supporters outside the courtroom. ''All praise to God,'' he said. ''We didn't do anything wrong.''
Asked about the men who pleaded guilty, he replied, ''They should have stayed strong. The government just pressured them.''
The trial is scheduled to resume on Monday.
