Chinese leaders, concerned that Hong Kong is becoming difficult to control, are making clear that they will decide who is sufficiently patriotic to govern Hong Kong and how soon democracy can be introduced there.
The issue is developing into a stern test of Beijing's ability to manage Hong Kong's six million people, many of whom have been demanding a greater say in choosing their own leaders.
Hong Kong, which under the terms of its return to Chinese rule in 1997 was to enjoy a high level of autonomy for 50 years, had been widely viewed as politically quiescent and concerned mainly with its economic well-being. But recent popular protests there have challenged the notion that Beijing can easily restrain the pace of democratic change.
In a barrage of statements in China's state-controlled news media that began Thursday night and are scheduled to continue into next week, Beijing is stressing that only people it considers patriots will be allowed to take positions of authority in Hong Kong, a former British colony.
Some central government officials have also said that popular demands to freely elect a chief executive in 2007, the earliest date permitted under the territory's Basic Law, or mini-constitution, are unrealistic. One prominent Chinese expert on Hong Kong affairs, Xu Chongde, said the political situation there was ''too unsettled'' to allow substantial democratic reforms in the near future.
''In the six years since Hong Kong returned to Chinese control there has been one problem after another there,'' said Mr. Xu, a former Chinese parliamentary official who helped draft the Basic Law, in an interview. ''So this is not the right time to rush into something new. The political changes have to be done well, and this means step by step.''
China has been struggling to contain pressure for new political rights in Hong Kong since some 500,000 people took to the streets last summer to protest a proposed new national security law. The march created a swell of support for Hong Kong pro-democracy political parties and undermined political groups closely allied with Beijing, including the territory's beleaguered chief executive, Tung Chee-hwa.
Hong Kong has remained peaceful, and some Chinese officials hope the demands for early elections will fade as its economy improves. But at a time when Beijing is also nervous about the outcome of crucial elections in Taiwan and simmering discontent in parts of the mainland, officials are eager to avoid a struggle over elections for Hong Kong's chief executive and legislature, in 2007 and 2008, respectively.
After years of speaking mainly through Mr. Tung, a former shipping tycoon selected by China and its allies in Hong Kong, Beijing has begun issuing direct warnings that the debate over Hong Kong's political future will ultimately be decided by Beijing. State news media have also insisted that future leaders will have to meet a test of patriotism.
Half of the front page of the People's Daily on Friday was an excerpt from a 1984 speech by the late Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping. It was Deng who first said that Hong Kong people be allowed to run Hong Kong, provided they loved the motherland. An editorial in the paper gave Beijing's definition of a patriot: anyone deemed to ''wholeheartedly support the motherland's restoration of its sovereignty over Hong Kong.''
''Anyone in the ranks of those governing Hong Kong, or anybody who wishes to join these ranks, should inspect themselves using this criterion,'' the editorial said.
An internal memo on news coverage of Hong Kong given to the mainland's news media on Friday, indicated that Beijing intends to publish a series of statements on the topic through the middle of next week.
Yeung Sum, the chairman of the Hong Kong Democratic Party, the leading opposition group, said that while Beijing had been making its views clearer, he believed that it could still be persuaded to hold open elections for the chief executive and legislature in a few years.
He said the standard of patriotism laid down by Deng, and reiterated by current leaders, is more generous than some pro-Beijing politicians in Hong Kong had intimated recently. He said his party clearly qualified as patriotic.
''There are some pro-Beijing people in Hong Kong who would like to exclude us, but I do not believe the statements from Beijing today are intended to antagonize,'' Mr. Yeung said. ''I am confident that the new leaders of China will respect their obligations under the Basic Law and allow universal suffrage.''
But some Chinese officials and experts on Hong Kong affairs believe that Beijing does not plan to move quickly in that direction. They say that Beijing believes it has the authority to determine when and how broadly Hong Kong democratizes, and stress that Beijing's timetable is much more extended than some in Hong Kong hope -- perhaps 20 or 30 years instead of 3 or 4.
Wen Wei Po, a Beijing-controlled newspaper in Hong Kong, warned this week that China's central government had the power to dissolve Hong Kong's legislature, a thinly veiled threat that it could take direct control if it judged the political system there out of control.
On Friday, the Hong Kong edition of the official China Daily said in a blunt editorial that some in Hong Kong's democracy camp were insufficiently patriotic and unfit to rule.
''Judging with this criterion, some people in the S.A.R. who are currently in positions of power do not meet this prerequisite to be rulers of Hong Kong,'' it said, referring to Hong Kong's designation as a Special Administrative Region of China.
Mr. Xu, the former parliamentary official, said he believed that Hong Kong had become restive mainly because of economic issues. Addressing those concerns is the solution to maintaining stability, he said.
''There have been some problems with the economy, and these things are being addressed,'' he said. ''On the other hand, there is not much that is wrong with the political system, so it would be a mistake to mix up the two.''
