Shane D. Mickelson, a 31-year-old helicopter pilot, wrapped up the details of the night shift as the sun rose over a patch of Colorado scrubland intended by the Army to mimic the deserts of Iraq. Beside him, Carl Tafoya, 56, the day-side pilot, worked his own list, making sure Black Hawk No. 308 was good to go for another day of air ambulance rescue training.
Rhythm and routine meshed as the two men, both chief warrant officers in the Wyoming Army National Guard, labored in silence.
But there was more going on here than procedures and safety checks.
More than three decades ago, Mr. Tafoya flew with Mr. Mickelson's father in Vietnam, and now, as the Wyoming Guard's 1022nd Medical Company prepares to ship out to the Middle East for active duty in a very different conflict, the circle that began back then has continued unbroken in another generation. [The unit left Fort Carson on Thursday night.]
''He told me to stick by Carl,'' Mr. Mickelson said of the parting advice from his father, David. ''He said Carl would keep me out of trouble.''
Helicopter duty, especially for medical units like the 1022nd, where a red cross on the fuselage signals noncombatant status and the rules of war are supposed to protect the souls within, is one of the most dangerous jobs in Iraq. And in sharp contrast to the Vietnam years, when pilots like Mr. Tafoya were full-time members of the military and a berth in the National Guard meant stateside safety, Guard units are filling the breach in Iraq as the first wave of active-duty soldiers returns home.
Since Nov. 1, 53 American soldiers have died in helicopter accidents and attacks, about 29 percent of all American casualties during that period. Since formal hostilities ended on May 1, about one in seven deaths among American forces has involved a helicopter, according to an analysis by The New York Times.
Fort Carson, a 216-square-mile expanse of bunch grass and pinyon pine near Colorado Springs, is one of a handful of big Army bases around the country from which these crews embark. Essentially, they come here to train, though perhaps ''polish'' is a better word. Through about a week of round-the-clock drills, the four-person teams -- pilot, co-pilot, crew chief and medic -- work out the kinks. Forced landings and damage assessments from simulated rifle attacks are part of the drill. Practice with 9-millimeter sidearms, carried for personal protection on the ground while working among the wounded, has been stepped up in the last year.
But the commanders of the 1022nd say they have an even stronger card to play in preparing the company: firsthand knowledge about what it is like to be shot at. Four of the unit's 16 pilots, including Mr. Tafoya, served in Vietnam. Others flew over Iraq during the Persian Gulf war in 1991.
It is a pool of wisdom, the officers say, that is as deep as any they have ever seen, not about killing the enemy but about evading threats and getting home safely. In the classroom and the cockpit, company members say, generations have melded, surrogate fathers bonding with surrogate sons, veterans with rookies.
''If you're taking fire, this is what you need to do, this is what worked and what didn't,'' said Maj. Stacy Roth, the company commander, referring to the lessons his veteran pilots impart. ''They can convey their knowledge and their experience to us and we try to use that as we can. It's not something you can read in a book.''
Over two days with the 1022nd, the same thought emerged again and again in conversations from the mess hall to the maintenance hangar: Medical units are supposed to be protected under the Geneva Convention by their very mission of mercy, but in Iraq the rules no longer seem to count. A red cross is not an inviolate shield.
''I'd trade those red crosses for a pair of M-60 machine guns,'' said Frank Buzzard, 39, a chief warrant officer and a pilot from Cheyenne, Wyo., who is a veteran of the gulf war. ''I'd be glad to do it.''
At Fort Carson, the Army testing program, which helicopter companies must pass through to be certified for duty, is intended to prepare each unit for its specific mission. For the 1022nd that means, for example, drills involving a combination of roadside bombs, truck rollovers and sniper fire. Night rescues are conducted in darkness, using night-vision goggles.
Other wrinkles are introduced at the last second to add more chaos. One victim on the ground is often designated as ''the crazy one,'' a demanding, uncooperative patient whose job is to distract the medic from more serious cases or from dangers lurking in the field. Always, the clock is ticking through the ''golden hour'': a 60-minute window when medical intervention can raise a victim's chances of survival.
''One thing we try to stress is that Murphy is never on your side,'' said Lt. Col. Eduardo Gutierrez, the commander of the testing unit, referring to the Murphy of Murphy's Law. ''The other thing we teach is that the bad guy gets a vote.''
But the danger of duty in Iraq is only one of the stresses that the 60-odd members of the 1022nd say they face.
Hardly any belong to the regular Army. Mr. Mickelson works as a tax assessor in Fort Collins, Colo., when not on active duty. Major Roth is a physical therapist. One soldier is a schoolteacher, another a Postal Service letter carrier. Mr. Tafoya flies a helicopter for a hospital in Greeley, Colo. And the military's demands on them are increasing.
About 30 percent of the first-wave soldiers in Iraq last year were National Guard members. That proportion is expected to rise to 40 percent or more this spring. Many in the 1022nd say they are reaching the limits of what they feel they can give.
The unit was first called up last March but stayed in the United States. It was called up again in December for up to 18 months of duty overseas. Training at Fort Carson was abbreviated because of the rush to replace a returning air ambulance unit, officers say.
Staff Sgt. James K. Kelly, 39, a medic from Butte, Mont., is among those rethinking their futures. He has been in the National Guard for 12 years and he said he still believed in the mission. But between the first call-up in March and the second in December, he was home only a few weeks last fall.
''I'm going to re-evaluate,'' Sergeant Kelly said, sitting on the edge of his cot on a recent morning, sipping coffee in the darkened hangar office that serves as a barracks. He talked about his daughter, Madisen, who is 9.
She does not understand why she should have to do her homework, he said. Sergeant Kelly had spent long minutes on the phone with her the night before, his voice alternately honeyed and firm as he made the case for school. ''She's having trouble with spelling,'' he said later.
The company's veterans and the testing officers said their main message was that the way to keep safe is by focusing on the small, present-tense details of helicopter flying, ingrained by training and repetition.
''It's hard to describe,'' Mr. Tafoya said, talking about the experience of being under fire. ''I tell the pilots, If it's going to happen, if you should get into contact, it's real, real fast and you're going to have to focus on what your job is and not let the other things distract you -- if you can focus on what you're supposed to be doing, you're way miles ahead.''
Major Roth, the company's commander, said he also depended on his veterans' experience in helping pilots weigh their options in response to threats. He said that if pilots flew at 300 feet, for example, they could be targets of rifles and rocket-propelled grenades. At 3,000 feet, pilots escape those threats but are vulnerable to surface-to-air missiles.
''We want to know what it looks like when somebody is looking back at you and wants to shoot you,'' Major Roth said.
Some of those lessons are harrowing. Brian Prahl, 57, a chief warrant officer, was shot down twice in Vietnam in his one-year tour there.
''I made myself a promise that I'd never get back into a helicopter if I survived that year,'' Mr. Prahl said, standing on the airfield as he prepared for a flight on a recent morning.
The promise lasted seven years, but in the end, he said, he just could not stay away.
