Every year or so the word would start to circulate. Something exciting, something new, possibly even something dangerous was happening downtown on Lafayette Street. Such gossip is lifeblood in the back-fence world of the New York theater, where success is measured as much in buzz as in awards and box-office receipts.
The genesis of this rumor-making activity was the Joseph Papp Public Theater, home to the New York Shakespeare Festival. But it was rare that anyone said, ''Do you know about what's happening at the Public Theater?'' No, more likely, the emphasis would be tellingly different, as in, ''Have you heard what George is up to?''
George was, and is, George C. Wolfe, the brilliant stage director -- arguably the best now working in the American theater -- who for nearly a decade was also the producer of the New York Shakespeare Festival, a post that last week he announced he was leaving.
It's safe to say that powerful leaders in the arts are going to be identified with the institutions they head, becoming human logos of sorts. Joseph Papp -- the colossus of self-promotion who founded the New York Shakespeare Festival in 1954 and created the Public Theater in 1967 -- could certainly say, ''The Public, c'est moi.''
Yet it always seemed easy to separate what Mr. Wolfe was involved in directly from whatever else was going on at the Public. Since whatever else happened to be the vast majority of the shows produced there, this was not necessarily a good thing. A multi-Tony Award winner who directed the epochal Broadway production of Tony Kushner's ''Angels in America,'' Mr. Wolfe the director shone brightly during his time at the Public. The Public Theater itself usually seemed to hang back in the shadows, like the timid offspring of a glamorous star.
Consider the roster of news-generating productions at the Public over the last 10 years, and they almost invariably seem to be all about George. The best Shakespearean production to come out of there in the last 10 years? That would be Mr. Wolfe's bold reconception of ''The Tempest'' as a parable of colonialism. The best musical? No question: ''Bring In da Noise, Bring In da Funk,'' the pulse-racing presentation of African-American history through tap dancing, expertly tailored by Mr. Wolfe in collaboration with Savion Glover.
Best staging of a new drama? Once again, the award goes to Mr. Wolfe, for his sharp-witted, resourceful direction of Suzan-Lori Parks's ''Topdog/Underdog.'' Best valentine to old-style Broadway razzmatazz? Mr. Wolfe's enchanting showcase for that salty trouper Elaine Stritch in her one-woman show. All these productions, by the way, wound up transferring successfully to Broadway, which brings us to the next category.
The most flamboyant failures to come out of the Age of Wolfe? Yes, Mr. Wolfe, in his role as director with a vision, was the shaping force behind those, too: the revival of the vintage wartime frolic ''On the Town'' and the dour Jazz Age fable ''The Wild Party,'' two musicals that bellyflopped on Broadway and that together lost the Public $11 million.
This led to a period of economic turmoil, and an executive director was brought in to oversee the Public's finanical side. The consequent belt tightening included reducing to one from two the number of summer productions of Shakespeare in Central Park, a holy tradition created by Papp. It was rare that all of the Public Theater's five stages were active at the same time. Predictions abounded that Mr. Wolfe's departure was imminent.
But Mr. Wolfe stayed on, although other Public personnel did not. And now he is leaving, appropriately, amid a Georgian symphony of buzz, as his production of ''Caroline, or Change,'' a socially conscious musical by Mr. Kushner and Jeanine Tesori, prepares to open on Broadway. And I'm sure I'm not alone in looking forward to his valedictory production this summer of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' in Central Park.
Yet looking back, my mind goes hazy when I try to think of memorable productions at the Public in which Mr. Wolfe did not have an active hand. Certainly, as a whole, the non-Wolfean shows were an improvement on the often arcane and academic fare staged during the brief, stormy reign of JoAnne Akalaitis, who was picked by Papp to succeed him shortly before his death, but who lasted as artistic director for a mere 20 months.
There's no denying that Mr. Wolfe expanded on Papp's vision of the Public as an artistic melting pot of ethnically varied voices. But only that of Ms. Parks, who won a Pulitzer Prize for ''Topdog/Underdog,'' has had the sort of urgency and clarity that insists it be heard. (Plays by Nilo Cruz, not including his Pulitzer-winning ''Anna in the Tropics,'' were also staged at the Public but caused nary a ripple.)
It seems telling that the new works that generated the most interest -- like the performance artist Danny Hoch's ''Some People'' and Richard Greenberg's ''Take Me Out'' -- were first seen at other theaters. Admittedly, Mike Nichols's star-packed production of Chekhov's ''Seagull'' in Central Park became that summer's glamour ticket. But no previously unknown director made his name at the Public during Mr. Wolfe's time there.
There were occasional flashes of brightness from relatively unknown artists, as in Diana Son's play ''Stop Kiss,'' Karin Coonrod's vigorously unorthodox staging of Shakespeare's ''Henry VI'' plays and, most important, the theatrical journalism of Anna Deveare Smith. But by and large the hottest original young talents on the New York stage were elsewhere, at the Drama Dept., for instance, or the New Group, the Labyrinth Theater Company, the Vineyard Theater and Performance Space 122, among others. (It's encouraging that the Labyrinth has taken up residence at the Public.)
Nor did Shakespeare flourish at the New York Shakespeare Festival, although under Mr. Wolfe it followed through on Papp's ambition to perform every play in the canon. Too often these productions took the already well-worn road of jazzing up Shakespeare with mismatched postmodernist flourishes. (Remember the Vietnam-era ''Troilus and Cressida'' in the park?)
Following a practice that began under Papp, reflecting a celebrity-besotted society, Mr. Wolfe brought in many stars with high Q ratings to try their hands at blank verse. A few acquitted themselves splendidly, like Liev Schreiber in ''Hamlet'' and ''Othello.'' Others -- including Ron Leibman (as Shylock), Julia Stiles (as Viola in ''Twelfth Night''), F. Murray Abraham (as Lear) -- turned in interpretations that became benchmarks in the flattening and mangling of Shakespeare by the talented.
It may be that we ask too much of the Public. Papp had enormous ambitions for the institution he founded, envisioning it as a pulsing, endlessly productive theater mecca along the lines of the National in London. Of course, no American theater has the artistic or financial resources of the National. Yet there were moments, in the 1970's in particular, when the Public exuded an optimistic energy that I associate with the National in its fertile periods.
Thanks in part to Joe's Pub, the delightfully varied cabaret established in 1998, there are still nights when the Public feels like the sort of vibrating, creative hive that the culturally curious in New York live for. And no doubt when and if Mr. Wolfe returns to the Public as a visiting director, the buzz from that hive will increase once again. In the meantime, his successor will need to fill in crucial blanks that were usually camouflaged only by the charismatic directorial talents of Mr. Wolfe himself.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
