WHEN Sílvio Botelho de Almeida was 13, he became the apprentice of a local designer of Carnival masks. His father, Alvaro, an appliance salesman, wanted his three children to become doctors or lawyers, and was not pleased.
''I didn't take drugs or drink, but he would still mock and ridicule and punish me,'' Mr. Botelho recalled ruefully. ''He thought I would never be able to make a living from Carnival. He used to say to me, 'Are you planning on eating only once a year?' ''
Today eating is hardly a problem. Mr. Botelho designs giant puppets, some standing more than 20 feet high and weighing more than 60 pounds, that are so popular he gets requests for them year-round. His fame for this elaborate craftsmanship has spread throughout Brazil and beyond.
He has been invited to show his work in Argentina, Cuba, France and the United States. At this year's Carnival, which starts officially at midnight on Feb. 21, Mr. Botelho, now 47, is commemorating the 30th anniversary of the creation of the first of his startlingly lifelike satirical puppets, ''The Afternoon Kid,'' still his personal favorite.
In turn, local Carnival neighborhood groups are celebrating him, both for his contribution to Brazilian popular culture and for helping make Carnival in this languid city of 375,000 people, on the northeast coast of Brazil, one of the best known in a nation that adores the annual pre-Lenten festival like no other.
''For as long as I can remember, I was always fascinated by Carnival and the playful force it embodies,'' Mr. Botelho said in an interview during his harried final week before the revelry began. ''Even as a little boy, the adrenaline would rise and the mere thought of Carnival would take form and force in my head. So I knew that I had something to give and had to have a life that was related in some way to Carnival.''
That childhood, he recalled, ''was very humble, or to put it more bluntly, poor.'' But poverty bred in him an ingenuity for expression with simple materials.
''My amusements as a kid were to play with things I found and recycled,'' he said, ''and so I always felt connected in some way to arts and crafts, whether it was drawing on paper or making sculptures out of pieces of wood or clay.''
BUT to please his father, Mr. Botelho said, he took the entrance exam for medical school anyway, five times in fact. He hoped to be a plastic surgeon, if only because he perceived a similarity to the craft he so loved, but he could never score quite high enough to be admitted.
''I tried to become a plastic surgeon, and now I'm a plastic artist,'' he said, laughing. ''Instead of operating on people's faces, I transform them into papier-mâché, and so far, no one has complained.''
Far from complaining, they line up for orders. This year there is a backlog because the weather has been unusually humid, which both complicates and slows his work.
A puppet can take two weeks to make, requiring the application of layer upon layer of paper. He has nearly a dozen helpers, but tends to do the most delicate and meticulous work himself, like the actual painting of the puppet's face.
This being an election year in Brazil, Mr. Botelho is swamped with requests that go beyond even the enormous demands of Carnival. Local politicians are among his best customers: they order puppets in their own images, to put at the head of street processions, with a live band following, in order to draw voters to rallies.
''I accept orders from all the parties, big or small, right or left,'' he said. ''It's just a question of my time and their money.''
All over Brazil, the most popular Carnival masks worn by revelers the past couple of years have been of George W. Bush, Saddam Hussein and Osama bin Laden. Mr. Botelho has refused to portray any of them, preferring instead to reproduce the images of local celebrities, like a fondly remembered waiter who died in 1997, a coconut vendor, a singer and a radio soccer broadcaster.
''Negative forces gain strength and energy when they are let loose,'' he explained. ''I don't want to criticize people for the wrong things they do, because that is something that ought to be forgotten, not mentioned.''
By his own count, Mr. Botelho says, he has made 478 different puppets, some of which he stores in his workshop between one Carnival and the next. People approach him on the street, he said, to ask when he will portray them, or to say their father, uncle or spouse would be a perfect subject.
He likes the prestige, attention and power that goes with his craft, Mr. Botelho admits. But there is one subject he says he absolutely refuses to depict: himself.
''I would never be so vain and narcissistic as to do a self-portrait,'' he said firmly. ''I've already obtained more respect and acceptance than I ever thought would be possible, so why should I deprive someone else of the privilege of being honored with a puppet?''
Mr. Botelho was honored a few years ago by a samba school in Rio de Janeiro, some 1,250 miles south. But he has resisted all entreaties to move there.
Rio's festivities, he says, have been hijacked by television networks, beer companies and other commercial interests. He called it a ''spectacle'' for tourists.
''Carnival in Rio is like going to the theater just as a spectator and leaving as soon as the play ends,'' he said, ''whereas here you are part of the show that's going on out on the street.''
THE intensely competitive aspect of Rio's parade, with one samba school walking away with all the glory, also strikes Mr. Botelho as contrary to the spirit of Carnival. He prefers the collegial atmosphere of the ''Encounter of the Giant Puppets,'' a celebration he sponsors on Carnival Tuesday in honor of all the local puppet makers, which has become a highlight of the festivities here.
Mr. Botelho's father died six years ago, still unreconciled to his son's success, though his mother, Maria Dolores, 72, is an admirer of his work. His own marriage, Mr. Botelho said, fell apart because his wife complained that he spent ''20 hours a day thinking of Carnival and only four hours thinking of her.''
Mr. Botelho acknowledged that he might have time for other pursuits if he could only find a proper heir to his craft. He has a 10-year-old son, Túlio César, who shares his enthusiasm for Carnival, but it is too early to tell if the boy also has the talent, Mr. Botelho said. As for the apprentices he hires, well, they just do not show the same dedication that he demands of himself.
''Most of them are slow to pick things up, and even the one or two who have come along and appear to have the gift, they have been easily distracted by other things, like soccer or music,'' Mr. Botelho grumbled. ''It's not enough to have the ability; you also have to have the commitment.''
THE SATURDAY PROFILE
