Franz Fischler, the departing agriculture minister for the European Union, said on Friday that American policy makers can no longer use Europe as their scapegoat in the global battle over farm subsidies.
After nine years of fighting to trim Europe's farm payments system and increase spending for food safety and the environment, Mr. Fischler said it was time to lay to rest the old stereotypes of subsidized European farmers amassing mountains of excess butter and lakes of surplus wine.
''American farmers now receive 10 times more than European farmers, but the myths haven't died,'' Mr. Fischler said. ''But here they act as if nothing has happened over the last few years, as if Europe hasn't made painful reforms to reduce their farm supports.''
The issue of dealing with farm subsidies is urgent as the World Trade Organization resumed talks this week on agriculture after the United States and Europe accused each other of blocking the negotiations.
Mr. Fischler said in an interview on Friday that he had reached tentative agreement in Geneva last week on ''90 percent of the trade agenda'' with the Group of 20, the developing nations that were pivotal in talks in Cancún, Mexico, last year.
The countries, which include India, Brazil, China and South Africa, have said this latest round of global talks must include the reduction or elimination of many of the agricultural subsidies in rich nations.
To advance the negotiations, Mr. Fischler said Europe was opening its markets to cotton exports from poor West African nations and would finance the countries' export programs, another demand at Cancún. At the same time, Europe is reducing subsidies for its own cotton farmers and its cotton exports.
In another nod to poor nations hoping that agricultural exports will be their ticket out of poverty, Mr. Fischler said the European nations would begin talks next month on opening the Continent's markets to sugar, a commodity that is as highly protected there as in the United States.
''You don't see that in the United States, '' Mr. Fischler said. ''The reality is we are moving away from the old-style supports of the 1990's but the United States isn't -- it has taken a step backward.''
Washington, however, sees things differently.
In his latest trade proposal, Robert B. Zoellick, the United States trade representative, put the onus on Europe's agricultural export subsidies as the biggest stumbling block in global talks.
''Export subsidies distort trade more than any other measure,'' Mr. Zoellick wrote in a letter to trade ministers. ''To move the negotiations forward, I believe we should seek an understanding that there will be elimination of export subsidies by a date certain.''
Mr. Fischler found the challenge one-sided.
''For my taste, Bob could have been more outspoken about attacking the U.S. export system,'' he said.
But most members of Congress support Mr. Zoellick, routinely citing figures they say prove Europe outspends the United States by as much as five to one on farm subsidies. Now, with trade a central issue in the presidential campaign this year, it is unlikely that lawmakers will risk upsetting the powerful farm lobby by cutting into the record subsidies passed in the 2002 farm bill.
In what may be his last visit here, Mr. Fischler, who leaves office in October, came to Washington this week to remind lawmakers and administration officials that Europe has cut in half the money it spends on agriculture subsidies and support as a percentage of the group's gross domestic product.
That money will be diluted further when 10 more countries are added to the European Union this year, along with their four million farmers.
''We did the final big step of reform last year before the expansion,'' Mr. Fischler said.
Among the changes put in place during Mr. Fischler's tenure are the system of labeling and tracing food to ensure its safety; increases in financing for programs to protect the environment and preserve the beauty of the Continent's rural landscapes; and the tightening of laws for animal welfare, which essentially rule out many of the practices followed in the United States.
Indeed, Mr. Fischler predicted that the United States would eventually adopt the changes made in Europe, especially those aimed at tracing food from the farm to the supermarket.
''I'm really convinced you'll see the same here -- Americans will ask how was this produced, where did it come from, how were the animals treated,'' Mr. Fischler said. ''American society won't accept what they have now.''
