In his short reign as coach, Lawrence Frank has pounded some themes into the Nets. He would have insisted that the 11 games that preceded Friday night's were wiped out of their minds; that the 48 minutes of play that had just ended had been their only focus, and even then, those thoughts should have faded as soon as the game was over.
But a player like guard Kerry Kittles, an eight-year veteran who has the longest tenure on the Nets, absorbs the accomplishments of the current group like salves for old wounds. On Friday night, the Nets coasted past the Toronto Raptors, 91-72, for their franchise-record 12th consecutive victory.
''I'm enjoying it, I really am,'' said Kittles, who had 19 points and 7 rebounds. ''Personally, I know what it was like when we were struggling, when we had adversity, even this year the adversity we had. Just being on teams that were outmanned on many nights, that had guys injured, not going into the game feeling confident that you can win, when you have a bunch of talented guys that are all on the same page, that all care about winning, that are going to give a good effort every night on both ends of the court, it's just great.''
The longest winning streaks in the N.B.A. this season are 13 games, by the San Antonio Spurs and the Detroit Pistons. The Nets' latest victory came against a Raptors team playing without Vince Carter and Jalen Rose.
The Nets' record for consecutive victories had been held by the 1982-83 team, which followed that 11-game streak from Dec. 23 to Jan. 12 by dealing for Micheal Ray Richardson. Coach Larry Brown departed with six games remaining in the season when he reached a deal to coach at Kansas the next season.
Last season, the Nets won 10 straight games in the regular season and duplicated that streak in the playoffs. Jason Kidd strained to recall when he had last been a part of a streak this long, wondering if he had done it in high school.
This victory was the 11th for Frank as a coach since replacing Byron Scott on Jan. 26, extending his N.B.A. record for triumphs to start a coaching career. He has tried not to acknowledge his accomplishment or even the team record.
''The bottom line is you're in this league to try to win every single game,'' Frank said. ''That's what we're trying to do.''
The Nets have won by focusing on the game at hand, by playing with an energy that was absent before Scott's departure, and even with a bit of luck -- a kind schedule aided by the absence of key players. But whoever they have faced, the Nets have methodically done the job.
At the start Friday night, the Nets were without Kenyon Martin, who was bothered by a sinus infection. He did play 24 minutes, coming off the bench for the first time in his career. But nothing slowed the Nets. They never trailed and put the game away in the fourth quarter when a 14-0 run gave them an 89-67 advantage.
Richard Jefferson led the Nets with 20 points, making 9 of 14 shots, and Kidd had 11 points and 15 assists.
Kidd said that in the professional ranks, it is impressive ''any time you put a double-digit win streak together.''
But he added: ''We have a bigger picture, that's to get better. Win or lose, we want to try to get better. That's what we're doing right now. We're learning how to win.''
Although this was another victory for Frank, it was also a curious reunion for him. Raptors Coach Kevin O'Neill gave Frank his first coaching job, hiring him as a graduate assistant at Marquette for $6,000 a year and paying out of his own pocket for Frank to get a graduate degree and an apartment near campus.
Last summer, after O'Neill got his first N.B.A. head coaching job, he called the Nets for permission to recruit Frank, then an assistant under Scott. But Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, refused to grant permission.
So Frank stayed with the Nets, taking over when Scott was fired, and on Friday night he and O'Neill found themselves on opposing benches for the first time.
But any pretense of a student-teacher chess match was removed with the Nets streaking and the Raptors playing short-handed. Frank and O'Neill hugged before the game, and that was as close as the teams were all night.
REBOUNDS
ROD THORN, the Nets' president, said that he expected to come to an agreement with EDDIE GRIFFIN on a buyout of his contract next week. Griffin did not play a game with the Nets after signing with the team on Jan. 8 and left the team on Jan. 28. He has since been charged in Houston with violating conditions of his bail and with assault. Thorn said he did not plan to add a player now, saying the Nets would see if their big players, particularly JASON COLLINS, stay healthy.
PRO BASKETBALL
