Far from Tampa and the breathless anticipation of Alex Rodriguez's arrival, on a side field usually reserved for minor leaguers, a few hundred Mets fans saw one reason they may still want to watch baseball this season.
Not to see Mike Piazza field ground balls. To see Mike Piazza hit long balls.
Most of the questions aimed at Piazza on Friday were about his short workout at first base. Most of the fuss, however, was about his first batting practice session, a one-man home run derby in which he stretched the dimensions of the Mets' spring training complex and appeared as refreshed as he had promised.
Whether Piazza wants to play first base or even play for the Mets may be a source of debate all season. But he put his happiest face on the topic Friday when he showed up for the first workout of spring training and used the word ''excited'' at least a dozen times. The 35-year-old Piazza seems resigned to the transition from catcher to first base and intent on relishing the latter stage of his career, no matter where it takes him.
''One of the things that's always grounded me is being a good soldier,'' Piazza said. ''I'm very aware of where I am in my career and how much I can help this team. I'm not a rookie anymore and I'm not 25 anymore. I see the light at the end of the tunnel of my career, and I have to relish every second. That starts with a good attitude.''
The Mets are treating their plan for Piazza's transition to first base like a state secret. He will work out at catcher and first base throughout spring training and could play first base once or twice a week to start the season, but the club does not pay him for his glove work.
Despite all the attention on Piazza's place in the field, what matters more is the production the Mets receive from his spot in the lineup. After returning from a torn groin muscle last season, Piazza hit .244 with 4 home runs in 123 at-bats, prompting concern that he might no longer be the slugger the Mets have counted on.
When Piazza reported Friday, he reeled off a list of questions facing him and the team, but none of them had to do with his hitting.
''My physical condition and ability aren't an issue,'' he said. As an exclamation point, he smashed a series of home runs that might have threatened the alligators camped out near Tradition Field.
''Mike put on a show,'' Mets Manager Art Howe said. ''He was hitting on a field with the wind blowing in, and he was crushing the ball. If Mike stays healthy this year, you'll see the Mike of old. I feel good with Mike and I think he feels good with me.''
Piazza's relationship with Howe could be dissected more than his scoops at first base. Piazza was upset at the way Howe handled his position change last season and he revisited the subject again Friday, mostly to try to move past it. Howe mentioned the possibility of Piazza's moving to first base in a television interview last May before talking about it with Piazza.
''For me, it was a lack of dialogue,'' Piazza said. ''My rules and ideas of being a man are simple: you come to me and tell me what you think. The fact that it wasn't done with talking to me face to face, that's a little bit of a turnoff.''
He added: ''I wanted it to be a more professional adjustment to my career. I didn't just want to throw it out there as being trivial. I take it very seriously.''
As proof of his commitment, Piazza started taking ground balls on his own three weeks ago. Meanwhile, Jason Phillips, a catcher who will play first when Piazza does not, spent much of his winter fielding balls hit by his father on the street outside the family's house in El Cajon, Calif. ''I hope kids weren't watching,'' Phillips said, ''because I booted a lot of them.''
It may be easier to play first base than catcher, but Piazza's patience will probably be tested in the next month. At several points last season, he seemed worn down by injuries, losses and incessant questions about a variety of hot-button issues.
The first day of spring training is generally an elixir for even the most hardened superstars, and Piazza insisted that he was satisfied anchoring a team in transition.
Piazza views the Yankees with interest and amusement, but he maintains there is no measure of jealousy.
''We're going to be anonymous in town now,'' Piazza said, sounding altogether thrilled at the notion. In the past few years, he has received enough attention to last until his retirement ceremony.
If Piazza is indeed on his way out and the end of last season was a harbinger of what's to come, the Mets will most likely finish at the bottom of the National League East for the third year in a row. But if he can recapture the form he showed even two years ago, the Mets could approach the goals set Friday by their owner, Fred Wilpon.
''These guys don't want to be second-class citizens in New York,'' said Wilpon, who disputed that the Mets are rebuilding or cutting costs. ''Our intention is to play meaningful games in September and be in it. We have a lot of doubters out there. I think a lot of people have gotten on the bandwagon.''
The Mets must be grateful just to have Piazza on their side, which was no given a few months ago. He is now playing first base for Howe on a team with no playoff expectations, and, at least in the tranquillity of South Florida, he appears at peace with it.
INSIDE PITCH
FRED WILPON said the Mets and the Yankees had approached officials from New York City about new stadiums and would meet with them again in the next two weeks. Wilpon said the Mets' plans for a new stadium were further along than those of the Nets and the Jets, who are also seeking new homes in New York.
BASEBALL
