Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg moved yesterday to yank the emergency lights and sirens out of the cars of 255 city officials, including the heads of some of the largest city agencies.
Joel I. Klein, the schools chancellor, Adrian Benepe, the parks commissioner, Michael A. Cardozo, the corporation counsel, and Charles S. Hirsch, the chief medical examiner, all lost or gave up the right to speed through stop signs and traffic lights during emergencies.
Mayor Bloomberg, who travels with a police escort in a black sport utility vehicle when not riding the subway, gets to keep the lights and siren. So do Deputy Mayor Marc V. Shaw and 70-odd civilian officials who were able to persuade the mayor that their ability to get somewhere quickly could be, in some cases, a matter of life and death.
The mayor's siren recall was announced yesterday by his press secretary, Edward Skyler, at a news conference in the Blue Room at City Hall. Mr. Skyler, who is one of only three members of the mayor's office to keep his lights and siren, handed out a sheet of paper titled ''Lights and Sirens Removal Program.''
Mayor Bloomberg did not appear at the news conference, but Mr. Skyler said that the mayor had decided which officials got to keep their lights and sirens and which did not. Mr. Skyler said the mayor called all his commissioners and made them justify why they should keep the perk.
''It was a back and forth, but ultimately the mayor had to be convinced that it was necessary for these people to have this,'' Mr. Skyler said.
The removal of the sirens came a week after a Channel 2 news report caught Deputy Mayor Carol A. Robles-Roman using her lights and siren to cut around traffic on her commute to City Hall. All week since, Marcia Kramer, the Channel 2 reporter, has asked the mayor about his confidence in Ms. Robles-Roman.
Mayor Bloomberg had responded by ordering a citywide review of lights and sirens assigned to civilians. While these are only supposed to be for emergencies, it has long been accepted practice for some officials to use them as a convenient means of speeding through New York's congested streets.
That was not supposed to be so under the Bloomberg administration. Two years ago, his administration stripped 18 city officials in the mayor's office of their lights and sirens as part of a larger cost-cutting and perk-reduction program. Other officials lost their cars and drivers entirely.
Mr. Skyler said the review of the practice this week showed that 328 so-called civilian officials had lights and sirens. The mayor then winnowed the list down by determining whether the official actually needed them to respond to emergencies as part of their jobs, Mr. Skyler said. In 255 cases, the mayor found, the answer was no.
In some cases, the official volunteered to give up the perk. Mr. Hirsch, the medical examiner, said that he had used his lights and sirens only once in 15 years, to get to the scene of an airplane crash at La Guardia Airport. ''It seemed to me if I had gotten there 10 minutes later, it wouldn't have made a whole lot of difference,'' he said.
Mr. Hirsch said he rejected the suggestion that it was a coveted status symbol. ''If I needed that to define who I am, I better redefine my priorities,'' he said.
By and large, city officials seemed to take the siren recall stoically, though privately some were said to be grumbling. The reductions went deep across the board. For instance, the Department of Education will lose all 14 of its lights and sirens, while the Parks Department will give up 16 of 17. The Department of Transportation will hand back 49 of 76, and the Department of Environmental Protection 18 of 34.
Tino Hernandez, chairman of the New York City Housing Authority, was one of the few administrators to hold on to the lights and sirens after telling the mayor that he needed them to respond to emergencies at the agency's housing developments.
''It's not something that's abused, it's not something that's overused,,'' said Howard Marder, a spokesman for Mr. Hernandez.
Mr. Skyler said that the removal of the sirens and lights would be completed in the next month, and cost more than $17,000.
Gene Russianoff, a lawyer for the New York Public Interest Research Group, applauded the mayor's efforts. ''I don't think the city will lose out because some official will be late to an emergency tree pruning or P.T.A. meeting,'' he said.
