A day after Douglas N. Daft, the Coca-Cola Company's chairman and chief executive, announced he would retire at the end of the year, analysts questioned the timing of the resignation and debated the effect it could have on Steven J. Heyer, Coke's president and chief operating officer, who has long been considered the heir apparent to Mr. Daft.
Coke's board said Thursday that it would move swiftly to name a chairman and chief executive by the end of the year. But it also said it would hire a search firm to evaluate candidates outside of the company, fueling speculation that Mr. Heyer might not get the job.
''Coke has now created a transitional situation involving its two top officers,'' said John D. Sicher, the editor and publisher of Beverage Digest, an industry publication. ''It needs to resolve its future leadership as soon as possible to maintain momentum.''
What is certain, analysts said, is that Mr. Heyer will continue to be under intense scrutiny as the board monitors his performance. Mr. Heyer's responsibilities have included helping the company with its marketing efforts for Coke Classic and, in December, taking over the company's North American operations. He is also said to have been the mastermind behind much of the company's restructuring efforts.
''It gives them one more year to evaluate him as a candidate,'' said Michael C. Bellas, the chairman and chief executive of Beverage Marketing. ''Lots of the fruits of what they've been working on will be a little more discernible at the end of the year, especially some of the new programs that are put in place.''
With senior management in flux, it made sense for the board to reinstate Donald R. Keough, a former Coke president, to the board, analysts said. His presence on the board could also help Mr. Heyer's chances of getting Coke's top job, some analysts said. They said that Mr. Keough has long been thought to have been at least partly responsible for Mr. Heyer's move to Coke from AOL Time Warner in 2001 and his quick rise through the ranks at the company.
''It could very well be that this was a tactical move to put someone who had history back on the board during this period when Doug Daft is going to go into lame duck status,'' said Debbie S. Wang, a beverage analyst at Morningstar Inc. ''If they're even thinking about the possibility of bringing in an outsider, I can understand why they would have wanted someone on the board like Don who brings a real measure of stability and continuity for this kind of transition.''
In October, Coke's directors voted to set aside the mandatory retirement age of 74 for its directors, paving the way for Mr. Keough to rejoin the board.
The decision to scuttle the age restriction also allows Warren E. Buffett, a Coke director and the chairman and chief executive of Berkshire Hathaway, to remain eligible to stay on the board after he turns 74 this August.
Mr. Daft's retirement announcement comes after a particularly trying year for Coke, with extensive layoffs, federal investigations into the company's business practices and the departure of several senior executives.
Still, the company's reputation on Wall Street has improved lately. Analysts cite better relationships with bottlers, the introduction of several successful products and the efforts to revitalize Coca-Cola Classic as examples of progress.
Shares of Coke fell 6 cents, to $50.94, yesterday as investors waited to see what the changes will ultimately mean for the company's bottom line.
Wall Street analysts, who for nearly a year have favored Mr. Heyer for the top job, said there was significant risk if someone outside the company was chosen.
''The risk in going to the outside, in our view, is that it could send a signal to the market that the operating difficulties at Coke will continue longer than expected,'' John Faucher, a beverage analyst at J.P. Morgan, wrote yesterday in a research note.
