George Balanchine built his new American ballet on the firm grounds of the Russian classicism in which he was trained as a child. Peter Martins, in his 1991 production of ''The Sleeping Beauty,'' achieved an approximate symbiosis of past and present. Revived for the New York City Ballet's current celebration of Balanchine's centennial and life's work, the production, last performed in 2000, returned to the repertory on Wednesday night at the New York State Theater.
Mr. Martins drew on what remains of the 1890 Petipa original, which in turn drew upon 17th- and 18th-century French court ballets and the international ballet styles of Petipa's time. He incorporated Balanchine's 1981 Garland Dance, and audience members on Wednesday spotted quotations from productions by Fyodor Lopukhov and Frederick Ashton. But those who expect the ornate mime of early versions or Ashton's humane lyricism will be disappointed.
In the City Ballet tradition established by Balanchine, Mr. Martins speeds through a streamlined ''Sleeping Beauty'' that does not leave much room for characterization and forces the performers to move very fast at times. This ''Sleeping Beauty'' finds its values in abstraction. It is intelligent and respectful, and beautifully designed by David Mitchell. (It is time, though, for the herky-jerky opening scenic panorama to be replaced by video.) The production is also effectively a statement of belief about City Ballet's past and present. But it is chill.
There is little time to savor Princess Aurora's crucial blossoming into young womanhood, although Jenifer Ringer infuses Aurora's 16th birthday-party choreography with warmth and gaiety. The lovely vision scene, in which the lonely Prince Désiré sees the sleeping princess awake before him as in a dream of his own, speeds by so quickly that Ms. Ringer and Philip Neal, her interestingly willful and elegantly ardent prince, are unable to build on the sense of mystery and longing that they establish at the start.
The City Ballet corps met the challenge of the production's restricted mime, the women breathing out a charming sigh of relief when the Lilac Fairy ordains that Aurora will merely sleep, not die. But the dancers' arms tended to look fussy and their feet choppy as the otherwise impressive orchestra, conducted by Andrea Quinn, sped them along at the requisite City Ballet pace.
Maria Kowroski danced the Lilac Fairy with solemn amplitude. Merrill Ashley, Mr. Martins's original Carabosse, was as deliciously, glitteringly evil as ever. Rachel Rutherford brought a hint of the quiet pleasures and depth of classical dancing of an earlier era to her role debut as the Fairy of Generosity. Lindy Mandradjieff danced a clear, precisely articulated new Fairy of Eloquence.
In other role debuts, Charles Askegard soared lyrically as Gold in the Jewels divertissement, in one of many role debuts in the ballet's culminating wedding scene. Ashley Bouder was an eccentric but exciting new Diamond soloist, with Amanda Edge accomplished but more straightforward in a debut in the Emerald solo, in a foursome completed by Pascale van Kipnis. Joaquin De Luz pushed hard in the virtuoso Bluebird pas de deux, coming into his own only in stylish turns in the coda. Megan Fairchild was largely wasted as a new Florine.
DANCE REVIEW
