Opponents of gay marriage suffered another setback here on Friday when a judge refused to block the issuance of same-sex marriage licenses, saying the opponents had not shown that the weddings were causing immediate harm.
In New Mexico, though, Attorney General Patricia A. Madrid moved swiftly to shut down an effort in a county near Albuquerque to follow San Francisco's lead. Ms. Madrid said through a spokeswoman that same-sex marriage licenses issued Friday in Sandoval County violated state law.
''If marriage licenses were issued today to same-sex partners, they will be void,'' said the spokeswoman, Sam Thompson.
The Sandoval County clerk, Victoria Dunlap, said she only began issuing the licenses because a same-sex couple requested one last week. After conferring with the county attorney, Ms. Dunlap said, it was determined that she had no grounds to deny the couple a license. By midday Friday, she had processed 35 applications from same-sex couples with dozens of others waiting in line.
''What I need is someone in government to stand up and clarify the law,'' Ms. Dunlap said prior to the attorney general's ruling.
The judge in San Francisco, Ronald Evans Quidachay of San Francisco Superior Court, did not rule on the substance of a lawsuit brought against the city asserting that the licenses violate the state's family code. Those arguments are expected to be heard next month, when a separate lawsuit against the marriage policy is scheduled for a hearing.
The judge said the two lawsuits, brought by conservative and religious groups, would be consolidated to ''avoid duplication of labor.'' It was the third time since Feb. 13 that a judge has refused to block the issuance of the licenses.
Opponents of same-sex marriages said they were confident of victory in the long run. ''The radical action that is taking place here is not something most Americans agree with, '' said Mathew D. Staver, who represents the Campaign for California Families, one group suing the city.
Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, concerned about the judge's inaction, wrote a letter late on Friday to the California attorney general, Bill Lockyer, saying that ''San Francisco's actions are directly contrary to state law and present an imminent risk to civil order.'' He directed Mr. Lockyer to ''take immediate steps to obtain a definitive judicial resolution to this controversy.''
Some judicial experts said that the moves in San Francisco and New Mexico indicated the debate over the licenses was becoming more rooted in legal, not political, ground.
''The plain effort by the gay rights movement is to have the law take the initiative, to replace the political sentiment,'' said Jesse H. Choper, professor of constitutional law at the University of California, Berkeley.
Mr. Choper called the strategy a bid to sidestep political and public opinion, which remains largely opposed to same-sex marriages.
A poll conducted last weekend by the nonpartisan Public Policy Institute of California showed that 58 percent of people in the San Francisco Bay area favored allowing gay and lesbian couples to marry, but that only 44 percent of all Californians shared that view. State law defines marriage as between a man and a woman, but city officials say equality provisions in the state's Constitution should take precedence.
''This ultimately has got to be resolved upstairs in the United States Supreme Court,'' Mr. Choper said.
Friday was the ninth day that the same-sex marriage licenses were issued in San Francisco following a directive by Mayor Gavin Newsom, bringing the total to 3,175 by 4 p.m.
Hundreds of couples waited after hours to receive an appointment for a license next week. But protests by religious groups heightened, with some opponents at one point blocking entry to the county clerk's office.
At 10 a.m., Mr. Newsom officiated at the highest-profile wedding yet, that of Cristina Arguedas, 50, and Carol Migden, 55, who have been partners for 19 years. Ms. Arguedas is a criminal lawyer who once represented O. J. Simpson and Ms. Migden is chairwoman of the state's Board of Equalization. She has also served as a San Francisco County supervisor and a state assemblywoman.
Ms. Migden said her decision to marry was partly made to support Mr. Newsom.
''I expect there to be resistance,'' Ms. Migden said. ''Any hard-fought civil rights gains certainly take a lot of time in the trenches. We are not afraid of that. We are not shying away from that. Frankly it all feels like a victory today.''
