A day before the first wave of Japanese ground troops prepared to leave for Iraq, Tokyo raised its terrorism alert to the highest level on Friday, tightening security at government buildings, nuclear power plants and other sensitive locations.
The Japanese authorities did not say whether any specific information had led to the alert, the highest since last March, when American-led forces invaded Iraq. In Washington, American officials also said they were unaware of any specific threat against Japan, where many American military bases are located.
The alert caused the yen to weaken to its lowest level in two months. The dollar rose to more than 109 yen.
Beginning on Saturday, police officers armed with submachine guns will be stationed at several major airports, including Narita Airport near Tokyo, according to news media reports. Security was also expected to be tightened in business, diplomatic and entertainment areas with links to the United States.
Japanese authorities have been concerned about a terrorist attack since the government passed a law authorizing it to dispatch 550 ground troops to Iraq. Late last year, an organization supposedly linked to Al Qaeda warned on the Internet that it would attack Tokyo if troops were sent to Iraq.
Last week, the Japanese news media also reported that a senior Qaeda member told United States authorities that it had planned an attack in Japan during the 2002 World Cup.
On Saturday, 140 members of Japan's Ground Self-Defense Force are expected to leave Japan for Iraq, the first of three waves that are to arrive in Iraq by the end of March. Advance teams are already in the southern city of Samawah, where 550 Japanese noncombat troops will engage in relief activities.
Japanese public opinion, which largely opposed the war in Iraq, has softened recently toward the first dispatch of Japanese troops to a country at war since World War II.
But many Japanese remain clearly opposed to the troop deployment and to moves by the government to stretch the limits of Japan's Constitution.
