The Senate has moved to curb a tax incentive that encourages small businesses to buy the largest and most fuel-inefficient sport utility vehicles.
Owners of small businesses can now deduct up to $100,000 a year for capital expenses, including everything from cars to medical equipment to software.
Most auto purchase deductions, however, are capped at $10,000 or less each year. But vehicles weighing 6,000 pounds or more fully loaded have no limit, be they pickup trucks, vans or sport utility vehicles.
The Senate's proposal would cap deductions for S.U.V.'s at $25,000 a year but leave the broader $100,000 small-business deduction unchanged. Deductions for large pickup trucks and vans would not be affected.
The proposal, which was among the fine print of a voluminous highway financing bill passed by the Senate this month, must still gain approval from the House to be included in the final bill that comes out of Congress.
When the pertinent section of the tax code was written, it was intended to allow construction businesses and farmers to deduct for hauling vehicles but restrict other deductions. But in recent years, S.U.V. sales have surged and the deduction has been used by a variety of businesspeople for purchases of dozens of luxury sport utility vehicle models. Among those eligible are Hummers, Range Rovers, the Ford Expedition, the BMW X5, the Toyota Sequoia, the Nissan Armada and the Infiniti QX56.
Only recently could the full cost of these vehicles be deducted. In its first big tax cut package, the Bush administration proposed raising the overall small-business deduction to $75,000 from $25,000 to stimulate job creation. Congress responded by raising the deduction to $100,000, but the S.U.V. deduction was not addressed.
Senator Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, played a crucial role in adding the S.U.V. cap to the highway bill, according to people close to the drafting process. The House has not yet passed its own version of the bill.
With the deficit swelling, the White House has urged Congress to keep costs down and has said the Senate's $318 billion highway bill is $62 billion too expensive. Whether the administration will favor an S.U.V. cap as a means of cost savings, however, remains to be seen.
An administration official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said, ''We are taking a careful look at the merits of the Grassley alternative in the Senate highway bill.''
Taxpayer and environmental groups have long criticized the so-called S.U.V. loophole as a potent federal incentive to increase oil consumption.
''This is a good proposal for rolling back what is a ridiculous loophole,'' said Aileen D. Roder, program director for Taxpayers for Common Sense, who added: ''We're not opposed to farmers using this. We're opposed to lawyers and doctors using this to buy vehicles for their latte runs.''
Car dealers and some automakers have embraced it as an enticement to get customers to buy some of their most expensive products.
''Allow me to introduce you to a fabulous opportunity,'' wrote a salesman at a Hummer dealership in Alaska last year, in a letter to potential customers. ''A tax loophole so big you could drive a Hummer H2 through it!''
Jim Jenkins, an accountant in Southfield, Mich., said he had seen a wide variety of people using the deduction for a variety of vehicles, from doctors to plumbers.
''I had a guy come in, a realtor who was looking at an Explorer and instead got a Navigator,'' he said. ''That saved him $20,000.''
The Ford Explorer, which starts at more than $20,000 less than the Lincoln Navigator, is too small to qualify for the tax credits.
''I would like to see more stimulus for other vehicles, not just S.U.V.'s or trucks,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ''These are targeted for small businesses and that's where the jobs are being created. But I think all the vehicles should be treated the same.''
Similar views were expressed by Eron Shosteck, spokesman for the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers, a leading industry lobbying group.
''Our position has been that you should expand it to apply to all vehicles that are used for small business,'' he said. ''An accountant who uses a four-door sedan should be able to deduct that the same way he can deduct computer equipment. Right now, it's discriminating against passenger cars.''
Ms. Roder said, ''Certainly, anytime we have the kind of budget deficits we're facing at this point, we have to do whatever is possible to reduce federal spending.''
''It's not the best use of taxpayer dollars,'' she added.
Environmentalists see the tax as part of a quilt of loopholes that have long stalled progress in curbing oil consumption. The fuel economy of the average new vehicle sold in the United States fell to 20.4 miles a gallon in the 2002 model year, its lowest point in 22 years, according to the most recent data from the Environmental Protection Agency.
And that data somewhat understates the nation's fuel economy. Why? Because the largest S.U.V.'s, vans and pickup trucks -- those that weigh more than 8,500 pounds--are also not regulated by the nation's fuel economy rules.
