Federal authorities yesterday seized a large portrait of the Roman Emperor Trajan that was a centerpiece of a major antiquities auction last month at Christie's, saying it was stolen six years ago from a museum in Rome, a spokeswoman for Christie's said.
While Christie's represented the piece in its catalog as an antiquity, it now appears that it is probably a reproduction made in the 17th century, according to a complaint filed by the United States attorney's office in Manhattan.
Margaret Doyle, a spokeswoman for Christie's, said the auction house had relied on information provided by the seller, who was identified only as a collector in Linz, Austria. Both Christie's and an outside consultant it had retained inspected the piece and concluded that it was a genuine antiquity, she said.
''The consignor provided us with provenance information that we believed to be credible,'' Ms. Doyle said. She said Christie's had not checked the authenticity of that information.
''If the receipt looks authentic and is credible, that suffices,'' she said.
Constance Lowenthal, a New York consultant on art-ownership disputes, said experts at art auction houses should be able to tell by looking at a piece's provenance whether it is problematic or easily verified. ''I say they have a responsibility not to take a provenance merely on faith,'' Ms. Lowenthal said. ''It is hearsay without further research.''
The piece, which is 22 inches high, sold for $276,300, bringing the third-highest price at the auction. The successful bidder was not identified.
In a complaint filed on Thursday in United States District Court in Manhattan, Federal officials charged that the portrait of Trajan had been stolen from a storage area at the Capitoline Museum in Rome in January 1998.
Italian law enforcement officials reported that the thieves had removed the marble portrait from a molded base that was left behind, according to the complaint.
In the catalog for the antiquities auction, Christie's devoted four pages to the dramatic portrait of Trajan, a general who ruled over the Roman Empire between A.D. 98 and 117 during the height of its power.
It attributed the piece to the ''property of a European collector'' and said its ownership history could be traced back 100 years to collectors in Germany.
Ms. Doyle, the Christie's spokeswoman, said the auction house was contacted by federal officials last month while the antiquities auction was in progress. She said the federal officials told Christie's then that the Italian authorities had informed them that they believed the piece was the one stolen from the Capitoline Museum.
She said that after talking with the officials Christie's decided to proceed with the auction but not to release the piece to its buyer until the United States attorney's office could investigate. A month before the auction, Ms. Doyle said, Christie's sent a copy of the catalog to the Art Loss Registry, a group that maintains a database of stolen objects but had not heard of any problems.
But Christie's now believes, as a result of subsequent inquiries to the seller, that it was provided incomplete and inaccurate information, Ms. Doyle said.
