''What a zoo.'' Stanford forward Matt Haryasz had that eye-rolling greeting for his teammate Jason Haas this week after Haryasz had wedged his 6-foot-10, 225-pound body past nine reporters inside the small players' lounge in quaint Maples Pavilion, the team's arena.
The attention by the news media was a changeup to the class-to-practice routine for Haryasz, his workmanlike teammates and their coach, Mike Montgomery. They are so unaccustomed to the attention in the Pacific-10 Conference that fewer than a dozen reporters -- normal for a basketball day at, say, Duke or Kentucky -- equals a zoo here.
This week, Stanford, 13-0 over all and 4-0 in the Pac-10 entering Saturday night's home game against archrival California, became the third-ranked team in the Associated Press poll.
Stanford has been ranked higher only two times in 91 years of men's basketball. The Cardinal was ranked second and then first in the poll during the 1999-2000 and the 2000-1 seasons.
This latest Cardinal team was about to hand Arizona Coach Lute Olson his worst home loss last weekend before turnovers shrank a 20-point lead with four minutes left into a mere 82-72 domination of what had been the nation's third-ranked team.
In December, Stanford beat then-top-ranked Kansas, 64-58. Two weeks later, the Cardinal turned back then-No. 13 Gonzaga.
''The three games that have caught everybody's attention, we played really hard,'' Montgomery said.
Hard workers, not high flyers, have typified Montgomery's 18 Stanford teams, adding to their relative national anonymity. The combined results of those teams: a 376-165 record and a .695 winning percentage.
''You look at Duke, maybe Arizona, U.C.L.A. in the past, they are getting the guy that you look at and say: 'Wow! Look at that. He can do this, this, this and that,' '' Montgomery said. ''Most of us are getting kids that have the potential, good players who will work. They've got some pride.''
Players like Matt Lottich, a 6-2 guard. Montgomery said Lottich was so fiery as a freshman that he was often out of control. But last month, Lottich, now a junior, controlled Gonzaga with a career-high 34 points in an 87-80 victory.
''That makes you feel good about what you're doing here,'' Montgomery said of Lottich's improvement. ''It makes you feel like, you know, this thing works a little bit.''
The ''whole is greater than the sum of its parts'' system created by Montgomery does work. Its success is illustrated by Lottich's modest scoring average of 13.3 points a game, which leads the team. And the Cardinal's one star, the junior forward Josh Childress, was out with an injured left foot when it beat Kansas and Gonzaga.
But the team has not reached Duke-like national acclaim.
That's because in March, college basketball's month of earning respect, Stanford has mostly faltered.
Unless this Cardinal team takes a U-turn, it will be Montgomery's 10th consecutive team with at least 20 victories and a trip to the N.C.A.A. tournament.
But Stanford has advanced past the second round just three times in the nine N.C.A.A. appearances. Often, faster, more athletic teams have eliminated the Cardinal.
The steely senior point guard Chris Hernandez is planning to change that trend.
His calming care of the ball against Arizona's frenetic defense led Olson to deadpan to reporters after Stanford's fourth straight victory in Tucson: ''They must have to have a pretty high G.P.A. to get in there or something, because they really play with poise and intelligence.''
Olson is on to something.
From 1986 through the entering class of 1999, just 3 of 197 players have left Stanford without a degree, said Susan Burk, Stanford's assistant athletic director for student services. Casey Jacobson and Chris Borchardt left after their junior seasons in 2002 to play in the N.B.A. Julius Barnes's four-year playing career ended last March, and he has filed a request to complete his degree this spring.
Stanford had a 100 percent graduation rate for the six-year period ending with the 2001-2 season. Of the other 64 teams in last spring's N.C.A.A. Division I tournament, 43 had graduation rates below 50 percent.
Stanford had good students when Montgomery arrived from Montana in 1986, but it had not played a postseason game in 44 years.
''There's been an adjustment over a long period of time,'' Montgomery said. ''Kids come here now because we have been good at basketball. They want to win.''
Childress exemplifies that. Although he has yet to start a game this season because of his injury, Childress had 19 points, 7 rebounds, 5 assists and 2 blocks while playing only 30 minutes against Arizona last weekend.
Stanford and Kansas coveted Childress, a sleek McDonald's High School all-American, with distinctive bushy hair, while he was at Mayfair High School in Los Angeles.
Landing him represented the attainment of a goal Montgomery set when he arrived at Stanford, a basketball hinterland, 18 years ago.
''We're recruiting basketball players now, and that's huge,'' he said. ''Stanford, as a university, speaks for itself. But a basketball player is not going to go someplace if he doesn't have a chance to go to the N.C.A.A. tournament.''
If those chances are converted into championships, there really will be a zoo at Stanford.
COLLEGES
