Two reports filed with a federal court Friday suggest that the November 2002 antitrust consent decree between Microsoft and the Justice Department has neither fostered significant competition nor changed Microsoft's anticompetitive behavior.
The government's agreement with Microsoft to settle its antitrust lawsuit has ''fallen short'' of its goal of creating competition, according to the court- ordered report issued Friday.
The plaintiffs' report, prepared jointly by the United States government, 16 states, the District of Columbia and Microsoft, stated that the plaintiffs had made a number of suggested improvements to a Microsoft licensing program established as part of its effort to make it easier to compete with the company.
Noting that the licensing efforts Microsoft has made so far have had some effect on the marketplace, the report stated the plaintiffs, ''are concerned that the development efforts of the current licensees are not likely to spur the emergence in the marketplace of broad competitors.''
The report also noted that since the last report, filed in October of last year, the government has received six substantive reports of violations related to the case. The complaints are being investigated.
Under the antitrust case settlement, Microsoft was ordered to license its Windows operating system, making it possible for competitors to use it .
A Microsoft spokeswoman said that since the company had modified the licensing program last year the company had added three new licensees. ''We feel encouraged by the progress of the industry so far,'' said Stacy Drake, the spokeswoman.
The company plans to modify its licensing program in response to the government complaints, changing pricing and simplifying the program, she said.
In a separate report, filed with the United States District Court for the District of Columbia, Massachusetts, which is the lone holdout from the antitrust settlement, stated that its investigations ''portend badly for the efficacy of the Nov. 1, 2002, judgment.''
''We have continued to receive and review indications that Microsoft is engaged in troubling business behavior,'' wrote Assistant Attorney General Glenn S. Kaplan.
The Massachusetts report said that the state was reviewing allegations that Microsoft is ''engaged in a campaign against various Internet search engines similar to the campaign it previously waged against Netscape's Navigator browser.'' The report also stated that a similar campaign was being planned against document software like Adobe's Acrobat.
''If Microsoft is taking steps to hobble the competitive effectiveness of these rival products and thereby supplant them, such serial killing of competing technologies is a serious and troubling prospect,'' according to the report.
The Microsoft spokeswoman said the company did not have information about the Massachusetts allegations.
''Given the vague nature of the allegations, its difficult to respond,'' Ms. Drake said.
Separately, on Thursday, Microsoft agreed to make changes in its Windows XP operating system so that it no longer forces consumers searching for music online to use Microsoft's Internet Explorer browser. Government antitrust lawyers decided that the link violated the 2002 consent decree.
Microsoft said it would make the change in a software update to be offered in February or March without acknowledging that the company was in violation of the decree.
Correction:  January 22, 2004, Thursday  Because of an editing error, an article in Business Day on Saturday about two court reports critical of compliance with the antitrust consent decree between Microsoft and the government misstated a provision of the decree. It ordered Microsoft to license the Windows computer code that controls the transfer of data, making it possible for competitors to connect to the company's server products -- not to license the Windows operating system.
