In the world of accounting scandals, Adecco may turn out to be a new breed, one that the reforms made in the Sarbanes-Oxley Act are far more likely to uncover and eventually prevent. That breed involves not enormous fraud but bad management that keeps the company, and therefore its investors, from knowing its financial condition.
Adecco, the Swiss company that is the world's largest provider of temporary employees, tried to reassure investors on Friday as it ended the first week of its scandal by disclosing a little about what was wrong -- albeit with few numbers attached -- and about how the problems were uncovered.
It was not a week to inspire confidence in management, and it ended with the departure of two top executives: the chief financial officer and the head of the American subsidiary where most of the problems seem to have been concentrated. The chief executive, under whose watch all this happened, is keeping his job but being detached from the investigations of what went wrong. [Page 3.]
For investors, the most important issue was whether Adecco was another Parmalat -- in which case no amount of investor panic was too much -- or a company where lax controls led to chaos. There could be fraud in such a company, but it probably would not involve top management or be large enough to threaten the existence of the company, or both.
Knowledge of whether controls are adequate -- and whether management is fixing any problems -- has long been known to be important. But before the Enron and WorldCom scandals galvanized Congress to act, efforts to require companies to assure that their controls were adequate had been repeatedly frustrated. In 1979 and again in 1988, the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed rules but ran into resistance from corporate America and decided against acting.
But the Sarbanes-Oxley Act required that company managements publish in annual reports an assessment ''of the internal control structure and procedures of the issuer for financial reporting.'' Moreover, it required that auditors ''shall attest to and report on the assessment made by the management.''
Those rules are not yet in effect -- they will apply to larger American companies in 2004 annual reports and to foreign companies like Adecco in 2005 annual reports -- but many companies have asked auditors to work on them this year. Such moves are intended to assure that a company's controls will get a clean bill of health by the time such assessments have to be made public.
On Friday, in providing limited new disclosures, Adecco did not indicate whether auditors from Ernst &amp; Young were involved in discovering the long list of control problems that were found at its American subsidiary, Olsten, which it acquired in a $1.6 billion deal in 2000. And the fact that it said whistle-blowers were involved may indicate that there are greater problems than inadequate controls, or that someone took advantage of the poor controls.
But it is clear that the problems included areas that the Sarbanes-Oxley Act sought to make auditors deal with, and thus provides an indication that inattention to such controls can be disastrous.
The areas of weakness Adecco reported it had uncovered in its American operations included routine practices like reconciliation of payroll bank accounts, applying payments to reduce accounts receivable, and the lack of systemic documentation of the rates that clients agreed to pay. The company was unable to quickly discover and correct billing errors. It also had problems related to the security of its information technology systems.
Another area in some branches was the ''lack of segregation of duties,'' which the company said had increased the likelihood of undetected errors.
Some of those problems have been corrected, Adecco said, while others are being worked on.
Adecco declined again to say where, other than in North America, it had problems. But it tried to minimize the extent of them by saying they involved countries that accounted for less than 10 percent of its business combined.
Investors put the company's stock on a roller coaster during the week, as they tried to assess, with little help from Adecco, just how serious the problems were. The shares, traded in Zurich and New York, ended the previous week at 81.80 Swiss francs in Zurich. On Monday, after the company disclosed it had problems in an announcement that made some traders fear it would be the next Parmalat, the shares fell to as little as 42.70 Swiss francs.
But during the day, Felix Weber, the company's chief financial officer, said that the announcement did not necessarily mean there were accounting irregularities. The shares recovered some of their losses by the end of the day and gained more in the following days.
The announcement on Friday sent the shares down some, and they fell further after a news conference produced more ''no comments'' than new pieces of information. Mr. Weber's departure was announced, as was that of the head of the North American operations. The shares closed Friday at 54 Swiss francs, down 5.85 Swiss francs.
In New York, Adecco's American depository receipts, each equal to a quarter of a Swiss share, fell $1.83, to $10.35. They had closed the previous week at $16.93.
At Friday's news conference, Jérôme Caille, Adecco's chief executive, said the company had been a bit slow to reassure customers early in the week but was doing so now. The company said that it had plenty of cash, that it was cooperating in all investigations, including those by the S.E.C. and federal prosecutors in New York, and that its board ''believes firmly in the continuing long-term success of Adecco.''
It is clear that the American operations needed a lot more help in accounting and record keeping. As Adecco seeks to hire that help, it might turn to one company whose Web site advertises that it can provide ''experienced accounting and finance professionals'' for temporary or permanent jobs.
''From a single auditor to an entire team of accounts -- whether you need executive, management or professional-level personnel for your projects or as permanent additions to your staff -- Olsten offers a resource pool of highly skilled experts with line and staff experience.''
That supplier, Olsten, is of course the American subsidiary whose own controls the company says were sorely lacking.
Market Place
