The crowd was cheering and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri was working the microphone with his finger jabbing and his fist pounding. For months now, he has crisscrossed this state, promoting his experience as a leader in Congress, his promise to provide universal health insurance and his long commitment to fair trade and working families.
But as the Iowa caucuses near, Mr. Gephardt has turned up the fire on a stump speech that once conveyed more plain-spoken sincerity than flash or flair. Locked in a four-way battle for Iowa caucus voters, Mr. Gephardt is working hard to engage his audience.
Recently he has incorporated the stories of struggling couples into his speech, introducing, for example, Mary and Gene Schrandt of Waverly, Iowa, who smiled shyly from the audience as he described how his health care plan would benefit them.
Instead of simply arguing that it would be better to repeal President Bush's tax cuts to finance his universal health insurance plan, he has started polling Democratic voters at some of his meetings.
''Raise your hand if you really love the Bush tax cuts,'' he asked voters recently at a high school gymnasium here. Not a single hand.
''O.K., raise your hand if you'd like to have health care,'' he said, ''that could never be taken away.''
A flurry of hands shot up. ''I rest my case,'' he said triumphantly.
He has also tried to add zest to his events, traveling to some campaign stops with a band, the Creek Dippers, that croons folk tunes, and arriving in Mason City at a union rally on Thursday in a caravan of 18-wheeler rigs with horns blaring.
The shifts are notable for Mr. Gephardt, who usually sticks so doggedly to his campaign message that he still peppers his speeches with phrases he used the day he announced his candidacy in February.
He still focuses on health care and trade as he did during his first presidential bid in 1988, promising to defend Medicare and Social Security and to renegotiate trade deals with Mexico and China that have been blamed for severe job losses.
He still accuses President Bush of catering to the wealthy while disregarding the needs of working families and failing to provide health insurance, adequate financing for education and a thriving economy. ''This guy is a job killer,'' he told supporters in Seattle this week.
And his speech always emphasizes his experience, focusing on his 27 years in Congress and his role as Democratic leader in the House of Representatives. He speaks of his travels to Mexico and China, meetings with presidents and parliamentarians and his contribution to President Bill Clinton's economic plan.
Unlike his challengers, he often says, he won't need ''training wheels'' in the Oval Office.
''When Clinton was president, we created 22 million new jobs in this country,'' Mr. Gephardt says. ''I led the fight in the House to get it done.
''I don't have to come here this morning and say, 'Gee, I think I know how to do this,' '' he says. ''We did it. We passed an economic program that was good for people.''
He is tightening his speech, though, and sharpening his words as he works to counter his image as a Washington insider more fluent in the language of Congressional appropriations than in campaign rallies.
The Republicans, he thunders, ''will cut or privatize Social Security and Medicare over my dead body!''
He has also been hammering at Howard Dean, saying at nearly every stop that Dr. Dean, as governor of Vermont, supported the North American Free Trade Agreement -- Nafta -- and Republican efforts to slow the growth of Medicare. He often reminds voters they will never have to worry about him keeping his word, a not-so veiled reference to Dr. Dean, who he says has shifted stances on several issues.
When he was House majority leader, Mr. Gephardt says, he led the fight against Nafta and refused to back down, even though President Clinton pressed him to support it.
''I will never let you down on trade!'' Mr. Gephardt told a cheering crowd recently. ''I will never be a president who will put up with the kind of stupid, bad trade deals that we've put up with that sell American jobs down the drain. It is time for a president who will lead not only America, but the whole world for a trade policy that is good for every human being!
''You've got to be tough,'' he said. ''We've got to get some leadership going here, not only here but across the world. I will be that leader. If you work anywhere in this world, you've got to make a living wage.''
It is a populist call that seems to resonate among the union members and older voters who typically nod and applaud as Mr. Gephardt works a room, shaking hands and cheerfully posing for photographs with his smiling supporters.
He talks about his ideas, such as increasing the minimum wage, subsidizing the training of teachers and to reduce American reliance on Middle Eastern oil by promoting renewable energy sources like wind power, ethanol and solar energy.
But Mr. Gephardt also emphasizes his personal experiences, discussing his humble origins and his religious values as a way to connect with voters on an emotional level.
He tells voters that his pledge to provide health insurance to all Americans was inspired by his son, Matt, who would have died from cancer as an infant had the family not had health insurance to cover the experimental treatments.
His promise to subsidize the college costs of those studying to become teachers was inspired by his daughter, Kate, whose first job as a teacher paid so little that she could not afford to pay her student loans. He and his wife, Jane, he says, are still paying those loans.
And he describes the struggles of his father, a milk-truck driver, and his mother, a secretary.
''I grew up poor,'' Mr. Gephardt says. ''Neither of my parents got through high school. My dad's best job was a Teamster truck driver; he lost it after 10 years and he never again made that much money.
''I am one of you,'' he tells his supporters. ''I've never forgotten where I came from.''
What he doesn't say is almost as notable as what he does. These days, Mr. Gephardt generally does not discuss his support for the war in Iraq, gambling that people care more about pocketbook issues and a campaign that he says has three goals: ''jobs, jobs and jobs.''
''Only the Democrats know how to make the economy work for everybody,'' says Mr. Gephardt, building to a standard laugh line. ''You know what I tell my Republican friends? If you want to live like a Republican, you better vote for the Democrats!''
This article is the third in a series looking at the basic campaign speeches of the presidential candidates.
The Stump Speech: Representative Richard A. Gephardt
