AARP, the influential lobby for older Americans, said Friday that it would seek changes in the new Medicare law to allow the government to negotiate lower drug prices for beneficiaries if private insurers are unable to win big discounts.
''We are beginning an all-out effort to lower the high cost of prescription drugs,'' said William D. Novelli, chief executive of AARP.
The law explicitly prohibits the government from interfering in negotiations between manufacturers and the private entities that will provide subsidized drug benefits to the elderly. Republicans and some Democrats insisted on that ban as a way to avoid any hint of federal price controls. They are counting on the private plans to negotiate discounts.
AARP, which has more than 35 million members age 50 or older, was instrumental in winning passage of the legislation, drafted mostly by Republicans. But Mr. Novelli said Friday that the law did not go far enough. Congress, he said, should authorize the secretary of health and human services to ''negotiate lower drug prices on behalf of Medicare beneficiaries in the event competitive purchasing doesn't work to lower prices.''
When AARP endorsed the bill last year, it infuriated many Congressional Democrats and some of its own members, who asserted that the legislation would privatize Medicare. At least 45,000 members resigned in anger, Mr. Novelli said.
Mr. Novelli said he had no regrets about the endorsement. But he added that while ''we had intended to keep after drug costs all along, the public clamor reinforces that.''
Representative Pete Stark of California, a Democratic spokesman on health policy, said leaders of AARP were busily making the rounds on Capitol Hill this week ''in an attempt to rehabilitate themselves as advocates for America's seniors.'' He urged his colleagues to reject such overtures. ''AARP -- what does it stand for?'' Mr. Stark said in a letter to House Democrats. ''Always Advocating for the Republican Party.''
Drug companies want to negotiate with private insurers, not with federal Medicare officials.
''When the government negotiates, it's not a real negotiation,'' said Ian D. Spatz, vice president for public policy at Merck &amp; Company. ''Federal officials make you an offer you can't refuse, because they have all the power. The whole design of this Medicare law is to have competing private-sector entities negotiate the discounts.''
Outlining its agenda for 2004, AARP said Congress should allow Americans to import cheaper prescription drugs from Canada. Mr. Novelli said Congress could impose ''strict controls, to ensure that consumers are ordering only from reputable Canadian pharmacies.'' The Bush administration has said it has no plans to allow such imports.
Mr. Novelli also said drug manufacturers and distributors should ''voluntarily limit price increases to no more than the rate of inflation'' for goods and services in general.
AARP said it would lobby Congress to enrich the Medicare drug benefit and to reduce the amount that beneficiaries must pay. It proposed these changes:
*The government should help fill the gap in drug coverage, sometimes called a ''doughnut hole.'' Under the standard benefit, Medicare will pay 75 percent of annual drug costs from $251 to $2,250, but coverage will then stop until the beneficiary has spent $3,600 out of pocket.
*The deductible and other costs to beneficiaries, which increase automatically with Medicare drug spending, should be linked instead to the Consumer Price Index, which typically rises at a much slower pace.
*The government should abolish the new law's limit on assets for low-income people seeking extra assistance with drug costs. This would help 1.5 million Medicare recipients.
AARP already offers a drug discount card, which, its executives said, members can use to obtain savings averaging 20 percent. Mr. Novelli said the group would seek a federal endorsement for its card under the new law, which provides for such discount cards until the Medicare drug benefit begins in 2006.
Under the law, Medicare drug plans can establish lists of preferred drugs, believed to offer the best value to patients. But Mr. Novelli said the plans should be required to tell beneficiaries, before they enroll, precisely which drugs are on the lists.
To inform such judgments, Mr. Novelli said, Congress should provide more money for research that systematically compares the effectiveness and cost of drugs prescribed for the same purpose, like lowering cholesterol or treating ulcers.
AARP also said the government should tighten regulation of drug advertising, so consumers can more easily understand the risks and benefits of products.
