Lebanese security officials in Beirut on Thursday seized a plane that had arrived from Baghdad carrying 19.5 billion in new Iraqi dinars, or about $12 million, said Lebanese journalists who spoke to the country's prosecutor general. The officials then detained three Lebanese businessmen for questioning on possible smuggling charges, the journalists said.
Separately, in the Shiite holy city of Karbala, a representative of Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani told worshipers at Friday Prayers that protests would be held if the American-led administration of Iraq refused to hold direct elections as part of its effort to turn over governance of the country to Iraqis by July 1.
One of the men detained in Lebanon, Muhammad Issam Abu Darwish, the scion of a prominent Shiite family from southern Lebanon, told investigators that the money had come from the American-led Coalition Provisional Authority in Baghdad and was intended to buy armored cars. Mr. Darwish went to Iraq after the fall of Saddam Hussein and opened a private security company, the journalists said the prosecutor's office had told them.
The old dinars with Mr. Hussein's likeness were fully phased out on Thursday and replaced with new notes with pictures of Iraqi landmarks. But the value of the dinar has risen considerably against the dollar over the last month, going from 1,600 dinars to the dollar to about 1,200 now, opening ripe opportunities for currency speculation.
Many Iraqis believe that the value of the dinar is rising in large part because of such speculation as well as smuggling, because both activities take money out of circulation. With the dollar weaker, those Iraqis who work for the state and whose salaries are pegged to the dollar have seen their earnings in dinars fall, while prices of goods in dinars have stayed the same.
The Coalition Provisional Authority did not return calls seeking comment on the issue.
In Baghdad, the deputy commander of the Army's First Armored Division, which has oversight for much of the city, told The Associated Press that there would be fewer patrols by American soldiers and fewer garrisons after his unit turned over security for the city to a new unit arriving over the next few months.
Attacks on Americans and Iraqis still shake Baghdad daily, however. A 15-year-old Iraqi boy who was watching American soldiers and Iraqi policemen trying to defuse a roadside bomb was killed by shrapnel when the device exploded. Five others were wounded, two seriously. The Iraqi police told Agence France-Presse that the bomb had been detonated with a remote-control device.
In Karbala, Sheik Abdel Mahdi al-Karbalai threatened to unleash a campaign against the Americans if they continue to resist direct elections. ''In the coming days and months, we're going to see protests and strikes and civil disobedience, and perhaps confrontations with the occupying force,'' he said. Protests have already spread through the Shiite south of Iraq, with 30,000 demonstrating in Basra on Thursday.
In Beirut, the prosecutor general, Adnan Adoum, who insisted on speaking only to local journalists, said that the flight carrying the new dinars had not been secret and that the money had not been hidden in the small twin-engine plane. But the shipment lacked proper documentation. Mr. Adoum has asked the Iraqi chargé d'affaires in Beirut to find out from the Coalition Provisional Authority if the money was in fact intended for purchasing armored cars.
The impounded plane was piloted by Mazen Bsat, a prominent Beirut businessman who owns a chain of pharmacies and a company that leases planes for charter flights. With him was Mr. Darwish and Richard Jreissati, who held the portfolio for foreign affairs of the Christian right-wing Lebanese Forces Militia during the country's civil war. Waiting to meet the plane was Michel Mkattaf, who owns a foreign exchange business and is married to the only daughter of a former Lebanese president, Amin Geymael.
Mr. Bsat, the pilot, was questioned and released Thursday evening. But the other three men remain in custody. Under Lebanese law, they can be held for up to four days for questioning, after which they must be charged with a crime or released.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: IRAQI MONEY
