Governor John G. Rowland won two important victories Friday in his efforts to head off a State Ethics commission ruling that he acted improperly in accepting gifts from contractors and state employes.
Thee Ethics Commission decided to suspend its own inquiry until after a federal criminal investigation is complete.
Alan Plofsky, executive director of the ethics commission, said he was asked by Nora Dannehy, the lead prosecutor on the federal investigation into the awarding of state contracts, to suspend the commission's inquiry, and the commission agreed.
Mr. Rowland, a Republican elected to a third term in 2002, also scored an important procedural victory Friday when the thics commission barred Mr. Plofsky both from commenting on the law regarding public officials receiving gifts and how that law applies to the governor. The commission also delayed a hearing on the matter.
In a decision that marked the first time a state ethics director was barred from publicly explaining the law, the commission announced that Mr. Plofsky, can respond only to inquiries about how the law applies to specific public officials, excluding the governor. And it barred him from responding to queries even in general terms.
The commissioners cited the sensitive nature of the inquiry in announcing the decision. The decision was a plus for Mr. Rowland, who has tapered off his apologies since his Dec. 12 admission that he received gifts and free improvements to his Litchfield cottage from people with state contracts. Faced with an impeachment inquiry, Mr. Rowland, said Monday he welcomed a fair and open process. Meanwhile Republican operatives are trawling public records for ethical lapses among state Democrats.
The commission also delayed a scheduled discussion of a legal opinion by Mr. Plofsky that said a public official cannot receive gifts of $100 or more from subordinates, political appointees, and constituents if the gift is offered because of the official's position. The opinion, written in general terms and distributed to the press Wednesday, was a response to a Dec. 18 request made by James A. Amman, a Democrat who is House majority leader, for clarification of state law as it applies to gift giving and public officials in the face of the Rowland admission.
Two of Mr. Rowland's lawyers, Ross H. Garber, his in-house counsel, and William F. Dow III, the criminal litigator he hired as his private lawyer, were present and submitted a brief to the commission urging it not to issue the opinion, for a host of reasons, including the argument that it would ''irreparably prejudice'' the governor's right to a fair hearing before the commission and the House proceedings.
On Friday, moments after the start of the 9:30 a.m. meeting, the commission members immediately announced their desire to table the discussion until their next meeting on Feb. 13. Two of the commissioners recused themselves, citing ties to the governor. John Woodcock, III, said he is being considered for an appointment to Superior Court, an appointment that would be made by Gov. Rowland and subject to legislative approval. Richard Vitarelli, said his law firm, Robinson and Cole, is representing Mr. Rowland in a class action suit. A third, Christopher Smith, disclosed that his law firm ''does substantial work for the state, but said that was not a conflict of interest. Mr. Smith is a lawyer at Shipman and Goodwin, a Hartford law firm hired to do substantial legal work on Adriaen's Landing, part of a $1 billion Hartford redevelopment project. Mr. Smith will be one of four commissioners hearing the legality of the state s ethics laws with regard to gift giving and public officials.
Friday marked the first time that anyone could recall that a commission director was barred from speaking generally on the topic of ethics laws. The commission chairwoman, Rosemary Giuliano, said she, not Mr. Plofsky, a 24-year veteran of the commission, would be making public comments but would not be discussing Mr. Rowland.
It was also the first time Mr. Rowland's lawyer, Mr. Dow, has spoken publicly about his client beyond ''no comment.'' Indeed, Mr. Dow vigorously chastised Mr. Plofsky for speaking to the press.
''It s a matter of public record that this staff and this commissioner have repeatedly made public comments prejudicial to my client, Mr. Rowland,'' he said. ''And if I'd done the same, I'd be before a judge right now paying a fine.
Mr. Plofsky said he had responded to one press inquiry in general terms, despite numerous requests for an opinion on the legality of Mr. Rowland having accepted gifts from people doing state work. He balked at Mr. Dow's suggestion that he refrain from discussing the law.
''This is a unique situation but it is a situation of the governor's own making, Mr. Plofsky said. ''First he lied and then he put out public facts. Are we not now to explain the law because someone might take it and apply it to the governor?''
