The preliminaries are finally over for Freddy Adu.
Adu, 14, was drafted No. 1 by D.C. United in the ninth Major League Soccer draft, held yesterday in Charlotte, N.C., a selection that was predetermined since he was assigned to the team last fall.
''I'm in awe of everything that has happened to me,'' said Adu, who moved to the United States from Ghana with his family in 1997 and is now a naturalized citizen. The family lives in suburban Potomac, Md., outside Washington.
''Hopefully, I can do something to help the team get back to its winning ways,'' he said. ''The first few years, D.C. was the team to beat. I still think that we have the talent and the team to win year-in, year-out.''
Adu signed last November with M.L.S., a 10-team league that negotiates and owns all player contracts. Adu's $500,000 salary will make him the league's highest-paid player.
Adu, 5 feet 8 and 140 pounds, had been pursued by some of the top clubs in Europe, but he decided to sign with M.L.S. because he could live at home and play top-level soccer. He would not have been able to play in a top league in the European Union because of rules on citizenship and age. He began playing with the United States' under-17 team last year at 13.
Adu and his D.C. United teammates will begin training soon under the team's new coach, Peter Nowak, in preparation for the season opener April 4.
With the 18th overall selection, the MetroStars, who were not scheduled to pick until the start of the third round, swapped picks with Chicago and selected Seth Stammler (6-3, 200), a defender from Gahanna, Ohio, and the University of Maryland. With the 21st pick, the MetroStars took goalkeeper Zach Wells (6-2, 187) from Costa Mesa, Calif., and U.C.L.A.
Wells will be the immediate backup to the starter Jonny Walker.
The MetroStars kept matters in the family and local with two other picks. In the fourth round, with the 36th pick, Coach Bob Bradley selected one of his sons, Michael (5-8, 155), a midfielder who has played for the under-17 national team. Bradley has been part of U.S. Soccer's residency program in Florida and will skip college, for now.
If the younger Bradley makes the team, it will be the league's first father-son combination. The elder Bradley then selected midfielder Johnny David (5-9, 165) from Hillside, N.J., and Fairleigh Dickinson.
Defender Chris Wingert, who won the Hermann Trophy last week, was not picked until early in the second round (No. 12 over all, Columbus Crew). Wingert, from Babylon, N.Y., played four seasons at St. John's and led the Red Storm to the final of the 2003 N.C.A.A. Division I tournament.
SOCCER
