He wanted a big international orchestra for his very own. It needed a change and needed it badly. After a two-year engagement, during which both parties disposed of old commitments, the hand-holding is over. When James Levine takes over the Boston Symphony next season, it will be time to find out whether personal longings will be mutual ones as well.
A few hours after Mr. Levine, the orchestra's new music director, and its management announced his plans for next season on Thursday afternoon, he offered what one might call a sampler program.
Mr. Levine said that the Boston appointment comes at the right time of his life. He is just past 60 and has more or less run the musical end of the Metropolitan Opera for more than 30 years. His health is both a mystery and a cause for concern. He walks gingerly and conducts sitting down. His musical energy, on the other hand, is as high as ever and his graphic if understated conducting style just as compelling. He talks as if he is planning on a long future.
He is famous and successful in Europe, while never quite inspiring there the near-awe that greets his New York performances. New York standards are very often higher than those elsewhere. It may be a question of some commodities traveling well and others not, just as it is hard, for example, to get a good bottle of French rosé on this side of the ocean. Mr. Levine may be only a shuttle flight away, but Boston will be another test of his exportability.
Schmoozing the press and rambling happily on subjects like divided string sections onstage and the virtues of opera in concert, Mr. Levine sounded like a conductor who had made a long-considered wish list of repertory and then gotten just about everything he wanted. Next season there will be ''Der Fliegende Holländer,'' Mahler's Eighth Symphony and the Berlioz ''Roméo et Juliette,'' among the big pieces, and such slender delicacies as an evening of Schubert for piano four hands with Evgeny Kissin, including the great F minor Fantasy.
Thursday evening at Symphony Hall brought Mozart's ''Paris'' Symphony, Elliott Carter being brief (the world premiere of ''Micomicón'') and expounding at length (''Partita''), and finally the Dvorak Symphony in G.
The Mozart plays to French impatience by omitting the traditional dance movement and doing away with some repeats. Mr. Levine's hurtling tempos helped things move even faster.
''Micomicón'' fits an elegant layering of very different moods, shapes and movements into a few minutes of music. ''Partita'' returns to the militant, almost military quality of Mr. Carter's music: rattling drums and percussion, shrieks and grunts from both ends of the orchestral range and constantly shifting meters.
The Dvorak was an act of love and a thing of beauty, demonstrating -- as Mr. Levine at his best seems to do -- that attention to detail can produce both the exquisite and the powerful.
Cynics of the music world like to say that orchestras tire of their music directors after five years no matter who they are. Mr. Levine, whose Met players still seem to adore him, has been an exception. He may have a hard time selling his vision to a new public, but he shares with the Boston Symphony a similar tradition: a mutual fineness of technique and sensibility that could make this marriage work.
He will be busy, conducting 12 subscription weeks and playing the piano in peripheral events, and he will be different. More hesitant orchestra patrons in Boston may squirm over Mr. Levine's predilection for tough-guy American avant-gardism. The likes of Mr. Carter and Milton Babbitt will be up front and in their faces; premieres by John Harbison and Charles Wuorinen occupy fully half of one concert in March. I count four programs that are all 20th century (although counting Schoenberg transcriptions of Bach may stretch the point).
More easily masticated repertory is often placed in the hands of guest conductors, yet almost every concert, whether Mozart- or Beethoven-heavy, has something of the last 100 years: or music that we call ''modern.''
The season is being sold with considerable cunning. The potentially daunting is juxtaposed with the kinds of pieces that no one could not love. Strengthening this strategy is Mr. Levine's versatility. At the Met, where he is the artistic director, he has shown the ability to hop from Wagner to Debussy to Mozart with remarkable grace.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
