The City Council, seeking to one-up the mayor's plan to offer $400 annual rebates to home owners, is instead considering permanently rolling back a small percentage of the city's property tax rate for all who pay property tax, including apartment building owners and businesses, senior council officials said yesterday.
While counter-offers from the Council are a normal part of the annual budget dance, it is quite out of character for the predominantly Democratic body to tell the Republican mayor that he is not doing enough for businesses and apartment building owners.
''They are trying to dance to the left and we are trying to counter him,'' said one council member about Mr. Bloomberg. ''As we are beginning to listen to business interests, we are hearing that this is bad for the economy because they continue to pay the real estate tax, which is passed on to tenants.''
The Council's maneuvers come as the Bloomberg administration announced yesterday a bit of good news-bad news for city property owners.
Real estate values in New York jumped 17 percent in the last year, according to the Department of Finance annual assessment roll, the biggest one-year increase in at least a decade. The average single-family home in New York is now worth $410,875, up $71,630, according to the city's full market value estimates. That means a buyer should be able to profit more when selling a home.
But that also means a higher tax bill, wiping out a chunk of whatever property-tax relief the mayor and City Council settle on.
The property tax is a critical source of revenue for the city. Property taxes paid by the owners of the city's 950,000 parcels are expected to produce $11.8 billion in the coming fiscal year, the single biggest contribution from city taxpayers toward the $45.7 billion city budget.
In November 2002, Mayor Bloomberg and the City Council backed an 18.5 percent increase in the property tax rate, worth about $1.8 billion a year, to help bridge a multibillion-dollar budget shortfall. This week, Mr. Bloomberg announced that with the improvement in the economy -- and rising property values -- he would like to give about $250 million worth of that increase back to owners of one-, two- and three-family homes, cooperative apartments and condominiums. In his budget report on Thursday, he said he would like to make the rebate, which will amount to $400, an annual occurrence.
City Council Speaker Gifford Miller hinted on Thursday that he thought the proposal did not do enough to help renters, who live in multifamily buildings that would not benefit from the annual rebate.
The council alternative -- which is one of several it is considering -- would roll back the overall property tax rate perhaps one to three percent, also benefiting owners of office buildings and apartment complexes.
The downside would be that by spreading the tax cut more widely, the city would not be able to give as large a rebate to homeowners. But the Council idea has at least one advantage: it would not require approval by legislators in Albany. State laws passed in the early 1980's also require that property tax changes on all classes move in tandem, which might not be the case under the mayor's plan.
Jordon Barowitz, a spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg, said that the mayor intended to defend his proposal. ''The mayor wants to help those who were hurt the most by the property tax increase,'' Mr. Barowitz said. ''Which means home co-op and condo owners, not power companies and corporations."
The mayor's rebate would also funnel tax relief disproportionately toward Queens, Staten Island and Brooklyn, where larger percentages of the population are homeowners. Those boroughs are also, polls show, where the voters who have expressed the most anger over the city's tax increase reside. Council staff members have only begun to fully analyze the mayor's budget, and it is already clear that there will be friction not only on tax policy, but on the spending side as well. Despite an assertion by Mayor Bloomberg that his spending plan for the fiscal year that starts July 1 includes no major program cuts, City Council staff members have already identified $385 million in cuts they say they will press the mayor to restore.
Many of these items are familiar targets for mayors. Mr. Bloomberg, like Rudolph W. Giuliani and other mayors before him, include these cuts as bargaining chips to provide leverage during budget negotiations. This year's list, according to the City Council, includes $10 million for summer jobs for youths, $36.1 million for parks, libraries and cultural programs, $11 million for programs for the elderly, $50 million for the school system, and $150 million to subsidize the city's privately operated bus lines, which Mr. Bloomberg wants the Metropolitan Transportation Authority to take over.
For Mr. Miller, who is contemplating a run for mayor next year, the ideal political solution would be somehow figuring out a way to restore those cuts, bring some property tax relief to homeowners and offer a property tax cut to small-property owners and owners of rental apartment buildings, who could be important to his bid for higher office. Already, the Council's idea was being praised by an organization representing some of the biggest residential property owners.
''If the concept is that those who shared the pain and had their property taxes increased should get them lowered,'' said Joe Strasburg, president of the Rent Stabilization Association, a group of apartment-building owners, ''then to selectively give back to a portion of the population is unfair. A rollback should go for all classes.''
A preliminary report on market valuation, which is released each year at this time, shows that the average Class 1 property -- one, two and three-family homes -- rose in value by 22 percent. The value of office buildings, hotels and other commercial properties went up by 7.3 percent, and rental buildings and most cooperatives and condominiums went up by 21 percent.
A state law caps property tax increases in New York City, effectively keeping the increase for Class 1 properties to just 4 percent, even as their full market value is increasing in double digits. That means taxes on Class 1 properties would rise by an average of $93, if the tax rates remain the same.
The higher property values would thus offset about a quarter of the $400 rebate check Mr. Bloomberg wants to send to homeowners. And if the Council pushes through a tax cut for all city properties, the average homeowner's check would be lower, adding up to a net gain worth little more than a dinner for two at a top New York City restaurant.
