The chants for Lenny Wilkens and the ovations for Stephon Marbury that filled Madison Square Garden last night came as little surprise, with New York embracing hometown heroes in a one-sided Knicks victory. And the crowd was ready to stand one more time when Marbury floated into the lane midway through the third quarter, elevating for a jump shot that drew the hands and eyes of the Seattle defenders.
But one set of eyes did not assume he would take the shot. Keith Van Horn slipped behind the defense, accustomed to what Marbury could do. Marbury whipped a pass to him, and Van Horn rose even higher than his teammate, dropping in a reverse dunk and drawing a foul. The ovation grew loudest of all for Van Horn.
The crowd's embrace of Van Horn, who responded with raised arms after 3-pointers and emphatic twists on the rim after his dunks, was well deserved. A sometimes embattled forward, Van Horn tossed in a season-high 30 points in just 28 minutes in the 108-88 victory.
''It's fun when the team is all playing well, playing great defense and you're getting out and running,'' Van Horn said. ''When you're playing like you're capable of, that's when basketball is most fun. I thought we did that tonight. We're going to have to continue because that's when the game is fun.''
The enjoyment surfaced mostly from the play of Marbury and Van Horn, who showed far more chemistry than they ever did during their time in with the Nets, a point Van Horn wanted to avoid.
''I don't like to talk about him and I developing chemistry,'' Van Horn said. ''It's the team. That was a big problem when we were playing in New Jersey. Everybody made it out to be Stephon and I, but it's not Stephon and I. It's Stephon and the rest of the New York Knicks and we as a team developing chemistry. That's what it's all about.''
While Van Horn saw a more polished passer than he knew during their struggles with the Nets, Marbury saw a different target.
''He's way more aggressive,'' Marbury said after assisting on 6 of Van Horn's 10 field goals. ''He attacks. He's always in attack mode. That just comes with maturity, also, just knowing the game, having a better feel for the game. He even said to me: 'Yeah, you got better. You see the pass quicker, like a second faster from before.' ''
Van Horn, who spent much of the second half on the bench with Marbury, echoed that.
''You know you always have to be ready,'' he said. ''You have to get in your spots. You have to run. You have to feed off of him. I keep my eye on Stephon the whole time he has the ball, find out where he goes. I'm just trying to move into an available location. He draws a lot of people to him; when my guy goes to him, I've got to find the open spot.''
PRO BASKETBALL
