After two days of intense negotiations, the lawyers for the estate of the Beatle George Harrison settled the estate's high-profile suit against a Staten Island oncologist yesterday with an agreement that the autographed electric guitar at the center of the case be ''disposed of.''
The suit drew worldwide attention with its assertion that the doctor, Gilbert Lederman, coerced a dying Mr. Harrison to autograph a guitar the doctor had his 12-year-old son play for Mr. Harrison. It also sought damages, claiming that interviews the doctor gave to reporters about Mr. Harrison around the time of his death from cancer in 2001 breached his duty of confidentiality to his patient.
''The guitar and any autographs will be disposed of privately,'' said a joint statement from the estate, the doctor and Staten Island University Hospital, where Dr. Lederman specializes in stereotactic radiosurgery cancer treatment and where Mr. Harrison had been treated before his death. The settlement left vague how the items would be disposed of.
''The Harrison estate will provide Dr. Lederman's son, Ariel, with a replacement guitar,'' the statement continued. ''The Harrison estate never contended that Ariel did anything wrong and appreciates that Ariel is an admirer of George Harrison.''
The judge in the case, Nicholas G. Garaufis of Federal District Court in Brooklyn, who had spurred the settlement talks during two days of frenzied legal diplomacy in the courthouse, read the terse settlement statement in a mostly empty courtroom at 4:30 yesterday afternoon.
The agreement barred anyone involved in the case from making public comments about a dispute that had drawn vast public interest. The lawyers brushed by reporters in the courthouse at the end of the day without answering questions.
But it was clear from the sketchy terms that the negotiations had been difficult because they involved volatile personal stakes, with Mr. Harrison's family trying to shield his memory from what they saw as exploitation and the doctor fighting not only to preserve his reputation but also to protect his son from an ugly battle. The doctor's son and two daughters, who the estate said had also received Mr. Harrison's autographs, were also named in the suit.
In the agreement, the estate acknowledged that the medical care provided by the doctor and the hospital ''was not an issue in this case.'' It also specified that the agreement settled all claims, indicating that the estate had surrendered its demands for damages for the asserted breach of confidentiality. No payments were called for.
In exchange, the estate received an assurance that the guitar and any other autographs Mr. Harrison had given the Lederman family would be taken out of circulation. Though the settlement did not specify how the items would be disposed of, it has been clear that the lawyers for the Harrison family wanted the guitar destroyed. After the suit was filed last week, Dr. Lederman offered to donate the guitar to charity, but the offer was rejected by a lawyer for the estate, Paul V. LiCalsi, who said the Harrison family did not want the guitar sold, traded or displayed by anyone.
The settlement was a success for the judge, who had called the lawyers for both sides together on Thursday, barely a week after the case was assigned to him, saying a quick settlement would benefit the parties and the court by clearing away a bruising lawsuit that might have taken years to resolve.
In brief comments from the bench yesterday, Judge Garaufis said the settlement ''preserves the dignity and protects the privacy of all concerned.''
The judge, who is 55, also gave a brief nod to the unusual subject of the suit in a court that is more likely to be immersed in Mafia trials than battles over the artifacts of the Beatles. ''George Harrison's music,'' he said, ''spoke to the heart and soul of my generation.''
