The Milwaukee Brewers, who have struggled to field a winning baseball team for more than a decade and who have had recent financial troubles, announced yesterday that the team was for sale.
The family of Commissioner Bud Selig has owned the Brewers since 1970, when the team moved from Seattle. Selig put his 30 percent interest in the team in a blind trust when he was named commissioner in 1998, after holding the job for six years on an interim basis, but the Brewers have still been considered his team. His daughter, Wendy Selig-Prieb, is the company chairwoman.
The Brewers have been criticized in recent months by politicians and taxpayers who have charged that the team abandoned its promise to spend more money and improve the club if the state of Wisconsin built the Brewers a new stadium. Miller Park, which was mostly financed with public money and loans, was built at a cost of about $400 million and opened in 2001. The Brewers have lowered their payroll every season since the retractable-roof stadium opened.
Selig, who did not return a telephone message yesterday, said in a statement that ''it is time for me to sever my ties with the Milwaukee Brewers.'' Selig added that it was the correct decision for him and his family and was ''in the best interests of the game.''
A sale would eliminate Selig's awkward position of being the commissioner and being so closely identified with one of Major League Baseball's 30 teams. Selig's critics have said that, with his connection to the Brewers, it is difficult for him to represent all interests in baseball.
Selig-Prieb said her father had been fastidious in removing himself from the day-to-day operations of the Brewers since 1998. But she acknowledged that he sometimes had to deal with the perception that he was still influencing what the Brewers did even as the commissioner.
''From time to time, that perception and those issues did come up,'' she said in a telephone interview. ''To not have that distraction which, at times, did occur, is a good thing for him.'' She added, ''I think it certainly does remove a major issue.''
Selig-Prieb announced the search for a buyer at a news conference yesterday at Miller Park and said the team would not leave Milwaukee because its 30-year lease was ironclad.
Forbes Magazine estimated the Brewers' value at $206 million last year, down from $238 million in 2002. Selig-Prieb would not comment on the valuation. She said that the ownership group had not discussed an asking price and that Allen &amp; Company, an investment firm in New York handling the sale, was just beginning to determine the Brewers' worth.
The announcement caps a chaotic period for the Brewers, who finished with a 68-94 record in 2003 for their 11th straight losing season. The Brewers also had myriad problems off the field: they acknowledged an operating debt of $110 million and blamed some of it on an attendance decrease. Attendance was 2.8 million in 2001, the first season at Miller Park, and 1.7 million last year.
In November the team also pushed out its president, Ulice Payne, the first African-American to be the chief executive of a major league team, because he expressed public concern about the Brewers' plan to reduce the payroll by 25 percent. Payne had almost four years left on a five-year contract.
Selig was lionized when he purchased the Seattle Pilots and restored baseball to Milwaukee by moving the team there in 1970. Five years earlier, the Braves left Milwaukee for Atlanta.
Since then, Selig has watched his team rise to play in the World Series in 1982 behind players like the Hall of Famers Paul Molitor and Robin Yount, then sputter.
Once the Brewers are sold, George Steinbrenner, the principal owner of the Yankees since 1973, will replace the Selig family as the baseball owner with the longest tenure.
Although the Brewers have received a boost in revenue-sharing income -- Major League Baseball said they had an operating profit of $16.1 million in 2001 -- the team has said that a reduction in attendance and an increase in debt has caused it to lower its player payroll.
The Brewers' payroll has shrunk to $40.6 million from $52.7 million in 2002. It is projected to be $30 million in 2004. The Brewers traded first baseman Richie Sexson, their best player, last month because he will earn $12 million this season.
The Brewers, who have not made the playoffs since 1982, will have one of the lowest payrolls in baseball this season and are not expected to be much better than they were in 2003.
BASEBALL
