Howard Dean and Richard A. Gephardt on Friday withdrew harsh television advertisements attacking each other, switching instead to sharp but indirect new assaults accusing their Iowa caucus rival John Kerry of failing to support some federal subsidies for agriculture, Iowa's vital economic engine.
The shift came as the Democratic contenders headed into the final weekend of campaigning before Iowa's first-in-the-nation caucuses on Monday. The caucuses are the first big test of whether Dr. Dean, who has dominated his rivals for months, can transform his formidable Internet-fueled campaign operation into electoral success.
Even as he and Dr. Dean declared a truce, Mr. Gephardt's campaign disclosed that it had sent mailings criticizing Mr. Kerry, a senator from Massachusetts, for voting against a measure to require use of ethanol fuel, made from corn, in 1994.
And Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, campaigning with Dr. Dean, went after Mr. Kerry, without naming him, for proposing in 1996 to eliminate or greatly reduce the size of the Agriculture Department as a means of reducing bureaucratic waste. Dean aides later sought out reporters to make sure they knew that Mr. Harkin was referring to Mr. Kerry, whom they also faulted for voting with Republicans in favor of an amendment to the 1996 farm bill that would have phased out federal farm supports over seven years.
The major candidates' public messages on the stump, by contrast, were upbeat and optimistic, adhering to an Iowa tradition that rewards candidates who take the high road.
But in a contest that has long been as much about expectations as about actual results, the attacks on Mr. Kerry by the Dean and Gephardt campaigns were the surest sign yet that both now felt threatened by Mr. Kerry.
''There's no doubt about it, that they're trying to slow our momentum,'' said Mr. Kerry's spokeswoman, Stephanie Cutter. She said that ''John Kerry was trying to eliminate waste, fraud and abuse at the Agriculture Department.''
She said that Mr. Kerry had opposed requiring ethanol use in 1994, ''when there wasn't enough ethanol produced to use,'' and that Mr. Kerry ultimately voted with most Democrats against the 1996 ''Freedom to Farm'' bill, which phased out subsidies.
The fourth major candidate in the race, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, who has waged a doggedly upbeat underdog campaign here, took credit for the decision by Mr. Gephardt and Dr. Dean to pull their negative advertisements, and called on them to halt the mailing of fliers Mr. Edwards has deemed negative as well.
''I have good news,'' Mr. Edwards said at the beginning of a speech in Council Bluffs. ''You and I, we already are changing America.''
Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, spent a second consecutive day campaigning in a soft crew-neck sweater, instead of his usual suit and tie, leading an unwieldy caravan of 13 vehicles, 55 reporters, a portable wireless Internet hub, assorted staff, political celebrities and enough food to feed them across 631 miles since Thursday.
At two morning events, he skipped much of his normal stump speech, spending just 10 or 15 minutes on his most direct appeal yet for support in Monday's caucuses, and taking no questions from voters.
''I'm not going to stand up for you if we don't all stand up for each other,'' he told about 150 students and teachers at William Penn University in Oskaloosa, many of them undecided. Speaking softly, he said, ''There's a lot of different candidates you can vote for in order to change presidents. There's only one you can vote for in order to change Washington, and change America.
In a chat with reporters, Dr. Dean said he not taken questions only because of his tight schedule. He said he had decided to avoid attacking his opponents at least through Monday and that he believes the Iowa race is deadlocked.
''We're going to just go with a positive message to get to the polls,'' he said. ''And I think that's what people want at the end and that's what we're going to do.''
Mr. Gephardt, a representative from Missouri, dashing across five cities in northern and central Iowa, sounded a similar note. ''We're in the stretch run,'' he told a small crowd of volunteers in Fort Dodge. ''This is when it all really counts. Now is the time to work harder than we've ever worked.''
After Dr. Dean withdrew a television advertisement that branded Mr. Gephardt, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards as ''Washington Democrats'' who voted for the Congressional resolution authorizing President Bush to use force in Iraq, Mr. Gephardt followed suit. He pulled an advertisement, which had started running Thursday, sharply attacking Dr. Dean's decade-old criticisms of the Medicare program. ''Now that they've taken theirs down, we've taken ours down,'' Mr. Gephardt said.
For his part, Mr. Kerry, who has struggled for months as Dr. Dean and retired General Wesley K. Clark ran strongly against him here and in New Hampshire, was suddenly behaving like a man with the wind at his back.
Polls of caucusgoers here are notoriously unreliable, both because of difficulties in predicting who will show up, and how they might behave in caucuses where they are encouraged to change their minds.
But all week, public and private surveys have shown Mr. Kerry moving up, and he has drawn overflow crowds and sympathetic audiences of undecided voters as he spends 20 hours a day crisscrossing the state from the Mississippi to the Missouri.
''It's focus time,'' Mr. Kerry said as his bus zoomed across northeastern Iowa, and he displayed a lucky four-leaf clover that a farmer had given him on Thursday. ''I'm not second-thinking anything. I'm not evaluating or analyzing. I'm just going to keep talking about what's important to people here.''
Like their stump speeches, most of the candidates' television advertisements, running one into another now on local stations, are relentlessly sunny, with Mr. Gephardt quoting the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and Mr. Edwards promising ''a new, positive, uplifting vision for America.''
Mr. Kerry's latest advertisement here has the governor's wife, Christie Vilsack, saying she is supporting him because ''he'll fight for us.''
The last-minute tumult in Iowa left at least one Democratic campaign happy: that of General Clark, who is not competing in Iowa but spent the day in New Hampshire.
A tight race or close finishes in Iowa would make it less likely that any one candidate would come roaring into New Hampshire.'' From our perspective, if it comes out jumbled, great,'' said Chris Lehane, a senior communications strategist for the Clark campaign.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEMOCRATS
