Beginning around midnight and lasting for a few fleeting hours, the official temperature of Manhattan dropped to 1 degree. By 4 in the morning, the temperature had doubled -- to 2 -- but that brief 1-degree period granted curious distinction to the day: it tied the record for the coldest Jan. 16 in city history, a mark established in 1893.
In one sense, this seems the slimmest of connections between days separated by 111 years. In another sense, though, there was odd comfort in knowing that this very cold was felt on this very day in this very city, at a time when a Tammany Hall lackey named Gilroy was mayor, and the economic calamity known as the Panic of 1893 was but months away.
This fleeting bond between two eras that bracket the 20th century was explored during a rough circumnavigation of the island of Manhattan in the morning hours when the temperature clung to 1. True, the experience was more often seen than felt, through the salt-encrusted windshield of a black sedan. But that sedan sometimes rocked to the rhythms of gusts, just one of the many ways that nature reiterated its timeless point: that even a great metropolis must give deference.
By 12:30 a.m., ice-sharp winds from the Northwest were dodging the edifices of Midtown to send streetlights swaying like buffeted piñatas, as if to suggest how easily nature can toy with us. It was as good a hint as any to stay indoors, and yet here came a deliveryman on a bicycle, wobbling down Lexington Avenue while on his handlebars he balanced a box containing someone else's pizza.
The gothic building that once housed the Bellevue Psychiatric Hospital loomed over the intersection of First Avenue and 30th Street; though ancient in appearance, it had yet to be built in 1893. A city shelter now, it was providing beds at this moment to several hundred men, a chilling thought made all the colder by the knowledge that behind the building were refrigerated trucks with the unidentified and unclaimed remains of World Trade Center dead.
On First Avenue near 56th Street, a steam pipe jutted like the Cat in the Hat's hat from the middle of the mostly deserted street; white plumes poured out, as though the only heat to be found at this hour was emanating from the earth's molten core.
It was not a night to strike up casual conversation with the few spirits darting in and out of the elements. A worker at a Department of Sanitation depot on the Upper East Side gave little more than a grunt as he shoveled rock salt onto a glazed sidewalk. A deliveryman for Poland Spring quickly shared that some of the water in his truck's hold was indeed frozen solid, and then he rolled up his window as fast as he could.
Occasionally, these breath puffs of human interaction reflected an unshakable trust in the urban machinery. Just north of a Harlem park named after Marcus Garvey, who turned 6 in 1893, a man stood rock-still in a bus shelter whose transparent shields shivered in the wind. ''It's coming,'' he said of his bus. ''I see it coming.''
Exchanges like these were few, though, because it takes two to talk. Other than the dodges of taxicabs and the crawl of the occasional police car, the only movement came from the knotted, garbage-filled bags that scuttled across streets to the whims of the winds that had liberated them.
Along a deserted northern stretch of Riverside Drive, where the roadway rises to meet the western hillocks of Manhattan, the winds whistled across the Hudson River to rattle the chains that hung Marley-like from a West Side Highway billboard, and to cause an unsettling banging sound -- rope against flagpole? -- at ghostly Grant's Tomb. The tomb was under construction in 1893.
''It's 1 degree and clear in Midtown,'' a radio news broadcaster said, delivering an assessment that was truer than he might have realized. At 2:30, the gaudy video graffiti that moves across the buildings of Times Square -- the network plugs, the zipper news, the chewing gum come-ons -- played to an audience of none.
The black sedan grumbled south, past the ice-coated plastic flaps of greengrocers; past a single, underdressed woman hugging herself on a corner in the meatpacking district (what was she waiting for?); past ground zero, set aglow like New York's eternal flame.
At 3 in the morning, with the temperature at 1 and the wind-chill factor making it feel like minus 20, the bottom of this crowded, swarming island was as desolate as the surface of Mars. Two visitors violated the stillness by trying to walk to the Hudson River at Battery Park, but were given the bum's rush by the muscular wind. It pushed them back to that black car like a bouncer who would not take no for an answer.
The wind was not as forbidding near the ferry terminal, at Manhattan's southern tip. But the water was: a murky gray, it chopped about the harbor, taunting anyone who might wonder how it calls some to its icy embrace, and not others.
Above New York Harbor hung a crescent moon that dangled like the smile of the vanishing Cheshire cat. It was 3:30 and 1 degree out. Time for anyone still out there to come in from the cold.
About New York
