Skin-blistering cold and biting winds continued to curse the Northeast and Midwest on Friday, contributing to at least seven deaths from Michigan to New York, including a hiker who died of hypothermia in New Hampshire and a woman found dead in the snow on Long Island.
Schools closed, including hundreds of districts and private schools in Massachusetts, where some children had suffered frostbite symptoms and the authorities feared that more would be stricken walking to school or waiting for the bus.
Temperature records were broken in several spots, including Boston, Providence, R.I., and Burlington, Vt., surprising even those who typically shrug off the chill of a New England winter. On Mount Washington in New Hampshire, temperatures reached 45 degrees below zero, breaking the record of 42 below zero set in 1994. The wind chill brought by winds of up to 103 miles an hour made it feel like minus 87 degrees, the National Weather Service reported.
Gov. Jim Douglas of Vermont warned of the possibility of rolling blackouts if people did not conserve the energy use to heat their homes. And ISO New England, which supplies power from Maine to Connecticut, asked customers to conserve electricity through Friday night.
The National Weather Service issued an urgent weather warning for New York, Massachusetts and Vermont, telling people that they should stay indoors if possible, and when outside, dress in layers and cover all exposed skin.
''The wind-chill factor is at times minus 30 to minus 40 below,'' said Charles Foley, a meteorologist for the National Weather Service in Southern New England. ''In that kind of cold, you can get frostbite in 10 minutes.''
In New Hampshire's White Mountain National Forest, a hiker and part-time park ranger, Kenneth Holmes, 37, of Athol, Mass., was found dead of hypothermia, said Samuel Sprague, a conservation officer with the New Hampshire Fish and Game Department.
Mr. Holmes, equipped with a tent and stove, had been hiking since Monday, and called a friend by cellphone Tuesday to say he would come home the next day, according to the Fish and Game Department and a friend, Bonnie Beauchemin. His body was found at an elevation of about 4,000 feet, and Mr. Sprague said he showed signs of hypothermia, including ''paradoxical undressing,'' a behavior that occurs after a person gets so cold that ''the body sort of dumps its last remaining heat, making the person feel warmer.''
Ms. Beauchemin said Mr. Holmes had frequently rescued stranded hikers from the mountains. ''I don't think he knew that it was going to get that cold, because if he did, I don't think he would have stayed,'' she said.
On Long Island, Philomena Fitzsimons, 54, of Bayville, was found in the snow, having apparently fallen while walking home after her car struck a parked car in her neighborhood, Nassau County Police said.
In Michigan, where 10 inches of snow north of Detroit made roads dangerous, one person died in a car accident. Four died clearing snow.
In Massachusetts, some 350 districts and private schools were closed, including Worcester's, where it was minus 12 degrees, tying the record for the day, set in 1994.
Worcester's superintendent, James Caradonio, said the district's 26,000 students either walk to school or take the bus, and weather forecasters were saying that frostbite could occur in 10 minutes. ''There's a very slim margin of error,'' he said. ''If you don't do it right, you're frostbitten.''
He said a student from Mexico got frostbite on his ears on Wednesday. ''We have kids from different countries and they think they're dressing warm but it's not warm enough,'' he said. ''I speak fluent Spanish and I don't know how to say frostbite in Spanish.''
One of the few districts that stayed open was Wayland, an affluent suburb west of Boston, where the superintendent, Gary A. Burton, said the district had not closed for weather in about five years.
''We have a longstanding tradition of remaining open even during periods of inclement weather,'' he said. ''It is New England, it is going to snow, it is going to get cold. While we are concerned about the safety of children, we also expect parents to know how to dress children so that they can go out in the cold. Most of our children have clothes that you could walk on the surface of the moon with nuclear-heated and solar-powered and battery-operated.''
But elsewhere, even people who make a living from cold weather were closing shop. With the wind-chill factor reaching 50 below, John Neal, the general manager of the Bear Creek Mountain Club in Plymouth, Vt., closed his ski operation Friday, the first time he had shut for an entire day.
''It's not safe,'' Mr. Neal said. ''The biggest issue we run into is having a failure on a lift, and if you had to e-vac people in 50 below weather, it would be brutal.''
Homeless shelters overflowed. At the Pine Street Inn in Boston, the largest homeless shelter in New England, the 700 beds were full Thursday night and 86 people slept on mats on the floor, said a spokeswoman, Shepley Metcalf. She said six homeless people were treated for hypothermia and frostbite.
Bostonians were swathed in scarfs and ski masks, but Marielle Ohanesian, 26, of Watertown, Mass., picked Friday to take the bus and subway into Boston for the first time in three years and forgot a hat.
''When I first started walking to the bus stop, it wasn't that bad,'' she said. ''But then my legs went totally numb and my head started pounding.'' And, she added, ''my nostrils stuck together.''
Jessica Benjamin, 26, stood in the Park Street T station wearing two scarves, leggings, pants, two shirts, one sweater, three pairs of socks and two pairs of mittens, and questioning the wisdom of living in New England.
Her best friend is on vacation in Key West, Fla., and did not invite her along. Now, Ms. Benjamin said, ''I'm reconsidering the friendship.''
