One might expect the Israeli cowboys of the Golan Heights to be a bit neurotic.
There are the wolves to worry about, and the cattle thieves. There are the Israeli tanks that sometimes knock down their barbed-wire fences, and the land mines that have been known to make hamburger of their cows.
And then there is the chance, now in the wind once again, of an eventual peace with Syria. That might cause Israel to return the Golan Heights, which it captured in the Arab-Israeli war of 1967.
Yet, as he checked on his herd after the gray dawn on Wednesday, Omer Viner was worrying about none of this when he stopped his pickup truck and peered intently through the rain at a rock-strewn field.
''I thought it was a mushroom,'' he said, turning back to the wheel, disappointed. ''I like mushrooms very much.''
For those at home on this range, life moves at a very different pace than it does for the rest of Israel, which can seem a vexed, jostling place.
The Golan has some hard-edged ideologues. But it also has gentler nature lovers and philosophical cowboys like Mr. Viner, who revere the open spaces (excepting the minefields), the tranquillity (once, as the cows do, you learn to block out the practicing tanks' constant shelling) and the wild irises that bloom in the ruins of Syrian military bases and villages.
It may be a little weird here, but it is stunning and undeniably peaceful -- free of suicide bombings or any other terrorism, and not attacked by Syria in 30 years. ''In the hardest times in Israel, here, quiet like in Suisse,'' said Mr. Viner, 58, in his self-taught, expressive English.
Through the wintry fog, near a tank pointing its muzzle toward the nearby Syrian border, came a rumble of hooves on turf, a clicking of hooves on stone, growing louder until half a dozen horses galloped past in shadowy outline and then vanished. They were the kibbutz horses, riderless, enjoying their expansive pasture on the shoulder of Mount Bental.
These days, Israel has experienced cowboys who know the cattle, the horses and the Golan, men like Yankale Carlebach, 44, who came to try ranching for six months some 20 years ago. A religious cowboy, unlike Mr. Viner, he wears a knitted skullcap as he minds the herds.
But in the beginning, the new Israeli cowboys did not know the trade or terrain, said Mr. Viner, who arrived in 1967 and helped found this kibbutz.
''My first day as a cowboy, they sent me to the field,'' said Mr. Viner, a big man with a weathered face and a deep, frequent laugh. ''No horse, of course. I had a dog. 'Go to watch the cows.' ''
He watched the cows wander through a gap in a fence into what to him, a former army officer, looked suspiciously like a minefield. But he was young, he said, so he went in after them, turned them around and started them back. He walked on, distracted by what looked like an ancient stone tool on the ground.
''I heard from behind a 'boom!' '' he said. ''And I saw a cow fly in parts -- steaks -- in the air, and I saw the cows running. Fourteen cows were killed. It was antitank mines.''
The rest of the herd scattered, and the kibbutz lost at least 300 cows. Their descendants still run wild on the Golan Heights. Those were small, sinewy Syrian cows, fleet of foot -- ''like airplanes,'' Mr. Viner said -- and hard to manage.
It was galling to the still clumsy cowboys to spend hours herding some obstreperous cattle into a corral, then to return the next morning to find them gone. Tracks would show that perhaps two Syrians had come on foot in the night to, as Mr. Viner put it, ''steal the cows back'' and that they had driven them, with evident ease, for miles across the border.
The cowboys eventually replaced the Syrian cattle with bulkier European stock. That was a mistake, Mr. Viner now believes, because the Syrian cows were more resistant to the tick-borne diseases of the Golan.
The Israeli cowboys also, eventually, learned to ride. Mr. Viner said he could now sleep on the back of a horse.
Although some Golan Heights cowboys were inspired by American westerns, they did not develop all the American habits. Mr. Viner remembers the shock of an American sheepherder when, on a trip to Colorado, the Israeli cowboy asked for sugar in his coffee. ''We don't drink beer,'' he explained over a rare glass of Golan Heights merlot in the kibbutz restaurant. ''I don't slaughter the cows. I don't like whiskey. It's another kind of cowboy. Now I have a hat, but I don't like to use it.''
Mr. Viner sells his cows for slaughter, but he cannot bear to do that work himself. ''I have some dissonance,'' he admitted.
Over time, the soldiers and cowboys worked out how to share the open plains here, at some 3,000 feet, lorded over by snow-capped Mount Hermon. A few years ago Mr. Carlebach lost five cows and a bull to an Israeli tank shell, but such instances are now very rare.
Once hunted by the Syrians, gray wolves returned in force to the Golan in the early 90's. Consulting American experts, Mr. Viner hit upon the solution of using powerful Akbash dogs to guard the cattle, protecting both the cows and the wolves, who might otherwise have been shot.
Twice in the last 10 years, in 1995 and 2000, the Golan settlers seemed to risk eviction through peace with Syria. But both initiatives collapsed. The Israeli wineries kept expanding and improving their quality, and the settlements continued to grow.
Now there are signs everywhere promoting new construction, even as Israel and Syria are again making noises -- some positive, some contemptuous -- about maybe negotiating anew. About 17,000 Israelis are living here, in 33 settlements.
Like most Golan residents, Mr. Viner, who raised five children here with his wife, a school principal, insists he is no ''settler.'' He says he is nothing like Israelis in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, who he argues set their own judgment above the state's.
''Look, I'm not afraid of making peace,'' he said, noting that he had never been afraid to fight, either. If he has to leave the Golan, he continued, that will be his problem, not Israel's.
''I don't think that somebody has to take care of me,'' he said. ''Israel and peace is more important. But it has to happen -- if it happens -- for real peace with our neighbors. Not a bit less than this.''
