The New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, filed a lawsuit Friday on behalf of an aggrieved bank customer in a direct challenge to the Bush administration's position that federally chartered banks cannot be touched under state consumer protection laws.
Mr. Spitzer said he hoped that the lawsuit would test banking regulations published last week, rules that have been criticized by many of the attorneys general in the country as well as many Democratic members of Congress and consumer groups.
Mr. Spitzer, who has differed with the federal government over whether he has the jurisdiction to go after Wall Street abuses and polluters in other states, said he saw the new banking regulations as part of a larger pattern intended to relieve pressure on business.
''This is a continuation on the part of the Bush administration to pre-empt state enforcement in areas that are critical to ensuring civil rights and consumer rights,'' he said. ''Things from predatory lending to spam to the quality of the air are implicated.''
The new regulations were issued on Jan. 7 by the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency in the Treasury Department, which oversees national banks. In essence, the regulations sum up what several courts have held over the years: only the federal government has the authority to regulate national banks, and federal banking laws override state statutes.
That means states cannot enforce their consumer protection laws against national banks or their subsidiaries, among them the Bank of America Corporation, Wells Fargo &amp; Company, Wachovia, Bank One and Citicorp.
Robert M. Garsson, a spokesman for the comptroller of the currency, said the rules, which take effect in 30 days, mirror what courts have ruled going back to the creation of the national bank system under President Lincoln. ''It's not something someone just dreamed up yesterday,'' he said. ''The states don't have the power to curtail federally authorized activity.''
The major banks supported the regulatory changes, mostly because dealing with a patchwork of banking laws across the country makes it harder for them to do business. Edward Yingling, the executive vice president of the American Bankers Association, predicted Mr. Spitzer would lose if the case ever came before a federal court. ''He's flying in the face of 130 years of court decisions, including numerous Supreme Court decisions,'' he said.
In a letter opposing the regulations, the attorneys general, however, said the states have historically shared jurisdiction with the federal regulators over national banks when it comes to consumer protection laws and have enforced those laws without objections from the Treasury Department.
Diana L. Taylor, New York's superintendent of banks, has also been critical of the federal comptroller, John D. Hawke Jr., for pushing through the regulations. Mr. Hawke has shielded every nationally chartered bank from any obligations to follow state lending laws, she has said.
The issue has come to the fore in recent years as more states have adopted laws to stop so-called predatory lending practices, like hidden fees, excessive interest rates and high-cost credit insurance. At the same time, federal courts have recently overturned attempts by San Francisco and Santa Monica, Calif., to limit fees at automated teller machines and a California law that requires greater disclosures of credit card issuers.
The test case that Mr. Spitzer brought comes from a 1974 mortgage issued by Mechanics Exchange Savings Bank to Robert H. Hall of East Greenbush, N.Y., near Albany. The $27,000 home loan was to be paid off over 25 years, and Mr. Hall arranged for an automated payment each month of $201.
According to the complaint, the loan was sold several times and ended up at First Horizon Home Loan Corporation in Irving, Tex., a subsidiary of a national bank, First Tennessee. Mr. Hall forgot the terms of the loan, and the bank continued to collect the payments long after his paperwork shows the loan to have been paid, collecting an extra $9,461 before Mr. Hall objected.
Then the bank said that the original lender had made a mistake and that Mr. Hall should have been paying $16 more a month. The bank then unilaterally extended the mortgage an extra 11 years. Mr. Hall refused to pay. The bank threatened to foreclose on the property, according to the complaint.
Hours after Mr. Spitzer filed his suit in State Supreme Court in Albany accusing First Horizon of deceptive business practices and unlawful collection methods, the bank dropped its threat to foreclose on the property, though it did not promise to return the $9,461 in extra payments, Mr. Spitzer's aides said. The bank's action came shortly after federal regulators, informed of the case by a reporter, contacted its managers.
''This case demonstrates perfectly why our role is critical and that the banks are already using the office of the currency comptroller as a shield,'' Mr. Spitzer said.
But Mr. Garsson said that Mr. Hall had never asked the federal regulators to intervene. ''This is why we would like for these cases to be brought to our attention, because this is the kind of thing we can fix in an hour,'' he said.
Mr. Spitzer and many other state attorneys general from both parties disagree, asserting that the administration wants to protect the large banks from state efforts to rein in unfair banking practices. ''The effort to shield nationally chartered banks from our capacity to enforce predatory lending and other consumer protection statutes against them will leave New York State consumers naked to rank abuses,'' Mr. Spitzer said.
