Maurice Clarett, the suspended Ohio State running back who filed a lawsuit challenging the N.F.L.'s eligibility rule, is considering a return to the Buckeyes next season, one of his lawyers said.
Percy Squire, a lawyer for Clarett based in Columbus, Ohio, said in The Columbus Dispatch yesterday that Clarett, a sophomore, would not seek entry into the N.F.L. draft in April.
''Maurice intends and wants to be the running back for O.S.U.,'' Squire was quoted as saying.
Clarett, Squire told the newspaper, does not want to play in the N.F.L. in 2004. ''His overwhelming preference is to go back to playing with his buddies,'' he said.
Squire represented Clarett after he was charged with filing a police report that exaggerated the value of items stolen from a car he had borrowed. Last week, Clarett pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of failing to aid law enforcement and was fined $100. Squire could not be reached for comment yesterday.
But in a telephone interview yesterday, Alan C. Milstein, the lawyer for Clarett who filed the lawsuit against the N.F.L., disputed Squire's claims that Clarett had decided to return to college football. Milstein also indicated that there were no plans to drop the lawsuit.
The league prohibits athletes from becoming eligible for the N.F.L. draft until they have been out of high school for at least three years.
''I don't think the lawyer is speaking for Maurice,'' said Milstein, whose office is based in Pennsauken, N.J. ''Maurice wants to keep his options open, depending on the outcome of the lawsuit.''
Clarett, 20, led Ohio State to a national championship after the 2002 season. Andy Geiger, the university's athletic director, suspended him in September after an N.C.A.A. investigation found that Clarett had received benefits worth thousands of dollars and had lied to investigators.
Steve Snapp, an associate athletic director at Ohio State, said in a telephone interview yesterday that Clarett had been in contact with Coach Jim Tressel during the suspension and that he and Geiger were continuing to evaluate Clarett.
''If he were to do all of the things necessary to meet the requirements we've set forth, we would evaluate him then,'' Snapp said of Clarett.
Snapp said Clarett would participate in the Buckeyes' winter conditioning program, which begins next week.
After the university suspended Clarett, he filed a lawsuit against the N.F.L. on Sept. 23 in United States District Court in New York.
But its viability may be compromised if there is concrete evidence of Clarett's desire to return to the Buckeyes, said Gary Roberts, the director of the sports law program at Tulane University.
''If he is now asserting his preference to play college football, he cannot show he has been injured by the N.F.L. rule,'' Roberts said in a telephone interview. ''If the N.F.L. can come up with the evidence that he wants to go back to Ohio State, and if he starts working out with the team, that becomes something the N.F.L can use as intention not to play in the N.F.L.
''I think almost any judge in the country would be willing to entertain a motion for dismissal.''
Judge Shira A. Scheindlin of District Court has said she hopes to rule on the case by Feb. 1.
COLLEGES
