President Chen Shui-bian of Taiwan on Friday toned down the questions he plans to pose in a referendum on March 20 after criticism from Washington that he was being too confrontational with Beijing.
Mr. Chen retreated from his previous plan for a referendum bluntly demanding that China renounce the use of force against Taiwan and immediately withdraw all ballistic missiles aimed at the island.
Instead, the main question will be: ''Should mainland China refuse to withdraw the missiles it has targeted at Taiwan and to openly renounce the use of force against us, would you agree that the government should acquire more advanced antimissile weapons to strengthen Taiwan's self-defense capabilities?''
A second referendum question, clearly intended to attract moderate Taiwan voters, as well as allay concerns in Washington and Beijing, will be added, ''Would you agree that our government should engage in negotiation with mainland China on the establishment of a 'peace and stability' framework for cross-strait integrations in order to build consensus and for the welfare of the peoples on both sides?''
Mr. Chen said he would continue making plans to rewrite Taiwan's Constitution, which China bitterly opposes, fearing that he will delete sections of the document that suggest that Taiwan is part of China.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and a White House spokesman responded by saying they welcomed steps to lessen tensions across the Taiwan Strait. But they stopped short of explicitly endorsing the new phrasing of the questions, which are still likely to upset the Chinese.
Beijing opposes the holding of any referendums in Taiwan, fearing that the island's residents may someday vote to declare independence, an action that Beijing has promised would lead to war.
Taiwan has been politically separate from the mainland since the Nationalists retreated to the island in 1949 after losing China's civil war to the Communists. Beijing has regarded the island as a province run by dangerous separatists ever since.
China had no immediate reaction to the new language. Earlier Friday, Chinese security officials invited reporters in four mainland cities to see seven Taiwanese recently arrested and accused of spying. The accused, prompted by prison officials, blamed Mr. Chen for their problems.
The referendum is to be held on the same day as a presidential election in which Mr. Chen is seeking a second four-year term. He and his running mate, Annette Lu, are locked in a race that is regarded as too close to call against Lien Chan, the Nationalist Party presidential candidate, and James Soong, the leader of the affiliated People First Party, who is running for vice president on a single ticket with Mr. Lien.
Mr. Lien and Mr. Soong ran separately in the last presidential election, in 2000, and split the vote of those in Taiwan who favor closer relations with the mainland, allowing Mr. Chen to prevail.
Needing a majority of the vote to win this time, Mr. Chen has stepped up criticism of the mainland; Nationalist Party candidates tend to fare badly in elections during periods of tension across the Taiwan Strait.
Mr. Chen's question about acquiring antimissile technology comes as he has been struggling to find money in his budget to buy American military equipment that President Bush agreed to sell in 2001.
The delay has irritated American officials, who contend that Taiwan risks falling behind the mainland in military preparedness.
