World music, machines and Minimalism shared a cozy affinity in the concert by Hamza El Din and Joan Jeanrenaud on Sunday night at the Skirball Center at New York University. It was a night of meditative music that found beauty in austerity: quiet drones and restrained melodic soliloquies.
Mr. El Din has reinvented the music of his native Nubia, on the upper Nile, by adapting ancient modes and rhythms to the oud, an instrument imported from Arabic music. Despite his traditional white clothes, he is a man of the world: a San Francisco Bay Area resident who has studied and taught in Rome, the United States and Tokyo. Ms. Jeanrenaud was a founder of the Kronos Quartet and spent two decades with the group before going solo in 1999.
The centerpiece of the concert was their duet on ''Escalay: The Water Wheel,'' a piece Mr. El Din wrote in 1971 and originally recorded as part of the Nonesuch Explorer series. It's a musical portrait of a machine, an irrigation device with gears turned by oxen, whose pace, Mr. El Din explained onstage, tends to hypnotize their driver.
For the duet version, he assigned Ms. Jeanrenaud the whine of the gears -- a humming, gradually evolving melody -- and gave himself the trotting of the oxen: first a briskly twanged tune, then a long-repeated note, plucked in quick, unswerving rhythm until its overtones rose and surrounded the cello lines. It was concentrated, utterly absorbing music, vigorous and methodical like a workday, but one transfigured by contemplation.
Mr. El Din's solo pieces were even more unadorned, with single lines of melody, sometimes joined by his singing in a dry, modest voice, and decorated only by his subtly varied attacks on the strings of the oud: rounded tones, precise tremolos or percussive string snapping, as is done on the banjolike Japanese biwa, which he has studied. Mr. El Din dedicated ''Monotonous Monochord'' to Daniel Pearl, the journalist murdered by kidnappers in Karachi, Pakistan. It was a series of low-register, minor-mode melodies, both an elegy and a musical image of captivity. ''A Wish'' was more celebratory, dancing through perpetual-motion lines. Mr. El Din also sang a stately new setting of poems by Rumi, the Persian mystic, about love.
Ms. Jeanrenaud's solo set kept things nearly as minimal, though she was abetted by machines: recorded backups and echo-loop devices. Recorded cellos provided the steady eighth notes of Philip Glass's ''Metamorphosis No. 4,'' with Ms. Jeanrenaud's live part placing the Romantic tension atop the four-chord musical cells. Karen Tanaka's ''Song of Songs'' used recorded drones and a tinkling to accompany yearning, sometimes foreboding melodies, never quite devolving into New Age music. And Ms. Jeanrenaud's own ''Vermont Rules'' began with unaccompanied, vaguely Slavic lines, then turned arpeggios into loops as the tunes climbed toward drama. Like Mr. El Din, she let melodies speak for themselves, exposed and self-sufficient.
MUSIC REVIEW
