THIS touchy-feely, huggy-kissy stuff is fine. Nobody is more popular than a new coach in the middle of a miserable season.
Right now the Knicks may be giving Lenny Wilkens a collective abrazo, the way Stephon Marbury did in front of the cameras on Thursday.
What is more important is the way they defended and ran the court last night in a 108-88 romp over Seattle, one of Lenny Wilkens's old teams. (He has a bunch.)
There were times last night when the Knicks actually looked like a good team, one that could make the playoffs, one that could entertain the long-suffering fans the way they used to.
Wilkens never played for the Knicks, but the Garden crowd gave a warm welcome home to the man from Boys High School in Brooklyn. The Garden had an air of expectation that hasn't been felt in the big barn for eons -- at least since the comeback of Antonio McDyess in the waning days of Aught Three.
These guys were going nowhere a month ago, and last night they looked deep and poised against a team from the powerful West.
Marbury promptly altered Wilkens's instructions, which he had once given to Gus Williams, his point guard in the 1978-79 championship season in Seattle: ''Just run, and if they're not there, shoot it,'' Wilkens said, meaning swift point guards like Marbury and Williams need not wait for slow teammates to catch up.
On this New York kind of night, the Knicks stayed up with Marbury. His old whipping boy on the Nets, Keith Van Horn, ran to the open places where the ball would be, and did wondrous things, including a reverse two-hander to open up a 20-point lead in the third quarter.
The Knicks gave instant credibility to all the action that has taken place since the Dolans suddenly lurched from somnolence to off-with-their-heads under Isiah Thomas.
Ownership waited too long, made too many bad decisions and nondecisions for years. It was ugly in the Garden in recent months waiting for the regime to collapse under its own dead weight. Scott Layden had no clout and Don Chaney had no answer and the team had no star point guard.
It grew truly ugly in recent days, watching a decent but overmatched man like Chaney show visible pain on his normally stoic face.
It is never pretty to watch the final days of a coach or manager, who is always the Last to Know. The last New York twist-in-the-wind spectacle like this was a decade ago when the Mets allowed -- no, forced -- Jeff Torborg to manage one more game while the players, the writers, the fans, the beer vendors and the urchins in the parking lot knew Dallas Green was motoring up the Jersey Turnpike from his farm. That was cold.
Unfortunately, the slow torture of doomed skippers is part of the endless quadrille of sports. A bad team is always glad to change direction. A softie is replaced by a meanie. A meanie is replaced by a softie. The inmates joyously flock from jail. The inmates eagerly file back into jail.
This change defies a good-cop, bad-cop scenario from the hapless Chaney to the wise old Wilkens, who had been back home in Seattle, not yet ready to ponder the dreaded R-word.
It's easy to avoid thoughts of retirement ''when you have N.B.A. Pass,'' Wilkens said last night, referring to the cable television package.
Wilkens didn't need to come in here snarling about wholesale changes. He doesn't need to, with Thomas wielding the gigantic hook. In a short time, Thomas has given the Knicks talent and depth -- and a coach with a reputation.
Marbury used to greet Wilkens respectfully whenever he played against Wilkens's teams, but he had never really talked to him.
When Wilkens emerged as the new coach, seemingly out the attic or the history books, Marbury roamed into Wilkens's first news conference and gave the old new coach a big hug, with lights flashing.
''I just felt he is supposed to be embraced,'' Marbury said last night.
''You're playing for a legend,'' Marbury added. ''He played and coached and he's in the Hall of Fame for both. These are the things you dream about.''
Marbury has often been too distracted in his professional career to be automatically judged capable of leading a renaissance on Seventh Avenue.
But for the moment, he is hugging Wilkens, one Brooklyn point guard to another.
''It doesn't mean anything,'' Marbury said of their similar roots, ''but it helps.''
Marbury had a good time last night, indulging in smiles and one-liners and winks at his teammates during the laugher. Tougher times are ahead, but the other Brooklynite, with his inscrutable smile, has laid down a challenge to the rest of the league:
''When you come to the Garden, you'd better bring your best basketball,'' Wilkens said.
No Knick coach has dared talk like that in a few years. If Wilkens and Marbury can collaborate and reach the playoffs, the Knicks will be further ahead than anybody could have expected a month ago.
But don't get all dewy because of the embraces. In the Garden, honeymoons tend not to last.
Sports of The Times
