It is an image that makes a football purist queasy, an owner alighting from his limousine to scout a potential draft pick and later, after all but clicking the stopwatch himself, evaluating for reporters the player's ability as a cornerback.
That was the Patriots' owner, Robert K. Kraft, before the 1998 N.F.L. draft, a display calling to mind the Daniel Snyder follies in Washington, but one that is now quite dated. In an era when the high-profile owner is de rigueur and sometimes disastrous, Kraft, who will celebrate a decade of owning the Patriots next week, has turned his reputation for meddling on its ear, and emerged as an almost model owner.
In the process, he has reinvented a franchise that won 19 games in the five years before he bought it. The Patriots were in such bad shape that, according to the Dallas Cowboys' owner, Jerry Jones, the league considered buying the team several times. Now the Patriots are one game from playing for their second Super Bowl title in three years.
''We had a lot of highs and lows,'' Kraft said in an interview this week. ''We took some real beatings in the process. This is a very tough, tough business. It's unforgiving if you don't learn from your mistakes. Part of it is knowing how to be a good owner.''
He was once tagged Amos Alonzo Kraft by Dan Shaughnessy, a Boston Globe columnist, for his involvement in football issues. Even his riding in a golf cart through the parking lot on game days, the better to shake hands with fans, was criticized.
There was plenty of reason to be cynical. The Patriots were so woeful, their fans so unruly, that ''Monday Night Football'' stayed away for 13 years. Home games rarely sold out. From 1960 to 1993, the Patriots went to the playoffs five times. But past failures did not mean New England wanted an owner that reminded anyone of the hated George Steinbrenner, another name invoked in Kraft's early years.
His well-publicized schism with his former coach Bill Parcells, and Parcells's adept spinning of the fallout, only added to the perception that Kraft was an owner running amok.
It is difficult, though, to find fault with Kraft's work in the last four years. He hired Bill Belichick, perhaps the best coach in the game today; even members of Kraft's family questioned the wisdom of parting with a first-round draft pick to acquire a coach who had failed miserably in his first head coaching job in Cleveland.
He built a new stadium without using public money. And if the Patriots beat the Colts in Sunday's A.F.C. Championship game, he will preside over a team that will go to the Super Bowl for the third time in the last eight seasons.
''He's had a great run,'' said Robert Tisch, the co-owner of the Giants. ''What he did for his team, it wasn't a laughingstock, but it was not a great team before he took over. And he got a stadium built at the same time.''
Kraft, whose Gillette Stadium office features ceramic footballs and huge photos of his sons, has clearly found a comfort level with Belichick, who is also a de facto general manager. Kraft concedes that when he realized Parcells had no intention of staying with the franchise after the 1996 season, he diminished Parcells's personnel power.
Kraft was also thrust into the limelight during the 1996 draft when he famously sided with his personnel department against Parcells in selecting receiver Terry Glenn when Parcells wanted defensive help. It is difficult to imagine such a split happening now. When Belichick released safety Lawyer Milloy just before the start of the season, Kraft was mum. Belichick and the vice president of player personnel, Scott Pioli, confer regularly with Kraft, but it is they who make the personnel decisions. And Kraft marvels at how Belichick places economic value on midrange players, aiming for those who fit his system.
''Part of it is learning the ropes,'' Kraft said. ''There is nothing that can prepare you for ownership in the N.F.L. You have to go through it. You have to get beaten up. What I learned early on, winning doesn't put you on as high a plane as losing. Losing is much lower than winning is high. You've got to learn how to get in that zone so you're balanced.''
Kraft is the rare N.F.L. owner who was able to buy a team that he had rooted for since its inception (he owned season tickets on the goal line in the old Foxboro Stadium), and he feels that that has informed his ownership. During a recent conversation, he returned repeatedly to the team's impact on the area, citing letters thanking him for putting the team on the map after the Patriots won the Super Bowl two years ago.
Kraft is very keen on having players with high character. One of the seminal moments of his ownership came two days after the 1996 draft, when the Patriots renounced the rights to Christian Peter after Kraft learned the extent of his legal problems at Nebraska, including a no-contest plea for third-degree sexual assault.
Kraft is still proud of the decision, and it nudged him toward taking a greater interest in setting standards for personnel. Just before Peter's release, Sports Illustrated reported at the time, the Kansas City Chiefs offered a seventh-round pick to acquire his rights. Kraft declined, because he did not want his team to profit from its mistake.
''I think I know what a fan wants,'' Kraft said. ''We got to view a lot of great players -- Mike Haynes, John Hannah, Steve Grogan. We had a few other folks floating around here that had a lot of off-the-field antics. It wasn't something we, as fans, could feel proud about. With us, reputation is important. You always run a business for the bad times. If you stress quality, your customer base will stay with you.''
That adage held true even when he made his pursuit of Belichick to succeed Pete Carroll. The decision was blasted in New England, and the heat grew more intense when the Patriots went 5-11 in Belichick's first season. But Kraft had found a connection with Belichick that few others had; Kraft compared it to finding his wife, Myra. That connection overwhelmed any concerns about Belichick's unsuccessful years in Cleveland.
When things were at their worst, when the Patriots started 1-3 during 2001, Kraft would call Belichick to tell him he believed in him. Later that year, the Patriots won the franchise's first Super Bowl.
Because of Belichick and Pioli's personnel acumen, the Patriots are situated for a long period of competitiveness. They have had excellent drafts. They have few salary-cap worries, in part because of the release of Milloy. They have 10 picks in this spring's draft, including two picks in each of the first two rounds.
''Robert gave up a lot in terms of bringing me into the organization,'' Belichick said. ''I lean on him quite a bit in terms of the big-picture decisions, and input on things like financial management and the direction of the team. He is the owner and he is the boss, but he is also a friend.''
And while Kraft is still plenty visible -- players call him a ''players' owner'' -- the image is more benign. Gone is the talk about a cornerback's attributes. Now Kraft talks about creating a family legacy in New England. Despite the bumpy start, he is already creating a blueprint.
Jones said: ''When comparing it to other franchises that could be doing better, he's the perfect example of what you can accomplish. When we're evaluating in the future and we look at people joining the league, I want them to be Bob Kraft Jr.''
PRO FOOTBALL
