Kostas Papagiannakis, a third grader at Public School 129 in Queens, said he had not heard of Michael R. Bloomberg. Jasmine Briu, a third grader at P.S. 5 in the Bronx, thought the name sounded familiar.
''The president?'' she offered, clutching a shoe-box diorama of the solar system on her way to school one recent morning.
But both know about the citywide reading and math tests for third graders that they will take this spring.
''You get left back if you fail the citywide test,'' said Jasmine, sadness sweeping over the part of her face that was visible between her hood and scarf.
''I'm kind of nervous because I don't know how I'll do,'' Kostas said softly.
The third grade citywide tests, the first among a battery of high-stakes standardized tests that New York City schoolchildren are required to take throughout their school careers, have long been a source of stress for parents, teachers and students. Last week, Mayor Bloomberg announced a new policy to use the tests as an automatic trigger to decide whether students are forced to repeat third grade, thereby ending the practice known as social promotion. Many parents said they were unaware of the policy change, which supplants a system in which tests were one of several determining factors. Those who knew of the change said they were bracing for higher levels of anxiety among their 8- and 9-year-olds, and themselves.
''Butterflies in her stomach, she'll say it hurts, and she won't want to go to school,'' said Lizette Figueroa, Jasmine's mother. ''I don't think it's fair. They're too small.''
Pia Moos does not intend to tell her son, Faust Moos-Nuñez, about the implications of the third grade test. After all, it was not until this year that Faust stopped begging to stay home from school on days when he knew he would have to take an unmarked spelling quiz -- they are not even called tests -- at the Earth School, on the Lower East Side.
''I think it puts pressure on him,'' said Ms. Moos, an artist who works in several public schools and lives in Brooklyn. ''It's so big. I don't believe that children should be faced with this. I talk to him about work in general and how his effort is important every day.''
The Earth School philosophy eschews the emphasis on testing, so Ms. Moos figured that Faust's teacher would not emphasize the high-stakes nature of the test. Other parents said that even if they wanted to shield their children from that knowledge, it probably would not work.
''I'm sure the teacher is going to mention something -- you know, 'You really have to do well on this test,''' said Maria Papagiannakis, Kostas's mother. ''I would like to be the first one for him to hear it from. I don't want it to be a shock.
''He's scared that he might not do well,'' she said. ''He's afraid that he might have to go to summer school. He had a friend that was left behind last year, in second grade. He knows that if he doesn't do well he will stay back.''
Children who score the lowest of four levels on either the citywide reading or math tests will be eligible for an optional summer school program with small classes and extracurricular activities, Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein said this week. They will have an opportunity to retake the tests at the end of the summer and will be promoted if they do well. But parents said that was little comfort.
''Why should they be punished when this is something they just came up with?'' asked Kendra S. Clarke, whose twin third graders, Justin and Jordan, spend their summers at camp in upstate New York. ''Summertime is the only time for a child to exhale.''
City administrators are aware of the pressure but stand by their decision. A spokeswoman said the Department of Education is ''mindful of the anxiety that can accompany test-taking'' and that teachers, principals and others would ''do everything possible to lessen it and provide support.''
Diana Dunbar Dean has mixed feelings about social promotion. Seeing her daughter struggle through some of her classes at P.S. 163 on the Upper West Side taught her the downsides of keeping children in classes where they cannot keep up. And in classes where her daughter does well, Ms. Dean said, she wants to see her daughter challenged by peers who are at her level.
Ms. Dean speaks with the confidence of an involved parent who has guts and grit. (She once navigated her way backstage at a David Bowie concert.)
''Should my daughter not be promoted because of her performance on one standardized test, I'll picket Mayor Bloomberg personally in his office,'' she said. She said she thinks the policy will be a problem for ''the people who don't have the time, the effort and the resources.''
In Manhattan, a parent coordinator, who did not want to be identified for fear of losing her job, said she learned of the new policy through newspaper reports and, as of yesterday, had not been formally notified. Most of the third-grade parents she has spoken to in the past few days had heard nothing of the change until she told them, she said, and now the parent coordinator is bracing for anxiety of her own.
''The parents freak out just as much as the children if not more,'' she said. ''If you know that these tests have so much power, you want your child to do well, and you're stressed out. Like, 'Am I doing the right thing?' 'Is my child remembering the information?' 'Am I doing everything that I can do?'''
Kayla Fuentes, 9, a third grader at P.S. 18 in Brooklyn, said she would be embarrassed if she were held back. ''I would feel real bad.''
DeJanique Grant, 8, a third grader at P.S. 123 in Harlem, said she was not nervous about the test because ''I know I'm going to pass.''
Gripping a pink ball of yarn for crocheting after school, she then acknowledged that her calm could fade.
''I might get nervous on the test and forget some stuff,'' she said. ''I don't want to be left back.''
