With local officials growing increasingly angry over costly mandates from Albany, Gov. George E. Pataki on Friday announced plans to relieve some of the burden of their pension bills, administration officials said.
Aides to the governor said a pension relief package, worth about $800 million in savings to counties, towns, cities and villages, would be a prime element of Mr. Pataki's budget presentation in Albany on Tuesday. The plan would also save the state $500 million in rising pension costs.
The plan does not address the rising costs of pensions in New York City, which has its own funds. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has been asking lawmakers to allow the city to establish another tier in the pension fund, in which new employees would be paid a lower rate.
The proposal -- coupled with the governor's effort to rein in the mounting costs of Medicaid and hold steady, at $792 million, the amount of unrestricted state aid to localities -- underlines Mr. Pataki's goal to make local property tax relief a top issue this legislative session, aides to the governor said.
''It always has been,'' said Lisa Dewald Stoll, the governor's communications director, noting that his Star program, which helps pay the property tax bills school districts charge to homeowners, was enacted in 1997, in his first term.
''It is certainly something that we believe is a priority this year,'' she said. ''And, I think you are going to see him advance a budget that will help localities, and help the state as well, in particular the property tax burden on taxpayers across the state.''
A debate about property taxes has raged of late, ever since the Citizens Budget Commission, a nonpartisan group backed primarily by businesses that seek ways to contain government costs and taxes in New York, released a report in November asserting that New Yorkers pay more of their income in local taxes than residents of any other state.
Recently county officials in both parties have threatened to challenge some incumbents to protest a rise in Medicaid costs that they say has forced them to raise local taxes to cover the costs and impaired their ability to govern. The governor's recent proposals, however, have buoyed their hopes for reform and relief on several fronts.
''Capping the local share of Medicaid has been our priority issue, but the second most important issue to counties and county taxpayers is pension reform,'' said Robert R. Gregory, the executive director of the New York State Association of Counties. ''Counties across the state were facing a $350 million increase in employer pension contributions, from 2003 to 2004, so this sounds like a comprehensive proposal and we look forward to working with the governor as pension reform is negotiated with the Legislature.''
, The governor's plan would set the contribution rate that local governments and the state pay to the state's roughly $115 billion retirement fund at 6.5 percent of employee payroll. In order to ensure that there are sufficient revenues to pay workers' and retirees' pensions, now and in the future, the comptroller has set the current rate at 12 percent. In an effort to keep the pension fund healthy, the comptroller has set the current rate at 12 percent, officials said.
Cutting the contribution rate will provide short-term relief to localities and the state, which is facing a $5.1 billion budget shortfall. The goal is to provide predictable increases in the fund, in part by raising the rate gradually over time. Analysts believe that as the equities market improves, the value of the pension fund will grow, increasing earnings on those assets in the fund and lowering the costs for localities.
The governor also wants to stretch out the costs of recent pension enhancements over 30 years, among other things.
Without changes, he said, the local governments would owe $1.14 billion more in pension costs in December. In a news release, Mr. Pataki referred to his plan as a sweeping reform. He proposed many of the same measures last year, but with the economy improving the plan holds greater promise to make the pension fund whole, pension analysts. Mr. Pataki stressed that the plan would, ''ensure that the pension fund is sound and that benefits are protected,'' for nearly 1 million participants, including about 300,000 retirees.
But E.J. McMahon, Jr., a senior fellow with the Manhattan Institute, a conservative organization, called it a short-term financial fix. ''It may be airtight financially and it certainly would save money for the local governments, and the state, in the short term,'' he said. However, he said, it does not ensure that large government contributions to the fund will not be needed in the future.
Last year, legislators enacted pension reforms proposed by state Comptroller,Alan G. Hevesi, the fund's sole trustee, setting the contribution rate at 4.5 percent for the last fiscal year and saving local governments and the state $1.6 billion by delaying the imposition of higher costs.
Legislators' reactions were mixed. ''We like it,'' said John E. McArdle, a spokesman for the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, a Republican. Charles E. Carrier, a spokesman for the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, stopped short of endorsing it.
