In a remarkable scene that mixed a courtroom appearance with a frenzied street carnival, Michael Jackson pleaded not guilty on Friday to charges of molesting a 13-year-old boy at his Neverland ranch.
As hundreds of fans chanted and sang outside, Mr. Jackson's morning at the Santa Maria court began with a stern admonishment from the judge, Rodney S. Melville of Santa Barbara County Superior Court. He chided the star for arriving 15 minutes late to his arraignment on charges that could land him in prison for 20 years.
''Mr. Jackson, you have started out on the wrong foot with me,'' Judge Melville told the defendant, who wore oversized aviator-style sunglasses and a silver arm band. ''I want to advise you that I will not put up with that. It's an insult to the court. You must be on time. Do you understand that?''
''Yes, sir,'' Mr. Jackson whispered. His lawyers later explained that he had been delayed by traffic and the boisterous crowd.
The judge then read the nine felony counts against Mr. Jackson, seven counts of engaging in lewd acts with a child under 14 and two of administering an intoxicating agent to a child to facilitate abuse. The authorities say the molestation occurred at Mr. Jackson's 2,700-acre ranch near this coastal city last February and March, and involved a boy, then 13, who was a cancer patient and had been befriended by Mr. Jackson.
The judge asked Mr. Jackson if he understood the charges and then requested his plea.
''Not guilty,'' Mr. Jackson said. His voice could barely be heard in the court, which was packed with lawyers, family, reporters and fans who had arrived at 4 a.m. for seats.
After a nearly two-hour hearing on matters relating to the case, Mr. Jackson left the court shielded from the sun by a black umbrella, hoisted himself onto the roof of a black S.U.V., and waved and danced to a sound truck blaring his music as if he had just left an awards show. Two cameramen he brought along filmed the scene.
Mr. Jackson was accompanied by his parents, Joseph and Katherine; brothers Tito and Jermaine; and sister Janet. They were surrounded by silent bodyguards from the Nation of Islam.
''We love you, Michael,'' hundreds of hysterical fans screamed. They had come from Fresno, Phoenix, South Carolina, even as far away as Europe and Japan to show their support and catch a glimpse of the 45-year-old entertainer. Busloads of fans arrived from Los Angeles and Las Vegas, joining a group of 100 to 150 people who had spent the night. A Sheriff's Department spokesman estimated the crowd at 1,000 to 1,500.
Beverly Brown, a 19-year-old majoring in English at La Salle University in Philadelphia, said she flew here to show support.
''I'd go around the world just to see him for three minutes,'' Ms. Brown said. ''He's done so much, not just for us, but for the world.''
Vendors hawked T-shirts, ice cream, burritos and barbecue. Police dogs barked, children wailed and helicopters hovered noisily above.
Dozens of officers struggled to control the crowd, which pushed against chain-link fences erected to contain them and swarmed around the blocklong motorcade of S.U.V.'s and limousines carrying the 25-person Jackson entourage.
Smaller demonstrations were held around the world. In Moscow, about 40 fans met near the United States Embassy in a show of support organized by the singer's Russian fan club.
After the hearing, many fans drove to Neverland for a gathering organized by Mr. Jackson.
At the entrance to the sprawling ranch, guests were asked to sign a release agreeing to participate in a television show about Mr. Jackson.
On the property, dotted with dozens of bronze sculptures of children at play, fans frolicked on swings and rode a small steam-engine train.
''This is kind of jovial,'' said Brandi Miller, 25, of Los Angeles, ''but it's sort of overshadowed by the fact that he's been charged with child molestation. There's an underlying theme here.''
In contrast to the scenes outside, the courtroom was sedate as Judge Melville established his authority quickly. Mark Geragos, the Los Angeles lawyer representing Mr. Jackson, asked that the judge recognize his new co-counsel, Benjamin Brafman, a New York defense lawyer whose high-profile clients have included the rap star Sean Combs and the mob boss Vincent Gigante. Mr. Brafman is not a member of the California bar.
Such requests are routinely granted, but Judge Melville refused to allow Mr. Brafman to speak. Later, the judge relented and gave Mr. Brafman courtroom privileges.
Mr. Geragos asked the judge to defer the next stage, the preliminary examination to decide if there is sufficient evidence to warrant a trial, for more than the usual 10 days. Judge Melville complied, setting the next hearing for Feb. 13.
The judge also granted Mr. Geragos's request that Mr. Jackson not be required to appear at all hearings. Thomas W. Sneddon Jr., the Santa Barbara district attorney, asked that he be allowed to demand Mr. Jackson's appearance when necessary. The judge agreed.
The court then turned to the question of whether to unseal the 80-page affidavit supporting a search warrant that was executed at the Neverland ranch in mid-November, and the 100-page document describing what was seized there.
Theodore J. Boutrous Jr., representing the news media, argued that the First Amendment and federal and California case law have established that such documents are in the public domain.
Mr. Brafman said that the search warrant contained numerous unproven accusations and could prejudice potential jurors. Mr. Sneddon also opposed disclosure.
The judge ordered that the documents remain sealed indefinitely, saying that editing would lead to ''a nonsensical document subject to more speculation than it already is.''
The judge denied Mr. Geragos's request that a gag order imposed on parties to the case be lifted, to let him respond to what he called false accusations and ''crazy rumors.''
The judge was not swayed and issued a sweeping order covering prosecutors and defense lawyers.
With the court's business nearly done, Mr. Geragos asked the judge to let Mr. Jackson leave the courtroom ''as a personal courtesy.''
The judge replied, ''I assume Mr. Jackson has to go to the bathroom. So do I.''
He added, ''I understand when you have to go you have to go,'' but then warned Mr. Geragos to tell his client to restrict his ''liquid intake'' before court.
At that point, the courtroom cleared, with Mr. Jackson waving and blowing kisses to supporters.
Brian Crane, 23, a supporter from San Francisco, held up a piece of paper to Mr. Jackson reading, ''We've got your back.''
Mr. Jackson then went to the bathroom, huddled with his family and lawyers, and then stepped into the California sunshine to party with his ecstatic fans.
