A 16-year-old boy knocked a high school security official down yesterday morning on a nonmoving escalator at a Manhattan high school, law enforcement officials said.
The security official, a 40-year-old man who serves as assistant principal for security at Norman Thomas High School on East 33rd Street in Kips Bay, suffered a strained back. He was escorting the boy, a student at the school, to the third floor from the second on the escalator  around 10 a.m. when the boy shoved him and bolted away, officials said.
The student, Dale Wall, was arrested and charged as an adult with second-degree assault. The security official, whose name was not released by the authorities, was examined at Bellevue Hospital Center, where he was briefly listed in stable condition and released.
Altercations between students and security officials are not uncommon, but this one came at a time when violence in the city's 1,200 public schools is coming under close scrutiny. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has promised to impose tougher disciplinary measures to crack down on violence in the schools, and this month he said a task force of police officers would work to impose order on 12 of the city's most dangerous junior and senior high schools.
Asked on his radio program yesterday about how the new plan was working out, the mayor said that crime at the 12 schools was "almost gone."
Norman Thomas High School is not on the list of most dangerous schools, and city officials were not able to produce records of the number of violent incidents there. One student was arrested there in June after trying to take a loaded gun through a metal detector.
City officials said that the security official was appointed to his position in October 2003. Before that, he had served for 10 years as a dean at Samuel J. Tilden High School in Brooklyn.
A law enforcement official said that the man was escorting Mr. Wall to in-house detention, and that the two were on the escalator steps when Mr. Wall turned, shouted that he would not go to detention and placed his hands on the official's chest, shoving him backward.
A spokeswoman for the city's Department of Education said that the student was suspended and would be sent to a Second Opportunity School, an alternative school where students receive counseling as part of the curriculum. The length of his stay there will depend on the outcome of a disciplinary hearing. He faces a prison sentence of up to seven years on the assault charge.
