The Bush administration's idea of spending $1.5 billion promoting marriage is one of those rather expensive but basically symbolic gestures that presidents like to make in election years. Mr. Bush's advisers may also hope that it will divert social conservatives from pressing for a constitutional amendment banning gay marriages. But as meaningless sops to powerful voting blocs go, this one is particularly cruel.
The whole idea of encouraging poor people to get married and stay married through classes and counseling sessions ignores the main reason that stable wedlock is rare in inner cities: the epidemics of joblessness and incarceration that have stripped those communities of what social scientists call ''marriageable'' men. Women in poor neighborhoods may find bitter amusement in the idea that they need the government's encouragement to search for a husband, or that conflict resolution courses are the way to shore up troubled unions between two poor people.
It is undeniably true that women tend to become poorer after divorce and that children from single-family homes are more likely to grow up in poverty. But the fiscal lift that occurs when middle-class couples marry and combine resources does not come about in neighborhoods where jobs have long since disappeared and men in particular tend to be unskilled and poorly educated.
By the late 1990's, the inner city had become the home of a needy ''nonworking class,'' where single-parent families had become the norm. Poor women have the same dreams about marriage as their suburban counterparts. But they also know that men with jobs, skills and hope for the future have become scarce in their world, and that a marriage to a man without any of these things may prove more devastating to the children than no marriage at all.
The $1.5 billion earmarked for the dubious and untested marriage initiative would be better spent on intervention programs that keep troubled young people -- especially boys -- in school. It could be spent on pregnancy prevention, and on the health insurance and the job training that single mothers desperately need to move themselves out of poverty.
To pour the money into marriage and relationship counseling for people without economic hope is a very expensive version of spitting into the wind.
