Between years of television comedies and years of Woody Allen films, the winning vagaries of middle-class couples are an inexhaustible -- and exhausting -- subject. Writers who choose the form must find a new approach (a different kind of couple and setting) or a fresh take on an old approach (familiar elements in unexpected combinations).
Erin Courtney adds fantasy to a screwball-tinged comedy of manners in ''Demon Baby,'' the Clubbed Thumb company's production at the Ohio Theater in SoHo through Jan. 31. The manners are those of successful young married couples. The comic tension? The longstanding one set off whenever eager, impulsive Americans meet imperiously confident English men and women. Here the Americans abroad are Art (Patrick McNulty) and Wren (Heidi Schreck). The move to London means a promotion for him, but her future is shakier. She writes children's books and has one elusive freelance assignment. As she weakly puts it, ''I write things and draw.''
They are in their stylishly sterile apartment, all pale tones, strict lines and window. ''So American,'' Cat says in a harsh loud nasal voice that Nina Hellman makes both aggressive and languid.
Wren wears schoolgirl skirts and sweaters and an awkward cloche. She hunches her shoulders, nervously folds her arms, shuts herself out of the apartment and can't get back in without help from a construction worker even though the door isn't locked. ''Be a good girl, then,'' he says, his voice like a growl.
That's exactly what she can't be. But she doesn't know how to be a bad girl either. And since she doesn't want to be in London at all, she quickly becomes agoraphobic. Art assures her that she once liked walks and museums. People stare, she answers; they know you don't belong here. He brings winning little gifts that she ignores. He wants her to feel better, but he's at work all day.
Ms. Courtney is deliberately updating a familiar struggle: the busy husband's efforts to smooth things over; the unhappy wife's refusal to be consoled. She supplies the right modern additions, too. Wren's editor, Alan, is all prig on the surface and a bit of a sybarite on the side. (This mix is nicely caught in both the dialogue and Gibson Frazier's performance.) The two young children of Sally and Charles (Polly Lee and Mark Shanahan) are clearly valued more as ideal photo images than as living creatures.
The playwright keeps Wren's desperation comic by making her a whimsical screwball heroine. Comedy swings into fantasy when we see Wren lying flat on her back with an enormous man in a voluminous red robe and a tall cone-shaped hat sitting on her chest. He looks like a garden gnome, she tells an unbelieving Alan.
He is the demon baby, and Glenn Fleshler makes him a mass of gleeful taunts and insinuation. His taunts are the voice of Wren's psyche. (''Get up,'' he orders. ''We're going home.'' Oh, but what's that large ugly mole on her face? ''I can see your capillaries,'' he adds. His tales are those of a ghoulish child or of a children's book writer gone wrong.
The demon baby turns Wren loose in her small circle of power couples; she stops being a recluse and becomes a guided missile. If you remember the movie ''Topper,'' the principle's the same: a supernatural character shakes up a status quo that is all routine and casual hypocrisy. Everyone comes out better for it despite a few injuries and losses.
Those injuries and losses are real. Emotionally, though, they don't signify much, and I think they're meant to as the play moves toward its close. That is when the well-wrought structure starts to wobble; the quick talk with its zany undertones doesn't accommodate the sudden moments of forthright seriousness. Ken Rus Schmoll's directing is swift but never rushed; he knows where to pause, slow the tempo down, let silence and physical action take over. Part of the problem lies in Wren's character: as written and played, she is too much like her name: fragile, cannily elusive, prone to flights of fancy. We are supposed to feel a bit too entranced by her, and we end up being somewhat wearied by her.
Nothing is harder for any writer than an ending, and this play's doesn't altogether hold. But most of what goes before does. It is a small, well-made, oddball comedy.
DEMON BABY
By Erin Courtney; directed by Ken Rus Schmoll; set by David Evans Morris; lighting by Garin Marschall; costumes by Kirche Leigh Zeile; sound by Michael Newman; assistant director, David Myers; stage manager, Leigh Goldenberg; assistant stage manager, Kelly Blackwell. Presented by Clubbed Thumb. At the Ohio Theater, 66 Wooster Street, SoHo.
WITH: Heidi Schreck (Wren), Patrick McNulty (Art), Nina Hellman (Cat), Gibson Frazier (Alan), Leo Kittay (Workman), Polly Lee (Sally), Mark Shanahan (Charles) and Glenn Fleshler (Demon Baby).
THEATER REVIEW  Correction:  January 21, 2004, Wednesday  A picture on Saturday with a theater review of ''Demon Baby'' carried an erroneous credit from the show's publicist. It was by Carl Skutsch.
