Her putter was like a magic wand Friday, and her gallery was taken for a magical ride.
Michelle Wie, a 14-year-old ninth grader from Honolulu, missed the cut by only one stroke at the Sony Open in Hawaii, but that could hardly be viewed as falling short. It was the thrill of a young lifetime, a remarkable two days of golf and a showcase for the most-talked about amateur player since Tiger Woods.
Here was Wie, believed to be the youngest player in a PGA Tour event, making improbable putts that sent roars across Waialae Country Club and threatening to become the youngest player to make a cut. With a birdie on her final hole for a two-under-par 68, she finished at even-par 140 for the tournament.
Wie tied for 80th in the 144-player field, one stroke short of those who advanced to Saturday's third round. She finished ahead of more than a dozen Tour event winners.
Her score was five strokes better than the 145 that Annika Sorenstam recorded when she became the first woman in 58 years to play in a PGA Tour last May at the Colonial. Wie won the United States Women's Amateur Public Links at 13 to become the youngest to win a United States Golf Association adult championship.
Before this tournament, some people questioned the wisdom of giving a sponsor's exemption to a 14-year-old girl, even one as talented as Wie. But she brings excitement, talent and crowds. Her gallery was huge Thursday, and it was perhaps three times as large Friday.
Wie has said her goal is to play on both the PGA and L.P.G.A. Tours, and for two days she looked as if the PGA Tour stage was not too big for her.
Wie did not know she had fallen one stroke short until her round was over and she was informed in the scorers' tent that the cut was 139.
''Just one more shot and I would have made it,'' she said. ''It's killing me now. I just thought I have to make a birdie to make it.''
Yet Wie realized that she had done something to be proud of.
''I struggled and I fought,'' she said. ''I think it was a very happy experience for me this week. It was a very good learning experience, too. I think I did very well under pressure. Last few holes, I was very nervous and I had to shoot two under or three under par in the last three holes. I think it's a big confidence boost. I think I can play out here one day.''
Wie's putting carried her all day. At the seventh hole, Wie made a 50-foot putt for a birdie. Her putter struck again at No. 11; she rolled in a 60-footer for a birdie, moving her to one over par for the tournament and one under for the day. As her putt disappeared into the hole at No. 11, Wie smiled and raised an arm in celebration as the gallery erupted.
After that birdie, making the cut was within Wie's grasp, and she gave it a run. At No. 13, she blasted her tee shot way right of the fairway and behind trees. Without a clear shot to the green, Wie punched out into the fairway and followed with an average approach shot that landed on the green but bounced into the rough.
That left her with a 30-foot chip for a par, but she left it just short, making a bogey that left her two over par for the tournament. Wie was three strokes off the cut and was running out of holes.
After barely missing a birdie putt at No. 14, she missed the fairway again at the par-4, 396-yard No. 15, but after her second shot stopped just short of the green, she made a nice chip for an up-and-down that saved par and kept her dwindling hopes alive.
Wie wasn't done. She birdied the par-4, 417-yard 16th hole, hitting a solid drive, a superb approach shot and a 12-foot putt. That was Wie's third birdie of the day, and it brought her to within two strokes of the cut with two holes to play.
At the par-3, 189-yard 17th hole, Wie pulled her tee shot well left of the green. It ricocheted back toward her off the grandstand, leaving her a difficult pitch shot from about 25 yards. She executed that shot nicely, hitting a soft shot that stopped about 6 feet from the hole, and she made the putt to save par.
That took Wie to the par-5, 551-yard 18th hole needing an eagle to make the cut. After hitting a 286-yard drive down the fairway, she hit her second shot left of the green, hit a nice pitch to about 4 feet and made the putt for a birdie to close in style.
Wie ended her effort two days earlier than she hoped. But she left with memories. She made superb par saves at Nos. 5, 6, 8 and 15, and she made eight par saves in all, showing how much her short game has improved since last year. She took advantage of her knowledge of a course she had played about five times a week since November.
And for Wie's golf year, this was only the start. She will play six L.P.G.A. events and will defend her title at the Public Links, among other amateur events.
This performance will be hard to top, though. And at age 14, she is just getting started.
CHIP SHOTS
STEVE ALLAN, an Australian who finished 105th on the PGA Tour's 2003 money list, tied the course record of 62 and was the second-round leader at 11-under-par 129. He was a stroke ahead of HARRISON FRAZAR (63) and two ahead of ERNIE ELS (64). FRANK LICKLITER II also shot a 62 to equal the record also held by JOHN COOK (2002) and CHARLES HOWELL III (2002).
GOLF
