High up in the Four- Cylinder Building, as BMW's bulbous headquarters tower is informally known, an elite team of technicians is armed with computers, sophisticated financial software and a gut feeling for where the market is headed.
Not the car market, which is the abiding obsession of everybody else here, but the currency market.
BMW's risk management department is responsible for protecting the company, which reaps one-quarter of its $53 billion in annual sales in the United States, from the vagaries of trans-Atlantic exchange rates. At a time when the dollar is plumbing record lows against the euro, that job has become almost as crucial to BMW's financial stability as the popularity of its cars.
''Our owners and employees prefer to see smooth operating results,'' said Joachim Herr, the youthful head of the department. ''It's our job to help the company deliver those results.''
By using financial transactions known as hedges -- essentially bets on future moves in exchange rates -- Mr. Herr and his team move some of BMW's exposure to exchange rate swings onto banks and other parties, insulating the company from what can be a nasty roller coaster ride.
Volkswagen, for example, attributed at least 1.2 billion euros ($1.5 billion) in losses last year to currency swings that it had not hedged against. PSA Peugeot Citroën of France said it might lose 600 million euros ($744 million) this year because of the strong euro.
European carmakers have been hit especially hard by the rising euro, because they pay for parts and labor in euros to build cars they export to the United States, where customers pay in dollars. As the dollar weakens, manufacturers that have not hedged will get fewer and fewer euros' worth of revenue for each dollar sale. There are two ways they can respond: they can raise the dollar prices of their cars in the United States to compensate for the weaker exchange rate, or they can absorb the difference in the form of lower profits. Neither choice is attractive.
Porsche tried the first approach in the early 1990's, the last time the dollar swooned. Customers fled, and Porsche nearly wiped out its American franchise.
Today, Porsche has hedged all its exposure to the dollar through July 2007. That means it can keep its prices steady in the United States without absorbing a huge blow to its euro profits.
Among German exporters, Porsche's strategy is by far the most conservative. BMW said it had hedged two-thirds of its exposure for this year and one-third for 2005. Volkswagen, after its heavy losses, stepped up its hedging last fall, to 70 percent of its exposure from 30 percent before.
To execute its strategy, Porsche must buy options in the financial markets to protect itself from every conceivable swing. ''How much it costs is one of our biggest secrets,'' said a spokesman for Porsche, Immo Dehnert. ''You don't get it for free.''
For German auto executives, who prefer to talk about turbochargers and torque, currency hedging is something of a black art. They discuss it reluctantly, usually only to explain poor results. In times when the dollar is strong, they often bury currency gains in their operating profits.
''German carmakers traditionally say, 'We're in the car business, not the currency business,''' said Ferdinand Dudenhöffer, director of the Center for Automotive Research in Gelsenkirchen.
Mr. Dudenhöffer raised eyebrows here recently with a study meant to dramatize how exchange rates can shake up the global auto industry. He showed that the euro had risen so much against the dollar that it would be cheaper for Germans to buy high-priced German cars in the United States and pay import duties and other costs to have them shipped back to Germany than to buy them at home.
One example used in the study was Porsche's new Carrera GT sports car, which costs $440,000 in the United States. Converting that into euros at $1.30 each yields a euro price of 338,462. Add 16 percent in taxes and that total rises to 392,615 euros. Getting the car back to Germany might add a few thousand euros.
The Carrera GT, Porsche's most expensive model, sells for 452,690 euros in Germany. A German buyer could save enough in America to buy one of Porsche's new Cayenne sport utility vehicles as well.
''Even for a Rolls-Royce owner, 65,000 euros is nice money,'' Mr. Dudenhöffer said. ''You can do something with that.''
Officials of the German carmakers dismissed Mr. Dudenhöffer's study as something of a gimmick. Porsche, BMW and Mercedes-Benz said they had seen no evidence that Germans were reimporting their cars. Porsche said it would build only 1,500 Carrera GTs, which means most buyers are likely to order a customized car, and perhaps even pick it up personally at the assembly plant in Leipzig.
But while executives dispute Mr. Dudenhöffer's conclusions, they agree that he raises a valid point. The disparity in exchange rates can upset the economics of the industry, particularly for the global players.
That is why auto executives talk a lot about ''natural'' hedging -- ways to offset the risks of an unfavorable exchange rate without resorting to exotic financial instruments. The simplest way is to build assembly plants in the United States, as BMW and Mercedes-Benz have done.
BMW produces nearly 160,000 cars a year in Spartanburg, S.C., and 100,000 of them are exported, mostly to Europe. BMW pays dollars for the parts and labor that go into those cars, and sells them for euros or other currencies like British pounds or Swiss francs, so a weak dollar makes the vehicles much more profitable for the company.
The remaining 60,000 cars from Spartanburg are sold in the United States. BMW's total sales volume in the United States is about 277,000 cars, which means that 217,000 are made in Europe and shipped to America; those cars become less profitable as the dollar weakens. Together, the gains and losses tend to smooth out BMW's overall results, however the exchange rate behaves.
DaimlerChrysler plans to expand production at its Mercedes plant in Tuscaloosa, Ala., in part to take advantage of the weak dollar. Daimler as a whole is less vulnerable to exchange rates than other European manufacturers because of its Chrysler Group, which makes and sells most of its cars in the United States.
Production decisions, of course, are driven by more than just exchange rates, so for German companies, currency trades are still the most common method of dealing with oscillating dollars and euros.
The euro's recent surge has put risk managers in a tricky position. Mr. Herr of BMW believes that at $1.25, the euro is overvalued. Using computer models, he estimates the currency's correct long-term value at something closer to $1.10. Based on that estimate, BMW has opted not to hedge heavily in 2005.
If the dollar stages a rebound, that bet will pay off. If the dollar remains weak until next year, however, BMW will have to take up short-term hedges at less favorable rates. Other carmakers are in similar straits.
Next year ''is looking very scary for all these companies,'' said Thomas Aney, an auto analyst at Dresdner Kleinwort Wasserstein in Frankfurt. ''They're going into the year with a naked hedge.''
For Mr. Herr, the crucial factors are sound analysis and steady nerves. He said he ignores market rumors in favor of signs that institutions like the Federal Reserve or the European Central Bank are shifting their thinking on the interest rates they set.
''The market has been very sentiment-driven,'' Mr. Herr said. ''But if you look at it, the fundamentals haven't changed.''
