BILL BRYSON slid off his muddy shoes, perched his burly frame perilously on the arm of his leather office chair and spun out a tale of two homecomings.
Eight years ago he moved back home to America, after two decades spent rummaging around the dales of Yorkshire with his wife and children, and found to his dismay that it ''was a lot like moving back in with your parents in middle age.''
''You may find that your parents are the most delightful people, but you don't want to live with them,'' said Mr. Bryson, 52, who conquered the chips-and-beer set here with his wry, accessible travelogues. ''And I kind of felt that way about my own country. It was kind of like my big adventure was over. As soon as I went home, I stopped being distinctive.''
No sooner did his third-eldest daughter graduate from high school in New Hampshire than Mr. Bryson, his British wife, Cynthia, and their brood packed up last summer and returned to England to quench his longing for Victorian pubs and predictably damp weather.
''But it is more than that,'' he said of his love for England. ''There is a certain amount of inevitability about it.''
Britain, for one -- a country that Mr. Bryson affectionately toyed with in his 1995 book, ''Notes From a Small Island'' -- is thrilled to have him back. Perhaps no American writer is as beloved here as Mr. Bryson, a best-selling author of self-deprecating romps through Europe, America and Australia whom the country seems to have adopted as its own.
Bookstores build veritable shrines to him; it is not uncommon to see a towering cardboard display stuffed with Bryson books, including his latest, a scientific explainer titled ''A Short History of Nearly Everything.'' For months, the book has bobbed at the top of best-seller lists in Britain and the United States.
When readers were asked in a survey last year to name the book that best captured England's national identity, they chose Mr. Bryson's portrayal, with its crusty landladies, unheated seaside hotels and small guilty pleasures, like eating a hard biscuit on a rainy day.
Home again abroad, as it were, Mr. Bryson quietly explained that he seemed slightly off kilter in America. To start, there was his accent, hovering as it does somewhere over the middle of the Atlantic, not altogether native Iowa, not quite adopted British.
THEN there also was his tendency to ask for things like polyfill at the hardware store because the American word (spackle) eluded him. He wondered when Bennigan's had started serving sophisticated salads with ''dandelions and rocket,'' a bitter English green, ''things that I'm sure we used to spray with herbicides.''
The fact is, he has spent more of his adult years in Britain than in America. Mr. Bryson, whose parents were both journalists, first arrived here as a young backpacker, ready to scrape his way across Europe on beer and cheese. Then he fell in love with Cynthia, a psychiatric nurse, and decided to settle down in Britain.
In his cozy office, complete with a bear (stuffed), and cans of Hatuey Lager nestling between books, he looks just the sort of family man who putters around the house, in his worn blue corduroys and blue cable-knit sweater. His reddish beard is bushy and his eyeglasses old-fashioned. Truckfuls of money have done little to erode his frugality, he said.
His one luxury is his newly bought 18th-century house, with a proper English garden out back. The driveway boasts the kind of sensible car, a Renault, that families rent in Europe. ''People ask me, 'Do you fly in first class and stay in palatial hotels and things?' '' he said. ''In fact, I don't. I couldn't bring myself to pay for these things out of my own pocket.''
Despite his success with travel writing, Mr. Bryson said, he has been eager to move beyond the genre. He never meant to be a travel writer. His first book, ''Lost Continent,'' in which he roamed the United States in his mother's Chevette, was a memoir, as far as he was concerned; his publisher, thrilled by the returns, told him otherwise and instructed him to turn out another travel book.
He obliged, churning out four more. Now, he said, he is content to shelve his professional wanderlust for something different. Traveling has lost a bit of its gleam anyway, he said, blighted as so many foreign places have been by Starbucks and Pizza Huts.
''What I think is particularly distressing is that people want that sameness,'' he said. ''I've never quite understood that feeling: that you arrive in a strange place, yet you want to have nothing but familiar experiences.''
He also said he felt tapped out on his subject: most of the first world. ''I don't want to go and start trying to make jokes in places like India, Tanzania or Iraq,'' he said. ''Afghanistan is not a funny place.''
The success of ''A Short History of Nearly Everything,'' which seeks to explain science in a way that is both accurate and approachable, has allowed him to move in a new direction. The book, which took him four years to finish, posed a challenge for Mr. Bryson, a science flunky who was driven by the notion that the subject was sexy underneath but always dourly dressed.
His next project, he says, is a mini-biography of Shakespeare for the Eminent Lives series begun by the editor James Atlas. His contribution will be a ''quick sprint'' though Shakespeare's life, which, Mr. Bryson said, remains decidedly mysterious.
The main challenge may be to overcome his skeptics. Mr. Bryson's prose, which tends more toward the goofy than the godly, has a way of irritating literary and intellectual sets. He was eviscerated in The Sunday Telegraph recently by a commentator who, choosing to remain anonymous, called Mr. Bryson's jokes unfunny and his writing excruciating. His audience, the writer continued, is made up of ''honest, clean-living folk who don't normally buy books and have no sense of humor.''
SUCH criticism has not damped the broad appreciation of Mr. Bryson here, or his own affection for Britain. Perhaps the biggest bouquet Britain has given him is his appointment two months ago to the Commission of English Heritage, the government's pre-eminent conservation body. It is a high honor for a man who once commented on the plethora of sex toys available to the Dutch.
But there is a logic to it. Mr. Bryson has long chided Britons for the way they cavalierly defile their centuries-old heritage by slapping up tacky storefronts under majestic Georgian buildings or threading highways though historic neighborhoods.
As a well-known, even recognizable figure, Mr. Bryson said, he is there to serve as an ambassador of sorts, a man who can drum up support for a cause. But as an ordinary guy, Mr. Bryson can also add the common touch to the proceedings; for example, his knowledge of visitor centers runs long and deep.
''There are landscape historians, archaeologists and architects on the board, most of them devoted in a very active and professional way to some aspect of the nation's heritage,'' Mr. Bryson said. ''And then there's me, fresh off the boat.''
THE SATURDAY PROFILE
