An Italian philosopher and political theorist who was scheduled to teach at New York University this semester has decided not to do so, as a protest against the new American policy of fingerprinting arriving visitors and employees from other countries.
The philosopher, Giorgio Agamben, also called for other intellectuals and teachers to join his protest.
''I have no intention of submitting myself to such procedures,'' Professor Agamben wrote in an article in Le Monde, the French newspaper, on Jan. 10, according to a translation forwarded by an N.Y.U. official.
In the article, Professor Agamben said that he deeply opposed the use of biological methods to track citizens, including procedures like finger and retina prints and subcutaneous tattooing, for political purposes.
''By applying these techniques and these devices invented for the dangerous classes to a citizen'' he continued, according to the translation, governments ''have made the person the ideal suspect, to the point that it's humanity itself that has become the dangerous class.''
Le Monde was one of several European newspapers that ran statements from Professor Agamben, and translations of those articles are now circulating at some American universities.
Richard Foley, dean of the Faculty of Arts and Science at N.Y.U., said that Professor Agamben had been named one of about a dozen global distinguished professors at N.Y.U., which would have brought him to teach at the university for short periods over several years.
Dean Foley said the professor notified the university about a week ago that he would not be coming.
''We were disappointed by his decision,'' Dean Foley said yesterday. ''But we recognized this was a matter of conscience for him. We are eager and hopeful that in future years he can take up the appointment again.''
Professor Agamben had been scheduled to teach an intensive, seven-week graduate course: ''The Life of the Images: Benjamin, Warburg and The Genealogy of Western Imagination.'' Sixteen students were registered to take the class and more were expected to audit it, and the graduate students had organized a national conference on his work.
Nancy Ruttenburg, the chairwoman of N.Y.U.'s Department of Comparative Literature, where Professor Agamben was to have taught, said she was concerned about the effect of American security policies on international educational exchange.
Efforts to reach Professor Agamben by e-mail and telephone in Italy yesterday afternoon were unsuccessful.
Sheldon E. Steinbach, general counsel for the American Council on Education, said he was not aware of other professors who had declined to come to the United States because of its fingerprinting policies, and suggested that Professor Agamben's decision was an overreaction.
''There is an undertone of massive paranoia that is speculative and anticipatory that is seemingly permeating some elements of the professoriate,'' he said yesterday.
