John Edwards says he is swimming in it. John Kerry claims to possess it as well. Richard A. Gephardt is hoping to sustain it. Joseph I. Lieberman insists he is eventually going to get it. Iowa is reputed to produce it in bulk.
Momentum, the holy grail of political campaigns, is evidently spreading through the Democratic presidential candidates like the flu.
''Its an amazing thing to watch, this incredible energy,'' said Senator Edwards, of North Carolina, whose campaign on Friday issued an electronic press release giddy over the senator's ''incredible momentum'' in Iowa.''
''My campaign has great momentum and great energy,'' Senator Kerry, of Massachusetts, declared a few days ago as he began his ascent here.
''We have a ton of momentum,'' said a spokesman for Representative Gephardt, of Missouri.
And Senator Lieberman, of Connecticut, allowed earlier this week on CNN that his decision to skip Iowa to focus on New Hampshire helped him make progress in New England. ''I think that's going to give me the momentum to go forward,'' Mr. Lieberman said.
Candidates crave momentum and hope to ride it like a wave. The problem is that it is difficult to gauge who is actually moving forward and who is engaged in wishful thinking. The laws of physics would seem to preclude everyone from having momentum simultaneously.
''At this point, I think it is particularly elusive because nothing has really happened yet,'' said Larry M. Bartels, a professor of politics and public affairs at Princeton University.
That detection problem is especially acute in Iowa, where the caucuses have historically posed an organizational test. A campaign better equipped to deposit its supporters at precinct meetings could surpass a campaign that has tapped into a vein of new excitement, though turnout and a candidate's personal appeal are obviously connected. Among the top four candidates, Howard Dean and Mr. Gephardt are reputed to have the best ground games in Iowa.
And the conventional way of measuring momentum before any votes are cast -- the public opinion survey -- is a bit unreliable here because turnout is relatively low and caucusgoers are encouraged to change their preferences during the event.
Recent polls show the race to be within reach of any of the main four after earlier surveys had put Dr. Dean in the lead. That would seem to indicate that if Dr. Dean has momentum, it might be in the wrong direction. His strategists are not buying that
''I've been here; this is my fourth, fifth Iowa caucus,'' said Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager. ''The one thing I can consistently tell you is: The tracking polls are always wrong in the last week.''
With no votes to count and the polls treated skeptically, gauging Iowa momentum becomes little more than guesswork: trying to judge the fervor of attendees at events, reading the buzz surrounding a candidate, interpreting a newspaper endorsement, conducting random voter interviews that find a swell of support.
But the benefits of being seen as having momentum are real: motivated staff members and volunteers, improved media coverage and, not to be overlooked, an upbeat, energized candidate. Voters themselves also look for candidates who seem to be on the upward track.
The closeness of the Iowa contest has put a premium on the search for surge among the candidates in a state where the talk of momentum usually follows the caucuses. The event is more traditionally seen as a way to gauge who is on the way up, the way down or the way out as the election caravan moves to the first primary state, New Hampshire, and beyond. Iowa has always been as much about the sense of momentum and the expectations game as it has about actual results, and the outcome Monday should be no different.
It was the first George Bush who shook hands with what he called ''Big Mo'' after he won the Iowa caucuses in 1980. ''I suppose I am out of the pack,'' he said in a classic bit of political analysis, ''but they will be after me, howling and yowling at my heels. What we will have is momentum. We will look forward to Big Mo being on our side, as they say in athletics.''
But Mr. Bush and his new friend did not remain on close terms for long as Ronald Reagan quickly claimed the initiative in New Hampshire and went on to the Republican nomination and the White House. Momentum, obviously, can be fickle.
And that may be why Mr. Kerry, after trumpeting his big push earlier in the week, is expressing a little more caution in the final days.
''It is kind of a double-edged sword,'' said Mr. Bartels, the Princeton professor. ''On the one hand, you want to build up expectations. But you don't want to build them up so high that come caucus night, people are disappointed.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
