After ripping the stick from the hands of the Devils' Sergei Brylin, Eric Lindros crashed to the front of the Devils' net and elbowed defenseman Paul Martin in the head. As Lindros skated to the bench, he was dumped by defenseman David Hale.
The Rangers did not score on that shift during Thursday night's game at Madison Square Garden and Lindros did not have a goal or an assist in their 3-3 tie. But he was effective again, and he was on the ice for goals by his linemates, Matthew Barnaby and Chad Wiseman. Lindros won 15 of 21 face-offs, including some important ones when the Rangers were short-handed.
He dived to block a shot while killing a penalty late in the game. One of his collisions knocked the helmet off Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski.
His speedy and determined bursts into the Devils' zone created more room for his teammates. He mixed his skill and size the way he sometimes has in his star-crossed N.H.L. career, which began in 1992. ''He's leading the charge,'' Barnaby said. ''He's keeping his legs moving. When he's finishing his checks, he's a tough guy to play against. His confidence is really high right now.''
The Rangers are 6-3-1-2 since Dec. 22 and head to Montreal for a game Saturday night in eighth place in the Eastern Conference, in contention to qualify for the playoffs for the first time since 1997. And their spurt has coincided with Lindros's best performances of the season.
Glen Sather, the coach, general manager and president of the Rangers, was asked if he had told Lindros to become more involved, instead of playing on the perimeter. ''No,'' Sather said.
But is Lindros doing this? ''Absolutely,'' Sather said. ''We just asked him to play like he can play. His attitude is good. He's turning into the leader on the hockey club we thought he would.''
With Lindros, however, there is always a ''yes, but'' being implied if not actually stated. He asserted himself against the Devils, but they were without the veteran defenseman Scott Stevens, whose hard check in the playoffs of 2000 gave Lindros the most devastating of his seven concussions. Lindros, who played for the Philadelphia Flyers at the time, missed all of the next season.
Will Lindros, who turns 31 next month, remain confident and rambunctious as the second half of the season progresses? Can he play hard and stay injury-free? After more than a decade of challenging hockey authority, is Lindros a mature and confident leader who can help push a team full of stars who have underachieved as a group?
''We're right on the verge of really turning this into something that could be special,'' Lindros said. ''You get that special feeling every once in a while and it's starting. The flu season's over. The special feeling's in.''
Although he is the largest player on the team, at 6 feet 5 inches and 237 pounds, Lindros has a fragility about him, physically and psychologically. Bobby Holik, another imposing Rangers center at 6-4 and 235, said Lindros was ''very hard on himself.''
''Sometimes he just needs words of encouragement to keep him going because he doesn't accept anything but the best of himself,'' said Holik, who added that he urged Lindros to ''just kind of relax and think about the next game.'' Of Holik's counsel, Lindros smiled and said: ''He's not exactly smooth as silk when he speaks, at times, but he speaks the truth. I enjoy what he says.''
With 9 goals and 18 assists, Lindros is fourth on the team in scoring with 27 points. That won't win him votes for the Hart trophy, which he won in 1995 with Philadelphia as most valuable player in the league.
After feuding with Flyers General Manager Bobby Clarke, Lindros was traded to the Rangers in 2001. His unusual contract reflects the uncertainty over his health. He has a base salary of $3.3 million and receives $80,000 a game, up to a maximum of 75 games, or $6 million. The team has an option for next season at $10.25 million.
Lindros did not like the ice time he was receiving earlier this season and Sather did not like Lindros's performance. But he now averages 16 minutes 3 seconds, third among Ranger centers behind Holik and Petr Nedved. Although the rookie Wiseman replaced the suspended Chris Simon on Lindros's left side on Thursday, Simon should return on Saturday.
Neither Simon nor Barnaby are deluxe finishers around the net. But they play a confrontational style that seems to suit that facet of Lindros's personality. He said it was good ''just to have consistency'' with his wingers and added that ''the more you work with a couple individuals, the better you're going to be.''
He also rooms with Barnaby and noted that ''we're always in the back of the bus'' for more conversation. In hockey, as in many other team sports, the comfortable meshing of personalities is an important, and intangible, ingredient for group success.
''You feel proud when you have the chance to play and he's been using me a lot more,'' Lindros said of Sather. ''I feel good about it.''
Has Lindros ever had second thoughts about coming to the Rangers? It was something he insisted on, just as he did his Junior A trade from Sault Ste. Marie to Oshawa and his first professional trade, from Quebec to the Flyers. ''Some days are better than others, let's not kid ourselves,'' Lindros said, before quickly adding, ''I enjoy playing here.''
Speaking again of his teammates, he said: ''We've got great people here. We're slowly picking it up.''
When he battled the establishment in previous phases of his life, his case was often carried to the public and the front office by his parents, Carl and Bonnie Lindros. In New York, however, they have remained in the background, occasionally visiting from Toronto.
On Thursday night at the Garden, with the temperature outside near zero, they waited for their son in a back corridor by a family area. When he emerged from the locker room wearing a gray suit, a dark cashmere coat and a blue stocking cap, they greeted him with smiles, fell into stride and walked alongside him out into the night of the big, cold city.
HOCKEY
