Todd Zeile called New York ''my home away from home'' in explaining why a Californian cannot get the city out of his baseball blood and why he has agreed in principle to a one-year contract for roughly $1 million with the Mets.
The 38-year-old Zeile has had 11 different ''homes'' in his 15-year major league career, and only Mike Morgan, who pitched for 12 teams, has had more. This will be Zeile's second stint with the Mets and the fourth time in the last five seasons that he is playing for a New York team; he started the 2003 season with the Yankees. Zeile's agreement is pending a physical next week.
''The bottom line is I still wanted to play and I wanted to play here,'' Zeile said in a phone interview. ''I held out hope about the West Coast because of family concerns, but I became more aware of how much the Mets had legitimate interest in me. I had the best times in my career here.''
Zeile, who will be a backup at first base and third base, was referring to playing with the Mets in the 2000 World Series, won by the Yankees in five games. He played 304 games for the Mets in 2000 and 2001.
A career .266 hitter with 244 homers and 1,075 runs batted in, Zeile said his conversations with General Manager Jim Duquette and Jeff Wilpon, the chief operating officer, had convinced him that he would have a ''meaty role'' on the team. Zeile thought the same thing would occur with the Yankees last year, but he played in only 66 games before being released in August. He finished the season with the Montreal Expos.
''I guess this is a little bit of a leap of faith on my part,'' Zeile said. ''But the National League is worlds away from the American League when you're a reserve. There's a chance for you to play every night. I know Art Howe was very clear with Jeff Wilpon about being able to find ways to use me.''
When Zeile signed with the Yankees last year, he spoke about possibly ending his career under Joe Torre, who was his manager with the St. Louis Cardinals, and with a World Series ring. But that rosy scenario did not materialize as Zeile hit .210 with 6 homers and 25 R.B.I.
''The way it ended up with the Yankees, I wasn't happy,'' Zeile said. ''It was no one's fault, but it made me wonder if I wanted to play again.''
Zeile waited a month after the season to see how he felt feel mentally and physically about playing another year, and he decided he wanted to come back. Once Zeile realized the desire to be close to his family on the West Coast was not coming to fruition, he said he was ''very happy'' the Mets wanted him. ''This is my opposite coast,'' he said.
Clemens Will Be Back
Roger Clemens will make his first appearance in New York since signing with the Houston Astros when he receives the Joe DiMaggio Toast of the Town Award at the 81st annual New York Baseball Writers' dinner at the Sheraton New York Hotel and Towers on Jan. 25.
Cubs Hire Little
Having missed an opportunity last fall to end the Boston Red Sox' World Series title drought, Grady Little will try next season to help the Chicago Cubs end theirs.
Little, the former Red Sox manager, was hired by the Cubs yesterday as a scouting consultant and assistant to General Manager Jim Hendry. Little will help evaluate trades and the Cubs' minor league system, and assist with coaching duties during spring training for a team that has not won a World Series since 1908.
For the last two seasons, Little managed a Red Sox team seeking its first World Series title since 1918. He was fired in October, two weeks after Boston lost to the Yankees in Game 7 of the American League Championship Series. Boston's ace, Pedro Martínez, failed to hold the lead in the game, and Little was blamed for leaving Martínez in too long.
The Cubs' chances got a boost yesterday when their ace, Kerry Wood, agreed to a $9.75 million, one-year contract. Wood had filed for arbitration on Thursday. The deal gives the Cubs and Wood time to negotiate a long-term contract. (AP)
Ordóñez to the Padres
The former Mets shortstop Rey Ordóñez agreed to a minor league contract with the San Diego Padres yesterday and was invited to spring training.
He will earn $650,000 if he makes the team, with a chance to make $125,000 more in bonuses. (AP)
BASEBALL
