Mayor Michael Bloomberg began his attempt to journey back into the political good graces of New Yorkers this week by showing them how he had turned the city's multibillion-dollar budget gap into a $1.4 billion surplus -- and promising many of them a piece of it. His preliminary budget plan was an impressive starting point for keeping the city safe, clean and fiscally sound. But it went too far in trying to make people happy.
By promising most homeowners a $400 rebate on property taxes this year and beyond -- at an annual cost of $250 million -- the mayor is betting that everyone will want to help nurture the city's new fiscal breathing room. That's unlikely, because Albany and Washington have their own money problems. The state faces a budget shortfall of about $5 billion. That leaves little room for the kind of sympathy that spurred state lawmakers to break with Gov. George Pataki and help the city last year. Yet Mr. Bloomberg needs the state to approve the tax rebate and then agree to absorb more Medicaid costs and carry out a plan to take over $500 million in debt service from the 1970's. The mayor deserves the support on Medicaid and old debt, but the rebate guts his best argument for help.
Mr. Bloomberg sounded a note of caution on the budget, but we wish he had gone further and dropped the rebate plan until the city showed clearer signs of being out of the woods economically. Happily, the budget contains other solid signs of economic prudence. The mayor is counting only half of the surplus toward balancing the 2005 budget, and squirreling away the rest for 2006. He also wisely moved toward ''pay as you go'' on capital projects, a step that lightens future debt obligations.
Mr. Bloomberg avoided another open confrontation with union leaders by not setting down a specific marker on the cost of the coming contracts. But that leaves another question mark in the budget. Even keeping wages level with inflation could cost an additional $500 million.
The much-hailed surplus could easily fade away before anyone has a chance to spend it. But Mr. Bloomberg has been steady in making choices, however unpopular, to do right by the city. We are counting on him not to change course now.
