Colts wide receiver Brandon Stokley practiced yesterday and plans to play against the Patriots in the American Football Conference championship game tomorrow.
Stokley missed practice Wednesday and Thursday morning after his month-old son, Cameron, was hospitalized with an undisclosed illness.
''He is planning on playing, as long as Cameron doesn't have any downturns,'' Coach Tony Dungy said.
Dungy said Stokley would leave the team if he needed to be with his son.
Stokley has emerged as one of the Colts' top receivers, catching a team-high six touchdown passes in the last five games.
If Stokley does not play, Troy Walters or the rookie Aaron Moorehead will most likely fill in for him. (AP)
Panthers' Davis Practices
Carolina running back Stephen Davis worked out yesterday, but no one was allowed to see it. Panthers Coach John Fox closed practice for the first time this season.
''He looked fine,'' Fox said.
Was he able to participate in all the drills? ''Uh-huh,'' Fox mumbled.
Davis, who rushed for a career-best 1,444 yards in the regular season, had been held out of practice all week with a strained left quadriceps muscle. (AP)
Eagles' Kalu Injures Foot
N. D. Kalu left practice with a sprained foot, but Eagles Coach Andy Reid is optimistic that Kalu, Philadelphia's starting defensive end, will be able to play.
Kalu turned his foot during warm-ups; X-rays showed no damage.
''He should be fine,'' Reid said. ''By the time he got to the X-ray unit, he was feeling better than when he initially started going there.''
Kalu has been one of the few constants on an Eagles defense depleted by injuries. He had 5 1/2 sacks and 74 tackles and had a steady presence on the pass rush.
Cornerback Troy Vincent was cleared to start after missing three games with a hip injury. Vincent practiced all week and said the hip no longer caused enough pain to prevent him from playing tomorrow at full speed. (AP)
Packers Fire Assistants
The Packers fired their defensive coordinator, Ed Donatell, five days after they were eliminated from the postseason by the Eagles in overtime. The Packers allowed the Eagles to drive 61 yards in the closing minutes of regulation and tie the score on David Akers's 37-yard field goal with five seconds left. Akers then won the game, 20-17, on a 31-yard field goal in overtime.
Packers Coach Mike Sherman said the decision was the result of ''philosophical differences.''
The 46-year-old Donatell, a 14-year N.F.L. coaching veteran, served as defensive coordinator since 2000. He coached defensive backs for the Jets from 1990 to 1994 and the Denver Broncos from 1995 to 1999 before joining the Packers.
Sherman also fired his tight ends coach, Jeff Jagodzinski. (Bloomberg News)
EXTRA POINTS
DICK LeBEAU returned to the Pittsburgh Steelers as defensive coordinator, rejecting an offer to stay with the Bills. LeBeau, who ran the Steelers' defense the last time they made the Super Bowl during the 1995 season, was the Bills' assistant head coach last season and worked with the defensive coordinator, JERRY GRAY, who will remain in Buffalo. LeBeau had been the Bengals' head coach for nearly three seasons.
The Browns hired the former Redskins defensive coordinator GEORGE EDWARDS as their linebackers coach.
WADE PHILLIPS was hired as defensive coordinator of the San Diego Chargers, agreeing to a two-year contract. He spent the last two seasons as the Atlanta Falcons' defensive coordinator and was was the interim coach for the last three games after DAN REEVES was fired. (AP)
PRO FOOTBALL: NOTEBOOK
