Representative Katherine Harris, a first-term Republican, announced Friday that she had decided against running for Florida's open Senate seat, ending months of speculation that she would enter that crucial race over the objections of her party's leaders.
Ms. Harris became an internationally known figure in 2000 when, as Florida's secretary of state, she supervised the recount of the state's presidential vote. When George W. Bush won Florida by just 537 votes, and with it the election, Democrats accused her of engineering his victory.
But she became a favorite of conservatives, and has proved a mighty fund-raiser for her party. In 2002, she won election to Congress here in Florida's 13th District.
While polls consistently showed that Ms. Harris would soundly defeat her Republican competition in the Senate primary, scheduled for August, many in the party questioned her ability to win the general election. They also worried that her candidacy would energize Democrats still smarting from the recount results, a potential problem for Mr. Bush's re-election campaign as he seeks again to capture this pivotal state.
The Democratic Party had already begun using the specter of a Harris candidacy to prod voters and donors. ''Please send Katherine Harris a message that we don't want her in the Senate, and won't let her steal any future elections,'' Andy Grossman, executive director of the Democratic Senatorial Campaign Committee, wrote in recent e-mail correspondence to donors. Mr. Grossman called Ms. Harris ''an election-stealing, right wing apologist for the radical Republican agenda.''
That kind of message is precisely why the Bush campaign team wanted Ms. Harris to stay out of the race, Republican officials said. Shortly after Senator Bob Graham, a Democrat, announced in November that he would not seek re-election, Republican leaders in Washington met with Mel Martinez, then Mr. Bush's housing secretary, and encouraged him to run in what was seen partly as a pre-emptive strike against Ms. Harris.
Mr. Martinez had considered earlier in the year a possibility of opposing Mr. Graham, but by summer was saying he had ruled it out. Within weeks of Mr. Graham's announcement, however, it became clear that Mr. Martinez would enter the race. He did so this month, joining a Republican field that includes former Representative Bill McCollum, among others.
Appearing at a Boys and Girls Club here in Sarasota, the biggest city in her district, Ms. Harris said Friday that no one in her party leadership had dissuaded her from running. When a reporter asked her to address a widely circulated rumor -- that Karl Rove, the president's chief campaign strategist, had himself warned her not to run -- Ms. Harris denied it. ''He was never discouraging,'' she said.
Florida associates of Ms. Harris said that she had originally planned to wait until 2006 and run against another Democratic senator, Bill Nelson, but that when Mr. Graham announced he was stepping down, she was drawn to the idea of running for an open seat. Even as she ruled out her candidacy Friday, she stressed that every poll she had seen suggested that she would win the primary.
She hinted that she would run in 2006 after all.
''My decision may surprise those who looked forward to the horse race and the headlines,'' she said, surrounded by several dozen supporters. ''Rest assured, all in good time.''
