A Manhattan woman died last night while walking her two dogs in the East Village in a bizarre accident that a Fire Department spokesman said appeared to have been an electrocution.
The woman, Jodie S. Lane, of 421 East 12th Street, was walking her two dogs, an Alaskan Malamute and a Pit Bull mix, along 11th Street near First Avenue about 6:25 p.m., when the dogs began to tremble, howl and attack each other, a witness said. One of the dogs even bit Ms. Lane. As she bent to help one of the dogs, the other jumped at her. She fell to the pavement, and was in cardiac arrest by the time firefighters arrived a short time later, a spokesman said.
The two dogs survived, and were taken in by people who had seen the accident, a witness said.
It was not clear precisely how Ms. Lane, 30, received the shock. The dogs had stepped onto a heavy metal plate embedded in the asphalt of 11th Street, just west of First Avenue, where they were walking. That plate, said Robert F. Zerilli, an owner of Veniero's pastry shop on 11th Street and First Avenue, seemed to have brought the dogs in contact with an electric current.
Ms. Lane yelled for help, as the dogs made a high-pitched yelping sound.
''You've never heard a sound like that before,'' Mr. Zerilli said.
A police officer who assisted in the rescue was treated for minor injuries.
Neither the police, nor the Fire Department spokesman provided details about how she died. A spokesman from Consolidated Edison, Chris Olert, said electric currents that normally travel along wire, can occasionally be conducted by equipment or other metal objects. It was unclear if that had been the case with the metal panel in the street.
''What happened, we just don't know,'' Mr. Olert said. ''We're still trying to investigate.''
A small crowd gathered, while Ms. Lane struggled with her dogs on the street just outside the pastry shop. She struggled for about five minutes, witnesses said. People did not know how to help her, Mr. Zerilli said.
''They were shocked. People didn't know what to do,'' he added. Last night on 11th Street, a candle had been lit and placed on the sidewalk near where Ms. Lane died.
Ms. Lane and her husband, Alex, were both engineers, said Zdzislaw Czerny, the landlord of their apartment building. ''She was so lovely.''
Mr. Czerny said Ms. Lane and her husband had moved into the penthouse apartment in the building about a year ago.
''They always walked the dogs, even on the coldest days,'' he added.
