To borrow half a line from Shakespeare, it was a barren winter's day of wrathful nipping cold.
Reluctant cars in icy driveways groaned if they came to life at all. Stubborn rail switches froze, stalling subways in the city and commuter trains in the suburbs and contributing to a derailment in New Jersey. Unhappy pipes swelled and burst, forcing unhappier homeowners to plead for attention from overworked plumbers.
New Yorkers bundled themselves in bulky parkas and thick scarves yesterday as the metropolitan area shivered through the coldest weather of a cold month. With a low temperature of 1 in Central Park in the early morning, yesterday was the coldest Jan. 16 in 111 years. With winds gusting to 40 miles an hour, the day felt colder still. Temperatures around the region set records: zero in Bridgeport, Conn., and at Newark Liberty International Airport; and 3 at La Guardia Airport.
As city officials logged more than 3,700 complaints from tenants lacking heat or hot water, a 47-year-old man was found dead in the cold in the Bronx. But a spokesman for the medical examiner said it was not clear whether the brutal weather had played a role in his death. The man's body was found in the driveway of a three-story house on Cannon Place in Kingsbridge Heights, a residential neighborhood at the crest of a hill overlooking the Major Deegan Expressway. The police did not release the man's name, saying they had not been able to notify his relatives.
Mary Schelzo, 66, who lives in the house, said that she found the body about 4 a.m. while taking out the garbage. She said that she summoned her son, Michael Schelzo, 33, who tried to warm the man with blankets.
''His face was frozen solid,'' Mr. Schelzo said. ''His chest was still warm, but when a police officer came, he put a finger on his neck and just shook his head.''
The man's body was found hours after a woman in Bayville, on Long Island, died in the snow. She had climbed out of her car after veering onto a neighbor's lawn.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said that the city and the American Red Cross would open temporary ''warming centers'' in the five boroughs. ''They will operate much like the temporary cooling centers we operate in the summer,'' he said. More information about the shelters is available by calling 311, the mayor said.
The cold slowed commuters at the beginning and the end of the day. In the morning, a section of rail on the Babylon branch of the Long Island Rail Road near Amityville snapped, said a spokesman for the agency, Brian Dolan.
One train had to be pushed back to Babylon, slowing traffic on the entire branch by 30 to 40 minutes during the morning rush, he said. Other parts of the L.I.R.R. struggled with 15-minute delays, mainly because train doors would not open or close. The culprits were snow and ice tracked on board by passengers.
Metro-North canceled trains in the morning as it coped with a shortage of usable coaches, said a spokesman, Dan Brucker. By evening, the line was combining some trains -- for example, the 5:09 to Poughkeepsie and the 5:12 to Beacon suddenly became one -- and canceling others. Mr. Brucker said the cold and the snow earlier in the week were playing havoc with the electric motors on its trains.
The derailment in New Jersey, also in the morning, involved one car on a four-car train bound for Hoboken that was traveling near the Secaucus Transfer Station, New Jersey Transit officials said. The railroad dispatched what it called a rescue train, which went nose to nose with the crippled one so passengers could go from one to the other without going out in the cold.
New Jersey Transit issued a statement saying its investigation into the derailment has indicated so far that human error may have caused the accident. The agency said that its personnel had cleared the train to proceed over a frozen switch.
The temperature climbed into the 20's by midafternoon, and forecasters were promising it would reach the 30's today. But that was little consolation for weather watchers resigned to the idea that this could be another January for the record books. Stephen Fybish, who tracks weather statistics from his apartment on the Upper West Side, said that the average temperature for the month so far was 27.5 degrees.
That matched the average figure for January 2003, which went down in Mr. Fybish's records as the second coldest January since 1982 and the 24th coldest since forecasters began taking readings in Central Park in 1869.
''While everybody was talking about global warming, January was saying, 'Not me, not me,''' Mr. Fybish said, adding that even he was surprised by how cold it felt yesterday. By the time he went outside in the morning, hours after the 1-degree low had been recorded, the temperature was up to 8 or 9 degrees.
The last time it was only 1 degree in Central Park on a Jan. 16, the weather was front-page news. ''Low temperatures lessen the coal supply,'' a headline in The New York Times of Jan. 17, 1893, said. ''Disgust and darkness because of frozen gas pipes -- mails late.'' Another story said things were no better at sea: ''All the vessels that came into port covered with ice and snow,'' the headline said. This time around, there were subway stations where stalactites formed as water dripped from the ceiling. And there were diners where customers did not bother to take off their down-filled jackets and their wool caps while they ate the warmest food on the menu.
Which was the story at Mike's, a diner on 31st Street in Astoria, Queens. In a booth comfortably far from the door, Christina Lowery and Scott Sylvester did a quick count and announced that they were wearing 10 layers of winter clothes between them - ''almost all of the clothes that we own,'' she said. The places in their apartment where the extra-heavy things languish most of the year were empty, they reported, and Ms. Lowery, a documentary film producer, said she had been wishing for long underwear.
''I figure, it's winter,'' she said. ''We've all gotten weak in our constitutions. This is supposed to happen a few times in your life.''
