In a campaign where national security issues have loomed large in every debate and pancake breakfast here and in Iowa, the major Democratic candidates agree on only a handful of points: that President Bush failed to prepare for the reconstruction of Iraq, that they would rapidly replace American troops with some kind of international force, and that the White House has needlessly alienated much of the rest of the world.
Yet as they try to convince voters that America would be a safer place in their hands, each major candidate has reached for a different blend of engagement and toughness, and devised arguments about how he could accomplish many of Mr. Bush's goals without employing his tactics.
And in interviews over the past weeks, the candidates disagree on much else, from whether Iraq was the right war to fight to whether there are smarter ways to disarm or win over America's enemies.
Navigating the frozen back roads of New Hampshire the other morning, Gen. Wesley K. Clark said that had he been in the Oval Office over the past year, he would have dealt with the North Korean nuclear threat before focusing on Iraq, and toppled Saddam Hussein another way: by indicting him.
''Present the evidence,'' General Clark said, ''call for his arrest, and arrest him.'' He did not say how the United States could have executed the arrest before Mr. Hussein's regime was toppled.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut said he would have ordered military action and, like all his rivals, insisted he would have had a more carefully prepared plan for the day Mr. Hussein fell. Unlike his opponents, though, he said he would fire L. Paul Bremer III, who heads the American occupation, and bring in ''an experienced administrator from an Arab country, so there was more of a sense of American liberation rather than American occupation.''
Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, said he would bring 100,000 troops from Muslim nations to replace American forces -- though he stops short of listing which nations would provide them. Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, striking at what all the candidates believe is a central flaw of Bush foreign policy, would focus on rebuilding fractured alliances.
''It would take a new president,'' he declared the other day, navigating New York traffic jams on the way to the airport, ''because this one will never get a sympathetic audience.''
The interviews with the candidates, most lasting about 45 minutes, ranged from how to get a viable Iraqi government on its feet to how to promote democracy in Iran. The Democrats also discussed how they would disarm North Korea and deal with Pakistan, an ally Washington badly needs yet deeply mistrusts.
There was talk of the Mideast ''road map'' -- every candidate said Mr. Bush engaged in the peace process only sporadically -- and of the falling dollar and its effects on American workers and influence. Yet they always returned to Mr. Bush's style, and the damage they argued it had done.
''All you need to do is read history, to watch the way alliances were built and collapsed,'' said Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who has been toting a copy of ''Paris 1919,'' by Margaret MacMillan, about the missteps that shaped the post-World War I world -- including the creation of modern Iraq. Then, in another jab at Mr. Bush and his advisers, Mr. Kerry said, ''These guys, I guess, don't believe in history.''
Perhaps not surprisingly, Messrs. Kerry, Gephardt and Lieberman were the most familiar with the issue-by-issue, country-by-country details of the world they would face from the White House, bolstered by their decades on Capitol Hill. Mr. Lieberman was the most hawkish, with prescriptions that sound harsher than Mr. Bush's approach to dealing with the likes of Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, or President Kim Jong Il of North Korea.
What makes this campaign unusual, however, is that these subjects are being discussed at such length during the primary season. It is tricky territory for the Democrats, navigating a political landscape that did not exist four years ago.
''I do not believe that the American people will elect any candidate who they do not think will be as tough or tougher than Bush on terrorism,'' said Samuel R. Berger, the Clinton administration national security adviser who has advised most Democratic contenders. ''Any Democrat has to prove that he will carry on an unrelenting and smart campaign against terrorism. But there is an opportunity here to focus on more than capturing bad guys.''
In their own way, each tries to do exactly that.
Senator Kerry, who served in Vietnam, reminds audiences he learned his lessons ''in the price of blood.'' General Clark starts big campaign events with a film that tracks his career and culminates in his role as supreme NATO commander, leading the bombing campaign that drove Serbian forces from Kosovo.
John Edwards, the only major candidate who did not make himself available for a lengthy exploration of his views, talks of a ''strategy of prevention, not pre-emption,'' and favors creation of a ''Global Nuclear Compact'' to stop countries from turning civilian nuclear power programs into weapons.
The world's leading nations, he argues, ''would use their power -- including sanctions policy -- to stop other countries.'' Mr. Edwards tell crowds that stiffer international rules would accomplish what ''the administration's dangerous doctrine of pre-emption'' cannot.
Such proposals are all part of trying to convince the electorate that the country would be safer in Democratic hands. But at the same time, the candidates are picking apart each other's positions.
They leapt on Dr. Dean when he declared, after Saddam Hussein's capture, that the United States was no safer with the Iraqi dictator in captivity than when he was at large.
General Clark's bid to position himself as more antiwar than Dr. Dean led both the Republican National Committee and his primary opponents to pore through his comments as a military analyst, picking out sentences where he described Saddam Hussein as ''a threat'' and urged Congress to vote its support for the United States to act ''if the United Nations cannot act.''
Mr. Kerry has spent much of the campaign responding to questions about why he voted in favor of authorizing Mr. Bush to invade Iraq, then against $87 billion in financing, mostly to rebuild the country. The first vote, he said in New Hampshire last week, was based on Mr. Bush's misleading assurance that war would be ''a last resort''; the second reflected his conviction that American troops would be more at risk if Congress paid for a reconstruction plan so ill-considered that it risked ''leaving behind a failed state.''
Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio has been among the most consistent Democratic candidates: He opposed invading Iraq and would exit immediately, declaring in October that ''the goal is to bring all U.S. troops home by the new year.''
The Rev. Al Sharpton has not made foreign policy a central theme of his run, but last summer he noted that ''there are many places that we have people that are despicable that I would like to see out of power,'' but asked ''how do we then justify going at one person rather than others?'' Neither was interviewed because polls have them trailing badly.
It was Dr. Dean who propelled Iraq to the top of the primary debates. His crowds grew last year as he sharply criticized the war. ''He was so enamored of this Rumsfeldian nonsense that we were going to be greeted by open arms and everyone was going to see us as a liberator,'' Dr. Dean said of Mr. Bush in an interview last month.
General Clark has gained ground on Dr. Dean in New Hampshire partly on the strength of his argument that Mr. Bush's priorities were wrong and Iraq was ''a total mis-direction of U.S. resources.'' He would have focused on hunting down Osama bin Laden, he said.
Mr. Gephardt says he warned President Bush in 2002 that there was a right way to deal with Iraq and a wrong way. Mr. Gephardt said he told Mr. Bush that he should ''get inspectors back in for at least enough time so that we can bring our allies with us.''
Mr. Bush ''didn't respond,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''There was no real dialogue.'' Now, Mr. Gephardt tells audiences, Mr. Bush compounds the error by failing to allocate enough resources to education in developing nations and by doing little to wean America of dependence on the oil of Saudi Arabia.
When the candidates are asked how they would deal with nations like Pakistan and North Korea, they speak of engagement and criticize missed opportunities but only reluctantly offer concrete strategies.
All fault Mr. Bush for refusing to negotiate directly with North Korea, and for failing to engage the country for the first 18 months of his term. ''North Korea was casting about for someone to talk to, and Colin Powell had a way until the president pulled the rug out from under him,'' Mr. Kerry said. General Clark said that in its zeal to confront Iraq, the administration turned a blind eye to North Korea's nuclear capacity, then sought Beijing's help. ''Why be a supplicant to China,'' he asked, ''when we have been the dominant security power in Northeast Asia?''
Mr. Edwards, in a speech in Iowa last month, argued that Mr. Bush's approach amounted to waiting ''until our enemies gather strength,'' then resorting to force.
Such issues Mr. Berger said, would become the stuff of the general election. ''For 30 years I fought in presidential campaigns with political people who said foreign policy doesn't matter,'' he noted. ''I always thought they were wrong, and in a post-9/11 world, it's the canvas on which leadership is painted.''
This article is the fourth in a series comparing the policy positions of the Democratic candidates for president. Earlier articles are online at nytimes.com/campaigns.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POSITIONS
