Just a few weeks ago, Howard Dean's presidential campaign was an open book, hailed by reporters as a marvel of transparency.
But in recent weeks Dr. Dean has become less and less accessible, these journalists say. Some of them became so frustrated this week that they ignored warnings that the campaign bus would leave without them as they waited to corner Dr. Dean when he left his plane.
And, during a series of conversations with ABC News last weekend, Dr. Dean's advisers threatened to take away the network's seat on the campaign plane if ABC went forward with plans to report that a Vermont state trooper who Dr. Dean once called ''a wonderful parent'' turned out to be a wife abuser.
Though network and campaign officials said the threat came in a series of heated arguments and was never taken seriously -- the report ran with no reprisals -- the dispute was the most extreme illustration yet of how much Dr. Dean's relationship with the national news media has changed.
Rival campaigns are now trying to figure out what that change means for them.
Through the fall, Dr. Dean's rivals grumbled that the news media's overwhelming interest in the former governor of Vermont had drawn crucial exposure away from them while allowing Dr. Dean's rise with what many called kid-glove coverage. Now Dr. Dean's senior advisers are sounding the way rival advisers did in the fall, complaining of a similar double standard, this time benefiting, Gen. Wesley K. Clark, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts.
''We've been getting hammered, and everybody else has been avoiding the scrutiny that we're taking,'' Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager, said. ''But we're weathering it, and we're still in it, and that's all you can hope for.''
Even some prominent members of the national press corps are questioning whether they built Dr. Dean up too high when he first seemed to catch on with voters in the summer only to knock him too hard when he became seen as the front-runner in the fall.
''We failed twice with Dean,'' Mark Halperin, political director of ABC News, said of the news media. ''Dean was able to rise in standing without being held to a high enough standard of scrutiny for months.''
But now, Mr. Halperin added, ''he is so overly scrutinized to be beyond fair.''
Such sentiment has increased as several polls show the race here tightening among the top four candidates, after weeks in which polls had shown Dr. Dean to be the favorite in a two-man race with Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri.
Polling experts say it is notoriously difficult to pin down the news media's influence on voter sentiment. But news coverage is inexorably tied to the trajectory of an election's plot line, and ultimately affects results, strategists say.
Underscoring complaints that the coverage has been lopsided, the three evening newscasts had a total of 64 reports about Dr. Dean's campaign last year, according to the Center for Media and Public affairs, a research group in Washington. The second-most-covered candidate was Mr. Kerry, with 31 reports. Mr. Gephardt had 19; Mr. Edwards, 17; General Clark, 16; Mr. Lieberman, 12.
A year ago Dr. Dean was barely a blip in the polls while other candidates won most of the attention in newspapers and on television. But in June 2003, Dr. Dean took the Democratic field and reporters by surprise when he emerged as having raised the most money during the second quarter of the year, thanks to contributions from a corps of supporters recruited on the Internet. It was an unexpectedly compelling story.
''What struck us was not just his ability to raise money on the Internet,'' said Jim Kelly, managing editor of Time, which, along with Newsweek, put Dr. Dean on its cover shortly thereafter.
Time's reporters, Mr. Kelly said, were ''struck by the passion of his supporters.''
''His style and presentation tapped into something you don't necessarily believe unless you see it yourself,'' Mr. Kelly continued.
Rivals complained that a sort of gee-whiz aura then dominated the coverage of Dr. Dean for months, without much critical exploration of his past or his policies.
''It was all Dean, all the time,'' said Jim Margolis, a strategist for Mr. Kerry. ''And it was difficult for everybody else in the process. There wasn't any scrutiny taking place.''
Bill Carrick, a strategist for Mr. Gephardt, said that when his candidate made major speeches about energy and foreign policy, coverage of them was overwhelmed by that of Dr. Dean's unexpected rise.
Speaking at a Dean campaign event here on Friday, Candy Crowley, the CNN senior political correspondent, said it was only natural that Dr. Dean would have received such coverage.
''During the early part of it, with Dean, who's out of nowhere, we were trying to figure out the appeal,'' Ms. Crowley said. ''As you go on, you get to the 'yeah, but,' stories.''
In recent weeks, those seemed to have come nearly every day, including last week's report that Dr. Dean had made critical statements four years ago about Iowa's beloved caucus system and his comments a few weeks ago about Osama bin Laden's getting a fair trial.
Mr. Trippi said he believed that the ferocity picked up with the help of rival campaigns who committed themselves to stopping Dr. Dean after he won Al Gore's endorsement in December.
''The rest of them went 'We've got to stop them, we've got to stop them right now,''' Mr. Trippi said.
Steve McMahon, Dr. Dean's media adviser, said the campaign had had to keep Dr. Dean at somewhat of a distance from reporters. Otherwise, Mr. McMahon said, Dr. Dean would spend all of his time responding to ''ridiculous charges.'' He added that Dr. Dean was also traveling with too many reporters to give each much individual attention.
Officials with rival campaigns, and even some journalists, said Dr. Dean had only himself to blame, noting that the extra scrutiny should have been expected as he emerged as the front-runner.
''His own words have gotten him in trouble,'' said Chris Lehane, a strategist for General Clark.
Certainly General Clark, along with Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry -- all of who have surged in several polls in the past few days in Iowa and in New Hampshire -- have benefited from the klieg lights being trained on Dr. Dean and not them.
''They're driving their own messages and are less distracted by the press firestorm,'' said Mike Feldman, a Democratic strategist.
In the meantime, Dr. Dean is taking steps to try to quell it.
During his bus tour on Thursday he stopped off in Grinnell, Iowa, to buy a peace offering for his traveling band of reporters: 60 of Iowa's famous loose-meat sandwiches.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NEWS MEDIA
