France is considering ways to help boost security in Iraq after the American occupation ends and sovereignty has returned to the Iraqi people, Foreign Minister Dominique de Villepin said Friday.
Responding during his New Year's reception for journalists to a question about whether France could envision sending troops to Iraq, Mr. de Villepin said, ''In this context, this is not an issue at the moment.''
But he did not categorically rule out a possible troop deployment at a later stage, saying, ''We shall have the opportunity to look in detail at this when a government has been formed in Iraq.''
Mr. de Villepin also restated the French position that support could take the form of a training mission for police officers. ''We are already working on the possibility of responding in the area of security, in particular through the creation of a school for gendarmes or by training police,'' he said.
However, the defense minister, Michèle Alliot-Marie, speaking Friday in Washington, said, ''It is out of the question to send French troops to Iraq.'' She reiterated that France wanted to help rebuild Iraq and would be willing to participate in training a future Iraqi army or police force -- as it is in Afghanistan.
Germany, another staunch opponent of the war in Iraq, also indicated this week that it might be willing to do more there. Chancellor Gerhard Schröder told the foreign relations committee of the German Parliament this week that he would be willing to send German troops to Iraq on medical evacuation missions under United Nations auspices.
''Earlier on, the government was only talking about Red Cross, financial assistance, technical support,'' said Karsten Voigt, who oversees relations with the United States at the German Foreign Ministry. ''By mentioning the term 'soldier' in a humanitarian context, he is coming closer to the boundary.'' But Mr. Voigt noted that he did not foresee Germany committing troops in any potential combat role, even with a United Nations mandate.
Mr. de Villepin's remarks mirrored those of President Jacques Chirac in an interview with The New York Times last September. At one point, Mr. Chirac ruled out the idea of an eventual deployment of combat troops, saying, ''We are talking about training, and not sending troops to Iraq, of course.''
But at another point, he was slightly less categorical. After saying, ''As things are now, there is no situation where I can imagine that France would send troops to Iraq,'' he added: ''Everything could change. I don't have a crystal ball. But for the moment, this is the position of France and the position of a number of countries.''
Since then, there has been much speculation on what France, with its superior military and vast experience in peacekeeping missions, however dangerous, would be willing to do to help improve the critical security situation in Iraq.
Friday's issue of Le Monde, citing an unnamed advisor, reported that Mr. Chirac is considering sending a military contingent to Iraq to serve under a United Nations mandate after sovereignty is restored to Iraq.
Le Monde also said France would not object and might participate if the Security Council asked NATO to send a multinational stabilization force to Iraq like the current multinational force in Bosnia.
A senior advisor to Mr. Chirac, perhaps reflecting the sensitivity of the issue, denied that France is considering deploying troops to Iraq.
The possibility of French help in improving Iraq's security was also underscored in remarks to reporters by Ms. Alliot-Marie, the defense minister, before heading to Washington on Thursday. ''We have said notably that we could play a role in defense as concerns training the future Iraqi army and police,'' she said, adding that France, Germany and Japan could work together closely to train Iraq's police and army after sovereignty is restored.
After meeting with Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld in Washington on Thursday, Ms. Alliot-Marie said she believed there was a ''real willingness to turn the page on tensions between the United States and France.'' She added, ''I really had the impression that the situation had become unfrozen and that there was a desire to resume normal relations.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE EUROPEANS
