The union representing about 1,600 reporters, copy editors, advertising salespeople and other employees at The Wall Street Journal and other Dow Jones publications said yesterday that its members had overwhelmingly rejected a proposed three-year labor contract its bargaining committee had negotiated with the company's management.
The defeat of the tentative agreement, by 84 percent to 16 percent, came on the same day that 18 reporters for The Journal -- members of teams that had won Pulitzer Prizes in recent years -- delivered a letter to the office of Peter R. Kann, the chief executive of Dow Jones, expressing concern for the contract's potential impact on ''the paper's quality.''
The writers of the letter said they objected to its wage provisions -- it included a one-time bonus of $1,000, a freeze on wages in the first year, and increases of 2.5 percent and 3 percent over the next two years -- as well as increases in some health care costs like deductibles.
''The Wall Street Journal has always stood for the highest standards of journalism and reporting,'' the journalists wrote. ''Management's plan to cut benefits and grant minimal wage increases threatens those standards and the company's ability to attract and retain top reporting talent.''
''While saving money in the short term,'' the journalists added, ''the cuts jeopardize a far more valuable asset: our award-winning journalism and deep connection with readers and customers.''
The rejection of the contract comes as Dow Jones, like other newspaper publishers, has been struggling financially in a slumping advertising market. The Journal has suffered more than many other newspapers because of its reliance on financial services and technology-related advertising, which have been particularly slow to recover.
Last month, the company reported that advertising linage in The Journal's American edition had fallen 6.2 percent in November, compared with a year earlier, and was down 2.8 percent year to date. That follows two years of declining advertising linage. At Barron's, its weekly publication, national advertising linage fell 20.6 percent in November and was down 16.7 percent year to date, the company said. It, too, experienced fall-offs in both 2001 and 2002.
In an e-mail message to employees yesterday, Mr. Kann and Richard F. Zannino, the company's chief operating officer, said they were ''obviously disappointed by this outcome.''
''We expect the union will request further bargaining,'' the executives wrote. ''We, of course, will comply with our obligations to continue to negotiate in good faith, but the company has no obligation to go further than it already has, nor is it obliged to keep the previously agreed terms on the table indefinitely.''
While saying that the agreement represented ''the limits of the company's flexibility on the terms negotiated,'' the two executives added that they were ''hopeful we can bring this matter to a conclusion soon so that together we can focus all our efforts on growing the company and thereby increasing opportunities for all.''
The bargaining committee of the union, Local 1096 of the Independent Association of Publishers' Employees, recommended approval of the contract, but the union's board urged the membership to reject it.
A spokeswoman for Dow Jones, Brigitte Trafford, said yesterday afternoon that Mr. Kann would have no comment on the letter because he had not yet been able to read it. She said it had been hand-delivered to his office in Manhattan while he had been working at the company's offices in South Brunswick, N.J.
The letter's signers included Geeta Anand, whose articles on ImClone and biotechnology analysts were part of the newspaper's Pulitzer Prize-winning package in the explanatory journalism category in 2003; Deborah Solomon, who has written about the Securities and Exchange Commission; Laurie Cohen, who has written about white-collar crime; Kate Kelly, who covers Wall Street; Martin Peers, a media reporter; and the Washington-based reporters Neil King Jr. and David Cloud.
Julia Angwin, a media reporter, said she signed the letter because she felt that ''if we were going to have to give up health care benefits, which are really important to us, we shouldn't have to give up wages as well.''
Ms. Trafford, the company spokeswoman, defended the fairness of the health care proposal, saying that the benefits for many employees who use in-network physicians would improve.
She added that the changes in the company's health care plan ''come after four years of no increases in health care costs to employees in the face of unprecedented increases in health care costs to all companies.''
The union has been working without a contract since last spring.
