The chairman and chief executive of Orbitz, the online travel agency that went public a month ago, has decided not to collect more than $500,000 that he could have claimed because of the decline in his company's stock price, a spokeswoman for Orbitz said.
Jeffrey G. Katz, who has run Orbitz since July 2000, has an unusual compensation arrangement that allows him to demand a cash payment from the company on certain dates to make up for a loss in the value of shares he owns. The first deadline arrived this week, 30 days after the company's first stock offering, which did not fare well.
Orbitz, which is controlled by five big airlines, raised about $315 million by selling 12.1 million shares for $26 each on Dec. 16. But the stock has hovered around $24 for the last two weeks. Yesterday, it closed at $24.11 in Nasdaq trading, down 7.3 percent from its offering price.
Based on a formula in Mr. Katz's contract, he could have chosen to receive about $520,000 by cashing in what essentially is an insurance policy against stock losses. The company's filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission do not say that Mr. Katz would have to forfeit any of the protected shares if he took the cash. He still has other chances to collect as much as $2.5 million if the stock does not rise to $30.
''It's a nice safety net,'' said Graef Crystal, a former compensation consultant who analyzes executive pay for Bloomberg News. ''Why turn it in now?''
Mr. Katz declined to discuss his reasons for not taking the cash now, said Carol Jouzaitis, a spokeswoman for Orbitz in Chicago. She said anyone else's interpretations of Mr. Katz's motivation would be mere speculation.
Ms. Jouzaitis said Mr. Katz gave up $2.5 million of equity in Swissair, where he was chief executive, when he joined Orbitz. To compensate him for that loss, she said, Orbitz gave Mr. Katz restricted stock with a value essentially guaranteed to be $2.5 million, or $30 a share.
If the stock price stays below $30, Mr. Katz is entitled to a cash payment to make up the difference. So, if Orbitz stock falls to zero, he could claim $2.5 million in cash. He can exercise that option on any of the first four anniversaries of the agreement, which was reached on July 6, 2003.
Mr. Crystal said that companies often give stock and options to executives they hire to replace equity they left behind at another employer. But he said it was ''absolutely not'' common to guarantee the value of the grants.
In most cases, he said, the message from the hiring company is that ''if you want to take your chances with this stock, go ahead.'' What Orbitz gave Mr. Katz was more like a convertible bond, a debt that the holder can exchange for shares if the value of the shares exceeds the debt.
Analysts said it would be difficult to glean Mr. Katz's view about the prospects for Orbitz stock from his decision not to take the cash now. Taking the money might have indicated that he was so confident that Orbitz stock would rise above $30 by July 6 and stay there that he thought this was his last chance to collect. On the other hand, they said, he might simply want to continue to be protected against a big drop in the stock price.
Just as likely, Mr. Crystal said, was that Mr. Katz was relieved that the stock did not turn out to be a ''burnt soufflé,'' falling flat as soon as it was pulled from the oven.
