History dogs the Philadelphia Eagles. The high points are telephone poles that hold sagging wires. The Eagles last won the National Football League championship in 1960. They have played in only one Super Bowl, in 1981, and lost.
They have lost the last two National Football Conference championship games, and the 27-10 defeat by Tampa Bay last year came in the final game at Veterans Stadium, which still stands at Broad and Pattison, condemned and forlorn, a carcass of a reminder.
Donovan McNabb was the Eagles' quarterback in both losses, and it would seem that he would be motivated by the defeats, or at least have learned from them, to want to beat Carolina badly on Sunday in the N.F.C. title game at Lincoln Financial Field.
McNabb does not operate that way. Yes, the losses make him angry. But he spends more time thinking ahead, to the end of Sunday's game, when the scoreboard clock is blinking to zeros, and he is savoring each second because the Panthers are beaten.
He was asked Wednesday how often he thought about going to the Super Bowl, and McNabb, without the slightest worry about how his response would be interpreted by the Panthers, said, ''All the time.''
He said of the two conference championship losses: ''You use that as a little fuel to the fire and go out and know what you have to do to take advantage of the things that are given to you. You make sure you're confident, and the guys see your confidence, and you all rally around each other.''
But the Eagles (13-4) will probably not beat the Panthers (13-5) if McNabb, Philadelphia's fifth-year quarterback, does not throw the ball well. As mobile as he is, the Eagles do not want McNabb to be forced to run against the Carolina defense.
McNabb has passed for 200 yards in eight of the Eagles' last 10 games. They won those eight games. They are 6-3 in the games in which he has thrown for fewer than 200 yards.
''We're not going in saying Donovan is going to run the ball; that's not what we do,'' Coach Andy Reid said. ''We go in saying Donovan's going to run the offense. If that presents itself, that's fine. If it doesn't, then the ball will come out somewhere else and someone else will have an opportunity to make the play.''
McNabb was sacked eight times in Philadelphia's 20-17 overtime victory Sunday over Green Bay. McNabb rushed for 107 yards, too, but his teammates know that he is more valuable as a passer than as a runner. ''If we do our job, he won't have to scramble,'' Philadelphia left tackle Tra Thomas said.
McNabb's 28-yard completion to Freddie Mitchell -- on fourth-and-26 -- to keep alive the Eagles' last drive in regulation against the Packers has already become part of Philadelphia sports lore. On the sports-radio call-in programs Wednesday, the play had a new name: Fourth-and-26. No other description was needed.
Eagles running back Duce Staley, referring to McNabb by his uniform number, said: ''Any time the ball is in 5's hands, your chances are better. He's shown that year after year. It's whatever works right now. I'm not here to break it down and tell you this is what we have to do. It's whatever works.''
But the Eagles do better when McNabb has time to throw. During the Eagles' nine-game winning streak this season, he rushed for more than 26 yards only once, a 33-20 victory over New Orleans on Oct. 23, when he ran for 54 yards.
McNabb rushed for 55 and 54 yards in the Eagles' first two games of the season, when they scored only 10 points combined in losing to Tampa Bay and New England.
''It feels like it was years ago,'' McNabb said Wednesday, referring to those two games. ''I know that some teams that were hot at that time when we were playing bad aren't playing anymore. We really don't care what happened early in the year. No one cares what happened during the regular season.''
The Eagles have a different motivation now. Fullback Jon Ritchie, in his first season with the team, said of veterans like McNabb, ''They have a strong feeling not to repeat what's happened in this game before.''
McNabb missed the Eagles' last six regular-season games in 2002 because of an ankle injury. He led Philadelphia to victory over Atlanta in a divisional playoff game and did not play poorly against Tampa Bay in the N.F.C. championship game, but he did not play well enough to win. It was a bitter loss.
''Last year there were opportunities in the pass game we could have taken full advantage of,'' McNabb said. ''I could have scrambled in last year's game. Just from watching that game and knowing the situation, obviously this year is a whole lot different.''
This is simply another opportunity, and he is thankful for it. Three of the four teams the Eagles lost to during the season are not playing anymore. The Eagles beat Carolina, 25-16, on Nov. 30, but that game no longer matters, Reid said.
''We don't look at what happened before; we try to look at the present and things we can control, and that's getting ourselves ready to play a heck of a football team,'' Reid said tersely. ''We get ourselves right.''
PRO FOOTBALL
