Culminating a boardroom quarrel that has lasted nearly a decade, Gordon M. Bethune, the outspoken and determined chief executive of Continental Airlines, said yesterday that he would step down at the end of December, more than a year earlier than planned. The airline said its president, Larry Kellner, 44, would succeed him.
Continental also said that David Bonderman, the chief executive of the Texas Pacific Group, which has invested in America West and tried to buy a controlling interest in US Airways, would leave the board in March. Three other independent board members will also leave the Continental board, shrinking it to 10 members from 14.
By all accounts, directors were distressed at the continual sparring between Mr. Bethune, known for a free-wheeling, entrepreneurial style, and Mr. Bonderman, whose company led Continental out of bankruptcy in 1994 and recruited Mr. Bethune from the Boeing Company to run the airline.
Mr. Bethune, 62, was scheduled to leave in August 2006. But he and the board agreed that he would remain through the end of 2004, seeing the airline through its transition to a smaller board and new leadership.
The development, reported yesterday by The Wall Street Journal and The Houston Chronicle, came as a surprise within the industry, setting off speculation that the board had asked him to go. People at the airline denied that, characterizing his departure as an instance of putting the airline's interests first.
These people, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that Mr. Bethune felt that Mr. Bonderman's continued presence was an irritant to its labor unions, creating problems for management. According to these people, Mr. Bethune offered to leave if Mr. Bonderman would do the same, feeling that the joint departures would be for the good of the company. ''Gordon chose to go ahead and step down'' in return for Mr. Bonderman's doing the same, one person said.
Those close to Mr. Bonderman disputed that account. They said Mr. Bonderman wanted to focus on other business interests and was eager to leave the board, given his long-running battles with Mr. Bethune. His Texas Pacific Group sold the last of its Continental stock last year.
Regardless, Mr. Bonderman, in a statement released yesterday by the airline, said it had been a ''great pleasure'' working with Mr. Bethune and his management team.
''It sounds like a long-running dispute that morphed into, 'let's take it outside,''' said Robert W. Mann Jr., an industry consultant based in Port Washington, N.Y. ''And they left it outside.''
No matter the reasons for the departures, the tension between Mr. Bethune and Mr. Bonderman was evident right up to the end, said Ronald B. Woodard, a Continental director who is a former Boeing executive and a longtime friend of Mr. Bethune.
Mr. Woodard, who joined the Continental board last May, said he regretted the situation. ''You couldn't have had two more different people in personality,'' he said.
In October, a committee of outside directors, led by Thomas J. Barrack Jr., a real estate developer based in Los Angeles, decided to investigate whether Mr. Bonderman's presence constituted a legal conflict because of his company's interest in other airlines.
They began their investigation after Continental employees, led by the Teamsters union, which represents the airline's mechanics, called for Mr. Bonderman to step down from his director's post. Union officials maintained that his sitting on the Continental board was improper, because it gave him access to inside information that Mr. Bonderman could use in his business dealings with other airlines.
The committee found that that was not the case. But the findings apparently did not satisfy Mr. Bethune, who continued to question Mr. Bonderman's presence on the board, said Mr. Woodard and others.
''Gordon has one blind spot, and that is that he hates authority,'' said one person, who has known Mr. Bethune for years. ''And that last bastion of authority is your board.'' Mr. Kellner is far less well known within the industry than Mr. Bethune, his swashbuckling boss.
He joined the airline in 1995, a year after Mr. Bethune, and served as its chief financial officer before becoming president in 2001.
Mr. Bethune's departure will mean that five of the nation's seven major airlines have changed chief executives since September 2001, when the industry was devastated by terrorist attacks in New York, Washington and Pennsylvania.
Next to Mr. Bethune, the industry's most recent departure was that of the Delta Air Lines chief executive, Leo F. Mullin, who was succeeded as chief executive this month by Gerald Grinstein, a veteran board member. Mr. Mullin will remain as chairman until April, when he will be succeeded by John F. Smith Jr., a former chief executive of General Motors.
By promoting Mr. Kellner, Continental improved its chances of hanging onto him.
Mr. Kellner, one of the industry's most promising midcareer executives, had been approached by executive recruiters several times recently as chief executive jobs opened up at other airlines.
In announcing the actions, Mr. Bethune called Mr. Kellner ''a strong leader with tremendous people, operational, marketing and analytical skills.'' He was, Mr. Bethune added, ''the perfect choice to succeed me at Continental.''
Union officials, meanwhile, applauded the departure of Mr. Bonderman and William Price, another Texas Group official, from the company board.
"We need directors who are invested in the success of Continental Airlines, not the success of our competition,'' said Rodney Rhoades, a Continental mechanic and president of Teamsters Local 19 in Houston.
Mr. Bethune's tenure at Continental has been lively, punctuated by his blunt opinions. In the fall of 2002, Continental vigorously opposed United Airlines' bid for a federal bailout package.
At the time, Mr. Bethune said that United's chief executive, Glenn F. Tilton, a former Texaco executive, was ''clueless'' about the industry.
United's application for federal loan guarantees ultimately failed, forcing it to file for Chapter 11 bankruptcy protection. United, a unit of UAL, has reapplied for federal aid.
Mr. Bethune has managed to keep Continental out of bankruptcy during his tenure. The airline hopes to break even for 2003.
