Israel's deputy defense minister has proclaimed the spiritual leader and founder of Hamas to be ''marked for death,'' signaling that Israel will step up its campaign to kill the leadership of the militant group.
The threat followed a Hamas bombing in the Gaza Strip on Wednesday that killed four Israelis: two soldiers, a border policeman and a security guard.
The Hamas founder, Sheik Ahmed Yassin, who attended prayers on Friday at a mosque near his home in Gaza City, said he would embrace ''martyrdom'' if it came his way.
Israel tried to kill Sheik Yassin on Sept. 6, dropping a 550-pound bomb on a Gaza City apartment building where he was meeting with other Hamas leaders. Sheik Yassin, a paraplegic, escaped with a light wound on his right hand. Israel said it had used too small a bomb, in an effort to avoid civilian casualties.
That strike was part of a series of Israeli attacks on Hamas leaders that followed a devastating Hamas suicide bombing in Jerusalem over the summer.
''We do not fear death threats,'' Sheik Yassin said Friday. ''We are seekers of martyrdom.''
He was reacting to comments by Zeev Boim, the Israeli deputy defense minister, who said that Sheik Yassin had made himself a target.
''Sheik Yassin is marked for death, and he should hide himself deep underground where he won't know the difference between day and night,'' Mr. Boim told Israeli Army Radio on Thursday night.
''And we will find him in the tunnels, and we will eliminate him.''
Before Wednesday, Hamas had not conducted a suicide bombing in four months, in what seemed an undeclared cease-fire. Israel also appeared to stop hunting its leadership, though Israeli officials denied any change in strategy.
Israeli security officials credited attacks on the Hamas leaders with intimidating the group into quiescence, though most of the strikes failed to kill their targets.
Previously, Israel had in practice accepted a distinction made by Hamas between its ''political'' and ''military'' leaders. Israel did not try to kill political leaders like Sheik Yassin, who insists he does not direct suicide bombers. Israel now accuses him of involvement in the attacks.
Sheik Yassin said Friday that he had ''nothing to do with military activity'' by Hamas.
Though its suicide attacks had subsided before Wednesday, Hamas repeatedly rebuffed attempts by the Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, and Egyptian mediators to arrive at a formal cease-fire among the Palestinian factions.
Hamas is officially committed to Israel's destruction. In recent interviews, Sheik Yassin suggested that the group would consider accepting some sort of temporary peace in exchange for a Palestinian state in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip, the territories Israel has occupied since 1967.
