ROGER CLEMENS infuriated many by two-stepping out of retirement this week, but far from being an isolated case of Yankee abandonment, he left on a conga line of icons from the so-called sports capital of America.
Also gone in recent times to tango in Texas: Andy Pettitte, Bill Parcells, Jeff Van Gundy.
''Don't forget Ewing,'' Rick Perry, the governor of the now erroneously nicknamed Lone Star State, said in a recent telephone interview.
That's right, J. R. Ewing, the Knick formerly known as Patrick, is assisting Van Gundy, the new badge and boss of the Houston Rockets.
Dang, was that really our native son, Mark Jackson of St. Albans, Queens, and St. John's University and Madison Square Garden, joining Sheriff Van Gundy and Deputy Ewing the other day as a backup point guard? Even little ol' Charlie Ward snubbed the amorous appeals of the Nets for a potential taste of a title, Tex-Mex style, with the defending champion San Antonio Spurs.
It must be a movement, all of these onetime mainstays of our metropolitan area leaving the gated security of Westchester and Bergen Counties to become homebodies on the hacienda. What used to be dedicated football country but the Bush League in the arena of sports celebrity is suddenly Park Avenue Southwest.
''I think historically, from the Northeastern perspective, Texas was a backwater, perceived as not being as cosmopolitan, as exciting a place as, say, New York City,'' Perry said. ''New York City is one of the most exciting, intriguing places on the planet. But, that said, Texas has grown.''
And did we mention the part about no state income tax?
The governor, a sports fan, a devoted runner, was on the line from Austin, where, he mentioned, lies the burial site of the baseball great Rogers Hornsby.
''He played a little for the New York Giants, you know,'' Perry said.
Yes, we know, although we are inclined to discount from this recent migratory phenomenon those who have relocated to Texas to rest in peace. Let's begin three years ago with the decision by Alex Rodriguez to sign with the Texas Rangers as the most expensive free agent in the history of sports.
Rodriguez should have been a New Yorker, a Met, the centerpiece of a new Wilpon empire, but he opted for the Texas-size payday. Of course, even the largest of the contiguous states isn't big enough anymore for A-Rod and his manager, Buck Showalter, who, in fact, preceded Joe Torre in the Yankees' dugout and once regularly worshiped in Monument Park.
Obstacles notwithstanding, Showalter and the Rangers have been determined this winter to make a bad situation much, much worse for New York by trying to peddle Rodriguez to the Red Sox. Yo, who you callin' backwater?
As they say, payback is, well, it is Parcells returning to the Meadowlands with the Dallas Cowboys to play the Giants and leaving Jim Fassel feeling like Al Gore on election night. It is Van Gundy's Rockets raining 3-pointers on the Garden homecoming of Brooklyn's Stephon Marbury, ruining any chance of Don Chaney's survival.
George Steinbrenner's worst winter nightmare has to be a 2004 World Series against Pettitte and Clemens's Houston Astros. Then again, we should be so lucky to have the Series back in New York next fall, because practically every other national event of significance this year is in Texas. The Super Bowl? Houston. The men's Final Four? San Antonio. The Breeders' Cup? Dallas-Fort Worth.
Houston has the men's tennis year-ender that once upon a time was played at the Garden. Next season's Major League Baseball All-Star Game is scheduled for the Astros' Minute Maid Park.
''A little bit of a coincidence,'' Perry said of the crowded calendar. ''But also, this is a real proactive state government with real proactive local governments, working hard to bring these events to Texas.''
Who do we have? All together now: ''Fire Puh-tack-ee . . .''
In addition to the N.B.A's leading fundamentalist, Tim Duncan, Texas has become the nation's foremost international basketball center, featuring Dirk Nowitzki, Tony Parker, Manu Ginóbili and Yao Ming. Who do we have? The 200-year-old Dikembe Mutombo and a page in the Knicks' yearbook devoted to Slavko Vranes.
Texas has, in Mark Cuban, the most outspoken and assessable owner in sports. We have James Dolan, Isiah Thomas's new chauffeur.
Texas has Bob Knight, who has New York roots at West Point but post-Indiana lugged his 10-gallon temper to Lubbock, to produce a top-20 power at Texas Tech. Excuse me, but does St. John's even have a coach?
Texas has Lance Armstrong, winner of the Tour de France a record-tying five straight years. We have bicycle messengers running over senior citizens all over Manhattan.
''We also have many, many Olympic athletes living here,'' Perry said. ''We have them working outside. I doubt you can do that in New York City.'' Not this week, it was agreed, unless ice fishing is about to become a gold medal sport.
Perry, the governor, wasn't gloating, admitting these things are cyclical and saying he wants to help his fellow Republicans in New York. He is coming our way next summer to run, though not against his good friend, the president.
''We're organizing a race during the Republican Convention,'' he said. ''A 10K, through Central Park.''
So we get the 10K and Houston gets Clemens and about one K for every inning pitched? Dang, who can we fire for making this deal?
Sports of The Times
