In the remaining two-bidder race to acquire the Nets, the question of how close a final deal is has taken center stage.
The president of the Nets' ownership group, Edwin Stier, said yesterday that no deal was imminent. ''We are carrying on parallel negotiations with prospective purchasers,'' he said, with the goal of completing them ''as rapidly as possible.''
The leading bidder, Bruce C. Ratner, who wants to move the team to a proposed downtown Brooklyn complex, has told his development team that a deal could be announced any day, and he is in close contact with city and state officials, according to a member of the team.
One city official, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said earlier this week of Ratner's $300 million offer, ''It's as close as it gets, in terms of almost being done.''
But an agreement has not been reached and one will probably not come before the middle of next week.
Without pointing to anyone for providing information for articles earlier this week that suggested an impending deal, Stier said, ''When you hear the story the way I heard it, it was clear that someone was planting it.''
Charles Kushner, a Florham Park, N.J., developer whose main partner is Senator Jon S. Corzine, has not raised his $267.5 million offer to come closer to Ratner's. His decision will be based on whether he can determine how much the Nets' investment bankers reduce the net value of Ratner's bid because of losses the Nets would incur at the Meadowlands in the years before he would be able to move them to Brooklyn, three people involved in the negotiations said.
It is also possible that the bankers, Goldman Sachs and Lehman Brothers, could adjust Kushner's bid after they assess its bottom-line value.
''I don't feel any pressure to do anything but responsibly review all the material, negotiate the legal terms of the deal and see what works as a good business proposition,'' Kushner said Thursday from Jerusalem. He will return Monday.
Stier said: ''This is necessarily complex, but I'm keeping it simple. It should be easy to compare what the purchasers are prepared to pay.''
Kushner emphasized that he had the financing to buy the team and would have a small group of partners. ''I have the money,'' he said. ''Why else would I be in it?''
Ratner has assembled 12 to 15 investors who are putting their money into the project, one investor said. More are intrigued by the real estate aspect of the deal than the basketball team, the investor added. The group includes the hip-hop entrepreneur Jay-Z; Vincent Viola, chairman of the New York Mercantile; and Lewis Katz, a principal owner of the Nets.
Ratner met yesterday with National Basketball Association officials, an executive involved in the negotiations said.
While Kushner works to complete a deal to finance up to $150 million in renovations to Continental Arena, the Nets' longtime home, Ratner's office is filling up with models of the evolving designs of the $2.5 billion Brooklyn commercial and residential project by his architect, Frank Gehry, said a visitor to Ratner's Brooklyn headquarters.
A third bidder, Stuart Feldman, has offered $257.5 million, but he is no longer viewed as being active. He has maintained a strict policy of public silence, although Stier said he had not imposed any restrictions on the bidders.
PRO BASKETBALL
