Among the hundreds of claims pouring into city offices over the last few days from people planning to sue over the Staten Island ferry accident in October, there was one from a ''Michael Gansas.''
Mr. Gansas was the captain of the ferry when it crashed and has been at the center of a criminal investigation into the accident, which killed 11 people and injured dozens more.
He has filed a $250,000 claim with the city, preserving his right to sue, arguing that the city should have provided him with legal representation in his questioning before federal investigators and should defend him in a pending federal class-action lawsuit.
''Lawyers for Captain Gansas hope this opens up a dialogue with the city so it can be resolved amicably,'' William R. Bennett, one of his lawyers, said yesterday.
Witnesses have told investigators that Mr. Gansas was not in the pilothouse, as he should have been under city rules, when the vessel crashed. His lawyers have contended that the rules are vague and have seldom been enforced.
Survivors of the accident, along with the families of those who died, had until last Tuesday to mail a legal notice to the city if they planned to sue. According to the city comptroller's office, 175 people have filed notices, asking for more than $3 billion in damages. Many of them have named Mr. Gansas in their claims.
Mr. Gansas' claim arrived on Wednesday and is based on a municipal law that protects city employees from liability in any job-related accident and offers them legal protection. In his claim, Mr. Gansas said his legal expenses totaled $250,000.
A spokeswoman for the city law department released a statement yesterday that said Mr. Gansas had forfeited his rights when he repeatedly refused to give investigators his account of what happened.
A spokesman for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, Edward Skyler, was harsher. ''It is beyond outrageous that, after refusing to cooperate with the city and investigators, Mr. Gansas now wants the taxpayers to pick up his tab,'' he said. ''It is a cruel insult to the families of the victims and to the entire city.''
