New York City released its initial bid yesterday to hold the 2012 Olympics, saying the summer games would pump $12 billion into the local economy and leave a lasting legacy of athletic fields, a stadium and waterfront development.
NY2012, the New York bid committee, outlined its plans in the submission, focusing on venues, transportation, security, political support and legacy. New York, like the other cities competing for the designation, delivered the documents to the International Olympic Committee on Thursday. The 65-page document was unveiled at the Riverview Restaurant at Queens West, across the East River from the United Nations and blocks away from where the city proposes to build an Olympic Village for the athletes. Under the Olympic plan, the village would be converted afterward to market-rate housing.
A year ago, New York beat San Francisco as the official nominee of the United States Olympic Committee for the 2012 summer games. New York is competing against London; Paris; Moscow; Leipzig, Germany; Istanbul; Rio de Janeiro; Madrid; and Havana.
Deputy Mayor Daniel L. Doctoroff said yesterday that work on three major elements of the plan - the Olympic Stadium on the west side of Manhattan, the expansion of the convention center and the extension of the No. 7 subway line - would begin before the I.O.C. makes its selection in July 2005 in Singapore.
Mr. Doctoroff rejected suggestions that New York's bid might not fare well because of the current unpopularity of the United States.
''They're not voting on America,'' Mr. Doctoroff said. ''They're voting on New York.'' He said the city was often viewed as a bridge to the rest of the United States.
London bookies currently rank Paris as the leading contender, with New York tied for fourth place with Rio de Janeiro at odds of 8-1.
Correction:  January 21, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Saturday about New York City's bid for the 2012 Olympic Summer Games misstated the name of the bid committee. It is NYC2012, not NY2012.
