In 1988, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri filled a charter plane with a crowd of cheering colleagues from Congress who converged on the steps of the Iowa Capitol to rally behind his first bid for the presidency.
This time around, Mr. Gephardt has struck a much more lonely figure on the campaign trail. Thirty-four members of the House of Representatives have endorsed his presidential campaign, down from 58 members 15 years ago. On Friday, Howard Dean, the self-proclaimed Washington outsider, surged ahead in the battle for Congressional endorsements, claiming 35 representatives and three senators.
The milestone passed without much fanfare here as the candidates focused on the battle for Iowa. But for some people, it was a painful reminder of Mr. Gephardt's waning influence in Congress, a stage he dominated for more than a decade.
Mr. Gephardt served as the Democratic leader in the House for 13 years, leading some of the most important legislative battles over trade, Medicare and the economy, until he stepped down last year. He raised millions of dollars for his colleagues and fought hard to keep an often-fractious caucus united.
But he also helped write the resolution that authorized the invasion of Iraq, which alienated some colleagues. And he was eclipsed in the minds of some members of Congress by Dr. Dean's fund-raising prowess, his opposition to the war and his fierce critique of President Bush. All these factors have helped to make Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, into the choice for much of the Democratic establishment, including former Vice President Al Gore, former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa.
''It's got to be hard for Dick,'' said Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the No. 2 Democrat in the House, who supported Mr. Gephardt in 1988 and endorsed him again this time.
Mr. Hoyer was among the dozens of Democrats who rallied with Mr. Gephardt at the state Capitol in 1988. He was in Iowa campaigning for him on Friday along with several other members of Congress.
''He is one of the most thoughtful, inclusive and substantive leaders with whom I've served,'' said Mr. Hoyer, reflecting on his colleagues' shift. ''But their calculus is that you need someone new. Dean looks like a winner, and front-runners tend to garner people. I think it reflects the frustration and lack of faith in existing establishment figures.''
Mr. Gephardt made light of the change, saying it would make little difference in his campaign because voters, not endorsements, win elections. Never mind that Mr. Gephardt has provided some of the Democratic candidates' most caustic appraisals of Mr. Bush. His aides had still expected Dr. Dean to pick up more endorsements for weeks.
Mr. Gephardt said it would be harder now for Dr. Dean to invoke the anti-establishment label. ''He's been endorsed by a whole bunch of Washington insiders,'' Mr. Gephardt joked earlier this week. ''Maybe I'm the outsider now.''
In his 27 years in Congress, Mr. Gephardt spent innumerable weekends on the road for his colleagues, attending rallies and fund-raisers across the country. Hoping to regain control of the House, he raised $37 million for Democratic candidates before the elections of 2002.
''He's worked very hard; he's done a lot for the caucus,'' said Steve Elmendorf, Mr. Gephardt's chief of staff. ''Some members have repaid the loyalty; others have not.''
Representative Martin Frost of Texas stood with Gephardt at the Iowa Capitol in 1988, but decided to endorse Gen. Wesley K. Clark this time. Mr. Frost declined to comment on his decision, but other members of Congress were less reticent.
Representative Zoe Lofgren of California, one of the first members of Congress to endorse Dr. Dean, said she decided to after hearing him speak last spring and finding him to be inspirational. She did not endorse a candidate in 1988.
''There's no question he's a hard worker,'' Ms. Lofgren said of Mr. Gephardt. ''But for eight years in a row he lost; he was the leader and he led us to eight years of losing. We want to win.''
Mr. Gephardt no longer wields the power he once did as Democratic leader and that made it easier for some members of Congress to go elsewhere. That may all change, of course, if he wins the nomination.
''I really have learned to let it roll off,'' said Mr. Gephardt, who does not plan to run for re-election to Congress. ''All you can do is your best. You can't get everybody. You can't please everybody.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CONGRESSMAN
