The changes yesterday hardly made the splash that Isiah Thomas had made with his other moves since taking charge of the Knicks, but the team kept busy, completing the reshaping of the staff for the new coach, Lenny Wilkens.
The Knicks retained two members of Don Chaney's staff, Herb Williams and Mike Malone, and named Mark Aguirre and Dick Helm as the other assistants. Aguirre had been with the team as a developmental coach and a special assistant since Thomas arrived. He served as an assistant coach under Thomas in Indiana last season. Helm has been with Wilkens in previous coaching stops in Seattle, Cleveland, Atlanta and Toronto.
Until Wilkens got a call from Thomas asking him to return to the sideline, the 70-year-old Helm had settled into retirement with his wife in the mountain community of Big Canoe, Ga.
''I went to the movies on Wednesday,'' Helm said. ''When I got home, there's 9 or 10 messages on my answering machines. I thought somebody died. I never get that many messages. The first two said, 'Have you heard the news about Lenny?' They didn't say what it was. I thought, 'Jeez, what's happened?' Then there a couple of messages from Lenny in the afternoon. He said, 'Please call me right away.' I got a hold of Lenny at home and he said: 'I'm taking the Knicks job. Why don't you go with me?'
''I've coached over 40 years. This is what you do. Your focus has to be on trying to come in and put it together and win some games. Do it positively, and do it in the right way with good relations with people. As far as being awed, yes, it is New York, but it's still basketball and we want to win.''
While the roles are not set yet, Helm has been Wilkens's sounding board since 1984.
''He's like an assistant head coach,'' Wilkens said. ''He sees things. He'll tell me what he thinks, whether I like it or I don't. He's a real student of the game.''
Aguirre, a childhood friend of Thomas's, said he hoped he had found a permanent role on an N.B.A. sideline.
''I'm a teacher,'' Aguirre said. ''To help the franchise, my best thing to do, I can take the guy's games and break down and implement things that make him more effective in the offense. That's what I do well. I want to be teaching. That's what I love.''
Williams served as the interim head coach Wednesday while the team waited for Wilkens to arrive, and the Knicks beat the Orlando Magic, 120-110. Malone was an unlikely holdover after the team fired his father, Brendan, also one of Chaney's assistants, on Wednesday.
''As it turned out, I helped Coach out today with our walk-through for Seattle,'' Malone said. ''Once the game starts, Lenny has a good feel.
''I think he'll lean on us, but at the same time, he's a Hall of Fame coach. He knows what we need to be doing.''
Bad Day for Malones
Mike Malone had a difficult night on Wednesday, serving as the only assistant coach for the Knicks after his father, Brendan, was fired. It was made more difficult when he learned that his father; his mother, Maureen; his sister Kelly; and his 19-month-old nephew, Thomas, had been involved in an accident while driving home from Madison Square Garden after Brendan Malone's dismissal.
The Malones' Lincoln Navigator was broadsided; none of the passengers were seriously injured. Maureen Malone was driving the vehicle, which was totaled.
PRO BASKETBALL: KNICKS NOTEBOOK
