Up in East Texas, Dick Fischer, a retired oil technician, put away his AR-15 rifle on Friday.
''Yeah,'' he said by telephone. ''I put it in the closet. I may not need it and a whole case of ammunition.''
Mr. Fischer and hundreds of neighbors around East Mountain in Upshur County were heartened, to the point of disarmament, by a Texas General Land Office decision on Friday that affirmed their right to the five square miles of land that they and their families have owned -- or thought that they did -- in some cases for generations and that some said they would defend at gunpoint if necessary.
Under an arcane bit of Texas law, surface and subsurface titles to a league of land, 4,428 acres, in an 1838 grant was challenged by two local claimants who contended that the original survey was faulty and that all transfers over the next 165 years were invalid, affecting 1,600 current titleholders. The claimants, W. L. Dixon and Barton McDonald, argued that the land, rich in oil and gas, should be declared legally vacant and revert to the state.
For discovering that, the two said, they were entitled to a share of the hundreds of millions of dollars in mineral wealth from the tract known as the King Survey.
After a hearing and an investigation, Land Commissioner Jerry Patterson ruled on Friday that the claimants had failed to make their case and that the land and mineral rights belonged where they have been.
''My staff has been burning the midnight oil and doing tremendous research on documents, field notes, maps that are over 150 years old,'' Mr. Patterson said at a news conference in Austin. ''Our findings are that there is no vacancy.''
He did find, however, that precise remeasuring of the tract, a square with sides two and a half miles long, had shown that it had ''excess acreage.'' The site was 200 acres larger than it was supposed to be. No one would lose their rights as a result, Mr. Patterson said, and owners could buy the excess from the state.
That finding and the chance that the ruling might be appealed to state court created new uncertainties that some residents said cast a cloud over their properties.
''It could be 8 or 10 years before we all know if we own our places or not,'' said Boogie Feagin, 70, a retired Kodak worker with 50 acres of the survey. ''This land can't be sold. It can't be bought. There are people with a lot of money put on hold. Land values are falling.''
Before the ruling was announced, Mr. Feagin was one of several residents who promised to do anything it took to defend their land.
''When you fool with a man's home,'' he said, ''there's not much more in life he's got left. That puts you on a bad path.''
He said he did not overtly threaten violence, explaining, ''What I said was, 'The first person who comes out to take it won't take it, but the one behind him will.' ''
Mr. Fischer, 65, had been more explicit, telling reporters, ''If somebody comes to take my land, somebody's going to die.''
''I wasn't making threats,'' he said on Friday. ''Just letting them know I'm not going to sit back and let someone take my land. Somebody would show up with the sheriff, and that's when the fight would start.''
Mr. Dixon, 80, a rancher, declined to comment, referring questions to his lawyer, Ben Jarvis. Mr. Jarvis did not return a call for comment. But in an interview on Thursday, he suggested that he might appeal an adverse ruling.
Don Westbrook, a lawyer in Longview who represented 220 landowners against the claim, said, ''I hope the other side takes a hint and does not appeal.''
Mr. Westbrook said the case should never have gone so far and criticized Mr. Patterson for granting a hearing, on Dec. 17. He said the claimants had failed to establish their challenge by first financing their own comprehensive survey.
The General Land Office, custodian of an $18 billion school fund fed by state land revenues, researched old records, deciphering faded scripts and tracing black oak and hickory trees as boundary ''monuments.'' The office set the hearing after Mr. Jarvis and his clients had agreed to stop suing its surveys director.
Mr. Patterson ridiculed ideas of ''conspiracy and collusion'' and said it would be bizarre that he would go through all this to make a little money for Texas. ''It's not a slogan I want to run on,'' he said.
