Stephon Marbury's greatest assist on a night of glittering passes that drew gasps and led to quick swishes occurred when he was already on the bench and the Knicks held a 25-point lead with five minutes to play.
Thanks to Marbury, the crowd of 18,661 at Madison Square Garden was hailing a coaching legend from Brooklyn, chanting ''Lenny Wilkens.''
Three days ago, Isiah Thomas had shocked the 66-year-old Wilkens out of his Seattle home by offering him the Knicks' coaching job. Last night, Wilkens stood in a blue suit with his arms crossed on the sideline for most of the game watching Marbury do all the work.
Thomas stood in the tunnel, admiring his handiwork. Marbury handed out 17 assists and dominated the game even though he took only six shots and scored 8 points in 34 minutes as Wilkens posted his first victory as Knicks coach, 108-88 over the Seattle SuperSonics.
''I thought he did everything I asked him to do,'' Wilkens said with a reserved smile.
When Marbury drove to the basket, the Sonics would collapse on him and then he would dish the ball to an open teammate for an easy basket. He also had two steals and hurled halfcourt passes for fast-break dunks.
Keith Van Horn scored 30 points and shot 10 of 15 from the field.
''He dominated the whole game without having to shoot, which is a great sign for a point guard,'' Van Horn said. ''He found guys, found guys on time, in rhythm.''
The Knicks have scored more than 100 points in three straight games, showing that suddenly, they are starting to click with Marbury at point guard. The Knicks, who play at Chicago tonight, improved to 17-24.
With only one practice and a morning shoot-around with his new team, Wilkens had a less perceptible influence on the game than Marbury. Wilkens left Don Chaney's system intact, putting in small changes. He gave the team a thorough breakdown of each Sonics player, from his informal scouting while living in Seattle.
''He's real cool, real subtle, saying, 'Just go play,' '' Marbury said. ''All he pretty much did tonight was call timeouts and make subs.
''The best thing in the world he did when he came here, he didn't switch up, he allowed us to play because guys have a system,'' added Marbury, who is playing for his fifth coach this season.
On the sideline, Wilkens was talking to players, offering brief lessons. He told Marbury to use the high crossover dribble, to draw the defense, which only enforced Marbury's own ideas.
For a week, Marbury, the point guard from Coney Island, has been talking to his boss, Thomas, on a daily basis, excitedly sharing ideas and plans. Now, with Wilkens, Marbury sees his career soaring.
''If you can't be a sponge now, you can never be one,'' he said. ''It's like predicting the future.''
He has the past as his guide. With loud fanfare, Wilkens's career came full circle last night. On Oct. 14, 1969, Wilkens was a player-coach for Seattle and his first game was against the Knicks. It ended in a humbling 126-101 defeat. He went on to lose five more.
''I don't remember the game that much,'' Wilkens said. ''I was still learning what coaching was all about. I didn't really want to do it, but they talked me into it. There were some great experiences along the way.''
Wilkens is in his 31st season on the sideline but professed to being nervous last night, coaching in front of his family and friends.
Wilkens did not hear the crowd chanting for him, but he did see Marbury run the show.
''It's so much easier when you got a legitimate point guard who can get to places, penetrate and help and cover; it's a nice feeling,'' Wilkens said.
Before the game, he said he thought Marbury might be overpassing. Marbury found the right opportunities last night.
''As long as we win, I don't care,'' he said. ''If I would have had no points and 17 assists and we won, I would have been happy.''
Last night, the Knicks held a team that shoots 44 percent to just 36.3 percent. In the second quarter, when the Knicks broke the game open, they held the Sonics to just 16 points.
The telling moment of that quarter came when Marbury hurled a half-court pass with his left hand directly into the hands of Kurt Thomas, racing to the basket on the fast break. The crowd erupted.
By halftime, Marbury had 10 assists. Van Horn had 19 points in the first half as the Knicks shot 57.5 percent and took a 60-42 halftime lead. Marbury noticed Van Horn being more aggressive than he was when the two played with the Nets.
Van Horn said to Marbury: ''You got better. You see the pass quicker, like a second faster from before.''
On one telling play early in the quarter, Marbury pointed to Michael Doleac as if to clear out. But Doleac, on instinct, stepped to the right elbow, all alone. Marbury drove to the left corner and passed back to Doleac, who nailed the 13-footer. Click. The Knicks got it.
''He can get 10 assists each and every game,'' Allan Houston said. ''It's a gift. To be able to score, not too many point guards can do both.''
Marbury scored 38 points in the Knicks' overtime loss to Dallas Monday when the fans chanted ''Fire Chaney.''
Houston saw the contrast with the fans chanting for Wilkens.
''It was funny to me,'' he said. ''Two nights you hear two extremes. When it's all said and done, I can say I had the experience of being in New York.''
PRO BASKETBALL
