The world's largest employment services group, Adecco S.A., said on Friday that its top financial executive and the head of its United States operations had resigned, days after the Swiss company revealed accounting problems at its North American unit.
Felix Weber, the company's chief financial officer, said in a telephone interview on Friday that he took full responsibility for Adecco's accounting problems and that his decision to tender his resignation at an extraordinary board meeting Thursday had been a personal one.
Julio Arrieta also resigned as chief executive of Adecco's United States operations, the company board said in a statement.
Adecco's shares plunged 35 percent on Monday when the Swiss company said its 2003 earnings report would be delayed while a new audit was performed. The Securities and Exchange Commission and the United States attorney's office for the Southern District of New York began immediate investigations into the matter.
With no clear indication of the extent of Adecco's problems, panicky investors feared a major accounting scandal on the scale of Enron or Parmalat. By Friday, the company had not released any figures on the extent of the flawed accounting.
Adecco's directors apologized for creating ''insecurity among investors and the general public,'' saying their public statements had been limited by legal restrictions. By Friday, the stock was down 38 percent from the previous Friday.
The directors said that they were fully cooperating with the company's auditor, Ernst &amp; Young, which is conducting a new audit, as well as with regulators to get to the bottom of what they called ''certain material weaknesses.''
After Thursday's meeting, the company's chairman, John Bowmer, stepped in as executive chairman to take charge of internal investigations, while Jérôme Caille, the chief executive, assumed responsibility for running day-to-day operations.
The problems found so far were in the company's North American operations, a unit that covers its business in the United States, Canada and Mexico. Adecco acquired 500 Olsten branches in the United States in 2000 in a $1.6 billion cash and stock transaction; it operates 100 branches under that name in the United States.
Some of the errors had already been rectified and others were being corrected, the directors said. Checks are under way for possible problems in other countries, which provide less than 10 percent of group revenues, they said.
The company did not identify who in the United States alerted it about the problems. In answer to questions, Mr. Bowmer declined to say whether negligence or fraud was suspected.
Weaknesses were found in the unit's information technology system security, its payroll bank accounts and in its ''application of accounts receivable.'' There were also revenue-recognition issues, including a ''lack of systematic documentation of agreed rates and hours'' and billing errors which had not been identified or corrected in time.
''The chief focus of these measures is to investigate accounting, control and compliance issues in the U.S. and in certain other countries, as well as to investigate accusations made by 'whistle-blowers' in the U.S.,'' the statement said.
Declining to say whether he had been pressured to resign, Mr. Weber said: ''I offered the board my resignation because I take the ultimate responsibility when there are control issues.
''In addition to that, my comments led to certain confusion in the market with consequences for the company,'' Mr. Weber said, referring to his remarks that appeared Tuesday in The New York Times.
In the article, Mr. Weber said responsibility for the difficulties was shared by all ''from the C.E.O. to regional management.''
''I take all responsibility as C.F.O.,'' he said on Friday, ''and I think it's the right thing to do if something like this happens, that the top people take the consequences.'' He declined to say whether he thought others in management, like Mr. Caille, should also resign.
Mr. Weber, who will be helping Mr. Bowmer's investigations until the general shareholders meeting on April 21, has been succeeded on an interim basis by Andres Cano, financial controller for the group, it said. Philippe Marcel, a board member and chairman of Adecco France, the group's largest national operation, was appointed to head the North American unit.
Mr. Bowmer sought to reassure investors in a conference call on Friday that he was ''confident of the company's long-term success.'' He said the group had 1.4 billion Swiss francs ($1.1 billion) in cash equivalents and short-term investments and that the company was functioning as usual.
Adecco named the New York law firm of Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton &amp; Garrison to conduct an independent investigation into the internal controls and practices at Adecco's  North American operations.
Analysts said the resignations were no surprise, but that the good news was the disclosure that Adecco's problems were largely confined to North America.
''The company will probably have to restate its results for North America, so this probably does not mean a major change in company results in general,'' said Ronald Wildmann, an analyst from Bank Leu in Zurich who has followed Adecco for seven years. He noted that the North American unit accounted for less than 4 percent of group income.
''The long-term problem is that investor confidence has been dented,'' Mr. Wildmann said.
Adecco, which was formed in 1996 when Adia of Switzerland was merged with Ecco of France, was audited until 2001 by Arthur Andersen, which collapsed in the wake of the Enron scandal. In 2002 it was audited by Ernst, which gave Adecco a clean report and said that the company had complied with United States accounting rules.
Last fall, Adecco reported that sales at its United States operations had fallen by 9 percent in the third quarter , but it was not clear whether those problems played a role in the control issues the company cited. It also remained unclear as to when Adecco would release its 2003 results, which would have been announced on Feb. 4.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
