Finessing seems a relatively simple subject when introduced to a beginner, although not easy to define. It is a second- or third-hand play that seeks to take a trick with a card, usually an honor, when the opponents hold one or more higher cards.
Complications set in when the declarer has to consider rejecting a finesse altogether or choosing between finesses in different suits. An example is the diagramed deal from a private game on Long Island. Suppose you reach five clubs and the opponents lead diamonds. You ruff the second round and enter dummy with a trump lead to the king. Should you now take a spade finesse? Or a heart finesse?
The normal contract is certainly three no-trump, a bid that North should make at his third turn. That happens to go down, because the defenders can lead and establish diamonds. They score four tricks in that suit plus the spade king, but they might fall into a trap. If East leads a diamond to his partner's jack, North could duck and cover the queen on the next trick. East would have to refuse to win at that point.
But North-South might reach five clubs, seldom a sensible choice with a four-four fit. This sets the problem posed above: diamonds are led and continued, with a ruff in the closed hand. After crossing to dummy with a trump lead, what should South do?
He must assume that at least one of the major-suit finesses will succeed. If he takes the obvious spade finesse and it loses, he will be forced to ruff another diamond. He is then stuck in his hand, with the clubs blocked, and he has no way out.
With the actual layout, the winning play, far from obvious, is to take a heart finesse at the fourth trick. If the jack loses to the king, South is still in control. He can ruff another diamond lead, cash the club queen, and cross to the heart queen. He can then draw trumps and take a spade finesse.
As it happens, the heart finesse wins. The declarer then plays spades from his hand, losing to the spade king. If another diamond is led, he can ruff, unblock the club queen and cash his spade winners. Luckily, the defender with the last trump has to follow to all the spades.
The nonobvious point is that a losing heart finesse leaves the declarer with a side-entry to the dummy. A losing spade finesse does not. But five clubs is a much worse contract than three no-trump.
BRIDGE
