Norman and Cathy Wilson have their hands, and their home, full.
Each cradles a sleeping baby as they pad around their apartment in Crown Heights, Brooklyn. Mrs. Wilson's daughter Jasmine, 12, sits on the sofa holding another baby to her shoulder. The triplets were born on Dec. 17. It was an uncomfortable pregnancy, with Mrs. Wilson required to be in the hospital for two weeks before the delivery.
Mr. and Mrs. Wilson are working hard, with feeding and sleeping schedules to maintain for three infants, not to mention all those diapers. But for the moment, the boys, Malachi and Jaylon, and the girl, Camara, are asleep, and the house is quiet except for a hissing radiator.
''We were looking to have one,'' said Mrs. Wilson, 32. ''When they said three, it was a whole different ballgame then. You need three of everything.''
It was certainly not what the Wilsons had in their budget. Mr. Wilson, 34, often puts in 12-hour days at the small Jamaican-American takeout restaurant he owns in Crown Heights. Mrs. Wilson is a family-assistance provider at the middle school that Jasmine attends, helping parents with their children's behavior and attendance problems. When Mrs. Wilson took a leave of absence from work last October after her doctor told her to stay home and rest, a significant portion of the family income was lost.
''It took awhile for us to adjust ourselves,'' Mrs. Wilson said.
It meant that Mr. Wilson and Jasmine would have to take on all the household chores. And Jasmine was not of much help, either, having broken her foot roller-skating in September.
''He had to close the store in the middle of the day to come home if I was feeling sick or something,'' Mrs. Wilson said. ''That took a toll on the family.''
But Mr. Wilson was far from unhappy. He said he has always wanted a large family. ''To get it all at once is really good,'' he said.
Mrs. Wilson felt the same way, growing up as an only child in a single-parent household. ''It was very hard on my mother and I, financially and emotionally,'' she said. ''I wanted to have a larger family.''
Already Jasmine is the consummate big sister, helping her mother around the house, holding and burping the babies. When her mother went to the hospital in the two weeks before the births, Jasmine was there every day and often spent the night in the hospital room. She even got to name Jaylon.
Following Mr. and Mrs. Wilson's marriage in 2001, the family went through a period where Mrs. Wilson said she felt she had lost touch with Jasmine. Hoping to find help communicating with her daughter, she took the family to the Bedford-Stuyvesant Family Center, a program of the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, one of seven charities that benefit from The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
It was there that they met Susan Brennan, a caseworker at the agency, who counseled Mrs. Wilson and Jasmine and who, a year later, became indispensable during the pregnancy.
When the doctor ordered Mrs. Wilson to stay home in October, Ms. Brennan visited the Wilsons every week at home to help them prepare for the births. She also obtained $1,045 from the Neediest Cases Fund for three cribs, three car seats and a three-seat stroller.
''The agency was very helpful in providing us the things that we needed,'' Mrs. Wilson said. ''They helped us get that start.''
Mrs. Wilson said it will be some time before she will be able to return to work.
For Mr. Wilson, who is from Jamaica, having a baby -- let alone three -- in New York brings out the differences between the two places. ''We have family here, but most of our family is very busy, you know New Yorkers,'' he said. ''Back home in Jamaica, you'd have someone nearby -- even if it's not a relative, a friend -- someone to watch the baby. But here everybody's got to go, because there are bills you've got to pay.''
But Mrs. Wilson knows they will make out fine: ''We pretty much rely on each other.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,002,638.15  Recorded Thursday: 41,418.97  Total: $7,044,057.12  Last year to date: $7,308,409.39
