In his stump speech, Representative Richard. A. Gephardt of Missouri emphasizes his experience and his plan for universal health care. Here is an excerpt from a speech on Jan. 9 in Williamsburg, Iowa, as recorded by The New York Times:
In my first week as president, I will ask the Congress to lay aside the Bush tax cuts. They have not worked, and I will use that money to see to it that every person in this country has good health insurance that can never be taken away from them.
Don't you think that's better than tax cuts for the wealthy?
My plan is the best plan. It's the only plan that helps everybody, everybody in this room, the press, all of you here in Iowa. Anybody that's in this room will do better under my plan and will be helped with their health care.
Every person will get a minimum of 60 percent of the cost of whatever health care plan you choose. Now that is a huge difference. That will help. So that you -- everybody is covered -- I just want to run through some categories so you know that I mean everybody: self-employed farmers, people who are unemployed, people who work for the church, people who work for the synagogue, people who work for the government, the local government, people who work for the state government; people who are police, teachers, firemen; firewomen. Everybody's covered; everybody gets the same thing.
That's why my plan is the best. It's the only plan that's truly universal; it's the only plan that's truly comprehensive.
Now, I can just hear George Bush, when I'm out in the debates with George Bush. He's going to say, ''Dick Gephardt's taking away that big tax cut I gave you. He's raising your taxes.'' That's what he's going to say.
Well, I'm going to have a great comeback. I'm going to say: ''Mr. President, you're wrong. Because my health care plan gives more money to the average family than your tax cuts. In fact, it's $3,000 a year for the average family, as opposed to $5 to $700 under the Bush tax cut. So my plan gives more money to the middle class and people at the bottom.''
Just think about it: 60 percent of his tax cut goes to the top 2, 3 percent. I'm taking all that money and spreading it out across the whole population evenly. So everybody gets more or less the same thing. So it's a better plan from an economic standpoint, from a family standpoint, and certainly it will get everybody covered with health insurance.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
