Negotiations between the union for workers at the Indian Point 3 nuclear power plant in Westchester County and its owners broke down last night, increasing the likelihood of a strike tonight, the union's president said.
Manny Hellen, the president of Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers Union of America, said a federal mediator had been called in to bring both sides back to the negotiating table.
Entergy, Indian Point's owner, ''unfortunately has proven to be an arrogant union-busting company that doesn't care about the work force, the community or the safety of Indian Point,'' Mr. Hellen said in a telephone call from the Ramada Plaza Hotel in New Rochelle, where round-the-clock talks had been taking place since Monday. He said union representatives had walked out of the bargaining session because of disagreement over health benefits.
Jim Steets, a spokesman for Entergy Nuclear Northeast, said he expected talks to begin again this morning with a mediator present. ''A federal mediator would be welcome,'' he said. ''An awful lot has been accomplished to this point. Our goals will be to agree to terms that are acceptable to everyone.''
The contract for the 276 union workers at Indian Point 3 will expire at 11:59 tonight. It covers technicians, control room operators, maintenance crews and other workers, but does not include the plant's security staff or workers at the Indian Point 2 reactor. The union has said it will go on strike if a new agreement is not reached by the deadline.
Until Entergy bought Indian Point 3 in 2000 and Indian Point 2 in 2001, the plants were owned and run by two separate entities, each with its own pay scale, rules and workplace culture. The company is seeking to meld two separate work forces into one, Mr. Steets said.
Con Edison owned Indian Point 2, and the New York Power Authority owned Indian Point 3. State law had prevented workers at Indian Point 3 from striking, but workers at Indian Point 2 went on strike against Con Edison for nine weeks in 1983. The plant, in Buchanan, 35 miles north of Midtown Manhattan, remained open.
Mr. Hellen said workplace conditions in 1983 should not be compared with today's. ''The N.R.C.'s requirements are much stricter now than they were 21 years ago,'' he said.
The Nuclear Regulatory Commission studied Entergy's contingency plans to see how the company would handle emergencies, security, maintenance and testing of equipment during a strike and found them acceptable, said Neil A. Sheehan, a commission spokesman. It verified the qualifications of the people who will run the control room, he said.
Entergy will staff the control room with licensed operators who are either managers who have come up through the ranks at Indian Point 3 or operators from the adjacent Indian Point 2. The N.R.C. will increase the number of inspectors on site if the workers go on strike, and if problems occur, it can impose any action, including closing the plant.
Although some local politicians have said the plant should shut down if there is a strike, Gov. George E. Pataki has not joined the call.
