Shinsei Bank, Japan's first foreign-owned lender, will list its shares on the Tokyo Stock Exchange in mid-February, completing a tumultuous five-year turnaround.
Shinsei's shareholders, which include the New York-based Ripplewood Holdings, Citigroup and Deutsche Bank, will sell 440 million shares, or about one-third of the outstanding common stock. About 55 percent of the shares will be sold in Japan and the remainder overseas. The bank has an option to sell an additional 36.3 million shares if demand is strong.
The shares will be priced on Feb. 9 and listed on Feb. 19. Bloomberg News, quoting a banker, reported that the shares would be offered at 435 yen ($4.07) each. This would allow Shinsei's shareholders to raise 191.4 billion yen ($1.8 billion), a 58 percent premium on what they paid for their stake in 2000.
The refloating of the bank, however, has been far from smooth. Shinsei was formed from the remains of the Long-Term Credit Bank, which collapsed under trillions of yen in nonperforming loans. Trying to stem a wider financial crisis, the government reluctantly nationalized the bank, one of the largest and most respected in Japan at the time.
With no Japanese investors able or willing to take over the Long-Term Credit Bank, lawmakers were forced to sell it to a consortium led by Ripplewood, which then had little presence in Japan.
Many policy makers opposed the sale, fearful that foreign investors would stop lending to weak, but politically influential, Japanese companies. The Western bankers who ultimately bought the bank were, for their part, suspicious of the official assessment of the bank's balance sheet, which turned out to be far worse than the government originally admitted.
To reach a deal, the government agreed to buy back loans to companies that were in far worse condition than initially agreed. Shinsei subsequently returned billions of yen in loans to the government, much to the consternation of local Japanese banks, which still had to grapple with their money-losing clients.
Aiming to improve the health of its own balance sheet, Shinsei also cut off dead-beat lenders, including the Sogo department store chain, a retailer that collapsed soon after.
The tough-love tactics worked, though. While Japanese banks struggled to remain solvent, Shinsei soon returned to health. Profits at the bank rose 28 percent, to 34 billion yen, in the half-year ended Sept. 30.
By writing off trillions of yen in nonperforming loans, the bank has shrunk its balance sheet by two-thirds, but also improved the quality of the loans it still holds. Its capital adequacy ratio, a benchmark of the bank's ability to absorb losses, is nearly twice that of other large banks in Japan.
Shinsei's new managers, including many recruited from Citigroup, Lehman Brothers and other Western banks, also narrowed the company's strategy. Outside of trying to provide all services to all customers, like most Japanese banks, Shinsei has focused on building retail and other fee-based businesses, including loan securitization. At the same time, the bank reduced its reliance on corporate lending.
''Shinsei is a good role model for other traditional Japanese banks,'' Naoko Nemoto, an analyst at Standard &amp; Poor's in Tokyo, said. ''They have proven that banks can still make profits in Japan.''
Other banks, with varying success, have tried to follow Shinsei's strategy. Japanese lenders have extended service hours for retail clients and branched out into new and more specialized investment banking services.
Since Shinsei's rebirth, other foreign investors have made inroads into Japan's banking industry, buying stakes in Aozora Bank, Tokyo Star Bank and others.
Morgan Stanley, Nikko-Citigroup and Nomura Holdings are the underwriters for the share offering, the first by a Japanese bank in seven years.
