Four health care officials were charged yesterday with cheating their poor and sick patients to benefit their political patron, Pedro Espada Jr., a former state senator and city councilman, the authorities said.
The four health clinic managers took food intended for their AIDS patients and used it instead at political rallies for Mr. Espada, who is president of the clinic chain, Soundview Health Center in the Bronx, according to charges announced yesterday by the state attorney general, Eliot Spitzer.
Mr. Spitzer also said the managers had told other clinic employees, who are paid by the state to care for sick mothers and children, to ignore their health care jobs and to work on Mr. Espada's political campaigns, gathering signatures on petitions and distributing fliers.
The charges were part of indictments against seven health care employees at Soundview, announced by Mr. Spitzer at a news conference in downtown Manhattan.
Mr. Spitzer charged the four senior managers at the clinics with taking more than $25,000 in government funds intended for the poor and sick, and diverting it to Mr. Espada's campaigns over the last several years. He said some clinic employees were awarded bonuses, paid with state medical funds, for diligent campaigning. And he accused the officials of fraudulently trying to obtain matching funds from the city's Campaign Finance Board.
Mr. Spitzer called the actions a ''betrayal of the public trust.''
''To pervert public programs designed to aid some of the neediest in our communities, including young children, for the advancement of partisan objectives is inexcusable,'' he said.
The four officials - Sandra Love, Maria Cruz, Esther Hill and Norma Ortiz - were arraigned on charges of third-degree grand larceny and first-degree fraud, and could face at least seven years in jail, Mr. Spitzer said. Three other clinic employees were indicted on perjury charges, he said, for allegedly lying to the grand jury investigating the case.
Mr. Espada, who is paid $200,000 a year as clinic president, was not charged, but officials familiar with the case said prosecutors were hoping to gather enough evidence to indict him as well.
Mr. Espada served three terms as state senator and then ran for City Council in a special election last year, leaving office when the term ended in December. He built a single health clinic in the Soundview neighborhood of the Bronx into a formidable social service network and used it as a political base to enlist support and gain political power across the South Bronx.
Mr. Espada called reporters yesterday to the upscale Manhattan restaurant Bouley to rebuff the charges.
In a phone interview before that, he called the indictments ''purely politically motivated'' and said the workers were victims of a political vendetta against him by Mr. Spitzer and state Democratic Party officials.
Mr. Espada said the indicted women were ''mothers and grandmothers who could teach Eliot Spitzer a thing or two about caring for children and families.''
''He has assassinated the character of good people and hurt our community,'' he said.
Mr. Espada defended the Soundview clinics - ''My politics were always kept separate from work at Soundview'' - and said he was being singled out because of his political record as a maverick in the Democratic Party, succeeding without the help of party leaders in the Bronx.
''I'm public enemy No. 1 for the state Democratic Party, and Eliot Spitzer owes a lot of people in the party favors,'' he said. ''They wanted him to teach me a lesson, so he's terrorizing me and my people with subpoenas.''
Mr. Spitzer said the indictments were based on facts. ''The last defense of those charged with criminal conduct is to challenge the motives of the prosecutor,'' he said.
