Conservatives like me don't get a vote in Democratic primaries, but we do have an interest. Even we frothing right-wingers know that the country needs a serious and responsible Democratic Party to counter the Republicans when they need countering, and beat them when they need beating.
So with the first actual votes about to be cast, I've been figuring out whom to root for. I've graded the candidates in three categories.
INTEGRITY/LEADERSHIP -- By this stage in the 1992 race, Bill Clinton's character flaws were already evident. None of this year's candidates seem to have any of those sorts of problems. But are they true to their convictions? Would they improve the tone in Washington?
Gephardt, A -- He's a man of integrity, who, putting his career at risk, has stuck tenaciously to his positions on the war, trade and the working class. Also, he's an experienced and fair-minded legislator.
Lieberman, A- -- Nobody has faced more hostile crowds. Nobody has more experience building bipartisan coalitions. He has problems looking presidential.
Edwards, A- -- Much more substantive than he seems at first. He is offended by cultural elitism, the besetting sin of national Democrats.
Kerry, B- -- Turned fuzzy when challenged. Personally aloof, he may have trouble building coalitions.
Clark, C -- Two years ago, he lauded Bush and his ''great team.'' Now he savages them with loopy conspiracy theories. Who is this guy and why aren't more of his military colleagues enthusiastic supporters?
Dean, F -- He's vague about what he's for, but he's venomous toward anyone who disagrees with him. If elected, political discourse would sink to new lows.
DOMESTIC POLICY -- Democratic proposals have grown more ambitious and expensive as the revenue to pay for them has grown scarce. Most of these plans, especially middle-class tax increases, would have no chance in a Republican or closely divided Congress. We'd be left with modest, overlapping proposals. High marks here go for any hint of creativity.
Lieberman, A -- One of the last free-trading Democrats, he would carry on where Clinton left off, with tax credits for high-tech innovation and the like.
Kerry, A- -- His bold plans for energy independence and national service should inspire the next president, whoever he is.
Edwards, A- -- Has the most detailed proposals. He focuses his attention on lower-skilled workers, who have seen their incomes stagnate.
Clark, B -- Has embraced generic but responsible Democratic ideas. Little that is daring or dangerous.
Dean, C -- On the stump, he rejects Clintonite centrism; in Vermont he exemplified it. If he won, who would serve: Governor Dean or Candidate Dean?
Gephardt, F -- Would capitalize on rising protectionist sentiment in the G.O.P. to erect trade barriers, setting off ferocious conflicts with the rest of the world and impoverishing workers here and abroad.
FOREIGN AFFAIRS -- The foreign policy debate has been absurdly backward-looking: how many angels can dance on the head of an Iraq resolution? High grades here go to those who are not merely reacting against Bush, but have their own view of the threats and opportunities we face.
Gephardt, A -- Deeply affected by 9/11. He believes in aggressive action to prevent further attacks.
Lieberman, A -- No other candidate has thought so much about Islamic fascism, and how to counter it.
Clark, B -- Of all the candidates, he's the most wedded to multilateral institutions. One may disagree, but it's hard not to be impressed by the sophistication of his thinking.
Edwards, B- -- He voted for the war but then, in the face of political pressure, against the $87 billion required to continue it.
Kerry, B- -- His instincts are slightly hawkish. The question is whether he would be able to make a tough decision, then stick to it.
Dean, C -- His advisers and speeches are on the dovish side, but he claims that his instincts, despite his Iraq war stand, are hawkish. Screaming to a crowd, he's Kucinich; talking to a small group, he's Kerry.
My Democratic friends complain, but this is a pretty strong field of candidates. I fear Dean's temperament and Gephardt's trade policy. But if any of the other guys were elected, the country would be fine, and we right-wingers would still find plenty to fume about.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: dabrooks@nytimes.com
