A majority of state environmental officials believes that air pollution from coal-burning power plants would increase if the Bush administration's changes to the Clean Air Act were to take effect, according to a survey to be released on Friday by the General Accounting Office.
The administration has said the changes, originally approved in August, would have minimal impact on air pollution.
The survey, which was requested by Senators Joseph I. Lieberman, Democrat of Connecticut, and James M. Jeffords, the Vermont independent, gathered responses from 44 states on the section of the Clean Air Act governing aging coal-burning plants, New Source Review.
Officials from 27 states said the administration's changes would increase emissions, while officials from 5 states said it would cut them. Officials from the other 12 states that responded said emissions would remain the same or were unsure about the impact.
''State and local authorities know best, and the vast majority say that these rule changes take us backward, not forward, in cleaning our skies and improving public health,'' Mr. Lieberman said.
The report highlights the tensions between the Environmental Protection Agency and a number of states, concentrated in the Northeast, since the administration started pushing the changes at the urging of industry.
Fourteen states, including New York, and several cities have sued the E.P.A. to block the new policy. The United States Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia Circuit barred the changes from taking effect in late December pending the resolution of a court case, in part because the changes were likely to cause irreparable harm.
The Bush administration has said the changes would reduce confusion and bureaucracy in the upgrading of power plants. But officials from 30 states said the changes would result in continued uncertainty.
State officials from 29 states said the changes' main benefits would be to give the utility industry increased flexibility.
Indeed, the E.P.A. said when it first announced the rule changes that it would hold off pursuing a number of cases against power companies, since those cases would no longer be valid. After the court suspended the changes in December, though, Michael O. Leavitt, the E.P.A. administrator, said the agency could continue to investigate the cases.
E.P.A. officials have said they are pushing other, more comprehensive policies to reduce air pollution.
''We have proposed a rule that will require power plants to reduce their emissions by 70 percent,'' said Cynthia Bergman, a spokeswomen for the agency, referring to a recent proposal that would create market-based trading in acid rain-causing sulfur dioxide and smog-causing nitrogen dioxides.
