The House ethics committee says it has been conducting a confidential inquiry into accusations of bribery surrounding the vote on the new Medicare drug plan, mollifying some Democrats who have been pressing for an investigation.
In a statement issued late Wednesday, the top Republican and Democrat on the panel, the Committee on Standards of Official Conduct, said the committee initiated a review in December of whether inducements made to Representative Nick Smith, Republican of Michigan, in an effort to win his vote might have crossed the line into illegal activity.
The statement, from Representatives Joel Hefley, Republican of Colorado, and Alan B. Mollohan, Democrat of West Virginia, said, ''On Dec. 8, 2003, we initiated informal fact-finding concerning the statements made by Representative Nick Smith on communications that he received linking his support for the Medicare Prescription Drug Act with support for the Congressional candidacy of his son.''
After the early morning vote on Nov. 22, Mr. Smith, who is retiring, said some lawmakers and groups had promised extensive financial support for his son's House campaign if Mr. Smith would support the drug plan. Mr. Smith, who voted against it, later said there had been no specific offer of money.
But Democrats have called for an investigation. Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the Democratic whip, wrote last month to the speaker of the House, J. Dennis Hastert, urging him to seek an inquiry and suggesting that if he did not, a Democrat would initiate one by filing an ethics complaint. The ethics panel's announcement seemed to be an effort to head off a formal request, particularly since Mr. Hefley had recently said he was not inclined to begin an inquiry on his own.
Representative Nancy Pelosi, the Democratic leader, said she was satisfied with the panel's action, especially after the earlier indication that an investigation would not be pursued. ''That seems to have been not quite the reality, and this statement, I think, is very satisfactory,'' Ms. Pelosi said.
Republicans have suggested that Democrats are promoting the ethics inquiry for political reasons.
''I think what they are doing is very, very dangerous,'' the House majority leader, Representative Tom DeLay, said this week.
Mr. DeLay said Democrats were planning to ''burn down the House'' as part of their effort to regain the majority in November.
