Boss Prize Finalists
The Solomon R. Guggenheim Foundation announced the finalists for its Hugo Boss Prize this week. The $50,000 award, named for the German men's wear company that sponsors it, is given every two years to an artist whose work represents a significant development in contemporary art.
''Since we don't do a biennial, this is our barometer of what's happening in the art world globally,'' said Nancy Spector, curator of contemporary art at the Guggenheim, who oversees the six-member jury of museum directors and curators from around the world.
Two years ago all the finalists worked in film, video and installation. This year's list is more varied and includes Conceptual artists, a filmmaker and a painter. Curiously, no American artists are included.
''This is not a predictable list,'' Ms. Spector said.
''You never know what happens when you get a jury together,'' she added. ''This year's short list shows that painting can be equally as provocative as video.''
These are the finalists:
*Franz Ackermann, 40, a German painter who lives in Berlin and Karlsruhe. His work often deals with his impressions of the cities he visits.
*Jeroen de Rijke, 33, and Willem de Rooij, 34, Dutch artists who have been collaborating since 1994 on films and video installations, which are meditative, ephemeral and often deal with the nuances of nature.
*Rivane Neuenschwander, 37, a Brazilian installation artist known for poetic works dealing with language and emotion.
*Simon Starling, 36, a British-born Conceptual artist who lives and works in Berlin. He often explores the history of modernism.
*Rirkrit Tiravanija, 42, an Argentine-born Conceptual artist who divides his time between New York, Berlin and Bangkok. He is known for exploring the social role of the artist.
*Yang Fudong, 32, a Beijing-born artist living in Shanghai, who makes films about contemporary China and its relationship to Chinese history, philosophy and the environment.
Ms. Spector said the finalists represented a good cross section of contemporary art.
The museum plans to publish a catalog of the finalists' work, which will be available at the museum store and at other bookshops this spring. The winner will be announced in October and have a solo exhibition at the Guggenheim in New York next winter.
New-Look Chicago
Chicago's $450 million Millennium Park, being built on 24 1/2 acres in downtown Chicago (on Michigan Avenue just north of the Art Institute), is shaping up to be a marriage of architecture, landscape design and art. ''It's a park that will define the city in the 21st century,'' said John H. Bryan, chairman of Millennium Park Inc. and of the Art Institute.
Scheduled to open on July 16, it was financed by a public-private partnership. Mr. Bryan said $270 million came from the city, and the rest was raised privately, mostly from corporations, foundations and individuals.
Its central attraction is a music pavilion designed by the architect Frank Gehry, an elaborate construction of billowing curves of stainless steel and a gigantic steel trellis. Mr. Gehry has also designed a stainless-steel-clad bridge, his first, that spans Columbus Drive, linking the park to the Daley Bicentennial Plaza.
To the west of the pavilion will be one of the world's largest outdoor sculptures: a 100-ton, mirror-finished stainless steel elliptical installation, 60 feet long and 30 feet tall, by the British artist Anish Kapoor. It is his first public work in the United States.
Mr. Kapoor was selected by a sculpture committee, which asked him and Jeff Koons for proposals, Mr. Bryan said. ''Jeff proposed a tower with cutout animal silhouettes,'' he said. ''The committee liked Anish's better.''
A competition determined who would design a fountain southwest of the sculpture. The architect Robert Venturi, the architect and artist Maya Lin and the Barcelona artist Jaume Plensa each submitted proposals. Mr. Plensa's design was selected because the committee thought it was the best example of a 21st-century fountain, Mr. Bryan said. It is to feature two 50-foot glass-block towers at each end of a shallow reflecting pool. Changing video images will be projected on the towers, and water will cascade from the top of each.
There was an open competition to design a three-acre garden. The team of Kathryn Gustafson, from Seattle, Piet Oudolf, from Hummelo, the Netherlands, and Robert Israel, from Los Angeles, were selected from 15 applicants. The garden will include many different kinds of spaces, Mr. Bryan said, incuding sculptured hedgerows and walkways. Among the plantings will be 240 varieties of perennials and flowering cherry trees.
Across the street from the park will be a new 230,000-square-foot wing of the Art Institute, being designed by the architect Renzo Piano, which is to house its collection of contemporary art. Building is scheduled to begin this fall and be completed in 2007.
Auction Moves to Paris
Christie's auction of Latin American art, traditionally held in New York in May, will take place this year at its Paris headquarters on the Avenue Matignon on June 10.
''Latin American collectors are happiest and spend lots of money in Paris,'' said Marc Porter, Christie's international managing director. ''I think it could be bigger and more successful.''
For years Christie's sales of Latin American art have been far less successful than those of its arch rival, Sotheby's. Some experts in the field say moving the auction to Paris will add a new edge to the market. Asked if the move is permanent or just a trial, Mr. Porter said, ''If it's a great success, we'll schedule others there.''
Inside Art
