A Cruel January For Several Shows
A chill set in on Broadway late last month when ticket sales dropped as precipitously as the temperature. With the exception of ''Fiddler on the Roof,'' still in previews, every show saw receipts decline, prompting a spate of closing notices that should empty Broadway houses before the end of the month.
''Never Gonna Dance'' (closing next weekend), ''Anna in the Tropics'' (Feb. 22) and ''The Retreat From Moscow'' (Feb. 29) never overcame mixed reviews. And even ''Gypsy'' (Feb. 28), with generally favorable notices, couldn't find enough of an audience to come close to recouping.
''Everyone says that January is always difficult, but this year feels worse,'' said the producer Margo Lion. The travails of this season's new shows are well documented, but what's really striking is how poorly Broadway's war horses are faring. ''42nd Street,'' ''Beauty and the Beast,'' ''Rent'' and ''Aida'' filled below 50 percent of their seats in the last week of the month. ''Thoroughly Modern Millie'' did only moderately better (52 percent). Of course, such low numbers are common in January, but the question is: how long can these shows continue to take losses?
There's even concern about hits like ''The Producers'' and ''Hairspray,'' which remain very popular, because of the imminent exits of their stars. In an interview last month with TV Guide Online, Kelsey Grammer disclosed that he was in talks to replace Nathan Lane, who, along with Matthew Broderick, leaves ''The Producers'' on April 4, but the producers say discussions have been postponed, sending them back to the drawing board.
''Kelsey Grammer will not be playing Max in the Broadway company of 'The Producers' when Nathan Lane finishes his engagement,'' said John Barlow, the spokesman for the show. ''But it's very likely that Kelsey will play the role at some point in the future.''
Filling Harvey Fierstein's housedress when he leaves ''Hairspray'' on May 2 does not pose quite as big a problem because the show has never been such a star vehicle. Producers are in negotiations with Michael McKean, an actor who recently appeared in the film ''A Mighty Wind.''
Actors' Union Complaint
Preparing for contract negotiations that will focus on the issue of non-Equity road tours, the Actors' Equity Association has filed an unfair labor practices complaint with the National Labor Relations Board against three behemoth producing companies: Clear Channel Entertainment, the Nederlander Organization and Dodger Stage Holding Theatricals Inc. Equity's goal is to force these companies to release information about their possible links to companies like Troika Entertainment, NETworks and Big League Theatricals that back non-Equity road tours. Its own inquiries received no response, said Alan Eisenberg, executive director of Actors' Equity.
''We think they have a cozy relationship with these nonunion groups,'' Mr. Eisenberg said by phone. In a written statement, he said, ''This failure to provide the information we requested begs the question -- what are they hiding?''
Executives from the three companies declined to comment.
A Character Revisited
Mrs. Farnsworth made her first appearance in an early draft of the play ''Scenes From American Life,'' the first to bring A. R. Gurney major attention. Mr. Gurney cut her out on the advice of Daniel Sullivan, who directed the play in 1971 for Lincoln Center Theater. Now he is bringing her back in an expanded form in his new political comedy, ''Mrs. Farnsworth,'' which begins performances on March 18 at the Flea Theater. ''There's something about her name that just stuck with me,'' Mr. Gurney said by phone.
In Mr. Gurney's play, his second of the spring (''Big Bill'' begins performances today on the Mitzi E. Newhouse stage at Lincoln Center), Mrs. Farnsworth is writing a book about an old romance with a handsome Yalie who drinks too much, dodges responsibility and is often bailed out by his wealthy family. If he doesn't sound familiar, here's a hint: he's not John Kerry.
The play was to be produced next season, but Mr. Gurney convinced the Flea's artistic director, Jim Simpson, who is also directing, that the topical subject matter needed to be seen right away. Sigourney Weaver, who plays Mrs. Farnsworth and is married to Mr. Simpson, describes her character as an ''über-waspy'' woman incensed at the current political climate. The issue in the play, she says, is the best way to fight the president. ''What is fair?'' Ms. Weaver said by phone from England, where she is receiving a lifetime achievement award from Empire magazine. ''Do you dredge up dirt from his past? Or do you go after his policies?''
'Streetcar' Rejects
On March 23, 1945, Tennessee Williams wrote a letter to his agent about a new play he was writing called ''A Streetcar Named Desire.'' He described almost the entire plot before admitting that he couldn't figure out how it would end. Williams wrote several versions before settling on the famous final scene in which the doctors come to take Blanche away. Two of these never-produced endings, along with four other discarded scenes, will be performed on Feb. 23 in ''Roads Not Taken,'' a reading in the Food for Thought Lunch Hour Theater series at the National Arts Club, with Robert Cuccioli as Stanley.
The unpublished scenes include some real surprises, among them a tougher, more resilient Blanche and a surprisingly tender Stanley (sometimes called Ralph).
''Roads Not Taken,'' which has been produced at a couple of free readings, is narrated by Dan Isaac, a former professor and Tennessee Williams aficionado who found this material in the Harry Ransom Humanities Research Center at the University of Texas in Austin. In his scripted introduction to the program, Mr. Isaac argues that Williams settled on the more tragic ending because he ''wanted to be Sophocles, not Chekhov.'' There are plans to mount an Off Broadway run of ''Roads'' with rotating casts next fall.
On Stage and Off
