Senate office buildings began reopening Thursday as investigators said they still had not determined how the poison ricin got into the mailroom of the Senate majority leader on Monday.
Hundreds of Congressional staff members, eager to return to desks that had been off limits for days, clustered outside the entrances to the Russell Senate Office Building across Constitution Avenue from the Capitol and streamed in when the doors opened just after noon.
Officials said the collection of unopened mail, the decontamination of the office and the environmental testing of the Senate buildings were all proceeding smoothly and more quickly then they had expected. As a result, the Capitol police reopened the Hart building Thursday evening, ahead of schedule.
The Dirksen building, where the poison was discovered, is scheduled to reopen no later than Monday morning, but officials were trying to get it back in business sooner as well.
''Substantial progress continues to be made to reclaim the building,'' Chief Terrance Gainer of the Capitol police said. ''We really are moving along very nicely.''
Officials from the Environmental Protection Agency, which is overseeing the testing, said ricin had not been detected anywhere except in the fourth-floor mailroom of the majority leader, Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, where it was first spotted by a Congressional intern about 3 p.m. Monday.
''We have not found a hot letter at this point in time,'' said Michael Mason, assistant F.B.I, director in charge of the Washington field office. ''In terms of how it was delivered to that room, it is open to your imagination.''
With no letter in hand, investigators seemed to be considering the idea that the substance may have arrived in another way. ''The possibilities for the delivery mechanism, whether it is a person or a letter or a package, is open,'' Chief Gainer said.
Mr. Mason described the criminal investigation as ''still in its infancy.'' The law enforcement officials acknowledged that the Secret Service had not immediately informed them of a ricin-contaminated letter directed to the White House in November, but they said new procedures put in place since then would prevent future communication gaps. ''From my perspective, this is water over the dam,'' said Mr. Mason.
But Senator Tom Daschle of South Dakota, the Democratic leader, said lawmakers of both parties were ''very frustrated about the way that whole matter was handled.''
''There's no reason why information that vital should be withheld,'' Mr. Daschle said. ''It affects our own ability to cope with circumstances similar to those, here on the Hill.''
Medical officials said none of the dozens of staff members who were in the vicinity of where the ricin was discovered had shown any symptoms of exposure.
