''Miracle,'' the movie version of the 1980 United States Olympic hockey team's Cinderella season, faces a hurdle that most fact-based films don't have to contemplate: the actual story the picture is based on was so corny and rousing that it hit all the notes many filmmakers would have too much shame to embrace. Fortunately -- or unfortunately, depending on how you look at it -- Disney, the studio that brought us ''The Rookie'' and ''The Mighty Ducks'' (the movie and the team/merchandising operation), has no such restraint.
Accordingly, ''Miracle'' does a yeoman's job of recycling the day-old dough that passes for its story. You can feel the film chafing against restrictions, given that many of the principals, like the goalie Jim Craig (Eddie Cahill) and the team captain Mike Eruzione (Patrick O'Brien Demsey), are still alive.
And since ''Miracle,'' which opens nationwide today, is aimed mostly at an audience that wasn't even born when the coach Herb Brooks's boys defeated the fearsome Soviet hockey team at Lake Placid, N.Y., younger audiences may not recognize the picture's staleness; that may make ''Miracle'' chewier. The movie efficiently delivers the story points, though nonsports fans should be warned: the climax features an almost 20-minute re-creation of the penultimate 1980 game between the Americans and the Soviets. (Team U.S.A. won the gold in the next game, against Finland, which the movie glides over.)
The voice-over from Kurt Russell (as Brooks, the taciturn, determined misfit who seizes the chance to lead the team his way when it is offered) recognizes that this event preceded the Dream Team invention. That device allowed American professionals to play in the Olympics, as well as professionals on other nations' teams.
The sad truth is that the United States Olympic basketball team has now become the equivalent of the dominating Soviets.
The Soviet hockey players were then the experienced, intimidating squad that whipped all comers, including a National Hockey League all-star team and, a week before the Olympics began, the very squad that Brooks assembled in an exhibition game. (Brooks, who died in an auto accident last year, once joked that he knew his team had already lost that game when he saw them applauding as their opponents took the ice.)
The external details are all in place: a number of clips from period shows and news programs, in which jolts like oil shortages and Jimmy Carter's troubled presidency (rocked further by the fall of the United States Embassy in Tehran and the taking of hostages) are damaging the national psyche. At least the movie has the good grace not to rely on clips from ABC, which has become a part of Disney; the Mean Joe Greene ''Coke and a smile'' commercial will swell tear ducts just as surely as the movie itself does.
There's nothing new in the picture's rote reiteration of history, evoking a period long ago and far away; did Nelly introduce ''Hot in Here'' for the 1980 Winter Olympics, before he reprised it on Sunday for the Super Bowl? But ''Miracle'' wasn't created for anyone looking for a surprise in the filmmaking, since the true-life story can be seen in all its primitive glory occasionally on ESPN Classic. (One of the executive producers, the HBO Sports president, Ross Greenburg, was responsible for a cable documentary using the same material, ''Do You Believe in Miracles? The Story of the 1980 U.S. Hockey Team,'' which may explain why the title was shortened here.)
The most important detail is Mr. Russell, wearing Brooks's uniform of sports jacket and checked bell-bottoms; it's been so long that those pants can now be seen on the runway during Fashion Week. Mr. Russell's own healthy head of hair was dyed and tamed into Brooks's 80's thick helmet-coif. The hair is almost the key to the performance; it's as stiff, unmovable and unforgiving as Brooks.
Mr. Russell tightens his face, limiting nearly all movement to his lower jaw. He plays Brooks as a man who refuses to waste emotion; it's why his driving his team so hard seems partly a shock, because he's not initially a bellower. (This small facet of the performance helps when it's revealed that Brooks wants to be hated, so the team can bond in its dislike of him.)
Taking a group of young, unproven players allows him to beat them down by constant pressure into the unit he wants -- he says they may not be the best team, but they're the right one. Mr. Russell's cagey and remote performance gives ''Miracle'' its few breezes of fresh air. He's yet to give a good performance in a movie people have turned out for; this may be his chance to realize an achievement similar to that of the man he plays.
And since Mr. Russell gets more screen time than anyone other than the broadcaster Al Michaels, playing himself, it's good to see that he's capable of maintaining focus. Eventually, it may seem that the real star of ''Miracle'' is Mr. Michaels, the ABC sportscaster whose heartfelt, enthusiastic cry ''Do you believe in miracles? Yes!'' was the shout heard 'round the world -- or at least 'round the contiguous United States.
His commentary is used for so much of the pivotal sequence, the big-screen re-playing of the game between the Americans and the Soviets, that Mr. Michaels should get a special screen credit. We can only hope that the good folks at ABC Sports are properly rewarded for his thrillingly apt play-by-play.
The director Gavin O'Connor's previous feature was the 1999 close-quarters independent film ''Tumbleweeds,'' and he gets the pounding effect of Brooks's drilling of his squad, which induces distaste from his assistant Craig Patrick (Noah Emmerich). The director handles the scenes of Brooks's personal life simply: standard stuff in which the coach ignores his family to bring his dream to life.
The screenwriter Eric Guggenheim has made those scenes, in which the gifted Patricia Clarkson plays Brooks's wife, Patty, more about a household power struggle than merely about a man immersed in his job.
Patty is not just along for the ride and wants him to pay attention to the other parts of his life. Ms. Clarkson forsakes her genteel good humor and goes just as flinty as her husband; it justifies a later scene when he kisses her hand.
That's the kind of phenomenon that has as much impact as the games played in ''Miracle.''
''Miracle'' is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It has mildly abrasive shouting and language, and intense re-creations of the kind of hockey violence often seen on ''Sports Center.''
MIRACLE
Directed by Gavin O'Connor; written by Eric Guggenheim; director of photography, Daniel Stoloff; edited by John Gilroy; music by Mark Isham; production designer, John Willett; produced by Mark Ciardi and Gordon Gray; executive producers, Justis Greene and Ross Greenburg; released by Walt Disney Pictures. Running time: 135 minutes. This film is rated PG.
WITH: Kurt Russell (Herb Brooks), Patricia Clarkson (Patty Brooks), Noah Emmerich (Craig Patrick), Sean McCann (Walter Bush), Kenneth Welsh (Doc Nagobads), Eddie Cahill (Jim Craig), Patrick O'Brien Demsey (Mike Eruzione) and Al Michaels (Himself).
FILM REVIEW
