Reeling from a string of defeats and rising disillusionment among his supporters, Howard Dean said Thursday that his presidential bid would end if he failed to win the Democratic primary in Wisconsin in 12 days.
Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, made his announcement in a stark overnight e-mail message to supporters. He was bowing to the reality of the collapse of a candidacy that had once seemed so far advanced that his aides had discussed who his running mate might be. By Thursday afternoon, he had upended two days of campaigning in Michigan, where caucuses are being held Saturday, to make a big show of flying here.
''The entire race has come down to this: we must win Wisconsin,'' Dr. Dean wrote in the e-mail message, which included a plea for $50 contributions to finance television advertisements there. ''Anything less will put us out of this race.''
Dr. Dean's advisers expressed optimism that Dr. Dean would get his candidacy on track here and emerge as the chief alternative to Senator John Kerry, who has won seven of the first nine Democratic contests.
Still, party strategists said it was unclear how much Dr. Dean would gain from Wisconsin on Feb. 17. By then he could have gone through 16 state contests without a victory. Democratic leaders say that Mr. Kerry seems poised to win contests this weekend in Michigan, Maine and perhaps Washington State, and that he is making an aggressive effort to win contests on Tuesday in Tennessee and Virginia.
Mr. Kerry, from Massachusetts, stepped up his efforts to present himself as his party's prohibitive front-runner, announcing a series of major endorsements including, most prominently, that of Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who quit the presidential race after placing fourth in Iowa. [Page A19.]
The fight in Wisconsin is now shaping up as perhaps the last big battle of the 2004 Democratic nomination campaign. Aides to Mr. Kerry, Dr. Dean and the other two major Democratic contenders, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, said Thursday they were preparing full-scale campaigns to win Wisconsin.
Dr. Dean held two poorly attended events on Thursday morning in Michigan. He had once been confident of victory there, but after the events on Thursday, he cut short his visit and flew to Wisconsin. At his final stop in Michigan, in Royal Oak, an entrepreneur in the lobby slashed the price of Dean campaign buttons to $1 apiece, down from three for $5.
Dr. Dean's announcement would seem to end any possibility that he might, as he had once suggested, wage a guerrilla campaign through the Democratic convention in Boston in July in the hopes that Mr. Kerry's candidacy would collapse. One Democrat close to Dr. Dean said that in scrapping plans for holding out until the end, Dr. Dean was seeking to avoid permanently diminishing his standing in the Democratic Party.
Combined with developments in other Democratic primaries and caucuses coming up over the next week, Dr. Dean's announcement signaled that the size of this once sprawling field of candidates might be about to contract, perhaps even before Wisconsin.
Mr. Kerry's intensified effort to win in Tennessee and Virginia, his aides said, was meant to address concerns among Democrats that he would be a weak candidate in the South, and also to deal what could be embarrassing setbacks to Mr. Edwards and General Clark, who are both from the South.
''If you're a regional candidate who can't win your own region, you're in trouble,'' said a senior adviser to Mr. Kerry.
Supporters of General Clark said that he was likely, but not certain, to pull out of the race if he did not win Tennessee. Though he has campaigned and advertised in Virginia, his aides stopped short of saying Tuesday he was no longer looking for a victory there.
''We intend to win Tennessee and then go to Wisconsin and fight like a badger,'' said Chris Lehane, one of General Clark's senior advisers.
Some of Mr. Edwards's supporters said Thursday it might be difficult for him to continue should he lose Tennessee and Virginia to Mr. Kerry, though they said he would press through to Wisconsin. But Mr. Edwards, speaking to reporters on his campaign plane in Nashville, said he intended to stay in the race no matter the outcome in those states. ''I am going on,'' Mr. Edwards said.
But Mr. Edwards's advisers said that his position had been made more difficult by General Clark's presence in the two states, since both were vying for Southern voters, creating an opportunity for Mr. Kerry
''To the extent General Clark's hanging around, it's mostly as a spoiler,'' said David Axelrod, a senior Edwards adviser. ''He's not going to be the nominee.''
Dr. Dean's announcement set off shock waves in his campaign and -- perhaps not by coincidence -- inspired a burst of contributions through his Web site. Dr. Dean's e-mail message, sent shortly before 2 a.m. Thursday to 640,000 people registered on the campaign Web site, set a goal of raising $700,000 by Sunday.
Dr. Dean's campaign said it had raised $475,000 by the close of business Thursday, including at least $50,000 in each of several hours, rivaling Dr. Dean's most fertile Internet fund-raising day last year, June 30. There is no way to verify the numbers provided by the campaign, which posts a running tally, in the form of a baseball bat being filled up, on its Web site.
''It's breathing something into this campaign,'' said Dr. Dean's pollster, Paul Maslin. ''I'm watching the bat go and I'm trying to figure out our media strategy next week 'cause Lord knows we're going to have one.''
Should Dr. Dean win in Wisconsin, he would need the contributions to continue at least at this pace. On the first two Tuesdays of March, there are 14 caucuses and primaries from coast to coast, burdening all the candidates with the need to finance what would in effect be a national television campaign. Dr. Dean has told advisers that he will not go into debt to finance his campaign.
A poll released Thursday by the University of Wisconsin Survey Center, and sponsored by The Capital Times of Madison and The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, suggested that Dr. Dean had his work cut out for him in Wisconsin. Mr. Kerry had the support of 32 percent of the respondents, compared with 9 percent for General Clark, 8 percent for Dr. Dean and 7 percent for Mr. Edwards. The telephone survey of 500 people was conducted from Jan. 27 to Feb. 3, and thus would not have picked up any lift Mr. Kerry or Mr. Edwards might have received in public opinion after their showings on Tuesday.
Standing in front of a Wisconsin flag in a ballroom at an airport hotel in Milwaukee and wearing a Wisconsin State lapel pin, Dr. Dean dismissed the poll, saying, ''We believe people are voting for Senator Kerry without knowing anything about him.''
As the day went on, there was some confusion about precisely what Dr. Dean had intended to say with that e-mail message. Dr. Dean's campaign chief, Roy Neel, told reporters that they should not read the words from Dr. Dean saying that he would be ''out of the race'' if he lost Wisconsin to mean that he would be out of the race if he lost Wisconsin
''I don't think that e-mail says that if he loses Wisconsin, he will get out of the race,'' Mr. Neel said.
Asked about the confusion sowed by Mr. Neel's remarks, Dr. Dean merely referred to the words of his e-mail message, which he called ''a brilliant ploy.''
Asked what he meant, Dr. Dean said, ''It depends what your definition of the word 'ploy' is,'' adding that he sees a ploy as a ''strategy.''
But he warned, do or die, he would be a no-show at the Democrats' Jefferson-Jackson Day dinner in Milwaukee this weekend
''My son's last hockey game as a senior is on the 14th of February,'' he said. ''I promised myself no matter what happened in this campaign I would be there.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
