As contract talks with the city teachers' union start in earnest today, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg is reaching for a prize even bigger than mayoral control of the school system: a scrapping of the 42-year-old, 200-page teachers' contract and its thicket of work rules.
The Bloomberg administration plans to propose wiping away decades of details in favor of a ''thin'' contract citywide: about a dozen pages that would give principals the right to hire and fire, and would end seniority rules that give teachers a say over everything from what schools they work in to what grades and subjects they teach.
In the past, city officials have often tried to tame the contract with clauses and exceptions. But nobody has tried to sweep it aside.
''It's climbing Mount Everest,'' said Eva S. Moskowitz, the chairwoman of the City Council Education Committee who in November held a series of politically charged hearings on the education contracts.
The contract has long been at the core of disputes over who is to blame for the ills of public education in New York City. Mr. Bloomberg, like many of his predecessors, sees the contract as an obstacle to effective management. The union says that mayors routinely scapegoat the contract to mask their own failures on education issues.
In recent days, the mayor's office ordered city education officials not to discuss the talks. And yesterday, a spokesman for the mayor, Robert Lawson, declined to comment. But the mayor and Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein have made no secret of the concessions they want.
In a speech to business leaders last week, for instance, Mr. Klein offered a scathing assessment of the current contract and called for sweeping changes, including merit pay for successful teachers and bonuses for teachers who agree to work in struggling schools and for teachers in subjects that are hard to staff, like math.
''At the heart of the problem are the three poles of civil service: lockstep pay, seniority and life tenure,'' Mr. Klein said. ''Together they act as handcuffs and prevent us from making the changes that will encourage and support excellence in our system.''
Mr. Bloomberg is so determined to break apart the contract that the teachers' union president, Randi Weingarten, took the extraordinary step last August of moving to outflank him by publicly offering to try a thin contract in perhaps 150 schools. But Ms. Weingarten has said her members are not prepared to abandon the existing contract in all 1,200 schools, and she has cautioned the mayor, who faces re-election in 2005, that contract talks could quickly hit an impasse if he pushes for too much too fast.
Officials familiar with the city's bargaining strategy, however, said the administration had no intention of heeding Ms. Weingarten's warning. They said the mayor's negotiators planned to push immediately for a citywide deal, a move that several officials said would put the city and the union on a collision course and that Ms. Weingarten, in an interview, said would sound the ''death knell'' for negotiations.
''They know we will reject it,'' she said, adding that she believed the administration was planning to sabotage the contract talks so it could blame the union and teachers for failures in the mayor's education reform initiatives, collectively called Children First. ''They are looking for a fight,'' Ms. Weingarten said. ''That says to me there are some real fundamental flaws that they identified in Children First that they need to try and scapegoat the teachers.''
In addition to her proposal for a thin contract, Ms. Weingarten, in her speech to business leaders last month, also offered to address another age-old complaint of city officials by speeding up the dismissal of incompetent teachers, a process that can now drag on for years. Ms. Weingarten said those offers demonstrated substantial good faith on the part of the city's 80,000 teachers, many of whom view the contract as their only protection against a city education bureaucracy they regard as unwieldy and unpredictable.
''We have spent the last several months proving to them and the city that despite the demoralization of teachers right now and the fact that there are lots of problems in the schools, we want to be problem solvers,'' Ms. Weingarten said.
One official said the city labor commissioner, James F. Hanley, had been working in recent days to persuade Ms. Weingarten not to walk away from the talks, even if the administration makes a citywide thin contract as its starting point in the negotiations.
The talks are complicated by politics on both sides. Ms. Weingarten, though popular among her members, nonetheless faces re-election this spring, a process that usually calls for union leaders to take a tougher stance.
Mr. Bloomberg is struggling to lift his approval ratings in the polls ahead of a re-election campaign next year. He has told voters that education is his most important issue and that they should judge him largely on his ability to fix the schools.
Ms. Weingarten, who is also chairwoman of the coalition of municipal unions, and the teachers could easily decide to stall the talks until after the November 2005 election in hopes of negotiating a contract with a Democrat who has a more favorable view of organized labor. The current contract expired last May 31, but it remains in force until a new one is negotiated.
The two sides are also likely to clash over money. Mr. Bloomberg maintains that the city has no money for raises and that the unions have to pay for any raises through productivity savings. In recent weeks, Chancellor Klein has had his staff scrambling to identify such potential savings.
But with the mayor also saying that the economy is improving, the teachers' union believes the city should be able to afford increases.
Experts on public education and New York State labor law say that the union clearly has the upper hand.
Bertrand B. Pogrebin, a labor lawyer who frequently represented the Board of Education in contract negotiations, said many protections for teachers and their contract are codified in state law.
Because teachers view themselves as education professionals, their contract demands often extend beyond the usual issues of wages and hours to include a role for teachers in educational policy. And once the city agrees to contract clauses, Mr. Pogrebin explained, state labor law requires that the union agree before they can be removed.
Some experts said the city and the union were in danger of missing an extraordinary opportunity to help the schools.
''If the city and the union agree to revamp the contract,'' said Arthur Levine, the president of Teachers College at Columbia University, ''that would be enormous. It's a real opportunity to build this profession if each side is willing to give.''
Mr. Pogrebin said that in the best schools, the contract is typically not a factor.
''There are schools all over the city that are blocks away from another school that's failing and this one is a gem, and it has the same mix of kids,'' he said. ''That's because the principals and the teachers have made some kind of deal and they are doing basically their own thing.''
''The best labor-management relationship,'' he added, ''puts the contract in a drawer.''
