The Russian Parliament on Thursday unexpectedly scheduled a vote this month on a long-ignored bill that would extend the presidential term to seven years, even though President Vladimir V. Putin has publicly opposed such constitutional changes.
The legislation was introduced by a group of regional lawmakers in 2002 but languished. As written, it could allow Mr. Putin to run for two new terms, conceivably keeping him in power until 2018.
The committee that controls Parliament's legislative agenda, which scheduled the vote, called for lawmakers and others to suggest any amendments by next Thursday and to prepare for a vote this month -- before the presidential elections scheduled for March 14, which Mr. Putin is universally expected to win.
Mr. Putin, traveling in central Russia, said Thursday evening that he opposed the legislation but understood that its proponents were ''guided by a desire to create more stable conditions for the country'' and were supported by a ''majority of the population.''
''This desire for stabilization must not lead to destabilizing the foundation of the state, the Constitution,'' he said in remarks broadcast on state television.
Given Mr. Putin's position, it was not immediately clear why the legislative proposal suddenly acquired new urgency, especially since Parliament is overwhelmingly controlled by the political party loyal to Mr. Putin, United Russia.
A party aide described the decision as a routine effort to clear a backlog of proposals. Others saw it variously as a trial balloon, an elaborate ploy to allow Mr. Putin to appear to be rising above the tide of popular sentiment, or a reflection of creeping dictatorship.
Irina M. Khakamada, a liberal candidate challenging Mr. Putin in the presidential elections, condemned it as an authoritarian step. ''I think we are looking at something like Turkmenistan,'' she said on the state-controlled NTV network, referring to the autocratic rule of President Saparmurat A. Niyazov in that former Soviet republic.
Almost from the day he rose to power, there have been calls for amending the Constitution so that Mr. Putin could remain in office beyond the end of a second four-year term in 2008.
Despite Mr. Putin's disavowals, the calls have gained momentum since United Russia won control of Parliament in elections last December. The vote left United Russia with 306 seats, slightly more than the two-thirds majority needed to amend the Constitution.
Last month, the pro-Kremlin president of Chechnya, Akhmad Kadyrov, and the leader of the nationalist Liberal Democratic Party, Vladimir V. Zhirinovsky, both said that Mr. Putin should be president for life.
Still, the decision on Thursday seemed to surprise the Kremlin and leaders of United Russia.
The party aide said Boris V. Gryzlov, the head of United Russia and speaker of the Parliament, opposed amending the Constitution, though one party member, Vladimir N. Pligin, heads the committee that called for the vote.
Since United Russia controls every aspect of the legislative process, the decision suggested the possibility of disarray in what many expected to be strict party discipline. One Kremlin official disparaged the members of Parliament as ''idiots.''
