Never burn a source. It's a cardinal rule of journalism: do not disclose the identity of someone who gives you information in confidence. As a staunch believer in this rule for decades, I have surprised myself lately by concluding that journalists' proud absolutism on this issue -- particularly in a case involving the syndicated columnist Robert Novak -- is neither as wise nor as ethical as it has seemed.
There are two powerful reasons behind a reporter's refusal to expose sources. To be trustworthy, one must keep one's word. And, more specific to journalism, sources are the lifeblood of newsgathering. In a world of secrecy and spin, the person who gives good information is better than gold. From Watergate to the latest corporate whistleblowers, the benefits flowing to the public from this pact of confidentiality are invaluable.
True, at the core of the pact lies the problem of anonymity. The same tool that exposes wrongdoing can foster it, and journalists' abuse of anonymous sources steadily undermines us. But it is incontestable that some information vital to a democratic public will reach it only through the protection of confidentiality. That is why more than 30 states and the District of Columbia have recognized a reporter's privilege not to be turned into an investigative arm of the government. This protection, never secure, is under increasing pressure from the legal system, causing journalists to feel ever more urgency about defending it.
Principles, alas, require defending even when they arise in an unappealing guise. Just such a case surrounds Mr. Novak. In 2002, a retired diplomat, Joseph Wilson, was sent by the Central Intelligence Agency to Niger to investigate intelligence reports that Iraq had obtained uranium yellowcake, used in the production of nuclear weapons. Mr. Wilson found no support for the charge. He reported this to the agency.
In his January 2003 State of the Union speech, however, President Bush cited efforts by Iraq to obtain African uranium to bolster his case against Saddam Hussein. As events moved toward war, the question of Iraq's programs in weapons of mass destruction remained central. In July, Mr. Wilson wrote an article for this page recounting his findings and questioning whether the Bush administration sought to ''manipulate intelligence.''
A week later, Mr. Novak wrote a column in which he named Mr. Wilson's wife as a C.I.A. ''operative on weapons of mass destruction'' and cited ''two senior administration officials'' saying she had suggested her husband for the Niger job. Revealing the name of an undercover C.I.A. employee is a felony, and the leak is now being investigated by a grand jury.
As a piece of journalism, the Novak column raises disturbing ethical questions. He apparently turned a time-honored use of confidentiality -- protecting a whistleblower from government retribution -- on its head, delivering government retribution to the whistleblower instead. Worse, he enabled his sources to illegally divulge intelligence information.
Now Mr. Novak may be called to testify before the grand jury. To most in the press, this signals an immediate duty: stand shoulder to shoulder beside a colleague. But before we all jump to his defense, there are two questions journalists should consider: one about what should not happen in the courtroom, the other about what should not happen in the newspaper.
Yes, it is in the public interest to protect journalists from being required to name their sources in the courtroom. But it is also in the public interest for journalists to speak out against ethical lapses in their craft. Far from undermining the principle of confidentiality, our acknowledgment that protecting sources can be used for ill as well as for good can bolster it, reassuring a public that often wonders who is watching the watchdog.
In this case, then, journalists should call upon Mr. Novak to acknowledge his abuse of confidentiality and reveal his sources himself -- thereby keeping the control of confidentiality in journalistic hands rather than in those of the legal system. Mr. Novak has in the past shown a willingness to identify sources who turn out to be lawbreakers: three years ago he revealed that he had taken information from Robert Hanssen, the Federal Bureau of Investigation agent who spied for the Soviet Union. He needed to divulge his connection to Mr. Hanssen, he wrote, ''in order to be honest to my readers.''
The same ethic holds true in this case. And any journalists who step out of line to call for such an accounting in the Novak-Wilson affair would be protecting both the principle of confidentiality and the practice of journalism in the public interest.
Op-Ed Contributor Geneva Overholser is a professor at the University of Missouri School of Journalism. She is a former editor of The Des Moines Register, ombudsman of The Washington Post and member of The New York Times editorial board.
Correction:  February 7, 2004, Saturday  A subheading with an Op-Ed article yesterday suggested that White House sources were responsible for leaking the identity of an undercover C.I.A. employee to the syndicated columnist Robert Novak. The source of the leak has not been determined; Mr. Novak has cited only senior administration officials.
