Four months after a Long Island father was killed outside his house upon arriving home from work, the Nassau County police said on Thursday that they had arrested five people in what they called a robbery gone awry.
The killing of the man, Anthony Battaglia, 37, after he walked home from the train station, led to an intensive police investigation, offers of a $30,000 reward, and repeated pleas from his wife for the arrest of his killers.
The police said the five defendants, some of whom are gang members, tried to rob Mr. Battaglia, and killed him when he fought back. Mr. Battaglia was just steps from his tidy gabled home when he was attacked late in the evening of Sept. 18, and he staggered to his back porch before collapsing, the police said.
Nassau County Detective Lt. Dennis Farrell said the five people, who are in their late teens and early 20's and live in Freeport, were picked up one by one Wednesday night and Thursday morning after officers had followed up on a confidential tip and interviewed one of the suspects, who was being held by U.S. marshals on an unrelated charge.
Lieutenant Farrell said the five defendants were also responsible for robbing a couple in Rockville Centre in September and another robbery in Long Beach. The police said they are investigating whether the defendants have committed any other crimes together over the past months.
Lynbrook village officials said the randomness and violence of Mr. Battaglia's death shocked people in the community.
The police said he was beaten, shot just above the hip and stabbed in the lower abdomen. His wife discovered him unconscious on their doorstep and called the police; he was pronounced dead shortly after the police arrived.
''It did galvanize people,'' said Thomas Miccio, Lynbrook's deputy mayor. ''People were concerned, they were afraid, but I think that most people realize that Lynbrook, like any other community, is not immune from this kind of crime. The police do what they do, but they can't be everywhere. He was in the wrong place at the wrong time.''
Although some of the five defendants arrested in Mr. Battaglia's death claimed to be part of the Latin Kings gang, the Nassau police said his killing was not related to a gang initiation, an initial speculation. Lieutenant Farrell said the defendants decided to rob Mr. Battaglia because he was walking alone late at night.
''Their motive was simply to go out and steal from other people,'' Lieutenant Farrell said. ''He was truly a random target.''
News of the arrests came one day after a task force of local and federal law enforcement authorities announced that 30 gang members on Long Island had been indicted for five murders and a litany of stabbings, beatings and a firebombing.
The police identified the defendants in the Lynbrook attack as Janny Paez, 20; Marina Musso, 21; Fernando Moronta, 20; Nelson Zuniga, 19; and Omar Delarosa, 18. Mr. Paez, Ms. Musso and Mr. Moronta are charged with second-degree murder, and Mr. Zuniga and Mr. Delarosa, whom police said actually did the shooting and stabbing, are charged with first-degree murder.
Thursday afternoon, all five walked stone-faced out of the Nassau County police headquarters and were driven to First District Court in Hempstead, where they are scheduled to be arraigned. They were mostly silent, but Ms. Musso, who, when asked by a reporter whether she was sorry, murmured, ''Yes.''
Lieutenant Farrell said that two of the defendants had been pulled over in late September by a Freeport police officer. The officer, Chris Pandolfo, told Nassau detectives that their sport utility vehicle matched descriptions of one seen near the Battaglia home.
Nassau Police said they also received a tip to their Crimestoppers hot line, combed through different databases and did surveillance to arrest the five suspects.
The sister of one of the defendants expressed surprise at the arrest. Mr. Paez's sister, Jeanette, said in an interview that her brother and Ms. Musso, who were dating, were friendly, easygoing people.
Jeanette, who would not give her last name, said Mr. Paez did not go to school or have a job, but he occasionally worked for his father. She said she could not imagine her brother robbing and killing anyone.
''I think I know how my brother is,'' she said in a telephone interview. ''He must have been with the wrong people at the wrong time. That could happen to anybody.''
Mr. Battaglia's wife, Caryn, emerged from the family's home Thursday afternoon and expressed her gratitude that the five had been arrested. ''They assured us they were going to find the people responsible, and they did,'' she said. ''At least there will be justice.''
