Lawrence Frank has taken less than two weeks to win over the players whom Byron Scott so obviously lost in his fourth year as the Nets' coach.
When the Nets promoted Frank on Jan. 26, the first question was how this 33-year-old career assistant with no playing or head-coaching experience could replace a former All-Star who led the Nets to consecutive N.B.A. finals.
Swiftly and easily, it turns out.
Respect in the N.B.A. can be difficult to come by, especially for someone like Frank, who is 5 feet 8 inches and looks closer to 23 than 33. But Frank, an assistant throughout Scott's tenure, has commanded attention, winning his first five games heading into Friday night's matchup against Orlando at Continental Arena. With every outing, the Nets make a stronger case that the interim tag in front of Frank's title should be removed.
''It's never this easy,'' Frank said after practice Thursday. ''We've been very, very fortunate. But we're still in the infancy stages. There's still a lot of feeling out to do.''
Since he took over, Frank has made at least one move in every game that captivated the Nets and solidified his new role. By using his authority, he has expanded it.
GAME 1 -- In the moments before his head-coaching debut at Philadelphia, Frank charged into the locker room and compared himself to every player on the team who was ever considered an underdog, who was ever written off because he didn't have enough size or experience, and who persevered anyway.
Apparently, the Nets listened. They leapt ahead of the 76ers, 26-6, and after the most convincing victory of their season, by 94-76, Jason Kidd handed the game ball to Frank.
GAME 2 -- As the fourth quarter began at Orlando, Lucious Harris had not made a shot and the Magic was finally mounting a charge.
After Harris finally sank his first jumper, Frank called a play for him, then another, and one after that. Harris made five field goals in a row and the Nets pulled away to win, 89-79.
''When you're shooting the ball well and your coach is calling plays for you, it's a good feeling,'' Harris said. ''It gives you confidence.
GAME 3 -- Taking too many outside shots, the Nets fell behind by 12 points at Houston, and some players expected their first tongue-lashing from Frank. Instead, he offered an apology. ''It was my fault,'' he said. ''I should have done a better job with my play selection.''
He opened the second half by calling a handful of plays in a row for Kenyon Martin, who bulldozed the Rockets in the paint and handed Frank an 88-77 victory.
GAME 4 -- The Nets trailed by 4 in the third at New Orleans when Frank barked at Referee Zach Zarba and received his first technical foul.
From that point, the Nets out-scored the Hornets, 54-29, and won, 91-70. They shot an astonishing 66.7 percent in the second half and notched another blowout. Afterward, Frank received a handful of public endorsements, but none was as enthusiastic as the one from forward Richard Jefferson, who said: ''He's our coach -- he believes in us and we believe in him. He's out there fighting for us. We're all in it together.''
GAME 5 -- In a moment that was vintage Jeff Van Gundy, Frank ran onto the Continental Arena court to pull away Miami's Malik Allen, who had committed a flagrant foul on Kidd.
The altercation ended, Frank went back to the bench, and the Nets cruised to another victory, 99-88. ''That was teammates protecting each other,'' Kidd said.
Frank has shown his loyalty in numerous ways. When he got the job, he met with each member of the team to discuss his role and address concerns. He also called every Eastern Conference coach to lobby for the Nets' All-Star candidates. He seems to have learned from Scott that the players decide the fate of the coach.
If Frank were ever considered the nerdy assistant whose head is always buried in a scouting report, he has cast that image aside. After practice Thursday, he pleaded with the team to sustain the momentum it has built. He told the players to study their statistics from the past five games. And he instructed them to sign up for another round of private meetings with him.
''Coaching is more than drawing up X's and O's on a clipboard,'' Frank said. ''You're dealing with people. All I can do is give my best effort, be honest, direct and sincere. The players determine if they respect me or not.''
PRO BASKETBALL
