Perhaps Next Year At the Super Bowl Show
We ran into the comedian ROBERT SCHIMMEL at the Starlight Children's Foundation benefit at Capitale recently.
(Note to Columbia Journalism School young'uns: Make a great big printout of the word ''recently,'' then press it to your heart, for it will be a friend like no other when an event took place so long ago that you will risk professional humiliation should you reveal the actual time, which in this case was Jan. 22. But, as MARCEL PROUST has proved, time lends its own patina, does it not?)
Mr. Schimmel, whose special ''Robert Schimmel: Unprotected'' was seen on HBO, uh, recently, told us about an evening when he had returned to his hotel after performing at the Stress Factory, a comedy club in New Jersey.
He's in the elevator with three guys, Mr. Schimmel tells us, when one of them says, ''Hey, Jimmy, do you know who this is?''
The Jimmy turns out to be JAMES GANDOLFINI.
Then the guy (not Mr. Gandolfini) tells Mr. Schimmel to ''come to the room and do your little show for us.''
''I said, 'I don't do shows in the room,' '' Mr. Schimmel recalled.
(Oh, by the way, J. School and other young'uns, that is more fine advice. Boldface is just full of life lessons today, are we not?)
''Then the guy said, 'I'm not asking. So I get up to the room, and they're all smoking cigars. They lined up three chairs and wanted me to do standup for them. The two guys James was with were not on 'The Sopranos.' They grew up with him in Jersey. We told each other dirty jokes. He's a really funny guy.''
The conversation, at one point, turned to sorrows.
Mr. Schimmel told Mr. Gandolfini of having lost a child to cancer.
Mr. Gandolfini, as Mr. Schimmel told it, spoke of a girl he loved who had died in a car accident. He goes back to New Jersey every year and visits her grave.
Mr. Schimmel has been in remission from non-Hodgkin's lymphoma for more than three years.
He told us that chemotherapy had had one unexpected bonus: his doctors suggested he use marijuana to help combat nausea and increase his appetite.
''My mom and dad are sitting there devastated, and I'm thinking this is a dream come true,'' Mr. Schimmel said.
''I've got a doctor tell me that I have to smoke pot. The only thing that could top that would be him telling my wife, 'Mrs. Schimmel, you're going to have to be in a threesome. That's the only chance Robert has.' She would of course say, 'Then he's not going to make it.' ''
Stuck With a Partial View At Williams-Sonoma
More recently -- no, wait, what are we saying? -- on Wednesday night we attended the opening of the Time Warner Center, where thousands of New Yorkers put on their festive black and were stepping out on a school night to attend the opening of a vertical mall.
An exception to the sea of black was TY MURRAY, the retired world bull-riding champ, who wore a white cowboy hat. Mr. Murray is the seven-time champion all-around cowboy, but that's a title that tends not to get much attention in these parts, so he was pretty much ignored.
Mr. Murray was hanging out with his girlfriend, the pop singer JEWEL, in the Tourneau shop, which served as the green room for the entertainers. Jewel was wearing a short fur jacket a friend had made, white pants and a low-cut creamy silk top.
So you're going to perform in a shopping center, we said.
''Yep,'' she said tersely, a tight little smile on the corner of her lips. ''Me and DEBBIE GIBSON.''
It is pretty crowded out there, we noted.
''It's going to be hard,'' Jewel said. ''I'm playing solo, so I'm anticipating it being pretty loud and talky, but it's full. DICK PARSONS I've known for a while, and he's been pretty good to me. It's cool being at the opening. I've seen it being built forever.''
We remember reading that Jewel, who was once so poor she lived in her car, wasn't much of a shopper.
''I'm not really,'' she said. ''The nicest thing for me about my job is that I have somebody that gives me clothing, because I hate it. I'd rather write.''
Off we go to brighten the evening of JON STEWART, the evening's M.C.
How did he get shanghaied into this gig, we asked during a break?
''Apparently, and I don't know if this is actually the case, but due to consolidation and synergy, somehow, when you sign up for cable you have one required appearance with Time Warner,'' Mr. Stewart said. ''It just so happened that this is mine. But they'll get you, too.''
How's the show going?
''Let me tell you about comedy,'' Mr. Stewart said. ''It's best performed by escalators. Always has been. Always will be.''
with Joe Brescia and Paula Schwartz
Boldace Names
