''It's better to burn out than fade away,'' once proclaimed Neil Young, who is still pretty unfaded at 58. ''Hope I die before I get old,'' wrote Pete Townshend, also 58.
Of course, lots of rock stars did die young, and their short, intense lives are the stuff of legend. Without suggesting a lemminglike mass suicide of today's opera stars, maybe a little rock 'n' roll abandon is just what they need.
I thought of all this, improbably enough, during the Kirov Opera's ''Ring des Nibelungen'' last week in Baden-Baden, Germany. Whatever you thought of the staging and design, the performances revealed a wealth of new Wagner singers, all Russians.
Many were young and audibly excited to be singing this music for the first time (or nearly so, since they had sung in two previous cycles). The way Mlada Khudolei, for instance, threw herself into Sieglinde's ecstasy and terror in ''Die Walküre'' made her about the most exciting exponent of the role since Leonie Rysanek.
Or the way the ''Götterdämmerung'' Brünnhilde, Olga Sergeeva, tore into the Immolation Scene really put a cap on the whole ''Ring,'' abetted, to be sure, by Valery Gergiev and his wonderful orchestra. Too often, for me, the end of the ''Ring'' is anticlimactic, a stolid soprano standing there pouring out notes, the orchestra cranking through its leitmotifs, and the director and designer ladling on whatever special effects they can muster. Here, Ms. Sergeeva sang as if the fate of the world really were at stake.
Mr. Gergiev has a reputation for driving his singers into vocal crisis through miscasting and overwork. Galina Gorchakova, so lovely a decade ago and rarely heard from now, is often mentioned as a case in point. To be fair, other singers have managed to sustain healthy careers under Mr. Gergiev's ministrations: Olga Borodina, for one.
Still, Mr. Gergiev has left himself open to charges of vocal exploitation in his ''Ring'' casting. Olga Savova, the ''Walküre'' Brünnhilde, seems to have previously sung only mezzo and alto roles, although she nailed her high notes; she also reappeared as an eloquent Waltraute (a mezzo part) in ''Götterdämmerung.''
Leonid Zakhozheev, who looked handsome and sang handsomely as the young Siegfried, with plenty of range and endurance for the punishing final duet with Brünnhilde, has until now specialized in light tenor roles like Almaviva in ''Il Barbiere di Siviglia,'' although he's done Lohengrin, too. A goodly number of the singers of heavy parts in this ''Ring'' were still in their 20's.
Such casting would horrify most American vocal coaches. Steven Blier, a singing teacher at the Juilliard School and co-director of the New York Festival of Song, wrote an interesting article for Opera News last year in which he lamented a climate of caution in the recent training of American singers. Starting with the vocal crises that struck a number of singers, primarily exponents of Italian verismo, at the Metropolitan Opera in the 1960's and early 70's, he documented a subsequent retreat into prudence.
Voice teachers became extremely conservative, he wrote: ''The most successful ones were imparting a philosophy of vocal safety and longevity. . . . Chest resonance was eschewed as 'dangerous' . . . There was a sense that full-voiced high notes were somewhat vulgar, and that floated pianissimos were a sign of class and control. Students were kept on the light side of their potential sound and generally funneled into lyric roles.''
The ''tenet of the times,'' Mr. Blier concluded, was '' 'the big stuff will kill you.' ''
Of course, there were reasons for this change in style other than fears of vocal burnout. Tastes shifted toward Handel and Mozart, and singers like Renée Fleming, who excelled in both, also brought a cool, controlled sound to Richard Strauss.
But when Ms. Fleming lets 'er rip, as she has recently in Verdi, she's downright thrilling. Whether she secretly fears that in so ripping, she is endangering her voice, I know not. I hope not.
Common sense would tell us that singers (and their teachers and conductors and advisers) need to preach some limits. But they can't be too timid. A climate of excessive caution has robbed opera of the animal excitement it needs to thrill a large audience. Luciano Pavarotti knew his limits, even when he pushed into roles not really suited to his light spinto tenor: Radamès in ''Aida,'' and finally Otello. But the sheer passion of his attack in those parts brought its own considerable reward. And for all his recent troubles, vocal and otherwise, Mr. Pavarotti has certainly enjoyed an extended career.
The archetype for vocal excess was, of course, Maria Callas. She lost all that weight, she took on all those parts (even, in her misguided youth, Isolde and Kundry). Sure, her soprano gave way at a relatively early age. But she had a good 15 years of fame. And, by the by, she was the most exciting, beloved singing actress of her century.
The history of opera is replete with youthful debuts: Conchita Supervia at 14, , Maria Malibran at 17 and on it goes: Callas sang Tosca in Athens at 18. Some of these (Anja Silja doing the Queen of the Night at 19 and Isolde and Brünnhilde in her early 20's) ran into difficulties. Some recovered from their crises (Ms. Silja is singing still, at 68); others did not. But German singers routinely took on Wagner in their 20's a century ago, and had notable careers. American voice teachers still fret that their tender young charges will be chewed up in the German repertory system.
But there's a counterargument. Mr. Blier goes so far as to suggest that technical deficiencies contributed to some singers' popular appeal. ''These very 'flaws' may have been precisely the elements that made their sound so magnetic,'' he wrote. In other words, smooth out the edges, and you smooth out the appeal.
''They sang from their gut,'' Mr. Blier quotes the mezzo Rosalind Elias as saying about the singers of the Met's vocal golden age of the 1950's. ''They didn't hold back.'' Cautious singers appeal only to a cautious public.
Far be it for me to suggest the deliberate, self-imposed ruination of any singer's voice. Singers nervously (neurotically) struggle to preserve ''their instrument''; it's their self-image and their income. But opera would prosper with more reckless abandon. The prima donnas of yore were larger than life not in their girth, the bane of so many placid Wagner sopranos today, but in their appetites for life and willingness to sing with passion. Taking vocal risks was a big part of that passion.
People fret about opera's increasing irrelevance, and there are a lot of reasons for that and a lot of exaggerations in the death laments as well. That said, the Gergiev ''Ring'' was thrilling partly because we heard singers throwing caution to the winds and singing as if their lives depended on it. They sang as if Wagner still mattered, desperately. And for those few hours, he did.
REVERBERATIONS
