George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, acknowledged for the first time on Thursday that American spy agencies may have overestimated Iraq's illicit weapons capacities, in part because of a failure to penetrate the inner workings of the Iraqi government.
In an address at Georgetown University, Mr. Tenet presented a steadfast defense of American spy agencies and their integrity. The speech was the first attempt by Mr. Tenet to provide a comprehensive accounting of the gaps between prewar intelligence on Iraq and what has been found on the ground there, which critics have called a major intelligence failure.
''When the facts on Iraq are all in, we will be neither completely right nor completely wrong,'' Mr. Tenet told a gathering of students and faculty that had been arranged at the request of the Central Intelligence Agency on less than 48 hours notice.
Mr. Tenet's presentation, though careful and calibrated, was more candid and less defensive than any previous government comment on the issue. In offering what he called a ''provisional bottom line,'' he said American spy agencies ''were generally on target'' in prewar warnings about Iraq's missile and unmanned aerial vehicle programs, but ''may have overestimated the progress'' that Iraq was making toward the development of nuclear weapons.
Mr. Tenet also made it clear that the failure so far to find chemical and biological weapons in Iraq had raised serious questions about the prewar intelligence that the stockpiles existed, though he said he believed that Iraq intended to develop such weapons and had the capacity to produce them on short notice.
He insisted that intelligence agencies had acted independently of policy makers, and noted that intelligence analysts had never portrayed Iraq as presenting an imminent threat to the United States before the American invasion last March. ''No one told us what to say or how to say it,'' he said.
Later Thursday, some Democrats, including Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination, seized on that statement as evidence that President Bush had no foundation for his prewar claim that Saddam Hussein's government was ''a grave and gathering danger.''
With teams still hunting in Iraq for illicit weapons and information about them, Mr. Tenet cautioned repeatedly in his speech that it was too soon to draw firm conclusions.
Mr. Tenet made it clear that the prewar assessment that Iraq possessed stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons was based to a significant degree on reports relayed by a friendly foreign government from human sources whose information the United States has still been unable to corroborate.
''We did not ourselves penetrate the inner sanctum,'' Mr. Tenet acknowledged, saying that American agents remained ''on the periphery'' of Iraq's illicit weapons activities. ''What we did not collect ourselves, we evaluated as carefully as we could,'' he added. ''Still, the lack of direct access to some of these sources created some risk -- such is the nature of our business.''
Mr. Tenet's speech was the most detailed presentation on the issue by a United States official since last October, when David A. Kay, then the chief American weapons inspector, issued an interim report on his findings. It came after new statements from Dr. Kay, who left his post last month, have forced administration officials, including Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld to grapple in public for the first time with the possibility that prewar judgments might have been mistaken.
In Charleston, S.C., on Thursday, President Bush acknowledged, in his most specific reference yet to the issue, that American inspectors in Iraq ''have not yet found the stockpiles of weapons that we thought were there.'' After resisting appeals for an independent inquiry, Mr. Bush plans on Friday to reverse himself and appoint an bipartisan commission to assess the threat from Iraq and the broader question of how to use intelligence to combat proliferation, terrorism and other threats.
An administration official, speaking on the condition of anonymity, told The Associated Press that Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, would be a member.
In their tone, Mr. Tenet's remarks on Thursday were very different from those of a year ago, when in strong and unwavering testimony to Congress he spoke of a ''solid foundation of intelligence'' on illicit weapons programs in Iraq.
He nevertheless went to new lengths to portray American intelligence in other areas as active and reliable, by making public new details of American successes in unraveling evidence of links between Pakistani scientists and the Libyan nuclear program. He said American spies had played a crucial part in penetrating what he called the black market for nuclear weapons in which a Pakistani scientist, Abdul Qadeer Khan, had a pivotal role, and added that Malaysian authorities ''have shut down one of the network's largest plants.''
[However, a senior Malaysian official said Friday that the government had not shut down the plant of Scomi Precision Engineering, which produced centrifuge parts sent through Dr. Khan's network to Libya. A spokeswoman for the company said it was operating normally.]
Until Thursday, Mr. Tenet had not spoken in public since last May. He and his aides decided only this week to enter the debate about intelligence on Iraq after Dr. Kay said he believed that Iraq did not possess large stockpiles of chemical and biological weapons at the time of the American invasion last March, and that intelligence agencies owed Mr. Bush an apology for their misjudgments.
Mr. Tenet sought to distance himself from Dr. Kay's conclusions, saying it was too soon for anyone to say anything with certainty about Iraq's prewar stockpiles. He insisted that the C.I.A. had honored its obligation to play an independent role in the prewar debate, saying that it had not been influenced by administration officials seeking to build a case for the American invasion.
In speaking out, Mr. Tenet was clearly seeking in part to pre-empt the criticism of the intelligence agencies' performance on Iraq that is spelled out in a classified draft report prepared by the staff of the Senate Intelligence Committee, which was reviewed for first time on Thursday by members of the panel.
''Did we clearly tell policy makers what we knew, what we didn't know, what was not clear, and identify the gaps in our knowledge?'' Mr. Tenet asked. ''We are in the process of evaluating just such questions, and while others will express views on the questions sooner, we ourselves must come to our own bottom lines.''
Mr. Tenet said he gave the highest marks to prewar estimates that Mr. Hussein's government was expanding its missile program in violation of United Nations resolutions, a conclusion that he said was ''generally on target.'' He said that intelligence agencies had also been right in detecting the development of a prohibited unmanned aerial vehicle, though ''the jury is still out'' on whether either of the two unmanned aerial vehicle programs under way in Iraq were intended for the delivery of biological weapons, as the intelligence community believed.
Mr. Tenet was less upbeat in his conclusions about the prewar intelligence on Iraq's nuclear, biological and chemical weapons programs.
While the National Intelligence Estimate of October 2002 said Iraq was reconstituting its nuclear program, Mr. Tenet said his current view was that Iraq ''intended to reconstitute a nuclear program at some point.''
On biological weapons, Mr. Tenet contradicted recent remarks by Dr. Kay and said there was still ''no consensus'' within the intelligence community as to whether mobile trailers discovered in Iraq after the war were for making biological weapons, as the intelligence agencies initially concluded, or for making hydrogen, as many intelligence analysts now believe.
He said he currently believed that Iraq ''intended to develop biological weapons'' but that ''we do not know if production took place.''
On chemical weapons, which intelligence agencies had judged with ''high confidence'' that Iraq possessed, Mr. Tenet said the United States had ''not yet found the weapons we expected.'' He said his ''provisional bottom line'' was that Mr. Hussein's government ''had the intent and the capability to convert civilian industry to chemical weapons production'' even though ''we have not yet found the weapons we expected.''
In an interview Thursday on CNBC, Dr. Kay said he believed that Mr. Tenet had underscored the need for an independent commission on Iraq because ''he opened up considerable space between him and the case that was made for war before we went to war.''
Mr. Rumsfeld, who was heading to Munich Thursday for a security meeting, said: ''David Kay properly said, in his judgment, we're about 85 percent complete. Tenet basically said what I said: that there's work yet to be done.''
