Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, granted a full pardon on Thursday to Abdul Qadeer Khan, the founder of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program, a day after Dr. Khan appeared on television and confessed to sharing nuclear technology with Iran, North Korea and Libya.
As a result, Dr. Khan, 67, will not face prison, a fine or any other punishment.
In a 90-minute news conference at army headquarters here, General Musharraf said Pakistan would not hand over all documents from its investigation to international nuclear inspectors. He said it would not order an independent investigation into the Pakistani Army's role in the proliferation, calling the idea ''rubbish.'' And he said he would never allow United Nations supervision of Pakistan's nuclear weapons.
''Negative to all three,'' General Musharraf said, raising his voice. ''It is an independent nation. Nobody comes inside and checks our things. We check them ourselves.''
The White House praised General Musharraf for breaking up the network linked to Dr. Khan, which appears to have been one of the largest ever discovered, but made little mention of the pardon and declined to say whether it would insist that Pakistan sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty. [Page A9.]
For General Musharraf, the news conference was a supreme test of political skill. Having satisfied international demands for an investigation on Wednesday, he switched to a defiant tone on Thursday, reaching out to a domestic audience and asserting that, unlike Libya, which had agreed under pressure to give up its nuclear program, Pakistan would stand firm.
Explaining his decision to pardon the scientist, General Musharraf said Dr. Khan ''is still my hero; he is still high in the sky for me.'' He said the scientist's role in helping Pakistan develop nuclear bombs to counter those of India, its longtime rival, was grounds for leniency.
''No one can negate it, no one can cancel it, no one can disprove it,'' he said, referring to Pakistan's nuclear arsenal, which remains a source of enormous national pride. ''This hero has given us grace and respect.''
Later, however, the general acknowledged that Dr. Khan had clearly benefited financially from his dealings, pocketing large sums to pay for a lavish standard of living and palatial homes.
The general, who seized power in a bloodless coup in 1999, also declared himself and senior army commanders free of any wrongdoing in connection with Dr. Khan's activities. ''No government or military official has been found involved in the activity of proliferation,'' he said.
American officials have said Pakistani nuclear aid flowed to Libya as late as last fall. Opposition political parties and Pakistani military experts have said it is nearly impossible that the army did not at least tacitly approve of the smuggling.
In Pakistan on Thursday, the issue was not whether Pakistan had done too little to aid international inspectors, it was whether it had done too much. Opposition political parties attacked General Musharraf's decision to have Dr. Khan read a confession on national television on Wednesday, calling the statement coerced and humiliating.
A coalition of hard-line Islamic parties has called for a national strike on Friday to protest the treatment of Dr. Khan, whose reputation appears not to have been greatly tarnished. In local news reports, many Pakistanis said Dr. Khan had been forced to make a false confession under American pressure. The extent of the strike could provide a sense of whether the government's deal with Dr. Khan plays well, or backfires.
Throughout his news conference, General Musharaf said he had not given in to American pressure by mounting an investigation into Dr. Khan's activities. ''Nobody is pressuring me,'' he said. ''We are acting independently.''
Reconciling international demands for an investigation with domestic demands that Dr. Khan not be scapegoated presented General Musharraf with one of the most difficult political problems he has faced as president. His reversal of Pakistan's support for the Taliban after the September 2001 terrorist attacks in the United States and new peace talks with India led to his being criticized for his association with the United States. He narrowly survived two assassination attempts in December.
A close aide to General Musharraf and a senior official in a pro-Musharraf political party said negotiations with Dr. Khan in the last week led to a simple deal. If Dr. Khan apologized on national television, he would not be prosecuted.
Chaudhry Shujaat Hussain, the leader of a pro-Musharraf political party, the Pakistan Muslim League Quaid-e-Azam, conducted the secret negotiations with Dr. Khan, a senior party official said. The deal's elements -- the request for a pardon, public apology and granting of the pardon -- came together this week. The official said the deal aimed to avoid a public backlash against the government, to prevent opposition political parties from turning Dr. Khan's case into a political issue, and to prevent details of China's nuclear weapons assistance to Pakistan from becoming public.
A senior member of the Pakistan Muslim League Quaid-e-Azam, told a Pakistani journalist that Chinese officials had expressed a desire for the inquiry to end quickly. The senior party official said government officials did not fear that Dr. Khan would identify top army officials if prosecuted. They feared he would publicly detail China's assistance -- an embarrassment to a crucial ally that Pakistan considers a strategic counterweight to India.
Western nonproliferation experts believe China has provided Pakistan with a nuclear warhead design, ballistic missile aid and help with a plutonium production reactor.
But a close aide to General Musharraf said concerns about China and incriminating information from Dr. Khan were not factors in the pardon. But, he said, fears of a public backlash were. The aide, and a cabinet minister, said that in the last several days they were barraged with demands from a spectrum of Pakistani society that Dr. Khan not be punished. The close aides said criticism of General Musharraf for his American ties would have been cemented.
''Everybody thinks we're under pressure,'' said the close aide, referring to the United States. ''It would have been a disaster.''
Dr. Khan became head of Pakistan's uranium-enrichment program in 1975, a year after India detonated its first atomic bomb. In the next 25 years, as head of the Khan research laboratories, he was a powerful and virtually untouchable force in Pakistani policy and public life.
Reports of corruption, the close aide said, led General Musharraf to remove Dr. Khan from his post in March 2001, but the government did not sound international alarms.
''When this was discovered 9/11 had not happened,'' the aide said, referring to a period when General Musharraf was politically isolated. ''We were not very comfortably placed in the community of nations.''
General Musharraf clearly played to his domestic audience during the news conference, which was later broadcast on national television. He spoke in Urdu, Pakistan's primary language, and wore his commando uniform. When he addresses a Western audience, he wears a business suit and speaks in English.
Knowing that Pakistan faced being declared a rogue state if it did not act, the general said he faced an agonizing choice. ''Is Pakistan important or the hero important?'' He said, ''Pakistan is important.''
His voice choked with emotion at one point, he described his dismay when first shown the evidence against Dr. Khan. He said ''we make such heroes larger than life,'' but ''they are only human.''
After avoiding several questions about Dr. Khan's palatial homes and business dealings, General Musharraf said one thing motivated the scientists.
''They were doing it for money,'' he said. ''They had a lust for wealth.''
