A Brooklyn rabbi and his daughter pleaded guilty yesterday to giving $5,000 to an intermediary to influence a Brooklyn Supreme Court justice who has since been charged with receiving bribes and other offenses.
After the court session, Charles J. Hynes, the Brooklyn district attorney, told reporters that the plea agreement was a significant development in his investigation of the suspended judge, Gerald P. Garson.
''The house of cards has begun to fall,'' Mr. Hynes said. But he said he would not speculate whether yesterday's plea deals would pressure the suspected intermediary, Nissim Elmann, to cooperate with prosecutors.
The pleas by the rabbi, Ezra Zifrani, 67, and his daughter, Esther Weitzner, 37, included a promise to cooperate in the investigation. In exchange for pleading to one misdemeanor conspiracy charge, they are each to be sentenced to 210 hours of community service and three years of probation.
But in court they both indicated that they did not know whether the $5,000 was actually paid to Justice Garson. In statements, they each said only that the intermediary ''clearly implied he was going to bribe Judge Gerald Garson'' in November 2002. The judge was handling a custody dispute between Ms. Weitzner and her ex-husband involving their five children.
Mr. Elmann, a Brooklyn electronic dealer, is facing bribery and conspiracy charges.
A lawyer for Mr. Elmann, Gerald J. McMahon, said yesterday that his client did nothing but give advice to people who asked about his experiences as a former participant in a court case. He said Mr. Elmann would go to trial and be acquitted.
The lawyer for Justice Garson, Ronald P. Fischetti, said it was irresponsible for Mr. Hynes to suggest that yesterday's plea deals were important. He said the reference to a ''house of cards'' falling by Mr. Hynes, who is called Joe by acquaintances, was misleading because Mr. Fischetti said there was no evidence that Mr. Garson received any bribes.
''I don't know what deck of cards Joe Hynes is playing with,'' Mr. Fischetti said.
