A former executive of Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, part of the WPP Group, has become the first person to plead guilty to charges of conspiring to defraud the government by overbilling the White House Office of National Drug Control Policy for work on its ad account.
Peter Chrisanthopoulos, the former president for broadcast and programming at Ogilvy and a sibling agency, MindShare, pleaded guilty last week to falsifying time sheets and instructing an unnamed Ogilvy employee to do the same. The plea was reported by The Daily News.
Mr. Chrisanthopoulos left MindShare in 2000 to become president and chief operating officer for marketing and sales at the Azteca America Television Station Group, part of the Pappas Telecasting Companies in California. He was promoted in September to president and chief operating officer of Pappas. On Jan. 12, Pappas announced that it had accepted his ''voluntary resignation,'' effective the previous Dec. 30, from those posts and from the board.
Also last month, federal prosecutors charged two others in an investigation of the overbilling at Ogilvy, and they pleaded not guilty. One, Thomas Early, was finance director of the New York office of Ogilvy; he resigned the day after he was charged. The other, Shona Seifert, was an executive group director of Ogilvy; she left in 2002 to become president of the New York office of TBWA/Chiat/Day, part of the TBWA Worldwide division of the Omnicom Group.
Ogilvy, in a statement yesterday, said: ''A plea by a former employee who left the company in 2000 was expected. Like the indictments against two former employees last month, it is related to billing mistakes for which Ogilvy compensated the government in a settlement announced two years ago.'' That was a reference to a $1.8 million payment by Ogilvy in February 2002 to settle charges of overbilling the drug office.
Ogilvy ''has not been charged with any crime, and we continue to cooperate fully with the government,'' the agency said, adding that ''the small number of individuals who have been, or may yet be, prosecuted'' are no longer with Ogilvy.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA
