A movie featuring Ice Cube bellowing ''No more profanity!'' and meaning it should produce a lot more laughs than the intermittently amusing ''Barbershop 2: Back in Business'' does. This film seems to be ''All About the Benjamins,'' to use the title of an Ice Cube action comedy. Most of the decisions involving this sequel to the spirited original ''Barbershop'' -- a movie that itself cobbled together pieces of other projects -- are about carefully retracing the steps of that 2002 hit to keep those $100 Benjamins flowing. But although Ice Cube's business sense is right on the money, the minor surprises of the first film are gone.
Ice Cube returns as star and executive producer of ''Barbershop 2.'' His Calvin Palmer provides the common sense that holds the shop together, a glue it desperately needs. That's because the moneyed inner-city entrepreneur Quentin Leroux (Harry Lennix) is determined to put up a group of bourgeois franchises like Jamba Juice in the South Side Chicago neighborhood of Calvin's shop. Calvin is unfazed by this -- at least as unfazed as the easily riled Ice Cube can be.
''As long as they ain't building no liquor stores'' -- or stripper bars -- ''I'm cool with that,'' he says with a shrug; it seems that Calvin learned the lesson about strip joints from the misogynistic ''Players Club,'' Ice Cube's sole directing effort.
But when Quentin builds a lavish competitor called Nappy Cutz right across the street from Calvin's shop, the battle is on -- Calvin has to fight to keep his shop alive. Nappy Cutz is described as a black version of Supercuts, but since Cutz features bikini waxing and a basketball court, either I haven't been in Supercuts in a long time or the writer of ''Barbershop 2'' is indulging in a fantasy.
The picture, directed by Kevin Rodney Sullivan, is a loving tribute to black culture, and the opening credits whir through the history of the African-American coif, making brief stops at the scary curl sported by N.W.A. and at Vanilla Ice's I'm-so-off-white fade. The film is kicked off by a flashback to 1967 that explains how Eddie (Cedric the Entertainer) became a fixture at the shop, then owned by Calvin's father. This funny and evocative sequence ends with the young Eddie's head being shorn -- ''I told you to pretend you was cuttin' it off,'' he sobs.
Eddie's history is the subject of several other flashbacks, interwoven into the contemporary gentrification plot that's also part of another ghetto barbershop comedy, ''Who's the Man?'' (1993). That film shares a cast member with ''Barbershop 2'': Queen Latifah, who in the current movie plays Calvin's former flame, Gina.
Gina runs the beauty shop across the street and has a toe-to-toe comic battle with Eddie that runs out of juice faster than a home permanent kit. Her brief yet underwritten appearance is intended to prime audiences for a ''Barbershop'' spinoff, ''Beauty Shop,'' due later this year. Given the stature and the presence that the entrepreneurial rappers-turned-film-moguls Ice Cube and Queen Latifah possess, the fizzle of their scenes is doubly disappointing.
It's probably fitting that ''Barbershop 2'' features rappers, since much of the movie feels sampled from a stack of old-school influences. Even the underscore to Eddie's flashback scenes -- Stevie Wonder's ''I Wish'' -- is redolent of something else.
Most of the characters from the first ''Barbershop'' can be found working their stations. Troy Garity -- all slow-talking, white-chocolate smooth -- returns as Isaac, the shop's answer to Justin Timberlake, and Michael Ealy is back as the ex-con and would-be roughneck Ricky. Eve reprises the wise-cracking Terri, though her edges are softened enough to give pause to all of the regulars except the smitten African, Dinka (Leonard Earl Howze, who provides a lovely, mellow dignity for the character).
All of these secondhand elements, combined with the threat to Calvin's place, give this movie a slightly melancholic tone; the only thing that's missing is Ice Cube sitting in the front seat of a lowrider, musing that it was a good day. The bittersweet aspects add texture, but they can't make up for the lack of comedy in a film that is positioned to be one; there were more laughs in Ice Cube's last picture, the biker saga ''Torque.''
Most of the humor burden falls to Cedric, who peppers the ball field with singles -- he's just not enough to bring the whole team home on his own. Eddie gets provocative lines, like ''The D.C. sniper is like the Jackie Robinson of crime,'' nuggets guaranteed to cause squabbles.
In the first ''Barbershop,'' Eddie got off a few stingers that made the Rev. Jesse Jackson's temperature rise; surely he had heard more challenging dialogue in a barbershop before. ''Barbershop 2,'' which opens nationwide today, ends with Eddie's being dared to insult Luther Vandross, and he comes dangerously close before backing off. It's too bad -- the one thing this film's predecessor had going for it was knowing that there's never too much.
''Barbershop 2: Back in Business'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has salty dialogue and comic violence that wouldn't be out of place on ''Ice Cube's Greatest Hits -- the Clean Version.''
BARBERSHOP 2  Back in Business
Directed by Kevin Rodney Sullivan; written by Don D. Scott, based on characters created by Mark Brown; director of photography, Tom Priestley; edited by Paul Seydor; music by Richard Gibbs; production designer, Robb Wilson King; produced by Robert Teitel, George Tillman Jr. and Alex Gartner; released by Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Pictures. Running time: 98 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Ice Cube (Calvin), Cedric the Entertainer (Eddie), Sean Patrick Thomas (Jimmy), Eve (Terri), Troy Garity (Isaac), Michael Ealy (Ricky), Leonard Earl Howze (Dinka), Harry Lennix (Quentin Leroux) and Queen Latifah (Gina).
FILM REVIEW
