DANCING WITH CUBA -- A Memoir of the Revolution  By Alma Guillermoprieto  Translated by Esther Allen. 290 pages. Pantheon. $25.
In his cartooning days Jules Feiffer would portray the butterfly fecklessness of his urban neurotics by having them devise dances to their vague emotional or intellectual weathers. It is in this sense that Alma Guillermoprieto titles her book about a young New Yorker (from a Mexican family) who spent six months in Havana in 1970 juggling her na誰ve misapprehensions with the stridencies of the Cuban revolution.
She is a dancer in her 20's, in fact, teaching or trying to teach modern dance to young Cubans. ''Dancing With Cuba'' recounts her chaotic experiences doing it. More deeply, though, it portrays the chrysalis of gauzy self-absorption that years later would bring forth some of the most sophisticated and steely writing about Latin America's revolutionary and postrevolutionary travails available to the American reader.
Ms. Guillermoprieto's first chapter recounts her apprenticeships under the three-way stylistic extremes of Martha Graham, Merce Cunningham and Twyla Tharp. The life was rigorous, a struggle with day jobs, exhaustion, injuries and the need, against the odds, to shine before it was too late. ''We were the oldest young people in the world: our time was already running out.''
When Mr. Cunningham passed along a Cuban request for an instructor, she knew that hers had. ''If I were you, I would take it,'' Ms. Tharp told her, barely glancing up from lacing a shoe. ''You're not going to get anywhere hanging around here.''
And so, her head filled with art for art's sake and scarcely a political notion or two, she found herself flung into the perplexing contradictions between the revolution's zealotry politics -- both popular and policed -- and its gingerly and suspicious patronage of the arts.
Her welcome at the National Schools of Art mixed warmth and rhetoric; a combination so unfamiliar that she promptly collapsed, ill. She was hailed as the fighter who had defied ''the butcher Nixon'' to come help the revolution. She'd never thought of herself as a public type; only as private and complicated. The sledgehammer words -- solidarity, internationalism -- left her missing herself.
Getting her feet on the dance floor helped; so did the enthusiasm of her dozen students, though they were woefully untrained. Also there were no mirrors -- essential to dance practice -- and no music apart from a phonograph sporadically on loan. Soon she realized that Mr. Cunningham's mystical silences and sculptured withholdings were alien to the activist Cubans; she reverted to the expressive passion taught by Graham.
Frustration set in. Elfrida, the American Communist in charge, was a martinet; she warned the new teacher against intimacy with the students. Relationships were to be mediated, not individually but through collective revolutionary dedication.
Young Alma came up against a darker side of such zeal. The authorities were sure that artists could be molded: campesino children were brought in to be trained. The price of such calisthenic pedagogy was loneliness. Children require more than a public voice. There was a scandal when it was discovered that the younger ones -- the privileged abandoned -- had used their feces to smear graffiti on the dormitory walls.
At a party she witnessed the authorities' own loneliness when confronting the arts. Mario Hidalgo, a Sierra Maestra veteran in charge of the school, poured out his misery to his old comrade Manuel Pi単eiro, a top security official and head of Cuba's insurgency operations abroad. His rant is a revealing comedy of despair.
He had been a baker, a fighter; he is willing to bake bread for Fidel or organize an ambush. ''Because for this, for administering this'' privy ''full of artists'' and homosexuals ''and intellectuals -- I'm no good for this,'' Hidalgo says. ''Co単o, chico, tell Fidel to get me out of here!'' Pi単eiro tries to rally him. Revolutionaries can't choose: this too is a mission. ''Look at me -- do you think I like being a police dog?''
The implications of such scenes are reflected upon by the mature Ms. Guillermoprieto while she recounts -- with the odd mix of pain and dispassion that makes her book both diffuse and piercing -- the confusions of the young Alma torn by personal doubts and longings.
The image of the dead Che Guevara captivates her; and she falls more or less in love with two Latin American guerrillas brought to Havana for training (and, to their disgust, for tightly cautious oversight by Cuban officials). Reading accounts of United States napalming in Vietnam, she was sure that the Cuban revolution was right even though she couldn't quite stand it.
She found refuge from public rhetoric with a group of gay artists and intellectuals, tolerated but just barely. Revolution or not, one explains, Cuba is an island and has always depended for art and much else on the outside world. (This -- the early 1970's -- was before the authorities went from denouncing Afro-Cuban music as a colonial remnant to recognizing its usefulness, perhaps reluctantly, as authentic popular expression; also as an export.)
''We're a port of call, and the only ideas that reach us are the ones that fall off some freighter while it's unloading,'' her friend insists. ''The only truly original cultural phenomenon this society has ever produced is, as always, Fidel.'' He spoke with a mix of irony and admiration; for Alma at this point, ambiguity was music. For most of her friends it would mean, years later, flight to the United States.
Ms. Guillermoprieto has written a memoir that is highly skeptical of the act of remembering. Some of what she tells is no doubt ''completely invented by the stubborn narrator we all have within us who wants things to be the way they sound best to us now.''
They do not sound best; they present painfully ''the inept young woman I was.'' This may win a share of our trust. More is won by the writer's trained skepticism even toward an effort so much her own that, despite her perfect published English, she has written it in Spanish. As a journalist she has disentangled too many botched and elided memories not to know that ''this was'' must always be less truthful than ''this may have been.''
There is no clear course to the past but only a kind of dead reckoning. It is such reckoning that gives authenticity to Ms. Guillermoprieto's uneasy and fascinating account, and, more than 30 years after the events, a pulsing sense of discovery.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
