An elderly woman who died after being found on the roof of a Queens nursing home late Tuesday night got up there because a door either malfunctioned or had been left unlocked, nursing home officials said yesterday.
A door to the roof of the Far Rockaway nursing home where the woman, Lillie Gardner, 79, was a resident, was supposed to be locked and equipped with an alarm to alert the staff if it was opened, a spokeswoman for the nursing home said.
Mrs. Gardner, a retired day care worker who had Alzheimer's disease, disappeared after dinner on Tuesday from the Bishop Charles Waldo MacLean Episcopal Nursing Home, and was found late that night by nursing home employees on the roof, which is off-limits to residents.
''That's the mystery point: what occurred at that door,'' said the spokeswoman, Melissa Krantz. ''It clearly has to be related to the door, whether it malfunctioned or was improperly unlocked.''
''The door should have been locked, and the alarm should have gone off and brought security immediately,'' she said.
Ms. Krantz called it premature to say anything for certain until the investigation was concluded, but she vigorously defended the hospital staff as very careful in supervising the residents.
Mrs. Gardner's family called a news conference yesterday to say that the home's negligence was to blame in her death, to raise questions about possible criminality, and to announce their intent to sue the home.
Several state and city authorities said that they would conduct investigations into Mrs. Gardner's death, including the New York City Police Department, the state health department and the attorney general.
Officials from the State Department of Health conducted two inspections of the home since January 2003. Officials documented several violations, but none were grievous or life-threatening, according to state records, and no fines were assessed, state health officials said.
Mrs. Gardner was found in a puddle of water on the nursing home's flat gravel roof around 11 p.m., Ms. Krantz said, and taken to the nearby St. John's Episcopal Hospital South Shore through an elevated footbridge that links the home with the hospital. She was pronounced dead there about 1 a.m.
Mrs. Gardner, who lived on the home's fifth floor, its top floor, was in the beginning stages of Alzheimer's disease. Family members said they placed her at the nursing home because of her habit of wandering.
One of Mrs. Gardner's sons, Sidney Gardner, 50, said: ''The quality of care, or the lack thereof, is why she died.''
Mr. Gardner, of Staten Island, complained that in the nine months since his mother was admitted to the home, ''the nursing home has deteriorated in quality.''
Mr. Gardner said that when family members first brought her into the nursing home, ''the overall presence of the floor was very clean.''
''Over the past months, however, there been a constant smell of feces, which my brother and I consistently complained about.''
Ms. Krantz dismissed that allegation, saying that Mrs. Gardner ''was treated with the utmost of respect and care.''
Mr. Gardner said he was called to the hospital late Tuesday night and told that his mother was found on the roof alive but that she had died from hypothermia soon afterward. Ellen Borakove, a spokeswoman for the city's medical examiner, said yesterday that the cause of death could not be determined for several days, until tissue studies were completed.
Mr. Gardner claimed that his mother's health problems rendered her incapable of climbing stairs without assistance. He said that at the hospital he saw bruises on his mother's arms and wrists and orange Betadine medical cleanser around her vaginal area.
Kenneth M. Mollins, a lawyer representing the Gardner family, said that he requested that the city authorities test Mrs. Gardner to see if she had been raped. ''She was taken up those steps, and her arms are suddenly black and blue,'' he said. ''Even on top of the negligence, something's not right.''
Ms. Borakove said a rape test would be done, as is standard practice when someone is found on a roof.
A Police Department spokesman said Mrs. Gardner showed ''no obvious signs of major trauma,'' and Ms. Krantz said, ''For the family to even raise that issue is absurd.''
It is not unusual for Alzheimer's patients to wander and get lost in nursing homes. Those who do are known by staffers as ''wanderers'' and many are given wander-guards on their ankles or wrists, which trip alarms if they leave their floors. State officials and nursing home experts emphasized that it was the homes' responsibility to ensure that they kept track of residents so that they did not endanger themselves.
Ms. Krantz said that Mrs. Gardner came to dinner on the nursing home floor Tuesday night around 6:30 p.m. and ate and took her medication.
Like most patients, Mrs. Gardner was given significant freedom on the floor, Ms. Krantz said, adding, ''She wasn't known as a wanderer, but it was known that she went for walks.''
Mrs. Gardner was noticed missing at the 9:30 bed check. The staff immediately conducted ''a full-scale search of the entire home,'' Ms. Krantz said, and finally found her around 11 lying on the roof.
''Who would have thought she would go up to the roof?'' Ms. Krantz said. She said that nurses called Mrs. Gardner very mobile and certainly capable of climbing a flight of stairs, contrary to the family's claim.
Ms. Krantz said the staffing at the home was smaller at night than during the day, but still in accordance with state guidelines. She said the home does not require frequent attendance checks, partly because ''patients are not prisoners.''
Mrs. Gardner, whose husband died in 1991, lived to take care of her family and had an ''infectious laugh'' and a love for cooking and gospel music, her son said. She had six children, 14 grandchildren and several great-grandchildren.
Yesterday, several people visiting relatives said they were considering taking them out of the home. The Gardner case is not the first time that the home has been accused of negligence that led to a resident's death. An elderly resident, Hiram Vasquez, tumbled out of bed in 1996 and suffered severe injuries that he eventually died from, according to his family's lawyer, Michael Siegel. The family later sued, and settled the case for $85,000, Mr. Siegel said.
