It was mentioned to James Jones, the men's head basketball coach at Yale, that he had a game tonight against an Ivy League rival, Columbia, and he was asked if he could describe its coach.
''Sure,'' Jones said. ''He's a bald black guy, name of Jones.''
And Joe Jones, the head basketball coach of Columbia, had precisely the same answer to the same tongue-in-cheek question.
''We even look a lot alike,'' Joe said. ''He was nerdy looking when he was younger, but he's gotten better looking.''
They know each other well, being brothers, with James, at 39, a year older than Joe. They played together one year on their high school basketball team, and, of course, have closely followed each other's fortunes through the years.
James Jones is in his fifth season as the Yale coach, while Joe is in his first year at Columbia. They have identical records this season, 6 victories and 11 losses, with Columbia 2-2 in the Ivy League and Yale 1-3.
When they meet tonight it will be the first time in more than 40 years that brothers will coach against each other in a Division I game, according to The Associated Press.
James said he wishes his brother well, but not against Yale. ''He's not getting any break from me,'' James said, ''and I'm certain I won't see Columbia going easy on us.''
Joe said: ''We never gave each other breaks when we were growing up. Why should that change now?''
James said: ''But if I had my druthers, if I could change the basketball world, I'd change it so that Columbia and Yale become the Penn and Princeton of the Ivy League, that we'd dominate basketball for the next 10 years in our league, the way Penn and Princeton have.''
Joe Jones, who had been an assistant coach at Villanova, took over a Columbia team that had fallen on miserable times. It did not win a single game in the Ivy League last season, going 0-14, and 2-25 over all. The coach, Armond Hill, was fired.
John Reeves, the Columbia athletic director, said he expected Joe Jones to win an Ivy League championship within three years. ''That's a bold statement, but I believe it,'' he said.
Joe Jones has heard that. ''We're laying a foundation here,'' he said. ''We have some really good kids.''
James Jones had his best team two seasons ago, winning 21 games and upsetting Rutgers in the first round of the National Invitation Tournament. Yale had also tied for the Ivy League title with Penn and Princeton but lost to Penn in a three-way playoff. Last season, there was a drop-off, with the team finishing with 14 victories and 13 losses.
The brothers grew up on Long Island, the sons of Herman and Edna Jones, who were divorced when the boys were 11 and 10. They then lived with their father, who worked in a dry-cleaning store, while maintaining a relationship with their mother.
They played high school ball in Huntington, then James went to the State University of New York at Albany, Joe to SUNY-Oswego. Both played on their college teams, both earned master's degrees.
James started in sales, but when an assistant coaching job opened up at Albany, he applied and was hired. He became the head coach there, and moved on to become an assistant coach at Ohio University and at Yale before becoming head coach.
Joe began coaching at a middle school on Long Island, then was a high school coach and an assistant at Hofstra and Villanova.
In Division I, there are only two other sets of brothers coaching basketball -- Dickey Nutt at Arkansas State and Dennis Nutt at Southwest Texas State, and Bill Herrion at East Carolina and Tom Herrion at the College of Charleston. It is believed, however, that the Joneses are a historical duo, being perhaps the first black brothers to coach at this level.
James Jones has attended only one of Joe's games, but has seen, he said, ''about five on tape.''
What has he seen? ''I saw a team playing as hard as any team I've ever seen,'' he said.
And who will the Jones family be rooting for in the game tonight?
''My family is a bunch of front-runners,'' he said, ''so they'll be rooting for whoever's winning.''
Joe Jones laughed when he heard his brother's characterization. ''What I think,'' he said, ''is that my family will be rooting for neither of us to lose.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
