Any loss annoys Devils center John Madden, but this one seemed even more unnerving. The Devils played a clunker Thursday night, and Madden will have the entire four-day All-Star break to let it eat at him.
The Vancouver Canucks routed the Devils, 4-0, and the crowd of 14,114 at Continental Arena seemed to forget that the Devils had been a hot team, with seven victories and a tie in their previous 10 games.
The Devils seemed to forget, too.
''It's hockey,'' Madden said in a low growl. ''You've got to keep playing.
Vancouver scored on the first shot of the game, and the Devils seemed flustered from that point on. Canucks goaltender Dan Cloutier stopped 24 shots to become the third opponent to shut out the Devils this season.
''There's obviously a reason we didn't play well. I don't have it, said Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer, who has been the captain in Scott Stevens's absence.
After a victory Tuesday over Ottawa, the Devils were 1 point behind Philadelphia for the Atlantic Division lead. Within 48 hours, the Flyers, who have played three more games, boosted their lead to 5 points.
With their lackluster effort against the high-speed Canucks, the Devils also fell into fifth place in the Eastern Conference, behind the Boston Bruins, who beat Buffalo on Thursday. Boston has 69 points in 56 games, the Devils 67 in 53.
''Games in hand are good as long as you win them,'' Madden said.
The Canucks had lost earlier this week to the Rangers and Islanders, and they opened Thursday's game by pushing the puck into the Devils' zone and keeping it there until they took the first shot, and scored on it.
''We knew they'd be ready to go, Niedermayer said.
Mike Keane, the 36-year-old right wing who had missed Vancouver's previous three games with a groin injury, flipped a pass from behind the goal to Daniel Sedin in the right face-off circle. Sedin sent a sharp pass to his twin brother, Henryk, in front of the goal.
Henryk Sedin redirected the puck past goaltender Martin Brodeur for his ninth goal. It came just 71 seconds into the game and it was only the 20th time in 53 games that a Devils opponent had scored first. The Devils are 5-10-4-1 in those games.
''We just didn't do a whole lot of things right tonight,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said. ''That's all. One of those bad days at work. It's not the end of the world.
The Sedins ganged up for another goal on the Canucks' ninth shot of the game. Henryk Sedin won a face-off with Scott Gomez in the circle to Brodeur's left, then took possession of the puck and noticed Daniel Sedin in front of the goal.
Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski, named Thursday to the starting lineup for the Eastern Conference in Sunday's N.H.L. All-Star Game, briefly stopped the puck, but Sedin got it back. He flung the puck past Brodeur at 3:51 for his ninth goal of the season.
''I was in good position, Rafalski said. ''I just couldn't get any strength to pull it back towards me.
Devils center Igor Larionov picked up a holding penalty with 8 minutes left in the period, and Vancouver scored an unconventional power-play goal. Madden tried to kill time by racing into the Canucks' zone with the puck, but he slipped and fell.
Todd Bertuzzi got the puck and nudged it to Markus Naslund. He hit Brendan Morrison, in full stride, near the Devils' blue line, and Morrison wheeled past Niedermayer.
Morrison put enough muscle on a backhand shot, and it floated over Brodeur's right arm and landed in the net at 13:46. It was Morrison's 16th goal of the season. The Devils had allowed three power-play goals in 29 chances in their previous 10 games.
''It's definitely a disappointment, Brodeur said. ''We felt we needed to play a better game.
SLAP SHOTS
WFAN-AM (660), which lost the broadcasts of Rangers and Knicks games Wednesday to its sports-radio rival, ESPN 1050, has agreed to a multiyear contract with the Devils to broadcast its games beginning next season.
Devils games have been broadcast for 16 seasons on WABC-AM (770), which, like WFAN, has a 50,000-watt, clear-channel signal that reaches many Eastern states. The Devils' contract with WABC is to expire after this season. LOU LAMORIELLO, the Devils' president and general manager, said in a statement that WFAN's commitment to sports made the deal appealing.
The Nets' contract with WOR-AM and the Islanders' contract with ESPN 1050 end after this season.  HOCKEY
