Larry Fitzgerald, a sophomore receiver for the University of Pittsburgh, has been granted eligibility for the National Football League's draft in April, a league spokesman said yesterday.
Fitzgerald, who finished second in the voting for the Heisman Trophy last season, applied for a special exemption into the draft because he attended a fifth year of high school.
The league's draft eligibility rule, which was struck down yesterday in United States District Court in Manhattan by Judge Shira A. Scheindlin, barred players from entering the draft until three years after the completion of their senior year of high school. Running back Maurice Clarett, an Ohio State sophomore, filed a lawsuit in September seeking entry into the draft.
The N.F.L. said it would appeal the ruling in the Clarett case, but any appeal would not affect Fitzgerald.
Fitzgerald, 20, graduated from Valley Forge Military Academy in Pennsylvania in May 2002. He attended Valley Forge to improve his grades after transferring from a Minneapolis high school midway through his senior year.
Fitzgerald could not be reached for comment yesterday, but his father, Larry Fitzgerald Sr., indicated in an interview in November that he had begun exploring his son's move to the professional level.
''The way I've looked at it is, I don't worry about somebody else's rules; rules are made to be broken or amended,'' Fitzgerald Sr. said.
''They usually are put in place as reasons to protect various interests, but I don't know if it's in the best interest of the athlete who comes out of high school who might be Kevin Garnett or Kobe Bryant in football cleats.''
Jeff Pash, the chief counsel for the N.F.L., speaking in a conference call before the league announced its decision on Fitzgerald, acknowledged that granting Fitzgerald eligibility ''may be an academic exercise'' after Scheindlin's ruling.
''Larry Fitzgerald has asked to be declared eligible and we had been in touch with his attorney and asked for some further information,'' Pash said before the Clarett ruling. He did not say what information was sought.
Even as Scheindlin declared Clarett eligible and the league granted Fitzgerald eligibility, Pash said he believed that young players who entered the league did so at great risk.
''It is perfectly clear that players that stay in school are better players and have more lucrative careers,'' Pash said. ''The people who will be hurt are the players who, one way or another, try to make the jump and are not ready to do so, and they lose their eligibility and their scholarship and their opportunity to play in the N.F.L. It's not a good thing for us, but we are not the primary loser.''
FOOTBALL
