Richard A. Grasso is no longer a member of Wall Street's most exclusive public club, the New York Stock Exchange, but he still belongs to its most secretive society, Kappa Beta Phi.
The sole purpose of the society, which claims more than 250 of Wall Street's executives and former chiefs, is to allow some of the biggest egos in finance to poke fun at themselves and to induct new members in a campy rite that dates back to 1929.
At its annual black-tie dinner on Jan. 15 at the St. Regis Hotel, Mr. Grasso was not only in attendance, but the butt of a series of jokes about his $139.5 million pay package as chairman and chief executive of the exchange. Bankers who were there said he took the ribbing in good humor.
Like the best of clubs, Kappa Beta has special privileges -- lifetime membership, which Mr. Grasso can now appreciate, and, for the broader membership, even the leeway to break a municipal law or two.
Laughing with Mr. Grasso were several former directors of the stock exchange who granted him that pay and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, perhaps the biggest titan in the room with a net worth of $4 billion. Though the mayor famously banned smoking in public places in New York, several Wall Street executives enjoyed an illicit puff of the occasional cigar in his presence.
''Sure, there were cigars passed out,'' said Alan C. Greenberg, the former chief executive of Bear Stearns, who is known as Ace. ''And some people even had the guts to smoke them -- including me.''
Smoking in a public room is not allowed at the St. Regis, according to hotel officials.
But such legal niceties were the details for another day: Wall Street's titans had gathered for a night of racy fun.
Among the inductees, or ''neophytes'' in club parlance, was Diana L. Taylor, New York State banking superintendent and the companion of Mr. Bloomberg.
Which could have been why Mr. Bloomberg, whose Wall Street bona fides go back to his days as a hot-shot salesman on the Salomon Brothers trading desk, was in the audience.
Each year, the new members of Kappa Beta Phi are asked to prepare a song-and-dance routine that they perform for the society's hooting members. The theme this year was shenanigans on Wall Street.
So Ms. Taylor, a tall, graceful woman, donned mock prison garb and, along with several other inductees, ran through a series of songs and skits lampooning Wall Street's many scandals, according to several bankers who were in attendance.
One popular target was Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, who began an investigation into trading abuses at mutual fund companies last year, and who, together with the Securities and Exchange Commission, is considering bringing a suit against Mr. Grasso and exchange directors over his pay package.
Mr. Grasso did not return calls to his lawyer seeking comment. Mayor Bloomberg also declined to comment. Ms. Taylor could not be reached for comment last night.
Drawing some of the biggest guffaws were a series of songs poking fun at Mr. Grasso's pay.
In many ways, it was a night for bygones to be bygones. Several executives closely associated with last year's scandal over Mr. Grasso's pay witnessed the evening's festivities.
Among the leading players were Kenneth G. Langone, a friend of Mr. Grasso's who was chairman of the exchange's compensation committee from 1999 to 2003, and Martin Lipton, a founding partner of Wachtell Lipton Rosen &amp; Katz, the powerful Wall Street law firm, who drew public criticism for offering personal legal advice to Mr. Grasso while also serving as the stock exchange's top legal counselor.
Also in attendance was David H. Komansky, the former chairman and chief executive of Merrill Lynch and a onetime board member of the stock exchange who served on the compensation committee from 1997 through 2003, the period when Mr. Grasso was awarded the multimillion-dollar pay package.
Another in the crowd was Sanford I. Weill, the chairman of Citigroup. Mr. Weill never made it onto the exchange board, but it was Mr. Grasso's aborted nomination of him to a seat a year ago that former board members point to as the beginning of the run of bad news for Mr. Grasso last year.
Mr. Grasso and the former directors of the stock exchange are the subjects of an investigation by New York state and federal regulators. According to regulators, Mr. Grasso and a number of directors who were on the compensation committee from 1998 through 2003 have been served with subpoenas.
Other former directors at the dinner included James E. Cayne, the chief executive of Bear Stearns, and Laurence D. Fink, the chief executive of BlackRock, the investment management company.
Several members, who described the evening on the condition they not be identified, defended the organization as a medium for acidic satire, with no intent to harm.
Despite the zingers, there were no bruised feelings, according to bankers who attended.
''People who compete against each other all day long get a chance to come together and have a good time,'' one Wall Street executive said.
Joining Ms. Taylor on the stage as society inductees were a combination of up-and-coming bond traders and elder deal makers and executives who were put up for membership by a nominating committee.
The group of about 10 included Thomas G. Maheras, the head of fixed income at Citigroup; Lesley Goldwasser, a top bond executive at Bear Stearns; J.Ira Harris, a former senior partner and mergers and acquisitions banker at Lazard Frères; and Lawrence Zicklin, the retired chief executive of Neuberger Berman, the asset management company.
The customs of the club are in many ways archaic. The top officers are referred to as Grand Swipe and Grand Loaf, and its motto is Latin for ''We Sing and We Drink.'' Members are strongly encouraged to maintain a bond of secrecy with regard to club rituals and the fun is had at members' expense.
There is no clubhouse; members meet once a year at the St. Regis. Dues are a couple of thousand dollars a year, quite reasonable for an evening with this group.
At the dinner, part of the tradition is for the members to hurl dinner rolls at the inductees as they perform their song-and-dance numbers. The club takes its performances very seriously, and inductees are provided with coaches to ensure that the skits are carried off with at least a modicum of professionalism.
One year, the performances were inspired by ''Cabaret,'' and the male bankers were required to dress in a skirt and halter and sing ''Wilkommen'' to the roaring crowd.
While the club has historically been a male preserve, the rise of women and minorities on Wall Street is also reflected there.
This year, the lead officer, or Grand Swipe, is Ronald E. Blaylock, chief executive of Blaylock &amp; Partners, one of Wall Street's most prominent African-American executives.
He replaces Alexandra Lebenthal, the president of Lebenthal &amp; Company, a brokerage house specializing in municipal bonds.
Still, bankers remain reluctant to discuss details. ''It's a secret society,'' said one Wall Street chief executive and member. ''I can't tell you any more, or it wouldn't be secret.''
