TERRA COTTA is a lovely name for baked earth; it almost sounds like an Italian dessert. Whatever else the Renaissance did for art, it elevated this fragile reddish substance, fired for longevity and used for buildings and their decoration since ancient times, to a sculptural material.
In the 16th century, terra cotta (its counterpart, unfired clay, is known as terra cruda) became the chosen modeling medium for neo-Classical artists devoted to visiting the Greek and Roman past and who worked close to the antiquities in Rome that served as their inspiration. They used it extensively for making bozzetti, or sculptors' rough drafts for larger works in stone or bronze, modeling in clay the way a painter might do a preliminary sketch on paper.
As the artists' practice of using terra cotta over other modeling materials, like wood or wax, spread through Europe, collectors were not far behind. The training and graphic eloquence of neo-Classical sculptors encouraged the idea of owning creations so close to an artist's original concept; sometimes the model possessed more life than the larger finished work in stone or bronze.
Stoking what seems to be a growing contemporary interest in Classical and Classically inspired art, the Metropolitan Museum has mounted ''Playing With Fire: European Terra-Cotta Models, 1740-1840,'' a show teeming with treasures that the Met cites as the first major museum exhibition devoted to neo-Classical terra-cotta sculpture.
By the first part of the 18th century the interest in terra-cotta models was catching on in France. They were shown at the salons of painting and sculpture that became regular events after 1737, and they drew the attention of the art-going public. ''They reveal much better the fire and true talent of the artist,'' wrote Ange-Laurent La Live de Jully, a terra-cotta collector, in 1764.
The idea of acquiring them was encouraged by art patrons. One was Anne-Claude-Philippe, Comte de Caylus, a French archaeologist, antiquarian and etcher, who wrote in 1749 that good models would ''train the eye of the wealthy among us who have no idea of the beauty of sculpture.'' He had another interesting thought: ''This might be a way to create a demand for large pieces of sculpture and thus to divert the excessive sums being disbursed for the decoration of houses in a mean and ugly taste.''
The Met's exhibition, organized by James David Draper, curator in its department of European sculpture and decorative arts, and Guilhem Scherf, chief curator in the sculpture department at the Louvre, displays about 135 works from collections in Europe and the United States. The range is from rough preliminary sketches to completely finished models.
The artists form a star roster, including Antonio Canova, Joseph Chinard, Claude Michel (called Clodion), John Flaxman, Augustin Pajou, Jean-Antoine Houdon, Johann Heinrich Dannecker, Philippe-Laurent Roland, Johan Tobias Sergel and the Russian Mikhail Ivanovich Kozlovsky. One woman, with the imposing moniker of Clémence-Sophie Daudignac de Sermézy, has been graciously included.
The show and its extensive catalog are divided into five parts. The first deals with the artist's methods, including images of the sculptors themselves, like the solemn relief self-portrait at age 24 by Flaxman, the famed English illustrator of Homer and Dante. Academic exercises in terra cotta make up the second part. Monuments, reliefs and groups form the third, including some strenuous depictions of men battling centaurs.
''Heroes and Heroism,'' ''Cupid'' and ''The Loves of the Gods'' are the categories in the fourth section, devoted to myth and fable. The fifth compares artists' styles in working on more usual subjects, like religious images, genre and funerary sculpture (this last group makes one of the liveliest displays).
Among the show's greatest names is that of Canova (1757-1822), the leading neo-Classical sculptor in Europe, known for his elegant, harmoniously proportioned marbles. Oddly, his terra-cotta models were largely unknown until the publication of a 1943 monograph by Elena Bassi and the inclusion of many examples in a 1951-52 exhibition in Rome. In this show, Canova is represented by eight works. They range from the very rough, like the not-quite-erotic ''Struggling Nude Couple'' (1787) -- thought to be a gestational version of his 1793 marble masterpiece, ''Cupid Awakened by Psyche's Kiss'' -- to the much more finished 1810 terra cotta for his most familiar work, ''The Three Graces'' (1813-1816), a design he adapted from ancient sources.
The gracefully elongated figures of this tableau, which depicts the daughters of Zeus known for the benefits they bestowed, are cunningly deployed to suggest the form of Apollo's lyre, to which they danced. It was commissioned in marble by the divorced Empress Josephine Bonaparte, who died before it was finished. (The marble was finally acquired by Nicholas II of Russia for the Hermitage, where it remains.)
Since the neo-Classicists adored heroes, the depiction of them, mythological and historical, looms large in this show. A war-torn Europe had rediscovered the Iliad, and its foremost player, Achilles, was the subject of many neo-Classical tributes. One of the most poignant is ''Achilles on the Strand'' (after 1775), a very finished work by Sergel (1740-1815), who was a French-trained Swede with a flair for mythological themes.
In his dramatic portrayal, Sergel shows the nude warrior lying on a beach, his shield by his side, distraught over the loss of the captive princess Briseis to his rival, Agamemnon. Achilles is in campy distress, his hair wild, his mouth agape, his arms pleadingly outstretched, presumably entreating his mother, the sea nymph Thetis, to intervene.
A perfect foil to this emotional tableau is ''Achilles Arming'' (1780-1790), a rare terra cotta by another leading English sculptor, Thomas Banks (1735-1805). Portrayed in the nude here, too, Achilles stands tall and noble, his garment draped over one half-missing arm, the other raised to don the lavish helmet (missing, too) ordered by his mother from Vulcan, in preparation for the Trojan War.
Not that all mythological subjects here are treated solemnly. More than occasionally wit rears its head, particularly slyly in the case of ''Bacchante Riding a Goat'' (1796), a small masterpiece by Roland (1746-1816). A beautifully finished work with wonderfully contrasting textures, it shows a strapping, slyly smiling maiden in diaphanous drapery precariously perched on the back of a shaggy, ribald-looking goat. She holds a thyrsus, a staff tipped with a pine cone. The goat itself smiles knowingly, as if in complicity, and who knows where this ride will take them?
Walking through this show (which has its share of bombastic clinkers, too), you come upon many other engrossing finds. A grisly study (circa 1782) by the same Roland depicts the death of Marcus Porcio Cato, a republican tribune, ripping out his bowels in the African town of Utica as his enemy Julius Caesar approaches with troops. An admirable larger-than-life head of Cicero (1771), best viewed in commanding profile, is by Luc François Breton, who was commissioned by an association of attorneys in his native town of Besançon.
Among a number of sketches for funerary monuments is a delicate tribute to a mourner by Clodion (1776): a meditation on death in the form of a young woman wrapped in voluminous draperies with a hand to her bent head. In a different key is the memorial for one Ludwig Rudolf von Jenner (1806) by the German sculptor Johann Valentin Sonnenschein. Jenner, a hiker killed in an avalanche, gazes soulfully upward, hands clasped in prayer, separated by a steep rock from the languishing figure of a nude youth who symbolizes death. But instead of mountain gear, Jenner wears Roman drapery and sandals.
In the genre category nearby is ''Woman Frightened by a Thunderclap That Has Just Shattered a Tree Beside Her'' (1798), a different acknowledgment of the power of nature. Brilliantly conceived by a French academician, Jean-Baptiste Stouf, it evokes a robust blast of wind that has scattered the branches of the tree, destroyed the victim's hairdo and sent a piece of her ample garment billowing wildly about her head in a cleverly executed hollow circular form. Some scholars see in it an allusion to the havoc wreaked by the French Revolution.
No one, after seeing this show, could underestimate the subtle power of terra cotta. It could lure a visitor more than once.
''Playing With Fire: European Terra-Cotta Models, 1740-1840'' remains at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street, (212) 535-7710, through April 25.
ART REVIEW
