The Islanders have been at their plucky best in recent days, showcasing an ability even late in games to come from several goals down and capture unlikely victories.
There has been a catch, however. For the most part, the Islanders have reserved that kind of resolve for home games.
A 2-1 loss to the Montreal Canadiens on Thursday night underscored how the Islanders' playoff prospects may well be decided away from Nassau Coliseum.
Playing their final game before the break for the All-Star Game, the Islanders (26-21-5-2) let an opportunity to pull a point behind the seventh-place Canadiens (28-20-6-2) slip away in front of 21,273 at the Bell Center. Montreal outshot the Islanders by 38-23.
The Islanders have won just seven times in 24 road games. ''Our road record is what it deserves to be,'' Coach Steve Stirling said. ''But we dug ourselves a big hole. We've got 15 out of 22 points in the last 11 games, so we have done something right.''
A victory against Montreal would have been significant. The Islanders may wind up battling with the Canadiens to advance beyond the eighth and final playoff position as teams try to sidestep a first-round series against whoever is the conference's top team.
Michael Ryder's 15th goal of the season, at 8 minutes 46 seconds of the third period, was the difference. Fending off Islanders defenseman Adrian Aucoin, Ryder swept in off the right wing and lifted a wrist shot that beat goaltender Garth Snow under his glove.
The Canadiens opened the scoring with a power-play goal 7:40 into the game when Mike Ribeiro deflected the puck off Snow and into the net.
The Islanders answered with three minutes left in the first period. With Richard Zednik serving a four-minute penalty for high-sticking Oleg Kvasha, Justin Papineau fought off a check from Canadiens defenseman Patrice Brisebois and beat José Théodore with a backhand shot for his sixth goal.
It does not get any easier for the Islanders, who resume next week with road games against Colorado and Dallas.
HOCKEY
