St. John's expelled one starting basketball player, moved to expel two others and disciplined three reserves last night. The actions came after an incident involving a 38-year-old Queens woman that began in a strip club in a Pittsburgh suburb.
The woman was charged by the Pittsburgh police with lying about her claim that she had been raped by several St. John's players she met at the club. Although no players were charged, the university took action against the six players on a team suffering through one of the worst seasons in St. John's history.
St. John's expelled Grady Reynolds immediately; suspended Elijah Ingram and Abe Keita and will seek their expulsion, pending a hearing; and suspended Lamont Hamilton and Mohammed Diakite from the team for unspecified violation of rules stemming from the events Wednesday night. Tyler Jones also faces unspecified punishment by the team's interim coach, Kevin Clark.
Ingram, the team's leading scorer, Reynolds and Keita are starters. If Ingram and Keita are also expelled and Hamilton and Diakite remain suspended, St. John's will have nine players on its roster with eight regular-season games remaining.
Even without criminal charges against players, the incident is the latest in an avalanche of problems for the basketball program. St. John's players have been involved in other off-the-court incidents over the past year; the coach, Mike Jarvis, was fired early this season; and the team has a record of 5-14 over all and 0-8 in the Big East.
The woman, Sherri Ann Urbanek-Bach, of Astoria, Queens, who is unemployed, was arrested and charged with fictitious reports to law enforcement, prostitution and criminal theft by extortion, the police said. All the charges are misdemeanors. She was being held in the Allegheny County jail and will be arraigned today, the police said.
The woman said she was raped in the hotel where the St. John's players were staying after their game with Pittsburgh on Wednesday night. After being questioned by the police early yesterday, the St. John's players returned to New York.
The woman did not have obvious injuries, said Cmdr. Maurita Bryant, of the major crimes division of the Pittsburgh police. Urbanek-Bach was interviewed a second time last night and the police concluded that her claim was not true, Bryant said.
Part of what cast suspicion on Urbanek-Bach was a cellphone with videotape of portions of the incident, said Lt. Kevin Kraus of the major crimes division for the police. The phone belonged to one of the accused players, Kraus said.
Several St. John's players went to the Club Erotica in the Pittsburgh suburb of McKees Rocks, where they met the woman about 2:30 a.m., the police report said. She accompanied them to the Westin Convention Center Hotel in downtown Pittsburgh, where they raped her, the report said she told the police.
Ingram is a sophomore guard from Orange, N.J., who turns 20 today. Keita, a 24-year-old senior from Tolland, Conn., and Reynolds, a 23-year-old senior from Abbeville, Ala., are starting frontcourt players. Diakite, 23, a senior center from Rockville, Md., Hamilton, 21, a freshman center-forward from Brooklyn, and Jones, 19, a freshman forward from Lakeland, Colo., are reserves.
''Although no charges have been filed by the police, based on the facts we have confirmed, the university has immediately suspended three players from the team for violation of team rules and behavior inconsistent with St. John's mission and values,'' the university said in a statement before the woman was charged.
Those three players were Ingram, Reynolds and Keita. The university later issued another statement with further actions against them, as well as its discipline of the other three.
The incident is the latest black eye for the basketball program. Earlier in the season, Jarvis suspended the senior Willie Shaw for his second marijuana-related offense. Then Jarvis was fired over the team's poor play and his criticism of the university's facilities.
Last season, Reynolds was charged with assaulting a female student; the matter was settled over the summer with Reynolds agreeing to take anger-management classes.
St. John's has the worst record in the Big East. It has been a huge dropoff for a program that five years ago, under Jarvis, reached the final eight of the N.C.A.A. tournament.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
