Making Monkeys Of Us All
He can move 108,000 miles in one somersault. He can do 72 transformations. And oh, yes, he can fly.
Although it may sound as if he sprang from the pages of Marvel Comics, this superhero is centuries old. He is the monkey king of Chinese folklore, a magical, mystical and ultimately wise figure little known to young Americans. But the Children's Museum of Manhattan hopes to change that with ''Monkey King: A Journey to China,'' an exhibition that, like the monkey, will travel far.
The show, whose recent opening coincided with the Chinese New Year (this is the Year of the Monkey), tells of this mischievous hero, who incurred the wrath of the powerful Jade Emperor by pillaging his peach orchard and crashing his dinner party. Buddha traps the monkey, offering him a second chance if he will accompany a monk on a long, dangerous mission. (Children at the exhibition can climb on a huge model of Buddha's hand.) The monkey sets off with the monk and a few other miscreants: a dragon horse, a sand demon and a pig monster.
The museum has imaginatively recreated this adventure, from an orchard of touchable peaches (they light up) to a miniature Buddha's palace. Along the way the show invites children to do monkey business of their own, including crawling under the emperor's dinner table and turning knobs to wreak havoc with the dishes. They can also mimic some of the monkey's 81 ordeals, like fighting the Bull Demon in something that resembles a video game. They can imitate his heroics as well, like working with a partner to move a small ball up a bamboo ramp that stands for the Flaming Mountains.
Much of the fun teaches Chinese values: cooperation, perseverance, bravery and self-sacrifice. ''The story is the way kids in China learn about their own traditions,'' said Andrew S. Ackerman, the museum's executive director. The show illustrates how the tale is reflected in Chinese culture, with art, a puppet theater and a video of a Peking opera performer. Video screens also show interviews with Chinese-Americans about what the story means to them today. As Buddha promised, this monkey is immortal.
''Monkey King,'' through July at the Children's Museum of Manhattan, the Tisch Building, 212 West 83rd Street, (212) 721-1223. Hours: Wednesdays through Sundays, 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Admission: $7; 65+, $4.
Flower Power
To flower enthusiasts, a rare orchid is like the Holy Grail. That passion is behind the Neta Dance Company's ''Orchid Show,'' but here the quest for the grail is much closer to the one undertaken by Monty Python than to that of the Crusades.
On the surface ''The Orchid Show'' is a parody of those public television programs that treat some esoteric subject with mind-numbing seriousness. The host is the actress Jill St. John, a kind of Alistair Cooke of the orchid world. Not the real Ms. St. John, however, but Jeremy Laverdure, whose wig and dress do nothing to conceal his chest hair and 5 o'clock shadow. He lip-syncs the narration, which is no more the voice of Ms. St. John (a real orchid lover) than he is. (It is a tape of one of the female dancers.)
Beginning with a solo, ''River of Orchids,'' to a song by the rock band XTC, ''The Orchid Show'' segues into other pieces about orchid lore and behavior. The dances, to music by composers ranging from Erik Satie to Neta Pulvermacher, the troupe's director and choreographer, are playful and sometimes frenzied.
Still, you may be asking, is this really family theater? Yes: ''The Orchid Show'' is part of the Give Us Your Children Festival at the Flea Theater in TriBeCa, and youngsters get right into the kooky spirit. Their only disappointment seems to be that the orchid ice cream Jill discusses isn't also for sale.
''The Orchid Show,'' through Feb. 22 at the Flea Theater, 41 White Street, between Broadway and Church Street, TriBeCa. Fridays at 9 p.m.; Saturdays at 1 and 5 p.m.; Sundays at 3 p.m. Tickets, $15; (212) 352-3101 or www.theatermania.com.
A Day of Discovery
If you're a parent, you may be exasperated by your children's tendency to act as if they know more than you do. But for about 1,000 high school students, that behavior is probably justified. That is, unless you can discuss subjects like ''Synthesis and Analysis of a Cerium Poryphrin Double-Decker'' or a ''Hybrid Propulsion System Utilizing Solar Energy for Jet Aircraft.''
Those are titles of projects in the New York Academy of Sciences' 2004 Science and Engineering Fair, whose participants are competing for prizes totaling more than $100,000. Children visiting the fair at City College on Sunday can also enter a contest: a scavenger hunt. ''It will be a list of 20 or so questions with items they need to find,'' said Jeanette Kim, assistant director of education at the academy. ''For example, 'Find a project that built a robot.' ''
The fair will be followed by Family Science Day, a series of demonstrations like ''Fire and Explosions,'' a sizzling introduction to the pyrotechnics of chemistry.
''The big favorite is always the naked mole rats,'' Ms. Kim said. ''There's a researcher here, and they are his subjects.'' And of course this nudity is rated G.
The 2004 Science and Engineering Fair, Sunday from 10:30 a.m. to noon at the Great Hall at City College. Family Science Day, 12:30 to 4 p.m. at the Marshak Science Building. Both at 138th Street and Convent Avenue, Hamilton Heights. All events free. Information: (212) 650-6850.
Family Fare
