Members of the English upper class wriggling to ragtime in evening clothes can be an alarming sight. But there are few more effective ways of conveying the decline of the British Empire after World War I. The discomfiture, the yearning to keep spirits as blithe as they never really were and the undignified scramble to adapt to a faster, alien rhythm are all telegraphed in a few incongruous dance steps.
That England is the setting for Series II of the ''The Forsyte Saga,'' a beguiling three-part mini-series that begins Sunday on ''Masterpiece Theater'' on PBS. Or at least it is England as Soames Forsyte (Damian Lewis) views it from his bitter, sidelined perspective.
This sequel to ''The Forsyte Saga'' that was shown on PBS in the fall of 2002 is based on ''To Let,'' the third novel in John Galsworthy's trilogy, written in 1921 by an older, more forgiving author than the one who scathingly mocked his own caste in the 1906 opening novel, ''The Man of Property.'' The television adaptation is also more sympathetic to Soames, the priggish bourgeois who loved and married but could never own the magnificent Irene (Gina McKee). So much so that at times whole scenes are filmed as if seen through his eyes, from ungainly jazz parties to gauzy close-ups of Irene. Now wrinkled, stiff-jointed and prone to Bloomsbury-style hats that make her look like Virginia Woolf, Irene regains her full beauty only when Soames is looking at her.
Soames is obsessed with money, but he is not a philistine, and it is his sensual appreciation for music, painting, architecture and English garden landscapes that enriches the screen.
There is a reason that viewers are still so drawn to mini-series set in England's Edwardian and post-Edwardian age: those times have a pull that goes beyond escapist nostalgia for grace, manners and perfectly manicured lawns. The world has not changed so very much since 1880, when the saga began, and we recognize ourselves more in a fragile society bracketed by Freud and World War I than in other, lustier eras of faith and certitude. One can smile at Galsworthy's quaint equation of truth and beauty, but his themes of loss, greed and clan loyalty have a familiar ring.
''The Forsyte Saga,'' be it this version by Granada Television of England and WGBH in Boston or the 26-part black-and-white BBC series shown on PBS in 1969, is almost as impossible to dislike as ''Gone With the Wind'' or the Harry Potter books. But Series II, which ends with Fleur's marriage, makes it a little easier, partly because tragic love triangles, when repeated in a second generation, tend to verge on farce.
The sequel centers on the clandestine love affair between Soames's daughter from his second marriage, Fleur (Emma Griffiths Malin), and Jon Forsyte (Lee Williams), the son Irene conceived after she and Soames divorced and she fell in love with Soames's cousin Young Jolyon (Rupert Graves), the bohemian black sheep of the Forsyte clan. (Just that tiny bit of exposition helps explain why the tale is called a saga and the film versions are invariably described as ''high-brow soap opera.'')
The two scions of feuding branches of the Forsyte family meet only once as children, in a garden at a tea party, but when they bump into each other again in an art gallery when they are 18, a spark is rekindled, horrifying their respective fathers, who unite only to keep the young lovers apart. Soames turns out to be a little less gothic than Jolyon and Irene about the family taboo, but then, he has less respect for tragedy. At the theater to see ''King Lear,'' Soames testily sums up the plot this way: ''Father, daughters, inheritance. The usual thing.''
World War I, which had just ended at the time of the lovers' meeting, is alluded to only elliptically, mostly as a reflection of a character's moral compass. When Soames complains that the war ''changed everything,'' he is referring to the vulgarity of low necklines and women riding horses astride, beggars on the streets and shopgirls with ''short skirts and common airs.''
June Forsyte (Gillian Kearney), Jolyon's daughter by his first marriage (he ran away with her governess and had two more children before meeting Irene), is Soames's opposite, all high spirits and generosity. She embraces modern art as an antidote to the horrors of Verdun and the Somme. ''People are bored with sentiment,'' she tells her father, a traditional landscape painter who is pained by an abstract sculpture of lovers in June's art gallery. ''Love has been bombed to smithereens. What does it mean anymore?''
Jolyon is aghast. ''Everything,'' he mutters. ''It still means everything.''
Fleur is as passionately in love with Jon as her father was with Irene, but she is Soames's spoiled, willful daughter, with a healthy dose of girlish callousness stamped into Forsyte DNA. Dancing with Michael Mont, a former officer who is instantly smitten by her beauty and bold ways, Fleur has a Mitford way of flirting. ''Were you in the war?'' she asks Michael, who quietly answers yes. ''How riveting,'' she replies.
This Fleur is lovely, and at times bewitchingly bad, but she is more classically beautiful than the one played by Susan Hampshire in the BBC mini-series. Her looks are lushly Edwardian, and she looks best in clothes and settings of her father's choosing -- silk gowns and candlelit ballrooms. The camera almost seems to be begging her to change her silly, unflattering flapper clothes and sit still for a Sargent portrait.
There are other times when the Soames's-eye view is more of a hindrance, most obviously in the portrait of the Belgian millionaire playboy, Prosper Profond (Michael Maloney). Speaking with a labored Hercule Poirot accent, Prosper is a parody of the simpering Continental gigolo, which is, of course, how Soames sees him. But he is too absurd to pass as a debonair cad capable of seducing, abandoning and reseducing Soames's second wife, Annette (Beatriz Batarda), as well as entrancing his sister, Winifred (Amanda Root).
In the presence of Irene, Soames swells up grotesquely with suppressed emotion, a sign that we are seeing him through her eyes. Galsworthy gave her all the virtues, but her beauty and happy marriage to Jolyon pall when Soames is out of view. It is his great passion, more than Fleur's and Jon's, that lends the sequel its grandeur and good fun.
It is possible to dislike parts of Series II of ''The Forsyte Saga,'' but it is impossible not to love Soames.
THE FORSYTE SAGA II  Sunday nights on most PBS stations (check local listings).
A ''Masterpiece Theater'' presentation. Mike Fleiss, executive producer; Kenneth Fuchs, director. Produced by Next Entertainment in association with Telepictures.
WITH: Damian Lewis (Soames Forsyte), Gina McKee (Irene Forsyte), Emma Griffiths Malin (Fleur Forsyte), Lee Williams (Jon), Rupert Graves (Young Jolyon), Amanda Root (Winifred Dartie), Ben Miles (Montague Dartie), Gillian Kearney (June), Michael Maloney (Prosper Profond) and Beatriz Batarda (Annette Forsyte).
TV WEEKEND  Correction:  February 7, 2004, Saturday  Production credits yesterday with a TV Weekend review of ''The Forsyte Saga II'' were reprinted in error from an ABC entertainment series late last year. This ''Masterpiece Theater'' presentation, which begins tomorrow night on PBS stations, was produced by Granada Television and WGBH Boston. The executive producers were Sita Williams and Andy Harries, Granada; and Rebecca Eaton, WGBH. It was directed by Andy Wilson. (The cast credits were correct.)
