Three international health organizations yesterday urged countries in Asia where avian influenza is spreading to consider large-scale vaccination programs to protect billions of healthy birds.
The move -- which would be a first, involving a vast undertaking in eight countries -- underscored the desperation of international public health experts trying to contain the outbreaks of a highly virulent strain of avian influenza.
And it would face considerable hurdles, both practical and scientific. It is not clear exactly how many birds would have to be vaccinated, but with an estimated 6.6 billion chicken and other poultry in the countries, inoculating even a fraction would be a daunting task -- especially since the birds must be injected individually. And because the existing bird vaccine is not highly effective, about half would continue to spread the virus.
In smaller outbreaks in the past, health officials have relied on standard strategies like identifying infected farms, equipping cullers with protective gear to slaughter infected birds and quarantining flocks.
Now, as avian influenza has spread to half the Asian continent, health experts say such measures have been scattershot, because health care systems are rudimentary and money is lacking.
Equally important, health officials say, the effects of the avian flu epidemic on human and animal health remain to a great extent unknown.
''There is no blueprint to help us'' deal with such a large-scale epidemic,'' said Dr. Klaus Stöhr, leader of the World Health Organization's influenza program, one of the groups urging vaccination.
''We have to start with a blank piece of paper,'' Dr. Stöhr said, but ''even if we are creative, there will be no quick fixes.''
The other two groups are the United Nations Food and Agricultural Organization and the World Organization for Animal Health, which held a meeting in Rome on Tuesday. The organizations and virologists there said that no measure could be ruled out because of the ''unprecedented'' nature of the current epidemic. It is caused by a strain of the A(H5N1) avian influenza virus that mutated from one that caused smaller outbreaks in Hong Kong in 1997 and 2003.
While health officials are deeply concerned that the spread among bird populations might lead to huge economic losses and food scarcities in some areas, their biggest fear is that the virus might swap genes with a human influenza strain to create a new one that could cause a worldwide epidemic among people.
The mutant A(H5N1) strain has killed birds in Cambodia, China, Indonesia, Japan, Laos, South Korea, Thailand and Vietnam. As of yesterday, the W.H.O. said there were 20 known human cases, 16 of them fatal, in Thailand and Vietnam.
The organizations did not define the criteria for which regions should require vaccination. The imprecision was among the reasons, Dr. Stöhr said, that ''the agricultural community is split'' on the effectiveness of a large-scale vaccination program.
Experts in favor of the approach contend that it will reduce the amount of virus that is spread among birds and possibly to humans.
But there is not enough vaccine right now to carry out a broad vaccination program; it would take months to produce enough to immunize birds in countries that decided to do so.
While vaccination could be an important step toward controlling the virus in the environment, critics contend that ''in the long-term these birds will continue to excrete the virus,'' Dr. Stöhr said.
Another problem is that to be effective vaccines should ideally contain the strain that is currently causing disease. But many of the three vaccines now marketed are made from old strains and have not been regularly updated as human vaccines have been, Dr. Stöhr said.
The virus is grown in live eggs and then killed before it is used as a vaccine. But because the avian influenza virus can kill chicken eggs, manufacturers have had to compromise by using a different and weaker strain, A(H5N2) and not A(H5N1), to make the vaccines, Dr. Stöhr said.
