A lively black and white mongrel named Dolly raced around beneath a grove of gnarled oak trees here with its nose to the ground before suddenly scratching frantically in the dark earth.
''Wait for me,'' shouted Dolly's owner, Michel Tournayre, a lean man of 40 wearing a brown leather vest and carrying a small pickax. Kneeling beside the dog, he pushed her snout aside, and dug out a hard plum-sized ball of black fungus. ''That's 30 euros,'' or nearly $40, he said, holding the truffle and giving it an enthusiastic sniff.
If only France's annual $30 million truffle trade were such simple, honest sport. But no, there is fraud afoot in the 6,000-square-mile swath of southern France that truffle lovers call the Golden Triangle.
Truffle prices have shot up this year, so even here in the heart of truffleland, Mr. Tournayre says, restaurants are secretly substituting an inferior and far cheaper Chinese fungus to stuff veal sausages, stud terrines and dress up the region's famous sauce Périgord.
''They're killing French culture,'' he declared as he pulled a chip of Gruyere cheese from his vest pocket to reward his dog.
Of course, the French are always decrying the destruction of French culture beneath the boot of foreign influences. But Mr. Tournayre and other truffle aficionados fret that people who taste the inferior fungus thinking it is the real McCoy will be turned off truffles forever.
Truffle experts blame the price increases on last summer's heat wave, which baked the moisture out of the ground, leaving many of France's trufficulteurs nearly truffleless. The November-to-March digging season has so far been the worst in memory and is expected to yield less than 20 percent of the truffles produced in a normal year.
As a result, wholesale prices for the ''black diamonds'' have surged to more than $1,250 per earthy kilogram, compared with about $25 for Chinese truffles. A kilogram, or 2.2 pounds, of fresh truffles at specialized boutiques like La Maison de la Truffe in Paris now costs nearly $3,200, making truffles one of those rare agricultural products more profitable than opium.
Back in his barn, Mr. Tournayre pulled a Chinese truffle from a sealed jar, taking care not to handle it too much for fear of spreading its potentially contaminating spores (some worry that the more aggressive Chinese fungus could crowd out the black French truffle if released into the wild). He sliced off a piece with his pocketknife and slipped it into his mouth. His nostrils flared in a sneer.
Though Chinese truffles have a fungal flavor, they are not as strong as the famed French species and have a faintly bitter edge. ''I don't know how to describe it,'' Mr. Tournayre said, spitting the bit back into his hand. ''It tastes like rubber.''
France began importing tuber indicum a little more than a decade ago, after a Frenchman spotted people in southwestern China feeding the fungus to their pigs. It is nearly identical in appearance to France's famous tuber melanosporum, the mysterious subterranean mushroom cherished by gastronomes all over the world. While connoisseurs say they do not come close in flavor, they can fool inexperienced palates, particularly when disguised with a dash of genuine black truffle juice.
Under French labeling rules, only tuber melansoporum can carry the name truffles, black truffles or truffes de Périgord, after the region that first marketed the mushroom on a wide scale. Use of the term truffle is also tolerated for the slightly inferior and cheaper tuber brumale, which is closely related to the tuber melanosporum and grows in the same areas. But tuber indicum, which does not grow in France, must be clearly marked as truffes de Chine.
The labeling applies not only to the truffles themselves, but to food prepared with them. Selling a ''boudin blanc truffé'' or serving a ''Coquilles St.-Jacques poêlées à la truffe'' made with Chinese truffles is punishable by two years in jail or a fine of $47,000 or both.
Mr. Tournayre says he knows who the cheaters in his neighborhood are because he occasionally takes bits of truffle home from restaurants to check under his own microscope. Even a speck of cooked truffle has millions of identifiable spores.
In December, Mr. Tournayre, as president of a local truffle producers' group, wrote to restaurants in Uzès and the surrounding area explaining that the union would promote at this year's truffle festival only those restaurants that could detail the provenance of their truffles. A form was enclosed.
Only a handful of the 40 restaurants in the region complied, and Mr. Tournayre's letter drew an indignant riposte from the president of the local hoteliers association, who reminded him that ''it's thanks to the talent of our cooks that the truffle has acquired its noble pedigree.''
A few days before Uzès's Truffle Day, which featured a 3,000-egg omelet cooked with nearly eight pounds of truffles, the local newspaper caused a scandal when it quoted the fruit and vegetable man at a local wholesale supermarket as saying that he had been selling more than six pounds of Chinese truffles a day.
Mr. Tournayre suspects that most of those foreign truffles end up in restaurants masquerading as the local specialty. ''I don't know of a single restaurant in the whole region that admits to serving Chinese truffles,'' he said.
At Jardins de Castille in Uzès, a restaurant that buys directly from Mr. Tournayre, he crumbled a fresh truffle over an already truffle-infused scrambled egg brouillard. ''Its power mounts and then stays in the mouth,'' he said, closing his eyes over a mouthful, ''leaving a sensation like good wine.''
Uzès Journal
