With the most impressive victory of his brief tenure as Knicks coach behind him and three days off ahead of him, Lenny Wilkens never thought about giving his team a day off. Instead, he scheduled three straight days of work.
When Wilkens was brought in to replace Don Chaney as coach on Jan. 14, whispers arose from his last stop, Toronto, where players complained that he had been too lax with practice, his workouts too brief to accomplish anything. Wilkens denies that and asks the Knicks to believe what they see. He said on Thursday that he wanted them to take the current three-day break in the schedule to conduct what would be as close to a training camp as he could mount. ''All misnomers,'' Wilkens said of the Raptors' complaints after his dismissal. ''You have to base it on what you see.''
The Knicks last played on Tuesday, defeating Indiana, 97-90; their next game is on Saturday at Miami.
''I thought we needed the time,'' Wilkens said of the Knicks' three consecutive days of practice. ''We don't have to kill them all three days, but I felt we needed the time to walk through some stuff, look at some video, work on some situations that we could be a little bit better at. I told the players we needed this time. They were very responsive.''
The Knicks players were an easy sell. The Knicks (23-27), who have gone two seasons without making the playoffs, have compiled a 7-3 record since Wilkens took over, although their schedule was relatively easy until they met the Eastern Conference-leading Pacers on Tuesday.
That victory put the Knicks alone in seventh place in the conference and hinted at the team's potential. It also helped make the players willing accomplices in Wilkens's call to step forward.
''He's been different from what you hear,'' point guard Stephon Marbury said. ''I mean, his practices aren't like hard, where you're getting drilled hard for two and a half, three hours. If you do what you're supposed to do, you're in and out. It's when you're not doing what you're supposed to do that you're there.''
The Knicks were behind closed doors for two and a half hours Thursday, but there were no complaints from the players, who were drenched in sweat at the end of the session and will be back Friday for another day of work.
Much of the Knicks' success so far under Wilkens has come with Chaney's system. Wilkens has slowly added some wrinkles, pushing for defensive adjustments first and then putting in new offensive sets and options off each play piece by piece. Only now, with a three-day window, could he truly try to put his own playbook in place.
''There are three new sets in that we do a lot off,'' Wilkens said. ''I did it slowly because I didn't want us to step back. I had new guys coming in who were just learning what Don was doing, and now here I come, and if I start changing everything they would be really confused. I didn't want that.
''I wanted us to feel good about who we are, get a couple of wins under our belt, and then when you start making adjustments it's easier. They start believing in themselves, that they can accomplish more. That's what you want. A baby starts crawling before it walks, and the more you encourage it, the more it will try other things.''
Forward Keith Van Horn said he thought Wilkens's modifications had helped.
''Just a few small plays and a few small changes to the way we play defense have really helped us,'' Van Horn said. ''I think he did it the right way, coming in and making changes slowly and not trying to change everything all at once. I'm sure he has a lot more things he still wants to implement.''
PRO BASKETBALL
