The boos arose from the throng of orange and white as soon as UConn women's basketball coach, Geno Auriemma, walked onto the floor of Thompson-Boling Arena on Thursday night. No. 1 Tennessee was getting ready to play the fourth-ranked Huskies before a crowd of 22,515.
It seemed the kind of big-game environment in which the UConn all-American Diana Taurasi buries the home team's hopes with one of her superb performances. But instead of Taurasi's ruining the evening for the Tennessee fans, the other Connecticut players did most of the damage.
UConn (17-2) won, 81-67, as Taurasi made 4 of 13 shots from the floor and eventually fouled out. The Huskies relied on the forwards Barbara Turner and Ann Strother and the reserve Ashley Battle to reassert Connecticut as the team to beat for the national championship.
''This wasn't one of those typical Diana Taurasi gets 35 and everybody just kind of goes along for the ride,'' Auriemma said. ''Everybody in their own right had to make some huge plays at all different times during the game.''
UConn, which has lost two games in a regular season for the first time in three seasons, got 17 points from Strother, 16 from Turner and 11 from Battle.
Taurasi led the Huskies with 18 points, but she struggled to get them. Taurasi was 3 of 7 from the 3-point line, but still became the team's career leader in 3-pointers made (280), breaking Wendy Davis's record of 279.
The Huskies, who were shooting 48 percent from the field for the season, shot 40 percent, but committed just 8 turnovers. UConn outrebounded Tennessee, 42-39.
Shanna Zolman and Tye'sha Fluker scored 14 points each to lead Tennessee (18-2), which was playing its third game without its starting point guard, Loree Moore, who injured her knee Jan. 24 in a 72-69 victory over then-No. 1 Duke. Moore is out for the season.
Connecticut's defense was superb down the stretch. The Lady Vols were within 67-63 with 6 minutes 28 seconds to play, but scored just 4 points the rest of the game, failing to make a field goal. The Huskies put the game away by sinking 12 of 14 free throws in the last 6:18.
It was UConn's fifth straight victory over Tennessee, but the first time Taurasi did not play a big part offensively. In six games against the Lady Vols, Taurasi had been averaging 23 points.
But after hitting her first shot, Taurasi missed six straight and the crowd was delighted with every miss. As she accumulated fouls, the crowd roared.
UConn, however, nearly always has a backup plan for the rare times Taurasi struggles. Turner, who was coming off a poor shooting game against St. John's (1 for 7), scored 11 points in the first half on 5 of 13 shooting.
UConn made just 10 of its first 27 shots, but it had 13 offensive rebounds to 4 for Tennessee in the half. The Huskies scored 16 points following offensive rebounds and led, 41-33, at halftime.
''They pounded and pounded the glass,'' Tennessee Coach Pat Summitt said. ''And we would not match their intensity. It was disappointing.''
It was 28-28 with 5:45 to play in the first half when Turner ignited a 13-2 run with a 3-pointer and then made a steal and a breakaway layup. The Huskies led, 41-30, but Auriemma hung his head after UConn allowed Zolman to hit an open 3-pointer with two seconds left in the half.
Auriemma and Summitt turned up the intensity in the arena in the second half with loud protests against the officiating. When Taurasi was whistled for her third foul with 16:41 left, Auriemma screamed ''that's unbelievable'' three times and pointed at Referee John Morningstar.
A few moments later, Summitt went to half court during a timeout and screamed at the officials for not calling a foul on UConn's Turner.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
