Howard Dean may be hinging his candidacy on Wisconsin, but a growing number of Democrats say if he cannot win the Washington caucuses here on Saturday, he should take that as a cue and bow out.
''If he can't win here, he can't win anywhere,'' said Cathy Allen, a Democratic strategist in Seattle unaffiliated with any campaign.
If any place should still count as Howard Dean country, it would be here.Seattle is where the former Vermont governor began to build his base more than a year ago, where he drew more than 8,000 people to a rally downtown last summer and where his antiwar message fueled the political fervor for which this liberal city is known.
Washington State, much less liberal as a whole than Seattle, also has a traditional inclination toward underdogs and unpredictable outcomes. In the 1992 caucuses, Senator Paul E. Tsongas of Massachusetts ran far ahead of the pack, with Bill Clinton finishing fourth, although the state also held a primary that year that Mr. Clinton won.
In 1984, Senator Gary Hart of Colorado scored a victory with Democrats here, and in 1988, the Rev. Jesse Jackson made one of his strongest showings, slightly behind Michael S. Dukakis of Massachusetts.
Dr. Dean has raised almost as much money in this state as all his rivals combined, $679,842 since declaring his candidacy, according to the Center for Public Integrity, a nonpartisan organization. Dr. Dean has repeatedly made optimistic predictions about Washington, where he made several appearances on Tuesday and Wednesday.
On Thursday, in a conference call from Michigan with Washington reporters, he was asked whether Washington was a ''make or break'' state for his campaign.
''Our plan is to win there,'' Dr. Dean said. ''And that's all I'm going to say. Our plan is to win Washington.''
Although no reliable polls have been announced on how Washington may vote, political consultants said they believed that a persistently loyal base here for Dr. Dean gave him a chance of making a showing.
''Because Dean has such a strong base and it is his strategy that this is his turnaround state -- the state he could win -- I would give him odds right now,'' Frank Greer, a Democratic consultant whose firm is working for Senator John Kerry, said. ''It's been astounding when you live in Seattle to see how many folks were for Dean. But I feel that shifting.''
In the last week, a growing number of Dr. Dean's supporters, as well as a number of the most prominent Democratic politicians in the state, including Gov. Gary Locke and six of the state's eight Democratic Congressional delegates, endorsed Mr. Kerry. They said they were closing ranks behind the candidate who they said had the best chance of beating President Bush.
Mr. Kerry's growing strength has also been evident. On Tuesday, he packed more than 2,000 people into a downtown hotel. On Wednesday, Dr. Dean drew 200 to a rally at another downtown hotel.
The chairman of the state party, Paul Berendt, has backed Dr. Dean, pointing up a divide in the party that started becoming noticeable in the last week, as more state elected officials began to join Mr. Kerry's camp.
Mr. Berendt, who said he was expecting a record turnout on Saturday because of unusually high interest in the caucuses, acknowledged how crucial Washington was for Dr. Dean and his supporters.
''Howard has to win some place, and if it's not here, it has to be Maine or Wisconsin or some place pretty soon,'' he said. ''It's very important that he win, and we need that.''
Dr. Dean's campaign officials in Washington played down the endorsements for Mr. Kerry and said they continued to count on a victory here.
''The only real endorsement that matters right now is all those people who show up for Governor Dean on Saturday,'' Steve Haro, a spokesman for Dr. Dean's campaign, said in Washington. ''The roots here are as deep as they are wide.''
The Washington State director of Mr. Kerry's campaign, Ali Wade, said she had seen many former supporters of Dr. Dean decamp to support Mr. Kerry.
''I think what's happened is they've seen the strong victories in Iowa and New Hampshire,'' Ms. Wade said, ''and it makes them look closer at the candidates. A lot of them thought Dean had all the momentum, that Dean could win. But then Dean couldn't win.''
Doug Davies, who lives in Renton, a suburb of Seattle, and is volunteering for Dr. Dean's campaign, posted an upbeat message on Wednesday on the Dean Web log for the state that said:
''This is a wonderful time to be a Washingtonian. This state has never played a significant role in presidential politics before, but this year we will be remembered as the state where Dean people made a stand and the tide was turned! Go get 'em!''
Diane Kenny, who runs a health-care communications company with her husband here, also said she had not been swayed by Mr. Kerry's victories.
''I'm going to the caucus and support Dean all the way,'' Ms. Kenny said. ''I think he feels like I feel. And I'm really mad.''
But Ms. Kenny was preparing herself for a defeat.
''I've still got my McCarthy and my McGovern buttons,'' she said. ''So I'm somebody who's been through this before.''
Her husband, Dennis, who said Dr. Dean enthralled him last summer on his stops here, said that in the last few days he had begun to lean toward Mr. Kerry.
''I'm not born again as a Kerry supporter,'' Mr. Kenny said. ''But he just seems to have momentum and be thoughtful, and it really sounds like the voters in several states have concluded that he's the guy they trust to take the fight to W.''
Governor Locke, who said in an interview he had wavered between Dr. Dean and Mr. Kerry but endorsed Mr. Kerry last week, said winning the Washington caucuses was crucial for Dr. Dean.
''It would be a boost for Governor Dean and enable him to continue moving forward,'' Mr. Locke said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: WASHINGTON
