Viktor Vekselberg, the Russian aluminum and oil tycoon who purchased the Forbes Fabergé collection in one stroke, said on Thursday that Yekaterinburg, the city where the imperial Romanov family were executed in 1918, was one of the places that he most hoped to show the treasures.
''The main piece in the collection is the egg that was given to Nicholas II on his coronation,'' Mr. Vekselberg said by telephone on a business trip to Japan. ''His life ended on a tragic path in Yekaterinburg. We have been sponsoring the construction of the Church on the Blood there. It would be logical to bring it to Yekaterinburg.''
The church was consecrated last year on the site of the house where Czar Nicholas, Empress Alexandra and their five children were killed.
Mr. Vekselberg declined to say exactly how much he had paid for the nine imperial Easter eggs and about 180 other pieces. ''I don't want to make it a commercial question,'' he said. But he acknowledged that it was more than $90 million, the minimum auction estimate.
Mikhail Piotrovsky, the director of the State Hermitage Museum in St. Petersburg, and Yelena Gagarina, the director of the Kremlin Museums, both said their institutions would be the most appropriate homes for the collection. The Kremlin Armory holds 10 Fabergé Easter eggs, the largest collection in the world. Last month, in anticipation of an auction at Sotheby's in New York, Russia's culture ministry said the state could afford to purchase at most one or two pieces from the Forbes collection and hoped a private party would step in.
The Russian government also lifted the taxes and duties that private collectors had to pay to bring artworks into Russia; these taxes had totaled 30 percent of the price. Because of the fees, almost all artworks purchased abroad by rich Russians were left in their foreign homes.
''We would really like to have the collection, although this question, unfortunately, doesn't depend on us,'' Ms. Gagarina of the Kremlin, who is the daughter of Yuri Gagarin, the first man in space, told Ekho Moskvy radio station on Thursday.
But Mr. Vekselberg said the list was still open. ''There are options,'' he said, mentioning the Cathedral of Christ the Savior in Moscow, which was blown up on Stalin's orders in 1931 and has been rebuilt.
Mr. Vekselberg's Siberian-Urals Aluminum company has major holdings near Yekaterinburg. Forbes magazine estimates his fortune at $2.5 billion.
He said the collection would be shown in regions across Russia where his companies operate. He is also the chairman of the Tyumen Oil Company, which merged with British Petroleum last year in a deal that he said helped finance this purchase. Mr. Vekselberg has not been a target in the government's campaign against some oligarchs, which landed another oil tycoon, Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, in jail.
''Right now in Russia, capital is being accumulated at a huge rate and there is a question of how to use private property,'' Mr. Vekselberg said. ''It's no secret that the BP deal occurred and that I as a shareholder got big financial resources from it.''
He denied, however, that the Fabergé purchase was an effort to improve the image of these new oligarchs, who have been accused of cashing out of Russia with deals like Roman Abramovich's purchase of the Chelsea soccer team in England last summer.
Mr. Vekselberg said he had already quietly accumulated a private collection of 19th- and 20th-century art that he keeps mostly in his home in Russia.
Of the Fabergé purchase, he said, ''I considered it my duty to do this,'' and added that he was thinking of acquiring other cultural treasures to be brought back to Russia through the foundation he created to buy the Forbes collection.
''Russia is looked at so negatively by the world,'' he said. ''This influences our business; it has interfered with our business and the development of our country. I would like to believe that this little situation will be a first step in the world looking at us differently.''
Mr. Vekselberg said he planned to have the collection in Russia in time for Easter, which falls on April 11 in both the Russian Orthodox Church and other Christian churches this year.
''That would be right,'' he said. ''They are Easter eggs.''
