Unidentified attackers tried Thursday to kill Iraq's most powerful spiritual leader, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, according to some accounts here, but the American military said it had no confirmation of any such attack.
Mowaffak al-Rubaie, an independent Shiite member of the Iraqi Governing Council who met Ayatollah Sistani on Thursday afternoon, said there was a failed assassination attempt against the ayatollah in the southern city of Najaf a few hours earlier, near the Shrine of Ali, a religious landmark.
''Some people tried to kill Sistani this morning, but he's now in very good health,'' Dr. Rubaie's spokesman, Ali al-Shapoot, said.
In a telephone interview, Dr. Rubaie said, ''What happened, happened this morning.''
Dr. Rubaie, a neurologist, said the ayatollah was uninjured and in a ''safe place.''
''He is robust physically and psychologically,'' he said.
Ayatollah Sistani, spiritual leader of Iraq's 15 million Shiites, is a central figure in the postwar Iraqi political scene, and his influence is considered crucial to help smooth the transition of power to the Iraqi people.
Al Jazeera, the Arab-language television station, reported that gunmen had fired at Ayatollah Sistani as he left his office to go home. He lives off an alleyway several blocks from the golden-domed Shrine of Ali, which is usually thronged with Shiite pilgrims.
The Reuters news agency quoted a member of his security detail as saying gunmen ''opened fire'' on the ayatollah at 10 a.m. as he greeted people in Najaf.
More than 12 hours later, no witnesses had emerged, and The Associated Press quoted a shopowner whose store is in the area as saying nothing had happened.
A person who answered the phone at the ayatollah's office in Najaf on Thursday night called the reports of an attack ''lies'' and hung up.
The Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, a political party with ties to Ayatollah Sistani, said there had been no attack, as did the son of another ayatollah in Najaf.
''The people of Najaf are very worried about Sayed Sistani's safety,'' said Muhammad Hussein al-Hakim, the son of Grand Ayatollah Muhammad Said al-Hakim.
''There's a lot of communication going from the Iraqi people to Sayed Sistani's office to check if that's true,'' he said.
In the 10 months since the fall of Saddam Hussein's government, Ayatollah Sistani has urged his followers to treat the Americans with patience, thereby mollifying the country's largest and potentially most restive group.
In recent months, he has challenged the Americans by insisting that the country hold direct elections for a national assembly rather than chose the members through caucuses, as the Americans have proposed..
American leaders say holding elections before June 30, the deadline they have set for turning over power to Iraqis, is impractical.
Through it all, the ayatollah has kept his distance, refusing to meet with the American leaders but holding out the possibility of a compromise and dealing through intermediaries.
Ayatollah Sistani's death would eliminate not only an important channel to the country's Shiites, but also one of Iraq's main sources of stability.
It was unclear whether the report of an attack on the ayatollah was related to the arrival of a United Nations team that is supposed to offer an advisory opinion on whether direct elections would be possible before June 30.
Ayatollah Sistani has indicated that he would be willing to accept something less than direct elections if the United Nations team convinced him that such elections were impossible.
American officials believe that antigovernment guerrillas are terrified of the prospect of the sovereignty transfer, lest it undercut their support, and the Americans have been preparing for the possibility of greater violence.
Ayatollah Sistani, an enigmatic figure with a long gray beard and a black turban, rarely leaves his home and receives few visitors. As a follower of the ''quietist'' tradition of Shiite Islam, he believes in keeping the worlds of politics and religion separate, setting him apart from many of his colleagues in Iraq and in his native Iran.
Despite that precept, though, he has taken an active role in the negotiations over the transfer of sovereignty.
Last Aug. 30 in Najaf, a car bomb killed another senior cleric, Ayatollah Muhammad Bakr al-Hakim, and more than 80 others. Like Ayatollah Sistani, Ayatollah Hakim was an important moderating influence among Iraqi's Shiite majority. Five days before Ayatollah Hakim was killed, he was wounded in a car bomb attempt.
Ayatollah Hakim's killers have not been found.
The violence continued in Iraq Thursday, as an American soldier was killed and another wounded in a mortar attack on a checkpoint outside the Baghdad airport.
