A celebration for the end of the national Spring Festival turned to tragedy on Thursday night, when 37 people were crushed to death in a stampede of revelers, the authorities said.
The accident, which injured 15 others, occurred in Miyun County, a northern suburb of Beijing, and was an inauspicious beginning to a lunar new year that senior government officials had vowed would focus on improving safety standards nationwide.
Revelers gathered in Mihong Park after dark for the annual Lantern Festival celebrating the final day of the extended lunar new year holiday, the Spring Festival, across China. Someone tripped on an open grate and fell, creating a chain reaction and prompting a frenzied reaction by the overflow crowd, according to the official New China News Agency.
''One person fell down on a grate in the park and caused many people to fall down,'' Wu Kun, a spokesman for the Beijing city government, told The Associated Press on Friday morning. ''There was a stampede. It was a lot of people. I'm not sure how many. These things are packed.''
The New China News Agency said most of the dead had been crushed underfoot or had suffocated under piles of bodies. It did not specify the names or background of the victims, but the event appeared to have been attended mainly by local families, suggesting that some of the dead and injured had been children.
The accident appears to have occurred on or near a concrete and metal bridge over a frozen river in the park. The bridge may have acted as a funnel forcing the crowd forward, local press reports suggested.
The police in China are not well trained in crowd control, and there was no indication that the authorities had sought to limit the number of people packed into the park.
The official news media reported that leaders from President Hu Jintao down had expressed ''deep concern'' about the accident. Beijing's mayor, Wang Qishan, and the city Communist Party chief, Liu Qi, were dispatched to personally supervise the rescue effort.
The high-level attention reflects growing sensitivity to rampant safety problems in China's fast-growing but poorly regulated economy. On the eve of the Spring Festival, the government promised to make 2004 a year for putting new safety standards into effect and reducing the number of workplace deaths.
In the first 11 months of 2003, some 120,000 people died in accidents broadly classified as related to work, including traffic-related deaths, according to government statistics. Road deaths are the leading culprit, but factories, mines and construction sites are notorious for putting production far ahead of safety.
The Lantern Festival marks the final night of the Lunar New Year holiday, which this year began on Jan. 22. It traditionally takes place under a full moon, as was the case on Thursday. Revelers carry red paper lanterns and feast on yuan xiao, a sweet round dumpling made especially for the occasion.
