The leader of Britain's Conservative Party, Michael Howard, called on Prime Minister Tony Blair on Thursday to resign, charging that Mr. Blair had failed to ask fundamental questions about Saddam Hussein's weapons before taking the country into war.
Mr. Howard's assault on Mr. Blair came after the prime minister's admission in Parliament on Wednesday that he was unaware that intelligence suggesting Mr. Hussein could activate chemical or biological weapons in 45 minutes referred to short-range battlefield weapons, not to strategic weapons that could threaten British and American forces in nearby countries.
Though Mr. Howard's challenge is not yet a serious political threat to Mr. Blair, whose Labor Party has a commanding position in Parliament, it suggests that the Tory leadership senses vulnerability in the record of prewar decision-making Mr. Blair laid out this week. As a new inquiry is getting under way to examine how intelligence was used in the period leading up to the war, Mr. Howard's call for Mr. Blair's resignation could also stir new rebellion within the prime minister's party. In any case, it was another indicator that Mr. Blair's political troubles are not yet over.
Mr. Blair's defense secretary, Geoff Hoon, appeared before a parliamentary defense committee Thursday to try to contain the criticism over Mr. Blair's admission. Mr. Hoon said that while he had personally inquired in his department for a clarification of what kind of weapons could be activated in 45 minutes, when he received the answer that it referred to short-range weapons he did not pass it on to Mr. Blair, and Mr. Blair made no inquiry of his own about it.
''It was not a significant issue,'' Mr. Hoon asserted.
Mr. Howard, traveling to Portsmouth on Thursday, told reporters: ''I am accepting what the prime minister told us at face value: he said he never knew, he never bothered to ask this question. If I were prime minister and I had failed to ask that basic question before committing our country to war, I would be seriously considering my position.''
Asked if that meant he was calling on Mr. Blair to resign, he replied, ''Yes.''
