EVERY morning except Sunday, Tye Haight revs up the motor of his custom-built 19 1/2-foot aluminum Fish-Rite and heads off from his dock on Little Connection Slough to deliver the mail to the watery reaches of the Sacramento-San Joaquin delta.
As the lone river route postman for 700 miles of navigable water, Mr. Haight braves duck blinds, hidden sandbars and fog so thick that he can barely make out the bow of his own boat.
He navigates the watery boulevards of Disappointment Slough, Whiskey Slough, Lost Isle and Bullfrog Landing by dead reckoning, battling perilous winds, tides and waves to reach dockside mailboxes that often go under when the river hits high tide.
He delivers the mail to people like himself: modern-day river rats with names like the Marsh Rat and Gator Barb who have forsaken the life of voice mail and Shadow Traffic updates to heed the pull of the labyrinthine waters of the delta, a languid 1,100-square-mile triangle-shaped network of levees, inlets, river channels, sloughs, marshes and fields extending from Suisun Bay to roughly 20 miles north of Sacramento.
''There's no brakes, no stoplights, no traffic signs,'' Mr. Haight, a former motorcycle mechanic, explained the other day about five miles into his 60-mile-a-day route, his mail boat bobbing on duck hunters' wakes. ''To watch the paint dry is a busy day.''
Formed by the state's two mightiest rivers, the Sacramento and the San Joaquin, the delta began life as a vast inland sea (a state to which doomsayers say it will return in a magnitude 8 earthquake). To accommodate steamboats and paddle-wheelers bearing forty-niners searching for gold, humans began taming the unwieldy swamp, engineering hundreds of miles of levees, built by hand by Chinese laborers and later, by clamshell dredger.
As his mail boat approached the Mandeville Island Bridge -- one of 20 or so ancient-looking manned drawbridges that still crisscross these waters -- Mr. Haight picked up his walkie-talkie and boomed into the windblown static: ''Mandeville Island Bridge! You've got mail!''
To intrepid souls like Mr. Haight, 44, who either eke out a living or connive ways to spend much of their time here, the delta represents California's last, fragile frontier. In the winter, in particular, it is a place of exquisite isolation, where the wet T-shirt contests and muscle boats of summer give way to great blue herons stalking tule reed islands and swans flying in formation across pearl-gray skies.
Beyond Herman &amp; Helen's Marina, Mr. Haight's departure point, lies a Netherlands-like landscape in which land and water do a delicate, precarious dance: the delta's islands lie below sea level and are in constant danger of flooding. Today, the delta supplies nearly a third of the water for Southern California, a force so powerful that when demand is high, giant pipes and pumps cause the San Joaquin River to change direction and artificially flow upstream, ''making for quite a wrestle match with the boat,'' Mr. Haight said.
The delta's 55 or so islands -- you can argue whether Mildred is an island now that it's flooded -- are a study in contrasts: for every Windmill Cove and Lost Isle, raucous party scenes fueled by ''liquid courage,'' there are ''cozy little gunkholes''-- as Richard Dillon, a historian, called them -- tulescapes of horizontal stillness where it is possible to flee life's currents and just drift. The boat names say it all: Quiet Shy &amp; Innocent. Splurge. Scot Free. My Prerogative. As Mr. Haight explained as he weaved his way down the delta, ''People don't come here to be unhappy.''
T HOUGH the delta has its share of problems, including toxic cocktails of pesticides and agricultural runoff, it remains a safe harbor for a far-flung assortment of human flotsam and jetsam -- ''some of them 51-50, certifiably nuts'' Mr. Haight said -- from loners fishing for sturgeon and stripers to Barron Hilton, whose Fourth of July fireworks show-off on the Stockton Deep Water Channel attracts 25,000 floating gawkers in some 6,000 boats. Mr. Hilton, the 76-year-old chairman of the Hilton Hotels Corporation, started frequenting the delta in 1958 with Clark Gable and other duck-hunting cronies. He now owns half of Venice Island, home of the venerable Venice Island Duck Club, to which he flies during fall hunting season on his private jet.
The delta is a bastion of ragged individualism. ''If you come up here long enough, you see everything,'' said John Vasco, a k a the Marsh Rat, who forsook life as a dentist to find a new identity in a transplanted railroad shack hanging over a levee on a marsh off Van Sickle Island. ''You can feel the pulse of the planet, the living ferment. It's a lost world.''
He acquired the name Marsh Rat after the swampy splendor he calls his backyard. His weekend boat, a flying-bridge Grand Banks trawler named Solo Mio, is 46 feet, ''but if you're the tax man, it's 42 feet,'' he said. His friend Skiboat Jan (a k a Jan Olivier), a former truck driver, ran a delta beauty salon called the Hair Shack for 14 years.
''In the delta, you know someone 10 or 15 years, and you have no idea what their last name is or what they do for a living,'' said Hal Schell, the Boswell of the delta. ''It's just not what you ask.'' This is why Ms. Olivier, a crack boat handler whose legal name was unrecognizable to her customers, had business cards for the Hair Shack that identified her as Skiboat Jan.
Among the crank-toilet set, Mr. Schell is famous for his monthly Dawdling on the Delta column in The Bay &amp; Delta Yachtsman, a boating monthly. He is also notorious for his habit of awakening fellow boaters by blasting reveille on his bugle at precisely 8 a.m. ''Of course, everyone's moaning and groaning,'' said Gator Barb Burns, a sanitary engineer and Skiboat Jan's sister. ''But if he didn't blow it, everyone would wonder what's going on.''
Mr. Schell has not visited San Francisco or Oakland, an hour away, in 10 years. Like Erle Stanley Gardner, who wrote the Perry Mason mysteries in the delta, Mr. Schell is a regular at Giusti's, a boisterous roadhouse along Snodgrass Slough, where, he observed, on Saturday nights ''the floor show is endless.''
''Boats cruise by as though this were Main Street in 'American Graffiti,' '' he explained.
Mr. Schell is intimate with delta rituals, from the Frozen Bun Run, an annual New Year's Day water-ski contest on Bethel Island (no wet suits allowed), to the more arcane pastime of drawing a circle on the barroom floor, putting a bunch of crawdads in the middle and betting which one will skittle out first.
The intertwining channels, with four-way intersections and backstreet canals, can all seem like an ''asphalt slough,'' as Mr. Schell calls streets back on the mainland, except for the inebriated bass boaters and ghostly half-sunken wrecks. Like a birder spying a dowitcher, he can instantly scope out a live-aboard, or full-time houseboater (look for the potted plants). It's easy to spot greenhorns: they're the ones in fancy yachts stranded at low tide.
As the lone lifeline plying the waters, Mr. Haight has put out fires at remote yacht clubs and removed a corpse from an abandoned boat. He knows who pays their bills and who is in trouble with the law. He delivers mail to migrant workers harvesting potatoes and asparagus, housebound widows, some 150 marinas and ''uppermost crust'' private yacht clubs like the St. Francis, its classical 1905 lighthouse transported from San Francisco Bay. Like many river rats, his affinity for the region developed slowly, first on weekends, as a respite from claustrophobic, fumy garages, where he worked as a motorcycle mechanic, and then, from days spent two stories underground in a subterranean power plant at the University of California, Berkeley, where, as an engineer, he sat in a windowless control room, ''surrounded by concrete and hundreds of gauges and switches 12 hours at a time,'' he said, ''waiting for an emergency.''
A FTER he had open-heart surgery, he decided the bunker life was not for him (he now commutes from Stockton, where he lives with his second wife, Mitchi, a software architect with whom he was instantly smitten when she stepped aboard a houseboat he was skippering). ''Maybe this place has positive ions,'' he mused, his fingers poking through wool gloves as he battled the wind.
Now his route weaves around clumps of water hyacinth, which can strangle an engine, each mailbox ''a full dock contact sport,'' as he put it. Still, there is nothing quite like the mailbox at Conner's Cork, Buffalo Bill Conner's hallucinatory half-sunken Fiji on a sandbar. ''I ran aground the first time I saw it,'' Mr. Haight said.
For the last 24 years, Mr. Conner, a 72-year-old ex-Marine, ukulele player and grandfather of five, has lived by himself on the tropical paradise he created from a 160-by-60-foot barge permanently parked on a sandbar. With its profusion of Hawaiian taro plants, ferns and a thatched bamboo roof from which hang corks, nets, gourds and other exotica, it is reality television without the TV.
''You got to have a theme,'' said Mr. Conner, a Rush Limbaugh fan whose decorative flourishes, like the poster of the first President George Bush on the water tower, have a distinctly conservative bent. He describes his style as ''simple, clean, but crude.''
No man is an island -- except Mr. Conner. He lives aboard two houseboats docked at the barge, one a spa with an exercise bike, shower, punching bag, cast-iron propane stove and a picture window made from a wedge of plexiglass ''that kind of floated down the river,'' he said. The master bedroom has a trapdoor in the vinyl floor beside the bed, which opens to reveal an indoor fishing hole. ''Some men buy boats and lose their wives and children to go fishing,'' Mr. Conner said cheerfully. ''And here I sit with a hole near my bed.''
Ever Saturday, Mr. Conner, a former resort owner, leaves his sandbar to visit his girlfriend, who lives about two hours away, piloting his motorized rowboat over to a nearby marina where he keeps his 1989 Oldsmobile.
''I have it good,'' Mr. Conner said. ''I have more money than I can spend, and more time than I can use. I have air and water. The two basic staples of life.''
To Bill Jennings, director of Deltakeeper, an environmental group in Stockton, river rats like Mr. Conner are themselves an endangered species, as suburban sprawl marches inexorably to the delta's edges, threatening delta towns like Locke, a historic rural community settled by Chinese. ''There is a delta culture, the last remnant of individualism in California, on which civilization's extended umbrella is closing in,'' Mr. Jennings said.
The change is perhaps most starkly symbolized by Discovery Bay, an upscale condoland with private docks and boat slips whose promotional slogan is: ''Live where you play -- call our toll-free number.''
Not everybody can handle the chicken-wire paradise of a true river rat, as Mr. Conner, the Castaway of the California Delta, will tell you. ''A woman comes in and says 'Oh, how nice,' '' he said. ''Then all of a sudden she's living in a mobile home out on Highway 99. There are very few women who can live this life day in and day out, and even men can't do it. You have to know who you are.''
HAVENS
