They may be old friends, but duck hunting together on a trip to Louisiana last month has brought Vice President Dick Cheney and Justice Antonin Scalia more than happy memories of a few days in the wild, bagging mallards and teal.
With Mr. Cheney as a defendant in a Supreme Court case involving his energy task force, legal ethics experts and Democrats in Congress say the trip, which was first reported by The Los Angeles Times, was inappropriate and should lead Justice Scalia to recuse himself from the case. A lawyer for one plaintiff, the Sierra Club, said he was considering a formal request to the court, asking that Justice Scalia recuse himself.
No evidence has emerged to suggest that Mr. Cheney and Justice Scalia discussed the case during their three days together, and no one has questioned their right to maintain a friendship. But critics have suggested that the timing of the trip, coming just three weeks after the court agreed to hear Mr. Cheney's appeal of an order requiring him to disclose members of an energy task force he led, created at least the appearance of a conflict of interest, prompting the calls for Justice Scalia to step aside.
''Frankly, I'm puzzled by it,'' said Senator Patrick J. Leahy, the Vermont Democrat who is the ranking member of the Judiciary Committee, in an interview on Thursday. ''I know Justice Scalia well; he's a very intelligent person. He has to know that with similar tactics, in any state in the country, a State Supreme Court justice would have to recuse himself. It's Law School 101.''
Senator Orrin G. Hatch, Republican of Utah and the chairman of the judiciary committee, declined to respond directly to the question of an appearance of a conflict. But he said in a statement that he was confident that Justice Scalia would ''do the proper thing.''
Mr. Cheney's office did not respond to questions sent by e-mail.
A spokeswoman for the Supreme Court said Justice Scalia was out of town and could not be reached for comment. However, in response to a question from The Los Angeles Times for an article on Jan. 17, Justice Scalia said, ''I do not think my impartiality could reasonably be questioned.'' He added, ''Social contacts with high-level executive officials (including cabinet officers) have never been thought improper for judges who may have before them cases in which those people are involved in their official capacity, as opposed to their personal capacity.''
On Jan. 5, Mr. Cheney and Justice Scalia flew to Southern Louisiana to spend several days at a duck-hunting camp owned by Wallace Carline, a friend of both men and a Democrat, said the local sheriff, David A. Naquin of St. Mary Parish. Sheriff Naquin, who was involved in planning Mr. Cheney's visit, said the vice president, Justice Scalia and other friends of Mr. Carline hunted that afternoon and the next morning before rain cut their activities short.
After accounts of the trip circulated, Senator Leahy and another Democratic senator, Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, wrote to Chief Justice William H. Rehnquist, questioning the appropriateness of Mr. Cheney's spending ''extended time'' in a social setting with Justice Scalia after the court agreed to hear an important case that involved the vice president as a defendant.
The letter suggested that ''reasonable people will question whether that judge can be a fair and impartial adjudicator'' of the case and asked what procedures were in place for justices to recuse themselves or, failing that, whether a justice could be removed if ethical issues arose.
Chief Justice Rehnquist answered several days later, saying ethical situations were covered by federal laws that govern judicial conduct. He said that the Supreme Court had no formal procedure for reviewing a decision by a justice in an individual case and that as long-standing court policy, individual justices decided for themselves whether it was proper to hear a case.
Recusals are not uncommon. Steven Lubet, a law professor at Northwestern University who specializes in ethics, said 14 cases were decided over the last four full terms by fewer than the full complement of nine justices. Justice Scalia has stepped aside from a case this term involving an appeals court decision that the words ''under God'' in the Pledge of Allegiance are unconstitutional. Justice Scalia expressed a view about the decision before it was appealed.
David Bookbinder, the Washington legal director for the Sierra Club, said the trip ''raises to another level'' questions of whether Justice Scalia could fairly decide a case involving the vice president. Mr. Bookbinder said that the club would decide soon whether to ask Justice Scalia to recuse himself.
Correction:  February 12, 2004, Thursday  An article on Friday about criticism of a hunting trip taken by Justice Antonin Scalia with Vice President Dick Cheney misidentified the newspaper that first reported the trip. It was The Daily Review in Morgan City, La., not The Los Angeles Times.
