In presenting ambitious concerts and music festivals, conservatories have an enormous advantage over professional orchestras and arts institutions: free labor. A conservatory orchestra is filled with excellent and hard-working young musicians who don't have to be paid. Overtime is never an issue. Need an extra rehearsal? No problem.
I kept thinking about this on Friday night when the Juilliard School presented the final program in its 20th annual Focus Festival, this year titled ''All About Ives.'' Joel Sachs, the conductor and longtime Juilliard faculty member who directed the festival, told the full house at the Juilliard Theater that this weeklong festival of orchestra concerts, chamber music, recitals and roundtable discussions was the most extensive commemoration of the 50th anniversary of Ives's death in 1954 anywhere in the world. And even allowing for some proud overstatement, he may have been right.
Last Friday night's program offered the Juilliard Orchestra conducted by Anne Manson in a triumphant guest appearance and the Juilliard Choral Union conducted by Judith Clurman. If the audience for the substantive and free concert benefited from the unpaid efforts of the musicians and choristers, the students benefited, too, from immersing themselves so thoroughly in music that seems more inventive and radical each time we hear it.
The program opened with a rare performance by the Choral Union of ''Psalm 90,'' a surprisingly lucid and spare-textured work for Ives, who so relished composing in multiple layers of music. For all his thorniness, Ives was a deeply devout New Englander, something that came through in this tender setting of the psalm, though at times there are elusive and unsettling elements in the wayward choral lines and the curious organ harmonies.
''The Unanswered Question,'' for strings, solo trumpet and a choir of woodwinds, came next in a performance that dutifully followed Ives's request that the strings play offstage. Yet Ives's staging concept never works as he must have intended. The solo trumpet and winds are meant to pose intrusive, dissonant questions on to a background of hushed, sustained, cosmic and calmly tonal harmonies from the strings. But the solo lines don't sound intrusive if the background strings are almost inaudible, as they were here.
The ''Emerson Overture,'' a de facto piano concerto that received its New York premiere, is an earlier version of what became the ''Emerson'' movement of Ives's ''Concord'' Piano Sonata. This work was pieced together from sketches by David Porter, so it's hard to know whether what we were hearing was what Ives conceived. Still, as realized, the work is more than 20 minutes of turbulent, stream-of-consciousness Ives, and the soloist, Lang-Ning Liu, rightly received a rousing ovation for her incisive, fearless and vividly colored account of the daunting piano part.
It was a wonderful idea to precede a performance of Ives's Symphony No. 4 with a performance by the chorus of five hymns that Ives incorporated into this path-breaking symphony. The hymns are not quoted from a sense of nostalgia or sentimentality. Rather it's as if the hymns, so beloved by Ives, are embedded, to use a much-current term, in the orchestral battle. And a battle it is, especially in the astounding second movement, a comic pileup of marches, hymns, revival meetings, contrapuntal chaos and what not that turns so wild the humor seems terrifying.
Ms. Manson, a slender and modest presence on the podium, gave a commanding account of this challenging score. Her cues were precise; her focus was on drawing music from the players, not attention to herself. With credits like the Los Angeles Philharmonic and the Vienna Philharmonic on her résumé, why did it take a conservatory to bring about her New York debut? In any event, she made a strong first impression on this Ives fan. And as a professional guest, surely she was paid.
MUSIC REVIEW
