PepsiCo said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings rose 30 percent, largely because of strong sales of noncarbonated beverages like Gatorade and salty snacks at Frito-Lay.
Consumers' continued concerns about nutrition and obesity contributed to sales of product lines marketed to the health-conscious. Those products helped PepsiCo post solid growth in each of its major business units.
In its beverage division, bottled water, Gatorade and diet soft drinks posted double-digit growth. Although traditional full-fat salty snacks continued to lead sales at Frito-Lay, the healthy snack lines, which include organic and natural potato chips, grew more than 20 percent.
PepsiCo's fourth-quarter results, analysts said, provided additional confirmation that troubles at Frito-Lay had been resolved.
Frito-Lay, which stumbled in 2002, recorded 3 percent growth in volume and a 6 percent increase in revenue. But the results at Quaker Foods North America, which makes up about 20 percent of PepsiCo's business, were disappointing, prompting speculation that the company would eventually sell the business. The unit recorded losses in volume and revenue for the quarter and posted no growth for the year.
Quaker is ''in a food fight in the breakfast day part, which means that maybe you'll get some margin but you're not going to get a lot of growth,'' said Marc Greenberg, a beverage and tobacco analyst at Deutsche Bank. ''Ultimately, is that a business that you want to invest behind? Not compared to Frito-Lay.''
PepsiCo executives said that although the fourth quarter was tough for Quaker Foods, the company planned to introduce more products and compete more aggressively with private-label brands in 2004.
In the fourth quarter, PepsiCo's net income rose to $897 million, or 51 cents a share, from $689 million, or 39 cents a share, in the quarter a year earlier.
The results, which included a deduction of 6 cents a share for employee stock-option expenses and a $147 million revamping charge, met analysts' expectations, according to Thomson First Call.
Total revenue rose 9.4 percent, to $8.07 billion. For the year, earnings per share rose 21 percent, to $2.01; revenue rose 7.4 percent, the company said.
Steven S. Reinemund, PepsiCo's chairman and chief executive, called 2003 one of the best years the company ever had, and said the company stood by projections it made in December of earning $2.24 to $2.28 a share in 2004.
''Five weeks of results in the marketplace makes you a lot more confident,'' Mr. Reinemund said yesterday. ''The first five weeks substantiate the trust that we had in December when we talked about the business.''
Mr. Reinemund said that PepsiCo would give more attention this year to its core products like Classic Lay's potato chips, which will have new packaging and advertising.
Pepsi, the company's trademark soft drink, will also receive significant advertising support. PepsiCo also plans to introduce products across most of its snack and beverage lines, including soy chips and low-fat, reduced-calorie and low-carb products for health-conscious consumers.
In North America, one of the brightest spots of the fourth quarter was the beverage business. The unit recorded a 5 percent increase in total volume growth and an 11 percent increase in revenue. Carbonated soft drinks, which have recorded very little growth throughout the industry, posted a 3 percent volume increase in the quarter.
In PepsiCo's international business, which includes snacks and beverages, net revenue grew 15 percent, to $2.78 billion.
Operating profit rose 18 percent, the company said. Snack volume was up 6 percent. Beverage sales rose 9 percent, with growth in nearly all of the company's major markets.
