HE had only a few weeks to go in Iraq when he jumped into the Tigris River outside of Baghdad, dove in after his company sergeant the way he would have once went for a fumble. He was 20 years old and not coming home. Not long before Christmas, Todd Bates drowned.
He played football for Bellaire High School in southeastern Ohio, in a blue-collar town shriveled in recent years by devastating job cuts in the steel mills and coal mines. Thousands moved away, most up to Columbus, according to the school's football coach, John Magistro.
Todd Bates would have loved to follow them, the coach said, given anything for an invitation to play football at Ohio State, to have been a classmate of the state legend, Maurice Clarett, out of Youngstown, an hour and a half away.
''Todd was not a great football player, but he was a kid who truly loved the game,'' Magistro said yesterday in a telephone interview from the school weight room. ''He played guard on the offensive line, defensive tackle, was voted a captain by his teammates as a senior.
''Todd didn't have much growing up. His mother wasn't around. His grandmother raised him. A big boy, 240-pounder, one of those kids who gets so much mileage out of football, out of the friendships.''
He finished high school and joined the Ohio Army National Guard. All around town, people would see him training with 50-pound weights on his back, slimming down to a muscular 190 pounds. Then he was gone, off to Iraq with the 135th Military Police Company, his choice, and one from which there was no moralizing sports commissioner to save him from making.
In the real world, that's what it means to be 18, or 20, the age at which Todd Bates died trying to fish another man out of a foreign river and the age at which Maurice Clarett has decided he is ready to carry the football into the massive hulks in those National Football League trenches.
Oh, no, says the N.F.L. That's too young, too risky, too much of an infringement on the country's reigning sports superpower. Commissioner Paul Tagliabue argues that Clarett, who would probably prefer Baghdad to more college classrooms, should stay in school. Tagliabue says Clarett will need more than a consent slip from a United States district court judge to gain entry into the upcoming N.F.L. draft. Tagliabue's army of lawyers will appeal a potentially historic decision that has gone against the league.
Pardon the metaphorical assault, but on the subject of the N.F.L. and its self-serving draft eligibility rules, even the judge of the United States District Court in Manhattan, in her ruling announced yesterday in New York, couldn't help herself.
''While ordinarily the best offense is a good defense, none of these defenses hold the line,'' wrote Judge Shira A. Scheindlin, adding later, ''because the N.F.L. cannot prevail in any of these defenses, the rule must be sacked.''
It was the right call, be it on anti-trust law or the more high-minded proposition that those who are old enough and tough enough to patrol the streets of Baghdad or Kabul are probably ready to catch a ball over the middle and take a hit from Ty Law. If not, then it's time for the N.F.L. to stop feeding half of America during Super Bowl week and start investing in a developmental vehicle that might actually facilitate the only meaningful reformation of major college sports.
Who really believes that the N.F.L. ever cared about players getting a college education? Who ever thought that this has been about anything other than preserving a free minor league system with all the promotional perks, not to mention enough annual national television revenue to rebuild half a dozen cities in Iraq?
Back in Bellaire, a 20-year veteran of the coaching wars could plainly see that the rules are outdated, unfair and all about a system that best serves the administrators, not the playmakers.
''Remember, this is the state where everyone's going crazy about LeBron James,'' said Magistro, who has sent two players, Dallas receiver Joey Galloway and Cleveland linebacker Ben Taylor, to the N.F.L. ''I don't know how you can allow kids to go in sports like basketball and hockey but not in football. I don't agree with that. I think maybe football does need to develop a farm system.''
If this sounded more like the pragmatism of a steelworker than the idealism of an educator, maybe it is because Magistro has watched the local jobs disappear, the population sink from more than 10,000 to fewer than 5,000 and too many high school graduates struggle to find their place in the community. Off the top of his head, he could think of six of his former students who have been serving in Iraq, a reflection of small town values and a depressed economy.
Unlike the ivory tower inhabited by Tagliabue and his battalion of lawyers, it's the real world, 101. ''It's a town that's suffered, that gets something out of us doing well, like when we made the state final four last fall,'' Magistro said. ''It's a nice place to live, if you have a job.''
No one was surprised when they heard how much Todd Bates had tried to do his, going into the Tigris to rescue Sgt. Aaron Reese of Reynoldsburg, Ohio, on Dec. 10. Neither man survived. In a year-long tour, they were the only men lost from the unit, the last of whose members returned to Ohio last Saturday morning, in time for the Super Bowl, our annual Armageddon for which a real war hero would have been too young to qualify as a dependable team man.
Sports of The Times  Correction:  February 7, 2004, Saturday  Because of a production error, most of a sentence was omitted in some copies yesterday from the last paragraph of a Sports of The Times column on the main sports page. The column supported a federal judge's decision that the National Football League's rule restricting younger players from entering the draft was in violation of antitrust laws. The affected passage, with the omission shown by brackets, should have read: ''[Pardon the metaphorical assault, but on the subject of the N.F.L. and its self-serving draft eligibility rules, even the judge of the United States District Court in Manhattan, in her ruling announced yesterday] in New York, couldn't help herself.''
