The indoor track circuit, once a Madison Square Garden staple for five successive winter weekends, makes its only local stop of the year tonight with the 97th annual Verizon Millrose Games, America's most prestigious indoor meet.
Marion Jones, returning to competition after the birth of a son last June, will run in the women's 60-meter dash, the start of her campaign for four or five Olympic medals this summer (she won five, including three gold, in 2000). Stacy Dragila, with a new coach and new warm-weather training, will try to win the women's pole vault for the fifth straight year. David Krummenacker, who has become world class in the men's 800 and 1,500 meters, seeks his third straight triumph in the Millrose 800.
The men's shot-put, which had been exiled to college gymnasiums to preserve the Garden floor, returns with a strong four-man field led by Adam Nelson. The elite 400-meter races, almost too high speed for the 11-laps-to-the-mile track, are gone, replaced by two discarded favorites: the Mel Sheppard 600 yards for men and the 500 yards for women.
There is a strong 60-meter hurdles for women starring Gail Devers, a strong 60-meter hurdles for men starring Allen Johnson and Larry Wade and a not-so-strong Wanamaker Mile lacking international stars.
One change that may stun old ticket buyers is the starting time of the Wanamaker Mile, the traditional feature race. For years, post time was 10 p.m., originally so Ted Husing could broadcast the race live on his 10 o'clock sports show on CBS Radio. This year, the Wanamaker Mile is scheduled for 8:57 p.m.
After the mile, while one track curve is being removed, four athletes will be inducted into the Millrose Hall of Fame: the pole vaulter Billy Olson, the 800-meter runner Johnny Gray, the high jumper Joni Huntley and the late middle-distance runner Joie Ray. Then, on the straightaway, will come the last 12 races: 8 sprints and 4 hurdles.
The next-to-last race will be the men's 60 meters, with John Capel, Coby Miller and Shawn Crawford, but without Maurice Greene. The last race, scheduled for 10:02 p.m., is the women's 60, with Jones, Torri Edwards and Allyson Felix.
The meet-ending sprints will include races for the fastest high school boys and girls in New York City and the fastest 8- and 9-year-olds in New York.
In some cases, the youth movement extends to the runners. Take Hazel Clark, 26, the defending champion in the women's 800 meters. Since 2000, when she won the United States Olympic trials and finished seventh in the Sydney Olympics, a stress fracture of the right foot has detoured her. Last year, when her brother and coach, J. J. Clark, was named head coach at Tennessee, he moved to Nashville and she stayed behind in Gainesville, Fla.
''I was basically on my own,'' she said at a news conference yesterday. ''It was very difficult doing those miles by myself. So now I've moved to Tennessee and I'm back now.''
If history counts, Clark should win the 800 in a breeze. Her family has won it 9 times in the last 19 years: 7 times by her sister, Joetta, now 41 and retired; in 2001 by J. J.'s wife, Jearl Miles-Clark, 37, who will run in the 500 yards tonight, and last year by Hazel. As Hazel Clark said, ''I grew up with this race.''
TRACK AND FIELD
