The enigma that is Maurice Clarett landed in New York yesterday to talk about a court victory that could clear his way to the N.F.L., but his life seemed to have little more direction than it had when his saga began.
Clarett would not say if he was headed for the National Football League, if the ruling is upheld, or if he would resume playing at Ohio State. He wavered between declaring himself ready, mentally and physically, at age 20, for a pro career and admitting he did not know whether college underclassmen could make the jump successfully.
''I really couldn't say,'' Clarett said. ''Somebody has to give it a try.''
The man in the middle of the N.F.L.'s tempest smiled and laughed through his news conference at the Regency Hotel on the Upper East Side. A small twist to the location is that the Regency is owned by Loews Hotels, a company co-chaired by the Giants co-owner Robert Tisch.
But the Clarett story is full of twists.
Clarett is a gifted tailback who helped lift Ohio State to a national championship in 2002, but he has also been a magnet for turmoil. He spent 2003 out of football after being suspended from the team for National Collegiate Athletic Association rules violations. He knows there are doubts about his durability and his maturity that N.F.L. general managers have yet to resolve.
''I'll say to them, if you don't want me, don't pick me,'' Clarett said. ''It's as simple as that. Any coach or G.M. who has faith in Maurice Clarett, pick me. Pick me wherever you want. It really doesn't matter. Pick me Mr. Irrelevant. Pick me last in the draft.
''But if you have the slightest doubt and you want to shy away from me for whatever reason, that's cool. But I think if I sit down with any G.M. and they get to know my personality and talk about all this Mickey Mouse stuff that went on in the last year and a half, I think I'll leave them impressed.''
Such matters have seldom been simple with Clarett, who seems to attract controversy even during the best of times.
He grew up in Youngstown, Ohio, reared by his mother, Michelle, and estranged from his father, Myke, after his parents divorced. Into that void stepped Bobby Dellimuti, the owner of a banquet hall in Warren, Ohio. He hired Clarett and his brother Marcus to work at the hall.
Clarett played at Harding High School in Warren, the stardom tag sticking to him at an early age. His Ohio State career began with a flourish when he was named the first freshman running back since 1943 to start the season opener. But he also publicly criticized his teammates for not practicing hard enough.
On the field, he was magnificent when he wasn't injured. Although he missed several games with knee and shoulder injuries, he helped lead the Buckeyes to a 14-0 record and a Fiesta Bowl victory over Miami to claim the national title.
But in the final seconds of that game, after Clarett had scored the winning touchdown in overtime, he sat by himself on the bench as his teammates celebrated, then showered and dressed before many of them had even left the field.
''This doesn't mean anything to me,'' he told reporters after the game. ''I just want to go home.''
Even before the game, Clarett said that he was upset with Ohio State officials because they would not pay for him to fly home from Arizona for a friend's funeral. Athletic Director Andy Geiger said Clarett had not filled out the proper paperwork. Clarett denied that and told The Associated Press, ''I won't sit here and let them lie about that.''
But the real trouble began after The New York Times reported last July that an Ohio State teaching assistant accused Clarett of getting preferential treatment in an African-American and African studies class. The university launched an investigation and officials said they found no evidence of academic misconduct on the part of athletes.
Then, in late July, Clarett ran afoul of the N.C.A.A. Clarett borrowed a car for a test drive overnight from a Columbus, Ohio, Chevrolet dealership. Clarett later told the police that clothing, compact discs, cash and stereo equipment, worth about $10,000, were stolen from it.
When the N.C.A.A. began to investigate, Clarett said he exaggerated the value of his belongings, but Ohio State announced in September that he would be suspended for the 2003 season for violating an extra-benefits rule.
In the past few days, Ohio State also acknowledged it was investigating claims that Clarett's benefactor, Dellimuti, was involved in gambling while talking to Clarett on a daily basis during the 2002 season.
Through the season of his suspension, Clarett stayed largely quiet aside from filing his lawsuit. He has followed the career of his friend, the Cleveland Cavaliers' phenom LeBron James. Clarett said yesterday that he was pained over missing a season of a sport he loves, but he also said the year off had healed his various injuries and made him stronger not just physically but emotionally.
''Nothing you can say to me can hurt me anymore,'' Clarett said. ''There were so many opportunities where I could have slammed Ohio State, slammed my teammates, everything. I'm just a stronger person. I know my goals now. I know what I'm trying to get in life. I will just keep my mouth shut and do my job.''
When he said that yesterday, one of his lawyers, Alan C. Milstein, turned to him and said, ''Are you sure?''
Clarett laughed. He said he was sure about that, if little else.
FOOTBALL
