THE early signs were not good. On the car radio as two of my daughters and I were driving up Interstate 87 in upstate New York for three days of skiing, they were interviewing someone about the New Hampshire primary, a guy who lived at a bend in the road in the White Mountains, which happens to be about roughly the same latitude and altitude as our place in the Adirondacks.
Our mountain cabin. Our unwinterized mountain cabin. Our grail. Our Waterloo.
The New Hampshire man speculated that when the voting took place a few days later, the temperatures would certainly be below zero. ''You can feel the deep cold coming,'' he said. I looked over in the front passenger seat at Meagan, one of my 15-year-old twins, who had been sleeping. Her eyes opened, rolled once for profound effect and then closed. I gripped the wheel, bumped the heater up and goosed the cruise control up a few m.p.h's for good measure.
Meagan and her twin, Erin, are hardy souls. Sure, they make those ''eeuww'' teenage noises when they spot a particularly vivid piece of road kill. But for the first six years of their lives they lived with me and me only, which suggests that they can live through anything. They turned out well, in spite of me, and this weekend represented the renewal of an obscure 80's power trio. I have since become well married, and seven years ago the twins acquired a baby sister, but the old math still has its own power.
This was a caper partly of the twins' making. In our house, when someone's grades earn them honors -- first honors, none of that second honors stuff -- they can do anything they want, as long as it does not involve an airplane. The girls have always had a fondness for skiing, which I share -- but I also have a warm feeling about fiscal solvency. (Skiing, as near as I can tell, is now pretty much meant for people who use it as a way to torch large amounts of cash when tennis is out of season.)
''Sure,'' I said. ''We can go skiing. And I know just the place we can stay.''
Our cabin is near both West and Gore Mountains, but it does not have the kind of construction or insulation that allows for winter habitation. On New Year's Eve one year, we tried to sneak in an off-season night. We shoveled our way in through a three-foot snowbank on our deck and settled in for Trivial Pursuit and sparkling grape juice. After we banked the fire and bedded down for the night, all of the snow on the tin roof slid down to the deck, trapping us inside behind another three feet of snow. We crawled out a window and shoveled our way in a second time.
The low that night was 28 degrees.
On this trip, we skied half a day at nearby West Mountain and then plowed our S.U.V. as close to the cabin as we could get. I set about flipping on long-dormant circuit breakers and making a fire while the girls unloaded the car with quickly freezing hands. The fire lighted, our gear in a pile, we settled in. Meagan, who is prone to chills, immediately buried herself under a mountain of blankets. Erin read, albeit in a parka and hat. A small, vaguely decorative wood-burning stove struggled to get on top of the cold.
I saw my breath condense in the air as I told the girls that it was only a matter of time before the wood stove declared dominion over the one room we had closed off. They didn't seem impressed when I pointed to the ancient, lukewarm baseboard heaters. I indicated the blanket we had hung over the cracked main window and reminded them of just how cold they would be had I not come up with that particular innovation.
As I was making that speech, the radio played an obscurity from an obscurity: ''10 Degrees and Getting Colder'' by Gordon Lightfoot. Ten degrees would have been swell just about then. It was actually minus 12. And getting colder.
And just in case team morale was not low enough, there was the other feature of our habitat to deal with. With the water shut off for the winter, there was no working toilet. Instead we had ''hats,'' inverted plastic sombreros that cover the toilet. The hats -- each of us had one with our name on it -- were given to us by my mother-in-law, who happens to be a registered nurse and familiar with such odd devices. The rule for the weekend was that everyone had to deal with his or her own hat. I tried not to look when the girls made the dash to the door.
FRANK, our guardian angel and neighborhood handyman, had chiseled a hole for us to slip through in the icy bank at the entrance, but we could not enlarge the opening once we were there. ''The Hat Dance,'' as it came to be called, was complicated by the fact that there was only a one-foot crack to squeeze through at the door, and then you had to step sideways onto a slippery hump of ice. It was tough getting firewood in and risky exiting with hat in hand.
After a bachelor dinner -- who says that Fritos and a can of chili is not a proper meal? -- we played some Scrabble and then the girls were tucked in. The fire was holding its own, but at some point in the night, it would achieve its entropic destiny. I set an alarm, but wondered if I would really crawl from beneath my blankets to stoke the fire.
I did wake up, thankfully. There is a fine line between a funny story to tell the folks back home and a 300-word item in the local paper. ''Father, daughters succumb to recent cold snap.'' The fire made it through the night, as did we. According to Weather.com, it reached minus 22 in the middle of the night in Corinth, the town several hundred feet below us.
For the next two days, we worked to stay warm enough to sleep at night and ski by day. We donned the equivalent of space suits on the ski hill, replete with boot and hand warmers, and concluded back at the cabin where we pretended that bulky sweaters and long johns were a form of pajamas.
I compensated for the bleak conditions by allowing Meagan to mainline whipped cream into her mouth straight out of the can and letting Erin eat Oreos for breakfast. The girls knew that they had leverage for allowing me to sucker them into my little winter adventure.
When we pulled into the driveway of our house, they shouted out the litany of comforts that awaited them. There were smiles of relief, but none of regret. We had made it.
RITUALS
