With rakes and shovels or just their hands, crews worked Thursday to clear sticky lumps of fuel oil from miles of Jersey Shore beaches before an approaching storm washed it back out to sea.
The oily globules, ranging in size from about a foot across to dime-size, began washing up on the beaches on Tuesday, with the worst concentrations in Ocean Grove, Bradley Beach, Avon-by-the-Sea and Belmar. There were reports from environmentalists that the oil, identified as No. 6 fuel oil, surfaced on beaches as far north as Sandy Hook in northern Monmouth County and as far south as Mantoloking and Brick Township in Ocean County.
Neither the Coast Guard nor the State Department of Environmental Protection could say yesterday where the oil had come from or how much of it had been deposited on the beaches. Elaine Makatura, a spokeswoman for the state environmental agency, said the oil could have been part of a cargo or fuel that leaked from a ship.
About 40 cubic yards of oil had been collected by late Thursday and put into hundreds of black plastic bags that lined the five- to six-mile stretch of beach along the four communities most heavily affected, Ms. Makatura said. By evening, the cleanup crews were picking small globules out of the sand by hand.
Lights were set up on the beach Thursday night to allow the crews to work through the night or until the approaching storm forced them to quit. The fear was that the storm would wash the oil back out to sea and contaminate the water or that the oil would be washed back up onto the beach over an even wider area, said Cindy Zipf, director of Clean Ocean Action, an environmental group based at Sandy Hook.
''This was not the Exxon Valdez and it was not as bad as many of the spills happening in the rest of the world, but for the area affected, this is serious,'' Ms. Zipf said. ''This heavily impacted a large area of the beach and we do not know yet whether some went into the Shark River.''
Ms. Zipf and other environmentalists were critical of the cleanup effort, saying the Coast Guard, state environmental agency and federal Environmental Protection Agency got a late start Wednesday, when only a handful of crew members began working on the beaches.
Petty Officer John Edwards of the Coast Guard countered that there had been no delay, but that the situation had undergone a standard assessment on Wednesday to determine how many cleanup crew members were needed.
Others from the community questioned why the rescue of birds fouled by the oil was not better coordinated. Ms. Makatura said that by late Thursday, when it was thought that all harmed birds had been found, 50 birds had been found dead, although some of those may have died of other causes, and 35 others had been taken in to have oil removed. Most were sea gulls and cormorants.
Birds found on the beach that needed to be cleaned were taken to bird rehabilitators in Wilmington, Del., with the assistance of local animal rescue groups.
A Belmar woman, who asked to be identified only as Joan, said on Wednesday that she picked up a razorbill, a relatively rare bird that does not come ashore unless it is sick or injured, that was covered with oil. It took her 24 hours of telephone calls and inquiries before she could find out where to take the bird so it would be delivered to rehabilitators.
''I know the environmental needs and people have to be taken care of first,'' she said, ''but I would hope that if something were to come out of this, it would be that the animal rescue efforts were better coordinated.'' Ms. Makatura said residents should not try to rescue any birds that are found, but instead should locate an animal rescue person.
Entrances to the beach from the boardwalk were blocked with yellow police crime tape in the four communities hit the hardest.
A worker in a protective yellow jumpsuit, who was sifting through the sand with his fingers, picking out marble-size globs, noted that the cleanup was made somewhat easier because the oil was cold and congealed into balls.
