New York City's outer boroughs weathered the recent recession better than Manhattan, losing proportionately fewer jobs and seeing private-sector wages increase while Manhattan's payroll declined, according to figures released by the state's chief financial officer.
Total wages paid by private employers in the Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens and Staten Island increased by 6.1 percent from 2000 to 2002, even as they fell in Manhattan by 7.1 percent, according to the figures, which were issued by the state comptroller's office yesterday with a report on the city's economy. While Manhattan lost more than half the jobs created there during the 1990's, Queens lost only 20 percent of such jobs from 2000 to 2002 and Brooklyn lost only 5 percent.
The loss of jobs outside Manhattan, however, was offset by salary increases in the jobs that remained, the study showed. At the same time, the other boroughs saw an increase in the number of jobs with a neighborhood focus, like service, administrative and health care jobs, even as they lost employment in manufacturing and air transport.
The outer boroughs' relative strength and stability reflect the peculiar effect of the recession on New York City. Conventional wisdom holds that when the economy sinks, blue-collar neighborhoods are hit the hardest. This recession, which particularly clobbered the finance and high-tech sectors, had a disproportionate effect on Manhattan, a national center of those industries. The other boroughs could not miss what they never had.
The boroughs outside Manhattan even showed stronger growth than the generally sprawling and affluent suburban counties around the city. In Nassau, Suffolk, Westchester, Rockland, Orange and Putnam Counties, wages grew by 3.3 percent from 2000 to 2002, according to State Department of Labor statistics, about half as fast as in the outer boroughs.
The report focused in particular on Brooklyn, which the comptroller, Alan G. Hevesi, said was insulated from the contraction that occurred elsewhere in the city after the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Manhattan, with its financial base near the World Trade Center, and Queens, with an export-oriented economy around two airports, suffered the largest economic damage after the attacks and lost the most jobs.
''The news is pretty good,'' Mr. Hevesi said at a breakfast at Long Island University in Brooklyn yesterday. ''It's not great, but considering the three years we've had, it's pretty good.''
In fact, in a case of the Brooklyn tortoise outpacing the Manhattan hare, from 1998 to 2002, private-sector wages in Brooklyn, adjusted for inflation, increased by 7.8 percent, the fastest growth in the city.
None of which is to say that the outer boroughs have rendered Manhattan an economic also-ran. From the start of the boom in 1995 through 2002, total wages paid in Manhattan jumped by 51 percent while those in the other boroughs increased only 32 percent. Manhattan employers now pay nearly four times the total wages of employers in the other four boroughs combined.
According to the report, based largely on State Department of Labor figures, the boroughs outside Manhattan lost 1 percent of their private-sector jobs from 2000 to 2002. Moreover, the average salary in the sectors that lost the most jobs was about $38,400, while the average salary in the fastest-growing sectors was only $29,800. But, due primarily to salary increases, total private-sector wages in the outer boroughs grew from $35.8 billion in 2000 to $38 billion in 2002, an increase of 6.1 percent.
Total wages in Manhattan dropped both because it lost 7.1 percent of its private-sector jobs, and because the salary difference between jobs that disappeared and jobs that were created was much greater than in the other boroughs. The average salary in the sectors that lost the most jobs in Manhattan was $85,500, while in the fastest-growing sectors it was $59,300.
As in the rest of the country, the economies of the other boroughs have shifted from manufacturing toward service. In Brooklyn, for example, the fastest growing job categories were social assistance and nursing and residential care, the latter reflecting, among other things, the graying of Brooklyn's established middle class.
For example, Sunrise Assisted Living, a company based in Virginia that runs high-priced housing for the elderly, has opened centers in Mill Basin and Sheepshead Bay, Brooklyn, since 2000. Employment at clothing stores and hardware stores has also grown, reflecting the expansion into urban markets of big national chains like Home Depot, which now has four stores in Brooklyn, said Kenneth Adams, president of the Brooklyn Chamber of Commerce.
That growth, Mr. Adams said, is likely to continue. ''Brooklyn still is under-retailed,'' he said. ''There's still pent-up consumer demand, and retail is going to continue to add jobs.''
One of the more surprising findings to emerge from the state labor figures was that the Bronx, widely seen as the city's most economically backward borough, actually showed the strongest growth in recent years.
Total private-sector wages paid in the Bronx grew by 8.2 percent from 2000 to 2002, the most in the city. Nearly 3 percent of all private-sector wages paid in the Bronx went to members of the New York Yankees. But even setting aside the team's payroll, which jumped to about $171 million from $107 million during that period, Bronx wages still grew by 7.3 percent.
Not only that, but the Bronx was the only borough where private-sector employment actually increased during the height of the economic downturn.
The Bronx borough president, Adolfo Carrión Jr., attributed the growth to the expansion of several colleges in recent years, including the College of New Rochelle and Mercy College. Other fast-growing sectors in the Bronx included health care, which Mr. Carrión called the borough's leading employer, and restaurants and bars.
The Bronx is even seeing growth in fields that it does not want. Waste management companies added 480 jobs in the Bronx from 2000 to 2002, at an average salary of $47,000.
''That one we're not happy with,'' Mr. Carrión said. ''We want those people to work somewhere else.''
