Directed by Bart Freundlich  PG, 92 minutes
The ultimate ''don't try this at home'' movie, ''Catch That Kid'' is a children's film about three preteenagers who pull a bank heist.
Of course they have their reasons. Maddy (Kristen Stewart), the group's precocious ringleader, has a father (Sam Robards) in the hospital, in need of a $250,000 spinal operation that can be performed only in Denmark. Maddy's mother, Molly (Jennifer Beals), is a security expert who has just designed a fiendishly complicated vault for a greedy, coldhearted banker (Michael Des Barres). Maddy's father is a nice guy, and the banker is not; that seems to be more than enough moral justification for the screenwriters, Michael Brandt and Derek Haas, authors of that finely nuanced study in ethics and responsibility, ''2 Fast 2 Furious.''
Maddy enlists the aid of two male friends, Austin (Corbin Bleu), a computer nerd, and Gus (Max Thieriot), a mechanical wizard, by employing a feminine strategy that would seem cynical coming from Lola Montes, much less a 12-year-old: she tells each of the boys that she's in love with him and him alone.
Breaking into the bank turns out to be a breeze, once Maddy has seduced her mother's supervisor (John Carroll Lynch) into giving her the master code to the building's electronic locks. But she still needs Austin to neutralize the surveillance cameras and Gus to construct three supercharged go-karts, which the children use to make a high-speed getaway through the streets of downtown Los Angeles.
Based on a Danish children's film, ''Klatretosen,'' ''Catch That Kid,'' which opens today nationwide, is the first mainstream studio movie from Bart Freundlich, who made ''The Myth of Fingerprints'' and ''World Traveler'' as an independent. Mr. Freundlich's naturalistic sensibility gets in the way of the film's broad fantasy elements, turning what might have been a stylized romp like Robert Rodriguez's ''Spy Kids'' into something a little too real for comfort.
''Catch That Kid'' is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for some action scenes that may be too much for younger viewers.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
