About two dozen ministers gathered at the State Capitol on Thursday to urge forgiveness for Gov. John G. Rowland.
Mr. Rowland, who was working one floor up, did not attend the brief prayer gathering. His aides said he was not invited.
After arriving at noon, the ministers asked reporters for a moment of privacy and walked to the north side of the Capitol lobby to pray. When they were done, the pastor who organized the prayer meeting, the Rev. Will Marotti of the New Life Church in Meriden, read a statement that said the ministers did not condone Mr. Rowland's wrongdoing. But, Mr. Marotti said, they were asking that he be forgiven and were urging him not to resign.
''Campaign donations have always garnered favor, and almost all of our political leaders have received donations and gifts,'' Mr. Marotti, who has participated in Mr. Rowland's faith-based initiative programs, read from the statement. ''The statement of faith is true: he or she who is without sin should cast the first stone.''
Three of the ministers who prayed for the governor stopped in to see him afterward but were told he was too busy for an impromptu meeting, aides to Mr. Rowland said.
Public displays of support have been scarce for Mr. Rowland, a Republican who is under federal investigation and is the subject of a House impeachment inquiry. Since his Dec. 12 admission that he accepted gifts and improvements to his lakeside cottage from people who do business with the state, Mr. Rowland's characteristically brash self-confidence has been tempered by a more sober, contrite demeanor. On several occasions, he has sought forgiveness from legislators, the public and the press.
A few ministers who gathered here on Thursday said they had met privately with Mr. Rowland at the Capitol and at the governor's official residence in Hartford. One, the Rev. Gary L. Jenkins, the pastor of the Sword of Spirit Ministries, a New Haven church, said he met with Mr. Rowland in his office last week.
''He asked if we could pray together and we did,'' Mr. Jenkins said. ''I told him to continue to seek forgiveness. He's got to be willing to show his vulnerability.''
Mr. Rowland, who is a Roman Catholic and a graduate of Holy Cross High School, a parochial school in Waterbury, and Villanova, a Pennsylvania university founded by the Augustinian order of the Roman Catholic Church, only occasionally invokes faith in his public addresses and is a sporadic churchgoer. His aides say he has attended Mass at local churches but also enjoys attending services of various denominations.
On Thursday, after a public appearance in Hartford, Mr. Rowland told reporters that he prays for his family everyday. But when asked if his prayers had increased since a committee began meeting to investigate whether there were grounds to impeach him, his answer was no.
''Whether someone fixed gutters on a cottage or not doesn't make me a different person,'' he said.
