The Bloomberg administration wants to close a loophole that allows thousands of property owners to avoid paying their water and sewer bills without fear of any real consequences.
In a bill introduced this week in the City Council, the city would seek the right to place a lien on private homes, condos, co-ops and rental buildings where the owners have failed only to pay their water and sewer bills. Under the current law, New York City residents who fail to pay their water and sewer bills can have a lien placed on their property only if they are also in arrears on their property taxes.
The proposal, which must be approved by the Council and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, would affect an estimated 4,500 properties out of more than 720,000 residential properties across the city and in Westchester County. City officials say the new law could generate $120 million a year in revenue.
City officials say they need expanded powers because some homeowners are paying off just their property taxes -- and not their water and sewer bills -- because they know the city will not try to collect. City policy also prohibits shutting off water service to residents, even if they fail to pay their bills.
The average household spends about $500 a year for water service, or a rate of $1.55 for every 748 gallons of water used, city officials said.
The proposal would allow the city to place liens on one-, two- and three-family homes that have fallen three years or more behind in their water and sewer bills, and owe at least $15,000. It would also allow for liens on condos and co-ops that are three years late, and rental buildings that are one year late, regardless of what they owe. City water officials can already place liens on commercial properties.
Mayor Bloomberg said yesterday that the proposal was intended to force ''absolute deadbeats'' to pay up, estimating that one would run up a $15,000 water tab after about 30 years of not paying bills.
''If you haven't paid your water fees for 30 years, I'd call you a deadbeat. I think your neighbors would like us do something about it, thank you,'' the mayor said. ''This is hardly going after upstanding citizens who are three days late.''
Council Speaker Gifford Miller declined to comment, but several council members said they were concerned that the proposal could unfairly penalize homeowners who fall on hard times.
''It's important that people pay their bills,'' said Councilman Eric Gioia, a Queens Democrat. ''But it would be unfair to use such a big hammer on a small fry who owes a few hundred dollars.''
The New York City Water Board, which sets water and sewer rates, sends out bills to residential and commercial users totaling about $1.7 billion a year. About $200 million of those charges typically go unpaid, city officials said.
