Deutsche Bank, emerging from a top-to-bottom overhaul of its operations, announced an ambitious new profit target on Thursday. But news of a brief flirtation with Citigroup overshadowed the optimistic outlook.
Deutsche Bank's chief executive, Josef Ackermann, met with Citigroup executives in New York in mid-January to explore the possibility of a deal, executives close to the discussions said. While those discussions were preliminary and general in nature, they followed a meeting that the chairman of Citigroup, Sanford I. Weill, had with Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany in Berlin last summer. Mr. Weill sounded out Mr. Schröder on how the government would respond to a takeover, according to an executive close to the situation.
The Financial Times reported on Thursday that Deutsche Bank had broached, then ended talks, about a deal with Citigroup, because of Mr. Ackermann's worries about its political fallout in Germany.
Talk of a merger comes at an awkward time for Deutsche Bank, given that Mr. Ackermann is on trial on charges of improper bonus payments. And the talk raises questions about the bank's future even as it is beginning to reap benefits from the economic recovery on both sides of the Atlantic, as well as from its own internal cost-cutting regimen. Deutsche Bank, Germany's financial flagship, is seen as a main player in any reshuffling of the European banking landscape.
On Thursday, Mr. Ackermann declined to comment on the Financial Times article, saying that the bank was not now in negotiations with anyone, and insisting that it was not vulnerable to an unsolicited offer.
''I do not expect a hostile takeover, and we are not ready for a friendly one,'' Mr. Ackermann said to reporters after a news conference in Frankfurt.
''First we want to show what we can do,'' he said.
What Deutsche Bank can do is leverage its dominant position in Germany, Europe's largest economy, as well as its investment banking, asset management, and trading businesses in London and New York. For a foreign bank intent on breaking into Germany's vast but fragmented market, analysts say, Deutsche Bank offers perhaps the only worthwhile entree.
And Deustche Bank is no stranger to trans-Atlantic deals, having acquired Bankers Trust for $10 billion in 1999
Shares of Deutsche Bank rose 2.5 percent on Thursday, to $80.20, on the New York Stock Exchange. Earlier in Frankfurt, its shares rose 1.4 percent.
Deutsche Bank currently has a market value of nearly $47 billion -- a steep price tag, but one Citigroup could swallow. Still, while Citigroup was known for its aggressive deal-making under Mr. Weill, it has been pursuing smaller acquisitions in recent years. Its biggest deal in recent years was its acquisition of Grupo Financiero Banamex-Accival, Mexico's second-largest bank, for $12.5 billion in 2001.
The January talks between the banks appear to have been quite preliminary, with executives noting that Mr. Ackermann has spoken to executives from other American banks as well. Germany has been rife with rumors about bank deals, now that its economy has sputtered to life and its banks are regaining a semblance of health. Deutsche Bank, as the nation's leading financial institution, figures high on the list of targets for foreign banks eager to break into the German market.
For Mr. Ackermann, a Swiss-born investment banker, the speculation about Deutsche Bank's future comes as he stands trial in Düsseldorf. He and other former directors of the telecommunications conglomerate Mannesmann are accused of paying improper bonuses to its executives amid a takeover battle with the Vodafone Group of Britain.
If the court convicted Mr. Ackermann, he would almost certainly have to resign, which analysts say would hobble Deutsche Bank at a time of potentially seismic change in the banking industry.
Adding to Deutsche Bank's headaches, the bank's former chief executive and its current board chairman, Rolf E. Breuer, is being sued in the United States on allegations that public comments he made about the debt-ridden media empire of Leo Kirch helped precipitate its collapse.
Some rivals of Deutsche Bank said its public resistance to a takeover, and its suggestion that one might meet political hurdles, was intended to buy time until these legal distractions were cleared up.
Indeed, industry analysts and bankers said they were doubtful that a friendly takeover of Deutsche Bank would raise political alarms.
And Deutsche Bank's German roots are becoming more tenuous, in any event. At Mr. Ackermann's financial presentation on Thursday, half the senior executives sitting on the dais with him strapped on headphones so they could listen to an English translation of his German remarks.
Deutsche Bank generates the bulk of its profits outside Germany, in businesses like investment banking, sales and trading, and asset management. Of the bank's 67,682 employees, only 29,857 are based in Germany.
Mr. Ackermann said on Thursday that Deutsche Bank hoped to earn 6.5 billion euros ($8.2 billion) in annual pretax profits, compared with 3.6 billion euros in 2003 and 1.4 billion in 2002. The bank reported net income of 1.4 billion euros last year, more than triple the amount in the previous year.
One of Deutsche Bank's German legacies is a cost structure considerably more expensive than those of competitors like Citigroup. Mr. Ackermann said the bank had whittled its costs through layoffs, and now had a cost-to-income ratio of 79 percent. The ratio at Citigroup is about 50 percent.
Mr. Ackermann said it was unfair to compare Deutsche Bank's costs with those of Citigroup because the two are in different lines of business. He said Citigroup's consumer credit franchise saddled it with more risk. ''You'll never come to Deutsche Bank for credit cards in India,'' he said.
Analysts generally praised Deutsche Bank's performance, which was in line with their expectations.
''Ackermann has done a great job,'' said Mark Hoge, a banking analyst with Lehman Brothers in London. ''The cost structure is better; the franchise is stronger; capital is being managed more efficiently.''
But Mr. Hoge expressed skepticism about Deutsche Bank's revenue and profit targets. To achieve its projected 9 percent increase in sales, he said, the bank would need an alignment of events outside its control, including a stock market boom and a rally in the dollar.
Mr. Hoge also said Deutsche Bank had apparently made no provision for paying larger bonuses to its bankers. Those payments would cut into the projected pretax profit of 6.5 billion euros, he said.
To judge by his tone on Thursday, Mr. Ackermann is not burdened by a lack of confidence. He drew criticism in the news media recently when he was photographed on the first day of his trial in Düsseldorf, smiling and flashing a victory sign at one of his fellow defendants.
Mr. Ackermann said the gesture had been misinterpreted. ''I want to apologize in case anyone was hurt and took this as a sign that I don't respect the judges or Germany's judiciary system,'' he said.
