On Mike Richter night at Madison Square Garden, Rangers goaltender Mike Dunham did little to make people forget his predecessor.
After Wednesday night's 4-3 loss to a Minnesota Wild team that had not won in its previous 12 road games, Glen Sather, the Rangers' embattled coach, said that he planned to speak to the Phoenix Coyotes' general manager, Mike Barnett, or to their managing partner, Wayne Gretzky.
The subject of those discussions has been Coyotes goaltender Sean Burke, 37, who was informed Wednesday that he would be traded by Monday. Philadelphia is believed to be the front-runner.
According to a team official in the N.H.L., the Coyotes are asking for prospects and draft picks for Burke. Burke can activate an option year on his contract that guarantees him $4.25 million next season, so Phoenix may be willing to trade him for a draft pick.
''Anything could happen,'' Sather said Thursday after practice. ''There's lots of conversations going on. I've had lots of conversations since all this started to happen.''
Sather was referring to the string of injuries that had befallen the Rangers' defense, their best player, Eric Lindros (out indefinitely with his eighth concussion), and even Dunham, who recently returned from a concussion.
Injuries and a tightly packed schedule have become Sather's two favorite excuses for why the Rangers skidded into this weekend's All-Star Game break 2-8-2-0. The Rangers (20-24-7-4) have 27 games remaining, and reaching the playoffs is a tall order for a team that has not won three consecutive games this season. The Rangers have not won consecutive games since Dec. 29 and 30.
But there is a growing sentiment within the Rangers' organization that the team could be a seller before the March 11 trading deadline and not a buyer. The final decision rests with Sather, who is in his fourth season as the team's president and general manager.
Sather will attend the league's board of governors meetings in Minnesota this weekend, then fly to a Las Vegas suburb for meetings with general managers Monday and Tuesday. He said it was difficult to make a trade with many injured players.
''It's difficult without trading your young people,'' Sather said. ''That's always a calculated risk. You try to help the organization now without hurting it down the road.''
Sather acknowledged the possibility that he might become a seller, which would be a novel approach for the Rangers.
''It's a little early to be making that kind of decision,'' Sather said, ''but it's something I've thought about.''
SLAP SHOTS
Defenseman GREG DE VRIES is set to return after the All-Star Game break. De Vries, who missed the past 15 games with an injured right knee, went through a full practice for the first time Thursday and said he would play Wednesday against the Devils.
HOCKEY
