DRIVING through the rolling hills of North Salem, in the northeast corner of Westchester County, it is easy to forget the flurry of suburbia nearby. Clapboard houses dating back to the Revolutionary War line roads that meander alongside horse farms delineated by wooden fences and stone walls. Streets are named for founding families -- the Vails, the Keelers, the Purdys. Plaques identify homes once owned by the likes of Thaddeus Crane, a member of the New York assembly from 1777-79; the Junes; and the Wallaces. A graveyard holds tombstones from the early 18th century, and those with sharp eyes might spot the small stone carriage marker along what was once the coach road between New York and Boston that announces in well-worn lettering: ''55 miles to New York City.''
Indeed, the town of North Salem, which consists of the hamlets of North Salem, Salem Center, Purdys and Croton Falls and was officially established in 1788, is just over an hour's commute from Manhattan. Which is just what attracted weekenders like the concert pianists Misha and Cipa Dichter, who have owned a home in North Salem for the last 10 years. ''We couldn't believe how remote it felt being so close to the city,'' said Mr. Dichter, adding that the couple's home sits on 20 acres atop a mountain with vistas of the Berkshires and surrounded by thousands of acres of open land. ''I hate to talk about it because we want it to remain as open as it is.''
A strong contingent of the community, which with just 220 residents a square mile has the lowest density in Westchester County, feels the same way. The North Salem Open Land Foundation, a land conservation trust founded in 1974, owns 562 acres in town, acquired primarily through bequests, and protects another 80 acres through conservation easements. Also helping keep development down are environmental restrictions around the Titicus Reservoir, part of the Croton Watershed, which supplies drinking water for New York City, and North Salem's large number of horse farms.
''Where the horses go, so goes the open space,'' said Carol Goldberg, a real estate agent with Vincent &amp; Whittemore in nearby Bedford and co-president of the Open Land Foundation. Still, keeping the area rural is a continuing fight, she said, ''like having 10 fingers but 11 holes in the dike.''
The Scene
Horsey is probably the word most used to describe North Salem, which has many privately owned horse farms, a network of trails maintained by the North Salem Riding Trails Association, and the nationally known Old Salem Farm, the site of top-level horse shows and competitions, including trials for the national championships and the Olympics. The Goldens Bridge Hunt Club, founded in North Salem more than 60 years ago, is among the oldest fox-hunting clubs in the country. Its members hunt twice a week from mid-August through April, weather permitting, chasing foxes on horseback accompanied by 30 to 50 hounds until their prey goes ''in ground,'' ending the hunt. ''It's like a taste of old England,'' said the town supervisor, Sy Globerman.
People often show up in riding attire at local restaurants like Purdys Homestead, the 1775 home of the Purdys family, where most other customers wear jeans and hiking boots. The Homestead, with fireplaces and exposed wooden beams, serves classic American cuisine, including roast duck, rack of lamb and Pacific prawns. Other local favorites include Auberge Maxime for French food; the Blazer Pub, a favorite for burgers; and the popular and often crowded 121 Restaurant &amp; Bar, with its extensive menu ranging from pizza and burgers to fish. Other than that, though, ''there's not a lot going on here,'' said Linda Gracie, a real estate broker with Houlihan Lawrence. ''And everyone likes it that way.''
Indeed, the town has no streetlights, no sidewalks and no hotels, and the only hint of a downtown is a small shopping area built in the 1980's, consisting of a bank, a fine-foods shop and the post office.
Pros
''We have all this beautiful, open countryside, and we're only an hour or so from Manhattan,'' Ms. Gracie said.
Unlike more remote spots where weekenders complain about the lack of shopping and services, North Salem is not far from big-box retailers, several malls and multiplex cinemas. Frances Sweeney Fraenkel, who has weekended in North Salem since 1960, when her parents bought a home there, frequently makes the 15-minute run to the Home Depot and the Stew Leonard's market in Danbury, Conn., often carrying groceries home to Manhattan. ''We enjoy doing our marketing up here,'' she said.
There are several golf courses in town, and 1,000-acre Mountain Lakes Park, part of the Westchester County park system, has four lakes and miles of hiking trails. Within its boundaries is Mount Bailey, the highest point in the county and a favorite vantage point for hikers. North Salem is also the home of the Hammond Museum and Japanese Stroll Garden, which includes the Georgian-style Guild Hall, home to its decorative and visual arts exhibitions, and four acres designed according to the principles of Japanese gardening. The Schoolhouse Theater nearby attracts audiences from throughout the area with its professional theatrical productions, art exhibitions, concerts and staged readings from October through June, and its foreign, art and classic film screenings during the summer. The Aldrich Museum of Contemporary Art is in neighboring Ridgefield, Conn., and Caramoor offers its summer classical music series down the road in Bedford.
A local curiosity clearly visible from Titicus Road is the North Salem Dolmen, a 90-ton boulder balanced on five smaller stones. While some consider it a glacial deposit, others suggest it was erected by early Indians or as a monument to a Celtiberian king, and cite its parallels to similar structures in Europe, Russia and China.
Cons
Those looking for a town with a quaint and historic downtown won't find it in North Salem: there's no central district to walk around, no movie theater, no cute shopping area. There is, however, traffic. Commuters from Ridgefield and Danbury cut through North Salem to reach the interstate or the train station in Purdys. ''We bear the brunt of their commuters,'' said Ms. Goldberg, the real estate agent and head of the Open Space Foundation.
Then there's the cost of buying and living in North Salem. The current $1.5 million median house price is among the highest in the country. County and local taxes are also high compared with those in more remote locations that have fewer services.
The Real Estate Market
According to local brokers, home sales in North Salem have remained fairly steady for the last five years, with a peak in 2000 and a slight uptick in 2003; about half the buyers are looking for second homes. It can be tough to find properties under $400,000 in town, and vacant land is hard to come by.
A few developments were built in town in the early 1990's, including Salem Chase; homes that sold for $500,000 then are now selling for $800,000. The three communities that edge Peach Lake, on the border of North Salem and Brewster, in Putnam County, were developed in the 1940's, primarily as summer homes for weekenders. Cottages there are small and close together, and priced accordingly: a two-bedroom, one-bathroom cottage with a deck and a lake view is listed at $159,900; a three-bedroom, one-bathroom ranch is listed at $265,000.
At the other end of the spectrum is Snow Hill, originally the Mead family home. Built on 117 acres in 1858, this estate features six bedrooms, six bathrooms, a guest cottage, a gymnasium, a barn with caretaker's apartment, a three-car garage, and a stone bridge across a stream; it has been on the market for $12,950,000 for over a year. There are far fewer listings for vacant land, with a 4.17-acre lot listed for $385,000.
LAY OF THE LAND  Horse Country Near Suburbia
POPULATION -- 5,173.  SIZE -- 22.9 square miles.  MEDIAN HOUSE PRICE -- $1,522,5000.  RECENT SALES -- A 2,900-square-foot four-bedroom, four-bathroom house with a pool and guesthouse, on 2.68 acres, sold for $1,050,000 (listed at $1,225,000) after six months on the market. A 1,400-square-foot three-bedroom, two-bathroom renovated ranch-style house on 2.18 acres, built in 1935, sold for $535,000 (listed at $525,000) in three months. A 680-square-foot, two-bedroom, one-bath cottage in a cooperative overlooking Peach Lake, with lake access and a mooring, sold for $146,000 (listed at $159,000) after four months.  DISTANCE FROM NEW YORK -- 55 miles.  TRAVEL TIME -- About 75 minutes from Grand Central Terminal in Manhattan on the Metro-North Harlem line to Purdys or Croton Falls; about an hour's drive from Manhattan.  GETTING THERE -- From New York City, take Interstate 684 North toward Brewster, N.Y., via either the Saw Mill River Parkway, the Hutchinson River Parkway or Interstate 87 (the Major Deegan Expressway) to Interstate 287 East (the Cross Westchester Expressway), Exit 9A. From Interstate 684 North, take Exit 7 (Purdys) or Exit 8 (Hardscrabble Road).  WHILE YOU'RE LOOKING -- The Elms Inn (500 Main Street, Ridgefield, Conn., 203-438-2541) was built by a cabinetmaker in 1760 and has been run as an inn since 1799. Its 20 rooms start at $150. The Hilton Garden Inn Danbury (119 Mill Plain Road, Danbury, Conn., 203-205-2000) is a 10-minute drive from North Salem. Rooms start at $99 on weekends.
HAVENS
