A federal judge ruled yesterday that the National Football League's rule restricting younger players from entering the draft was in violation of antitrust laws, opening the way for Maurice Clarett, the Ohio State running back, to be eligible for the draft this year.
Judge Shira A. Scheindlin of the United States District Court in Manhattan struck down the N.F.L. rule, which prohibits players from entering the draft until three years after they graduate from high school.
The league, which said it would appeal the decision, had contended that Clarett had no legal standing to file the lawsuit. The N.F.L.'s lawyers also said the eligibility rule was reasonable because it prevented younger, less physically mature players from entering the league too soon and getting hurt.
But Judge Scheindlin, in a 71-page decision laden with football metaphors and allusions, said the N.F.L. had failed to justify Clarett's exclusion from the draft, and she found that the league's draft restriction amounted to a restraint of trade.
''I was pleased that the rule was brought down,'' Clarett said yesterday at a news conference in Manhattan. ''It will give kids an opportunity to choose their own path, as they do in every other sport.'' Clarett would not say what he planned to do next. [Page D1.]
If upheld on appeal, the ruling could have broad implications for the N.F.L., the National Collegiate Athletic Association and high school sports. In basketball, baseball and hockey, athletes can jump directly from the playground to the professional ranks. Similar court rulings in those sports helped make it possible for teenagers to join elite professional leagues right after high school.
Judge Scheindlin's decision could open the door for football players to make a similar leap, including the 20-year-old Clarett, who sued the N.F.L. in September. Clarett contended that the eligibility rule, which would have prevented him from entering the draft until 2005, represented a restraint of trade and an antitrust violation.
As a freshman running back in the 2002 season, Clarett helped lead Ohio State to an undefeated season and the national championship. But he was suspended for the 2003 season in September for having received benefits worth thousands of dollars and having lied to investigators. Clarett filed the lawsuit two weeks after his suspension.
Clarett and his lawyer, Alan C. Milstein, declined to say whether he would apply immediately for the draft, although Jeff Pash, the N.F.L.'s chief counsel, said he had already done so.
''I think it's a terrific decision, well-reasoned, complete, and I think it's an historic moment in sports,'' Milstein said of Judge Scheindlin's ruling in a telephone interview yesterday. ''I'm not surprised at the decision. I think it is correct and it is justice at work. It is exactly what the court needed to say.''
Pash said he was surprised by the ruling, but confident that an appeal could be won.
''The eligibility rule is protected by the collective bargaining agreement,'' Pash said in a conference call. ''We do think it's a very strong appellate position and one we are very comfortable advancing.''
Pash also said that unless Judge Scheindlin's ruling is quickly reversed, ''Mr. Clarett would be eligible to be drafted.'' Pash acknowledged that the appeals process could take at least several months, and added, ''He has asked to be included in the draft and the judge has specifically ordered that he be eligible.''
Should the N.F.L. win its appeal after Clarett were drafted, Pash said, he would remain in the league.
''Once he's in the draft, if Maurice Clarett is selected and signs a contract, he is in the N.F.L.,'' Pash said.
Lawyers for the N.F.L. had argued in the case that federal antitrust laws did not apply to the draft eligibility rule. They said the rule was exempt from the antitrust laws because it was part of the league's collective bargaining agreement with the players' union.
But Judge Scheindlin said the N.F.L. had failed to justify Clarett's exclusion from the draft, and she found that the rule that kept him out of the draft represented a restraint of trade.
''Because the N.F.L. cannot prevail on any of these defenses, the rule must be sacked,'' Judge Scheindlin wrote.
''Indeed,'' she said in the decision, ''Clarett has alleged the very type of injury -- a complete bar to entry into the market for his services -- that the antitrust laws are designed to prevent.''
The ruling had other immediate ramifications for the league.
According to Pash, underclassmen who did not apply for the draft by the league-imposed Jan. 15 deadline will now be given a chance to do so.
''In order to be faithful to the ruling, there will be a new opportunity to apply to the draft within a reasonable time frame, and teams can do due diligence and look at film and prepare for the draft,'' Pash said. ''We're looking at identifying the right set of procedures and will have some guidance in the next day or so.''
Scheindlin's ruling prompted strong reaction from lawyers and athletes on both sides of the argument.
Ray Brown, a guard with the Detroit Lions and a member of the union's executive committee, said the decision to enter the draft should be up to Clarett. But Brown also spoke of potential pitfalls.
''I'm not sure if he's mentally ready, but guys are getting younger and younger and I don't think anyone should be denied a chance to make a living,'' Brown said by telephone from San Jose, Calif. ''But once he makes that decision, he has to realize that he can't go back. That's my primary concern. These are grown men trying to take care of their families. The league spits guys out every year.''
Brown, an 18-year veteran, said he did not believe the lawsuit would make the 6-foot, 230-pound Clarett a target of other players or hurt his standing among the league executives who will consider drafting him.
''Now that his hat has been thrown in the ring, somebody is going to take a chance on him simply based on what he's done,'' Brown said. ''The fact is, what he's shown in a big-time college program gives him some credibility on the next level. Who knows, he may get better because he doesn't have to go to class and won't have to stay within the N.C.A.A. rules. He may be the kid that breaks the mold.
''Just looking at him, physically, he looks like he can play in the N.F.L.''
Harris Barton, the former San Francisco 49ers' offensive lineman, said he disagreed with Judge Scheindlin's ruling.
''I think the N.F.L. was trying to protect these kids, making them stay in school, get an education,'' Barton said during the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am. ''I think that was the right thing to do. It's a shame that the courts ruled like that, but the precedent was set in the N.B.A. and baseball. That's the way it works.''
Bob Griese, a broadcaster and former Miami Dolphins quarterback, said at Pebble Beach: ''I have two feelings on it: No. 1, this is America, and you have a right to work, and if you need to work, you should be able to go out and get a job. Having said that, I think that rule has been very good in terms of the N.F.L. I think playing in the N.F.L. is a whole lot different for a high school kid going pro, skipping college, than it is for any other sport.
''If you see these kids trying it, they're either going to get hurt, or they're not going to be successful.''
Opinions in legal circles were equally firm -- and divided.
''Crazy,'' Gary Roberts, the director of the sports law program at Tulane University, said of Judge Scheindlin's ruling. ''The labor exemption is just about as clear as can be on this point.'' Roberts added that he would be shocked if the ruling was upheld on appeal.
Robert A. McCormick, a law professor at Michigan State University who worked on Clarett's behalf in the case, disagreed. ''She decided correctly that this is not the sort of thing exempted from antitrust law,'' he said. ''This is a 100 percent vindication for our argument.''
FOOTBALL
