When Paul Rudnick rewrote the Bible a few years ago for his delightful theological comedy ''The Most Fabulous Story Ever Told,'' he dared to make the world's first humans a couple of fellows named, inevitably, Adam and Steve. But Eden was pretty much the same old garden it had always been. Now Mr. Rudnick, exercising the godlike license that is a playwright's prerogative, has created a less generic version of paradise, something more specifically suited to gay lovers.
In ''Valhalla,'' the strained comedy that opened last night at the New York Theater Workshop, Eden comes equipped with a ravishing artificial grotto, a Versailles-style hall of mirrors and a gold-encrusted bed, for starters. By the way, the two men who discover their bliss there are hunky soldiers in battle gear, who stumble upon the 19th-century castle of King Ludwig II behind enemy lines in Bavaria during World War II.
Argosy magazine meets ''The World of Interiors.'' Now that's covering your bases in gay fantasy fulfillment. Mr. Rudnick, however, has more on his mind than erotic high jinks in lavish surroundings, though things might have been more fun if he had limited himself to that.
''Valhalla'' juxtaposes the story of a beauty-loving misfit from Texas in the 1940's with that of Ludwig II, a monarch with a notorious appetite for opulence, as a means of examining the correspondences between the lust for aesthetic perfection and, well, plain old lust in gay men. Directed by Christopher Ashley, Mr. Rudnick's frequent collaborator, ''Valhalla'' aspires to take apart a common homosexual stereotype, one that has made its way into mainstream American living rooms via shows like ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy.''
This is certainly a myth that could use some exploring, or even exploding. But Mr. Rudnick doesn't so much dissect the idea of the gay aesthete as befog it in a sentimental haze, with lots of saucy jokes glittering in the mist. In the world of ''Valhalla,'' the love of gorgeousness is the voice of the soul, and it embraces everything from crystal swans to a spirited hunchback princess, from ''Lohengrin'' to the Greek physique of a high school sports hero.
For a play that celebrates excesses -- or at least excesses of good taste -- ''Valhalla'' is strangely mild and static. It confirms Mr. Rudnick's reputation as one of the zippiest writers of zingers in American theater and film. (He's the man you would most want to ghostwrite a wedding toast for you.) And it has an appropriately frilly and feverish Ludwig in Peter Frechette, an actor who specializes in extreme personalities.
Still, unlike, say, Mr. Rudnick's ''Jeffrey,'' on which he memorably teamed with Mr. Ashley a decade ago, ''Valhalla'' is built on jokes driven by a fixed concept instead of fluid character. You can be sure that a winsomely wicked bon mot will fly by every minute or so. But there's no psychological texture in between, and the evening starts to feel like a risqué, hyperextended sketch from the old Carol Burnett variety shows.
Aside from Mr. Frechette, who combines baroque body language with a look of glazed intoxication, the production lacks the galloping madness that might disguise the play's limitations. Even those talented pros Thomas Lynch (sets) and William Ivey Long (costumes) haven't come up with anything breathtakingly imaginative (although Mr. Lynch's scallop shell footlights are an inspired touch).
The play's attractive ensemble includes Sean Dugan, as Ludwig's 20th-century soul mate, and Scott Barrow, Candy Buckley, Samantha Soule and Jack Willis in multiple roles. The cast members gamely show up in various states of overdress and undress, and it goes without saying that the show features full male nudity.
''Valhalla'' is bejeweled with some funny set pieces that capture the considerable appeal of Mr. Rudnick's naughty-but-nice sensibility, including one in which the opera-addicted Ludwig, trying to keep his mind on affairs of state, suffers through Wagner withdrawal. But in Mr. Rudnick's best plays, humor illuminates shadowy depths beneath clever surfaces. While beauty may indeed be truth in ''Valhalla,'' it is also pancake-foundation-deep.
VALHALLA
By Paul Rudnick; directed by Christopher Ashley; sets by Thomas Lynch; costumes by William Ivey Long; lighting by Kenneth Posner; original music and sound by Mark Bennett; hair and wig design, Robert-Charles Vallance; choreography, Daniel Pelzig; fight direction, Rick Sordelet; production stage management, Sarah Bittenbender; assistant stage management, Erika Timperman. Presented by the New York Theater Workshop. At 79 East Fourth Street, East Village.
WITH: Scott Barrow (Henry Lee Stafford, Helmut and singer), Candy Buckley (Margaret Avery, Queen Marie and others), Sean Dugan (James Avery), Peter Frechette (King Ludwig of Bavaria), Samantha Soule (Sally Mortimer, Princess Sophie and others) and Jack Willis (Footman, Otto and others).
THEATER REVIEW
