President Bush and his top national security officials spent the week in an increasingly desperate attempt to defend themselves from the damaging conclusion by David Kay, the president's former chief weapons inspector, that Iraq had no weapons of mass destruction on the eve of the American-led invasion. None of them succeeded. The strained remarks by Secretary of State Colin Powell, Defense Secretary Donald Rumsfeld and George Tenet, the director of central intelligence, fell far short of vindicating the way Mr. Bush rushed the nation into war without international support. So did President Bush's own attempt to mount a defense of the war in a speech in South Carolina yesterday.
The saddest spectacle was Mr. Powell, who had argued the case for using force against Iraq before the United Nations, based largely on intelligence that now appears to have been wrong. In an interview with The Washington Post on Monday, Mr. Powell said he was not sure that he would have recommended an invasion had he known Iraq did not have stockpiles of banned weapons. The next day, in remarks coordinated with the White House, he quickly retreated and said, ''The President made the right decision.'' We have seen Mr. Powell do this before. He does not make himself look better by dropping hints about his true feelings and then scurrying back to the loyal soldier's position when scolded by the White House.
Mr. Rumsfeld, whose department was one of the most hawkish proponents of the invasion, took refuge in the hope that banned weapons might yet be found in Iraq, a large nation with lots of potential hiding places. Mr. Rumsfeld told Congress that it was ''possible, but not likely'' that Iraq had not had weapons of mass destruction at the start of the war. He suggested that weapons might have been shipped to another country, destroyed just before the invasion or buried somewhere in Iraq. Those possibilities have largely been discounted by Dr. Kay. They are precisely the kind of unfounded speculation that got us into this intelligence mess. About all Mr. Rumsfeld conceded was misspeaking when he said before the war that ''we know'' where Iraq's banned weapons were stored. He needs to admit that we don't know that there ever were any weapons.
In the most ballyhooed presentation of all, Mr. Tenet made a spirited but ultimately inadequate defense of the prewar intelligence estimates in a hurriedly arranged appearance at Georgetown University yesterday. He argued that intelligence is almost never completely right or wrong. Mr. Tenet said his provisional assessment was that the consensus intelligence report before the war had mostly been right about Iraq's missile programs but might have overestimated Iraq's progress on nuclear weapons. He acknowledged that nothing had been found to support the intelligence agencies' predictions about biological and chemical weapons, but argued for more time to look. In other words, the intelligence may well turn out to have been mostly wrong.
The thrust of Mr. Tenet's defense was that intelligence analysts had been justified in drawing dire conclusions about Iraq because of Saddam Hussein's history of using chemical weapons, his repeated lying, the inability to confirm that Iraq had destroyed previously known stockpiles of chemical and biological agents, and a stream of reports from human agents, satellite photos and communications intercepts, all suggesting that Iraq might have been hiding banned weapons. That defense will not wash. It may explain the worst-case mind-set of many analysts, but can hardly justify the egregious overestimates of Iraqi capabilities.
Mr. Tenet's speech seemed mostly intended to ward off attacks on the intelligence community, including a reportedly critical brief now being prepared in Congress. He noted that the analysts had never said Iraq posed an imminent threat, had judged that Iraq was several years away from making a nuclear weapon and had always spelled out their areas of disagreement. Those sounded like warning shots against scapegoating the intelligence community for exaggerations made by higher-ups who were pushing for war.
No doubt there will be plenty of blame to go around when all the investigations are completed. It is hard to imagine that anyone's bottom line would be a continued administration of the nation's intelligence agencies by George Tenet.
Finally, Mr. Bush acknowledged yesterday that ''we have not yet found the stockpiles of weapons that we thought were there,'' but he insisted that ''America did the right thing in Iraq'' because Mr. Hussein had used weapons of mass destruction in the past and had been intent on making more. ''We cannot wait to confront the threats of the world,'' he said, pledging to ''protect and defend this country by taking the fight to the enemy.'' After everything the public has learned in the last week, it's unnerving to hear the president continue to defend the idea of pre-emptive strikes based on unverified suppositions.
Today's Editorials
