Want to know how many vacant lots are in your neighborhood? How steep the rent increases have been? The rate of mortgage foreclosures? How many people live in ''linguistic isolation'' (bureaucratese for ''non-English speakers'')?
Under a new federally financed program, anyone wanting to tap into a wealth of housing (and other) information about any of New York City's neighborhoods -- would-be home buyers, renters, policy makers or community advocates -- can log on at no charge to a simple-to-use Web site at www.nychanis.com.
Nychanis stands for New York City Housing and Neighborhoods Information System, and the Web site is the design child of Michael H. Schill, director of the Furman Center for Real Estate and Urban Policy at New York University's School of Law, and Denise Previti, a former researcher at the center. It was financed by a $457,000 grant from the United States Department of Commerce, with matching contributions from local foundations and banks.
''The project is part of a national movement toward democratizing data,'' Professor Schill said. ''The idea is that government agencies and private organizations collect huge amounts of information that average people have no way of accessing. With Nychanis, anyone can have this data at their fingertips.''
Someone wondering whether to buy a home in the Flushing or Whitestone sections of Queens, for example, could readily discover that the inflation-adjusted median value for single-family homes in the community rose to $300,000 in 2002, from $215,000 in 1999. From 1999 to 2002, the percentage of individually owned housing units increased to 49.6, from 47.2. Approximately 60 percent of the area's housing was built before 1960, with 22.5 percent built before 1939, the data show.
A Web searcher could draw a social portrait of the neighborhood. In Flushing-Whitestone, for example, the percentage of students in public elementary and middle schools who performed at grade level or above in English rose to 60.8 in 2003, from 52.2 in 1999. Violent crimes dropped to 3.54 per 1,000 residents in 2001 , from 7.84 incidents in 1990.
Someone weighing whether to rent an apartment on the Upper West Side could find that more than 76.8 percent of the rental units in the neighborhood are rent-regulated in one form or another, leaving 23.2 percent at market rate. From1999 to 2002, the median rent for all apartments -- including regulated units and those in public housing -- rose by 10.3 percent to $950. If someone wants to buy an apartment on the Upper West Side, they could find that the inflation-adjusted median value rose to $600,000 in 2002, from $322,000 in 1999.
The Web site offers 65 categories of information about each neighborhood.
''Not only can people download data tables,'' Professor Schill said, ''they can create custom-made maps, graphs, pie charts.
''If a community group is concerned that subprime lenders are targeting minority communities, it can create a map showing where subprime loans are most prevalent, then overlay where most minority families live.''
The statistics come from a host of sources: New York City's Departments of Planning, Finance, Housing Preservation and Development and the police and, on the federal level, the Census Bureau and the Departments of Commerce and Education, as well as data collected in accordance with the National Home Mortgage Disclosure Act.
Someone logging on can enter an address and obtain information based on the local census tract, subborough area, community district, school district or police precinct. ''It blends the housing data with digital maps of the city,'' said Richard Annitto, vice president of Bowne Management Systems, the company that designed the site. ''It's the most complete source for housing statistics in the city.''
The Department of Housing Preservation and Development has already used it for policy purposes. ''Because of our interest in homelessness, we mapped where the overcrowded apartments are,'' said Harold Shultz, the department's special counsel.
Residential Real Estate
