Igor Landau, the chief executive of Aventis, made his case Thursday against what he called a ''ridiculous'' bid from a rival pharmaceutical company, Sanofi-Synthélabo, while presenting strong results for the fourth quarter and full year.
Mr. Landau promised double-digit sales and earnings growth over the next four years, which he said would be achieved with the help of promising new products in the pipeline and the divestment of nonstrategic products that account for 1.5 billion euros in annual sales. The company also plans to buy back 2 billion to 3 billion euros ($2.5 billion to $3.8 billion) of its own shares.
The $60 billion hostile bid that Sanofi began on Jan. 26 is ''not below the line, it's below below the line,'' Mr. Landau said during a meeting with the press Thursday morning. Merging with Sanofi would be a step backward for Aventis, he said, and shareholders would be left with Sanofi stock that could decline in value if a deal went through. He also said that some of Sanofi's leading products were developed by other companies.
Mr. Landau may be fighting a losing battle. Many investors think that the deal will proceed, and that it is only a question of Sanofi's offering a higher price. The merger also appears to have the blessing of the French government, which weighed in even before the bid was announced.
Mr. Landau said on Thursday that the deal was ''not a political battle,'' because the majority of Aventis shareholders were outside of France. He called himself a ''true believer'' in Europe, rather than any one country.
Aventis is exploring alternatives to a combination with Sanofi, Mr. Landau said, and added that it was too early to elaborate on what might happen.
The company's drugs include Lantus, a long-acting injectable insulin; Actonel, an osteoporosis treatment; and Delix, a heart drug. New products coming to market include Exubera, an insulin that can be inhaled rather than injected, and Sculptra, an injectable wrinkle remover that does not kill nerves as Botox does and therefore does not affect facial expression. Over all, the company has five drugs in the process of being registered for use and nine in the last stages of clinical trials. It also has 80 in development.
The company's profits were strong, but its sales were weak, in part because of the weakness of the dollar. Net income from its core business rose 22.8 percent, to 716 million euros ($897 million), in the fourth quarter from the year-ago period, while sales fell 3.7 percent, to 4.39 billion euros ($5.5 billion).
For 2003, net income rose 17.5 percent, to 2.44 billion euros ($3.06 billion), but sales fell 4.5 percent, to 16.79 billion euros. On a constant exchange rate basis, sales rose 5.9 percent, the company said.
