THE bag snaggers were out and about on the Upper East Side the other day.
These are not to be confused with purse snatchers, who undoubtedly were out and about, too, but will remain someone else's concern. The bag snaggers, employees of the city's Department of Parks and Recreation, were a force for good.
First, some background:
This is the season when New York's trees are in bloom -- with light plastic bags from the local deli, with sad strands of yellow tape stamped ''Caution,'' with balloons that got away from Junior after the birthday party, with streams of videotape ripped from the cassette, with heavy-duty plastic used by delivery guys to bind cardboard boxes.
Back in the day, trees stayed properly bare in wintertime. That was when people carried their groceries home in sturdy brown paper bags. Now we have flimsy plastic bags with handles and those ridiculous smiley faces. This is known as progress.
One problem is that the plastic floats easily on the winds, and comes to rest just as easily in trees. For an errant deli bag, New York streets are a target-rich environment, lined as they are with 550,000 trees, give or take a London plane or a Norway maple here and there.
In summer, leaves obscure snarled plastic. The leaves are also splendid, parks people say, at repelling the polymerized intruders before they can land.
But in a brooding winter, such as this, debris dangles miserably from bare branches -- the unsightly hiding in plain sight. Trash collection has suffered because of the snow, leaving more rubbish than usual to blow hither and yon. In coming weeks, the cityscape may grow even bleaker. The winds of March, in this regard, do not make the heart a dancer.
In a world of mayhem, there are surely larger worries than this winter blight. Still, ''it's a little issue that makes you crazy,'' said Adrian Benepe, the parks commissioner.
Ian Frazier, a writer, goes even further. ''Nothing makes a neighborhood look scarier than bare-branch trees draped with plastic-bag shreds above a razor-wire fence similarly fluttering and bestrewn,'' he wrote last month in The New Yorker.
Mr. Frazier is something of an expert in these matters. Eleven years ago, he and a couple of friends, brothers named Tim and Bill McClelland, began to go around the city harvesting plastic stuck in trees. They went so far as to invent what they formally called the Bag Snagger, a long pole with a prong and hook. They patented it and tried to market it. Warren Buffett doesn't seem about to knock on their door any time soon, though.
''We've stayed true to our original financial model,'' Mr. Frazier said in an interview. ''We're still a multihundred-dollar company. We sell in the ones and twos.''
One belongs to the Parks Department. On Wednesday, a day of uncommon warmth in this dark-souled winter, its bag snaggers went on the prowl for wayward plastic that they had noticed or that had been reported by others.
Manhattan is notably trouble-prone, Mr. Benepe said, because of its heavy commerce, tall buildings and broad plazas. That combination is a formula for gales of plastic bags swirling in the air.
ON East 88th Street, Paul Mercado of the Parks Department used the hook of his yellow Bag Snagger to pry loose several orange balloons roosting in a tree. It was a knotty problem. ''Balloons are the worst,'' Mr. Mercado said. ''The strings really wrap around the branches.''
Nearby, on York Avenue, a colleague, Jesse Black, climbed into the bucket of a cherry picker to reach an especially nasty bit of plastic caught in high branches. It took 20 minutes of twisting and tugging to do the job. Mr. Black was a model of patience. ''It was hard,'' he said later. ''We just try not to damage the tree.''
The plastic itself does no grave harm to the trees, officials said. In a strong wind, however, it can billow like a sail and cause thin branches to snap, said Namshik Yoon, the department's chief of operations in Manhattan. Sometimes, Mr. Benepe added, birds become snarled in plastic. But mainly, ''aesthetic harm'' is the issue, he said.
There is nothing to stop any New Yorker from bringing high-flying plastic down to earth, though the risk of injury always has to be a concern.
''It's actually a very bracing and wonderful thing to do,'' said Mr. Frazier, who lives now in New Jersey and is no longer a frequent snagger. ''You feel good afterwards. Physically, it's a workout. And you accomplish something. You make the city prettier.''
NYC
