You don't have to wait until the Westminster Kennel Club's 128th Annual Dog Show on Monday at Madison Square Garden to see some fine canine champions.
Tomorrow the William Secord Gallery will open an exhibition of dog portraits by S. Edwin Megargee Jr. (1883-1958), a significant American painter of dogs, who is well represented in the Museum of the Dog in St. Louis.
The show has oils, sketches, pencil drawings and watercolor portraits of subjects that include a Brittany spaniel, a bloodhound, a pointer, an Irish setter, a borzoi, an Afghan, an Old English sheep dog and a West Highland terrier, among others.
The gallery is at 52 East 76th Street and the show continues through March 27. (It will be open this Sunday because of the Westminster show.)
Unlike most painters of dogs, Megargee specialized in purebred-dog portraits and portrayed many show champions from the first half of the 20th-century.
He grew up in the Philadelphia area, one of 11 children, and began drawing as a child. Beginning in 1912 he went on to write and/or illustrate at least 50 books, most of them about dogs but others about birds and horses. He also did commercial work, including the Greyhound bus logo.
''He chronicled purebred dogs during the period of the huge kennels, when people like the du Ponts, Dodges and Rockefellers kept hundreds of dogs,'' said Mr. Secord, president of the gallery.
Megargee lived in New Jersey and worked in a studio on Union Square in Manhattan. He also traveled for commissions. Plantation owners would invite him south to their shooting estates during the hunting season to portray their dogs in the field. ''It was a very different era,'' Mr. Secord said.
Megargee himself became a breeder of Scottish terriers and a dog-show judge. His dog portraiture is not sentimental; it shows a thorough knowledge of anatomy and an understanding of dogs.
''All animals have a sort of sixth sense in selecting people in whom to place their confidence,'' C. P. Long wrote about Megargee in The New York Herald Tribune. ''I have never known a horse or a dog that would not obey his slightest command. I have never known one that would not give him complete and perfect devotion. After all, this may be the best measure of his character, both as a man and as an artist.''
In 1942 Megargee wrote and illustrated ''Dogs,'' with pictures of 76 breeds. His pencil drawing of a Brittany spaniel, an ancient breed with a stub tail, is one of several original illustrations from that book in the show. In 1945 Megargee wrote and did six paintings for ''Gun Dogs at Work.'' In 1954 he wrote and illustrated ''The Dog Dictionary.''
''He was one of the few dog painters not to use a camera,'' Mr. Secord said. ''He did sketches of dogs in their environments.''
In 1934 Megargee wrote, ''Early in my career I was determined to portray animals as they actually are and I studied the anatomy and structure of birds and animals until I could have articulated the skeleton of anything from a hen to a horse.''
He also did illustrations for novels, including Scott Hart's ''Moon Is Waning,'' and for magazines like Country Life, Field &amp; Stream and Hunting and Fishing.
''He is probably best known for his sporting dogs and he himself enjoyed shooting,'' said Galina Zhitomirsky, director of the gallery.
The pictures range in cost from $2,200 to $50,000 and can be seen at www.dogpainting.com.
The prices for the dog pictures at Doyle New York's sixth annual ''Dogs in Art'' auction on Tuesday may be even more affordable, judging by the estimates.
The viewing for the Doyle sale begins tomorrow at 175 East 87th Street. At noon, Alan Fausel, a Doyle specialist, will give an informal gallery talk. On Sunday Doyle, with the American Kennel Club, is the host of a benefit brunch for DOGNY, a fund that supports canine search-and-rescue organizations.
The 275-lot sale has no Megargee pictures, but it does have works by the popular British painters Arthur Wardle and John Emms, including Emms's magnificent ''Borzoi in a Landscape.''
''This is not a standard subject for Emms, who usually painted hunting dogs,'' Mr. Fausel said.
In his book ''A Breed Apart'' (Antique Collectors Club, 2001), Mr. Secord wrote of Emms: ''The best of his work exhibits a painterly, almost calligraphic style that gives his portraits a fresh, immediate quality.''
The art can be viewed at DoyleNewYork.com.
French Furniture Shines
The Palm Beach Classic, the 88-dealer antiques show at the new convention center in West Palm Beach, Fla., through Sunday, has only a handful of dealers selling French furniture. Nonetheless, Jean Ronfort and his partner, Jean Dominique Augarde, two experts in 18th-century French furniture, turned up a few important pieces.
''I'm looking at the show from a museum's and collector's point of view, because that's whom I advise,'' Mr. Ronfort said as the two toured the show last week.
J. Féau, a Paris dealer in antique wood paneling since 1875, has a white Empire-style frieze with gilded eagles, acanthus leaves and swags from the Paris town house of Prince Eugène de Beauharnais. ''I think Joséphine Bonaparte, Napoleon's wife, ordered the decoration for the prince's house when he was away at war,'' Mr. Ronfort said. ''The frieze might be by Percier and Fontaine, her favorite decorators.''
Mary Helen McCoy of Mountain Brook, Ala., is showing a Louis XIV commode that she attributes to Thomas Hache (1664-1747), a French master in marquetry. The commode has inlays of ebony, olive and walnut as well as its original bronze fittings. ''The more decorated the piece, the richer the client,'' Mrs. McCoy said. ''Hache was to marquetry what Boulle was to brass.'' She is asking $440,000 for the piece.
It didn't bother Mr. Augarde that the commode wasn't signed. ''It only became obligatory for Parisian masters to sign their works after 1755,'' he said.
The Paris dealer Gérard Orts had a fine French early 18th-century gilded console with two legs sporting carved dragons. ''It would be perfect in a room with rococo boiserie,'' Mr. Ronfort said. ''The Château de Bercy in Paris, which was torn down and auctioned off in pieces during the reign of Napoleon III, had the same design.'' Its price is $120,000.
Mr. Augarde admired a pair of French 18th-century elaborately carved gray consoles with pale gray-green marble tops at Steinitz, another Paris dealer.
''The carving is well worked, the condition is impeccable, and the 'verdette' marble from the Pyrenees is original,'' Mr. Augarde said.
''These are the kinds of antiques needed to form taste in Palm Beach because it has no decorative arts museum.''
ANTIQUES
