In an extraordinary scene, the bishop of Albany, Howard J. Hubbard, faced a crowded news conference yesterday and denied having sex with anyone in his 40 years as a priest, forcefully rejecting claims that he had had a sexual relationship in the late 1970's with a man who later killed himself.
The bishop offered to take a lie detector test and urged the Albany district attorney to investigate, because he wanted his name cleared by an independent authority. The district attorney, Paul A. Clyne, said he would look into the matter.
Bishop Hubbard was prompted to make his appearance after a news conference on Wednesday by Andrew Zalay, whose brother, Thomas Zalay, was 25 when he died in April 1978. It was only last year, Mr. Zalay said, that he found a suicide note by his brother while going through the belongings of their mother, who had suffered a stroke. He said the note confirmed a longstanding belief in the family that the bishop and his brother had had a sexual relationship.
Bishop Hubbard rushed back from a vacation in Florida when he heard of the accusation on Wednesday, the diocese said. ''I have been faithful to my vow of celibacy,'' he said, speaking calmly during a news conference that was broadcast live on local television. ''I have never sexually abused any person of any age.''
It was the latest jolt to a diocese roiled by the sexual abuse scandal like many others nationwide. It also puts Bishop Hubbard in the company of other American prelates drawn personally into the spotlight in the past two years. The archbishop of Milwaukee resigned after acknowledging that a man who accused him of sexual assault was paid $450,000 in a settlement; the bishop of Palm Beach, Fla., resigned after admitting abusing an under-age student; and the bishop of Lexington, Ky., stepped down after charges he denied. Cardinals Edward M. Egan of New York and Roger M. Mahony of Los Angeles were each the subject of accusations found to be baseless.
The note, which is typewritten, undated and unsigned, speaks of a relationship with ''Howard'' -- no last name was used -- that is spiritual and intellectual but also ''decadent and sinful.'' It said, ''Howard explains that his role as bishop and his vows of celibacy are not involved because the Bible describes celibacy as being free of women. I do not and have not considered myself homosexual but maintaining this relationship serves spiritual purposes.''
The note continued, ''As bishop, I think he has unfairly used his position to get what he wants from me'' and refers to ''sexual acts I am compelled to endure.'' A lawyer for Andrew Zalay, John Aretakis, said an expert had matched the letter to a typewriter Thomas Zalay used to write poems.
Mr. Zalay died in a fire at his parents' home 13 months after Bishop Hubbard, then 38, was elevated to his rank. A local newspaper said the fire was confined to Mr. Zalay's bedroom and was under investigation. The death certificate lists asphyxiation as the cause of death, but his family maintains it was suicide. Andrew Zalay also found a second, handwritten suicide note that made no mention of a bishop.
Mr. Zalay, reached yesterday at his home in Laguna Niguel, Calif., said the relationship between his brother and the bishop had been a family secret for decades. ''When I came across these papers, it kind of clicked what happened to my brother,'' he said. ''If I didn't do this, other people would be in harm's way,'' he said of why he went public.
Mr. Zalay said his brother's death devastated his family. He said that while he knew of no official determination about his brother's death, his parents told him he had poured gasoline in his room and set the fire. He said his brother was a happy child and altar boy who loved the church. ''From his writing it sounds like he went to the bishop for spiritual purposes and the bishop used him for sexual purposes,'' he said. ''The family has this shame, and the only way out was to commit suicide.''
The bishop said he had no memory of ever meeting Thomas Zalay, or of the family even being part of the diocese. He said he would not resign. ''I believe I would be wrong to dignify an absolutely false charge by walking away from my responsibilities here,'' the bishop said. ''My life has been in a sense an open book. I can only look people in the eye and say this never happened.''
He has weathered a number of storms since the clerical abuse scandal began two years ago. At least eight priests have been removed from ministry for abuse allegations. The diocese says it found ''reasonable cause'' to believe in allegations against 18 priests over 53 years.
Mr. Zalay's lawyer, Mr. Aretakis, has been a prime adversary of the diocese. He has filed at least five lawsuits against it or its officials that are indirectly related to abuse charges. One was dropped, three were dismissed, and a fifth is pending. He is also the subject of ethics complaints by diocesan officials.
