Conceptualism, the most easily transportable artistic practice, spread like a highly contagious virus all over the world in the late 1960's and 70's. ''Parallel Actions: Conceptual Tendencies in Central European Art From 1965 to 1980,'' an exhibition at the Austrian Cultural Forum, focuses on that one region where it flourished -- parallel, as the title suggests, to its occurrence elsewhere.
The show was organized by Hedwig Saxenhuber and Georg Schoellhammer, who are Viennese curators and magazine editors. Few of the more than a dozen artists represented will be familiar to New Yorkers. Their countries include Austria, Croatia, the Czech Republic, Serbia and Slovenia. Among the participants, Valie Export of Austria, who once famously invited passers-by to feel her breasts inside a cardboard box covering her chest, is the best known in the United States.
This show's visual interest is minimal: various forms of paper make up most of what is displayed -- photographs, collages, posters and other printed matter, as well as some grainy, semiabstract films shown on video monitors. There is already a look of antiquity about most of this material. And without a catalog to fill in artistic, social and political backgrounds, much of it remains enigmatic to a contemporary New York viewer.
Still, the show provides an intriguing glimpse of what some radically minded people thought was worth doing in the name of art at a certain moment in history and in places remote from the Western world's major urban art centers.
Among the works on view are black-and-white photographs with typewritten texts documenting absurdist performances by Jiri Kovanda of the Czech Republic, which recall 1960's performances by American artists like Vito Acconci and Adrian Piper. The caption for one picture, of Mr. Kovanda apparently doing nothing in particular, explains that he was performing actions scripted so that passers-by would not realize he was doing an art performance. In another case he rides up an escalator while standing backward and locking eyes with the person behind him.
Some art historical context might help at this point. Conceptualism is a late development in a centuries-old debate about whether artists should be seen as mere artisans or as intellectuals on a par with poets, philosophers and scientists. Modernism advanced the debate by devaluing craft and repositioning the artist as an innovator of ways of seeing and thinking about art, the self, society and the world.
Meanwhile, from modern philosophy, the idea arose that reality is not fixed but is shaped or constructed by the way people think, what they believe and how they describe the world. This gave Conceptualism its traction: if you could change the way people ordinarily think, you could change the world.
And to do that, you needn't do much. Slight but purposeful deviations from ordinary modes of thought or behavior, like those performed by Mr. Kovanda, might conceivably alter whole cultural and social landscapes. It is the art world's version of the butterfly effect.
One instance of this line of thought is Milenko Matanovic's ''Collective Fixing of the Point.'' In the gallery, Mr. Matanovic's work appears as a small photograph of an antique statue on a tall column, with a little circle inscribed just above the statue's head. A text invites people to concentrate on an imaginary point above the statue in Slovenia, the country where the artist lived; this is to be done from 11 a.m. to noon on a certain date and thereby ''inscribe the point into the memory of the world.'' As the artists of the Fluxus movement had come to believe, going from individual imagination to global reality might not be such a great leap.
Another strategy was to focus on art world conventions. For his 1971 exhibition Goran Trbuljak of Croatia simply put up posters announcing, ''I do not wish to show anything new and original.'' In theory, at least, Mr. Trbuljak's Bartlebyesque renunciation would cause viewers to reflect critically and subversively on the arbitrary nature of the art system and its connection to broader, equally arbitrary systems -- academic, economic, governmental and otherwise.
Sanja Ivekovic, a Croatian artist, confronted contemporary politics and power directly in a 1979 performance called ''Triangle,'' documented by photographs and text. The prose explains that while President Tito of Yugoslavia was going by in a motorcade outside Ms. Ivekovic's apartment, she sat on her balcony reading, sipping whiskey and pretending to masturbate in full view of a surveillance officer stationed in a building across the street. The police quickly came to her door and ordered her to stop. What, if any, further consequences followed we are not told.
This is the big question raised by an exhibition of this sort. Unlike paintings and sculptures, which are comparatively self-sufficient, the kind of activities addressed here do not travel well without good supplementary information.
Julius Koller, a Slovakian who invented something called the anti-happening, organized a group of young artists into a Ping-Pong club, founded an organization called U.F.O. (for ''Universal Futurological Operations'') and continues to make an annual absurd photographic self-portrait as a ''U.F.O.-naut.'' He looks like an artist worth getting to know better, and others may be also.
But without more information about the contexts that these artists worked within and what influence, if any, their works had in the world, one feels more baffled than informed. And the skeptic is allowed too easily to conclude that it all might amount to not very much.
''Parallel Actions: Conceptual Tendencies in Central European Art From 1965 to 1980'' remains on view at the Austrian Cultural Forum, 11 East 52nd Street, Manhattan, (212) 319-5300, through March 20.
ART REVIEW
