Football may come to resemble basketball, with underclassmen leaving school earlier or attempting to jump from high school to the National Football League, if Maurice Clarett's successful challenge to the league's eligibility requirement is upheld, coaches, administrators and other experts said yesterday.
Judge Shira A. Scheindlin of the United States District Court in Manhattan ruled yesterday that the N.F.L.'s refusal to admit players until three years beyond high school violates antitrust laws and that Clarett should be made eligible for the league draft.
The N.F.L. said it will appeal the decision, but if that appeal fails, coaches and administrators said they had no doubt that a number of players would join Clarett in challenging the draft rules.
On one hand, younger players would find opportunities for employment.
On the other hand, greater risks would be created for injury in a professional sport that requires physical maturity, for further devaluing education and for diluting talent both at the college and professional levels, experts said.
Greg Toal, who coached Don Bosco Prep of Ramsey, N.J., to a 23-0 record the past two seasons, said he was certain that some N.F.L. team would select a high school senior, likely a running back, a position that relies on vision and instinct as much as technical skill.
''I think it's a fair ruling,'' Toal said. ''If someone has the ability to play in the N.F.L. and doesn't want to be in college, they shouldn't be there.''
The National Collegiate Athletic Association expressed concern that graduation rates would decrease further if all underclassmen were able to enter the N.F.L. draft. The graduation rate for Division I football players is 54 percent, two percentage points below that of the overall male student population, said Wally Renfro, senior adviser to the N.C.A.A.'s president, Myles Brand.
''From an educational standpoint, we are disappointed with this decision,'' Renfro said. ''This opens the door for more student-athletes to leave early without a degree than ever before.''
Bruce Svare, director of the National Institute for Sports Reform, said he saw positives and negatives in yesterday's court ruling.
''I see no problem with Clarett and others skilled enough to be able to earn a buck,'' said Svare, who is a professor of psychology at SUNY-Albany.
College freshmen and sophomores who only want to play football will not have to feign an interest in education, Svare said, thus reducing some hypocrisy in big-time college football.
But less than 2 percent of college football players make it in the N.F.L., according to the N.C.A.A. And, unlike the National Basketball Association, the N.F.L. generally does not offer guaranteed contracts. Young athletes who fail to make the N.F.L. will be left in a kind of athletic purgatory, Svare said, without a degree or a chance to earn significant money in a developmental league.
''What I worry about most is the message that increasingly is being sent to younger kids, especially African-Americans, that this is the route to the promised land,'' Svare said. ''I think that pressure for football players is going to be ratcheted up even more. And those kids who are good athletes are going to view getting ahead by way of education even less so.''
By the count of Nick Saban, coach of the co-national champion Louisiana State, 35 underclassmen were selected in the N.F.L. draft last year, 12 in the first two rounds.
''I don't think you can keep someone from making a living by law,'' Saban said of yesterday's ruling. But, he noted, football is a game that requires tremendous physical development, and players get dramatically stronger between ages 18 and 23.
''My big concern is that a lot more guys with less maturity and less development are going to be put in a position of making a decision of whether they should go for the draft,'' Saban said.
This would be potentially dangerous for younger athletes who would be competing against players five or 10 years older in the N.F.L., said Dick Beck, coach of North Penn High in Landsdale, Pa., the Pennsylvania Class AAAA state football champion.
Ken Hatfield, coach at Rice University and president of the American Football Coaches Association, said he also feared that agents would begin to entice players at a younger age, playing havoc with rules regarding amateurism.
''All you are asking for is more agents to start marketing everybody for the almighty dollar,'' Hatfield said. ''We have a hard enough time controlling our boosters. You've got no control over agents and unscrupulous people who say, 'I'll take care of you and you'll go to the NFL.' ''
Only hours after the Clarett decision, the N.F.L. declared Larry Fitzgerald, a sophomore receiver at Pittsburgh, eligible for the draft because he had been out of high school for three years. But no other players petitioned the league to join Clarett.
Mike Williams, a star sophomore receiver at the co-national champion Southern California, said in a statement: ''Who knows, maybe it will open the door for others who think they can succeed. But I always thought the rule was fine the way it was.''
Pete Carroll, the U.S.C. coach and former N.F.L. head coach, said he did not think relaxed draft rules would have a drastic impact on college football. ''Certain guys can handle it better than others, but the transition into the N.F.L. is not as easy as they might think,'' Carroll said in a statement. ''It's hard enough when you're 22 or 23, let alone 18 or 19. They don't know what it's like in the N.F.L. from an emotional and social and cultural standpoint.''
Others wonder whether younger players will increasingly be embraced by the N.F.L. as a valuable source of cheap labor for salary-cap purposes. The risk is that college and professional football could have a drop in the caliber of play, as many believe has occurred in basketball.
''I can't imagine this wouldn't increase the number of college players who leave early, and set the N.F.L. into a position where the N.F.L. has found itself,'' said Richard Lapchick, chairman of the DeVos sports business management program at the University of Central Florida. ''The earlier they go, the more it dilutes the talent because players are not well enough developed. In football, it's even more exaggerated.''
FOOTBALL
