While John Kerry continues to rake in money and Howard Dean taps thousands of online supporters as he makes his last stand, Senator John Edwards is being forced to work hard to raise enough cash to capitalize on his momentum from his victory in South Carolina on Tuesday and strong showings elsewhere.
Mr. Edwards, who gets praise from fund-raisers for strong money management, took a detour from the campaign trail this week to attend fund-raisers for his presidential campaign in New York and New Jersey and continues to make solicitation calls.
But fund-raisers say that without the broad network that Mr. Kerry has or the strong Internet roots of Dr. Dean, Mr. Edwards must struggle to compete financially.
''He's probably raised a lot of money, but not in the quantities that he needs to compete with Kerry,'' said Rick Davis, who managed John McCain's presidential campaign in 2000. ''He was poorly positioned, as far as infrastructure for fund-raising goes, to take advantage of the momentum he got.''
Because Mr. Edwards has raised much of his money from donors who have already given him the maximum contribution -- $2,000 -- and because the campaign has not focused on Internet fund-raising, he must now reach out to new donors with very little time. Edwards campaign officials say that they are equal to the task.
''We will not lose this campaign for lack of money,'' said Fred Baron, a financial co-chairman for the campaign. ''We are exceeding our goals significantly.''
Aides have set up volunteer phone banks to make fund-raising calls and drawn on lists of contributors who were orphaned when Representative Richard A. Gephardt and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman left the race. They are also soliciting online. On Monday they sent out an e-mail message that rewarded every $50 contribution with a recipe for peanut butter pie.
Candidates are all scrambling for cash as they roll through critical primaries in the next month, including the Super Tuesday contest on March 2, when 11 states vote.
While it is not clear exactly how much candidates have raised and spent this year because financial reports are not yet public, Mr. Edwards raised roughly $1.6 million from the Iowa vote Jan. 19 to the first of this month, his aides said. The campaign has raised another $240,000 over the Internet since Tuesday and at least as much through other means, aides say.
Dr. Dean, by contrast, has yet to win a primary but raised more than $540,000 on the Internet on Thursday alone after he announced that he must win in Wisconsin to continue in the race, a campaign official said. He has raised about $4 million since Iowa, the aide said.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark's campaign, which suspended employee salaries this week to save money, has raised about $380,000 since Tuesday and between $1.7 million and $2 million since Iowa, aides say.
Kerry campaign officials say their candidate's has raised about $4.5 million since Iowa, with about half coming in over the Internet. Aides say that victories in Iowa, New Hampshire and elsewhere have re-ignited his large network of fund-raisers. He met with donors and fund-raisers in New York on Thursday.
''We're doing as well at fund-raising as we have at any time during this campaign,'' said Alan Solomont, a top Kerry fund-raiser.
A former trial lawyer, Mr. Edwards was a fund-raising leader early in the race, reaping millions from members of the legal community. But he raised less each quarter and, after spending about $16.2 million last year, he emerged in December with just $275,000 on hand and $585,000 in debt, campaign finance reports show.
But fund-raisers and political analysts say Mr. Edwards has been extremely savvy with his money. The campaign is lean on staff and cuts expenses where it can, with employees often sleeping in supporters' homes to avoid hotel costs. Advertising was limited to states where the candidate was competitive.
Mr. Edwards also participated in the public financing program, which Mr. Kerry and Dr. Dean rejected, and was entitled to about $3.4 million in January. This kept him in business -- and on the air -- through the crucial early primaries.
With his financial discipline, Mr. Edwards stands in contrast to Dr. Dean, who stopped advertising amid money troubles brought on by heavy spending, and Mr. Kerry, who mortgaged his house to inject money into the campaign before his victories rekindled fund-raising.
Mr. Edwards has received only about $289,000 in public financing in February and the campaign is again picking its targets, focusing attention on Tennessee, Virginia and Wisconsin as competitive states.
''They got a lot of credibility and they didn't spend a lot to get it,'' said Tony Coelho, a Democratic strategist not aligned with any campaign. ''They have enough to stay in the game, as long as they keep replenishing it. It's been done very well.''
Some political strategists and fund-raisers say Mr. Edwards must win Tennessee or Virginia next Tuesday or his money will dry up. Others say he will have to perform well outside the South to raise enough to be competitive in the March 2 states.
''That's going to be hard for him to do,'' said Mitchell Berger, a top fund-raiser for Mr. Lieberman. ''It's not impossible, but it's hard.''
Super Tuesday is a challenge, Mr. Baron acknowledges.
''That's a big mountain for us,'' he said. ''I feel good about where we are until March 2. We are not fully funded for March 2, but I don't think anybody is.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
