Directed by Lucas Belvaux  In French, with English subtitles  Not rated, 100 minutes
''An Amazing Couple,'' the second installment in Lucas Belvaux's exhaustingly ambitious ''Trilogy'' to open in Manhattan, was the first to be released in France. This may prove one of Mr. Belvaux's main structural points, namely that narrative order, even in more or less realist filmmaking, is arbitrary. A lot of things happen to different people at the same time, and the self-conscious practice of sorting out simultaneous events and arranging them in generic packages -- a thriller (''On the Run,'' which opened last week), a melodrama (''After the Life,'' which arrives next week) or a comedy (''An Amazing Couple'') -- provides the director with his self-conscious formal gimmick.
Luckily it does not intrude too much on the more conventional pleasures of the movie, which unravels in a classically farcical domestic misunderstanding. Whereas ''On the Run,'' despite some sinewy dramatic moments, failed to be very thrilling, ''Couple'' is, for the most part, pretty funny. It helps enormously that the protagonist, a fussy, hypochondriacal lawyer named Alain, is played by François Morel, whose rubbery, hangdog face and slumping posture take some pressure off Mr. Belvaux, who as a farceur is more competent than dazzling.
Alain, told by his doctor that he needs some minor surgery, decides to keep this fact a secret from his wife, Cécile (Ornella Muti), who concludes that he is having an affair. To keep abreast of Alain's imagined philanderings, she engages Pascal (Gilbert Melki), a morose police inspector who is the husband of one of her colleagues (and also the pursuer of a left-wing terrorist who escaped from prison -- the character played by Mr. Belvaux in ''On the Run'').
Pascal, hoping to find evidence of Alain's deceit, promptly falls in love with Cécile, leading Alain to conclude that she is the unfaithful one, and that she is moreover at the center of a conspiracy to have him killed. The film is an elegant crescendo of collisions and missed connections, punctuated by variations on the vain protestation errant spouses always seem to fall back on: this isn't what it looks like.
And ''An Amazing Couple'' isn't either, exactly. The film's tableau of duplicity and innocent schemes gone awry is shadowed by the grim business of ''On the Run'' and the swelling pathos of ''After the Life.'' Some of the scenes are like mislaid puzzle pieces, and they snap into place only when all three movies have been seen and absorbed. This makes watching any one of the episodes both more interesting and more frustrating than it might otherwise be, since a portion of dramatic satisfaction is always withheld.
A. O. SCOTT
FILM IN REVIEW
