A businessman with close ties to Gov. John G. Rowland has made an extra $700,000 on property he leases to the state in New Haven because of irregularities in the way the renewal was handled, state auditors have concluded.
This is the second time state officials have been criticized for issuing lucrative leases to friends or associates of the governor.
The other lease involves a building in Windsor, Conn., that is owned by Mark and Allicia Wertheim, who are friends of the governor and his wife. In an investigation in 2002, Connecticut's attorney general found that the lease was ''rigged'' to provide other payments to the Wertheims beyond the $838,000-a-year lease payments, and four state employees were disciplined as a result.
In the most recent case, the landlord is Robert V. Matthews, a local entrepreneur who has drawn the attention of federal investigators looking into whether the Rowland administration has steered contracts to favored parties. The state has until Feb. 19 to produce records concerning Mr. Matthews and his companies. Mr. Matthews received a personal subpoena in June.
As a friend and former neighbor of Mr. Rowland's, Mr. Matthews acknowledges having done favors for Mr. Rowland before and after he became governor in 1995. When Mr. Rowland separated from his first wife in 1992, he moved temporarily into a carriage house on Mr. Matthews's property. Nine years later, Mr. Matthews allowed the governor to vacation at his home in Palm Beach, Fla., in a deal that caused the State Ethics Commission in Connecticut to impose fines and restitution.
Mr. Matthews also got involved when the governor no longer needed his condominium in Washington, D.C. Mr. Matthews arranged for his niece to rent it and then helped find a buyer who paid the governor $68,500, far more than comparable units in the building were fetching.
The relationship has not been one-way. Companies owned by Mr. Matthews have received millions of dollars of economic assistance from the state, and Mr. Rowland once made a phone call from a golf course to help woo a company to Connecticut on Mr. Matthews's behalf. Mr. Rowland has said such calls fell squarely within his duties as the state's chief corporate recruiter.
More recently, Mr. Matthews has complained that his ties to Mr. Rowland have hurt, rather than helped, him in his dealings with the state.
Specifically, he has said that the Department of Public Works' wariness about renewing its lease at 1 Long Wharf in New Haven, given his relationship with the governor, cost him money because it was keeping him from getting the going rate on that space. With the space being used by social service agencies, he said, he did not want to use eviction to cut his losses.
But the state's top two auditors, Kevin P. Johnston, a Democrat, and Robert G. Jaekle, a Republican who was Mr. Rowland's running mate in his unsuccessful bid for governor in 1990, issued an opinion last month that the process by which Mr. Matthews's lease was renewed contained many irregularities.
They said the state's failure to renew the lease by the June 4, 1999, deadline reopened the deal, forcing the state to pay $1.54 per square foot in additional rent each year to stay put. They said the lapse also played a role in the state's having to pay about $95,000 a year for additional parking.
The auditors also concluded that state employees knew and failed to tell the State Properties Review Board, which reviews leases, that the consultant whose expertise they were relying on, Archie D'Amato, worked for Mr. Matthews. Mr. D'Amato was presented to the oversight board as a ''private consultant with a long history of real estate expertise in the Connecticut market'' who could corroborate the need to pay $70 a month per car for the overflow parking that was no longer covered by the new lease.
Mr. Matthews did not return phone calls seeking comment for this article.
In the past, he has defended his dealings at 1 Long Wharf by noting that the lease predated the Rowland administration. In an essay he wrote for The Hartford Courant last June, he remarked, ''Can someone show me how long-term leases, put in place under Gov. Lowell Weicker's administration, could be affected by John Rowland?''
Nothing in the auditors' letter, dated Jan. 16, 2004, tied the governor to the renewal of the lease. But the auditors concluded that the state would have been entitled to renew the original five-year lease, which expired on Dec. 1, 1999, for $14.46 a square foot had it simply notified the landlord by June 4, 1999. The original lease would have also entitled the state to some additional parking at no charge.
In a letter dated July 3, 2003, Theodore R. Anson, then commissioner of the Department of Public Works, said that the department's failure to meet the deadline was a ''clerical error.'' Mr. Anson resigned from his post in September after admitting to having accepted free architectural plans for his home from a state contractor.
The auditors sharply criticized the state's handling of the renewal, saying, there was no documentation that the department had mailed the notice on time or made any effort to persuade Mr. Matthews to honor the terms in the original lease.
Alan S. Plofsky, the executive director of the Ethics Commission, was the first to raise questions about the renewal last year, and referred the matter in June to the state's auditors for further study.
Now that the auditors have substantiated Mr. Plofsky's assertions, they have taken the next step: referring the matter to the governor for possible action.
''We've read the auditor's report and we're reviewing it,'' said Ross Garber, the governor's in-house counsel.
