Assemblyman Roger L. Green of Brooklyn pleaded guilty Thursday to stealing money from the Legislature by submitting false travel expenses, making a deal with Albany prosecutors that allows him to keep his seat, at least until the November elections.
Mr. Green, 54, appeared before Judge William A. Carter this morning in state court here and said he was guilty of two counts of petty larceny and one count of filing a false instrument. In doing so, he acknowledged for the first time in public that he had billed the Assembly for travel after taking free rides to Albany from a prison-services company seeking state contracts.
''I obtained funds that I was not entitled to by seeking and receiving reimbursement for travel expenses that I did not incur,'' the Brooklyn Democrat told the judge. ''I got caught up in this practice.''
The Albany district attorney, Paul A. Clyne, also a Democrat, said his investigation had revealed a widespread practice of lawmakers being reimbursed for driving to and from Albany without having to document their spending for travel. He described a lax policy in the Legislature as ''don't ask, don't tell'' and said many lawmakers seemed to think the reimbursement for travel expenses was a perquisite of the job. The Legislature does not do a good job auditing these reimbursements, Mr. Clyne said.
''This is a significant plea, in my opinion, because it basically puts the rest of the Legislature on notice that if they are going to engage in this kind of behavior, siphoning off public funds, it's going to be prosecuted,'' Mr. Clyne said.
Members of the Senate and Assembly receive a per-day payment of $142 for lodging and meals in Albany and must submit receipts for train and air fares for traveling to Albany from their home districts. But they operate on an honor system when it comes to mileage they put on their cars, receiving 36 cents a mile, a spokesman for the Assembly majority, Charles Carrier, said. The reimbursements in the Assembly are audited by outside accountants every three years, he said.
As part of his bargain with Mr. Clyne, Mr. Green escaped having to plead guilty to a felony, which would have prevented him from standing for re-election next fall. Instead, he agreed to be placed on probation for three years, pay back $3,000 to New York State and pay a fine of $2,000 for the petty larceny convictions.
About a half-hour after his appearance, Mr. Green, who earns $92,000 a year as a legislator, came out of court with his lawyer, his wife and his mother. He declined to say whether he would run for office again.
''Truth be told, I never consider running for office until the petition process,'' he said. But he said he hoped his decision to admit to the charges would remove a cloud hanging over the Legislature. ''I felt it was appropriate for me to acknowledge I made a mistake, that I erred,'' he said. ''I apologize to my constituents and also to my colleagues for embarrassment this may have caused.''
The investigation into Mr. Green's travel expenses grew out of a larger inquiry into the lobbying activities of the Correctional Services Corporation, a Florida company that runs halfway houses for state prisoners.
A year ago, the corporation agreed to pay a $300,000 fine to the state's Lobbying Commission after it was revealed that it had failed to report free transportation, meals and other gifts it had given to legislators in its efforts to keep millions of dollars in state contracts.
Mr. Green, once one of the most powerful lawmakers in the Assembly, was one of a dozen people the company courted. Prosecutors say that the company's van ferried him to Albany without charge dozens of times in 2001 and 2002 and that Mr. Green later requested reimbursements from the Assembly for roughly 30 of those trips.
The company's efforts to curry favor with lawmakers came to light during a separate investigation by the Manhattan district attorney that led to the conviction of a former Bronx assemblywoman, Gloria Davis, who admitted taking free rides from the company, among other things. Ms. Davis quit the Assembly and served a prison term.
Mr. Clyne would not say whether other lawmakers were under investigation for submitting false travel expenses. ''I'm not going to comment on whether anyone else is on the radar screen,'' he said.
Mr. Green is a leader in the Democratic Party organization in Brooklyn and the former head of the Black and Puerto Rican Caucus in the Assembly. His star has dimmed over the last year, however, as the investigation hung over his head.
In a prepared statement, the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, said he would convene a panel of Assembly members to review the chamber's reimbursement procedures. ''I am deeply troubled by the facts of this case and fully recognize that wrongdoing or impropriety among elected officials is a serious concern for all New Yorkers,'' he said.
