The White House praised President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan on Thursday for breaking up what now appears to have been one of the world's largest nuclear proliferation networks, and made little mention of his decision to pardon Abdul Qadeer Khan, the scientist at its center, and terminate any investigations into whether the military was involved.
In a reflection of how far the administration is going to bolster General Musharraf, the White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, declined to answer questions from reporters traveling here with President Bush about whether the United States would now press Pakistan to sign the nuclear nonproliferation treaty.
In the past few months, the White House has issued stern warnings that Libya and Iran must fully comply with the treaty -- including allowing highly intrusive inspections by international inspectors -- and demanded that North Korea rejoin the treaty, which it renounced last year.
Dr. Khan, the creator of the Pakistani bomb, has admitted that his network aided all three countries. But administration officials are certain that Pakistan would not submit to the treaty's requirements, which would include dismantling its nuclear weapons arsenal and allowing international oversight of its government-run Khan laboratories, the center of the Pakistani proliferation network.
With General Musharraf in a precarious political position after two assassination attempts against him in December, and with American forces needing his cooperation in hunting down Al Qaeda terrorists, administration officials are reluctant to make the kinds of demands of Pakistan it has made of other nations.
But in Vienna on Thursday, the director general of the International Atomic Energy Agency, Mohamed ElBaradei, said Dr. Khan's confession was only ''the tip of an iceberg.'' In contrast with the Bush administration's assessment, Dr. ElBaradei said that Dr. Khan's admission ''raises more questions than it answers.''
''It's a supermarket,'' he said of the maze of clandestine nuclear buyers, shippers, middlemen and manufacturers in the network extending out from Pakistan that Dr. Khan fostered. ''It's the most dangerous phenomena we've seen in the nonproliferation area for many years.''
But Dr. ElBaradei said that his agency was satisfied so far with the help it was receiving from Pakistan in its effort to track down and stop the underground proliferation. ''We expect that we'll get more information,'' Dr. ElBaradei said. ''But they are cooperating well.''
As Mr. Bush traveled between Washington and South Carolina, the administration's approach was to portray President Musharraf as a close and reliable ally who was working in his own way to battle nuclear proliferation. The proliferation network ''is no longer,'' Mr. McClellan said. ''The actions of Pakistan have broken up this network.''
Mr. McClellan seemed to take at face value -- at least in public -- the Pakistani story that the military was not involved.
''President Musharraf provided us assurances that the government of Pakistan was not involved in any kind of proliferation activities,'' he told reporters aboard Air Force One. ''We value those assurances and his actions since he made those assurances demonstrate his commitment to the issue of proliferation.''
Some administration intelligence experts place little stock in those assessments. In interviews over the past three months, many of them concluded that there was little chance that the laboratory that is the crown jewel of the Pakistani military could have operated so long, sometimes using military planes to deliver its goods, without the cooperation of many in the upper echelon of the government.
But administration officials tend to view the pardon of Dr. Khan as akin to a plea bargain, and they are hoping that President Musharraf will use it to extract more information about which countries bought the nuclear designs and parts.
Dr. ElBaradei, addressing a seminar of nonproliferation experts, and then talking to reporters, said the rogue Pakistani scientist was only the most visible part of an emerging and sophisticated ''global black market'' in nuclear weapons technology. He said the new revelations about this market exposed serious lapses in the world's nonproliferation regime.
''You need a complete overhaul of the export-control system,'' he said. ''It's a small group of countries working with a gentleman's agreement, and that's not working.''
