An agency company based in Toronto, Wolf Group Integrated Communications, which has extensive holdings in the United States, is suddenly unraveling, closing its New York operation and selling or closing all but one of its remaining offices.
The rapid disappearance of Wolf, which began last Friday in New York, is an unwelcome reminder to Madison Avenue of the fragility of the recovery of the advertising economy that is anticipated this year.
''There's always this optimism with advertising agencies, 'If I get one more win, it'll be O.K.,''' Sharon Napier, president and chief executive at the Wolf office in Rochester, said yesterday.
''I think we all knew it was going to be a very tough year when we saw the financials for the whole network,'' Ms. Napier said, referring to the offices in Atlanta, Cleveland, New York and Toronto as well as Rochester. ''I'm not sure anyone realized it could end so abruptly.''
The problems at Wolf, which had 2002 revenue estimated at $37 million by the trade publication Advertising Age, are being traced to an ambitious expansion during the industry boom in the mid- to late 1990's.
The office in New York was formed in 1998 through the acquisition of a well-known midsize agency, Partners &amp; Shevack, and the office in Atlanta was opened in 1999 by the managers of the Rochester agency to help serve a large client of theirs, Eastman Kodak.
Wolf ''bought a lot of agencies and ran up some good numbers in the good years,'' said Stan Sutter, associate publisher and editorial director at the Marketing Media Group in Toronto, a division of Rogers Media that publishes Marketing Magazine, the Canadian advertising trade weekly. ''But were they really the great properties to buy?''
Gay Haines, worldwide chief executive at Kendall Tarrant, the recruiting company in London that specializes in advertising, said that agency companies like Wolf took part in a buying binge ''when acquisitions were the name of the game at any price.''
Ms. Haines contrasted that approach to the one taken by agency companies that sought to expand by ''buying good businesses at a reasonable price and, more importantly, pick up great talent'' when their overexpanded counterparts stumble.
For instance, last week, as Wolf was disintegrating, another company based in Toronto, MDC Partners, was acquiring 60 percent of the Kirshenbaum Bond Creative Network in New York, which owns shops like Kirshenbaum Bond &amp; Partners and Media Kitchen.
Larry Wolf, the chairman of Wolf, who founded the agency company in 1967 with his wife, Mary, said in a statement this week that ''this past year was extremely difficult for us financially, which unfortunately led us to this decision'' to close and sell so many operations.
The Cleveland office remains open, Mr. Wolf said in his statement.
In addition to the closing of the New York office, where 50 people worked, Wolf closed its Toronto agency, called Flavor, and sold the Rochester agency along with the Atlanta office to Ms. Napier and other senior managers there.
Ms. Napier said she and the other managers completed the buyout agreement with Wolf, ''which we were hoping to do anyway,'' last Friday. She will continue as president and chief executive for the Rochester and Atlanta operations, which are being renamed.
Ms. Napier said that she ''didn't have any idea the New York office was closing till the afternoon on Friday.''
Nor did the 50 employees there, the trade publication Adweek reported on its Web site. They were told that day of the decision by Paul Kelly, president and chief executive at Wolf, in a visit from Toronto. Days later, Mr. Kelly resigned his posts at Wolf.
For several years, the New York office landed additional assignments from clients as well as gaining new accounts in reviews. But the streak ended last year when the agency came up short in 10 reviews, Adweek.com reported.
Last year, the office also lost the contract to create the Empire State Development Corporation's ''I Love New York'' tourism campaign, with spending estimated at $8 million a year, as well as the media planning and buying duties on the account for the Scotts Company, the maker of lawn- and garden-care products, with billings estimated at $80 million.
The Wolf New York office did keep the creative assignment for Scotts, which is shifting to an agency being formed by Mike Rogers, who had been executive creative director at Wolf New York.
Gordon Hecker, senior vice president for North American marketing at Scotts in Marysville, Ohio, confirmed a report by Adweek.com that the company would hire Mr. Rogers's new agency, the M.L. Rogers Agency, to handle the creative assignment.
The fate of other accounts at the New York office when it closed, including the AAMCO automotive-repair chain, Equal sweetener and Mott's food products, is unclear.
The sudden end to Wolf does not seem to daunt an agency executive with expansion on his mind, Scott Goodson, creative partner at StrawberryFrog in Amsterdam, which just opened its first full-service outpost outside the Netherlands, in New York.
''There's room for everybody,'' Mr. Goodson said, ''except for some people.''
''The reason we want to come into the States,'' he added, ''is that the greatest brands are in the U.S., and the greatest marketing people, and StrawberryFrog wants to be part of that.''
As for the notion that the Wolf executives based in Toronto probably at one time had similar thoughts, Mr. Goodson said that he and his colleagues have ''managing more efficiently, faster and better'' as foremost on their minds rather than expansion for expansion's sake.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
