When the United States opens a two-day meeting of finance ministers from the Group of 7 industrialized nations on Friday, the Bush administration will come under fire for a plunging dollar and a surging budget deficit.
Though officially still committed to a strong dollar, Treasury Secretary John W. Snow is fending off European leaders who fear that the dollar has fallen so far against the euro that European exports will soon be in jeopardy.
The dollar has lost more than one-quarter of its value against the euro over the last year, and it has declined to a three-year low against the yen despite intervention by the Bank of Japan to keep the yen from rising.
The weak dollar has provided a big lift to American exporters, because it makes American products cheap in other markets. Exports shot up 19.1 percent in the last three months of 2003, and all signs point to further increases ahead.
''They are delighted with the cheap dollar, because the cheap dollar creates jobs in an election year at the expense of foreigners, who don't vote,'' said Carl Weinberg, chief economist at High Frequency Economics, an economic forecasting business in Valhalla, N.Y.
Ben S. Bernanke, a Federal Reserve governor, predicted Thursday that the trend on exports would continue. ''The dollar has come down, and I think that will pass through over time to a strengthening of our export markets and will help us recover some of this trade deficit that we have been facing,'' Mr. Bernanke said in a speech in South Carolina, Reuters reported.
Mr. Bernanke gave a mostly optimistic assessment of the economy and said the Fed had the luxury to be patient about any increase in interest rates because of low inflation.
At its last meeting in late January, the Fed left the federal funds rate on overnight loans between banks at just 1 percent, but retreated from its promise to keep rates low for ''a considerable period.''
At the same time, President Bush's new budget proposal has convinced many traders that the federal budget deficit will remain quite high for years to come and that the United States will be an even bigger borrower of foreign money than it already is.
New details about Mr. Bush's budget suggest that the deficit will not decline by half over five years, as the administration has predicted, even though cuts to domestic programs will be even deeper than first imagined.
Among other things, the White House has proposed a new tax credit for uninsured people to buy catastrophic health insurance. The measure would reduce revenue by $65 billion over 10 years, but the administration listed the cost as zero because it promised that it would find -- though it did not spell out -- other ways to offset the credit's expense.
President Bush has vowed to reduce the deficit to $237 billion in 2009 from $521 billion this year. But that estimate does not include the cost of keeping troops in Iraq or the tax changes the administration supports that would cost at least $2 trillion over the next 10 years.
European leaders are fretting that the combined impact of the United States' budget and trade deficits will hurt their growth.
''The twin deficits are a concern in this respect,'' Ernst Welteke, president of Germany's central bank, said in a speech earlier this week. ''The domestic causes of these imbalances need to be addressed.''
European countries like Germany and France have budget deficits that are at least proportionate to that of the United States. But that has not prevented European leaders from complaining about the United States' rising indebtedness to the rest of the world.
Senior Treasury officials say the budget deficits have had little or no effect on the trade deficit or on interest rates. The real problem, they contend, is that Europe and Japan need to speed their own growth to rates closer to those of the United States.
But the declining dollar could make the budget deficits more expensive to finance. Foreign investors, and foreign central banks in particular, have been the biggest buyers by far of United States Treasury securities, and the weakening of the dollar reduces the value of those holdings.
Last year, analysts estimate that the Japanese government bought about $200 billion in American securities, largely as a way to prop up the dollar in relation to the yen. In January, the Japanese intervened even more extensively, buying up about $67 billion.
But a sharp drop in the dollar reduces the value of American securities held by the central banks as well as by foreign private investors. To the extent that foreign demand for Treasury securities wanes, the United States will be forced to offer higher interest rates to finance its borrowing.
C. Fred Bergsten, director of the Institute for International Economics, a policy research group in Washington, said the Bush administration was feeling little remorse.
''The administration wants a continued gradual orderly decline in the dollar, and the Europeans want to stop the rise in the euro,'' Mr. Bergsten said. American and European leaders would like to see the Japanese reduce their intervention and the Chinese relax their policy of locking their own currency, the yuan, at a fixed exchange rate to the dollar.
Regardless of what the administration does, analysts predict that the dollar will continue to fall for some time. The United States is now running a current-account deficit of $500 billion a year, or 5 percent of the gross domestic product. The current account is the broadest measure of trade and financial balances with the rest of the world.
Alan Greenspan, chairman of the Federal Reserve, has called that imbalance unsustainable. A drop in the dollar serves as an automatic adjustment mechanism, making exports cheaper and imports more expensive.
But some analysts predict that investors are now so pessimistic about the dollar that they could push it down much further if the Group of 7 countries show willingness to stem the decline.
Investors will be closely watching the communiqué issued by the finance ministers on Saturday. At the last meeting, the group helped depress the value of the dollar by issuing a united call for greater ''flexibility'' in exchange rates -- a message intended to pressure Asian nations, especially China, to allow their currencies to rise in value.
This time, European ministers would like some kind of acknowledgment that the dollar has fallen enough.
They would also like to drop the word ''flexibility,'' with its implication of letting the dollar float to whatever level set by the market.
Larry Greenberg, an international economist at Reid, Thunberg, an investment advisory firm, said the differences between Mr. Snow and his counterparts would not be easy to smooth over.
''The irreconcilable differences are clear,'' Mr. Greenberg said. ''The Europeans have staked out a position that the weak dollar is the Americans' fault. The American view is that they don't really care.''
