For Tommy Tolles, being back on the PGA Tour is a blessing. Being in contention is a bonus.
After being one of the Tour's top-30 money winners in 1996 and 1997, Tolles's game steadily declined. By 2001, he was no longer fully exempt on Tour, and he was primarily playing on the Nationwide Tour, sorely missing the big time.
''You can go play at your local club with your buds and get a few shots and still have good competition,'' Tolles said. ''But the atmosphere is just not the same. There is only one PGA Tour.''
By finishing 20th on last year's Nationwide Tour money list, Tolles earned his way back to the PGA Tour full time. Apparently, he intends to stay. In his first round of the year, Tolles shot a six-under-par 66 Thursday and was in third place, one stroke behind the co-leaders J. J. Henry and Matt Kuchar heading into Friday's second round of the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am.
Tolles and Henry played at Pebble Beach, while Kuchar played at Poppy Hills Golf Course.
At age 37, no longer inexperienced and wide-eyed, Tolles has learned to appreciate the beauty of Pebble Beach while handling his business. During a round that included seven birdies and one bogey, Tolles took in the scenery, yet rarely lost focus. It was a far cry from his first round at Pebble Beach in 1995.
''My rookie year out here, I was shell-shocked,'' said Tolles, an admitted introvert who lives a quiet life in Flat Rock, N.C. ''I had never seen so many people in my life. I've been to lots of rock concerts, seen 5,000 or 6,000 people, but never seen 60,000 people on a golf course. You learn to narrow your focus. When you get over the ball, you block everything out. It took me a while to learn that. That's all part of growing up and getting older, and I've got the wrinkles to prove that I'm old.''
Tolles looked headed for stardom during 1997, when he finished third at the Masters, tied for fifth at the United States Open and nearly made the 1997 Ryder Cup team. But soon after, his game started to fade. Bad swing habits became ingrained, and Tolles lost confidence.
Things only began to look up about two years ago, after Tolles worked with the swing coach David Leadbetter.
''He told me I can either try to learn my old swing, or learn the correct swing,'' Tolles said. ''The last two years I've been trying to learn the correct swing, more of like the machine-type swing like a Charlie Howell or Ernie Els, both Leadbetter disciples.''
Still, Tolles did not feel completely comfortable until he visited Jeff Heilman, a golf pro from Naples, Fla., who taught Tolles as a youngster.
''I'm not Charles Howell,'' Tolles said, explaining why he returned to his former coach. ''I'm not 25 years old. I can't twist and turn like he does, or else I'd snap. So I'm going to learn to swing it like an old man like I'm supposed to.''
Nothing about Tolles looked old Thursday, and he hoped a solid performance this weekend would lead to a solid year.
Asked why he had waited until February to make his first start of the year, Tolles, married with two children, said: ''I couldn't peel myself away from home. I couldn't quite get motivated for earlier in the year. When Hawaii came around, my game wasn't ready. I had absolutely no game to bring. I figured that AT&amp;T was a little bit more of a less stressful place to be.''
Tolles would welcome the stress of being on Sunday's leader board.
''I'd like to think that I'm on the way back up,'' Tolles said. ''I'm not quite sure yet, but I'm pretty sure.''
CHIP SHOTS
VIJAY SINGH, who has 11 consecutive top-10 finishes, was one of eight players tied for fourth place at 67. Singh has more top-10 finishes (54) on the PGA Tour than any other player in the past four years. TIGER WOODS has 52 and PHIL MICKELSON 46. . . . Mickelson was off to a solid start Thursday, after an opening-round 68. MIKE WEIR struggled to a 73 at Spyglass Hill Golf Course, while the defending champion, DAVIS LOVE III, shot 75 at Spyglass.
GOLF
