The White House has wisely reversed its opposition to granting an extra two months of investigation time to the independent commission delving into the 9/11 terrorist attacks. Now President Bush should take the next step and order better cooperation with the investigators, who complain of being stymied in gaining full access to vital intelligence information related to the attacks. After opposing the creation of the outside investigation, then meeting its requests with resistance and delay, Mr. Bush was obliged to give the commission more time to do its work. His commendable reversal on this issue means that the new deadline for presenting an unclassified version of the panel's findings to the nation is July 26. This will come during the heat of the presidential campaign. But politics should not be allowed to overwhelm the public's need to finally receive the fullest accounting of the attacks and whether they could reasonably have been prevented.
Public pressure has been building on the White House for greater cooperation with the 10-member bipartisan commission. The next test for the administration may come this month when the panel considers whether to resort to subpoena power in its long-running dispute over access to the president's intelligence briefings. This is a crucial issue because the White House earlier confirmed that there had been at least one intelligence warning a month before the attacks suggesting that Al Qaeda terrorists might be intent on hijacking airliners.
In an attempt at compromise, three commission members were allowed to review classified documents. But the administration wrongly denied them the right to share their notes with the rest of the panel. We agree with the commission's chairman, Thomas Kean, the former Republican governor of New Jersey, that the mandate from Congress requires that all members review vital secrets if they are to report responsibly to the nation. It is also crucial that the panel take private testimony from the president and Vice President Dick Cheney, as well as from their predecessors, Bill Clinton and Al Gore, who also dealt with the evolving terrorist threat. The president can demonstrate that his reversal on the deadline was a sincere change of heart about cooperating with the investigation by removing the more substantial roadblocks to its work.
