Senator John Kerry secured a series of high-profile endorsements yesterday -- most significantly that of the former presidential contender Representative Richard A. Gephardt -- as he worked to create an air of inevitability about his nomination and drive his remaining rivals from the Democratic race.
Mr. Gephardt, who dropped out of the presidential race after a fourth-place finish in Iowa, planned to put his support behind Mr. Kerry today in Warren, Mich., Democrats said, giving the senator a powerful boost with the industrial unions and blue-collar workers important in the Michigan caucuses tomorrow. Polls show that Mr. Kerry already has a commanding lead in the state.
The Gephardt endorsement was only one that the Kerry campaign rolled out as the senator flew from Maine to Manhattan to Michigan and also picked up checks from a growing cadre of fund-raisers.
Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, was endorsed by Gov. John Baldacci of Maine, who spoke over a loudspeaker from his office in Portland, still suffering from a broken rib and bruises from a car accident on Wednesday. Mr. Kerry also picked up the backing of former Senator George J. Mitchell of Maine, in advance of the state's caucuses on Sunday.
In Michigan, Mr. Kerry received the endorsements of Senators Carl Levin and Debbie Stabenow.
And in New York, where he raised more than $750,000 at a fund-raiser, Mr. Kerry was endorsed by Speaker Sheldon Silver of the State Assembly, Comptroller Alan Hevesi and Betsy Gotbaum, the New York City public advocate, all of whom previously supported Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut. Mr. Kerry was also endorsed by about 15 members of the Assembly.
Before leaving Boston yesterday morning, Mr. Kerry and his deputy campaign manager, Steve Elmendorf, who had worked for Mr. Gephardt, met with representatives of 18 industrial unions, including the Teamsters. An official said an endorsement was not in hand but could come as early as next week.
As Mr. Kerry raced from the Northeast to Michigan, Senator John Edwards and Gen. Wesley K. Clark battled in the South. Howard Dean headed to Wisconsin, on which he is resting the fate of his candidacy.
General Clark slammed the voting records of both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards. ''The American people don't want another Washington insider who never plays it straight,'' he said at a rally in Lebanon, Tenn. ''They don't want a follower who makes decisions by licking his finger and sticking it up in the wind and seeing which way it blows.''
Senator Edwards campaigned hard on trade issues, promising to toughen trade agreements that he blamed for the lose of tens of thousands of jobs.
''Think of the devastation that creates, creates for communities, creates for families, all these jobs going overseas,'' Mr. Edwards said in Nashville before starting a campaign tour in Virginia and Tennessee, which hold primaries Tuesday.
Mr. Kerry took aim at President Bush, calling for an independent inquiry into the integrity of intelligence on Iraq after the C.I.A.'s director said the intelligence agency had never called weapons of mass destruction an imminent threat.
''It goes to the core of why the nation went to war,'' he said. ''If there is that kind of failure, that kind of separation between the truth of what the C.I.A. tells the White House and what happens, then we have to separate that investigation from that White House so the American people get the truth.''
At a Portland rally, a heckler interrupted Mr. Kerry's speech, shouting, ''How about your vote for the war, and the Patriot Act and for John Ashcroft?''
Mr. Kerry, who voted against Mr. Ashcroft's confirmation as attorney general, shot back, ''I don't run away from anything -- I'll never run away from those votes.''
Later, he affirmed his support for civil unions but not for gay marriage, a day after Massachusetts' highest court ruled that people of the same sex must have the right to marry. He dismissed a suggestion that Republicans could try to use the ruling in against him.
''Well, big deal for the Republicans,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''If they want to choose some kind of wedge issue and distort my position, I will fight back very clearly.'' He added, ''I have the same position that Vice President Dick Cheney has.''
Mr. Kerry also faced questions about his dealings with the insurance company the American International Group.
The Associated Press reported that Mr. Kerry and his fellow Massachusetts senator, Edward M. Kennedy, fought against a bill that would have stripped $150 million from the Big Dig, the Boston infrastructure project, after the Transportation Department found that the project had overpaid $129.8 million to the insurer for worker compensation and liability insurance, then allowed the insurer to keep the money in a trust and invest it.
Over the next two years, The A.P. said, the insurance group paid Mr. Kerry's way to Vermont and donated $18,000 to his Senate and presidential campaigns and $30,000 to Mr. Kerry's Citizen Soldier Fund, which he used to lay the groundwork for his presidential bid by helping Democrats in states like Iowa and New Hampshire.
Mr. Kerry said yesterday that the Vermont trip was a one-day round trip to give a speech and was ''perfectly normal procedure in the context of the United States Senate.'' He said he opposed the bill affecting the insurance group, as did ''every single member'' of the Massachusetts Congressional delegation, because it would have stripped $150 million from the Big Dig.
And he noted he had opposed the insurance industry on bankruptcy legislation and terrorism insurance, which he said ''were far more important to them than anything to do with the Big Dig.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR  Correction:  February 7, 2004, Saturday  A note yesterday with an article about endorsements for Senator John Kerry in the Democratic primaries referred incorrectly in some copies to the location from which Edward Wyatt contributed reporting. It was Lebanon, Tenn., not Lebanon, Va.
