Happy John Waters Day, everybody. Several years late and a day early.
In 1985 Baltimore declared Feb. 7 an official celebration of the filmmaker, a native son. And tomorrow the New Museum of Contemporary Art in SoHo opens ''John Waters: Change of Life,'' a survey of his photographic work. This is the last major show in the SoHo space before the museum moves to temporary quarters while its new home is built on the Bowery.
In truth, the attention Mr. Waters brought to Baltimore, where he was born in 1946, could have been considered a Chamber of Commerce nightmare. Three of his earliest films, out of circulation since they were made in the 1960's, are high points of this exhibition, and they show Baltimore as a gross-out Gomorrah populated by sex-crazed housewives, trailer park killers and senior-citizen terrorists.
For such creatures no act is too repellent; no substance, ingested or excreted, too vile; no gender too bent; no joke too bad. And with a trio of 1970's classics -- ''Pink Flamingos'' (one review compared it to ''a septic tank explosion''), ''Female Trouble'' and ''Desperate Living'' -- Mr. Waters foreshadowed and helped create the reality-TV America of today. In these films cultural bottom-feeding is the norm.
All of this quieted down in the 1980's as Mr. Waters's skills and budgets increased. He still cast from a homegrown troupe of actors, among them his childhood neighbor Harris Glenn Milstead, better known as the 300-pound transvestite sensation Divine. But he also hired commercial stars: Tab Hunter in ''Polyester'' (1981); later, Kathleen Turner and Melanie Griffith. By the late 1980's, his films had become genial, even, shocking to say, edifying, as the transition of ''Hairspray'' from the screen to the Broadway stage suggests.
There is nothing either egregiously edifying or particularly shocking about the photographic pieces that he began to create around 1995, which make up the bulk of the New Museum show. Maybe for that reason, they feel a bit distant and thin in the aggregate, and their debt to Andy Warhol and Richard Prince is a shade too apparent. At the same time they are distinctly Watersesque in character and are probably best taken as extensions of his films rather than as stand-alone gallery art. He calls them ''little movies.''
Mr. Waters is steeped in film history and professes an abiding admiration for B-grade-and-below Hollywood efforts that worked just as hard to be bad films as good films worked to be good. Such reviled material is a source for his photographs, and his appropriation technique is straightforward. He finds a film that he wants to revisit, then snaps pictures of it as it plays on a video monitor. From hundreds even thousands of these stills, he chooses a handful and arranges them in a framed sequence.
Sometimes the idea is to distill the essence of an entire film in a few shots. For instance, he reduces ''Peyton Place'' to the series of New England tableaus -- towering steeples, rushing streams -- that signified sexual interludes in the original. By joining stills from several films, including his own, he creates thematic mini-movies about childbirth, cosmetic surgery, electrocution and serial vomiting. A piece consisting entirely of naked posteriors adds a piquant touch of raunch. And Mr. Waters, a renegade Roman Catholic, still has a naughty way with religious emblems, as a cross-shaped photographic piece consisting of Crucifixion scenes attests.
Like Warhol, he is also fixated on the spiritual and erotic power of fame but gives his passion a fetishistic twist. In place of iconic headshots of stars, he offers odd parts and quirks. Grace Kelly becomes a set of elbows. Lana Turner is seen only from behind (the view most male viewers wanted, Mr. Waters says). Nine images of Dorothy Malone dwell on the upturned collar that she made her sartorial signature.
With Ms. Malone we are already sliding out of relatively high-end Warhol territory and into low-bottom Waters land, where Divine lords it over Elizabeth Taylor, Jayne Mansfield is the real Marilyn, and Don Knotts and Charles Manson have canonical status.
The photographic works that result are ingenious and often very funny, but they can't carry a show of this size. The addition of other kinds of photography, including a series of large-scale prints of the taped blocking marks on Mr. Waters's film sets, helps, as does work in other media, like the big collage of his daily to-do cards. But the three early films, juvenilia though they are, save the day. By themselves they make the show, which was organized by Lisa Phillips, director of the New Museum, and Marvin Heiferman, a guest curator. And after seeing them, everything else gains interest.
Mr. Waters made the first of them, ''Hag in a Black Leather Jacket'' (1964), when he was a senior in high school, using stolen film stock, friends as actors and his parents' home as a set. The plot, such as it is, involves an interracial marriage presided over by a Ku Klux Klansman and ends with some dirty dancing to the strains of ''God Bless America.'' It's a larky mess. But it keeps you wondering ''Where did that idea come from?,'' which is good. It has a great Top 40 soundtrack (The Shangri-Las, Mary Wells). And the final image, of a piece of paper inscribed ''The End'' disappearing down a toilet, is the real Waters thing.
His next film, ''Roman Candles'' (1966), consisted of three reels projected simultaneously, à la Warhol's ''Chelsea Girls,'' though Mr. Waters recently reformatted it for a single screen. What happens? A guy in a paisley shirt shoots up; a raccoon-eyed nun lusts after a priest; Divine vamps; Pope John XXIII prays. The soundtrack mixes more pop music and an interview with Lee Harvey Oswald's mother. As all this flashes by, you realize just how much Mr. Waters's output comes from a specific time and place: urban America crashing out of the skinny-tie 1950's and into the violently tripped-out, liberationist 60's.
In ''Eat Your Makeup'' (1967), the production feels more confident. Many of Mr. Waters's pet themes are in play: celebrity, religion, class, sexual perversity, fashion, crime, drugs, other movies. A nymph in a miniskirt says the rosary; runway models are cannibalistically attacked. Then, about halfway through, Divine appears, reading a magazine story about Jacqueline Kennedy. The film dissolves to a re-enactment of the Zapruder film of the John F. Kennedy assassination, with Divine in a pillbox hat waving at nonexistent crowds, cradling her dead husband (played by Howard Gruber) and struggling over the back of a car, a beat-up sedan convertible with fins.
Shown just once, in 1967 in a church, the film apparently brought Waters instant notoriety. Even now you imagine its impact, just four years after Kennedy's death. The equivalent might be if someone this year made a semicomic version of the World Trade Center destruction.
What Mr. Waters was doing was tackling a subject that fascinated him -- assassination -- in the way he knew best, with the resources at hand, which included Divine. Was he trying to be tasteless? Yeah. Tasteless works. It gets blood boiling and emotions flying. It's fun if you think it's fun, and in the right hands at the right time, it can help change the cultural rules about what's sayable and what's not, as Mr. Waters has done just by puncturing holes in inviolable American things.
This dynamic doesn't come across in his photographic work, or at least not with comparable impact. There the icon-busting looks a little old-hat. Or maybe Mr. Waters has put hard-core behind him, though that doesn't seem to be the case. He has hinted that his next film, titled ''A Dirty Shame'' and scheduled for release this summer, will mark a return to terrible-infant sleaze glory. So the real John Waters Day may still be some months away.
''John Waters: Change of Life'' opens tomorrow at the New Museum of Contemporary Art, 583 Broadway, near Prince Street, (212) 219-1222, and remains on view through April 15.
ART REVIEW
