A man who was charged with slashing a young woman as she waited for a train on a subway platform in Lower Manhattan last year was convicted yesterday of first-degree assault.
The man, Edwin Santiago, 31, faces up to 25 years in prison when he is sentenced next month in State Supreme Court in Manhattan. Mr. Santiago's defense throughout his trial, which began on Jan. 28 and included testimony from two eyewitnesses, was that the authorities had the wrong man. The jury deliberated for about a day.
The victim, Yael Leopold, was a college senior visiting the city from Amherst, Mass., when she was attacked. She was waiting for the downtown J train in the early morning hours at the Chambers Street station after being out with friends at an East Village club, when she was attacked on Jan. 10, 2003.
Just days afterward, Ms. Leopold vowed to return to New York to teach, because that had been her dream. Today, she is a sixth-grade teacher in the city.
Ms. Leopold, 22, testified against Mr. Santiago, and said she was pleased with the verdict even though ''there is never justice'' for someone who lives with the emotional scars of being hurt.
''I don't get that night back in my life,'' she said during a telephone interview yesterday. ''Justice really is that he isn't out there to do that to anybody else. I am happy to hear that news.''
On the night of the attack, Ms. Leopold said she noticed Mr. Santiago acting erratically, ducking behind posts as he got closer to her from the north end of the subway platform. He approached, and she laughed off a question he asked about whether she worked for an escort service.
Then he took out a blade and began to slash her. The cuts to her scalp were deep enough to reach her skull. She had 70 stitches, and reconstructive surgery on her left thumb, which was also sliced in the attack. She said she had regained about 75 percent of normal function in the thumb. ''I look in the mirror and see it every day,'' she said.
Seth D. Gross, Mr. Santiago's lawyer, said his client had nothing but sympathy for Ms. Leopold.
''Our defense was always that Mr. Santiago was not the man who did this, that it was simply a case of mistaken identity,'' Mr. Gross said.
''He's always maintained his innocence and we believe he was innocent. We were very saddened and upset by the verdict.''
Mr. Gross said he plans to appeal.
As for Ms. Leopold, she said: ''I hope that this whole chapter of my life is coming to an end and that I don't have to deal with it anymore.''
