The Israeli police questioned Prime Minister Ariel Sharon here on Thursday as part of a bribery investigation that could impede his plan for ''unilateral disengagement'' from the Palestinians and withdrawal from the Gaza Strip.
The investigation, into whether an Israeli developer bought Mr. Sharon's influence to advance a project in Greece, has been under way for months, and Mr. Sharon has been questioned before. He has denied any wrongdoing.
The investigation moved to the center of Israeli politics last month with the indictment of the developer, David Appel. He was charged with trying to bribe Mr. Sharon with about $700,000, most of it paid to Mr. Sharon's son, Gilad, whom he hired to consult on the project.
The indictment quoted Mr. Appel as telling Mr. Sharon that his son would make a lot of money. Justice officials are looking into whether there is evidence to indict Mr. Sharon and his son.
In a measure of the political strain the inquiry is now causing the prime minister, his announcement on Monday of plans to evacuate settlers from the Gaza Strip was seen by commentators across the political spectrum as an attempt to shift attention elsewhere. He denied any connection.
The continuing investigation, and news leaks, could weaken Mr. Sharon as he tries to accomplish his most difficult feat as prime minister: rallying domestic and international support to impose a separation plan on the Palestinians that would involve evacuating up to 17 settlements in Gaza and others in the West Bank.
Some leading members of his Likud Party have not announced whether they will support a possible evacuation. But Mr. Sharon received the backing on Thursday of his defense minister, Shaul Mofaz. Mr. Mofaz told the Israeli daily Yediot Ahronot, ''Evacuating the Gaza Strip would ensure greater security for Israeli residents than they have now.''
That argument represents a stunning about-face for Likud politicians, who traditionally contended that settlements in Gaza were a cornerstone of Israeli security, and that to evacuate any while violence continued was to reward terrorism. Mr. Mofaz is not an elected member of the Israeli Parliament and owes his post in government to Mr. Sharon.
Mr. Sharon says that he will pursue his unilateral plan if he judges that the Bush administration's peace initiative, the road map, has failed. He says the governing Palestinian Authority has not proved itself a credible partner for negotiations.
Palestinian officials accuse him of deliberately undermining the Palestinian Authority to avoid negotiations that might force him to yield more territory.
Conditions for Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza are increasingly chaotic. In Gaza on Thursday, four members of the Preventive Security force, which is controlled by Muhammad Dahlan, got into a dispute with the commander of the police, Ghazi al-Jabali. They attacked Mr. Jabali's headquarters with guns and at least one explosive, wounding 11 police officers in a gun battle that lasted 90 minutes, Palestinian officials said.
The Israeli inquiry -- into what is known here, rather salaciously, as ''the Greek island affair'' -- now dominates political gossip, particularly inside Mr. Sharon's Likud faction, where maneuvering is under way to succeed him.
It may be months before prosecutors decide whether or not to indict the prime minister. Mr. Sharon has said he will continue to serve ''at least until 2007,'' when elections are scheduled.
One deputy minister in the government, Zvi Hendel, a Gaza settler and member of the ultranationalist National Union party, has said of a Gaza withdrawal, ''The extent of the pullout will correspond to the depth of the investigation.'' Likud politicians and settlers have speculated that Mr. Sharon is seeking to curry favor with prosecutors, widely believed on Israel's right wing to be from the left.
Mr. Sharon was questioned at his official residence in Jerusalem for two and a half hours by at least four members of the International Criminal Investigations unit of the Israeli police. He cooperated fully, a police official said, adding that there were no plans now to question him again.
The indictment accused Mr. Appel of trying to bribe Mr. Sharon beginning in the late 1990's, when he was foreign minister in a previous government. But Mr. Appel told Channel Two television here on Wednesday that when Mr. Sharon was foreign minister, ''he didn't know about anything that is tied to this, not from me at least.''
