Following is an excerpt from the ruling yesterday by Judge Shira A. Scheindlin of the United States District Court in Manhattan that the National Football League's eligibility rules violate antitrust laws. The full ruling is online at nytimes.com/sports.
Maurice Clarett's goal is to play in the National Football League next year. The only thing preventing him from achieving that goal is the league's rule limiting eligibility to players three seasons removed from their high school graduation. The question before the court is whether this rule violates the antitrust laws.
Clarett, a star freshman football player attending Ohio State University, now in his sophomore year, challenges the rule, claiming that he is ready, willing and able to play in the N.F.L. and that his exclusion violates the antitrust laws. Clarett's challenge to the rule raises serious questions arising at the intersection of labor law and antitrust law, not to mention the intersection of college football and professional football. Should Clarett's right to compete for a job in the N.F.L. -- the only serious pro football game in town -- trump the N.F.L.'s right to categorically exclude a class of players that the league has decided is not yet ready to play?
The answer requires the court to tackle a number of technical legal issues. The N.F.L. defends itself by asserting three arguments: (1) the rule is the result of a collective bargaining agreement between the N.F.L. and the players union and is therefore immune from antitrust scrutiny; (2) Clarett has no standing under the antitrust laws to bring this suit; and (3) the rule is reasonable.
While, ordinarily, the best offense is a good defense, none of these defenses hold the line. Because the rule does not concern a mandatory subject of collective bargaining (wages, hours and conditions of employment), governs only non-employees, and did not clearly result from arm's length negotiations, it is not immune from antitrust scrutiny. Clarett has standing to sue because his injury flows from a policy that excludes all players in his position from selling their services to the only viable buyer -- the N.F.L. Finally, the N.F.L. has not justified Clarett's exclusion by demonstrating that the rule enhances competition. Indeed, Clarett has alleged the very type of injury -- a complete bar to entry into the market for his services -- that the antitrust laws are designed to prevent. It is axiomatic, in the words of Learned Hand, that the antitrust laws will not tolerate a contract ''which unreasonably forbids any one to practice his calling.''
Because the N.F.L. cannot prevail on any of these defenses, the rule must be sacked.
FOOTBALL
