Like everything else in election season, the politics of national security have become badly polarized. When a federal judge in California last month struck down part of the Patriot Act, liberals cheered the decision and conservatives denounced it. When President Bush, in his State of the Union address, called for a renewal of the act a year ahead of schedule, Republicans applauded and Democrats sat on their hands.
In fact, there is something opportunistic about the Democratic denunciations of the Patriot Act: when it was introduced two years ago, only one Democratic senator, Russell Feingold of Wisconsin, voted against it, and many of its provisions were originally proposed during the Clinton administration after the Oklahoma City bombing.
But there is also something opportunistic about President Bush's decision to run on the politics of terror: polls cited by the administration suggest that about half the public approves of the Patriot Act, 20 percent think it doesn't go far enough and only 20 percent think it goes too far. (The rest are undecided). The 20 percent opposing the act consists of a bipartisan coalition of libertarian conservatives and civil libertarian liberals, who have proved more successful in blocking the administration's most draconian proposals than in persuading the administration to construct balanced alternatives.
The politicizing of the war on terrorism is unfortunate, because there are moderate compromises that could ensure that the new laws and technologies passed after 9/11 strike a reasonable balance between privacy and security. This position would require the Bush administration to make a bargain with its critics, and the Democrats to stop their knee-jerk condemnations. The administration would get expanded surveillance authority, but only if it promises to focus on suspected terrorists, rather than trolling through the personal data of millions of citizens in a search for lower-level crimes.
As a model for this kind of compromise, consider the evolution of the new Computer Assisted Passenger Pre-Screening system, called Capps 2, which is now being tested and which the administration plans to put in place later this year. According to proposals by the Transportation Security Administration, the administration will assign all passengers at American airports a ''threat index score,'' based on their perceived trustworthiness.
Under the program, each passenger's name, address, home phone number and date of birth will be linked to two commercial databases, Lexis-Nexis and Axiom, which collect information about consumer habits. The data may not contain medical or bank-account information, but may include information about passengers' magazine subscriptions and buying patterns, where family members live, and how long they have owned a car. Based on the information, passengers will be assigned to green, yellow or red categories, and will be subject to corresponding scrutiny.
In its initial announcement last January, the administration proposed to share personal data from the Capps 2 system with national and international police to allow the prosecution of any civil or criminal violations. But critics objected that this could create widespread abuses, allowing the administration to scour the personal data of millions of people, uncover relatively minor offenses, and threaten its critics with vindictive prosecutions -- much as Richard M. Nixon scoured the tax returns of Vietnam protesters. In response to these criticisms, the Transportation Security Agency agreed last August to restrict officials from sharing personal data with law enforcement agencies, except for individuals who had an outstanding federal warrant for a violent crime.
This was a welcome and important victory for privacy. Some additional checks and balances would help -- people need a chance to correct their data, for example, and the system should be legally restricted to airports to ensure that citizens' threat rankings don't trail them in all of their interactions with the government. But the attempt to limit the search for data and sharing of personal information -- so that the system is focused on the most dangerous suspects and criminals rather than on trivial offenses -- could be a model for the rest of the federal government.
Unfortunately, officials have been less willing to accept sensible compromise in the design of another important data system, the Multistate Antiterrorism Information Exchange, or Matrix. This program would combine public and private databases -- including criminal histories, driver's license data, digitized photographs and significant amounts of consumer data -- to allow state and federal law enforcement officials to conduct searches and create personal dossiers. Eight states (including New York) have agreed to participate in the program, although several have refused because of privacy concerns.
In its current form, the system poses a significant danger that unscrupulous state officials will conduct dragnets in search of crimes that have nothing to do with terrorism. But were the administration to follow the model of the Capps 2 compromise, the Matrix system could be designed so that names could not be linked with personal data unless the system indicated a significant risk for terrorism or other violent crimes.
Likewise, the same model could guide efforts to reform the Patriot Act so that it protects privacy and security at the same time. Federal officials have already invoked the act's surveillance authority to prosecute citizens and noncitizens for low-level crimes that have nothing to do with terrorism. In addition, the act allows the government to conduct secret searches of information held by third parties without notice to the individual involved. In theory, then, the government could secretly scour the personal data of its critics and use the information to embarrass or prosecute them.
But there is a sensible way that this danger could be eliminated. In the Senate, a bipartisan coalition including Larry Craig, Republican of Idaho, and Richard Durbin, the Illinois Democrat, have introduced a bill that would allow for the Patriot Act's secret searches of personal information held by third parties, but only when an individual has already been identified as a suspected spy or terrorist.
A moderate compromise along these lines has been embraced by European countries that have more experience with domestic terrorism and surveillance than we do. In Germany, which over the last 60 years has learned all too well the dangers of too-powerful security services, the intelligence service is given broad powers of domestic surveillance, but if officers find evidence of low-level crimes, they may not share it with law enforcement officers or introduce it in court. In addition, evidence obtained through wiretapping can be used only in the investigation and prosecution of national security crimes or certain other serious crimes.
Could a compromise along these lines be adopted in America? Not as long as Democratic and Republican presidential candidates are determined to pander to the fears of their respective bases rather than negotiating sensible trade-offs. But in Congress, the bipartisan constituency for a reasonable balance between privacy and security seems to be growing and, with any luck, might eventually become too persuasive to resist.
Op-Ed Contributor Jeffrey Rosen, legal editor of The New Republic and a law professor at George Washington University, is the author of ''The Naked Crowd: Reclaiming Security and Freedom in an Anxious Age.''
