IT is said that you can determine a government's priorities by studying its tax proposals. By that standard, the Bush administration does not appear to be very interested in the biggest tax fight now going on with Europe.
Nor is it eager to deal with the prospect of the alternative minimum tax, which was intended for high-income earners, harming many middle-class taxpayers.
But assuring that wealthy Americans who die in 2011 and after will not face taxes on their estates is viewed as too important a decision to be postponed.
And in one of the lesser tax proposals in the budget released this week, President Bush offers a tax break for what must be a very small group of taxpayers: those who support their grandchildren even though the kids are independently wealthy or earning a substantial income on their own. For the first time, such grandparents will be able to claim dependent exemptions for the grandkids.
The most pressing corporate tax issue is the tax break for exporters that has been ruled illegal by the World Trade Organization. Europe plans sanctions next month if the tax is not repealed. Though the budget discusses the issue, it does not offer proposals. Chances are Congress will repeal that tax break while passing other corporate tax breaks that will cost the government a lot of money. By remaining silent, President Bush can make the revenue projection look less bad than it is.
For individual taxpayers, the alternative minimum tax looms largest. If nothing is done, as many as a third of all households will have to pay that tax by 2010. Their tax returns will be much more complicated, and their tax bills higher. This budget proposes a one-year fix costing about $23 billion and promises a long-term plan after the election. Some people in the administration talk of solving the problem in a revenue-neutral way, but give no specifics on how to do it -- or which taxpayers would pay the extra taxes needed to accomplish that.
Back in 2001, President Bush could have dealt with the alternative minimum tax issue, just as he could have proposed lowering taxes and not pretending they would bounce back to the old rates in 2011, including the return of the estate tax. But doing either would have made the tax cut look more generous than was deemed politically expedient, so the problems were put off. That practice of postponing hard choices continues in this budget.
In some ways, this bill would make the tax code more complicated. For example, it offers a ''refundable tax credit'' for the purchase of health insurance by some taxpayers.
But President Bush also proposes a variety of things that are supposed to simplify the law. The provision to benefit grandparents raising rich kids is one simplification. Another is a proposal to reduce the maximum capital gains tax on gold coins from 28 percent to 25 percent.
Bush's package does include some efforts to crack down on tax shelters, including tactics that have allowed individuals to get excessive deductions from donating cars to charities and permitted companies to get similarly outsize benefits from donating patents.
Of the $1.24 trillion that the administration estimates its tax proposals will cost over the next decade, only 11 percent will hit before the 2008 election. But the impact will be severe on the budgets of the president elected that year.
''It will be a perfect fiscal storm, with huge tax cuts and baby boomers starting to ask for their Social Security benefits,'' said Leslie B. Samuels, a partner at Cleary, Gottlieb Steen &amp; Hamilton, who served as the assistant Treasury secretary for tax policy under President Bill Clinton.
It is probably unreasonable to hope that the current Congress will give much thought to that prospect when it votes on taxes this year.
Floyd Norris
