Perhaps the smartest thing Ann Veneman, the agriculture secretary, has done since the discovery of a case of mad cow disease in Washington State last December is appoint a panel of international experts to assess the measures that need to be taken against the disease. On Wednesday, that panel, which includes scientists and veterinarians from Switzerland, New Zealand, Britain and the United States, released its findings. It praised the speed of the Department of Agriculture's response. But the panel also made it clear that the only practicable way for this country to contend with mad cow disease is to bring its handling of meat and meat byproducts -- from the feedlot to the supermarket -- up to internationally recognized standards, something that should have been done long before the first American case of mad cow disease turned up.
The report has already prompted an attack by the National Cattlemen's Beef Association, and its recommendations are likely to stir a certain amount of xenophobia. But America lags well behind many other countries in such basic matters as animal-identification procedures and efforts to keep the riskiest materials -- tissues from the central nervous system -- from contaminating human food and being used in animal feed.
Because cattle can get mad cow disease from eating tiny quantities of infected tissue and because it is so hard to ensure the effectiveness of partial restrictions, the panel recommends ending the practice of feeding animal protein to cows, including protein derived from poultry. Only a broad ban like that is likely to be effective.
Ever since that infected Holstein was discovered in Washington, the beef and dairy industries have reacted as if the problem could be dealt with by proving that the cow came from Canada. The report minces no words about this. ''The first case of B.S.E. in the United States,'' the panelists write, ''can not be considered in isolation from the whole cattle production system in North America. The significance of this B.S.E. case cannot be dismissed by considering it 'an imported case.' '' In other words, we had better react as if mad cow disease was endemic in North America as a whole. Simply claiming that U.S. beef is safe will not do -- especially, the report argues, if those claims undermine efforts to reduce the risk of mad cow disease.
The task is to guarantee the safety of beef by doing everything we can to end practices that increase the risk of mad cow disease. The best way to do that is for the U.S.D.A. -- as well as American cattle producers and the representatives of their industry -- to embrace the measures outlined in this report.
