Following are excerpts from a speech on Thursday by George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, as transcribed by Federal News Service Inc. A full transcript is at nytimes.com/international.
. . . Much of the current controversy centers on our prewar intelligence summarized in the National Intelligence Estimate of October of 2002. National estimates are publications where the intelligence community as a whole seeks to sum up what we know about a subject, what we don't know, what we suspect may be happening and where we differ on key issues.
This estimate asked if Iraq had chemical, biological and nuclear weapons and the means to deliver them. We concluded that in some of these categories Iraq had weapons and that in others where it did not have them, it was trying to develop them. . . .
But before we start, let me be direct about an important fact. As we meet here today, the Iraq Survey Group is continuing its important search for people and data. And despite some public statements, we are nowhere near 85 percent finished. The men and women who work in that dangerous environment are adamant about that fact. Any call that I make today is necessarily provisional. Why? Because we need more time and we need more data. . . .
Let me turn to the nuclear issue. In the estimate, all agencies agreed that Saddam Hussein wanted nuclear weapons. Most were convinced that he still had a program, and if he obtained fissile material, he could have a weapon within a year. But we detected no such acquisition. We made two judgments that get overlooked these days.
We said that Saddam did not have a nuclear weapon and probably would have been unable to make one until 2007 to 2009. Most agencies believed that Saddam had begun to reconstitute his nuclear program, but they disagreed on a number of issues, such as which procurement activities were designed to support his nuclear program. But let me be clear, where there are differences, the estimate laid out the disputes clearly.
So what do we know now? David Kay told us last fall that, quote, ''The testimony we have obtained from Iraqi scientists and senior government officials should clear up any doubts about whether Saddam still wanted to obtain nuclear weapons.'' End of quote. Keep in mind that no intelligence agency thought that Iraq's efforts had progressed to the point of building an enrichment facility or making fissile material. We said that such activities were a few years away. Therefore, it's not surprising that the Iraqi Survey Group has not yet found evidence of uranium enrichment facilities.
Regarding prohibited aluminum tubes, a debate laid out extensively in the estimate, and one that experts still argue over -- Were they for uranium enrichment or conventional weapons? -- we have additional data to collect and more sources to question. Moreover, none of the tubes found in Iraq so far match the high-specification tubes Baghdad sought and may never have received the amounts needed. Our aggressive interdiction efforts may have prevented Iraq from receiving all but a few of these prohibited items.
My provisional bottom line today: Saddam did not have a nuclear weapon; he still wanted one; and Iraq intended to reconstitute a nuclear program at some point. But we have not yet found clear evidence that the dual-use items Iraq sought were for nuclear reconstitution. We do not yet know if any reconstitution efforts had begun, but we may have overestimated the progress Saddam was making.
Let me turn to biological weapons. The estimate said that Baghdad had them, and that all key aspects of an offensive program, research and development, production and weaponization were still active, and most elements were larger and more advanced than before the gulf war. We believed that Iraq had lethal biological weapons agents, including anthrax, which it could quickly produce and weaponize for delivery by bombs, missiles, aerial sprayers and covert operatives.
But we said we had no specific information on the types or quantities of weapons agent or stockpiles at Baghdad's disposal.
What do we know today? Last fall the Iraqi Survey Group uncovered, quote, ''significant information, including research and development of biological weapons, applicable organisms, the involvement of the Iraqi Intelligence Service in possible biological weapons activities and deliberate concealment activities.'' All of this suggests that Iraq after 1996 further compartmentalized its program and focused on maintaining smaller covert capabilities that could be activated quickly to surge the production of biological weapons agents.
The Iraq Survey Group found a network of laboratories and safe houses, controlled by Iraqi intelligence and security services, that contained equipment for chemical and biological research, and a prison laboratory complex possibly used in human testing for biological weapons agents that were not declared to the United Nations. It also appears that Iraq had the infrastructure and the talent to resume production, but we have yet to find that it actually did so, nor have we found weapons. Until we get to the bottom of the role played by the Iraqi security services, which were operating covert labs, we will not know the full extent of the program.
Let me also talk about the trailers discovered in Iraq last summer. We initially concluded that they resembled trailers, described by a human source, for mobile biological warfare agent production. There is no consensus within our intelligence community today over whether the trailers were for that use or if they were used for the production of hydrogen. Everyone agrees that they are not ideally configured for either process, but could be made to work in either mode.
To give you some idea of the contrasting evidence we wrestle with, some of the Iraqis involved in making the trailers were told that they were intended to produce hydrogen for artillery units. But an Iraqi artillery officer says they never used these types of systems and that the hydrogen for artillery units came in canisters from a fixed production facility. . . .
I must tell you that we are finding discrepancies in some claims made by human sources about mobile biological weapons production before the war. Because we lacked direct access to the most important sources on this question, we have as yet been unable to resolve the differences.
My provisional bottom line today: Iraq intended to develop biological weapons. . . .
Let me now turn to chemical weapons. We said in the estimate with high confidence that Iraq had them. We also believed, but with less certainty, that Saddam had stocked at least 100 metric tons of agent. That may sound like a lot, but it would fit in a few dorm rooms on this campus and . . . they're not very big rooms.
The work done so far shows a story that is similar to that of his biological weapons program. Saddam had rebuilt a dual-use industry. David Kay reported that Saddam and his son Uday wanted to know how long it would take for Iraq to produce chemical weapons. However, while some sources indicate Iraq may have conducted some experiments related to developing chemical weapons, no physical evidence has yet been uncovered. We need more time.
My provisional bottom line today: Saddam had the intent and capability to quickly convert civilian industry to chemical weapons production.
However, we have not yet found the weapons we expected.
I've now given you my provisional bottom lines, but it is important to remember that estimates are not written in a vacuum. Let me tell you some of what was going on in the fall of 2002. Several sensitive reports crossed my desk from two sources characterized by our foreign partners as established and reliable.
The first, from a source who had direct access to Saddam and his inner circle, said Iraq was not in the possession of a nuclear weapon; however, Iraq was aggressively and covertly developing such a weapon. Saddam had recently called together his nuclear weapons committee, irate that Iraq did not yet have a weapon, because money was no object, and they possessed the scientific know-how. The committee members assured Saddam that once fissile material was in hand, a bomb could be ready in 18 to 24 months. The return of U.N. inspectors would cause minimal disruption because, according to the source, Iraq was expert at denial and deception.
The same source said that Iraq was stockpiling chemical weapons and that equipment to produce insecticides under the oil-for-food program had been diverted to covert chemical weapons production. The source said that Iraq's weapons of last resort were mobile launchers armed with chemical weapons, which would be fired at enemy forces and Israel; that Iraqi scientists were dabbling with biological weapons, with limited success, but the quantities were not sufficient to constitute a real weapons program.
A stream of reporting from a different sensitive source with access to senior Iraqi officials said he believed production of chemical and biological weapons was taking place, that biological agents were easy to produce and hide, and that prohibited chemicals were also being produced at dual-use facilities. The source stated that a senior Iraqi official in Saddam's inner circle believed, as a result of the U.N. inspections, Iraq knew the inspectors' weak points and how to take advantage of them. The source said that there was an elaborate plan to deceive inspectors and ensure prohibited items would never be found.
Now did this information make any difference in my thinking? You bet it did. As this information and other sensitive information came across my desk, it solidified and reinforced the judgments that we had reached and my own view of the danger posed by Saddam Hussein, and I conveyed this view to our nation's leaders. Could I have ignored or dismissed such reports?
Absolutely not.
Now I'm sure you're all asking, Why haven't we found the weapons? I've told you the search must continue, and it will be difficult. As David Kay reminded us, the Iraqis systematically destroyed and looted forensic evidence before, during and after the war. We have been faced with organized destruction of documentary and computer evidence in a wide range of offices, laboratories and companies suspected of weapons of mass destruction work. The pattern of these efforts is one of deliberate rather than random acts. Iraqis who have volunteered information to us are still being intimidated and attacked. . . .
I have a responsibility to evaluate our performance, both our operational work and our analytical tradecraft. So what do I think about all this today? Based on an assessment of the data we collected over the past 10 years, it would have been difficult for analysts to come to any different conclusions than the ones reached in October of 2002. However, in our business simply saying this is not good enough.
We must constantly review the quality of our work. For example, the National Intelligence Council is reviewing the estimate line by line. Six months ago, we also commissioned an internal review to examine the tradecraft of our work on Iraq's weapons of mass destruction, and through this effort we are finding ways to improve our processes. For example, we recently discovered that relevant analysts in the community missed a notice that identified a source that we had cited as providing information that in some cases was unreliable and in other cases fabricated. We have acknowledged this mistake. . . .
Among the questions that we as a community must ask are, Did the history of our work, Saddam's deception and denial, his lack of compliance with the international community and all that we know about this regime cause us to minimize or ignore alternative scenarios? Did the fact that we missed how close Saddam came to acquiring a nuclear weapon in the early 1990's cause us to overestimate his nuclear or other programs in 2002?
Did we carefully consider the absence of information flowing from a repressive and intimidating regime, and would it have made any difference in our bottom-line judgments? Did we clearly tell policymakers what we knew, what we didn't know, what was not clear and identify the gaps in our knowledge?
We are in the process of evaluating just such questions. And while others will express the views on these issues sooner, we ourselves must come to our own bottom line patiently. . . .
Excerpts
