Directed by Stan Brakhage  Not rated, 80 minutes
At 80 minutes, Stan Brakhage's 1991 film ''A Child's Garden and the Serious Sea,'' which is receiving its New York theatrical premiere beginning today at the Anthology Film Archives in the East Village, is an unusually long work for this seminal avant-garde filmmaker, who died in March at 70.
Yet it is a film constructed of Brakhage's usual components: images made abstract and poetic by being unfixed from standard readability, through rapid cuts, uncentered compositions, whip pans and distressed or manipulated film stock (scratches in the emulsion, visible splices, colors painted directly on film). Brakhage's great aim was to break down what were, for him, the overly rational, reductive ways of seeing imposed by Renaissance perspective and rediscover, as the title of one of his most important short films puts it, ''The Act of Seeing With One's Own Eyes.''
The first part of a series known as the ''Vancouver Island films,'' ''A Child's Garden and the Serious Sea'' is on the primary level an attempt to evoke the childhood landscape of Brakhage's second wife, Marilyn, a native of British Columbia. The film is an 80-minute dance (to no sound; Brakhage believed the images should provide their own rhythm) between two broad sets of images: those that evoke a composed, tamed nature (like the opening shot of a red flower blooming before a field of garden shrubbery) and nature in its more powerful, primal state (images of the waves and water surrounding the island).
Though Brakhage himself, in his written introduction to the film, identifies its sources as works by the modern poets Ronald Johnson and Charles Olson, the images also powerfully evoke the first account of the Creation in Genesis: ''And the earth was without form, and void; and darkness was upon the face of the deep. And the Spirit of God moved upon the face of the waters.'' Here are the waves (the word spirit in the King James version can also be translated as wind) lapping on the shore, yielding the Garden of Eden that Brakhage imagines as his wife's childhood.
''A Child's Garden'' is a beautiful, densely allusive and ultimately elusive film, as determinedly difficult as any passage in modern poetry. Brakhage's most profound influences would seem to be Eliot and Pound, rather than any artists from the film world. For filmgoers looking for an escape from the tyranny of narration, here is a ravishing experience.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
