Doug Varone plunges into the dark obsidian heart of the ballet ballroom in ''Castles,'' performed by Doug Varone and Dancers on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater. A world premiere, ''Castles'' is set to a score by Prokofiev that includes the climactic waltz from ''Cinderella,'' which in itself suggests what Mr. Varone is up to.
Cinderella finds and loses her prince to this music. It is in formal ballroom scenes that plotlines often ravel in story ballets, from ''Swan Lake'' and most versions of ''Romeo and Juliet'' to George Balanchine's ''Sonnambula.'' Lovers unite or do each other in there, swept along in a crowd by the irresistible push and grandeur of the music. Some will be alone by the evening's end. Love takes no prisoners in ballet.
Mr. Varone's ballroom dancers are far from the usual elegant royals. They look and move like rag dolls, falling and rising and colliding in a fast-flowing tide, always a little isolated from one another. Mr. Varone essentially deconstructs the classical pas de deux in two duets, one performed by John Beasant III and Daniel Charon and the other by Natalie Desch and Kayvon Pourazar.
The elements are unexpected. The first lovers are both men, covert at the start and end of their dance in the deserted ballroom but clearly as engaged as any prince or princess. Mr. Varone even seems to allude slyly to the ur-duet for men in Lar Lubovitch's ''Concerto 622.''
Ms. Desch is a rousting Columbine to Mr. Pourazor's melancholy Pierrot in the second duet, where connection is expressed through the lovers' disengaged manipulation of each other's limbs, and later, when the dancers loop through them. Adriane Fang is the loner in a hauntingly strange solo that takes her winding through the ballroom in choreography that points up her precision and steely delicacy.
The dancers -- who also included Stephanie Liapis, Catherine Miller and Eddie Taketa -- fill the stage as if they were a crowd of hundreds. And the lighting, designed by Jane Cox and Joshua Epstein, feels as choreographed as any steps, shifting between vertical and horizontal shafts and small and large pools in which the partygoers stand momentarily or move to in the dark ballroom. Liz Prince's costumes were uncharacteristically dowdy and unflattering.
Mr. Varone's ''Short Story,'' a 2001 duet set to Rachmaninoff piano music, not only offers incredible opportunities for dramatic dancing but also suggests what a psychologically astute storyteller Mr. Varone is. The theme is a favorite of his: the discomfort of two intimates who can neither live together nor apart.
He and Nina Watt, the guest dancer who performed ''Short Story'' with him here, brought the finely honed expressive skills of mature performers to the piece. A textbook example of the power of simplicity, their performance will be repeated tomorrow night and Sunday afternoon.
The balance of the program was a disappointment. Mr. Varone's superb dancers are always worth seeing. But ''Of the Earth Far Below'' and ''Rise,'' which completed the evening, spool out the rag dolls of ''Castles'' in high-energy, disjointed dances that are distinguishable for the most part by their different scores and designs rather than the choreography. The company performs through Sunday night at the Joyce, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea.
DANCE REVIEW
