THIS might sound obvious, but the first thing you need for snowshoeing is a lot of snow.
Or so I discovered my first time on snowshoes several years ago, when -- drawn by the fresh falling of about four inches outside the door of my home in Connecticut -- I strapped on newly purchased shoes and headed out for a good long walk, setting my sights on the inviting terrain of a neighbor's snow-covered farm. I got only as far as the mailbox before my journey was halted: My crampons immediately sank into the frozen soil. It was only later, after I headed farther north, where more snow had fallen, that I discovered the true function of snowshoes. When walking over snow that is at least eight inches deep, the shoe distributes your weight over a larger surface area and you don't sink down as much.
Many animals -- snowshoe hares, foxes, lynxes and wolves -- are equipped by evolution for traveling over deep snow. Cross-country skis work on the same principle, but for deep snow and rough terrain, with fallen trees and boulders, or on steeper inclines, there is no better snow-travel tool than the snowshoe. In any case, snowshoeing is generally easier than cross-country skiing, especially for winter-sport beginners. It is gaining popularity among aging baby boomers because it is not as hard on the body as skiing.
One of the beauties of snowshoeing, as opposed to hiking in summer, is that you can go off in almost any direction and still follow your tracks back to where you started (as long as it isn't snowing or very windy).
Snowshoeing can be a transcendent experience, as I found on a trip to the White Mountains of New Hampshire. One morning after a fresh snow of two feet, on top of another two or three feet already on the ground, a friend and I walked down a steep hill -- all the downed timber covered in snow, as were the big boulders and other obstacles that would make walking in summer difficult. It was as if the woods had been flooded and we were navigating through them in a small canoe.
It was still enough to hear the occasional clump of snow tumble off an overstrained evergreen bough and ''ploof'' onto the ground. Then, all of a sudden, in a nearby stand of spruce we heard a cacophony of gobbles. A flock of wild turkeys had been stalked and ambushed by coyotes. As we approached we saw tracks from the coyotes and turkeys along with the imprint of wings that had been made as the birds flew away, leaving perfect snow angels behind.
There is no way to know when the snowshoe was invented because the materials were perishable, but it is thought that the first ones were used in Central Asia. (A frequent date cited by snowshoers is 4000 B.C., probably because this date was quoted without a source in one of the few books on snowshoeing, ''The Snowshoe Book,'' by William Osgood and Leslie Hurley, out of print since 1988. Needless to say, there is a need for an updated version.)
The snowshoe may have helped humans crossing the Bering land bridge to North America about 15,000 years ago (though we don't know whether they walked on frozen earth, ice or snow). Indigenous American cultures are certainly indebted to this device, as were early colonists much later.
The modern snowshoe saw its greatest innovations, up until the aluminum-frame models used today, among the native tribes of what is now Canada. Some of the best documentation for Indian use of snowshoes, how they were worn while hunting or in battle, for example, is in the 19th-century paintings of George Catlin. The varied designs -- known in snowshoe-speak by names like the bearpaw, the Maine, the Michigan (sometimes also called the Algonquin), the Alaskan and the Ojibwa -- were created for travel over different snow conditions and terrain. The bearpaw, an oval design that is the most common shape of the aluminum-frame snowshoe, is probably the most versatile. It is not as long as the other types and therefore allows sharp turns in thick woods without tripping. The longer styles with more upturned tips, however, like the Alaskan and the Ojibwa, track straighter, and are better for deep snow.
French trappers were probably the first Europeans to learn the use of snowshoes from American Indians, most likely in the 17th century. According to the Oxford English Dictionary, the first English-language use of the word snowshoe was in John Josselyn's ''Two Voyages'' of 1674, in a passage that described ''a crust upon the snow sufficient to bear a man walking with snow-shoos upon it.'' A battle in the French and Indian War near Lake George was fought on snowshoes. Called, understandably, the Battle on Snowshoes, the event led the British military to make snowshoes part of its basic equipment.
When the Scandinavians brought the ski to North America in the mid-1880's, it became the favored means of snow travel. Now, the snowshoe is making a comeback. The most notable changes in the snowshoe have come in the last 15 years, with the advent of the aluminum frame. Aluminum-frame snowshoes are much lighter than their wooden tennis-racket predecessors, and -- even better -- they look cool. This is especially true of the Piranha, made by the Tubbs Snowshoe Company, with its carbon-fiber frame and titanium crampons.
Tubbs, which controls the largest share of the snowshoe market, was founded in Norway, Me., in 1906. (Adm. Richard E. Byrd wore Tubbs shoes on some of his expeditions, and thousands of Allied troops in World War II strapped them on.) The company has developed men's and women's snowshoes for specific uses like trail walking, expeditions and running. (Information at www.tubbssnowshoes.com.)
Choosing the size and the shape of a snowshoe depends on aesthetic taste and the conditions you'll be walking through. Your local outdoors shop can advise you. Another consideration is the boot that will be strapped to the snowshoe. I use my Gore-Tex hiking boots or a pair of old-fashioned Maine hunting boots from L. L. Bean.
For all the assets of modern materials, the original snowshoe design still works, and there are benefits to traditional models, like the Ojibwa made by Wilcox &amp; Williams. With ash frames and nylon polyurethane-treated lacing, they are good for deep snow and off-trail snowshoeing because of their generous surface area. (These are available at Country Ways, www.snowshoe.com.)
ON a recent trip to Boulder, Colo., a friend and I were encouraged by a fresh snowfall to get up into the higher elevations and hike. When we drove through the town of Nederland on our way to Ward and the trailhead to Brainard Lake, it was still snowing, and we were excited to get out in all our gear and walk through the snow-covered woods. We were not alone; the trails were alive with cross-country skiers (a few attached by ropes to huskies) and snowshoers.
I stopped to talk to one of the snowshoers who was on his way back home after a three-mile hike to Brainard Lake. The storm was passing and in its wake was a cold wind whipping through mountain.
''This is just what the doctor ordered,'' he said. ''I was just waiting for this side of the mountain to get some snow on it. Now I can go home and watch football and have a beer and feel like I deserve it.''
IF YOU GO  Where to Use Those Snowshoes
YOU can snowshoe on almost any trail you hike in the spring and summer. But there are some places in New England that are particularly good for a weekend of snowshoeing.
Connecticut
Fairfield County has excellent trails for all levels of fitness and experience. Try the Connecticut Audubon Center at Fairfield (2325 Burr Street, Fairfield, Conn.; exit 44 off the Merritt Parkway; 203-259-6305). The trails run through 152 acres of woods and meadows with ponds, swamps and streams. Also in Fairfield County is Collis P. Huntington State Park in Redding. Take exit 44 north on Route 58 into Redding to Sunset Hill Road. Turn right on Sunset Hill and you will see the park entrance beside bronze sculptures of wolves and bears. In northwest Connecticut, you can snowshoe along the Housatonic River on the Appalachian Trail from near Cornwall to Kent, about 10 miles. It is mostly flat and a good hike for beginners. Take Route 7 north, cross the Cornwall Bridge; bear right on Route 7; and take the first sharp right onto River Road. It will turn under the bridge. Go south past a church for two miles to a big sign marking the Appalachian Trail. Housatonic River Outfitters (860-672-1010) on Route 7 by the Cornwall Bridge has directions to other trails.
Massachusetts
In the Berkshires, there are good trails at Butternut Ski Basin (380 State Road-Route 23, Great Barrington, 413-528-2000). Also, on a particularly cold day in December, I hiked down to Bash Bish Falls (the trail is steep -- but it could be done on snowshoes) in Mount Washington, in the state's southwest corner. The waterfall's final drop is 80 feet. When I came upon it, the whole thing was frozen solid. It looked like a castle of ice, and I recommend going if the temperature is below 5 degrees. (Take Route 7 to Route 23 west, Route 41 south, then follow the signs up Mount Washington Road.)
New Hampshire
A favorite place to snowshoe in New Hampshire is on the trails at Bretton Woods ski area in the White Mountains (brettonwoods.com). Bretton Woods has more than 60 miles of trails that wind through spruce and fir forests. Along the trails, warming huts that look like yurts add a little comfort to a wilderness experience. There is also a complete Nordic ski facility with snowshoe rentals (603-278-3320). Parts of the trail have fantastic views of Mount Washington. After a long snowshoe, you can get a coffee, or perhaps something stronger, at the historic Mount Washington Hotel.
Vermont
Vermont has endless trails for snowshoeing. Among those recommended by experienced snowshoers are near the towns of East Arlington and Manchester in southern Vermont off Route 7A. You can rent snowshoes at several places in East Arlington or Manchester. The White House Inn (178 Route 9, East Wilmington; 800-541 2135) has trails specifically for snowshoeing. It also provides rentals.
JOURNEYS
