For the Italian sculptor and draftsman Giuseppe Penone, drawing is first of all touch, the mark left by skin on paper, say, or even the pressure of the hand on a pencil (and vice versa). A considerable part of ''The Imprint of Drawing'' at the Drawing Center in SoHo, his first New York solo museum show, is a series of 10 very large sheets of paper, each registering in hugely blown-up scale the print -- expanded by incredibly patient and painstaking drawing -- of each of his fingertips.
If the 10 offer little in the nature of visual seduction, they succeed in proclaiming the artist's equation of touch with visuality as an aesthetic way of exploring the world. He regards what he does to be as much sculpture as drawing.
Other works on view in this very tactile display, which covers the 25-year period between 1968 and 2003, bear out his commitment to the principles of Italy's Arte Povera group: to shake up the boundaries between art and nature; to use simple, humble materials that counter the idea of art as a precious object; to salute the processes of daily life; and to make clear the interdependence of humanity and other earthly creatures. (Arte Povera began in the 1960's; Mr. Penone is its youngest member.)
More than 20 smaller works on paper bear direct impressions taken from the artist's skin. But much more engulfing are the several billboard-size works that give epic dimension to his obsessions. For instance, a huge flow of wrinkly lines and spaces on paper, measuring some 9 feet high by 24 feet wide, dominates the entrance to the gallery.
Is it a map of some esoteric place? The movements of a river? Animal trails in a jungle wilderness?
No, it is a blown-up study of the skin of Mr. Penone's forehead, made by covering the area with pigment, then pressing tape against it and transferring the results to paper. The drawing is studded with hundreds of needle-sharp acacia thorns, whose collection from the ground is regarded by Mr. Penone as part of the laborious process of preparing the work.
The thorns, he has explained, were applied to the points shown in the drawing where the tape made contact with his skin. Inevitably they suggest suffering, like the thorns in the mocking crown bestowed on Jesus.
A possible reading, agreed Mr. Penone in an interview with Catherine de Zegher, director of the Drawing Center and curator of the show, that is in the show's catalog.
On another vast wall hangs another humongous drawing, ''Eyelid,'' this time made from gelatin imprints of his eyelids. He projected huge blowups of them onto 10 separate almond-shaped layers of unwoven fiber, which together measure 48 feet in width, then traced the pressure points of gelatin and lids over and over with charcoal.
The layered drawing, dense surfaces of tiny irregular lines and veins that might be found on a leaf, with small white plaster casts of upper facial parts affixed to it at various points, makes a particularly rugged skinscape. It is meant to suggest the back of the eyelid, what might be seen if the eye could regard its cover when closed, leaving the body's tactile dimension to function unimpeded by vision.
A fourth monumental work, made especially for this show, is ''Nails,'' a white expanse of paper on plaster covered with repetitive gashes made by the artist's fingernails as he clawed at the paper. It puts one in mind of the early perforated paintings of the influential Italian artist Lucio Fontana (1899-1968), whose interest lay in the physical and metaphysical properties of space.
Still, Mr. Penone is very much his own master, an original who attributes his view that a common vitality animates all earthly beings, even trees and stones, in part to his rural early life.
He was born in 1947 and grew up on a farm between the Ligurian Alps and the Po Valley.
He has said that he regards the role of the artist not to invent form but ''to indicate things that are already there, that are existent.''
In his work that concept has taken the form of pieces like ''Repeat the Woodland'' and various others entitled ''Trees,'' in which he carves trees from planks of wood, patiently restoring the form from which the planks were derived. He thus pays tribute to the natural growths that give birth to the materials of art.
''To Reverse One's Eyes'' (1970), an influential early work, is a photograph of Mr. Penone wearing mirrored contact lenses. (The photographer can be seen in the twin mirrors.)
Rather than explore the world through sight, the premise of conventional art, the blinded eyes that reflect rather than see redirect emphasis to the entire body.
To make the 10 drawings of his fingerprints, which might be called the show's chef d'oeuvre, Mr. Penone extended each fingerprint by penciling myriad unbroken thin lines around it, one millimeter apart, creating a dense radius around each that suggests the rings of a very ancient tree or the infinite ripples of a quiet eddy in a stream.
The rough paper surface, the hardness of the pencil, the different degrees of pressure exerted on it, and the sometimes uncontrollable twitches and slips of the hand are reflected in the lines, giving the drawings an interesting tension, at least to those on Mr. Penone's meditative, rhythm-of-nature wavelength. But if you look for work of more dash and brio in this show, you are lost.
In the enlightening conversation between Mr. Penone and Ms. de Zegher that appears in the catalog -- perhaps the best part of the show -- she recalls an ancient story of a gardener who neglected his orchard, and was punished by transformation into a tree. ''That is not a punishment,'' Mr. Penone observes. ''Perhaps it is a reward.''
''Giuseppe Penone: The Imprint of Drawing'' is at the Drawing Center, 35 Wooster Street, SoHo, (212) 219-2166, through March 6.
ART REVIEW
