Four former executives of a large hotel chain were convicted Wednesday of conducting a $100 million bank fraud during the mid-1990's that victimized a dozen financial institutions.
Monty D. Hundley, a former owner of Days Inn of America and a principal at Tollman-Hundley Hotels, owner and operator of more than 100 hotels nationwide, was convicted after a three-month trial before Judge Loretta A. Preska of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
The jury also convicted three of Mr. Hundley's associates at Tollman-Hundley: Sanford Freedman, the company's general counsel; James Cutler, its chief financial officer; and Howard Zukerman, vice president for finance.
Stanley S. Tollman, Mr. Hundley's business partner and a participant in the fraud, according to prosecutors, is a fugitive. Mr. Tollman's son, Brett, pleaded guilty last September to taking part in the conspiracy by failing to report compensation paid to Tollman-Hundley Hotels' executives and employees to the Internal Revenue Service.
During the 1980's, prosecutors said, Mr. Hundley and Mr. Tollman built a hotel empire on money borrowed from major banks, including Chemical Bank, now a part of J.P. Morgan Chase; Marine Midland Bank, now a subsidiary of HSBC; and First National Bank of Chicago.
Some of the hotels failed to repay the loans and went through a restructuring in the early 1990's. Mr. Hundley and Mr. Tollman signed notes making themselves liable for about $100 million owed to their lenders.
About the same time, Mr. Hundley and Mr. Tollman sold Days Inn of America to Hospitality Franchise Systems, or HFS, the predecessor to the Cendant Corporation.
The partners struck an agreement with HFS entitling them to more than one million shares of HFS stock if the hotel properties met certain performance benchmarks. The hotels did well, and Mr. Hundley and Mr. Tollman received and sold more than $100 million worth of HFS stock from 1993 to 1995, prosecutors showed at the trial.
Rather than repaying their obligations to the creditors of the Tollman-Hundley hotels, the partners maintained they were bankrupt, prosecutors said. The partners lied to the banks about their assets, prosecutors showed, which included ownership in Alpha Hospitality, a publicly traded gambling company they controlled, and multimillion-dollar homes in London; Palm Beach, Fla.; Bedford, N.Y.; and in Manhattan.
At the same time that Mr. Tollman and Mr. Hundley were pleading poverty with their creditors, they duped the banks into selling the distressed debt on the hotels to supposedly unrelated individuals at steep discounts. In reality, the evidence showed, the companies that bought the debt at about 10 cents on the dollar were sham entities controlled by Mr. Tollman and Mr. Hundley.
Mr. Hundley, 60, and a resident of Windemere Fla., was also convicted of tax evasion. Evidence at the trial showed that he had filed to file personal income tax returns from at least 1974 until the investigation into the bank fraud began in 1996.
David N. Kelley, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, said in a statement: ''The conduct in this case -- involving wealthy businessmen defrauding banks, the I.R.S. and ultimately honest taxpayers of tens of millions of dollars -- strikes at the heart of relationships between businessmen the banks and the I.R.S. Such conduct, for the sake of the integrity of the marketplace, cannot be tolerated and violators will face lengthy prison sentences.''
The four former executives are scheduled to be sentenced in June. Prosecutors are seeking forfeiture of $45 million from them. The government is also seeking the return of Mr. Tollman, who is thought to be living in London.
