KEITH JUROSKO, as a heavyweight in light opera, is part of a vanishing world. Possessed of a rich, classically trained baritone voice, an imposing athletic frame and the most commanding, subtly ironic stage presence this side of Barrymore, Mr. Jurosko is one of the leading Savoy specialists in America, a roving star player in Gilbert and Sullivan operettas around the country.
A master of the works' intricate solos, duets and trios, Mr. Jurosko, 58, is also an accomplished deadpan comedian. The demanding drama critic John Simon once called him ''a leading man of greater charm, polish and originality than can be found on any of New York's musical stages.''
But unless you are a G&amp;S addict or a follower of the comedic Gran Scena Opera Company in New York, where Mr. Jurosko performs in uproarious parodies of grand opera, you may not have heard of him. For Mr. Jurosko toils in the world of light opera, a high-talent, low-glamour backwater of the performing arts, where pure singing, rapid-fire recitative skills and comic timing are taken for granted, and the words ''percentage of the gross'' are never heard. (Well, hardly ever.)
Like some latter-day minstrel, he travels from city to city, from major stage to minor, by plane, bus and car, sleeping in dingy hotels, rehearsing with uncountable local amateurs, all for the joy of practicing this antique art form.
This month at the City Center, Mr. Jurosko will appear close to home with the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players as the grandiose Captain Corcoran in ''H.M.S. Pinafore'' (beginning on Jan. 16) and the fire-breathing emperor of Japan in ''The Mikado'' (Jan. 23). (The company's run begins on Friday, with ''Iolanthe'' but without Mr. Jurosko.) After that he will pack his bags again and hit the road.
''I am rather Gypsylike,'' Mr. Jurosko said recently in his apartment in mid-Manhattan. ''It is an itinerant profession. I love working with regional opera companies. But after a quarter century of doing this, if I never see another airport or hotel, I'll be happy.''
The hallmark of his signature roles, like Captain Corcoran, is imperiousness. In addition to his lyric baritone voice, Mr. Jurosko has a chiseled face that is nevertheless quite animated. It can go from granite indifference to outraged shock to sheer deviousness in an instant.
''He is a quintessential Captain,'' said Albert Bergeret, the founder and artistic director of the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players. ''Stylistically, no one else can touch him. He is precise, military. He has the timing. He has the crispness you expect.''
In ''The Mikado,'' a satire set in feudal Japan, Mr. Jurosko doesn't appear until the final act, and he sings only two songs. So when he finally does appear, he needs to be an exercise in hyperbole. Mr. Jurosko does not disappoint. Swathed in a giant gilded kimono, with a traditional pillbox hat, fearsome makeup and an awesome array of bracelets, rings and whatnot, he somehow manages to render the complex song ''A More Humane Mikado (Let the Punishment Fit the Crime)'' with malevolent glee, hurling mouthfuls of lyrics all the way to the back row.
Up to 50 times a year Mr. Jurosko takes such roles, at the Boston Academy of Music, the Anchorage Opera and smaller companies like the Sorg Opera in Middletown, Ohio, and the Light Opera Company of Salisbury, Conn. Typically he spends a few weeks with a company, but sometimes he shows up cold, only a day or two before the performance. Without knowing any of the players or even the director, he attends a technical rehearsal and a dress rehearsal, then it's on with the show.
What happens if the director doesn't have a clue, the chorus is in chaos, and the supporting players can't help hitting you in the face with a prop sword?
''It does happen, but, miraculously, very rarely,'' Mr. Jurosko said. ''I've never actually gotten hit in the face with a sword, but I have had to teach people what make-believe is on the stage, so you don't get whacked so hard that it knocks the wind out of you, and you can't sing your next line.''
Mr. Jurosko recalls a tour with the New York Gilbert and Sullivan Players that ran into a snowstorm between Detroit and Brantford, Ontario. The cast bus made it through, but the truck carrying the sets and costumes did not.
''We went to that theater and did the thing in our street clothes, with borrowed umbrellas instead of parasols,'' he said. ''And the audience loved it. They loved the fact that we didn't just turn tail and give up. They got the work without the feathers and the epaulettes. They still got a 'Pinafore.'
''What you do is make the best of it. My feeling about Gilbert and Sullivan is that they really are classic, and that you can wound them, but you can't kill them.''
Offstage Mr. Jurosko is relaxed and easygoing, without a trace of the gimlet-eyed puissance of his stage persona. Raised in Schenectady, N.Y., he first wanted to be a surgeon, but a high-school guidance counselor, thinking that the boy was shy, encouraged him to try the stage. After one performance of ''Arsenic and Old Lace,'' Mr. Jurosko was hooked.
''When I realized I could make people laugh, hold their attention,'' he said, ''it gave me such joy.'' Out went the medical career, the idea of cutting people open replaced by cutting people up.
Around the same time he discovered his singing voice, which is deep and far-ranging (though he also sings falsetto with Gran Scena, an all-male company, sending up both male and female roles). He studied for many years in New York with Charles Reading -- old-fashioned bel canto singing -- and dreamed of singing grand opera.
''I wanted to be the next big thing at the Met,'' he said. ''But in fact I really wanted to be a working performer, which is what I am. Any performer, I don't care who, will have to admit they always wanted to be a star.''
He initially turned down the first Gilbert and Sullivan role he was offered, Strephon in ''Iolanthe.''
''I was an opera snob,'' he said. ''But after much badgering, I agreed to do it.''
He occasionally plays grand opera roles, having recently sung Haly in Rossini's ''Italiana in Algeri'' at the Boston Academy of Music. But that kind of big singing is generally confined to the privacy of his home. ''I just let it rip, like an Italian opera singer,'' he said. ''Every clown wants to be Hamlet.''
Mr. Jurosko prefers operetta to mainstream musicals, because of its heightened sentimentality and more operatic-sounding music. Of course operettas also give him an opportunity to practice his highly developed sense of shtick.
''Keith can be funny any time he wants to,'' said Stephen Quint, another itinerant performer specializing in Gilbert and Sullivan, who will appear with Mr. Jurosko in the City Center productions. ''He can lift an eyebrow or do a tiny little double take, and he's got you. There's an economy of gesture that is audience-riveting.''
Mr. Jurosko gets a gleam in his eye when he talks about Gran Scena, the currently dormant comedic troupe, which has a cult following in New York and Europe. ''I had a rather unique position in that company,'' he said, ''in that I was their standard baritone doing all the great baritone villains in grand opera.'' But he has also sung high coloratura parts.
''I had a beautiful soprano voice when I was very young, and when my voice changed, the boy soprano never went away,'' he said. ''It still terrifies me.''
In an age when acting has gone minimal and the acme of dramatic art sometimes seems to consist of looking model-gorgeous and wet-eyed as the camera moves in for the close-up, Mr. Jurosko has abundant time-honored talent and individuality.
''There is a blandness and a homogeneity to a lot of performing, in opera and on Broadway,'' he said. ''Today it might be difficult for Maria Callas or Ethel Merman to get a job.''
Mr. Jurosko says he is fortunate to have learned from a master, the retired English comic baritone John Reed, whom he calls ''the last of the really major G&amp;S comedians from the original company.'' He played alongside Mr. Reed several times, in ''The Pirates of Penzance'' and ''H.M.S. Pinafore.''
Mr. Jurosko has been urged to direct an operetta himself, and he is interested in doing so. Last year, at a regional company, he worked with a director who was clearly at sea with Gilbert and Sullivan. When the director was finally removed, Mr. Jurosko helped direct the performances.
He would also like to take on other light-opera roles, especially in Viennese works by Strauss, Lehar and Kalman. He has never done Offenbach, and he would like to.
''There are some that I might want to do, but I'm happy to console myself with the Captain, the Mikado and the Pirate King,'' Mr. Jurosko said. ''They still give me joy.''
MUSIC Woody Hochswender, a former reporter for The New York Times, sings with the Light Opera Company of Salisbury, Conn.
