AS a sharp, damp cold unique to Oxford on a winter's night rolls in mists up from the river, academics finish their day, uncork the sherry and slip into chapel for evensong. The custom hasn't changed in centuries. So there was nothing too unusual about the bodies wrapped in scarves and overcoats, filing into the freezing darkness of New College Chapel one recent night, except for their number and the fact that they stood huddled like a large crowd waiting for a late train.
Suddenly, dramatically, the west doors opened, and the choir processed in, followed by people who were clearly not in the choir. Some became traffic cops, clearing space, while others filled it with instant theater: forming tableaux vivants, stretching sheets of golden fabric into sunbursts, acting out scenarios related to the singers' texts. Spotlights plucked them from the darkness. Anyone expecting evensong was in for a surprise.
What we were watching was an astonishing and memorable piece of stylized musical theater based on two interwoven works by Benjamin Britten: the ''Ceremony of Carols,'' for choir and harp, and the song cycle ''Winter Words,'' for tenor and piano. Never meant for staging, still less for interweaving, they proved none the worse for it. The stage director was Kenneth Richardson, formerly the artistic director of the Covent Garden Festival in London. The tenor was a rising star, Tom Raskin. And the New College Choir is Oxford's answer to the choir of King's College, Cambridge, both among the finest in Europe. Good names for the program book.
But they appeared alongside names that weren't even complete. Most of the artists were designated Angie, John or Michael.
''And for all I know they may not be their real names,'' says Matthew Peacock, the producer of the show and the founder of the London-based Streetwise Opera. ''We don't probe. Some of the people in our shows don't want to be identified. They may be on the run. They may be trying to escape from something or someone. That's their business, not mine. I'm just concerned to provide them with a supportive environment where they can do this work, and do it to the highest standard.''
The critics seem to think he is succeeding. The previous Streetwise event -- a staging of Britten's ''Canticles'' in Westminster Abbey -- drew reviews competing to applaud the loudest. ''The most moving and uplifting piece of music-theater in the entire year,'' The London Times proclaimed, adding, ''beyond criticism . . . truly awe-inspiring.'' The Guardian called it ''proof that it's worth investing in the arts because they can improve people's lives at ground level, where it's needed.''
And whose lives exactly are to be improved? The Streetwise audience perhaps, but more especially the Streetwise artists. Most of them are homeless.
Mr. Peacock first had the idea of a company that mixed homeless people with professional performers three years ago, when he was an assistant editor of the London-based magazine Opera Now. A former singer with a social conscience, he had begun to do voluntary work for a London night shelter and found that it was taking over his life.
''Some of the people there were what you'd expect,'' he says, ''difficult, drunken, drugged. But others weren't. They were ordinary guys just like me, except they'd had a stroke of bad luck and couldn't cope. And then their self-esteem would go, they'd slump into the daily grind of organizing benefits and health care, sorting out addictions or whatever, with nothing to make them feel good about themselves or help them deal with the stigma of being homeless.
''I started talking to them about what I did at Opera Now, found they were interested and thought maybe there was something practical that could come out of this. Not least because opera is just as misunderstood by the public, and gets as bad a press, as the homeless. Maybe, I thought, the two could help each other.''
The idea was all the more radical, since homelessness is regularly used by British journalists and politicians as a stick to beat the opera world. When the National Lottery made its first significant donation to the arts -- a lump sum for the renovation of the Royal Opera House in 1995 amounting to $138 million at present exchange rates -- there were outraged cries of ''money for the toffs'' in the tabloids, and television coverage included token quotes from homeless men. Making matters worse, a government minister defined the poor as ''people you trip over when you come out of the opera.''
Yet there has always been an inspirational alliance between poverty and opera. ''La Bohème,''  ''The Rake's Progress,''  ''La Cenerentola'': dire need proves useful in explaining what motivates sopranos and tenors to sing (as well as describing the straitened circumstances that some have to endure to do so). And Mr. Peacock guessed that the reverse would also hold: that singing would prove useful in explaining dire need to the world.
''There are plenty of projects around these days where arts organizations go into hospitals or prisons for workshops,'' he says, ''but they don't usually result in something the public can see. And it's good for the public to see the homeless in our shows, good to challenge their assumptions. But that's only going to work if what you show them is itself good. Which is why our shows are small-scale -- we're not ready for 'Carmen' or 'Fidelio,' and probably never will be -- but quality. Not worthy fluff.''
Streetwise Opera runs on a shoestring budget that barely allows Mr. Peacock to take a salary. And he has only just acquired something that passes for an office, behind a paint shop in South London. But the professionals he hires for his projects get a full commercial rate.
''I want the best,'' he says, ''so I pay them generously.'' And they have their work cut out.
Preparation for the ''Ceremony of Carols'' show began three months in advance, with the director, the designer, the tenor soloist and the musical support staff visiting centers for the homeless around Oxford for weekly workshops.
''We've had about 80 homeless people involved at one point or another,'' says Mr. Richardson, the director, ''and of course we know from the start that their involvement in the actual singing will be limited. That's where the professionals come in. But there are many levels at which the homeless can enter this project -- not only as actors but doing props, lights, front of house -- and they've all been involved in developing ideas for the staging.
''Because we're not staging conventional operas, we start with a blank canvas. So with 'Ceremony of Carols' we did a lot of work about what 'ceremonies' were, about processions, ritual objects and relating that to 'Winter Words' songs like the one about the convict and the boy with the violin, where the violin is a symbol of freedom. There were logistics to work out, because we use the whole chapel, moving around and taking the audience with us.''
But there are bigger problems in Streetwise projects.
''By definition the homeless are a shifting population with a tendency to chaotic lives, and their attendance at rehearsals can be random,'' Mr. Richardson says. ''So the trick is to do things people can get involved with at short notice, with plenty of cover for the no-shows. But at the same time, part of the workshop process is to build a sense of commitment through the three months. And in doing that, you have to treat the homeless on the same terms as the professionals. We're in this together. We share the responsibility to make a show that's worth an audience paying to come and see. That's the message.''
It's a message the homeless seem to take to heart. Streetwise has awkward moments -- people turning up under the influence of alcohol or drugs -- but they're comparatively rare. Most of the performers take it seriously as a chance to sort their lives out.
Michelle, a sober-looking woman dressed in black who could easily be mistaken for a North Oxford academic or librarian, says she has never ventured past the gatehouse of a college.
''I don't think I'd have felt comfortable, coming into somewhere like New College,'' she says. ''I'm not a confident person at the best of times, so this has been something different for me. And yes, I think it's helped me feel more confident about what I can do. I don't know what it will mean for the future, but it will probably help me deal with things better.''
It's the kind of testimony Mr. Peacock documents and files. And knowing the ways of financing bodies, he can process it into statistics.
''The authorities like figures, and we've got them,'' he says. ''Eighty percent of our long-term participants say they feel more confident in dealing with their problems. Seventy percent feel they can communicate better. And there are categorical cases of people who've got back on their feet, gone into detox, re-established contact with their families as a result of Streetwise. It doesn't happen for everyone, but we provide a follow-through for those who want it. We set up work placements. And I've been training some students from New College to continue the Oxford workshops when this project is over.''
AS for New College itself, it's hard to know what the consequences of its involvement with Streetwise might be. Importing homeless people into such a bastion of the privileged intelligentsia has undoubtedly set up interesting encounters.
''And so far as we're concerned, entirely positive ones,'' says Edward Higginbottom, director of music in the college chapel, whose choral tradition runs back almost unbroken to 1379. ''The boys in the choir here would have formed opinions about homeless people from seeing them on the streets. They might perhaps have found them scary -- some are -- and of course we had to get their parents' agreement to getting involved. But there were no objections. And it's been a terrific experience for us all.''
Still, in the long term, what? Does New College go back to singing evensong while its onetime colleagues in art go back to their shelters?
''No,'' Dr. Higginbottom says. ''If you're asking, do we now invite the homeless of Oxford in for tea every week, I'm not sure what that would achieve. It's playing Lady Bountiful. And you'd cause more problems than you solved by bringing the homeless into this environment with no role for them except as recipients of charity.
''The Streetwise project worked because it was shared, with a level playing field between us all. But there will be consequences. It's been a chance for us to do some joined-up thinking about homelessness, to raise funds for future projects. And it's been an eye-opener. Awareness is an ongoing thing, especially for the boys in this choir, who mostly come from rather cushioned backgrounds and will, I'm sure, have been changed by this experience.''
Robert Brooks, a 10-year-old New College chorister, says: ''I've sometimes given homeless people money in the street, but I'd never met one or shaken hands, as we all do at one point in this show. We've had fun. I hope they liked it too.''
MUSIC Michael White is a columnist for BBC Music Magazine and writes for The Sunday Telegraph in London.
