Cold-Water Flat Days
Q. I'm fascinated by the old Public Baths building on Huron Street in Greenpoint, Brooklyn. What is its history and what is the current state of its interior?
A. When the Huron Street Public Bath opened at 139 Huron in 1904, it answered what was seen as a genuine public health need. Two years earlier, The Brooklyn Daily Eagle had reported on its front pages that the United States lagged far behind most European countries ''in regard to public bathing facilities'' and sternly warned Brooklynites that ''the lack of public baths in an overcrowded city is naturally a menace to public health.''
In a time when many apartments lacked rudimentary baths, the concern was not entirely exaggerated, and Brooklyn eventually had five public bathhouses.
The passing of the cold-water flat meant that demand for the public baths was no longer as great as it had been early in the 20th century. At the height of its popularity, the Huron Street Bath averaged more than a thousand people a day, but by 1959 that figure had dropped to 25. The borough's other four baths had closed by 1953.
The Huron Street facility lingered until 1960, when it was turned over to the Department of Real Estate to be auctioned off. Today it is a workshop for the manufacture of picture frames for museums.
These establishments will be the subject of ''New York's Public Baths,'' a lecture by Joyce Mendelsohn on Jan. 28 at 6 p.m. at the Lesbian, Gay, Bisexual &amp; Transgender Community Center, 208 West 13th Street, Manhattan; for reservations, call (212)614-9107 or e-mail cmcneur@hdc.org.
Flicks on 14th Street
Q. I have read that D.W. Griffith's Biograph Company at one point was located on East 14th Street near Fifth Avenue. Which building was it?
A. From the early days, New York was hotbed of filmmaking. In 1894 a former Edison employee named Robert Chinnock shot a prizefight between Robert T. Moore and James W. Lahey on the roof at 1729 St. Marks Avenue, in East New York, Brooklyn, probably the first film made in the five boroughs.
Many of the names of filmmakers whose careers began in New York City are familiar, but few of their names resonate as profoundly as does David Wark Griffith, and none of the city's long-dead studios are more famous than Biograph.
Biograph was founded in 1896 as the American Mutoscope Company, first located at 841 Broadway, just below Union Square, where it shot short comedies on the roof. Within three years it changed its name to the American Mutoscope and Biograph Company, which in May 1903 opened an indoor studio at 11 East 14th Street.
It was there that Griffith directed some of his groundbreaking early shorts, including the 1909 offering ''The Lonely Villa.'' By 1913 the Biograph Company, as it was now known, had built a larger New York-based studio at 175th Street and Prospect Avenue in the Bronx. But Griffith defected to another studio and never set foot in that facility. The East 14th Street building was torn down long ago; an apartment building stands on the site.
GEORGE ROBINSON
F.Y.I. E-mail: fyi@nytimes.com
