HE'S a ''fixer'' by nature, said David W. Lichtenstein, whose national real estate company, the Lightstone Group, is based in this unlikely small-town venue, in an old Georgian mansion he rescued from dilapidation. He likes fixing buildings, fixing problems and tinkering with companies to enhance their value, Mr. Lichtenstein said.
Still, hammering together the deal that gave Lightstone a prominent position in the list of privately held companies acting as retail landlords in the country required skills beyond what he had ever had to muster before, he said. ''By the end,'' added Mr. Lichtenstein -- who could also count comic timing as a skill -- ''I was munching Prozac.''
Lightstone, a private company that previously owned mostly apartments and industrial properties, acquired Prime Retail in the deal -- and its portfolio spanning 23 states and 10.2 million square feet of space, including 36 outlet centers and 154,000 square feet of office space.
The $625.5 million sale, which involved taking over a public real estate investment trust and making it part of the private Lightstone Group, took 18 months -- and was like ''dealing with a huge, dysfunctional family, trying to get everyone to agree on a complicated set of points and each sign on the dotted line,'' Mr. Lichtenstein said.
''It's very hard to get five Americans to agree on anything,'' he noted. ''Here, we were trying to buy out 60 million shares and had four different classes of shareholders to convince this was a good idea -- along with Prime Retail's board of directors and management.''
''For this deal,'' Mr. Lichtenstein said, ''I really needed an M.S.W. rather than an M.B.A.''
The Prime Retail takeover was accomplished by merging it into the Prime Outlets Acquisition Company, a Delaware limited liability concern affiliated with Lightstone. For the new business structure to take shape, however, Prime Retail's preferred stockholders had to agree to cash out their holdings. . Separate agreements also had to be made to acquire common stock and preferred units held by members of Prime Retail's operating partnership. Lightstone paid a total of $115.5 million to stockholders and assumed about $510 million of debt.
Mr. Lichtenstein said he began the quest for the deal out of a sense of restlessness.
''Residential real estate is the safe and boring part of real estate,'' said Mr. Lichtenstein, principal in a 15-year-old firm that owns and manages 16,000 apartments, in addition to office, industrial and retail properties. ''People always need a place to live, and there will always be a living in being a landlord. But it can become a routine, like chopping wood.''
R ETAIL is more like college basketball,'' he said, ''a running end-to-end game that is more challenging, more exciting, and requires you to be more resourceful and work a little harder.''
Will Lightstone continue its expansion into retail property?
''We are not risk-adverse,'' he replied. ''The next acquisition could be another retail deal. It could be another complex transaction that is very demanding -- but inevitably that means I don't get to see my kids very much. Right now, I'm going to take a little time to be with them.'' Mr. Lichtenstein, 43, is the father of five children ranging in age from 6 to 16.
Lightstone is the only corporate presence for many miles around Lakewood, which is in Ocean County. It has about 800 employees, having gained about 400 with the Prime Retail deal. At its Lakewood headquarters, however, there are only 50.
John D. Rockefeller once had a country estate here, but that property has long since become a state arboretum, and the Rockefellers never did any business here. Mr. Lichtenstein -- whose name means Lightstone in German -- wanted his family to live here, and later decided his company belonged close to his home.
The town of Lakewood has 36,000 residents, and no Starbuck's. ''Still, it's very livable,'' Mr. Lichtenstein said with a laugh. A low-profile home base has suited his company just fine, he said.
During a period of rapid expansion for his company, which has been one of the more aggressive buyers of all types of real estate in the country this year, assembling a portfolio with a market value approaching $2 billion, the Lightstone principal has not seen fit to put up a sign over the company's door. ''Well, we're not a store,'' he said. ''We don't have any inventory. What do we need a sign for?''
With the Prime Retail deal, his firm holds a total of 15.5 million square feet of retail space, putting it fifth among privately held companies; Edens &amp; Avant of Columbia, S.C., is No. 1, with 25 million square feet in its retail portfolio, according to Commercial Property News, a trade publication.
The Prime Retail outlet malls, which operate under the name Prime Outlets, vary in size. The Prime Outlets mall at Niagara Falls, N.Y., has 150 brand-name outlet stores, while the one in Grove City, Pa., near Pittsburgh, has 140 and the one in Sedona, Ariz., has about 30. Mr. Lichtenstein commented that he is amused to find himself a major landlord for Polo and Nike, among other high-profile brands.
''But we're not in the business of trying to sell merchandise,'' he said. ''Our business is to keep occupancy up, keep tenants happy and keep finding profitable deals.''
IT does not require a bit of ''pixie dust'' to make a deal profitable, Mr. Lichtenstein said. ''It's focus,'' he said. ''It's all about focus.''
He said he and his executive team in Lakewood and in satellite offices in Baltimore, New York, Virginia and California, do the same things everyone else in the commercial real estate business does -- scrutinize company reports and try to find a market where there is ''a mispricing of an asset.''
''You look for profitable niches, which could be anywhere, so you have to be willing to cross geographical lines,'' he said. ''Or they could be anything -- hotel, restaurant, office, retail -- so you have to be willing to cross industrial lines.''
Real estate entrepreneurs must also be willing to make a lot of mistakes, and then learn from experience, the Lightstone chief observed. ''People ask me how do you know if a deal is good, and I say it's like: how do you know if a roofer is good?
''When he has walked on 1,000 roofs, that is a good roofer.''
Commercial Property
