WHEN I saw the fosa, I knew that Madagascar was truly an alternative universe. A sleek chocolate-brown animal, it was almost, but not quite, feline. It had the agility and power of a wild cat, a face and paws more like a dog's, and, with the nervous energy of a ferret, it caught the raw meat the keeper tossed into the cage in midair.
My husband, Peter, and I had come to Madagascar last March to see its flora and fauna, many of which, like the fosa, a distant relative of the mongoose, are diminishing or on the verge of disappearing. As molecular biologists normally concerned with the invisible world of bacterial viruses, we knew that the island was the world's sole home to lemurs. Beyond that we were embarrassingly ignorant.
We had arrived in Antananarivo (Tana for short) on the weekly flight from Nairobi at night, but we could see the dilapidated buildings and crowded food kiosks. Madagascar, the world's fourth largest island and a former French colony, is one of the poorest countries on the planet. For several months in 2002, its former president, Didier Ratsiraka, had refused to cede his position to his elected successor, Marc Ravalomanana, and the troubles that ensued have devastated tourism. A recount confirmed his win, gaining Mr. Ravalomanana army support and foreign recognition, and leading Mr. Ratsiraka to flee the country. The only remnants of political activity during our visit were faded ''Vote for Marc Ravalomanana'' T-shirts.
Given Madagascar's troubles, we were amazed when the chef at the simple Hotel Mahavelo, who was French, produced entrecôte with sautéed fresh chanterelles, perfect French fries and an excellent French wine. This set the somewhat incongruous tone for our two-week visit -- fine dining and comfortable accommodations against the backdrop of vanishing vegetation and wildlife, and people whose simple way of life has changed little over the millennia.
Madagascar, we soon learned, has few decent roads. Our guide, Guy Ratsarazaka, who accompanied us everywhere and works for Cortez Travel, the company that arranged our trip, explained that French tourists prefer to travel by minibus to a single destination ''because it gives them lots of time to talk,'' while Americans want to see everything and fly from place to place. We did some of both. As the pilot expertly guided the 44-passenger turbo-prop into the sky, we watched the highlands of Tana give way to the tropical greens and turquoise waters surrounding Maroantsetra, our first stop on a two-week trip that would take us to four corners of the country.
Maroantsetra is a medium-sized town with one store-lined street, one gas station, two large churches and a vibrant daily market. A decrepit but lovingly maintained Renault taxi carried us past elevated bamboo and thatch bungalows. Women and children sat in doorways watching our progress as the driver wrestled with his steering wheel to avoid giant water-filled potholes and a steady stream of people, some carrying huge bundles on their heads.
The modern Relais du Masaola, a short walk from the town center, yet totally peaceful and secluded, had airy bungalows scattered among palm, hibiscus and clove trees. We chatted with the few guests: the French-born co-owner of the Relais and her visiting friends, and an enthusiastic older couple from Atlanta. Later, we took a stroll to the bay, a vast blue expanse dotted with tiny dugout canoes, where we watched a group of men maneuvering a long fishing net; holding it at intervals, they walked the net into the water, circling around to surround a school of fish.
We explored the river delta by boat with Julien, a local guide, who pointed out rainbow-colored chameleons (unique to Madagascar, as are at least 90 percent of its reptiles) and various water birds hidden in the papyrus and water hyacinth. People were everywhere -- bathing and washing clothes in the river, paddling dugout canoes filled with produce.
Julien volunteered to take us to look for nocturnal lemurs, so at sundown we set off. The area is heavily populated, and we followed paths that connected clusters of bungalows with their cassava fields. Families sat outside in the dark, chatting and tending pots of coffee on hibachi-type charcoal grills. As we crossed the fields and entered a remnant of the original forest, Julien held his flashlight at eye level so the light would reflect back to him from the retina of any animal caught in the beam. When he heard the soft clucks of lemur vocalizations, he replied in kind and we followed their answers. We tiptoed closer. The diminutive mouse lemur, with its huge bright eyes and teddy-bear fur, charmed us.
The next morning, we took a day trip by power boat to Navana, a small village on the Baie d'Antongila. The inhabitants subsist on bananas, rice, cassava, milk and fish. Zebu, the local long-horned cattle, is eaten on special occasions. Cloves, coffee and vanilla beans are cash crops. The local people are curious about visitors and seemed pleased to be asked questions. However, small children often burst into tears when they saw us. Apparently, some parents tell their children that the vazaha (foreigners) will eat them if they don't finish their dinner.
We watched men building a bungalow, a machete their only tool. A couple pounded rice in a large wooden mortar, using six-foot-long clubs in an alternating rhythm. One startling sign of modernity was the blackboard outside a bungalow announcing ''Piège à Hong Kong'' starring Jean-Claude Van Damme (television inside, kerosene-driven generator out back). We left with two cups of aromatic cloves, bought at the general store for 30 cents.
The next day, back in Maroantsetra, we navigated the pothole-filled road by foot to visit the market. It was huge and wonderful -- a sea of umbrellas and mud (short, intense cloudbursts are a hallmark of this region year round). Women did all of the selling and most of the buying. Small children were everywhere. Fruit, vegetable and fish stalls were jammed with customers, and young boys crisscrossed the area hawking hot tea from enormous swinging canisters.
After a short flight south to the port city of Toamasina, we left the coast for the 75-mile drive to the Perinet Reserve. The humidity and temperature dropped, litchis and oranges at countless roadside stalls gave way to jackfruit and custard apples, and the bungalow style shifted from bamboo to mud. Children stood by the road holding freshly caught eels for sale; boys herded zebu; men with machetes harvested eucalyptus for charcoal production; people of all ages were occupied at all stages of rice production. This was not some remote backwoods region -- we were on the busy main road that leads back to Tana.
We arrived at the Vakona Forest Lodge around noon. The lodge, said by Guy to be the nicest place to stay in Madagascar, serves as a weekend getaway for well-to-do residents of Tana and a convenient base for tourists visiting Perinet. Clusters of small chalets and a strikingly modern main lodge were at home in the hilly terrain and alpine climate. Lunch -- French cuisine with a Malagasy accent -- featured a sauce so delicious that finding its fresh green peppercorns became a major shopping objective.
We strolled over to the lodge's zoo, which features animals endemic to Madagascar and includes its only two large predators. It was feeding time, and when the first hunks of meat landed in the small artificial lake built to house them, the water erupted as scores of crocodiles rushed over. Then it was the fosas' turn. After their mesmerizing display of power and grace had subsided into contented bone gnawing, we drove to another lake whose guava-covered islands serve as lemur refuges. Lemurs do not swim (hence the mystery of how they got from East Africa, their original home, to Madagascar 60 million years ago -- a 250-mile trip). A local guide paddled our kayak and provided bananas, which the lemurs accepted with great dignity and gentleness.
The next morning, backpack-toting children on their way to school slowed our 10-minute drive to Perinet. Once within this national park we hiked past strangler figs and ancient fern trees in total solitude. We spotted red-fronted brown lemurs and an enormous orb spider in the center of a mist-outlined web. Then we heard an eerie wailing that grew into deafening shrieks. Several indri, the stars of Perinet, materialized among the trees, taking leaps of 20 or 30 feet that left the branches oscillating wildly. These large black and white lemurs with koala bear ears and piercing green eyes seemed to be performing for our benefit.
The next day, we interrupted the two-hour drive to Tana with a stop at La Mandraka Nature Farm, the creation of a French herpetologist who has established breeding populations of exotic chameleons. Offspring are sold to zoos and collectors to support the farm. A walk-in cage the size of our apartment was dense with vegetation and chameleons hidden in the foliage. Other cages held flowering plants, butterflies and red tomato frogs that resembled Jabba the Hutt.
Back on the road, an elaborate system of hand signals and headlight flashes from our driver allowed us to pass truck after truck struggling up the steep grade toward the central highland plateau on which Tana is situated. Tana, a sprawling city of more than two million inhabitants, was bustling, filled with old Citroëns and Renaults. Initially city and country overlapped, with rice fields and browsing zebu intermixed with billboards and construction sites. The ethnic diversity of the Malagasy was more evident, reflecting successive migrations of Indonesians, Southeast Asians, Arab traders, East Africans and finally Europeans. In central Tana, third world gave way to modern city, in the midst of which stood the venerable Hotel Colbert, Tana at its most French. With our jeans and dusty backpacks, we felt happily out of place among the well-dressed businessmen, and enjoyed people watching as we ate our first mediocre meal in Madagascar.
ANOTHER perfect Air Madagascar landing and we were in the coastal southern city of Tolanaro, en route to the spiny forest in a hired S.U.V. We crossed wide rivers on derelict bridges. Our destination was Berenty, only 50 miles west, but as arid as Tolanaro is humid. Berenty is a private reserve in a patch of riverine forest preserved by the owners of the adjacent sisal plantation. The lodge consists of a dozen bamboo-lined cabins and a dining room filled with lovely old wooden statues -- elongated human figures that anticipate Giacometti. Berenty, one of Madagascar's most popular destinations for tourists and rich Malagasy, is usually heavily booked. The catastrophic effect of Madagascar's recent political troubles were evident, as it was almost empty the two nights we stayed.
Ring-tailed lemurs, however, were everywhere. They were bouncing out of bushes and dropping from trees. Only the matriarch sat quietly, staring at us out of a clownlike gray and white face. Scampering along the ground, the other members of the troop held their long black and white tails straight up. They are spectacularly beautiful creatures, comfortable in the open.
In the woods at daybreak, we watched brown lemurs groom one another and dig up edibles. Several Verreaux's sifakas, animals in the lemur family that are about the size of a small baboon, with thick white fur and black extremities, arrived trapeze-style and swayed at the extremities of slender tree branches. Eventually, they descended to the forest floor, stood on their hind legs with arms outstretched, and bounded off. A paradise flycatcher fluttered amidst dense branches without damaging his improbably long tail feathers.
The local Antandroy people who live in the area no longer weave their own cloth nor carry water in calabash gourds. But in most respects -- including the wooden spears the men carry -- their lives have changed little over the centuries, as detailed in the extremely fine ethnographic museum at Berenty, filled with artifacts, perceptive commentary and vivid photographs.
At the botanical garden in Tolanaro the next day, the guard's one-year-old son cried when he saw us, two disheveled vazaha; we made friends by offering him wild guava plucked from a nearby tree.
Then it was over. There was much more we hadn't seen: the resort island of Nosy Be; the elusive aye-aye and other (as our guidebook put it) ''seriously weird'' creatures. But then, there was so much we had experienced, and so far, the tempo of life back on our own island -- Manhattan -- has not blotted out the sights and aromas of this complex and magical place.
Looking for the elusive lemurs
United States citizens need a tourist visa, available from the Madagascar Embassy, (202) 265-5525; Mission to the United Nations, (212) 986-9491; or through Cortez Travel, below, whose owner, Monique Rodriguez, is an honorary consul of Madagascar. Information: www.embassy.org/madagascar.
Malaria, some of it chloroquine-resistant, is endemic; see the Web site of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, www.cdc.gov/travel/yb/countries/Madagascar.
We ate only at hotels (or took picnics they provided) frequented by tourists and knowledgeable local people. The food was excellent everywhere. Although we were careful to use bottled water, we did eat fresh vegetables, salads and seafood, with no ill effects (we were probably lucky).
We worked out an itinerary with the help of Susan Herbst of Cortez Travel, Post Office Box 1699, Solana Beach, Calif. 92075, (800) 854-1029 or (858) 755-5136, www.cortez-usa.com, which specializes exclusively in Madagascar travel. She arranged all aspects of our trip (international and internal flights, the guide who traveled with us, hotels, meals and cars with driver). The current price for a 14-day trip (including everything but international air fare) is about $4,000 a person, based on double occupancy.
Gerald Durrell's 1992 book, ''The Aye-Aye and I,'' which describes his adventures trying to make a documentary film about these elusive nocturnal lemurs, is utterly charming. It brought us closer to the real Madagascar than we would have wanted to experience directly.
Getting There
Air Madagascar flies to Antananarivo three days a week from Paris and once a week from Nairobi; Air France flies three or four days a week from New York via Paris. Current international air fare from New York to Antananarivo is around $1,600 round trip in low season; $2,100 in high season (July, August and Christmas).
Where to Stay
East Coast (Maroantsetra): The very pleasant Relais du Masoala (relais@simicro.mg) has about a dozen bungalows with modern bathrooms, a central lodge and a dining area that serves Malagasy-accented French cuisine; about $50 a night.
Near Perinet Reserve: Vakona Forest Lodge, (261-22) 213 94 or 624 80, www.Madagascar-contacts.com/vakona, is really a full-service family resort. In addition to its private zoo and man-made lemur islands, there is an outdoor pool, a game room and a small boutique filled with crafts. Horseback riding and escorted night walks are available. About $65 a night.
South Coast (Tolanaro, formerly Fort Dauphin): We stayed at the Hotel Le Dauphin, (261-2092) 212-38,which is owned by the same family that owns the Berenty Reserve and also handles reservations for bungalows and meals there. A room at the hotel, which has a lovely garden but no ocean views, is about $75 a night with breakfast and dinner. To stay in a bungalow at Berenty, it is about $150 a person, with transportation, lodging and meals.
MARJORIE RUSSEL
MARJORIE RUSSEL is a molecular geneticist at Rockefeller University in New York.
Correction:  January 18, 2004, Sunday  A picture caption on Jan. 4 about the diminishing array of wildlife in Madagascar misstated the name of an animal species. It was a ruffed lemur, not ruffled.
