It has been a brutal holiday season. Christmas and New Year's coming midweek meant you had to party twice as long, eat and drink twice as much, yak yourself hoarse, smile yourself into a rictus. Enough already! It's time to get yourself to a transformational spa. ''Transformational'' meaning that it treats not just the slack, doughy outer you, but also the churning, frazzled inner you. It turns you around, gets you started in a new direction. It's the born-again thing, without the religion.
How will you know that you have landed in such a spa? Let inspirational décor be your guide. Take exhale, with a lowercase ''e.'' It's sparkling new in two locations, one at the Hampshire House on Central Park South, the other on Madison Avenue at 76th Street. The architect David Mann blends old and new, yin and yang, the spirituality of the East with the efficiency of the West. Massive 200-year-old Indonesian doors open onto studios where you can practice Core Fusion to achieve thin thighs and flat abs, or -- in a room complete with a recessed altar, a Buddha and candles -- you can practice yoga to attain spiritual enlightenment, thin thighs and flat abs.
In discreetly screened treatment rooms, you can improve your appearance with everything from waxing and manicures to laser therapy and tooth-whitening. But maybe now is a good time, and certainly a good place, to look within. Rob MacDonald, licensed masseur and acupuncturist, says his goal is to put clients in balance, so they can grow to another level. He will insert long, sterile needles in all the right places to get your energy flowing. Do not be alarmed if the first needle goes right between the eyes. You won't feel a thing. Merely being in MacDonald's large-boned, calm and sincere presence for an hour will leave you feeling saner than before.
Or try body enlightening with Simon Park, a lean, lithe young man. You lie on a mat in a room illuminated by candles. He stretches and folds you, using his body as resistance. At one point, you look in the mirror: you are bending backward, suspended on his feet. (He doesn't try this with everyone, he says.) He cradles and rocks you in his arms. At the end of the session, he curls up in the corner and breathes audibly. You breathe with him.
Afterward, you can stop at the juice bar for some seaweed salad and green tea and other stuff you probably didn't get a lot of at your holiday buffets. When you check your bill -- $150 for acumassage, $150 for body enlightening -- you will realize that serenity, like everything, has its price.
You are beginning to understand the genius behind this new concept. Manhattan is choked with spas. As far as the outer self goes, there are only so many acres of hair and skin to wax, buff and gloss. But the inner self, with its unease, malaise and angst, can absorb endless coddling. Of course, great ideas have an air of inevitability. Just as Darwin was not alone in thinking up evolution, so, too, others are hitting on the theme of the born-again spa. When you venture into the AmorePacific on Spring Street in SoHo, you see certain parallels with exhale. AmorePacific isn't exactly a spa. It's primarily a showcase for the luxury skin-care line of a major Korean cosmetics company, but it offers facials, body treatments and reflexology. Like exhale's, however, its mission is to treat the inner client. Also like exhale's, the surroundings are high concept. The design by the Toronto-based architectural firm Yabu Pushelberg is keyed to what AmorePacific considers the five elements representing life's essential energies: water, fire, metal, earth and tree. A four-ton basalt boulder stands in the middle of the floor. Thin strips of wood veneer crisscross the ceiling. Water flows over slate counters, rippling past products displayed like holy relics. As you approach, a description of each product materializes on a giant screen above it.
You sit with an adviser at a desk made of resin striated in several shades of red while you ponder a computer questionnaire about your skin and the core of your being that asks, Which of five flowers is truly you? The computer prints out your five-element analysis, revealing that you could use more tree. Passing through a curved lacquer door, you are greeted by Oni, who is administrating the customized five-element healing massage facial. She is dressed better than you, in a black jacket and pants by Rozae Nichols, the darling of the hip Hollywood set. Ninety minutes later, you emerge with your complexion clearer and your elements in balance. Reconnected to ki, the energy that makes up and underlies the universe, you leave with a bag full of lotions, serums and soaps.
Restoring energy balance could wreak havoc with the bank balance. (The facial alone costs $150.) Nevertheless, the idea of promoting emotional harmony is so right for our fractious times that these new spas will no doubt proliferate. In fact, after a while there may be so many architecturally fabulous transformational spas that you will have to sneak out to some outer-borough hole in the wall for a cheap, quick manicure, no questions (about the inner you) asked.
STYLE
