IN THE LAND
OF MAGIC SOLDIERS
A Story of White and Black in West Africa.
By Daniel Bergner.
216 pp. New York:
Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux. $22.
WHEN the first generation of abolitionists exhibited thumbscrews and slave whips on lecture platforms in England some 200 years ago, audiences were genuinely shocked that such things could exist. After the full nature of the Holocaust became clear, many felt that it surpassed all other horrors in memory. Africa's recent crop of civil wars -- most notably in Congo, Liberia and Sierra Leone -- seem to represent yet new depths of human cruelty: forcing children at gunpoint to cut off their parents' hands; can we imagine anything more vicious?
Unfortunately, of course, such cruelty is all too familiar. Slavery was widespread for most of recorded history. There were outbreaks of genocide long before the word was coined. And forced cannibalism may have been known to the ancient Greeks, for in the Oresteia trilogy of Aeschylus, Thyestes is tricked into eating the flesh of his own children.
The journalist and novelist Daniel Bergner is right, however, to see Africa's civil wars as a horror of our time that deserves exploration, and that is what drew him to spend time in Sierra Leone in the aftermath of the gruesome conflict there that ended several years ago -- for the time being, anyway.
There seems something especially tragic about Sierra Leone's civil war, because the country was not known for great violence in the recent past. Although it was once a center of the slave trade, its origins lie partly in a remarkably utopian 18th-century settlement of emancipated slaves. Later, British rule there was far more benign than colonialism in most of Africa, and independence in 1961 came peacefully. But by the 1990's, Sierra Leone was the same story as too many other African nations: a government that essentially no longer provided services, marauding rebel soldiers fueled by drugs and lust for diamonds, children wielding AK-47's, mass rapes.
Bergner has a keen eye, although at times his writing feels frustratingly elliptical. It is occasionally hard to keep his characters straight, and he never tells us exactly how much time he spent in the country. He renounces any attempt to explain fully the impoverished nation's descent into savagery. Instead the strength of his spare and evocative account is his gallery of characters, whose stories weave through the book and at times intersect with one another. One, Lamin Jusu Jarka, had both his hands chopped off by rebel soldiers. He takes Bergner to the place where it happened, and, with steel pincer prostheses, holds his hand against the mango tree root -- still marked by the blows of an ax -- where he lost his own. At the end of the book, Lamin leads a group of amputees to wait under another mango tree to vote in the country's first postwar election. Where the ballots call for a thumbprint, he marks his with his big toe.
The man who crippled Lamin, a rebel wearing a white T-shirt with the words ''C. O. Cut Hands,'' has recently been seen around the capital in the uniform of the new national army, composed of veterans of both sides of the civil war. Bergner is not able to track the man down, but he does talk to others who carried out mutilations. Some are teenage orphans, often unable to return to their communities because they were inducted into the rebel army by being forced to cut off the limbs of their own parents, brothers, sisters. One tells Bergner how he killed a Nigerian peacekeeper who he felt wronged him, tore out his heart and liver, and boiled and ate them. The stories numb us with their horror. And yet at the same time, after Sept. 11, 2001, Bergner writes, ''the condolences offered me, as an American, were constant and, as best I could tell, shocked and sincere and weighted with empathy.''
Hovering uneasily in the background of the book is the question: Is this level of barbarity unique to Africa? Bergner once or twice asks the question directly, wonders if he is racist for asking it, then backs away from it. But his final chapter seems to imply, at least, that Africa is more primitive and less rational than other violent parts of the world: he visits a village witch doctor, whose apprentices put on a demonstration of eating razor blades, placing flaming sticks on their skins and other such feats. The scene is perhaps meant to justify the book's title, and it is true that one of many ingredients in Africa's wars has long been the belief that the proper magic can make one immune to bullets. However, conjurers perform similar feats in other countries. One could also argue that Washington's confidence in high-tech weaponry represents a different kind of faith in magic. And to a civilian on the receiving end, a piece of depleted-uranium shrapnel can feel as inexplicable a horror as an ax wielded by a drugged teenager.
What is of value in this book is less what it says about Sierra Leone than about the human condition. Here Bergner's most haunting figure is Neall Ellis, a white South African mercenary who flies the sole combat helicopter the Sierra Leone government owns. Ellis lives for the thrill of rocketing and machine-gunning from the air: ''Better than sex. . . . There's a lot of adrenaline going. You're all keyed up, and when you realize you're on target, that you've taken out the enemy, it's a great feeling.'' Human Rights Watch has documented dozens of dead or wounded civilians in towns he attacked. Yet at the same time, Ellis is using some of his salary to pay school fees for local children, to put one of his Sierra Leonean girlfriends through nursing and midwifery school in England and to put a young man through medical school. Later on, as the fighting winds down, Ellis raises funds for the treatment of a badly burned young woman, and plans a local burn center, ''because right now there isn't a place like that in the whole of Sierra Leone, nowhere a victim can go to get that type of treatment.'' A few months later, however, Bergner gets an e-mail message from Ellis: civil war has broken out in the Ivory Coast, and he is ''hoping for a possible contract.''
Ellis is so memorable because the strange blend of killing and healing in his life is a reminder of the potential for each that we all carry within us, of how precarious is the balance between them, and of how easily it can be tipped one way or the other by the societies we build for ourselves. ''In the Land of Magic Soldiers'' does not analyze the causes of Sierra Leone's war, but it reminds us of this precarious balance, and that may be the greater service.
Adam Hochschild is the author of ''King Leopold's Ghost,'' ''Finding the Trapdoor: Essays, Portraits, Travels'' and other books.
