When the Bush administration raised America's antiterrorism alert status from yellow to orange over the holidays, some travelers became anxious, while others took the warning in stride. If and when another attack on American soil occurs, however, everything we know about the psychology of fear suggests that it will lead to extreme public panic that may be disproportionate to the actual casualties. The public responds emotionally to remote but terrifying threats, and this leads us to make choices about security that are not always rational.
After the 9/11 attacks, for example, officials at Orlando International Airport began testing a new security device. Let's call it the Naked Machine, for that's more or less what it is. A kind of electronic strip search, the Naked Machine bounces a low-energy X-ray beam off the human body. In addition to exposing any metal, ceramic or plastic objects that are concealed by clothing, the Naked Machine also produces an anatomically correct naked image of everyone it scrutinizes. The Naked Machine promises a high degree of security, but it demands a high sacrifice of privacy. With a simple programming shift, however, researchers at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory in Richland, Wash., have built a prototype of a redesigned Naked Machine that extracts the images of concealed objects and projects them onto a sexless mannequin, turning the naked body into an unrecognizable and nondescript blob. This redesigned version of the Naked Machine -- let's call it the Blob Machine -- guarantees exactly the same amount of security while also protecting privacy.
The choice between the Blob Machine and the Naked Machine might seem to be easy. But in presenting the choice hypothetically to groups of students and adults since 9/11, I've been struck by a surprising pattern: there are always some people who say they would prefer to go through the Naked Machine rather than the Blob Machine. Some say they are already searched so thoroughly at airports that they have abandoned all hope of privacy. Others say those who have nothing to hide should have nothing to fear. But in each group, there are some who say they are so anxious about the possibility of terrorism that they would do anything possible to make themselves feel better. They don't care, in other words, whether or not the Naked Machine makes them safer than the Blob Machine, because they are more concerned about feeling safe than being safe.
In their willingness to choose laws and technologies that threaten privacy without bringing more security, the people who prefer the Naked Machine to the Blob Machine are representative of an important strain in public opinion as a whole. When presented with images of terrifying events, people tend to miscalculate their probability. A single memorable image -- of the World Trade Center collapsing, for example -- will crowd out less visually dramatic risks in the public mind. This explains why people overestimate the frequency of deaths from disasters like floods and fire and underestimate the frequency of deaths from more mundane threats like diabetes and strokes.
How can we protect ourselves from our psychological vulnerabilities? First, we can turn off the TV. A study of psychological responses to 9/11 found that, two months after the attacks, 17 percent of the American population outside New York City reported symptoms of post-traumatic stress related to 9/11. High levels of stress were especially notable in those who watched a lot of television. This anxiety is only heightened by cable networks, which have converted themselves into 24-hour purveyors of alarm.
But cable TV isn't the only institution of democracy that has an incentive to exaggerate risks. We've seen the temptations for politicians to pass along vague and unconfirmed threats of future violence in order to protect themselves from criticism in the event that another attack materializes. Ultimately, our success in overcoming fear will depend on political leadership that challenges us to live with our uncertainties rather than catering to them. After 9/11, for example, Mayor Rudolph Giuliani understood that the greatest leaders of democracies in earlier wars did not pander to public fears; instead, they challenged citizens to transcend their self-involved anxieties, embracing ideals of liberty and justice larger than themselves. It is hard to imagine Franklin D. Roosevelt instituting a color-coded system of terrorist alerts.
The vicious cycle at this point should be clear. The public fixates on low-probability but vivid risks because of images we absorb from television and from politicians. This cycle fuels the public's demand for draconian and poorly designed laws and technologies to eliminate the risks that are, by their nature, difficult to reduce. We have the ability to resist this dangerous cycle by choosing leaders who will insist on laws and technologies that strike a reasonable balance between freedom and security. What we need now is the will.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-4-04: ESSAY Jeffrey Rosen contributes frequently to the magazine. This article is adapted from his book ''The Naked Crowd: Reclaiming Security and Freedom in an Anxious Age.''
