''MARRY Big! Marry Big! Marry Big!''
Sarah Jessica Parker is sitting in her trailer outside the Silvercup Studios in Long Island City, Queens, where ''Sex and the City'' is filmed. With one eyebrow arched, she's chanting the refrain she hears every day: women begging for a fairy-tale ending for the series, which begins its final eight episodes tonight on HBO. It's a finale she knows would thrill half her audience and fill the other half with rage.
''I just want Carrie to be content,'' she says, speaking of the character she has played for six seasons. ''I wanted people to feel she was O.K. But you have to be careful, because we have to honor these people who have paid money to have us in their homes, and a lot of women who don't think that finding a man is the answer to contentment, and think that being alone is all right and good and fulfilling, and friendships can fulfill you, and the families you create can fulfill you. And that we have to honor what we've done and not fail.''
She's rambling a bit, but perhaps that's understandable. Ending a long-running television series is always a challenge, one that will be faced by several shows this year, including ''Friends'' and ''Frasier.'' But for ''Sex and the City,'' that final plot twist poses a particularly tricky dilemma. From the beginning, the show has revolved around the question of whether it's possible to be content without a steady romantic partner. No matter which direction the writers have decided on, the final episode will be seen as an answer to a question that Carrie Bradshaw herself might have typed, cigarette in hand, gazing out her apartment window: In a single woman's life, what counts as a happy ending?
''I am very leery of this phrase, 'only two episodes left,'' says Michael Patrick King, an executive producer of the series. ''That's the phrase that scares me the most, that people will be whipped into such a frenzy that on the initial viewing there'll be this shock that it's over.''
The writers are intent on keeping their final plot turns secret, although certain elements are already known, including the fact that they're filming in Paris. They have shot multiple endings to keep the one true finale from leaking. Even Ms. Parker says she postponed reading the final page of the last script. (Guest stars are the only spoiler I can dish: on the set I saw Wallace Shawn and Candice Bergen, plus Kristen Johnston wandering around in a bathrobe.)
With two-thirds of the final season already shown last summer and fall, some of the show's conclusions already feel ordained. Charlotte is happily remarried, newly Jewish and seeking fertility treatment (though the show may build suspense around whether Charlotte will get what she most desires: a child). Miranda, the corporate lawyer, has a toddler, and she has rekindled a warm, idiosyncratic romance with the boy's father. Samantha, the show's sexual adventurer -- a kind of stylized superhero of cheerful promiscuity -- is rumored to face issues of mortality this season. But she seems unlikely to succumb to marriage fever, despite the puppyish devotion of her model boyfriend.
This leaves Carrie Bradshaw, the show's single-girl heroine, a lightning rod for fans. Alternately flighty and brave, self-absorbed and generous, Carrie began as the semi-autobiographical creation of Candace Bushnell, the Manhattan glamour girl whose collection of columns from The New York Observer inspired the series. But under the guidance of Mr. King and Ms. Parker, Carrie has deepened beyond her origins as a brittle urban anthropologist, becoming that tricky combination: an iconic character portrayed as an idiosyncratic individual.
To marry Carrie Bradshaw off -- to give her an end-of-the-season connubial blowout -- might seem to violate the show's central premise. But to leave her without a partner might also feel disappointing, or present a falsely bravura notion of autonomy at odds with the character.
Everyone expects to be represented in the final scenes of ''Sex and the City,'' Mr. King says, ''single women, married women, couples that aren't married, older women, old guys who like Samantha, 17-year-old girls who look for the shoes,'' not to mention fans of Carrie's gay pal Stanford and the few people who still miss Skipper from Season 1.
Among fans there are several clear camps. For some the on-again-off-again romance between Carrie and her commitment-phobic lover, Big, should absolutely be on again, ideally with a full-force wooing out of ''Wuthering Heights.'' To others Big is no Heathcliff but instead a lesson for Carrie -- not the man that got away but the dysfunctional love she was lucky to escape. For Big to transform into a man capable of faithful love would be shoddy wish fulfillment. (The magazine publisher Ron Galotti, the ex-boyfriend on whom Ms. Bushnell modeled the character, has his own preferred ending: ''Mr. Big returns, Jeff Bewkes,'' the former HBO chief executive, ''gives him a $10 million bonus, and somehow it ends up at my house.'')
Then there is the peculiar cadre of viewers who watch in order to hate Carrie and who hope to see her punished somehow. Few fans seem charmed by Carrie's broody Russian artist beau, Aleksandr Petrovsky, played by Mikhail Baryshnikov -- although if Carrie ended up with him, it might provide a nice Escher-like twist, since Ms. Bushnell eventually married her ballet dancer boyfriend.
''My ideal ending would be Carrie ending up with Mr. Big and moving to Paris,'' says Jennifer Valdivar, 27, a publicist who has been watching the show since its first season. ''But I don't want her to get married. And if she ends up with Mikhail Baryshnikov, it'll leave a sour taste in my mouth.''
These debates spilled over into the writers' room. Every member of the writing team is unmarried, Mr. King says, and while they had agreed to take an upbeat approach, not everyone agreed on what that meant. ''If Carrie was the only girl in the show, it would be rougher,'' Mr. King says. ''But we have four women and four options.''
Jenny Bicks, who has written for the show since the first season, says that since the writers have so frequently used plots from their own lives in the show, they feel particularly implicated in the decision about an ending. ''We're a very emotional group,'' she notes dryly. ''We have no wilting violets amongst us.'' (Points of contention include the character of Petrovsky. In response to some writers' concerns, next week's episode, ''The Ick Factor,'' deals straightforwardly with Mr. Baryshnikov's age.)
Mr. King has his own nightmare vision of the show's finale. ''It's that stupid idea of 'they all get married in a four-way wedding in Central Park,' '' he says with a moan, clutching his stylish shirt in horror. ''I don't think I could bring my hands to type that. And if they did type it, within the next five minutes a single woman would've broken in and cut them off with a cleaver -- 'You'll never do that to anyone again!' ''
The writers keep a chart on the wall of plots they never got to: the worst holiday for single people, an unprintably smutty phrase for men who fake orgasms. But another writer, Cindy Chupack, says she feels satisfied that they've hit most of the notes they hoped for with the character of Carrie: the extramarital affair with Big, the ''lonely season,'' the idea that sometimes it's as much of a triumph to leave the wrong relationship as it is to be in the right one. Ms. Chupack says her focus in the final lap was to end on ''a hopeful note, that life goes on, but somehow not to tie it up in a bow.''
Many fans seem to agree. ''It's kind of like my life in a way -- the fantasy version,'' says Katy Hansz, a 27-year-old model who moved to New York from Minnesota 10 years ago. ''And all the characters represent part of myself. I hope they don't end it too fairy-tale-like. I hope they leave it a little open-ended, so you can use your imagination to fill in the gaps. But I hope everybody is happy in the end. It would be nice to see Carrie happy with somebody, because that character really deserves it.''
Still, for superfans like Stacy Horn, the author of ''Waiting for My Cats to Die: A Morbid Memoir,'' no ending will be truly satisfying. She says: ''Whenever I hear Sarah Jessica Parker respond to questions about why the show is ending with questions like, 'Wouldn't you rather we go out on top, while you still like us?,' I want to answer her in a way that fits the show: 'No! When do you want a boyfriend to leave? While you still adore him? Or when you've fallen out of love?' So, end the series if you want. You're entitled. But don't say that it's better for us. Except I guess in a way it is. I'd rather be alone than be with someone who really doesn't want to be with me.'' (Then Ms. Horn admits: ''I'm insane. It's official.'')
There's one group that may be at least a tiny bit relieved at the show's end: the many female relationship columnists who have labored in Carrie Bradshaw's wake. Lynn Harris, the author of ''Breakup Girl to the Rescue!'' and the novel ''Miss Media,'' says she admires the show's wit and resents the way it provokes moralistic hand wringing in the media. ''Did anyone ask if the Tony Danza show was good for men?'' she asked, referring to the sitcom ''Who's the Boss?''
But she does admit there's an advantage to having the series end. ''I will die happy if I never hear somebody say, 'Your life is so ''Sex and the City,'' ' '' she said with a sigh, then added, ''I guess it's better than hearing that your life is so 'Oz.' ''
TELEVISION
