A PHOTOGRAPH from the 1950's shows Jean and Alex Turney dancing cheek to cheek, her ear-to-ear smile and brunette bob pressed against his chiseled Gene Kelly good looks. Looking at it, you can tell that they adored dancing, and each other.
Jean had grown up in Chicago, studying modern dance with Pearl Lang, a disciple of Martha Graham, from the age of 13. During the 40's, a man once saw her and a male friend dancing whimsically up and down the subway stairs in Chicago and told them: ''You kids should take that to New York; you'd make a bundle.''
She took herself to New York in the fall of 1947, where that spring she met Alex at a party. He had come to the city in 1937, a Jewish refugee from Berlin, where his mother had put him in an orphanage because she could not afford to raise him. In New York, he and his mother, a milliner, joined four other families in a six-room apartment on West 93rd Street.
Alex loved folk dancing; Jean loved modern. What more did they need? In 1948, they married.
Jean had a brief career in the domestic dance company, a kind of farm team, of Katherine Dunham. Then life took over. They raised three children in Manhattan. Jean kept the books and took dictation for Alex's business, installing fuel-saving devices. Whenever they could, they took ballroom dancing lessons.
Then in 1985, ''Tango Argentino'' came to town and became a hit Broadway show. Alex saw it first. ''You have to see it,'' he told his wife. Soon they were taking tango lessons with two of the cast members, Nelida and Nelson. By this time, the Turneys were in their 60's. The next thing they knew, they were traveling to Buenos Aires to experience the real tango, and following the show to New Orleans, Fort Lauderdale and Paris. ''Ah! Alejandro y Juanita!'' the cast would say when the Turneys turned up.
By the time the couple got to Paris, they had seen ''Tango Argentino'' 18 times. While there, they saw it six more.
''We became like the camp followers,'' Jean said.
''It was like a lunacy,'' her husband agreed.
Back in New York, Alex made a decision. ''No more lessons.'' The craziness had gone too far. He was dancing through his arthritis, fortified by Tylenol with codeine and a couple of glasses of wine.
Then the couple discovered Danel and Maria. From Nelida and Nelson, the Turneys had learned ''tango fantasia,'' the Broadway show version of the dance, full of sexy kicks between the legs. Danel and Maria taught salon tango, a more restrained, traditional form. ''It was like changing churches,'' Alex said. They were hooked once again.
The couple won contests and developed a reputation on the New York tango circuit. Friends asked them to dance at birthday parties. Jean sometimes wore the black crocheted dress, a peach slip peeking through the holes, that her mother had made in 1912 (originally worn with a black slip) and passed down to her. The dress had a character all its own.
Jean and Alex, too, were character actors; that was their appeal. They didn't just walk out to the floor and start to dance, as others did. Alex sauntered out with a cigarette in his mouth, and threw it down, like a challenge. Jean played hard to get.
''I was always a really good dancer, but not exceptional,'' Jean said in her husky voice. ''I was very good at comedy roles.''
Last January, Alex's health club near Lincoln Center, All Star Fitness, asked if he and Jean would do ''a little tango'' for a senior exhibition. ''I don't do little tangos,'' Jean retorted. But she relented.
In the audience was David Licata, a 42-year-old Web master by day, a struggling filmmaker on weekends. He wanted to make a short film about the tango. Would the couple audition? Last May, they did, and won the part. At the time Jean was 79, Alex 84. Only after Mr. Licata cast them did he come up with a title: ''Tango Octogenario.''
Last Sunday, Alex showed a video of the movie to friends at an early New Year's party in Morningside Heights. The director had warned him not to show it in unauthorized venues, but he could not resist. The guests filed through a small study in shifts, as he screened the six-minute film again and again.
On the television set, Jean, in her peekaboo dress and ear-to-ear smile, and Alex, mysterious in all black, slightly hobbled by arthritis, danced cheek to cheek, as they have for 55 years. They were the best thing in the film.
COPING E-mail: amh@nytimes.com
