After lengthy negotiations, American and European authorities have agreed on what kinds of passenger information European airlines must give to United States authorities, and how it can be used. The agreement must be approved by member nations.
Under a law enacted after Sept. 11, United States officials required airlines flying into the United States to turn over all of their data on passengers within 15 minutes of a plane's departure, with violators subject to $6,000 fines and denial of landing rights. That policy conflicted with European Union privacy laws, which place strict limits on government collection, use and retention of consumer information.
Last March European airlines started giving United States authorities access to their booking records. But the European Union said that a global agreement that addressed concerns about both terrorism and privacy was necessary.
The agreement limits the data European airlines must turn over to 34 items, though airlines will have only 10 to 15 of them for most passengers, including name, address, country of citizenship and whether the passenger paid with cash or a credit card.
Under the agreement the United States may retain the data for 42 months, when the agreement expires, not the 50 years proposed by American officials, said Fritz Bolkestein, the European Union commissioner in charge of taxes and customs issues.
Mr. Bolkestein said that after a video meeting with Homeland Security Secretary, Tom Ridge, the United States also agreed that passenger data would be used only for terrorism and related crimes and ''other serious crimes, including organized crime, of a transnational nature.'' That means the data cannot be used to investigate or prosecute routine domestic crimes, he said.
The data can be used to deny entry to the United States. European Union citizens who are denied entry, and who cannot get a satisfactory explanation, or later entry, will have the right to involve European Union privacy officials in pressing their complaint, Mr. Bolkestein said in a Dec. 16 speech.
The complexities of the issue were shown when Air France canceled six flights from Paris to Los Angeles on Dec. 24 and 25. American officials said they found terrorist links among some people who booked reservations on the flights, but French security officials, who briefly detained six people, said the next day that they had not found any such links.
DAVID CAY JOHNSTON
TRAVEL ADVISORY
