THE POEMS OF MARIANNE MOORE
Edited by Grace Schulman.
449 pp. New York:
Viking. $40.
IF Marianne Moore's poems seem odd to us even now, more than 80 years after the appearance of her first book, this is partly because they are literally -- mathematically -- odd. Far more than any English-language poet before her, she experimented with lines containing an odd number of syllables -- 9, 7, 5 or, as in ''The Fish,'' an unlikely 1 and 3:
All
external
marks of abuse are present on this
defiant edifice.
Traditionally, English and American poets have spurned odd-syllable lines, with the exception of the extrametrical feminine ending and the seven-
syllable line (Shakespeare's ''Now the hungry lion roars,'' Blake's ''Tyger! Tyger! burning bright''). In all sorts of ways, conventional prosody is constructed by ''evenness'': iambs, couplets, quatrains, octets, the sonnet's bipartite assertion and rejoinder. Moore was a great imbalancer. Musically, her innovation was vast, if rooted in seemingly minute modifications of syllable count: in the end, she didn't sound like anybody else.
''The Poems of Marianne Moore,'' edited by her friend Grace Schulman, gathers some 100 previously uncollected, mostly early, poems and clarifies her poetic development. Moore died in New York City in 1972, at the age of 84, and until now the standard text has been the ''Complete Poems'' of 1967. The new edition reveals plainly how, as her poetry steadily evolved, what was foursquare became lopsided, discrepant, asymmetric. What was solid became fluid; what was fixed, untethered. Titles to poems lost their isolation (she converted them into first lines by bleeding them straight into the text) and the text itself dissolved into supplementary notes (some of her poems make little sense without them). Stanzas grew more rococo while, increasingly, the sentences inlaid into them originated and halted in unexpected places.
Time and again she employed the language of logic to explore and promote the irrational. She composed analogical chains that collapsed on inspection (''Diligence Is to Magic as Progress Is to Flight''). She relished what might be called false parallelisms, as in ''the enslaver is / enslaved; the hater, harmed'' (one expects the hater to be hated, yet how much more telling is that softer substitute) and in her habit of conjoining unlike things (''oratories and wardrobes'').
It may be that no critic of Moore should be trusted who doesn't sometimes find her off-putting. Certainly, some of her keenest advocates have grown exasperated. For Randall Jarrell, the breaking point was the naïve view of war in ''In Distrust of Merits.'' For Helen Vendler, it was Moore's public eccentricity, like her ''preposterous exchanges with the Ford Motor Company over the naming of the Edsel.'' My own patience thins where meticulousness becomes adjectival mania, as when a paperweight suggests a sword-blade
of three-ore'd
fishscale-burnished antimony-
lead-and-tin smoky water-drop type-metal
smoothness emery-armored
against rust.
Like her gifted contemporaries E. E. Cummings and John Crowe Ransom, Moore could be, when she wasn't being marvelous, thoroughly annoying.
Still, Moore's equable ghost successfully wards off criticism. This stems partly from her poems' impeccable but reserved civility, which discourages any but the mildest quibble; partly from their recurring focus on animal self-defense (she was especially fond of armored creatures), suggesting a deep if tacit vulnerability; and partly from her sheer decency, the sense she gives you (rare among her often vainglorious fellow modernists) that you're reading somebody who daily battles the soul's natural egotism.
More than 30 years ago, Donald Hall published a study, ''Marianne Moore: The Cage and the Animal,'' in which he neatly pointed out that ''no one whose poetry is being read with close attention could be held in such unvarying esteem.'' Schulman makes a similar point in her helpful introduction: ''No major poet is cherished more and known less than Marianne Moore.''
She's a poet ill served by some of her admirers, who treat her luxuriant poems, with their fine thorns and outsize, hardy blooms, like delicate shade plants that couldn't survive a strong blast of sun. Such wholesale protectiveness is likely to overlook, for example, the disastrous turn her poetry took after World War II. The falling-off was all the more puzzling given that the early 40's inspired some of her loveliest work, poems that wedded an ornate architecture to a sophisticated rhetoric laced with plainspoken urgency (''He 'Digesteth Harde Yron','' ''Nevertheless,'' ''The Mind Is an Enchanting Thing'' and my favorite of her poems, ''What Are Years''). In her final decades Moore frequently retreated into a kind of peppy whimsy, where little was ventured and little gained. (Whimsy was always her besetting weakness, as sentimentality was for Cummings.)
The earlier ''Complete Poems'' opened with a striking authorial dictum: ''Omissions are not accidents.'' The new book shows her guilty of that most forgivable of all artistic sins -- excessive rigor toward one's own work. She jettisoned some real gems, now restored (''Melanchthon,'' ''Old Tiger''). The new edition also offers clear dating (Moore's own arrangement was thematic rather than chronological), so that the winding, ever-surprising progress of her career is belatedly uncovered.
Moore's beloved brother, Warner, was a Presbyterian minister, and the two siblings shared a passion for that indispensable tool of the pulpit, the moral epigram. Time and again her poems cohere into some ethical injunction; she's keen to tell the reader how to live. In this regard, her poems have an old-fashioned feel, or would if such pronouncements were not so quirky and enigmatic: ''Distaste which takes no credit to itself is best,'' or ''Because one expresses oneself and entitles it wisdom, one is not a fool.''
Her ethical rhetoric helped make her, more than any other poet I know, reliant upon ''is'' and ''are'' -- those natural building blocks of the writer intending to speak of eternal verities. If Moore in her youth had ever attended a poetry workshop, she would have been advised that these are weak and bloodless verbs (sound advice, generally). But her career, as Jarrell pointed out, was ''one long triumph'' over her limitations, and she achieved some of her choicest effects with just such bland and blunt tools. In ''What Are Years'' all but one of the last six verbs is ''is,'' and yet the lines conclude with the colossal air-borne grandeur of church bells echoing on a frosty autumn morning:
. . . Though he is captive,
his mighty singing
says, satisfaction is a lowly
thing, how pure a thing is joy.
This is mortality,
this is eternity.
Other poets have favored abstract language, but I know of none except Hopkins who so felicitously combines this with a truly fresh-eyed surveillance of the natural world. She was drawn to exotic, small, remote creatures -- mongooses, pangolins, jerboas -- whose precisely noted attributes had a way of crystalizing abruptly into something like moral apothegm. The veering speed of these transitions created some of the most startlingly beautiful effects in American poetry. After observing at length the ant-eating pangolin, she arrives at a personal artistic credo, ''To explain grace requires / a curious hand,'' and springs from there to the notion -- a characteristic marriage of the physical and temporal -- that ''Humor saves a few steps, it saves years.'' Like the desert rat, revered for its ability to launch itself ''as if on wings, from its match-thin hind legs,'' Moore moved by leaping back and forth between the physical and the abstract, as in the conclusion to ''Nevertheless'':
The weak overcomes its
menace, the strong over-
comes itself. What is there
like fortitude! What sap
went through that little thread
to make the cherry red!
If she ultimately espoused spirit over body, heaven over earth, this allegiance is all the more remarkable given how brilliantly she paid tribute to the planet's flora and fauna, its stones and seas and storms. Moore's poems are famously unforthcoming -- you can study them for years and derive little sense of her family, friendships, jobs, and littler sense still of the nature of any balked hopes and private losses. Even so, in a modest poem like ''Nevertheless'' we glimpse an essential, perhaps the essential, intimate truth about her: how extraordinary was this woman whose poems could love the world so eagerly, embracingly, intoxicatedly, and yet love another world still more.
Brad Leithauser's novel in verse, ''Darlington's Fall,'' recently appeared in paperback.
