IF simply imagining myself thinner worked, I would already be a sylph. The plans I have made to lose 10 pounds this month, well, next month, to fit into that flirty little black and white skirt I bought for New Year's, to walk five miles a day or join a gym, have all come to naught. It is so easy to be made over on ''Queer Eye'' or ''Trading Spaces.'' It is a lot harder to do it yourself.
Perhaps I was suffering from diet fatigue. I had been an Atkins success story. But eventually I just had to have a piece of bread, a slice of pizza, a muffin, and the weight came back. I lost some of it on the punishing Ornish no-fat diet, felt deprived the entire time and celebrated the end by roasting a duck and sharing it with friends.
I bought the prepared Metro Zonelike diet (three meals a day, two snacks, 40-30-30), and the weight started to come off. But who could stay with that regimen for long? Or afford it, at nearly $250 a week? I joined Weight Watchers with high hopes, and lost five pounds in the first few weeks, then stalled through the remaining two months of earnest lectures, weigh-ins and little instruction books. And then the group disbanded.
A new book, ''Keep It Off: Use the Power of Self-Hypnosis to Lose Weight Now,'' sanely sidesteps the specifics of high protein, grapefruit, Zone, South Beach or any other diet and goes straight to the mind-over-matter struggle of all weight loss plans. This book's trenchant promise is that any diet works, as long as you can stay on it. Hmm.
The book's author, Dr. Brian Alman, Ph.D., a psychologist who is a consultant to a weight loss program with the Kaiser Permanente health care organization, believes that weight loss can come with the right combination of self-induced trances and Stuart-Smalley-like positive affirmations.
So there I sat, Week 1, his book in one hand, a bacon sandwich in the other. The good news for me was that with this book, you don't start dieting immediately. In fact, you don't start dieting ever. You just have to brainwash yourself into eating right.
The bad news was that I was supposed to learn self-hypnosis. There is a chapter on ''breathing and relaxation,'' answers to practical questions like ''do I keep my eyes open or closed,'' instructions on how to get into a trance and, reassuringly, a chapter on how to come out of one. Then again, if my life were going to consist of telling myself, ''I only eat foods that are good for me,'' over and over again, why would I ever want to come out of the trance?
Negative thinking! One of the first lessons in the book is to avoid being negative. '' 'I will not eat dessert,' is a negative statement that might easily be ignored by the unconscious mind,'' the book says. Hey, the conscious one, too. Put it positively, the book advises, as in, ''As I eat less and less ice cream and candy, I feel heathier and more satisfied with myself.'' O. . . . K. More satisfied with myself, less satisfied with what I eat.
Clearly I need a dose of what Dr. Alman calls ''building your motivation.''
Here is what Dr. Alman promises from self-hypnosis: ''control over fears, relief of stress, freedom from unwanted habits, resistance to disease and aging and increased performance at work and in sports.'' Oh, and you will lose weight, too, and be happier than you have ever been. It is just that you have to come up with the eating plan yourself.
I felt at sea trying to lose weight without a sure-fire formula to keep me on the cottage cheese and off the cheesecake. (And this was eggnog season, to boot.) And I found it harder and more time-consuming to tackle trances, self-hypnosis and counting to 100 and back again than it would be, say, to go out for a jog.
Not that I did that either.
Dr. Alman suggests getting into a trance state with the stairway method, the candle flame and by taking a lot of ''deep, satisfying breaths.'' There are three clues, he says, that will tell me when I have reached a hypnotic state: rhythmical breathing; a sense of coolness or warmth, numbness or heaviness somewhere in my body; and experiencing time distortion. I call that a nap.
It is easy to laugh at suggestions to ''hug your inner child,'' and it is true that some of the exercises seem downright demented, like writing an imaginary letter to a person you regret having had sex with. (Only one?) But there are also paragraphs that hit home, especially for someone who has always been heavy. Like the ones about hiding behind my weight or the need for love. Buried within the pablum (''It's time to learn to set yourself free. Like a bird let out of a cage. Fly!'') there are hard truths.
Whereas most diet books reassure you that their way will make you lose weight, Dr. Alman's book delves into the pain that leads to overeating. He talks about how critical anyone overweight can be toward herself, the recurring disappointment in failed diets, the shame that makes life miserable and leads to more eating. Don't try to need love less, Dr. Alman counsels. Oh boy!
Self-acceptance is a huge part of his program, including an exercise of standing nude in front of a full-length mirror (and not reacting as Jack Nicholson did in seeing a middle-aged woman nude in ''Something's Gotta Give''). Love yourself, he says. Let go, get rid of stress, and the weight will come off.
Under ''building motivation,'' Dr. Alman lists reasons to lose weight, including ''relieve emotional pain'' and ''fit into fashionable clothes.'' Well and good, but when I push my grocery cart through the supermarket or open a menu, I need some kind of rules, whether ''40-30-30,'' ''no carbs,'' ''no fat'' or ''no cheesecake.'' Therefore, I am going back on the Atkins diet, but will try to deploy Dr. Alman and his motivations. On the top of my list I'm putting, ''To dare to take off my clothes again in front of a fella, not that there is anyone standing in line.''
And I'll try not to be negative about it.
