WHEN the Ford Motor Company landed J Mays as design chief in 1997, it was considered something of a coup. Well spoken and well coiffed, Mr. Mays was among the most celebrated and daring young designers in the business. In his previous job, he had presided over the imaginative reinvention of the Volkswagen Beetle into a car that managed to revive the old Bug's spirit while being thoroughly modern at the same time.
At Ford, Mr. Mays has applied a similar makeover to the legendary Thunderbird, but over all, his stamp on the company has been hard to discern.
Part of the problem is the length of production cycles, which make quick turnarounds tough. And Ford's product development pace has been particularly tortoiselike in recent years, as the automaker has been beset by management shake-ups, financial struggles, lagging quality ratings and a lack of focus on its core business.
But since William Clay Ford Jr., Henry Ford's great-grandson, took over as chief executive in 2001, he has pledged to rededicate the company to product development. So, after more than six years on the job, Mr. Mays, 49, finally has a chance to redefine a car line that has been characterized by the long-in-the-tooth Taurus flagship.
This fall, Ford plans to introduce the first entries in a suite of new high-volume cars: the Five Hundred, a large, upscale sedan; a 2005 model Mustang that looks like an interstellar reinterpretation of the one Steve McQueen drove in ''Bullitt''; and the Montego, a new midsize sedan from the Mercury division.
The company will also offer an exotic, limited-production sports car, the GT, which will start at $140,000.
Ford and the rest of the industry are also rushing to sell crossovers, a growing category of alternatives to sport utility vehicles combining car and truck features. The Ford Freestyle, also scheduled to go on sale in the fall, has a dozen cupholders and meshes minivan with S.U.V.
Production versions of Ford's Five Hundred, Mustang and Freestyle will be shown here at the North American International Auto Show, which begins its press previews today. And next year, the company will add a midsize car, the Futura, to fill out the Ford brand's car lineup.
SO, in a sense, 2004 will be something of a debut for Mr. Mays, Ford's group vice president for design.
''There's been a lot of speculation, and a lot of articles written, about how the Japanese sort of took the car business away from Americans,'' Mr. Mays said in an interview last month. ''To a certain degree that might be true, but to a larger degree I think the Americans walked away from the car business,'' he added. ''And I know at Ford we were so enamored with the success of our truck and S.U.V. business, and the great revenue that those products generated, that we probably lost focus.''
Certainly, bolstering car profits, long flat, is viewed by analysts as vital to the health of the Big Three. Ford, like General Motors and the Chrysler division of DaimlerChrysler, has said that it wants to start making cars that people might buy without $4,500 rebates or zero percent financing. The Detroit-area automakers have gone so far as to call 2004 the ''year of the car'' as a backdrop for the auto show.
Beyond a doubt, Ford has made strides since Mr. Ford took over. But it is hardly a picture of health. After reporting a cumulative loss of $6.4 billion for 2001 and 2002, a slim net profit, in the range of $300 million to $400 million, is expected for 2003. Still, foreign automakers like the Toyota Motor Corporation are far more profitable and are flooding the market with S.U.V.'s and pickups, Detroit's crucial profit lifeline.
Scott Sprinzen, a credit analyst at Standard &amp; Poor's, wrote recently in a report that ''Ford has little earnings diversity'' because it is so dependent on S.U.V. and pickup sales. By his calculation, the company's North American passenger cars are not profitable, one among many reasons he downgraded the company's debt to BBB-, which is one notch above a junk rating.
Winning back car buyers won't be easy. ''It's very tough. They have to build a series of home-run cars over the next several years,'' said Csaba Csere, the editor of Car and Driver magazine. ''They didn't lose American car buyers overnight, and they're not going to win them back overnight. Being close to a Camry or an Accord isn't going to cut it. They have to do better.''
Mr. Mays, with striking blue eyes and close-cropped gray hair, carries himself like the kind of urbane and upscale customer Ford wants to woo. He grew up in Maysville, Okla., a town named for an ancestor. Fifty miles south of Oklahoma City, it has a population of about 1,100. His father was a rancher, and his brother runs a ranch and farm there.
His love of cars came from his grandfather, A J Mays, from whom he received his single-letter name. Grandfather Mays was an Indy pit crew veteran and car buff who built a mile-long go-cart track on the Mays ranch.
''For a time period there in the mid-60's, we would have hundreds of people descend on our farm from Kansas, Colorado, New Mexico and Texas every weekend to race,'' Mr. Mays recalled. ''So I grew up breathing far more methanol than I probably should have, and as a 6-year-old walking around the pits and watching my brother and dad race, that was a complete turn-on to me.''
He also drew, and loved, the cars of his youth. ''I was absolutely fascinated by cars of the late 50's and early 60's, and to this day, those retain an important meaning to me in all of my memories of childhood,'' he said. ''I think cars from the early 60's embodied the entire ideal that anything is possible in this country.''
So what went wrong?
''I think they lost it in the 70's with the gas crisis,'' he said. Many designers and auto executives see the advent of fuel-economy regulations as having stifled design because they initially led Detroit to make vehicles smaller and lighter, though some of the most innovative recent designs have come in the smallest packages, from the Beetle to the Mini Cooper, from BMW.
After a stint at the University of Oklahoma studying journalism, Mr. Mays transferred to Art Center College of Design in Pasadena, Calif., one of the world's top auto design schools.
HE and his classmates of the late 1970's would go on to become some of the world's top designers. They included Chris Bangle, now BMW's design chief, and Freeman Thomas, a top DaimlerChrysler designer who worked with Mr. Mays at Volkswagen and collaborated on the Beetle project.
''We were a bunch of reckless dreamers,'' Mr. Mays said. ''We hated everything that was going on in Detroit. We were hellbent on the future, and customers be damned. ''That's the design aesthetic of an uninitiated student. Only when you get into the industry, and you realize the economic realities -- oh, you're in business to make money -- do you start to grow up and face the music.''
But he went to Germany, not Detroit. He worked at Volkswagen and its Audi division for much of the 1980's and 90's and was named Audi's top designer in 1993; he also worked for a time at BMW.
As Ford's design chief, Mr. Mays oversees a staff of more than 1,000 that is scattered around the world. As if the challenge of reviving the Ford brand were not enough, there is also the company's Mercury brand. Its sales have been lagging, and critics say it lacks a coherent identity. And there is the Lincoln brand, which has been criticized for looking flat-footed while G.M. has reinvented Cadillac with sharp-edged designs and by introducing Escalade S.U.V.'s.
Mr. Mays also oversees the designs of Ford's suite of foreign brands -- Volvo, Land Rover, Jaguar and Aston Martin -- whose fortunes are seen as crucial to the company's future. And the company has a large stake in Mazda as well.
His signature style, which he calls retrofuturism, spawned the new Beetle, and is distinctive enough to have been celebrated in a recent show at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles.
But Mr. Mays's most appreciable impact at Ford has been in the satiny overhaul he has given to the interiors of the company's S.U.V.'s and trucks, especially to the lavishly redesigned F-Series pickup. This year, new products appear to be going in several directions, most prominently toward the conservative, chrome-accented styling that is prevalent in European cars.
The Ford Five Hundred, a sedan with a trunk large enough to store eight golf bags, is meant to give Ford a classy, luxurylike offering. The car could be called an Audi knockoff, but at least it comes from the source. ''It's human nature that everybody wants what they can't have,'' Mr. Mays said. ''Let's say you aspire to have a German luxury sedan, but you just don't have the cash to do it.'' With the Five Hundred, he said, ''you can pull up in front of a very upscale restaurant or hotel in that vehicle and not feel the least bit embarrassed.''
But can a Ford really win snob appeal? Bryon Fitzpatrick, chairman of the industrial design department at the College for Creative Studies in Detroit, a top car design program, said Mr. Mays ''commands a lot of respect'' and praised him especially for giving such a sophisticated overhaul to the interiors of Ford's trucks and S.U.V.'s.
But, he said, the Five Hundred may not be enough of a jump to lure back buyers who have given up on American cars. ''The Ford Five Hundred is nothing really new,'' he said. ''You wonder if they need to do something really different to have an impact.''
He added: ''You have to be careful that people don't point their finger and say that's an Audi rip-off. There are a lot of the same shapes and icons.''
MORE aggressive, and fully in the retrofuturist vein, is the new Mustang. Its design, which sets it far apart from current Mustangs, has been praised by critics and enthusiasts.
''The Mustang looks to be a good effort,'' said Mr. Csere at Car and Driver. ''These are the first J Mays cars that are fully his,'' he said, but he called the Five Hundred ''a relatively evolutionary design.''
''I think I'd like to see a little bit more boldness,'' Mr. Csere said. ''He's very gifted but a little inhibited. He's unwilling to be bold with mass market.''
This year, at least, there will be cars to judge Mr. Mays on.
''He's the celebrity of the automotive design group in this country -- you could argue for Chris Bangle in Europe -- but his influence on the Ford product line has yet to be really seen in the high-volume Ford products,'' said Wes Brown, a partner at Iceology, an automotive consulting firm based in Los Angeles. ''This is his first time, '04 and '05, where we will start to see the high-volume products where he has had influence and his finger has been in there from the beginning.''
Of the waiting game required of car designers, Mr. Mays said: ''When I was at Audi, it took 14 years to turn that brand around. I would suggest to you that it's going to take a decade to fully go through and focus this brand to the extent that it needs to.''
''It's always a huge frustration,'' Mr. Mays added, ''but this is a game that's measured in decades, not in years.''
