I watched ''North by Northwest'' again the other night, as I do at least once a year. One reason, among many, is the scene in which the 20th Century Limited makes its way up the tracks along the Hudson River, through the last rays of sunset, carrying Cary Grant and Eva Marie Saint away into the night. Somehow commuting is never like that. Not that there isn't beauty on the commuter lines running into New York City. On the line I take, the light sometimes turns the landscape into a place I've never seen before, even though I've seen it over and over and over. It's hard to describe just how familiar those fields and rivers and pastures feel to a commuter, except to say that their familiarity is contained in the act of sliding past in a railroad car. If the train stopped and we got out on the tracks between stations, all that familiarity would vanish in an instant.
The tracks cut like a river or a highway through the more natural landscapes well north of the city. But once we get close to the city, I always have the sense of sliding through forbidden terrain. It is, actually, legally forbidden: private property, no trespassing. But it feels like a corridor of disuse. A rail spur that used to run somewhere now runs off to nowhere. Companies that specialize in ready-mix cement or construction scaffolding edge right up to the back of the tracks. Here and there we pass spillways of trash, as though the rail cut were just a dry gully in the plains where ranch debris -- old threshers and hammer-mills -- had accumulated over the years. The coming and going of the trains is so ferocious -- there are so many of them closer in to the city -- that humans rarely stray into the rail corridor. But the corridor is a vortex with a gravity all its own. It sucks neglect into it.
I suppose most commuters have tried, as I have done once or twice, to count all the basketballs on the tracks and in the right of way between, say, Valhalla and Melrose. Or perhaps they've counted shoes or refrigerator doors or hubcaps or simply wondered what it's like to live your life backed up, in a brick tenement, to the roar of the trains. It takes an effort to realize how much order is required to run a railroad -- how much attention to rails and ties and switches and grades. But between the order of the rails themselves and that of the streets just beyond them lies a disorder that is probably -- to be fair -- more visual than moral. Nature abhors a vacuum is just a way to say that people will dump stuff anywhere. The wind that follows the trains into the city does its part. It pulls a funnel of papers along behind it, as if those papers, too, were late for work and trying to catch the train that has left them behind. They keep up for a while and then settle to rest until the next train passes.
VERLYN KLINKENBORG
The City Life
