At the age of 65, Anne Wood could have been forgiven for spending one of the hottest summers on record in England relaxing a bit: gardening at her home outside Stratford-Upon-Avon, touring art galleries with her daughter or visiting her favorite island destinations off Cornwall. Instead, on a July afternoon on one of the season's wiltingly hot days, she sat in a conference room of her production company, Ragdoll, uneasily awaiting a call from a television executive in the United States. Wood may have developed and produced one of the most profitable children's shows in history with her internationally successful ''Teletubbies,'' but like everyone else in independent television production, she still answers to the networks -- in this case, PBS.
At the appointed hour, the phone rang. On either side of the Atlantic, colleagues cued up a video so that Wood and John F. Wilson, the senior vice-president of programming at PBS, could simultaneously vet a segment of her new series, ''Boohbah,'' which makes its U.S. debut later this month. ''We're a little ahead of you,'' Wood said to Wilson over the speakerphone, hearing that the two videos were not perfectly in sync. ''That's not the first time, Anne,'' Wilson said -- a doff of the hat to the elder stateswoman of make-believe. Then silence on both sides as they watched a segment showing kids, invariably cute, of varying ethnicity, performing goofy, easy exercises in rhythm (sort of) with the music. Against a dreamy pastoral backdrop of green lawn and far-off trees, two giggling 6-year-old girls snapped their hands like lobsters and bobbed up and down; then a boy about the same age proudly did push-ups, albeit with knees on the ground.
Wilson approved the segment, which, like the rest of the program, is designed to inspire kids from 3 to 6 to get up and start moving, even as they watch TV. He had only one quibble: a recurring phrase -- ''Look what I can do!'' -- that each child calls out before showing off the moves. ''I like 'Look what I can do,' '' Wilson said, ''but wouldn't it benefit from a call to action? 'Look what I can do -- you can, too!' ''
Wood explained why she didn't want such an explicit invitation. ''The body language invites them to do it,'' she said. ''It's the way the kids smile at the camera. You don't want to set up anxiety on the part of children who don't want to do it. This leaves it up to the child. You just smile at them and make them feel confident, rather than put upon.'' There was a long silence on the other end of the phone, and Wilson let the matter drop.
The next day, when Wood arrived at work, she learned that Wilson had called back to say he felt strongly about ''Look what you can do.'' Exasperated, but not surprised, Wood said she had no intention of changing the line -- a point on which she would ultimately prevail.
'' 'Look what you can do,' '' she said to me, rolling her eyes, cornflower blue beneath lavender-shaded lids. ''I mean, what self-respecting kid is going to respond to that?''
If Wood has an almost self-righteous sense of certainty about how to engage children, it's because she has more than 25 years of experience in children's television to back her up. Even before ''Teletubbies,'' Wood established a successful children's-television production company in the U.K., though it wasn't until ''Teletubbies'' was shown on the BBC that she came into great wealth. Wood demurs when asked about her net worth, but the British tabloids put the figure between $80 million and $260 million. ''Teletubbies'' is now shown in 120 countries, including China and Russia, and its four squishy, dimwitted protagonists have generated close to half a billion dollars in revenue from foreign sales and merchandising, much of that in America, where Wood managed to monopolize all rights. (Elsewhere, she shares most of the broadcast rights with the BBC.) More than 10 million ''Teletubbies'' videos were sold in the United States in 1998, its first year in this country, which broke every record for the children's genre to that point.
By now, Wood has enough confidence in her judgment that she almost never sees the need to meet with developmental-education gurus or child psychologists in the early phases of developing her shows, bypassing a step generally considered essential in expert-obsessed America. (''Oh, God, no, we don't go in for that kind of thing at all,'' she said when I asked her about experts.) Most of the major players in entertainment typically won't give a green light to a new children's show unless kid-filled focus groups indicate that they'd want to buy the related toys; Wood forges ahead with a concept before testing what her counterparts call its ''toyetic'' potential. (She seems unconcerned with many typically American preoccupations, among them liability. One scene in ''Boohbah'' involves children running around on a plastic, off-kilter, rainbow-hued set as it's sprayed with water from a fountain at its center.)
Far from the tyranny of Hollywood culture, well established in her own domain, Wood pretty much does as she pleases, which occasionally includes eating ice cream twice a day, if she feels like it, and dying her spiky, otherwise gray bangs with streaks of a startling shade of cranberry. (''I got tired of being called the white-haired Wood,'' she told me.) The bangs don't do much to dispel a grandmotherly softness about her, with her peaches-and-cream complexion of another era, her whiff of scented powder and her Calder-like dangling earrings. On her feet, she often wears finely crafted, colorful elfin boots -- handmade, they're one of the luxuries she indulges since the success of ''Teletubbies,'' along with a smartly dressed driver named David who chauffeurs her from production site to office and home.
Wood spends much of her professional time watching TV, specifically footage of children watching her own shows. The footage is taken by Ragdoll's ''Children's Response Unit,'' which is made up of several employees who have developed relationships with families throughout England who agree to let their children be videotaped as they watch versions of a show at every step in the production process. Wood's team gathers impressions of how children watch the shows naturally, in their own homes, rather than viewing kids en masse in a contrived focus-group setting. (Chris Wood, Anne's son, is the rare employee who has no qualms giving her the occasional negative feedback.) Wood watches the videos over and over, hunting for hints into the children's psyches and incipient passions: when they laugh, when their attention drifts, when they start talking back to the TV. ''I'll be in a room where Anne might be doing an edit,'' says Andrew Davenport, Wood's collaborator on ''Teletubbies.'' ''And she'll be concentrating on watching it from the persona of a child. She knows exactly the point at which a child will get confused. She's actually able to see it from the point of view of a 3-year-old -- I don't mean that in a spooky way, but she has that skill.''
The results of all this observation are shows that reflect a world tailored to children's entertainment cravings, some unexpected, some more predictable -- slurpy noises, rainbows, glittering balls, kaleidoscopic colors. The Boohbahs, for instance, are five doe-eyed creatures who mew, ping and emit flatulent noises in a shameless but admirably effective ploy for laughs. What they do, mostly, are gentle Boohbah aerobics set to catchy electronica, with the aim of inspiring kids to stretch, jump and side-step along with them. Throughout the show, electronically generated sound effects -- the beeping and clicking of modern life, transposed into fairyland -- are magnified to almost eerie effect. The sherbet hues of the sky shimmer so brightly they nearly hurt the eye.
The show asks its viewers to jump from one world to the next, to have faith in its unique logic and magical leaps. In the opening segment of each episode, children's voices call out ''Boohbah,'' an incantation that summons the Boohbahs from the sky; in later scenes, the same word has a performative function, enabling the real-life kids on the show to send gifts to a set of storybook characters who live in a silent, generically pastoral space -- Grandmama and Grandpapa, Brother and Sister, Mr. Man, all played by actors. Small stories play themselves out: in one skit, Little Dog Fido takes over Grandpapa's armchair, so the children back in Boohbah-land send over a dog bed (though Grandpapa, not Little Dog Fido, ends up in it). In the closing segment, created to fill an extra five minutes for the American time slot, the real-life kids are shown doing their sporty thing.
The show's sequence of events may sound incoherent, yet the overall effect is mesmerizing, sometimes funny, even beautiful. To hear Wood describe the show is to hear the impressionistic, somewhat incomprehensible language of an artist describing her work. A glittering orb in which the Boohbahs travel reflects, in Wood's telling, ''children's power and light''; the Boohbahs themselves are a bit like a ''kaleidoscope that children arrange and rearrange''; a particularly bright light pervades all the sets ''to fit with the idea that it's a magical zone.''
Wood's otherworldly aesthetic is nonetheless anchored by the logic of a savvy business executive. ''Boohbah'' has an explicitly global appeal, with opening segments that depict children from, say, Namibia bouncing a glowing orb to children in France. The show is almost exclusively visual, which makes it easily transportable to foreign markets. (Japanese TV is already expressing interest.) Babies learning almost any language might stumble into ''boohbah'' as an early word. ''Boohbah'' dolls covered in a kind of sparkly AstroTurf quickly became one of Toys ''R'' Us's top-selling products in the U.K. when the show was introduced there last April. Viewership is building, and the critical response, so far, has been positive. One critic described the show as ''beautifully shot and hypnotic'' and suggested it could be nominated for the Turner Prize, Britain's most prestigious contemporary art award.
Known by name, if not face, in the U.K., Wood has remained mostly anonymous in the United States, partly because she developed an aversion to the press by the time ''Teletubbies'' was broadcast here. At the peak of the ''Teletubbies'' craze in England, British tabloids regularly sent helicopters to fly over the set, eager to get a picture of a Teletubby with its costume head removed, revealing the actor within. Wood halted production each time, at considerable cost, to spare children the trauma of seeing pictures of headless Teletubbies in their parents' morning paper. Critics also went after Wood when she refused to allow the making of a feature-length ''Teletubbies'' movie on the grounds that babies don't go to the movies. ''I wouldn't let the characters go round in suits, either,'' she says, meaning no oversize Teletubbies to greet kids at toy stores, fairs or other public events. ''When you make something for children, they have an image in their minds, and you can destroy that. There's a culture of that, of course -- you go to Disney and meet Mickey, and I think children go along with the game of it -- but actually, deep down, those figures can be quite scary, particularly to the little ones.''
Wood sees herself as a kind of children's public defender, protecting their imaginations from all things threatening, confusing or, worst of all, patronizing. She doesn't so much see her shows as a substitute for one-on-one attention or teaching, but a pragmatic improvement on the television that children will inevitably watch. ''They don't have books, they don't really have anyone to read them a story, they're just there with the television on the whole time,'' she says. ''They can live in intensely poverty-stricken and ugly surroundings. So to have the privilege of working to create some really beautiful -- not escape, exactly -- but a canvas where they can engage imaginatively is very important at this time.''
Wood grew up with firsthand experience of cultural deprivation, raised in a working-class home in a drab mining town in northern England. She keenly remembers wanting more books and the irritation of teachers' failure to nurture her intelligence because she was a girl. She dropped out of school to work in a shop at age 15, but she eventually received her teacher's certification in Yorkshire, where she discovered the body of children's literature she craved as a girl. She caught up with a vengeance. ''There was a richness about what was going on in children's literature from 1956 through the 1970's,'' she says. ''I read everything I could about children's books, and the books themselves -- 'Charlotte's Web,' 'The Borrowers,' 'Stig of the Dump,' Laura Ingalls Wilder.''
After she started teaching high school in the late 50's, she and her husband moved to London, and then a suburb nearby, as they brought up their two children. On the side, Wood began to write a newsletter for her housing complex called Books for Your Children. National press about the newsletter led to countrywide expansion of the publication (the U.K. still has hundreds of children's-book groups that spun off from it), then TV consulting jobs, then network jobs in children's programming. Hired at a new channel called TV-AM in the early 80's, Wood created Roland Rat, a slickster puppet who slyly spoofed the station's real-life morning news show. The puppet, created for kids, became a sensation, popular enough with adults that he's largely credited with saving the network, which was faltering.
Wood's early success and cultural cachet didn't protect her from budget cuts and changes in management. Laid off from TV-AM and facing a new industrywide emphasis on independent production, she put up her home as collateral and started her company, Ragdoll, pitching children's shows to network representatives, cold-calling executives in the United States. Wood still sounds surprisingly bitter about the struggles along the way, revealing a sharp edge that contrasts with the soothing sunniness of her work. ''They misread you,'' she says, referring to the gatekeepers at the networks. ''They patronize you. Of course, they don't now. But they used to for years and years and years and years. I was this white-haired figure who looked after little kids' programs -- 'Give her a pat on the head, the broadcaster's authority says you have to put these programs on, so you might as well.' ''
It wasn't until the early 90's, the dawn of the lucrative children's video market, that Wood finally found herself enjoying financial leverage. ''Rosie and Jim,'' a show she created in 1990 about two rag dolls, sold a million videos in its first year. ''I walked into one meeting not long after that and literally did that comic thing of looking behind me to see who else had come in,'' Wood says. ''Because all these people high up in the network's hierarchy were already there, and I thought they couldn't possibly be there to see me.''
By the time she created ''Teletubbies,'' Wood had the savvy to make sure she secured the American rights, a coup that made her one of England's wealthiest women. The controversies the show generated now seem quaintly dated -- grousing pundits concerned the show would create a generation of illiterates, the Rev. Jerry Falwell convinced that the character Tinky Winky and his ''purse'' (technically a magic bag) promoted a gay agenda. In the end, the project reportedly made BBC Worldwide more than £130 million (about $230 million) and established Wood's reputation as a genius for divining children's entertainment wishes. Even still, she occasionally grumbles about the lack of respect for the kind of television she creates. ''Whenever Andy Davenport tells people he wrote the 'Teletubbies' episodes, they usually say, 'Somebody wrote that stuff?' '' Wood says. ''But writing anything, especially for children, is certainly an art form. And I certainly think of myself as an artist.''
A longtime outsider among the Oxford graduates of the BBC set, Wood's defensiveness, now more habitual than necessary, may be what continues to fuel her drive. ''My exit strategy's the same as everyone else's,'' she said when I asked her about retirement. ''Some day I'll die.''
One day during my visit, Wood spent her lunch hour on the set of a ''Boohbah'' segment being shot at Pinewood Studios, nearly an hour's drive outside of London, where acres of property had been blanketed with artificial snow -- flaky, messy stuff that smelled of sawdust and got into the lungs on an already uncomfortably hot day. The actors ran frantically back and forth in the sun, twirling around, throwing handfuls of snow in the air as the director urged on more energy: ''Whoo hooo! More balletic now! Now you're children playing in the snow!'' Wood mostly watched from under a canvas shade, comfortable with the staff she has carefully trained. ''It's difficult to find people sufficiently relaxed,'' she said, ''that they'll let go and hold the shot as long as it takes for a child to get it as his pace.''
Afterward, as we headed out in her air-conditioned Mercedes, the real world outside the window -- the glassy blue sky, the neatly trimmed lawns of nearly identical thatched-roof homes -- looked almost more like a storybook set than the technologically produced one she'd just overseen.
Suddenly, the car stopped. David, her driver, got out and leaned in the back window to inform Wood that there was a small turtle in the middle of the road. Wood, unfazed, waited patiently as David scooped it up and headed up the walkway of the closest house. She watched as he rang the bell, then gestured, turtle held out, as the man who answered the door bobbed his head in gratitude and took back his escaped prize. A children's tale in the making.
''You take the stuff of your life and you use it,'' Wood said to me. ''And where the rest of it comes from -- God only knows.'' David returned to the car and resumed his job, transporting Wood from one magic zone to the next, and the next.
Susan Dominus is a contributing writer for the magazine.
