THE PURSUIT
OF PERFECTION
The Promise and Perils
of Medical Enhancement.
By Sheila M. Rothman
and David J. Rothman.
Illustrated. 292 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. $25.
IN 1923, a middling writer named Gertrude Atherton published a thinly veiled autobiographical best seller called ''Black Oxen,'' which might be considered a kind of endocrinological morality tale. The novel tells the story of Mary Ogden Zattiany, a woman of a certain age (much like the 66-year-old Atherton) who travels to a Viennese clinic to receive hormone-stimulation treatment to reverse ''premature senescence.'' The ''therapy'' -- repeated zapping of the ovaries with X-rays, a treatment Atherton herself underwent -- produces a dramatic rejuvenation of the protagonist's body and spirits but offends all her increasingly decrepit female friends, who view this as an unnatural and indecent form of medicine. ''I am not the years I have passed in this world,'' Mary declares. ''I am the age of the rejuvenated glands in my body.''
Though the novel is about as subtle as the first gush of hormones during puberty, it turns out to be a remarkably prescient document about both the mindless medical euphoria that periodically swells up around some dubious new form of enhancement therapy, and the moral scolds who just as periodically pop up to denounce such treatments as another sign of civilization's decline. Indeed, so scandalous was Atherton's tale of glandular enhancement that there+was+a move (unsuccessful) to ban the book from public libraries.
The '' 'Black Oxen' scandal,'' like the book, is long forgotten, but this delicious anecdote is resurrected to great effect by Sheila M. Rothman and David J. Rothman in ''The Pursuit of Perfection,'' a retrospective history that could hardly be more topical. Perfection -- or, rather, perfectibility+- is much in the air these days, from the recent report of the President's Council on Bioethics on the pharmacological pursuit of happiness to the world of professional sports, rocked by the steroid scandal du jour. With each front-page account of new techniques that theoretically allow scientists to soup up embryos and stack the genetic deck we're all dealt in our favor, one senses a cultural foreboding rising in the collective gorge.
Noting the ''admittedly flimsy line between cure and enhancement,'' the authors shrewdly look backward at the history of medical innovation over the past century. The Rothmans (she is professor of public health, he is professor of social medicine and history at Columbia University) argue that many medicines begin as therapies for clearly recognized diseases but quickly assume second careers as medical enhancements -- a transition, they note, increasingly driven by the sophisticated marketing of powerful pharmaceutical companies (think Viagra). Their conclusion (though they never quite gather this sentiment in a satisfyingly declarative way) is that many future treatments will also turn out to be negligibly effective as enhancements while posing real risks to long-term health. There is no free lunch in biology.
Most of the book is a kind of glandular picaresque, as the Rothmans recount the history of hormone treatments like estrogen, testosterone and human growth hormone. It may seem a quaint conceit at first, but the Rothmans present persuasive evidence that endocrinology was as much the rage a century ago as genetics is today. In the 20's and 30's, they note, ''we were our hormones; now we are our genes.''
With academic precision (although with less narrative verve than general readers might hope), the Rothmans consider several notable examples of ''treatments'' that have crossed that vague line from therapy to enhancement. Perhaps the most clear-cut example -- enhancement at its most pure,'' they write -- is plastic surgery, which began as a reconstructive treatment for World War I injuries. In recounting the history of liposuction, the Rothmans describe how in the 70's the French surgeon Yves-Gerard Illouz adapted a suctioning tool used for abortions to vacuum away deposits of anatomical fat. In 2001, 400,000 procedures were done in the United States. This modest chapter in cosmetic enhancement concludes with the book's most important message: despite all the hype and hoopla surrounding a novel therapy, side effects will almost always perturb the picture. According to a survey of plastic surgeons in 2000, the mortality rate for liposuction was about 1 in 5,000, a high rate for an elective procedure.
The persistence of testosterone therapy provides a variation on the theme. As early as 1889, a prominent French scientist, Charles Édouard Brown-Séquard, then 72 years old, reported that he had recaptured his youthful vim and sexual vigor with extracts of dog and guinea-pig testicles. This triggered a half-century biochemical stampede to find the male hormone, which ultimately resulted in the isolation of testosterone in the 1930's. Drug companies rapidly moved in to market the hormone as rejuvenating medicines, essentially inventing a medical condition -- the ''male climacteric,'' or male menopause -- to justify its use. There was (and is) no compelling evidence that testosterone relieves fatigue or nervousness, and later there was evidence that it might be harmful. Testosterone now qualifies as a postmodern exemplar of snake oil, regularly hawked in that new digital bazaar, the Internet.
Women, alas, have been forced to live the most hair-raising chapters in this history: estrogen treatment. Following the isolation of the ''female principle'' in the 20's, doctors began to recommend estrogen to treat the symptoms of infertility and, most notably, menopause. As ''Black Oxen'' attests, the treatment rapidly reinvented itself as an anti-aging tonic. Doctors urged women to undergo ovarian transplants, X-ray ''stimulation'' of the ovaries and, ultimately, hormone replacement therapy; by 1975, 27 million American women were taking hormone treatments. Only later did it become clear that the scientific data suggesting efficacy were far from definitive; by 2002, a large study of hormone replacement therapy sponsored by the National Institutes of Health had to be abruptly stopped because of serious side effects, and experts counseled against estrogen for chronic disease.
The estrogen story, however, also illustrates how daunting it is for society to patrol the border between therapy and enhancement. Despite decades of wrongheaded enthusiasm, the initial motivation was undeniably medical -+it looked as if estrogen replacement could prevent osteoporosis, cardiovascular disease and cognitive decline, all worthy goals of preventive medicine. If you accept this subtler version, then the estrogen saga -- and its implications for the future of enhancement -- really becomes a cautionary tale about immature science leading to premature medical applications, egged on by a credulous, grasping public. That's a little different from a broad cultural imperative for perfection. Moreover, there are inherent limitations to the power of these case histories to predict the shape of the future. The initial medical use of estrogen and testosterone, for example, gained momentum in the 20's and 30's, before the Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act of 1938 changed the landscape of prescription medicines by requiring drug companies to prove safety before receiving F.D.A. approval.
Perhaps the most important challenge resides in the quandary posed by Gertrude Atherton in ''Black Oxen'': once a drug is approved, some patients are going to demand it as an enhancement, and some doctors are going to give it to them. This is an unsavory fact of medical life: Market demand is an essential component of this dynamic, as is cultural desire, and self-propelling economies build up around drugs that offer minimal efficacy and maximal fantasy fulfillment. But so long as safety is not an issue, you needn't be a libertarian to feel queasy about governments or moralists muscling into the private transactions between patients and doctors.
In the end, the Rothmans concede, it is ''extraordinarily difficult, really impossible, to distinguish consistently between cure and enhancement.'' Their prescription for society is wise precisely because it does not fall into an absolutist trap. Rather, they demand a much higher standard for clinical research while invoking the oldest of consumer warnings+- caveat emptor -- for new medicines: ''Healthy adults will have to calculate how much risk they are willing to accept in order to try to optimize a trait.'' With the boundary between cure and enhancement so historically muddy, one suspects we'll walk that fuzzy line with greater wisdom and enlightenment only if biology's power to enhance ultimately ''improves'' the most complicated trait of all: human nature. Despite much fevered speculation, that is not likely to end anytime soon.
Stephen S. Hall is the author, most recently, of ''Merchants of Immortality: Chasing the Dream of Human Life Extension.''
