The people fussing the most about the Food and Drug Administration's recent proposal to make the morning-after pill available without a prescription are in many cases the same people who disapprove of condoms in the schools and of letting the United Nations spend money to encourage family planning. Some of these people, of course, have genuine philosophical or religious objections to the notion of birth control itself, but for many the real issue seems to be a fear that if you remove all the danger and anxiety from sex -- especially the threat of disease or of unwanted pregnancy -- people, and unmarried teenagers in particular, will start coupling with abandon.
This school of thought was represented at the F.D.A. hearings on the morning-after pill by Dr. W. David Hagar of the University of Kentucky, who said that the morning-after pill could be as earthshaking as the original birth-control pill, which inaugurated ''a new day and age for the expression of sexuality among young people.'' Robert Marshall, a state legislator from Virginia, painted a particularly vivid tableau, envisioning a future in which ''playboys,'' as he called them -- conjuring the specter of pipe-smoking guys in pajamas -- and adolescent males would ply women with the morning-after pill in hopes of seducing them. Instead of resorting to the time-honored methodology of dinner and drinks, in other words, these lotharios would simply drop by the pharmacy.
This same kind of thinking -- the idea of women as romantically hapless on the one hand and, on the other, the notion of the teenage libido as something so enflamed that the slightest loosening of societal constraint will give rise to an epidemic of sex -- can also be seen, perhaps, in the recent flap over Abercrombie &amp; Fitch's now defunct A&amp;F Quarterly, as the company catalog was grandly called. The Quarterly, which was the size of a small phone book, typically sandwiched pictures of merchandise between celebrity interviews and even book and music reviews in the back and, in the front, several Bruce Weber photo spreads of attractive young people -- ripped, hunky guys and long-limbed blondes, mostly -- who seem to have lost most, or even all, of their own Abercrombie apparel. (To judge from the pictures, the company might as well discontinue the production of boxer shorts. There doesn't seem to be much call for them.) It was these spreads that occasioned all the protest, from groups like the American Decency Association and the National Coalition for the Protection of Children and Families, on the grounds that the imagery (and in the last issue, the headline ''Group Sex'') was too racy and provocative for teenage consumers.
In truth, there was nothing in these pictures that most kids hadn't seen before, and in much rawer fashion. Like much of Weber's work, the Abercrombie photos were too stylized -- too improbable -- to be much of a turn-on. They were not erotic so much as just dreamy -- a middle-aged man's fantasy of how sexy young people might look and behave. Moreover, the real porno impulse here -- the hope that the Quarterly would cause young people to lust after Abercrombie merchandise -- doesn't seem to have worked. The company's sales have been slipping.
It's impossible to overestimate the power of teenage hormones, but all the same, there is some reason to think that young people may not be as sex-obsessed as is commonly believed -- that they may, in fact, be more sensible on the subject than we so-called grown-ups. The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention announced recently that the teenage birthrate has declined by 30 percent in the last decade, and the abortion rate has declined by almost half. According to a recent study by the National Campaign to Prevent Teen Pregnancy, teenagers are not just having less sex than their parents think, but their attitudes toward sex are actually more conservative than those of their parents. Many more parents than children thought it was embarrassing for a teenager to admit to being a virgin, for example, and virtually all the kids thought that sex should take place only within a long-term committed relationship.
It's possible, in other words, that it's the older generation, not the younger, that has sex on the brain, and that our fears about what teenagers would get up to, if offered prescription-free morning-after pills or unlimited access to the A&amp;F Quarterly, are really projections of what's going on in our own heads. Certainly nothing in Bruce Weber's erotic imaginings is as disturbing as the world evoked in a recent article by Warren St. John in The Times's Sunday Styles section -- the one that featured the swinging Manhattan social set where it is apparently customary for men and women to have sex first and then make up their minds whether or not they're interested in each other. Most of the men in this crowd are gobbling down Viagra, the story explained, because nonstop dating has given them the jitters. ''We live in a crazy, high-velocity world, and if you're dating in New York right now, there are no road rules,'' a 34-year-old man said. ''It's a very tumultuous sexual arena, and it's exhausting.'' This arena, it should be pointed out, is also one in which women, far from needing to be seduced, are often aggressors, and a would-be playboy proffering morning-after pills here would not get very far.
You could argue that these sexual gladiators were once teenagers themselves, and that that is when they got started on the road to frantic, competitive sexuality -- from looking at too many clothing catalogs, among other things. But the evidence suggests something else -- that in our culture, really adolescent behavior now begins at an age when people ought to know better.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-4-04 Charles McGrath is the editor of The New York Times Book Review.
