ON occasion, issues are addressed in this column before they have been fully resolved. Court cases are appealed, laws are adopted or amended, circumstances change. Here are updates of some topics discussed over the past year.
''It's over,'' said John Van Der Tuin, a Manhattan lawyer who represented a Manhattan co-op in one of the more significant court cases affecting co-op shareholders in recent memory.
What became known simply as the Pullman Case revolved around the efforts of the co-op at 40 West 67th Street to evict a tenant-shareholder, David Pullman, on the ground of ''objectionable conduct.'' According to court documents, Mr. Pullman, ''in the view of the cooperative,'' engaged in a course of behavior that ''began as demanding, grew increasingly disruptive and ultimately became intolerable.'' Among Mr. Pullman's activities were numerous demands to change the services in the building, replace lobby mailboxes and hire 24-hour door attendants.
In addition, Mr. Pullman complained about his upstairs neighbors and ''in a stream of vituperative letters to the cooperative -- 16 letters in the month of October 1999 alone -- he accused the couple of playing their television set and stereo at high volumes late into the night, and alleged that they were running a loud and illegal bookbinding business in their apartment.''
What made the case precedent-setting was that the co-op was trying to evict Mr. Pullman without going through the standard landlord-tenant eviction procedure in the courts. Instead, in accordance with a provision in the co-op's proprietary lease, the shareholders held a special meeting at which they voted that Mr. Pullman's lease should be terminated because of his conduct.
The original trial judge ruled that it was the court's job, not the co-op's, to determine whether Mr. Pullman engaged in objectionable conduct, but an appellate court reversed that ruling, saying that the co-op's action was protected by the ''business judgment rule'' and was not subject to review by the courts. In other words, once the co-op decided that Mr. Pullman had engaged in objectionable conduct, his lease could be terminated and he could be evicted. On May 13, the state's highest court upheld that decision, thereby definitively ratifying a co-op's power to control its own affairs.
What remained after that decision, however, was the trickiest part of all: actually getting Mr. Pullman out of his apartment and getting the shares into a new tenant-shareholder's name without further legal battles. According to court papers, the apartment was to be sold -- with or without Mr. Pullman's cooperation -- and the proceeds applied to maintenance arrears and legal fees owed by Mr. Pullman to the co-op. In June 2003, however, the parties reached a settlement under which Mr. Pullman was given time to sell his apartment. While other terms of the agreement are confidential, the resolution of the case is an affirmation of a co-op's power.
''All I can say is that the apartment was sold in August and Mr. Pullman is now living elsewhere,'' Mr. Van Der Tuin said.
In another controversial case, the State Court of Appeals struck down a New York City law that governs how property owners must address lead-paint hazards in residential buildings. On July 1, the court ruled that since officials had failed to conduct an environmental impact assessment of Local Law 38 of 1999 -- which specified, among other things, when lead-based paint was considered a hazard and how that hazard had to be addressed -- the law was null and void.
Matthew Chachere, counsel to the Coalition to End Lead Poisoning, an advocacy group in Manhattan, said that while the voiding of Local Law 38 was good for tenants -- the ''trigger points'' for lead hazards were more favorable to landlords than tenants' groups were comfortable with -- the court's ruling resulted in a 1982 lead law becoming the governing law. That law requires landlords to immediately remove or encapsulate lead-based paint in any multiple dwelling where a child under 7 lives, even paint that has not deteriorated.
Shortly before the Court of Appeals ruling, however, the City Council held hearings on yet another lead paint law known as Intro 101A. That law is supported by tenants' groups because it provides what Mr. Chachere called ''a happy medium'' by allowing lead paint to remain in dwellings where children reside while requiring the owners to ensure that it does not constitute a hazard.
The City Council approved Intro 101 on Dec. 15. A few days later Mayor Bloomberg vetoed it.
Now what?
''I'm assuming that the mayor's veto will be overridden,'' said Mr. Chachere, since 44 Council members voted to adopt the law and only 34 votes are needed to override the veto.
Another piece of legislation, which went into effect on Sept. 1 created a fair amount of confusion, required nonresidents to pay estimated taxes on profit realized on the sale or transfer of real estate in New York. Lawyers said that while the obligation to pay such taxes was not new, the law's requirement that an estimated tax be paid before the closing made it difficult for sellers who needed the money from the sale to pay the tax. In other words, the law created a Catch-22 of sorts: nonresident sellers who needed the money from the sale to pay the tax could not get the money from the sale until the tax was paid.
Sam Tilton, a Rochester lawyer who is co-chairman of the title and transfer committee of the real property section of the New York State Bar Association, said that to rectify that problem, the Legislature passed an amendment allowing estimated taxes to be paid when the deed is recorded, making it possible for the seller to use the proceeds of the closing to pay the tax. That amendment was signed on Oct. 21 by Gov. George E. Pataki.
In July, this space reported that the United States Environmental Protection Agency had reached an agreement with producers to discontinue sales of lumber treated with chromated copper arsenate -- a preservative that contains arsenic -- for residential purposes by the end of 2003.
While the agreement was a result of a voluntary decision made by the wood preservative industry, environmentalists nevertheless pressed the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission for an outright ban on any lumber treated with the preservative, commonly referred to as C.C.A., since exposure to the chemical in things like children's play sets was believed to constitute a health risk.
On Sept. 29, however, the commission's staff issued a report that concluded: ''Arsenic is ubiquitous in our environment and all individuals will have exposure throughout their lives, primarily through food and drinking water.'' The report also noted that ''over a lifetime, arsenic exposures from food, especially certain foods such as rice, other grains and meats; drinking water; and other sources could be much larger than exposures from playground equipment during childhood.''
Jim Hale, executive director of the Wood Preservative Science Council, an industry organization based in Mount Vernon, Va., said that on Nov. 4 the commission voted unanimously to deny the petition for an outright ban on C.C.A.-treated wood.
Since the industry had already agreed to stop selling the product for residential purposes by the end of the year, why is the action by the commission significant?
''If the federal government had come down with a decision saying this product is banned, I think that in today's litigation-prone society, that could have encouraged plaintiff's lawyers to file lawsuits asking for replacement of all decks and play sets made out of C.C.A.-treated wood,'' Mr. Hale said. He pointed out that in a recent case in Florida, a judge dismissed a class-action lawsuit in which the plaintiffs wanted the industry to replace not only treated decking, but also the soil surrounding it.
''That's what we would have been facing if the commission went ahead with the ban,'' Mr. Hale said, adding that the industry nevertheless planned to keep its promise to stop selling C.C.A.-treated wood for residential applications as of Dec. 31, 2003.
YOUR HOME
