Q: You seem to believe that 9/11 did not have to happen.
Yes, there is a good chance that 9/11 could have been prevented by any number of people along the way. Everybody pretty well agrees our intelligence agencies were not set up to deal with domestic terrorism. Everybody had been set up to fight the cold war. They were not ready for an internal attack.
Did anyone in the Bush administration have any idea that an attack was being planned?
That is why we are looking at the internal papers. I can't talk about what's classified. President's daily briefings are classified. If I told you what was in them, I would go to jail.
Are you a friend of the president's?
I've met Bush, but I know his father better than I know him. Actually, I've discussed 9/11 more with President Clinton. We are friends. We were governors at the same time.
As a former Republican governor of New Jersey, can you genuinely be fond of a Democrat from the South?
Governors don't have to be political, because we are not competing against one another. When I was chairman of the education commission, Clinton was vice chairman. We became good friends.
Do you feel the 9/11 commission has had full access to the documents you need?
Yes, but these classified documents cannot move. In order to read them, I have to go to little rooms, which are wired and where cellphones don't work. I always thought a skiff was a small boat. But not in Washington! In Washington, a SCIF (sensitive compartmented information facility) is a room where you keep classified documents.
Are you allowed to photocopy the documents?
No. The highest-classified documents, I can take notes on. The notes are then kept in the same safe. I can't walk out of the room with my notes. When I want to read them, I have to go back to the SCIF.
But doesn't that defeat the whole point of note-taking?
This is not my world. I go along with what everyone else goes along with.
Where are the SCIF's located?
I can't say. There are a bunch of them around the White House and around Congress.
Who, exactly, decides what disappears into the SCIF's?
There seems to be a group from the intelligence agencies, and they are classifying everything in sight. I have told friends of mine in Congress that one of the things they should look into is overclassification.
Would you say that the bureaucracy of intelligence agencies is hampering your investigation into intelligence?
It's not hampering the investigation. But it makes it inconvenient when you can't take things back to the office with you to study, when you've got to refresh you memory by going across town to a little room in the White House to read your notes.
In other words, you are not sitting in bed at night reading government documents.
Oh, no! At night I am reading the latest volume of Bob Caro's biography of Lyndon Johnson. Caro was a classmate of mine at Princeton.
Speaking of New Jersey, why do you think the state seems so mired in political corruption?
But we're looking a bit at Connecticut now!
I assume you are referring to Governor Rowland and his acknowledged business dealings with people who received state contracts.
Yes. New Jersey has a lot of problems, but at least we are finding them out and putting people in jail. I don't know what goes on in other states.
Deborah Solomon
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-4-04: QUESTIONS FOR TOM KEAN
