AMONG the many gripping moments in the video for Good Charlotte's recent single ''Hold On,'' the most gripping of all may well be a close-up shot of an ordinary-looking middle-aged man -- not a band member or an actor but Bob Burt, a high school coach who lost his 19-year-old daughter to suicide. ''It's not the right order of things,'' he says, his face creasing in grief. ''You're not supposed to bury your children, they're supposed to bury you.''
The ''Hold On'' video is an avowed attempt by this double-platinum pop-punk band to talk suicidal kids back from the brink. ''Hold on if you feel like letting go/ Hold on, it gets better than you know,'' the singer Joel Madden keens as the black-clad, heavily tattooed band plays in a dilapidated little house whose walls are scrawled with words like ''fear,''  ''lonely'' and ''pain.'' The music breaks for a series of other heart-rending sound bites from friends and relatives of those who have committed suicide.
Made in conjunction with several suicide prevention organizations, the video closes as a tearful young woman, her voice breaking, says: ''It's O.K. to get help. You're going to miss out on so much.'' A black screen lists hot line phone numbers and the Web address of the American Federation for Suicide Prevention.
''It's almost like a public service announcement,'' Mr. Madden recently told MTV.com. If so, it's a hugely popular one: ''Hold On'' is a big hit on MTV, played heavily and featured on the channel's ''Total Request Live,'' which showcases viewers' favorite videos. (It's not the only song on Good Charlotte's latest album, ''Young and the Hopeless,'' that addresses suicide; another is called ''Day That I Die.'')
''Hold On'' is a perfect specimen of a new strain of teenage-oriented music -- call it therapy rock -- that uses the language of punk music to address, and sometimes even attempt to assuage, many adolescents' powerful feelings of alienation and despair. Of course rock has long addressed itself to the emotionally wounded teenager. What's new is this genre's astonishing frankness, its wide popularity and its active, earnest attempt to lend troubled fans a helping hand.
Musicians from a few different punk-related genres are exploring therapy rock: the up-and-coming ''emo'' genre, which features hyperdramatic, almost mawkish rock delving deeply into personal upheaval; rap-metal, an aggressive hybrid that has lately turned more introspective; and pop-punk, a slick version of punk that's deceptively up-tempo and not generally noted for its profundity. But it is bands in the last category -- like the hugely popular Good Charlotte, Sum 41 and Blink-182 -- whose songs most often amount to vivid case studies in adolescent mental health issues. The group A Simple Plan, who are also receiving heavy play on MTV, might have expressed pop-punk's attitude most directly: ''I'm just a kid/ And life is a nightmare.''
Consider Blink-182. With more than 10 million albums sold, it's one of the biggest bands in the country. Its new self-titled release is punctuated by evocations of depression like ''I'm so lost, I'm barely here/ I wish I could explain myself but words escape me/ It's too late to save me.''
''Adam's Song,'' from Blink-182's previous album, was based on a fan's suicide note; it profiled a character struggling to overcome hopeless thoughts. (Unlike the real-life inspiration, the song's protagonist survives his crisis.)
With their messages of care and support, these bands give the lie to the hoary stereotype of the nihilistic punk rocker. And not only do some of them make videos that are specifically designed to serve a public health function; they've found other novel ways to guide their fans through emotional troubles.
The annual Take Action Tour, mostly featuring punk-derived ''screamo'' bands, raises depression and suicide awareness and benefits the National Hopeline Network (which oversees the anti-suicide hot line 800-784-2433). This summer the network sent a gleaming new semi full of information on the popular Warped Tour, which featured Rancid, the Used and AFI among many major acts. (The benefit album ''Take Action, Volume 3'' includes multimedia content based on ''Suicide: The Forever Decision,'' a book by Dr. Paul Quinnett, as well as a self-test for depression.)
Some songs in this genre are downright prescriptive, counseling kids to be patient and tenacious through the lonely, bewildering years of adolescence. (Many other tracks merely depict depression, in hopes that teenagers might at least find comfort in knowing someone else understands what they're going through).
In ''Hang On'' (not to be confused with Good Charlotte's ''Hold On'') the pop-punk band Smashmouth exhorts, ''Things are gettin' weird/ Things are gettin' tough/ Nothing's makin' sense/ But you keep on lookin' up.'' Virtually every song on the bad-boy pop-punks Sum 41's hit record ''Does This Look Infected?'' is about profound alienation, depression or imminent emotional breakdown, but on ''Hell Song'' the band urges listeners to look for solutions, instead of wallowing in despair: ''Everybody's got their problems/ It's just a matter how you solve them/ And knowing how to change the things you've been through.''
Other songs recommend solidarity: ''I was confused/ And I let it all out to find/ that I'm not the only person with these things in mind,'' Linkin Park's Chester Bennington sings on the band's hit single ''Somewhere I Belong.''
In 1967 the Beatles sang ''Getting Better All the Time,'' whose lyrics now read like a gentler version of the prototypical therapy rock song. (Sure enough, Smashmouth covers the song on ''The Cat in the Hat'' soundtrack.) Four years later the Who famously sang, ''Don't cry, don't brace your eye/ It's only teenage wasteland'' on the classic rock staple ''Baba O'Riley.'' Heavy metal and industrial rock have profiled psychological imbalance for decades, and many current bands worship the 80's mope-rockers the Cure. (Robert Smith of the Cure even sings a tune on the new Blink-182 album.)
But therapy rock has its most direct roots in the genesis of American punk rock, a movement founded by a tiny coterie of troubled misfits and outcasts. The pioneering Southern California punk band Black Flag's landmark 1978 debut EP was called ''Nervous Breakdown'' and themes of insanity, alienation and depression have been a hallmark of punk lyrics ever since.
The first stirrings of therapy rock's introduction to a mass audience came in the early 90's, when alternative rock, inspired by punk music and led by Nirvana, apotheosized a generation of disaffected and confused latchkey kids. ''Lots of music now comes from Nirvana, and a lot of people identify with what Kurt Cobain was saying,'' said William, 16, of New York City. In what many interpreted as the defining event of a generation, Cobain killed himself with a shotgun blast in April 1994.
The tuneful punk revivalists Green Day picked up the ball of teen angst in the mid 90's, and thereafter various pop-punk bands ran with it all the way to commercial glory. American youth welcomed songs about the emotional difficulties of being a teenager. The audience for therapy rock was always there, it was just waiting for punk rock's popularity to catch up with it.
Since commercial success and punk credibility are virtually antithetical, the new pop-punk bands embrace themes of emotional distress as a way of asserting their authenticity and musical lineage. (They cleave to punk orthodoxy musically as well, having progressed remarkably little from early Southern California punk bands like the Descendents and Bad Religion.)
As a result therapy rockers fetishize depression like gangsta rappers fetishize the thug life, publicizing their plight while asserting their credibility. Just as the group Public Enemy once called rap the ''CNN of the streets,'' therapy rock claims to report from the front lines of suburbia. In other words, it's cool to be bummed out. And it sure sells records.
The popularity of therapy rock may in part be a reaction to the shallow kiddie-pop and testosterone-addled ''nu metal'' of recent years, making sincerity and relentless introspection the new rebellion. But even considering the adolescent penchant for magnifying ordinary personal woes into downright apocalyptic melodrama, therapy rock addresses some sober realities. According to the National Center for Injury Prevention and Control, the adolescent suicide rate has about tripled since the 1950's, and suicide is the third-leading cause of death for people 15 to 24 (behind accidents and homicide). Each year about 5,000 young people kill themselves, and several times that number try. The numbers have tailed off somewhat in recent years but only, some experts say, because of the rise in antidepressant prescription drugs.
''If all the bands are singing about this, I can't see how you can't see it as a voice for what the youth are thinking,'' says the Blink-182 singer-guitarist Tom DeLonge.
It may be the very fact of pop success that's spurring bands to write these songs. With huge sales figures comes a deluge of needy fans, some of whom say they literally owe their lives to the band. ''Every day we read letters from fans saying that the stress of life, the pressure with family and losing love is too much to bear,'' Mr. Madden of Good Charlotte noted in a recent news release.
''Once you actually start selling records, and you actually figure out that people are listening to you,'' says Mr. DeLonge, who recently became a father, ''then you start thinking about it, going, 'Wow, you don't want to influence them in a bad way.' ''
Performers like Marilyn Manson, Ozzy Osbourne and Judas Priest have faced public condemnation and even legal action after accusations of influencing kids' behavior adversely, so rock musicians know that, whether it's appropriate to do so or not, the public holds them accountable.
But these musicians' motivations run deeper than that. Punk is a vast support group for misfits, a community united by alienation. That strong sense of community is the same impulse that leads even the most hardened body-slammers to help up those who have fallen in the mosh pit. Likewise, punk bands -- and even bands who merely grew up on punk -- look out for their fans. The difference now is that they enjoy a vastly bigger community than ever, and that the bands have cast themselves more directly as trusted peers.
And adolescents seem more than ready to listen. Raised in a culture of therapeutic self-examination, the current generation of teenagers may be more alert to -- and articulate about -- their troubles than their predecessors. ''I think it's just becoming less of a taboo subject and more people are talking about it and being aware of it,'' said Saara, 16, from Rockville Centre, N.Y. ''Everyone knows someone who's gone through it.''
Steve Pedulla, of the emo band Thursday -- whose recently released ''War All the Time'' is virtually a concept album about coping with suicidal urges -- agrees. ''Kids are more self-aware now,'' he said.
Suicide and depression may also, however, be among the few remaining dangers that still bear a sense of romantic fascination. In the late 50's, for example, when teenagers first became a major presence on the road, there was a profusion of car crash songs -- so many that the songs constituted a subgenre of their own. The 60's and 70's saw a host of anti-drug songs; in the 80's fear of AIDS manifested itself in pop music. Those are no longer the cutting-edge topics of youth culture. But partly as a result of school shootings, depression and its consequences retain their edge.
Even for kids who aren't severely troubled, pop-punk has become a medium for ritual soundings of distress. Like a high-school version of the blues, it's a cathartic shout-out to the hellhounds on one's trail.
''A lot of kids are depressed about school and friends, and instead of hearing happy music they'd rather hear something that's sadder than they are -- it makes them feel better,'' says 16-year-old William. ''They don't want to hear about why things are so great.''
The bands say they hope that this new line of pop discourse will have an actual effect on kids' lives. ''It's good that it's out there,'' the Blink-182 bassist-singer Mark Hoppus says. ''It opens dialogue. It makes people able to talk to one another about things. And hopefully it makes things better, you know?''
Dr. Dan Romer, research director of the Adolescent Risk Communication Institute of the Annenberg Public Policy Center, says no significant studies have been made of whether this music has a therapeutic effect. ''Not enough attention has been paid to the stuff that's actually pretty valuable to young people,'' he said. ''Unfortunately most of the time we spend trying to find out if it's bad for people.''
Indeed, there is some concern that songs decrying suicide could actually encourage it. A 1999 Surgeon General's report concluded that ''suicide can be facilitated in vulnerable teens by exposure to real or fictional accounts of suicide.''
Much to Blink-182's horror, the ultimately life-affirming ''Adam's Song'' was found playing on repeat when Greg Barnes, a teenage survivor of the Columbine massacre in Colorado, hanged himself in May 2000.
''It affected us really strongly because that song was a song of hope,'' Mr. DeLonge said, the pain still clear in his voice. ''When we were writing it, we knew specifically that we did not want kids to think it was something that we thought was cool or rad. We didn't endorse it in any way.''
Judging by a visit to the Good Charlotte online message board (http://www. goodcharlotte.com/board/index.php?s=), however, plenty of other teenagers are getting valuable support from songs like ''Adam's Song'' and ''Hold On.''
''Just a week or so ago my friend was going to kill herself, then she saw the 'Hold On' video,'' said a Good Charlotte fan named Ann, 14, of Columbus, Ohio. ''It stopped her from slitting her wrists. I just don't want to think about what would have happened if that video didn't come on.''
Kelly, 15, of Grove City, Ohio, said in an interview conducted via Instant Message, ''As disappointing as it is, most kids listen to famous people a lot more than their parents or a teacher.''
Lee Huff, president-elect of the National Association of School Psychologists, said that although he devoutly wished parents and schools were more involved, he approved of rock bands counseling young people about depression and related issues.
''Bless their hearts,'' he said. ''It certainly goes a long from talking about killing bitches and whores and cops and everything else doesn't it? If kids listen to rock music more than they listen to a teacher in a classroom, God bless us that they're getting the message.''
Michael Azerrad is the author of ''Come as You Are: The Story of Nirvana'' and ''Our Band Could Be Your Life: Scenes From the American Indie Underground 1981-1991.''
Correction:  January 18, 2004, Sunday  An article on Jan. 4 about rock groups whose songs and videos address teenage suicide, and sometimes encourage teenagers with suicidal urges to seek help, misstated the name of a prevention group. It is the American Foundation for Suicide Prevention, not Federation.
