WALLACE SHAWN'S play ''Aunt Dan and Lemon'' begins and ends with a monologue by a fragile young woman named Lemon (portrayed by Lili Taylor in the current New Group revival) speaking directly to the audience. This excerpt is from Lemon's final speech, which addresses the morality of killing. The play, at the Clurman Theater on Theater Row through Saturday, reopens at the Acorn Theater in the same complex on Jan. 13 and runs through March 27.
The bigger a creature is, the harder it is to kill it, and that's awful to see. We know it takes at least 10 minutes to hang a person. Even if you shoot them in the head, it's not instantaneous -- they still make those squirming movements at least for a moment. And people in gas chambers rush to the doors which they know very well are firmly locked. They fight each other to get to the doors. So killing is always very unpleasant. Now when people say, ''Oh, the Nazis were different from anyone, the Nazis were different from anyone,'' well, maybe that's true in at least one way, which is that I imagine they observed themselves very frankly, perhaps, in the act of killing, and admitted how they really felt about the whole process. I imagine that they said, of course it's very unpleasant, and if we didn't have to do it in order to create a way of life that we want for ourselves, we would never be involved in killing at all. But since we do have to do it, why not be truthful about it, and why not admit that yes, yes, there's something inside us that likes to kill. Some part of us. Why wouldn't that be so? Our nature is derived from the nature of animals, and of course there's a part of animal nature that likes to kill. If killing were totally repugnant to animals, they couldn't survive. So an enjoyment of killing is there inside us. In polite society, people don't discuss it, but the fact is that it's enjoyable -- it's enjoyable -- to make plans for killing, and it's enjoyable to learn about killing that is done by other people, and it's enjoyable to think about killing, and it's enjoyable to read about killing, and it's even enjoyable actually to kill, although when we ourselves are actually killing, an element of unpleasantness always comes in. That unpleasant feeling starts to come in. But even there, one has to say, even though there's an unpleasant side at first to watching people die, we have to admit that after watching for a while -- maybe after watching for a day or maybe for a week or a year -- it's still in a way unpleasant to watch, but on the other hand we have to admit that, after we've watched it for all that time -- well, we don't really actually care any more.
THEATER: EXCERPT
