AS a teenager on the North Shore of Long Island in the 1970's, Marc Morrone gave new meaning to the popular term ''animal house.''
''I had lots and lots of pets,'' Mr. Morrone, now 43, said recently in a telephone interview from his store, Parrots of the World, in Rockville Centre. ''Lots of pets.''
So many, in fact, that by the time he was 18 his animal collection had outgrown his parents' home. That's when, in 1978, he and his friend Nick Guerra pooled their money and opened Parrots, a pet shop specializing in birds, ferrets and animals other than cats and dogs.
Twenty-five years and two television series later, Mr. Morrone still has lots of pets. Lots of pets, 20 to 30 of which he brings back and forth to his shop each day --a shop that also serves as the set of his newest syndicated series, ''Petkeeping With Marc Morrone,'' shown Saturday mornings at 7 on Channel 5.
Geared to viewers 8 to 16, ''Petkeeping'' stars members of Mr. Morrone's menagerie, including Harry the Scarlet Macaw, Darwin the African Gray Parrot, Harvey the Flemish Giant Rabbit and his mixed-breed dog Murphy. Using his pets to demonstrate tips on pet care, offer advice on animal adoption and answer viewers' questions, Mr. Morrone peppers serious animal-kingdom knowledge -- both his own and his guests' -- with chitchat and guileless enthusiasm.
Nearly six years ago, his quirky approach and cast of critters, shown on a local cable channel in Connecticut, caught the eye of a particularly enterprising pet lover.
''The phone rang at 7:59 and a half one day, and it was Martha Stewart, and she asked, 'Do you want to be on TV with me?''' he recalled. ''She had me on her show as a guest a few times, and she taught me how to be a real TV person, how to get more information out in a shorter amount of time.''
Ms. Stewart then put him in his own show -- ''Petkeeping'' -- and made him a columnist in Martha Stewart Kids magazine and a contributor to Martha Stewart Living.
Not everyone greets Mr. Morrone's pet pointers with such unbridled passion. In recent years, animal rights activists have complained that his one-big-happy-family schtick gives inexperienced viewers the wrong idea about the practicalities of commingling species, and that, as a pet store owner, his first priority may be turning a profit selling pets -- regardless of the home they're going to.
Still, ''I've never done something that I'm ashamed of or wish I hadn't done,'' Mr. Morrone said.
''I'm just a big kid and I have a really vivid memory of all the pitfalls and problems I had as a child keeping pets,'' he said.
''What I really like doing is making children respect animals for what they are,'' he went on. ''Say a child wants a dog but his mother is allergic so he winds up with a hamster. Now, when a child has a hamster, he might feel like he's missing out on something. He turns that hamster into a poor substitute for a dog. But if he understands that hamster, he's not going to miss that dog because a guy on TV taught him that his animal has unique attributes and a lot of value as a creature.''
Kathryn Shattuck
FOR YOUNG VIEWERS  Correction:  January 11, 2004, Sunday  A picture credit on the Young Viewers page of the Television section last Sunday, with an article about the series ''Petkeeping With Marc Morrone,'' misstated the photographer's surname. She was Vanessa Lenz, not Marek.
