THE FURIES  By Fernanda Eberstadt  Knopf  ($26, hardcover)
Crisp autumn day, as sparkly -- after three days' rain -- as if God had bathed the city with His own hands. In Central Park, the grass is newly washed silk, the earth underneath delicious rich muck. Fall is the season of beginnings.
When they reach the cherry grove overhanging the toy-boat pond, mother and child break into a downhill canter.
Gwen, behind, delights in her daughter's prowess: how she shoots free of the maternal grasp and streaks down the hill, sturdy little legs splaying sideways.
Gwen knows she should teach her daughter caution, but instead she encourages Bella's wildnesses, thrilled silly to have produced a child who has less sense than a fox of traffic, high windows, electrical sockets. People talk of courting danger: well, danger had never been so thoroughly beguiled.
Bella races all the way to the boat pond, where for one panicked instant Gwen -- too far behind -- thinks the baby's not going to stop. Caught, on the brink, by an elderly gentleman, who pins her, flailing, by the hood of her sweatshirt, till Gwen -- simultaneously frightened, angry, and impressed -- catches up.
Just before her mother can bawl her out, Bella, grinning, kisses Gwen's knees, and is off again. Stops once more to look into the water.
THE LITTLE WOMEN  By Katharine Weber  Farrar, Straus &amp; Giroux  ($23, hardcover)
The Green sisters grew up with the confident expectation that many of the residents at 165 West 75th Street were as close as family, which was absolutely true. Given that both of their parents were only children, which meant that they had no first cousins, and given that by the time they were in high school their two remaining grandparents, whom they had hardly known anyway, had died, it was especially nice that they could count on the fond attentions of their neighbors.
There was always a good supply of loving adults around to remember birthdays, attend school plays, and be really interested in and charmed by homemade Green family Halloween costumes. (Amy especially put a lot of effort into her costumes as she grew older and was frequently disappointed when they were simply too obscure for their meanings to be clear without explanation, as, for example, when she went trick-or-treating as a shooting star in a Garbo mask, wielding a six-shooter.)
Janet and Lou were grateful for the attention to their children, but they certainly didn't engineer it -- there were just always people around who wanted to do things for the girls.
WHO SLEEPS WITH KATZ  By Todd McEwen  Granta  ($18.95, hardcover)
Isidor headed in his natural direction, down Fifth, moving southward -- pausing at the corners only as sensibly as anyone else -- diminishing rapidly and becoming an ant along with the rest of them by the time he shouldered by Empire -- which looked rather upright, stiff and presentable today, not drooping like it sometimes does.
You couldn't have seen much of what Izzy was thinking now, but as he walked under the canopy -- when is this ... thing going to get fixed, finally fixed? -- and wondered as usual why the EMPIRE STATE BUILDING has discount drug stores in its clay feet -- he noticed a certain aluminum gleam to Empire's sides which seemed like modern light-weight coffins.
Now he had to go down and see MacK -- he didn't like feeling that heading downtown had anything to do with death -- but perhaps it was just looking at the poets' letters -- thought suddenly with a pain that MacK was in the habit of wearing lots of dead people's clothes -- from Mrs. Leninsky's family, his own uncle even -- and he fretted that MacK had caught something from a garment like that. But, said Isidor at the corner of 29th, as he hurried toward the all-important corner, you don't just throw away a Pendleton shirt.
NEW YORK BOOKSHELF/NOVELS
