''THE game is never over,'' Jack H. Llewellyn, a sports psychologist, asserts in his new book, which bears the irrefutable title ''Winning Sure Beats Losing.'' If you ''win, if you achieve, if you succeed, then you earn the right to take a breath and move to the next level.''
I didn't quite know what Dr. Llewellyn meant by the next level, but I didn't much care. I knew that in the New Year I wanted to speed up, not slow down. I wanted to engage the world each day with the sort of toughened demeanor that would send people running for tranquilizers.
Self-help books, it seems, fall roughly into two categories: those in the vein of ''Don't Sweat the Small Stuff,'' and those like Dr. Llewellyn's, which treat the human heart and mind as a corporation in need of productivity gains, smarter senior management and higher fourth-quarter earnings. My affinities lie with the latter, and like Dr. Llewellyn (who blessedly never quotes Lao-Tse), I embrace the notion that complacency is self-betterment's worst enemy and anxiety its dear friend.
I approached the book with the goal of combating the forces of procrastination that have kept me from being my best. I wanted to adhere to a schedule like those of the moguls I've read about in Fortune for years, who never seem to go to bed before 1:30 a.m. or wake up after 4:45, take boxing classes, yell at minions in early-morning conference calls to the Brussels office, and generally dominate everything around them.
Permit me to make a relevant digression into my own psychological failings. Whenever I am confronted with something important to do -- writing an article, settling months' worth of Verizon bills -- I am overwhelmed by questions utterly unrelated to the matter at hand. Recently, for example, while on deadline for an article on winter-white fashion, I began to wonder what ever became of Donald Segretti. This led me to a Google search (he appears to be working at a company called African Wireless), then to thinking about other Nixon-administration figures, and to wondering whether any of them ever calls the Watergate hotel to reserve a room using his own name only to say, ''I'm just kidding!''
Dr. Llewellyn's program involves a thorough assessment of one's assets and liabilities, and the reader is advised to amass a team of supporters to help. It was in devising Team Ginia that I ran up against my first problem. I wanted to keep the numbers small, but if I invited Giulia, Elizabeth and Deak to join, how would that make Lisa, Betsy, Ginger, Mary, Ali, Michelle, Jim, Nell, Meredith and my mother feel? Was I elevating my own sense of importance to assume they would even want to devote time to Team Ginia? Was narcissism keeping me from success?
I realized I was wasting time (Dr. Llewellyn's methods were working!) and decided to elect a single member to my team, Giulia, with whom I am in near constant contact. I was now ready to list assets and liabilities, which I would edit and discuss with her. I began to fire off my gifts: I'm an excellent badminton player! I make an unfailingly succulent roast chicken! I can pack for a weeklong trip in under 18 minutes! Prepare for a party in eight! I never pay retail!
I e-mailed my list to Giulia, who replied, ''I'd attest to all of those, and I might add that you make a good salmon, a good sea bass and have nice hair.''
Reviewing my list allowed me to see that I already possess a few mogul tendencies. Clearly I have a winner's DNA. Given Giulia's comments I am arguably a mogul-plus: Warren Buffet and the girl on the L'Oréal box.
At that moment, in my haze of vainglory, I could not determine a single personal deficit. I'd make my list later. No, that would make me a recidivist. So I phoned Giulia and asked her what she thought my liabilities were. ''You bring drama and neurosis to situations that don't warrant any,'' she said. ''You get in your own way.''
This is the truth. If I have a lunch date with my mother on Saturday but realize on Tuesday that I won't be able to make it, I will spend a good part of the week fretting, realizing that I can't rearrange my calendar but believing that I should.
What I like about Dr. Llewellyn is that he wouldn't have me abnegate the stress I so obviously cherish. ''Remember you don't want to relax,'' he writes.
Dr. Llewellyn would say take that stress and use it in combat. It could have been repurposed during a recent run-in with a plumber from Roto-Rooter. Arriving 27 hours after the designated time to unclog a kitchen drain, the gentleman seemed put out by the seriousness of the problem. ''This is not a garbage disposal you know,'' he said, standing beside the overflowing sink.
''I realize that,'' I said.
''No you don't,'' he shot back. Instead of reprimanding him for his lateness and bad manners, I was too cowed to do a thing. And this with a man wearing shorts, in December. This was obviously a ''lose'' for me.
But I will deploy such tactics in the future. And the next time I have to cancel lunch with my mother I'm going to do it early. ''Mom,'' I will say, ''as you know, I'm tremendously industrious. I've got lots to do; am planning a takeover of Omnimedia right now should things go sour for Martha Stewart. So you see, the weekend is out of the question.''
This reminds me that Martha Stewart has a great recipe for pissaladière. Why is it that some people have an aversion to onions, by the way? A friend of mine recently told me he didn't much like red ones. He lives in Nashville. Do you think Dolly Parton ever went out with Johnny Cash?
