WHEN Narelvin and Ivan Andrade and their 21-month-old son moved into the hamlet of Carmel in the Putnam County town of Carmel, they settled into a more rural setting than they had expected when they started looking.
''We had looked everywhere, including all parts of Westchester and even Danbury,'' said Mrs. Andrade, who had had a condominium in Elmsford. ''It's a little surprising that we're here because it's farther than we wanted to go from my husband's job as a computer administrator at Misys in White Plains. But it's so beautiful and peaceful.''
The area has many hills, many lakes and serene vistas, and many residents find the setting irresistible.
Two years ago, Helene Reda, director of foreign exchange sales for UBS Warburg in Stamford, moved to new construction in the hamlet. She had worked overseas for seven years and had ''collected quite a lot of stuff,'' she said. ''I thought of moving to New York City, which is a great place, but it's very congested, and I really wanted a big house to put all my stuff. I've been everywhere -- London, Zurich, Africa, the Far East -- but this is where I prefer being.
''When I come home at night, I can look up and see the stars. It's just a real pretty place to live.''
Even though Home Depot and Kohl's have recently moved to the outskirts of the hamlet and it has a multiplex cinema and major supermarket chains, there are also historical sites. These include a fairground; a tavern, Smalley's Inn, where George Washington is said to have visited; and Revolutionary War cemeteries.
Lynn Greenwood, 66, who lives in the house he was born in, said that although some places where he used to go hunting for rabbits and squirrels as a young boy have yielded to housing developments, he still goes deer hunting in the hamlet and ice fishing on Lake Gleneida.
The real estate market ''is still trickling along at a time of the year when many markets have completely shut down,'' said Robert J. Bradley, a real estate broker at Holly Real Estate in Kent Lakes, a neighboring section of the town of Carmel. ''We have high demand even though our inventory is low. When customers can't find anything in Westchester, we're the next stop.''
The hamlet's real estate prices have been steadily increasing in recent years, he said. A house that sold for $195,000 in July 1999 sold for $369,000 in November.
The town supervisor, Robert Pozzi, who recently took office, said he had begun to take steps to ensure that the recent rapid expansion of the hamlet does not outpace its resources or alter its charm. He said the town was looking to encourage other categories of development to offset part of the tax burden on residential taxpayers.
At the low end of the housing price spectrum, roughly $295,000 to $400,000, buyers can choose from small Cape Cods and ranches that need renovating to larger three- or four-bedroom, two-bath raised ranches on half-acre to one-acre lots. Larger Cape Cods and colonials ranging up to 2,500 square feet average between $400,000 and $500,000, Mr. Bradley said.
Newer homes on one-acre lots built within the last few years in developments like the 52-lot subdivision Centennial Ridge list for $550,000 to $850,000, said Tony Costanza, an associate broker at Coldwell Banker Elite Realtors in Carmel.
ONE of the newest and largest subdivisions, Willow Ridge, a 70-home community of different style homes on approximately one-acre lots, is almost sold out, according to the sales center. The 3,050- to 6,000-square-foot homes there sell for $670,000 to $1.4 million.
Michael Carnazza, director of code enforcement and building inspector for the town, said: ''There's a pretty big building boom that has gone on here. Most of the larger properties have been divided and built upon. But there are still properties that can be built.''
Construction began recently at a new 23-home subdivision called Michael's Glen. ''Since all new construction in the hamlet is on sewer and water,'' Mr. Carnazza said, ''the construction will not affect the runoff and septic problems you come across in other areas of the town.''
The hamlet also has a smattering of multifamily homes and scores of homes with apartments, as well as 434 condominiums in four complexes. Mr. Costanza said prices run from $172,000 for a two-bedroom unit at Vista on the Lake to $260,000 for a two-story town house at Kings Grant. Both have a pool and tennis courts.
A two-bedroom apartment in the hamlet rents for $1,200 to $1,500 a month, Mr. Bradley said.
There are also 200 rental units of federally funded housing in the hamlet for persons 55 and older, said Mr. Carnazza, and a private senior housing facility, Hughson Commons. Proposals are on the table for additional senior units, he said.
The 5,000-student Carmel Central School District is the second largest in Putnam County. It serves Carmel, Kent, Patterson, Putnam Valley, East Fishkill and Southeast.
Marilyn Terranova, the superintendent, said: ''We're really excited about our elementary program partnership with Columbia University Teachers College. Our teachers train there in the summer, on weekends and after school in how to best teach students reading and writing.''
There is also an artist-in-residence program at the district's three elementary schools: Kent Primary, for kindergarten through second grade; Kent Elementary, which has second grade through fourth grade; and Matthew Patterson Elementary, now kindergarten through fourth grade. By September 2005 all three schools will offer kindergarten through fourth grade, so that siblings in the early grades will not be sent to different schools.
The George Fischer Middle School, which offers fifth through eighth grade, is one of the largest in the state, with 1,600 students, said Dr. Terranova It uses a team approach, in which a team of teachers instructs a specific group of students for the whole year, ''still managing to keep the school very personable and family-oriented.''
The high school, Carmel High, is in the hamlet and offers a select three-year science research program, which recently produced a finalist in the Intel Science Talent Search competition. The school also offers 14 advanced placement courses, and it has a large core concentration on environmental studies, using town properties like the great swamp in Patterson.
Students who complete 300 hours of community service receive a special ''diploma of excellence,'' which ''no other high school in Westchester or Putnam County has,'' Dr. Terranova said. Six graduates last year received the diplomas.
Last year's average scores on the SAT reasoning tests were 514 in verbal and 520 in math, compared with statewide averages of 496 and 510, respectively. Of last year's 329 graduating seniors, 116 went on to four-year colleges and 88 to two-year colleges.
In April, residents will vote on an approximately $18 million referendum to build, among other things, 14 new science classrooms and laboratories in the high school and to renovate the middle school.
The hamlet offers a variety of recreational opportunities: fishing on Lake Gleneida, playing baseball or softball at the high school's reconditioned fields, and golfing at the 27-hole Centennial Golf Club.
There are also a number of facilities elsewhere in the town. These include Sycamore Park Waterfront, a 32-acre park on the fringes of the hamlet that includes ball fields, a beach and a place to rent canoes, rowboats and paddle boats, said Richard Gennaro, the town's director of recreation and parks. A 20-acre wheel park for extreme bicycling and skateboarding is at Crane Road Fields, and Volz Park in neighboring Mahopac is a 16-acre passive park that includes hiking trails. A new recreational facility, Carmada Park, is to open in the spring of 2005, Mr. Pozzi said.
New county recreational facilities are also planned for the town. Putnam County recently purchased Mahopac Airport and Lake McGregor Country Club in Mahopac and ''there are plans in the works to build more ball fields, open a county golf course and build the first indoor swimming pool in the county on these properties,'' he said.
In 1697, the Dutch burgher Adolph Philipse bought the land that is today Putnam County. In 1751 the estate was divided among his heirs, with Mary and Philip Philipse claiming what was then called Frederickstown. By 1795, the town was divided into smaller townships, including Carmel, which was named for Mount Carmel in Palestine because of its ''fertile and habitable valleys.'' (Carmel is pronounced CAR-mel, like the mount and unlike the city in California.)
Some time after the Revolution, the area of narrow streets hugging Lake Gleneida, formerly named Shaw's Pond for one of its early residents, became known as the village of Carmel.
Among the notable early residents was Enoch Crosby, a soldier in the American Revolution, who became a secret agent, passing important information to American officers. He was the model for Harvey Birch, hero of James Fenimore Cooper's novel ''The Spy.'' Upon his death in June 1835, he was buried in the Gilead Cemetery, which is listed on the National Register of Historic Places. The County Courthouse in Carmel, the second oldest in New York State, and the Reed Memorial Library are also on the Register.
In the 1800's, residents made their livelihoods by farming and by cutting ice from Lake Gleneida. In 1865, the Putnam County Fair, where livestock and produce were exhibited, moved to fairgrounds in the hamlet. When the New York and Northern Railroad opened to Carmel in December 1880, more tourists began arriving in the area and reservoirs were built. The farming industry declined and the fairgrounds became a racetrack. Regular harness races were held there until 1932.
If You're Thinking of Living In | Carmel  Correction:  January 11, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about living in Carmel, N.Y., misstated the number of graduates of its high school last year, as well as the figures for those going on to colleges. There were 327 graduates, not 329. Of those, 194 went to four-year schools and 92 attended two-year colleges (116 and 88 were the figures for those who went to schools in New York State).
