THE Wall Street research scandals have made Howard M. Schilit a rich man.
Mr. Schilit's firm, the Center for Financial Research and Analysis, scours corporations' books but doesn't trade in their stocks. It has turned out to be a profitable policy. When big securities firms reached a $1.4 billion settlement with regulators last December after accusations that they had published misleading stock research, they pledged to spend some $500 million over five years to buy research from independent analysts. And Mr. Schilit, who had established a reputation for ferreting out financial maneuvering at companies like Royal Ahold, the Sunbeam Corporation and Rite Aid, was suddenly a hot commodity.
''There's a gold-rush mentality right now,'' said Mr. Schilit, a former accounting professor at American University, during an interview in his spare office in Rockville, Md.
Offers began pouring in for his company, which he founded just a decade ago and which struggled in its early months. In October, he sold a majority stake to TA Associates, a privately held Boston investment firm that specializes in new financial areas like online stock trading, for $60 million. With independent research being underappreciated until very recently, the price raised some eyebrows -- including, Mr. Schilit acknowledges, his own.
Wall Street has long contended that research alone cannot make a profit, but Mr. Schilit's firm appears to be proving them wrong. Its clients -- 400 money managers, mutual funds, hedge funds and corporations -- each pay $36,000 a year for a daily online evaluation of two North American companies. Adding an appraisal of a European company is an extra $12,000 a year. Ratings run from 1 (the top grade) to 5.
''If you look at investment research, businesses are allocating multiple billions of dollars to it,'' said A.Bruce Johnston, managing director of TA Associates.
With the infusion of money, Mr. Schilit, 51, plans to acquire operations that can broaden the center's financial coverage, which may expand to include credit analysis and customized consulting and training packages for companies on preparing financial statements.
Mr. Schilit, who in his sweater and slacks seems more like the academic he was than the financial figure he has become, has a 15-member staff of former students, most of them male, working out of a building in Rockville and in Boston and London. Soon, he hopes to double the number of analysts and build a marketing team to add clients in the insurance, banking and legal industries.
His forensic approach has homed in on a long list of companies -- including those that were involved in eight of the 10 biggest accounting scandals in the 1990's.
His company's reports alerted investors to rising inventory problems at the drug store chain Rite Aid in October 1998, several months before the stock began to dip. Months before Sunbeam ran into significant troubles, Mr. Schilit reported in December 1997 that its accounts had expenses posted to an earlier period to lift profits, and that its accounts receivable were surging. Before the market noticed, he pointed out accounting problems in October 1997 at Oxford Health, the health maintenance organization, whose stock fell over the next two weeks.
His detective work did not include Enron because he had no energy analyst then. But two years before the $1.1 billion accounting scandal at Royal Ahold, the Dutch food company, started making headlines early this year, his company was reporting operational problems and making warnings about problems there.
A product of New York public schools and Queens College, Mr. Schilit received a doctorate in accounting in 1981 from the University of Maryland. He taught at American University for a decade, analyzing failed companies as a sideline.
In 1993, he wrote ''Financial Shenanigans: How to Detect Accounting Gimmicks and Fraud in Financial Reports,'' which drew news media attention. He set up shop the next year, initially from his home in Bethesda, Md., and began writing a half-dozen or so reports a month on companies and selling subscriptions.
''I was suddenly earning $60,000 a month, the same amount that I earned as a professor in an entire year,'' he said. Still, he juggled both jobs for 18 months; he quit his professor's job in 1996.
He says his sleuthing cannot pinpoint fraud. Rather, examining public documents often turns up gimmicks or aggressive accounting aimed at camouflaging problems. ''You never have a smoking gun,'' he said. ''So you have to be careful about alleging wrongdoing. My job is to find an early sign of problems.''
Mr. Schilit says he sold his stake to make more time to do research and to pursue another passion: educating the news media, law students, insurance brokers and others about financial sleights of hand. Even with his new nest egg, he plans to stay in the same four-bedroom brick colonial in which he has lived since 1985 with his wife, Diane, and where they are raising their three children. His main concessions to his wealth are a beige Jaguar XJR convertible -- his 14-year-old daughter calls it too conspicuous and refuses to be seen in it -- and a condominium in Key Biscayne, Fla. He says he gives more money to charity than his family spends in a year.
He says the investment public is still not skeptical enough. For example, recent accounting troubles at Freddie Mac failed to ignite public outrage, he said. ''Investors yawned, even after Enron and WorldCom.''
MR. SCHILIT says he used to be perplexed by the failure of accountants to correct problems he identified at corporations. Often, after he was ignored, the corporations were later sued -- and blamed him for alerting the world.
His relations with accounting firms are better now but will never be ''warm and cuddly,'' he said. Nor does he expect them to ask his advice -- a mistake, in his view. ''If I were in their business and had such substantial risks,'' he said, ''I would search out anyone who could help me.''
Private Sector
