THE first thing to understand about the exercises in ''Snap Out of It! 101 Ways to Get Out of Your Rut and Into Your Groove'' by Ilene Segalove (Red Wheel/Weiser; January 2004) is that they are probably best not performed in public.
''Get help,'' said the woman standing next to me on the uptown C train, when I chanted the vowel set out loud (No. 21, Vocalize the Vowels), in a joyful fit of wellness.
She did not know that I am now my own best friend. That day was the first day of the rest of my life.
My 51-year-old's idea of self-discovery is finding my house keys in the morning, remembering whom I had drinks with the night before or inviting a cashier into a conversation when picking up groceries for dinner after a dubious trip to the gym.
''Something smells,'' a clerk said recently, nosing the bunch of cilantro I was buying, then following the stench across the checkout toward my damp sweatshirt and pants.
That's Monday, or interchangeably, Friday. Does this sound like a rut, or the crease at the bottom of the Mariana Trench?
The purpose of Ms. Segalove's book is neatly summarized in her title. With readily doable physical exercises, or ''snaps,'' using the five senses, readers might hope to free themselves from the rut of corrosive, debilitating habit and recapture the kinetic, balloon-headed creativity of childhood -- ''your groove,'' as Ms. Segalove calls it. She describes her intention as ''liberating your mojo.'' For me, this meant several days of waking up and thinking briefly that I was Jimmy Buffett.
Ms. Segalove's book also swims with whales. There is (for my age group) the mandatory rootedness to ''greater principles,'' metaphysical or spiritual, that include Hebrew prayers, transcendent sex, Gaia, hugging rocks, and yin and yang. This is insurance that once you get free, you will stay free by hang gliding off higher ground.
Little of this is programmatic -- it's just there. Ms. Segalove suggests either using the exercises in sequence, which seemed erosive to a healthy mind, or picking and choosing at random, which I did.
With the desperate logic of vitamin overdose, I tried all 101 exercises, including Sacred Password (No. 60), which involves extending your arms, palms up, and talking to yourself while staring into space (I had the presence of mind not to try this one on the subway) and Tree Time (No. 5), in which you pretend you are a tree. I turned out to be really good at it.
In her introduction, Ms. Segalove qualifies life's problems by explaining that everyone is one of two types. People are ''zombies,'' zoned, dazed, spaced, loose and shapeless. Or they are ''spinners,'' manic, anxious, loud.
Some exercises, like Tree Time, are more expressive, some, like Jump Up and Do the Hula! (No. 3), more prescriptive. I skipped the hard ones, like Fight Club (No. 11), which involved muscular resistance training.
There are also shortcut ''combos,'' like Mexican food platters, listed at the back. I tried No. 93, the Focus/Problem-Solving Combo, which includes Vocalize the Vowels, Infinity Eyes (No. 38), On the Right Foot (No. 15) and Two Thumbs Up (No. 78).
Infinity Eyes, in which you wave your thumbs in the air in an infinity pattern and watch them until dizzy, was a knockout. I experienced a chill druglike rush of idiocy, which I'm confident Ms. Segalove would take full credit for. If that's not success, I'm an unchanged fool. On the Right Foot, in which you stand on one foot, then stand on the other, alternating rapidly, is basically like having to visit the bathroom when there isn't one handy, which sent a badly mixed message to my mojo.
Ms. Segalove, a multimedia artist and radio commentator, is 53, and much of her rut-busting profundity comes from baby boomer culture. Boomers, I suspect, are also her core audience. The moon landing, the John F. Kennedy assassination and the political tumult of the 1960's make appearances, as do popular television programs like ''Password,'' the quiz show, which is playing in a hospital room during Ms. Segalove's last visit with her dying grandfather.
''Put your genie in a bigger bottle,'' Ms. Segalove advises readers deadened by life, in her version of an epiphany. (Yes, she means Barbara Eden.)
Here's one by James Joyce, not included in ''Snap Out of It.''
''Better pass boldly into that other world, in the full glory of some passion, than fade and wither dismally with age,'' muses Gabriel Conroy in Joyce's Christmas story ''The Dead,'' as he lies beside his sleeping wife, contemplating mortality and watching the snow fall, ''like the descent of their last end, upon all the living and the dead.''
That kind of revelation, a drifting thought that deepens until the world is both buried and new, gets quickly shoveled by self-help and its exercises. You don't want to slip on the truth and break something.
Asked how she segued into self-help from art, Ms. Segalove said on the telephone last week, ''I support people embracing the raw material of their lives as art.'' She added that ''these books, goofy as they can be, give them tools,'' though she acknowledged that it put authors like herself in an odd position.
''If all these books are out there, why aren't we well?'' she said.
A last piece of advice about ''Snap Out of It.'' Do not mix it with alcohol. I learned this during Inner Happy Face (No. 57), then again during Stroke Your Pet (No. 71). I don't own one.
One hundred and one Dalmatians -- sorry, exercises -- later, was I improved? Have I changed my spots?
I defer to Yes Master, No Master (No. 12). You fold your arms on your chest, elbows bent at 90-degree angles, as though ready to serve. You nod yes, up and down, gradually speeding the motion. I can imagine, done in front of the right people, that this could lead rapidly to self-improvement in the form of a pay raise or promotion.
But saying no, nodding side to side, worked my neck more vigorously.
And that genuinely grooved me.
