At 55 West 13th Street, a 90,000-square-foot building constructed in 1891 has variously housed manufacturing activities, a warehouse and a Bon Marché department store. Largely abandoned in the 1970's, it is now occupied by the New School University, which has renovated all nine floors at a cost that a school official put at about $40 million.
Although the New School has long owned or leased buildings in the area, Bob Kerrey, the president of the school, described the renovation project as ''a continuation of trying to develop more spaces for the school's 7,000 degree students,'' including more than 800 international students.
The effort to modernize the building began in 1995 and was completed in September 2003.
To make the conversion, the New School employed four Manhattan architectural firms: Butrick, White &amp; Burtis; Fox &amp; Fowle; Helpern Architects; and Ohlhausen DuBois. The firms did not collaborate on the project, but instead independently suggested different designs and projects. The major construction company on the project was Corporate Interiors Contracting of Manhattan.
''There wasn't really a master plan,'' said Bruce Fowle of Fox &amp; Fowle, ''and as floors became available the university determined the appropriate use and then selected the architect they felt was best qualified for the work.''
''The greatest challenge for us as architects of the public spaces on the lower two floors of the building and the exterior expression,'' Mr. Fowle added, ''was to try to give this most important university building an identity while expressing the progressive nature of the uses inside.'' The renovations eventually resulted in an expanded lobby, a 115-seat performance hall for the university's jazz program, a community center and what is known as the Knowledge Union -- four technology floors that include numerous computer labs and classrooms in which students produce television.
A staircase winds from the lobby to public spaces on the second floor. Also rising to the second floor is a large colorful mural painted by the artist Sol Le Witt, who donated it to the school.
Renovations of the last two floors were made possible by a gift from Henry Arnhold, co-chairman of Arnhold &amp; S. Bleichroeder Holdings Inc., a securities firm. On Dec. 10, the university named the building Arnhold Hall.
EDWIN McDOWELL
Postings
