THERE are no bad reasons for watching ''The Battle of Algiers'' -- the legendary epic about terrorism and counterterrorism in colonial Algeria by the Italian director Gillo Pontecorvo and the screenwriter Franco Solinas -- but some may be worse than others.
Among the most obvious of good reasons: a fresh print is going into theaters on Friday, opening at Film Forum in New York and at art houses in Los Angeles, Chicago and Washington. Some viewers might seek out the film just for Marcello Gatti's cinematography, which has been restored to the newsreel-like immediacy that first startled viewers in 1966. But when a rerelease combines great artistic power with lasting political interest, celluloid junkies are not the only ones who ought to be excited. Architects could spend a happy two hours concentrating on ''The Battle of Algiers'' just for the winding staircases, inner courtyards and rooftop lookouts of the Casbah, the city's old Muslim section, where the events that Mr. Pontecorvo dramatized had actually taken place. Musicians could be content to take in the insistent, percussive score by Ennio Morricone and Mr. Pontecorvo, which is legendary in its own right.
Military strategists and revolutionaries, on the other hand, may have flimsier reasons for watching the film. The Black Panthers studied it in the late 60's as a textbook of urban warfare, even though it's more of a how-not-to manual. The movie does conclude with the Algerians' successful uprising against French rule in 1962, shown through one of the grandest crowd scenes ever devised, but ''The Battle of Algiers'' is mostly concerned with revolutionary defeat.
It recreates the events of 1954-7, when the French military systematically crushed a terror campaign and general strike organized by the F.L.N., the National Liberation Front. The Panthers were mistaken in their enthusiasm; and I think that Pentagon planners may have been misguided in their own way this summer when they organized a special screening to encourage fresh thinking about Iraq.
''How to win a battle against terrorism and lose the war of ideas,'' read the flier for the event. ''Children shoot soldiers at point-blank range. Women plant bombs in cafes. Soon the entire Arab population builds to a mad fervor. Sound familiar?''
Apart from noting the inaccuracies that can bedevil any synopsis -- in the film, children shoot policemen point-blank, not soldiers, and the Arab population builds to a state of sullen withdrawal -- I think the flier was too coy in implying that ''The Battle of Algiers'' could illuminate today's Baghdad. In fact, I'm not even sure the film works as a guide to contemporary Algiers. Its lessons ought to be applied to other situations cautiously, precisely because of the film's principal strength: its deep roots in a specific time and place.
Mr. Pontecorvo and Solinas visited Algeria shortly before independence, to plan a movie dramatizing the war through the eyes of a French paratrooper. That project fell through; but in 1964 Mr. Pontecorvo received an unexpected visit from the F.L.N.'s former military chief in Algiers, Saadi Yacef, who had come to Italy to recruit a filmmaker. Mr. Yacef had some money -- half from private sources, half from the new Algerian government -- and a script that Mr. Pontecorvo later described as ''awful, and with a sickeningly propagandistic intention.'' But Mr. Yacef also had something more: the power to grant access to Algiers. Mr. Pontecorvo offered to go back there with Solinas to write a new script, and to do it on spec.
SIX months later, after extensive interviews in Algiers, similar fact-finding in Paris and many hours of digging through documents, Mr. Pontecorvo and Solinas were ready to begin writing. Their script was not at all the triumphalist pageant that Mr. Yacef had expected. But when Mr. Pontecorvo agreed to let Mr. Yacef appear in the film -- essentially playing himself as a leader of the insurrection -- and raised more than half the budget on his own, ''The Battle of Algiers'' went into production.
Even today it's easy to see why the results outraged French officials (who banned the film until 1971) and astonished everyone else. No other fiction filmmaker had so accurately replayed a recent, world-shaking conflict. No one else had pursued the truth by creating a big film with so few trained performers (138 people picked off the streets, augmented by a single professional actor). And apart from Orson Welles, no one before had so imaginatively imitated the look of a newsreel, although Welles had pulled the trick only for the ''March of Time'' segment of ''Citizen Kane,'' whereas Mr. Pontecorvo kept up his illusion for 123 minutes. The term docudrama was not yet in wide use, and already Mr. Pontecorvo's film overshadowed the nascent genre, as the ''St. Matthew Passion'' towers over an advertising jingle.
Not that any of this would interest moviegoers at the Pentagon. Their sudden fascination with ''The Battle of Algiers'' has to do with Mr. Pontecorvo's acute analysis of terrorism and counterterrorism, which he presented almost like a demonstration of Newtonian physics. Action: the F.L.N. (a small and ragtag organization, working without popular support) carries out terror attacks against fellow Arabs and the French police. Reaction: the police blow up a house. Counter-reaction: people from the Casbah support the F.L.N. in increasing numbers and carry out even more horrifying attacks.
The French, in turn, escalate hostilities; they send in paratroopers, whose leader, Colonel Mathieu, destroys the entire F.L.N. network by means of torture and extra-judicial killings. That apparently is the end of the chain reaction -- except that the French have now outraged the whole Arab population. In the movie's coda, set after a long period of apparent quiescence, the Casbah suddenly rises up again as one.
I won't try to guess what use the Pentagon might make of this scenario. As a movie critic, though, I would advise the planners to heed one of the movie's main lessons, which is that film is unreliable. That's the point of a crucial scene in which Mathieu (the actor Jean Martin) reviews surveillance film from checkpoints around the Casbah. The cameras, trained on a crowd, have filmed the perpetrators of a particularly gruesome series of attacks, but Mathieu has no way to pick the murderers out of the passing faces.
The essence of the situation remains invisible to the cameras, just as the final revolt in ''The Battle of Algiers'' is invisible until it bursts forth. If the notably clear-headed Mathieu is so blind, despite 130 years of French presence in Algeria (another theme of the film), then I wonder whether American forces can learn much about their new field of operations in Iraq by watching a two-hour movie.
Even the maker of ''The Battle of Algiers'' turned out to be partially blind. Although Mr. Pontecorvo strove to be fair to the French, he clearly believed the F.L.N.'s struggle was part of a happy shock wave of liberations around the world. Instead it spawned an authoritarian regime in Algeria that today suppresses both the large Berber population and a popular Islamist movement.
But Mr. Pontecorvo was too smart to include any hints about the future in ''The Battle of Algiers.'' He confined the film to events in the past, which he made riveting for audiences in 1966. They ought to be riveting enough today. ''The Battle of Algiers'' remains a great movie, which is the best reason to watch it.
FILM Stuart Klawans is the film critic for The Nation.
