For as long as residents can remember, Peter Cooper Village has been a sort of crime-free oasis. Even in the 1960's and 70's, when neighborhoods to the south were undone by drugs, the 2,200-unit complex on First Avenue from 20th Street to 23rd Street withstood urban decay. And the city's crime rate has been dropping steadily for more than a decade.
That is why many residents there are puzzled and angered by a new security system being installed by Peter Cooper's owner, MetLife. The system, scheduled to go online early this year, calls for electronic card keys to replace existing metal door keys on the front doors of all 21 buildings.
To get a card key, tenants must fill out forms, give their Social Security numbers and have their photos taken. Tenants can now duplicate keys and give them to guests or neighbors; under the new system they will be limited to two guest cards, which must be renewed after 30 days.
While Peter Cooper's management said in a flier that the system will ''enhance the security of the residents and property,'' many tenants think it is a major inconvenience. ''What if I have guests coming to town?'' said one longtime resident who asked not to be named. ''Before, I could give them a key. Now I have to make several trips to the security office.''
There is also concern among the complex's elderly residents, many of them homebound, who would be unable to walk to the security office to authorize clearance for caregivers or grocery deliverymen.
Originally, the system was going to work through face-recognition technology, in which a camera would compare a tenant's likeness with the photo on the ID card. While MetLife has since done away with face recognition in favor of an electronic swipe, Steven Sanders, a New York State Assemblyman and resident of Peter Cooper Village, still maintains that the new system will infringe on tenants' rights.
''What the owner has really come up with is a surveillance system under the guise of security,'' Mr. Sanders said. ''They will now know when someone enters the building every day, or when they leave.''
Mr. Sanders, who is seeking a temporary injunction to postpone implementing the system, said he had made several unsuccessful attempts to discuss the matter with MetLife. Holly Sheffer, a MetLife spokeswoman, said the company had no comment on the new security system.
STEVE KURUTZ
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: PETER COOPER VILLAGE
