THE Leuthold Group keeps a close watch on price-to-earnings ratios. The rise of those ratios in June 1998 made Leuthold, a valuation-oriented money manager, turn bearish long before the stock market bubble burst in 2000.
So it may be a little disturbing to some investors that Andrew Engel, senior research analyst at Leuthold, says the stock market was overvalued by 22.9 percent at the end of 2003, using the P/E ratio of the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index. That ratio was 23.1 at year-end, compared with a median of 17.8, based on data back to 1950.
But don't worry yet -- at least about valuations. From Mr. Engel's point of view, it is more important that the price-to-earnings ratio is still much less than the peak overvaluation of 49.3 percent, reached in July 1999, when the ratio was 35.1. And it is also well below the overvaluation of 40.3 percent, in June 1998, when the ratio was 29.8 and the firm went negative on the market. At that time, Leuthold, which is based in Minneapolis, reduced its stock holdings to 5 percent of its portfolio, which is now about $350 million.
Right now, the firm remains fundamentally bullish, with 60 percent of its portfolio in stocks, although that number has been reduced from 66 percent, Mr. Engel said. ''We are a little bit more cautious'' because of the rising P/E ratio, he said. But, he added, this is a ''momentum type of market where strong performance begets strong performance, and that is enough to overcome the valuations.''
He also said growth in corporate earnings this year could ''prolong the advance.''
Leuthold is projecting that operating earnings for the S.&amp;P. 500 will rise about 20 percent this year, well above Wall Street analysts' consensus projection of 12.8 percent, compiled by Thomson First Call.
Another reason that the climb in the P/E may not be too troublesome is that inflation remains very low. The Consumer Price Index was up just 1.8 percent in the 12 months through November.
Abby Joseph Cohen, the chairwoman of the investment policy committee at Goldman Sachs, argues that it is reasonable for P/E ratios to be higher in periods of low inflation. Her data show that the average ratio for the S.&amp;P. 500 since 1950 has been 18.4 when inflation is 2.5 percent or lower. The average falls to 12.1 when inflation is 3.5 percent to 4.5 percent, and declines to 8.6 when inflation is more than 7.5 percent.
But that does not mean the market is out of the woods.
In fact, Mr. Engel said that he expects stocks to fall sharply at some time during the year. He is predicting a 10 percent to 15 percent correction, which, he said, ''would be enough to reset the valuations.''
So if valuations won't stop the market, what will?
He said investors were likely to be scared by rising inflation later in the year, although a modest increase would still leave inflation very low. For the 12 months through November, the core Consumer Price Index, which excludes food and energy, was up just 1.1 percent, the lowest gain since the period ended in January 1966.
''We think there will be an inflation issue in the market,'' he said, adding that the Federal Reserve's decision to keep interest rates low for a considerable period might make some investors worry more about an inflation surge.
INFLATION could also be aggravated by a sharp fall in the dollar. The dollar dropped 16.5 percent against the euro last year and could keep falling this year, raising prices for imports.
Mr. Engel also says that the presidential election ''will bring about some focus on the negatives'' -- like the federal budget deficit, which could reach $500 billion, as well as the dollar's weakness.
There is a positive in all this for investors. In the past, the Leuthold Group was among those who became stock market bears early. So if its managers are not even contemplating turning from bulls to bears now, the market may well have a rally ahead.
Mr. Engel projects that the S.&amp;P. 500 will be just above 1,200 by the end of this year, even with a sell-off during the year. That is a gain of nearly 10 percent. Not bad.
PORTFOLIOS, ETC.
