SOME HOPE
A Trilogy.
By Edward St. Aubyn.
336 pp. New York:
Open City Books. Paper, $14.95.
THE slender novels in this trilogy -- laconically titled ''Never Mind,'' ''Bad News'' and ''Some Hope'' -- were first published in England a decade ago, but it is perhaps unsurprising that they have taken so long to appear here. Edward St. Aubyn's subject is the British upper class, a social stratum known to most of us only through celebrity gossip or ''Masterpiece Theater,'' and the techniques with which he guides us through the arcane hierarchy of competing snobberies seem, at first, old-fashioned -- a style of social comedy more reminiscent of Evelyn Waugh, Anthony Powell or Nancy Mitford than of anyone writing today.
Taken as a whole, the trilogy is a bildungsroman about Patrick Melrose -- a damaged 5-year-old in the first novel, a 22-year-old junkie in the second and, in the third, a drug-free 30-year-old trying to put the past behind him. Much of the time, however, Patrick cedes the stage to a monstrous cavalcade of dysfunctional aristos and obsequious hangers-on. ''I firmly believe that one should have the widest possible range of acquaintances,'' says one, ''from monarchs right down to the humblest baronet in the land.''
St. Aubyn is enough of a snob to enjoy this outrageousness, but also sensible enough to see the other side, as when an American character wonders ''why the English thought it was so distinguished to have done nothing for a long time in the same place.'' As a matter of fact, St. Aubyn's own family has been in the same place, a granite crag on the coast of Cornwall, for a very long time indeed -- since at least the time of Henry IV, according to Burke's Peerage. Furthermore, the outline of Patrick Melrose's story -- rotten childhood, drugs, reform -- turns out to be autobiographical. British newspapers are fond of the story of the author's final examinations at Oxford, for which he equipped himself with a bag of heroin, a pen to snort it through and a crisp, new white shirt for each day of the proceedings. Aspiring socialites, one imagines, will read these novels carefully, taking note of every judgment passed or wine served. Edward St. Aubyn is evidently a man whose savoir-faire is to be trusted, whether on which fork to use or what to do when you miss a vein in the dark.
The first novel takes place in the 1960's, in Provence, at the chateau of Patrick's parents -- David Melrose, a disinherited aristocrat, and his wife, Eleanor, a sozzled, pill-prone American heiress whom he lives off and terrorizes. David is a disappointed man (he had talent as a pianist but never really applied himself and trained as a doctor but gave up soon after marriage) whose frustration has warped his personality. When we first meet him he is taking the opportunity, while watering the garden, to drown an ant colony -- a comic detail until we realize that such languid cruelty characterizes his behavior toward everyone. This is the sort of man who looks out from his balcony and reflects, ''How easy it would be to dominate the whole valley with a single machine gun riveted to the rail.''
The novel's action centers on a dinner party whose guests include an aging playboy with an obviously unsuitable young girlfriend and a socially ambitious philosopher. (There is a tantalizing sense that many characters in the trilogy would be identifiable if one were better connected.) With careless ease, St. Aubyn flits between various points of view, exposing the matrix of scorn that lurks behind the politesse. But the amusingly bitchy surface of the novel is torn open by two scenes of real power and exceptional nastiness, in which David abuses his son. In the first, he picks the child up by the ears; the second is far nastier.
The unexpectedness of these scenes adds to the shocking effect, but it also invites the suspicion that St. Aubyn isn't quite capable of juxtaposing comedy and savagery in a way that would enhance the effects of both. Even though Patrick's sufferings form the core of the trilogy, they seem out of place here. One senses that St. Aubyn is too sophisticated to be interested in writing a conventional novel of childhood trauma, and the idiosyncrasy of his decision to turn pain into a comedy of manners is appealing, even when it leads to miscalculation. The same goes for other frustrating flaws -- slapdash plotting, characters introduced to minimal purpose, set pieces laboriously engineered only to fall flat at the last moment. Such lapses seem almost appropriate to the aristocratic mien of these pages, as if St. Aubyn -- like David Melrose -- would rather be an inspired gentleman-amateur than an industrious professional.
Most of the second novel takes place inside Patrick's head. His father has died and the journey to collect the ashes becomes a 48-hour drug binge in 1980's Manhattan. Patrick's addled thoughts give rise to the most stylistically ambitious passages of the trilogy, a kind of pharmo-phantasmagoria. After one particularly incautious moment of indulgence, there is a surreal playlet performed by various characters from his subconscious and a few literary figures (''A hit, a very palpable hit,'' puns the courtier from ''Hamlet''). It comes off like the Circe chapter of ''Ulysses'' rewritten by Monty Python, but, although copying Joyce is a doomed enterprise, it is perhaps an achievement that the result is not a total embarrassment. Where St. Aubyn really succeeds, however, is in evoking the desperate logistics of serious drug use -- the careful arithmetic required to make a limited stash last the night and the perpetual acts of dissimulation, like ''that authentic-sounding flush with which every junkie leaves a bathroom, hoping to deceive the audience that crowds his imagination.''
By the third novel, Patrick is clean: ''Nowadays when I go into loos I say to myself, 'What are you doing here? You don't do drugs anymore!' '' It generally takes him a moment to realize that he's in the place for its intended purpose.
The tone of the writing has mellowed slightly. St. Aubyn's dandified barbs are as acerbic as ever, but the worldview behind them is less unremittingly dark. Characters who seemed hateful in the first novel are now more forgivingly portrayed.
The format of the novel is, once again, a comedy of manners, this time arranged around that staple of the genre, a country-house weekend. The handling, however, is far more assured than at the start of the trilogy. St. Aubyn expertly mixes pathos and humor, most notably in a scene where Patrick unburdens himself to his best friend on the matter of his childhood, but is continually interrupted by an overzealous waiter. St. Aubyn also pulls off a memorable tour de force by introducing Princess Margaret as a fictional guest. Even those who profess no interest in the Royals are likely to be tantalized by this glimpse of overpowering obtuseness and snobbery. The climax -- in which the French ambassador inadvertently splatters the princess's dress with food and is commanded to clean it up ('' 'Wipe,' she said with terrifying simplicity'') -- is a comic masterstroke of which Evelyn Waugh himself might have been proud.
The very rich make a tricky subject for a writer because they exist at such a remove from the quotidian bourgeois grind that has been, historically, the fuel of the novel. St. Aubyn's trilogy -- a clutch of modern novels trapped inside the rusting armor of an old-fashioned one -- often seems in danger of losing direction, not unlike its hero. But it is saved by its clearsightedness and bitter brilliance, which seem likely to win the admiration of a small but extremely well-spoken readership.
Leo Carey is on the staff of The New Yorker.
