ONE of these days I plan to relax. I suspect that this will happen when I am dead. Until that unwelcome occurrence, I suppose that the core of my personal stress-reduction program will have to consist of gabbing with friends, running nowhere on a treadmill, creeping around Central Park with my aged hound dog and dosing myself therapeutically with white wine.
It is hard to relax a life from the outside in, a thought I cannot be alone in. And this is why I am having trouble getting anywhere with ''1,001 Ways to Relax: An Illustrated Guide to Reducing Stress'' by Mike George. I want it to work. I want to believe that as the writer Bell Hooks once pointed out, there are home truths to be culled even from the tailings of the slag-heap genre euphemistically called self-help.
I've involved myself long enough with what a friend refers to as Viennese voodoo to recognize the broad markers of neurosis. I can tell when I am lapsing into transference. I'm as good as the next guy at catching myself acting out. It stands to reason, then, that I could manage anxiety handily by using any of the basically sound ideas put forward in this blocky volume. Yet just when it is obviously time to draw a healing yoga breath or pause for that moment of mindfulness or relax my tongue to ease tension in my jaw, neck and face or to break into spontaneous song so that music can fill my heart, something else happens. A whiny voice starts whispering in my inner ear. It sounds a little like Alvy Singer and it is carping about, say, the comma in the title of this book.
It is the small things, as we all know, that wedge in our consciousness and detour all attempts to chill out. How did that comma get in there, I found myself asking. Were the publishers trying to make me subliminally edgy at the prospect that the book involved math? And what of the assertions made by the author about how we are living in ''tense, turbulent and, for many people, unrelaxing times''? Weren't they kind of a tease?
Without wishing to overstate, one might point out to Mr. George, identified on the cover as a ''renowned stress counselor,'' that beneath the desk where I write sits a small khaki tote bag containing my own personally fitted emergency escape hood, provided by my employer against what one hopes is the unlikely event of an N.B.C. An N.B.C., as most readers know by now, is Homeland Security lingo for a nuclear, biological or chemical attack.
According to Mr. George (available at mike@relax7.com) in this 10-chapter, 384-page, quarter-pound paperback, the world is badly in need of more people able to ''focus on the positive when all around are inclined to reinforce the negative.'' While I endorse anybody's Miss America efforts to eradicate world stress, I have to admit to having difficulty putting the practices to work.
I tried the techniques, not all 1,001, but a handful from what reads like a self-help version of a Putumayo global-music compilation combining Buddhism, Hinduism, Freud and a soupçon of Dale Carnegie. I took the time today to throw open a window, to close my eyes, to utter a morning prayer. I would like to say I did a predawn meditation, but I actually faked that step while walking the dog. On the same stroll I found myself unconsciously multitasking by concentrating in a bleary way on the ''half light of dawn'' and also ''imagining six impossible'' things before I'd had my morning coffee.
Although results are always hard to measure, these all seemed reasonable and worthwhile ways to stay calm until I realized that three of the impossible things attached to overdue deadlines. Immediately, I ran to the deli and bought Diet Coke to get myself properly stoked on caffeine.
The book is loosely organized around the cycles of the day and the essential outposts of selfhood (body, job, home), hence of stress. It makes engaging reading if you have already finished organizing your sock drawers and paying the bills. To suggest that there is a politics built into such a project is perhaps beside the point. Yet it struck this reader that there is something suspect in advising people to pep up by ''wearing an exotic or unusual hat'' when a substantial number of Americans live in terror of losing their insurance, Social Security or Medicare benefits.
But never mind that. One can always ignore the creepy omens carried on the political winds and, as Mr. George suggests, watch a spider spinning. Or at least one can if one doesn't happen to live in a New York apartment where weekly visits from the exterminator make finding Charlotte's web somewhat of a chore. At any rate, you can indulge the unarguably beneficial effects of showering in the morning, bathing at night, putting on a freshly laundered white shirt and wearing clothes that fit.
Letting go is apparently at the core of stress reduction. If you want to stay mellow, you will have to relinquish your fury at what Mr. George calls ''the symphony of noise that penetrates your bedroom.'' That traffic outside, that bird song, those jackhammers are not really unwelcome racket. They are a ''wonderful random concert for which you have a privileged free ticket.''
Before the reader reaches for a sick bag, let me mention that I tried this thinking when a kook in the building next door started singing along with his Judy Garland records at 2 a.m. (''If happy little bluebirds fly, WHY, OH WHY, OH WHY CAAAAAAAN'T I?'') It helped. I also called the police and that helped, too, although they never arrived.
Since the next day was Saturday, I did not have to worry about nodding off at my desk. I was able to take a proper nap. There I was free to ''meet a friend in a dream,'' as Mr. George suggests. It was probably while networking in dreamland that I heard the mail drop into the box and, with it, the latest issue of Men's Health, a Rodale Press publication, one of the proliferating guy magazines whose formula for boosting ad pages is to induce a high level of anxiety in men about spreading middles, male pattern baldness and sadly diminishing erectile quality.
This issue featured an interview with Richard Branson, a boilerplate Q. and A. in which one exchange seemed so sensible as to trump all 384 pages of ''1,001 Ways to Relax.'' ''How do you maintain your energy level?'' the interviewer asked Mr. Branson, who replied with a simple antidote to stress.
''One thing that bothers me about America is that you get only two weeks of holiday a year,'' said Mr. Branson, the billionaire founder of the Virgin Group. Not only would the American economy be more efficient, he said, but there would probably be more overall creativity, productivity and plain old happiness if people relaxed by following an old European custom. ''Take time away,'' Mr. Branson said, ''to recharge.''
