MIKE FAGAN and Lisa Schreibman have a few relics from their apartment's last occupants: half a blood pressure machine, four doctor's nameplates, and an X-Ray light box, for which Mr. Fagan's sister kindly donated an X-ray of her own pelvis, kidney stone plainly visible.
Like many of the ground-floor apartments in the stone and brick buildings that line the stretch of Eastern Parkway in front of the Brooklyn Museum of Art, Mr. Fagan and Ms. Schreibman's began life as a grand single family unit. Built during Brooklyn's last boom time, in the 1920's, these had maids' rooms and pantries, delicate herringbone parquet floors and semiprivate entrances. (Their own apartment is in Turner Towers, built from 1922 to 1926; local legend says that its owner/builder, the Turner from whom the building took its name, leapt from the roof when the crash came in 1929.)
In any case, like the ground-floor apartments in full-service buildings in Manhattan, what came naturally for these units was not families but doctors. As the doctors have retired, a few families are moving in, making a circle of the social history of these apartments.
Todd Ernst, an architect, and Joan Tally, an urban planner, moved into a former doctor's office a year ago after a gut renovation to remove the warren of examining rooms -- there were 10 in 1,500 square feet -- and reconfigure the space into a two-bedroom apartment. Turns out the people across the hall, another urban planner and architect, had also colonized former doctor's offices.
AND when Ms. Schreibman, an urban planner, and Mr. Fagan, a social worker, were knee-deep in their own demolition and construction last summer, their neighbors, an architect and photographer, appeared with food and sympathy. ''They said, 'We know what you're going through, would you like some soup?' '' Ms. Schreibman said.
You'll note the professions of all these new residents are those that stress visual and spatial skills. ''I think for most people this kind of a project would be too daunting,'' Mr. Ernst said.
It was Mr. Ernst who beckoned Mr. Fagan and Ms. Schreibman to Eastern Parkway. Ms. Schreibman, 33, described a typical New York City domestic sequence that began in a studio apartment. ''When I turned 30 and people began to call me 'professor' '' she said, ''I felt I needed a bedroom. In Greenwich Village, where I was living, that was too much to ask. When Mike and I got married last year, we needed a two bedroom. But in Park Slope, where I was living . . . .'' You can see where this is going.
This apartment's doctors had long since decamped, but the unit still retained its commercial certificate of occupancy. ''That was a huge problem for most of the banks I visited,'' Ms. Schreibman said. ''They couldn't conceive of a mortgage for a commercial space that we would live in that was within a co-op.''
Fleet Bank, acting as a broker, was the only institution that would play, offering a variable rate on a $130,000 loan. The co-op was the seller, to whom Ms. Schreibman and Mr. Fagan paid $450,000 for 2,200 square feet. Unlike Mr. Ernst and Ms. Tally's apartment down the block (they paid $215,000 for 1,500 square feet, and spent more than $100,000 making it livable), the couple's apartment did not have to be reconfigured as much as it had to be opened up. The previous occupants had by and large used the original footprint: bedrooms were offices; a study and a dining room, examining rooms; the foyer was the foyer, and so forth.
There were service bells in every room. ''I kept ringing for the maid,'' Mr. Fagan said, ''but she never came.''
A building flood destroyed their second bathroom, which was nice because it was repiped and finished at the building's expense. The contractor was paid $100,000 to open up the center rooms into one huge living area with a kitchen, convert the small, existing kitchen at the rear into a utility room, refinish the floors, move and add plumbing, and completely rewire the space. Now, the apartment feels like a five-room house. Ms. Schreibman and Mr. Fagan painted closets and bought hardware, from faucets to the new kitchen, with a little help from friends.
''Our wedding presents were gift certificates from Home Depot,'' Ms. Schreibman said. A thank-you note fashioned by the couple sports two photographs: a wedding portrait straight out of Martha Stewart and, on the flip side, a snap of Ms. Schreibman and Mr. Fagan -- she still in her veil, hair still up and he in his tuxedo shirt, though both are wearing jeans -- at Home Depot, with Ms. Schreibman cradling a Delta faucet.
When a unit is converted from a commercial to a residential space, the law requires that one bathroom be wheelchair accessible. Compliance for Mr. Fagan and Ms. Schreibman had the happy result of allowing them to create a vast and luxurious marble-floored bathroom with a wide pocket door and granite-topped counter that stretches the length of the room.
The couple spent last summer at her parents' apartment on the Upper West Side. They moved in September, when one bathroom had been completed. Sadly, this was at the far end of the apartment, yards and yards away from their bedroom. ''So we had to put on our boots in the middle of the night if we needed to go,'' Ms. Schreibman said. The floors were done by October, a dust-producing activity that meant ''we could write our names in our clothes each morning,'' Mr. Fagan said.
''I had to dry-clean every item in our closet,'' Ms. Schreibman said.
The other night Mr. Fagan had a nightmare: the dead brown paint that had covered the area where the old kitchen was, the paint that had required four or five coats of white to hide it, had begun a stealthy reclamation. ''I dreamed a spot began to grow and grow,'' he said, wincing a bit at the memory.
When he awoke, sweating, in the middle of the night, he staggered into the kitchen to make sure his nightmare wasn't a reality.
For Valentine's Day last year, Mr. Fagan's gift to Ms. Schreibman was membership to the Brooklyn Botanical Gardens across the street. ''The thought was to butter her up for what was about to occur,'' he said.
On the Thursday before Christmas, the herringbone parquet floor shone, the walls of the kitchen were resolutely white, and there were two plump TV cushions, the kind with arms and stiff triangular backs, on the floor in a front parlor (there are two), rather hopefully placed in front of a television set.
Ms. Schreibman and Mr. Fagan were home that morning, waiting for a cable guy who never showed up -- their second attempt. By the end of the week, they had given up, and signed on for satellite television.
The gleaming maple dining room set was a gift from Mr. Fagan's parents.
''They moved to Hawaii, and the deal was, we'd store their things and in return we'd get the table and chairs,'' said Ms. Schreibman, opening a door to what she called the Fagan Family Closet. Mr. Fagan's sister's X-ray, said Ms. Schreibman, wasn't part of the bargain.
That was an added bonus, she said.
Habitats | Brooklyn  Correction:  January 11, 2004, Sunday  The Habitats column last Sunday, about converting a former doctor's office in the Turner Towers co-op in Brooklyn into an apartment, referred incorrectly to the death of the building's developer, Samuel S. Turner. He died in 1949 -- not, as local legend has it, by jumping from the roof in 1929.
