OFTEN, one salient event sums up why two people are meant for each other. In the case of Tanisha Nicole Tingle and Kenya Keith Smith, it was an eight-hour phone argument in 1993.
''It was one continuous call from 8 p.m. until 4 a.m., and we fought the whole time; it was like a nuclear war,'' said Mr. Smith, 34, who can't recall the topic but guesses it was politics. ''We have so many similarities, and yet so many different opinions.''
A healthy exchange of ideas, not to mention endurance, has always defined the relationship between Mr. Smith, an architect and real estate developer at the Athena Group in New York, and Ms. Tingle, who, starting next month, will work for the government in Washington as a political analyst specializing in Africa and the Middle East.
''Tanisha speaks five languages and reads thick books on foreign policy for fun,'' said Jacqueline Wilson, a college friend. ''She has this serious, sharp political mind that a lot of men would be threatened by. But she can also be giddy and girly.'' Mr. Smith is serious and driven, ''low-key, intuitive and empathetic,'' according to his friend Tiffany Dubin.
Mr. Smith said he had a feeling about Ms. Tingle from the time they first met in June 1992, when both had summer sales jobs at Fortunoff in Westbury, N.Y. ''She had this presence about her, a buzz,'' he said. He kept those feelings to himself, but when they returned to college that August, Mr. Smith to Howard University in Washington and Ms. Tingle to New York University, they exchanged phone numbers.
That Christmas, Mr. Smith called Ms. Tingle on a visit home to New York, and they got together as friends. The long-distance phone marathons began soon after. ''He was a great conversationalist, and we talked about everything under the sun,'' recalled Ms. Tingle, now 32. In addition to debating, they bonded over their common backgrounds: Both were only children raised by single mothers who pushed them to excel in school and to place their careers before everything else.
In early 1994, Ms. Tingle, then a senior in college, said she felt a spark of romantic interest while packing for a student trip to West Africa. ''I was stressing about what to wear,'' she said. ''Kenya sat with me for two hours, going over every outfit in my wardrobe, helping me decide what to take. I thought, Wow. He's a keeper!''
On Christmas Eve 1994 they became a couple, but the relationship was to remain a long-distance one. Ms. Tingle had just started a job at Salomon Brothers in New York and Mr. Smith was working as an architect at the Defense Department in Washington. As their monthly phone bills began to approach $800, it became apparent that this partnership was, indeed, a keeper.
''There was such comfort between them,'' said Tonie Davis, a longtime friend. Ms. Wilson added, ''Kenya allows her to glow and shine and be herself. He's warm and comfortable to be around.''
In January 1998, Mr. Smith found a way to shorten the distance, joining the Hillier Group, an international architectural firm, in New York. ''At some point that year,'' he said, ''Tanisha got wise and said, 'You know what? I need that ring.' ''
A year later, on Christmas Eve 1999, at Chez Es Saada, a Moroccan restaurant in Manhattan with low lighting and pulsating music, he proposed, rising with difficulty to one knee from the pillows on which they were seated.
For the next four years, school pre-empted wedding plans. A date in July 2000 was canceled because Mr. Smith was accepted into a master's degree program in real estate development at Columbia.
A Christmas 2001 wedding was canceled in the wake of 9/11 and because Ms. Tingle was studying for a master's degree in international affairs at Columbia (which she expects to complete in February). At least they were in the same city.
But when Ms. Tingle was offered a government job in Washington last spring, they decided to marry before she reversed their long-distance coordinates.
They settled on Christmastime again, marrying on Dec. 20 at the Christian Cultural Center in Brooklyn, where the Rev. William Pointer led the ceremony. Ms. Tingle's mother, Valerie Tingle, walked her daughter down the aisle. Later, at a reception at the New York Botanical Garden in the Bronx, the couple's 100 guests were greeted by a steel-drum player -- a nod to the couple's Caribbean heritages -- and by two large portraits of the couple, which resembled African masks.
''I get a warrior vibe from Kenya and a regal vibe from Tanisha,'' said Imar Hutchins, a friend of the bridegroom and the painter of the portraits.
When the moment arrived for a traditional child-parent dance, Ms. Tingle and her mother took to the floor, doing a samba to a Tito Puente number.
''I taught Tanisha Spanish and Latin dancing when she was 3,'' the bride's mother said. ''I danced on my mother's feet because my father was never around, and I taught Tanisha the same way.'' She added: ''I see Tanisha now coming into her fullness. The world is her oyster.''
WEDDINGS/CELEBRATIONS: VOWS  Correction:  January 25, 2004, Sunday  The Vows column on Jan. 4, about the marriage of Tanisha Nicole Tingle and Kenya Keith Smith, misstated the bridegroom's family background. While the bride's heritage is indeed Caribbean (Barbados and Jamaica), the bridegroom's family comes from Missouri and South Carolina.
