FOR Eric Rockwell and Joanne Bogart, brazen parody is the highest form of praise. As the creators -- composer and lyricist, respectively -- behind ''The Musical of Musicals: The Musical!,'' Mr. Rockwell and Ms. Bogart have turned their intoxication with show tunes and their creators into a parody parade.
The York Theater Company production at the Citigroup Center, which opened to enthusiastic reviews on Dec. 16 and runs through Jan. 25, tells the same story (poor June cannot pay her rent) in five set pieces, written in the style of different musical theater giants: Richard Rodgers and Oscar Hammerstein II (''Oh, what beautiful corn''); Stephen Sondheim (''The art of retribution/ Depends on execution''); Jerry Herman (''We all love a show tune/ The plot is not advancin'/ But so what? At least we're dancin' ''); Andrew Lloyd Webber (''It might sound just a teeny/ Like something by Puccini,/ But no, it's all brand new''); and John Kander and Fred Ebb (''Drink your wine/ Cause life's a cabernet'').
Ms. Bogart and Mr. Rockwell also perform as part of the show's cast of four, joining Lovette George and Craig Fols in end-to-end action, directed by Pamela Hunt, that sends Ms. Bogart up and down a ''Hello, Dolly!'' staircase and brings Mr. Rockwell out from behind the piano to huff and hoof as the evening's designated villain, a landlord variously named Jidder, Jitter, Mr. Jitters, Phantom Jitter and Jütter.
''Initially this was going to be a Rodgers and Hammerstein parody,'' Mr. Rockwell said, seated with Ms. Bogart out front in the Theater at St. Peter's Church after a recent performance. ''We wrote it in the BMI-Lehman Engel Musical Theater Workshop for our fellow songwriters. Then it just grew.''
Ms. Bogart asked rhetorically: ''Did we do a lot of homework? Yes! It took five years.''
Mr. Rockwell elaborated. ''We chose these particular composers and lyricists because we wanted to work with the strongest voices and the most opposite voices.'' His favorite section spoofs his idol, Mr. Sondheim. ''It was the most intricate and challenging in terms of music,'' he said. And what if the composer stops by for a look? ''I'd be excited and scared,'' Mr. Rockwell replied, ''just like Little Red Riding Hood'' in the Sondheim musical ''Into the Woods.'' Indeed, the characters in ''A Little Complex,'' the title of the Sondheim section, live in an apartment house called the Woods.
Ms. Bogart's favorite song in the show is ''Sell Your Body,'' which she performs in deep deadpan in the section that lampoons Mr. Kander and Mr. Ebb. Splayed across a bentwood chair à la ''Chicago,'' and employing a Teutonic accent à la ''Cabaret,'' Fraulein Abby sings: ''Eager men will pay your price/ When you're hot they spot it/ It's very special merchandise/ You sell it -- you still got it!''
Ms. Bogart and Mr. Rockwell, who are in their mid-40's, met in the chorus of a summer stock production of ''Camelot'' in 1987. He had arrived in Manhattan from the Lake Tahoe area of Nevada; she, from Queens, admittedly a shorter journey, ''but it still takes a while to cross that river.''
''We've done just about every one of the shows we're parodying,'' Ms. Bogart added, ''in regional theater or summer stock. Finally we decided to switch gears and join BMI as writers.''
Their last number in ''The Musical!'' is called ''Done,'' a parody of ''One,'' the famous finale in ''A Chorus Line'': ''It's over/Done/ For theater cognoscenti/ Done/ So we could pay the rent-y.''
Are they, in fact, done?
Ms. Bogart laughed. ''Now people are asking us: 'Can you do Lerner and Loewe?' 'What about Cole Porter?' ''
Mr. Rockwell shook his head. ''We've written a number of children's musicals,'' he said, including ''The Trials of Alice in Wonderland'' at the Tada! Theater last summer and a forthcoming ''David and Goliath.'' ''That's the good thing about children's theater,'' he continued. ''Those shows get produced. Now we need to write a book musical. For adults.''
THEATER Barry Singer's latest book, ''Ever After: The Last Years of Musical Theater -- and Beyond,'' will be published in April by Applause Books.
