Few things irk New Yorkers more than the rickety wall of news boxes that clog the sidewalks. But eight months after the city started enforcing a new ban, the City Council is mulling whether to revise the law, saying it might have gone too far.
At a Council hearing on Dec. 9, publishers of newspapers large and small, including The New York Times, complained that the ban violated their First Amendment rights.
The law bars news racks from crosswalks and other pedestrian areas, and requires that the boxes be clean and graffiti-free. In particular, the publishers say, the city has set so high a standard for cleanliness it is threatening their existence.
''In early June, we put out 400 plastic orange boxes, straight from the manufacturer,'' said Charles D. Colletti, the publisher and president of New York Press, an alternative weekly. ''Less than two weeks later, we were aware of 41 violations for having dirty boxes. You tell me how a box that is brand new is considered dirty.''
Mr. Colletti said he has since received 244 warnings and 175 violations. With a maximum fine of $500 for each violation, he could face a bill of $87,500. The bulk of the fines, he added, were for violations outside his control, such as graffiti and normal wear and tear.
''I might have to let people go,'' he warned.
Sal Caputo, the distribution manager for Manhattan Media, which publishes West Side Spirit and Our Town, a weekly for the East Side of Manhattan, said he had to remove half of his 200 news racks because of $25,000 in possible fines.
Some readers, he said, wondered if the two community weeklies had ceased publication.
From April, when the new rules went into effect, through early December, more than 2,940 warning notices and 2,349 violations were issued citywide under the ban, according to the city's Department of Transportation, which is responsible for enforcing it.
Iris Weinshall, the transportation commissioner, testified at the hearing that the law struck a fair balance between public safety and First Amendment rights, and objected to any tweaking of the legislation. ''Community groups and elected officials say that they are not seeing improvements in the streetscape quickly enough,'' she said.
Ms. Weinshall, however, surprised some observers when she referred to the untitled law as the Street Beautification Act of 2003. ''The City Council passed the law primarily for public safety,'' said Councilman John C. Liu, chairman of the Council's Transportation Committee. ''I think the portion of the law that deals with aesthetics will have to be amended.''
The primary author of the law, Councilwoman Eva S. Moskowitz, might disagree. ''The bill was not just about safety,'' said Councilwoman Moskowitz, who represents the Upper East Side, where news racks prompt some of the loudest complaints. ''The bill was also about order and civility on our streets.''
DENNY LEE
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK UP CLOSE
