COURTNEY LOVE -- There's a fine line between causing trouble and being in it, and over the last year the most dangerous woman in rock has seemed more like the most endangered. And yet her new single, ''Mono'' (available for download at www.courtneylove.com), is furious and passionate, overstuffed with ambivalent rallying cries and secondhand guitar riffs and incoherent snarls. In short, it's Courtney Love at her best. When she slips into the first-person plural (''We gotta smash it up/ You won't abandon us again''), it's not clear which troops she's commanding, but it's a thrill to hear her once more leading the charge.
BELLE AND SEBASTIAN -- This gentle (but petulant) Scottish indie-pop band sends up its own twee reputation with a witty new video, ''Step Into My Office, Baby.'' The song comes from Belle and Sebastian's current album, ''Dear Catastrophe Waitress'' (Rough Trade/BMG), a collaboration with the deft mainstream pop producer Trevor Horn. It's a perversely bright song, full of leering woodwinds and absurd workplace double-entendres: ''I'm pushing for a raise/I've been pushing, now, for days.'' Appropriately enough, the video is an old-fashioned sex farce, starring a window washer who finds more-than-willing partners wherever he goes. Watch it online at www.mtv.com/bands/az/belle_sebastian/artist.jhtml, or find it on the ''Step Into My Office, Baby'' CD single.
NELLY -- This rapper's new CD, ''Da Derrty Versions: The Reinvention'' (Universal), seems like a quick (and derrty) way to squeeze some more money out of his biggest hits. But it may also be the future: more and more stars seem to be figuring out that they can leverage their popularity by releasing a handful of CD's every year, some of which (like this one) may require only minimal involvement. In any case, ''Da Derrty Versions'' is better than it needs to be. Ron Isley sings on a silky new version of ''Pimp Juice.'' And for his bizarre, instantly likable remix of ''Ride Wit Me,'' the producer Jason Epperson borrows the tune and guitar line from John Mayer's recent light-rock hit ''No Such Thing.''
AGF -- AGF is Antye Greie-Fuchs, an intriguing electronic producer who seems to be obsessed with the sound of her own voice. Her new album is ''Westernization Completed'' (Orthlong Musork), a disc of fragmented poems and lush constellations of sound, packaged in a handsome hardcover book. (Find ordering information at www.musork.com.) Her previous album, ''Head Slash Bauch,'' included some whispered computer code; here words and ideas and rhythms and tunes dart in and out of the mix, often flickering for a while before they disappear.
DAFT PUNK -- This great French house duo has two appealing new releases. A DVD called ''Interstella 5555: The 5tory of the 5ecret 5tar 5ystem'' (EMI Video) contains a wordless, luminescent anime movie by Leiji Matsumoto; it's basically one long music video for ''Discovery,'' the last Daft Punk album. A new CD, ''Daft Club'' (EMI Music France), collects remixes of the sublime electronic pop songs from ''Discovery.'' Cosmo Vitelli takes the scrambled love song ''Face to Face'' and scrambles it some more, and the Neptunes add a trebly backbeat and a delirious falsetto chorus to ''Harder, Better, Faster, Stronger.''
CAN -- ''Can DVD'' (Mute), a package of two DVD's and one CD, simultaneously glorifies and demystifies this great German art-rock band. The group's strategy of laying leisurely explorations atop a steady funk beat was surprisingly prescient: a concert in Cologne from 1972 sounds as if it could have taken place last weekend, somewhere in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. A feature-length documentary focuses on the band members themselves, almost all of them oddly dressed and wildly pretentious. You hear them muse earnestly about the importance of rhythm in their compositions, then you see them play their minor dance-club hit ''I Want More,'' accompanied by a couple of dancers wrapped in gold lamé.
GOODIE MOB -- OutKast is more popular than ever, but the duo's grimier Atlanta cousins Goodie Mob never quite went mainstream. The group member Big Gipp released a strong, weird, all-but-ignored solo CD, ''Mutant Mindframe'' (Koch), over the summer. (It includes ''Boogie Man,'' a delicious collaboration with André 3000.) Now comes ''Dirty South Classics'' (Arista), a greatest-hits CD that should dazzle the uninitiated: there are conspiracy theories and love songs, skeletal electronic beats and smooth acoustic guitars. Perhaps nothing is more transfixing than ''The Experience,'' Cee-Lo's slick and witty disquisition on his (least) favorite racial epithet.
MUSIC: PLAYLIST
