IT'S still a tossup whether 2003 was a great year for movies. But there's no argument that it was one of the most gratifying years in recent memory for cinematography, and not just the eye-catching, high-contrast color gloss that often passes for great camera work but would be better relegated to press-on nails.
Much of the most impressive imagery was in some of the most provocative films. Gus Van Sant's ''Elephant,'' photographed by Harris Savides, was made in a style that could best be described as autumn-afternoon languorous: the camera pokes in and out of classrooms, hallways and school grounds, as if it were a student trying to catch up with a friend to borrow change for a Snapple at lunch.
''Elephant'' uses a stylized, near-square frame, the boxy aspect ratio that was standard for movies until the 1950's and that's more familiar to us today from television. This comfortable throwback framing mutes the tension of the movie's blood-rush subject, an ordinary day that ends with a massacre similar to the Columbine murders. The director and the cinematographer employ a lulling master plan to recreate the breeziness of a typical high school day. The images in ''Elephant'' are so plangently real that they become almost surreal, abstract. And given the outcome, the lovingly filmed sequences before the slaughter have the effect of heightening the tragedy without overloading the picture with cheap, exploitative dread.
Patty Jenkins and her cinematographer, Steven Bernstein, accomplish something similar with ''Monster,'' the dramatized version of the life of the serial killer Aileen Wuornos. ''Monster'' doesn't lapse into lurid, swooping camera moves in order to fashion a sensational scheme for sensationalized material. The movie delivers a subtler approach; the dank bar in which Aileen (Charlize Theron) meets her lover, Selby (Christina Ricci), has the drab, underlighted look of a place people crawl into in order to get drunk.
''Monster'' is informed visually by a bruised intimacy, and a similar quality -- close-quarters familiarity -- can be found in a romantic comic melodrama that's considerably less controversial: Sofia Coppola's ''Lost in Translation.'' There the intimacy emerges through Lance Acord's use of hand-held equipment to trail the dislocated American characters through their Tokyo adventures. The stylized camera work brings to mind a series of distracted journal entries, never intended for consumption by anyone other than the diary keeper. It's a tricky thing to evoke through the look of a film, but Mr. Acord manages it.
The art of providing an appropriately compelling look for little money seemed to be the order of the day among the independents in 2003. The Polish brothers' grim magic-realism tale, ''Northfork,'' was another case in point. It has a weathered, distressed appearance, but its cinematographer, M. David Mullen, also gave the picture a dense clarity, a visual counterpart to the mystical bent of the narrative.
The wizardly Mr. Mullen has attended to all of the Polish brothers' movies, conjuring a specific visual style for each. The nearly pointillist vibrancy of their on-the-road karaoke story, ''Jackpot,'' grew out of his masterly command of the digital video camera and his willingness to use it for its own strengths.
For the fablelike unfolding of Jim Sheridan's ''In America,'' Declan Quinn shifted from hard-grained harshness to an expressionist richness. And Eduardo Serra found a luscious film equivalent for Vermeer's paintings in Peter Webber's ''Girl With a Pearl Earring.''
Movies with bigger bankrolls appear to be appropriating the storybook visual charm of smaller, independent movies. In Gary Ross's ''Seabiscuit,'' John Schwartzman continued his move away from the lush, commercial punch in movies like ''The Rock'' and ''Pearl Harbor.'' He now feeds an appetite for more idiosyncratic films like ''Seabiscuit'' and last year's ''Rookie.'' He gave much of ''Seabiscuit'' the almost blurry warmth of family photo albums from the Depression. And he kept that soulfulness in the race track scenes, contrasting it with the pounding of hooves as the horses thunder toward the finish line.
John Seale also employed the idealized look of family pictures for Anthony Minghella's adaptation of ''Cold Mountain.'' It helped him bestow a period fullness on a film with overwhelming -- and overstated -- pictures that might otherwise have distanced the audience.
''Cold Mountain'' is concerned with distances both literal and metaphoric. It's an epic in which the expanses of woods, battles and snowscapes could have overshadowed the actors. Mr. Seale had to strike a balance. Mr. Minghella encouraged him to light the countryside in a way that communicated loss. Mr. Seale's triumph comes in evoking such visual poetry without ham-handedness.
Much of the invention lavished by cinematographers on the films of 2003 came in stories about displacement. The subject invited the camera toward tone poems that suggest emptiness. John Toll achieved this in Edward Zwick's ''Last Samurai,'' especially in the first battle scene, in which the precise and lethal samurai appear in the midst of a foggy, smoke-shrouded battlefield like a host of apparitions.
Last year cinematographers reached a similar level of stealthy accomplishment, serving the films they worked on instead of calling attention to their images.
FILM
