In a town where a woman can be held up at gunpoint for her Gucci loafers, as happened in downtown Manhattan a few years ago, shoes are more than mere commodities. They announce the banker before the business card, the fashionista before the Grey Goose martini.
And so it is not surprising that this world has given birth to Natasha Shapiro, a TriBeCa artist who paints portraits of New Yorkers' lace-up -- or slip-on or buckle-down or Velcro-shut -- alter egos. The worn sneakers and platform Mary Janes that she has committed to canvas often say as much about their owners as a silhouette.
''Shoes carry a person's history and take on the shape of their wearer,'' said Ms. Shapiro, 35, who this day was wearing jeans, purple nail polish and matching eggplant ''vegetarian'' Doc Martens obtained on special order from England. ''When you see a pair of empty shoes, you imagine the person who is not there.''
A year ago, Ms. Shapiro began making a request to fellow New Yorkers: Bring me your shoes. ''And pick the pair that is most you,'' not necessarily the ones that see the most pavement, she instructed.
''Just one pair?'' asked Brad Brown, a self-confessed Imelda Marcos of men's shoes. Mr. Brown heads the graphics department of a Manhattan law firm and plays bass in a jug band called Pork Chop ''when the group is in town.''
Mr. Brown considered a pair of beloved hand-me-down boots before settling on the second-hand cleats he had decorated with nail polish and glitter to wear on stage. ''I wanted to give fun shoes that are totally me,'' he said. ''Those are the ones.''
Ms. Shapiro's subject may be lowly, but she finds inspiration in the masters. For Mr. Brown's portrait, Ms. Shapiro was partly influenced by the van Gogh postcards taped to the walls of her studio. She also alluded to van Gogh's ''Pair of Shoes'' in her portrait of tan hiking boots, resting on a chair, that belong to Mimi Gross, a SoHo artist.
''The work shoes show a readiness of character,'' Ms. Gross said of the boots. But Ms. Shapiro also painted Ms. Gross's custom-made pink and orange loafers. That pair shows ''a kind of aesthetic,'' Ms. Gross said. ''Each pair represents a different aspect of me.''
But most of Ms. Shapiro's volunteers pick play shoes over work shoes as the symbol of their true selves. Jenny Davidson, a literature professor at Columbia University, chose the ''aspirational'' orange patent leather slides she saves for parties over her ''real'' shoes. Dena Michnowich, a social worker, selected high-altitude strappy sandals.
Miguel Sancho, a CBS News producer, chose the ''oxblood Beatle boots'' he co-opted from his father's shoe rack and often wore with a crimson sharkskin tuxedo jacket in his early days in New York. Jacqueline Shapiro, the artist's mother, chose the icy blue Givenchy heels she wore to meet Emperor Hirohito of Japan on his first visit to New York in 1975.
''I always loved the fairy tale aspect of shoes: Cinderella's glass slipper, Dorothy's ruby slippers,'' said her daughter.
MARY CHRIST
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: TRIBECA
