PETER MESKOURIS is clearly a ladies' man. Mr. Meskouris, 27, stood at his bar at H.K. at 523 Ninth Avenue last Sunday afternoon, talking with a pair of patrons: young women, one age 24 and the other ''six months older,'' as her friend explained, each wearing spaghetti-strap tank tops that revealed tiny, delicate tattoos.
Mr. Meskouris, a smooth, solid man who wears a diamond stud in each ear and has impeccably barbered eyebrows, invited them to his New Year's Eve party. The restaurant would be closed but open to ''friends and people we know,'' he said. The women sipped at the small straws in their collins glasses -- which didn't sound like ''no.''
But business is business. And Mr. Meskouris has business on his mind. H.K., which stands for Hell's Kitchen, is two weeks old. And Mr. Meskouris, his brother Alex and a cousin, Peter, scions of the Jackson Hole burger-joint enterprise, a family operation that includes nine restaurants, are $700,000 lighter. After 10 months of renovation, the three, who grew up together, have jointly opened H.K., a former bodega, above which Mr. Meskouris used to live. He said he started saving money for his own restaurant when he was 13, working for his father at Jackson Hole. The apartment upstairs is now a convenient couch and a shower for 12- to 18-hour days below.
Mr. Meskouris designed H.K., its menu and its drinks list, and he has adhered to the new cocktail bar, lounge and restaurant formula lethally, as only a 27-year-old could. The dining room is 21st-century diner style: industrial steel and gloss white, with a roll-up garage door that opens the restaurant to the street. Three flat-screen televisions electronically billboard the top of the bar. The menu is sun-dried, roasted and grilled. And the drinks list has a page of martinis, a page of specialty cocktails, 45 vodkas (including flavors), 18 tequilas and 7 single-barrel bourbons. It reads like a wine list.
Martinis include the most popular martinis that are not martinis to purists, like the reigning princess of the problem, the apple martini. Mr. Meskouris has two, apple and sour apple.
It's 2004, and the apple martini is here to stay. It's not a gin martini, but it's not a bad drink. It's tart when it should be sweet, and it presents well. It has a crisp, pale-cash liquidity that makes it look as if it's enjoyable to spend. Every cocktail is a charge against your time, and you learn quickly what not to order. Mr. Meskouris makes his apple martini with Berentzen's apple liqueur, a pricey schnapps that gives it a platinum edge.
Mr. Meskouris also managed the construction on H.K., down to the last square foot of concrete flooring. Last Sunday, living on the nerve energy of a new restaurateur, he insisted on a tour of the women's bathroom, which was beautiful.
A ladies' man clearly had a hand in it.
APPLE MARTINI  Adapted from H.K.
5 ounces vodka  2 ounces Berentzen apple liqueur  1 ounce Midori melon liqueur  slice of green apple, for garnish.
Combine liquid ingredients in a shaker with ice. Shake until chilled, then strain into an 8-ounce martini glass, and garnish with apple.
SHAKEN AND STIRRED
