If you see a diamond ring on the fourth finger of a woman's left hand, you probably know what it means: in America, this has long been the digit of choice for betrothal jewelry, and the lore of the trade traces the symbolism back to ancient times. But if you see a diamond ring on the fourth finger of a woman's right hand, you may or may not know that it signifies an independent spirit, or even economic empowerment and changing gender mores. ''A lot of women have disposable income,'' Katie Couric said recently on the ''Today'' show after showing viewers her Chanel right-hander. ''Why wait for a man to give her a diamond ring?''
This notion may be traced back, approximately, to September. That's when the Diamond Information Center began a huge marketing campaign aimed at articulating the meaning of right-hand rings -- and thus a rationale for buying them. ''Your left hand says 'we,''' the campaign declares. ''Your right hand says 'me.''' The positioning is brilliant: the wearer may be married or unmarried and may buy the ring herself or request it as a gift. And while it can take years for a new jewelry concept to work itself thoroughly into the mainstream, the right-hand ring already has momentum.
At the higher end of the scale, the jewelry maker Kwiat, which supplies stores like Saks, offers a line of Kwiat Spirit Rings that can retail for as much as $5,000, and ''we're selling it faster than we're manufacturing it,'' says Bill Gould, the company's chief of marketing. At the other end of the scale, mass-oriented retailers that often take a wait-and-see attitude have already jumped on the bandwagon. Wal-Mart's half-dozen or so right-hand offerings include the Keepsake Independence (''a shining symbol of your feminine spirit'') for $389. Costco, the discounter, doesn't advertise or even give names to its jewelry offerings, but it has experienced an increase of more than 15 percent in nonbridal diamond sales in the last few months that the chain attributes to the Diamond Information Center campaign.
The Diamond Information Center is the division of the ad agency J. Walter Thompson that serves the Diamond Trading Company, which in turn is the sales and marketing arm of the diamond giant De Beers. The center's Sally Morrison explains that the campaign came about partly because celebrities like Halle Berry and fashion-forward sorts were sporting the rings. This sort of thing is hard to gauge. Morrison says fashion runways were another early site of the trend, and one example she offers is the use of right-hand rings this spring by the designer Carmen Marc Valvo -- but that decision was actually made ''in conjunction'' with the Diamond Information Center, a spokesman for the designer says.
In any case, the other inspiration is easier to quantify: rings' share of diamond jewelry sales had slipped. Plus, only 14 percent of diamonds are self-purchased; there are more career women with money to spend, says Kenneth Gassman, a diamond-jewelry analyst, but ''they just haven't been spending it on diamonds.'' Focus groups, Morrison says, revealed ''a sort of superstition'' that a diamond ring should only be a romantic gift from a man. Thus the positioning of the right-hand ring as a ''signature style piece'' that ''liberated'' women from a taboo. (And if the woman's disposable income is high enough, maybe this is the birth of the bling finger.) Firms like Kwiat were given what Gould calls ''direction'' from the Diamond Information Center about the new ring's attributes -- multiple diamonds in a north-south orientation that distinguishes it from the look of an engagement ring, and so on. But all this is secondary to the newly minted meaning. ''The idea,'' Morrison says, ''is that beyond a trend, this could become a sort of cultural imperative.''
A tall order? Well, bear in mind that ''a diamond is forever'' is not a saying handed down from imperial Rome. It was handed down from an earlier generation of De Beers marketers. Joyce Jonas, a jewelry appraiser and historian, notes that De Beers, in the 40's and 50's, took advantage of a changing American class structure to turn diamond rings into an (attainable) symbol for the masses. By now, Jonas observes, the stone alone ''is just a commodity.'' And this, of course, is what makes its invented significance more crucial than ever.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-4-04: CONSUMED
