KYRA NICHOLS is 45. No, it's not exactly young for a ballerina. But for those who didn't experience the prime of George Balanchine and his New York City Ballet, Ms. Nichols -- with her luminous phrasing, regal presence and generous free spirit -- makes everything O.K. Though she is a mother of two, it is difficult to imagine she ever danced better than she does now. A native of Berkeley, Calif., she trained with her mother, Sally Streets, a member of the company in the 50's, before becoming an apprentice with City Ballet in 1974 and a principal in 1979. Now, just as the world is celebrating the centenary of Balanchine's birth, New Yorkers can honor Ms. Nichols, who will be dancing in several principal roles. In a recent conversation with Gia Kourlas at the company's headquarters at the Rose Building in Lincoln Center, she discussed age, dance after childbirth and the years she spent with Mr. B.
GIA KOURLAS -- What first appealed to you about ballet?
KYRA NICHOLS -- The pretty costumes, the applause, the lights. I used to put on shows in my parents' basement. Anybody who came to dinner had to watch.
KOURLAS -- How did you end up moving to New York?
NICHOLS -- I came to the School of American Ballet for three summers. At the end of the last one, they asked me to stay.
KOURLAS -- Was it overwhelming?
NICHOLS -- It was scary. In those days there were real stars in the company. You'd walk into the studio, and there was Patty McBride and Karin von Aroldingen and Merrill Ashley. Balanchine was teaching every day. That was very intimidating to me, to see the great George Balanchine in the studio. His classes weren't conventional. He was trying to teach us about the speed and ease of doing things. You wouldn't do a combination, but a lot of repetitions, where your legs would just burn. But if you did that in class, you would be able to do it onstage. You wouldn't have to think about it.
KOURLAS -- Did you realize what he was doing, or did it seem boring?
NICHOLS -- It seemed a little bit boring. But you know who would pull me aside and help me out? Jacques d'Amboise. I wasn't really understanding why we had to do 32 tendus. I was just sort of watching everybody and thinking, ''Oh, it's so wonderful.'' I wasn't incorporating it. And Balanchine was waiting for me to do that.
KOURLAS -- How did you know that?
NICHOLS -- I know that now. If I knew it then, I probably would have done it. There are a rare few who picked it up right away. Or caught his eye and had the look. As Balanchine once said in an article, I was a ''slow-baked potato.''
KOURLAS -- I read that dancers would get ''dolled up'' for Balanchine's classes. What did that entail?
NICHOLS -- He loved beautiful women. We used to wear pretty makeup, perfume, leotards with matching skirts, our hair neat. If you had a fresh flower, you'd put it in your hair. There was so much excitement going on at the theater, and you didn't know what was going to happen next. And he made a point that everybody was important. He wanted all the girls in the corps to stand out individually but in a line. Everybody tried to show that by looking nice.
KOURLAS -- How could you be an individual within the corps?
NICHOLS -- You'd do what he taught you, but you'd let your personality come out. Also he'd give you a role, and you were expected to go into the studio and work by yourself. It was the best thing for me. It would give you time to think of how you could do it within the restrictions of the choreography.
KOURLAS -- Your phrasing is so wonderful.
NICHOLS -- It comes from years of working on my own in the studio and also from watching in the wings. One of the hardest roles for me to adapt to was Suzanne Farrell's part in ''Diamonds'' because it's so her. The arm movements didn't feel right on me. I felt like I was acting, so I tried to simplify it. And that was O.K. with Mr. B.
KOURLAS -- I'll bet the wings used to be packed.
NICHOLS -- Oh, yes. I remember being one of the four corps girls in ''Chaconne.'' There was a part where Peter Martins would take Suzanne's head and fling it back, and we'd all run to the wings to see it and then get ready for our entrance. Those were moments that you'd just die to see.
KOURLAS -- You were very close to Jerome Robbins. When did you first start working with him?
NICHOLS -- Well, I thought he was never going to like me. I was never in his ballets. Then he picked me to do spring in ''Four Seasons.'' In our first few rehearsals our personalities clicked, and I don't know why. He was always very nice to me. I don't remember him ever yelling at me.
KOURLAS -- Do you get to choose which ballets you perform?
NICHOLS -- At this point, yeah. I've seen too many people dance past their prime, so I try to pick very carefully. Peter Martins has been so wonderful. If he insisted I be in the theater all the time and dance exactly what he wants, I couldn't do it. I would have hung up my shoes a long time ago.
KOURLAS -- How did you meet your husband, David Gray?
NICHOLS -- He worked in the press office. He had just started, and I was out with an injury. He heard that I had just broken up with my boyfriend, so he sent me roses, saying: ''I feel bad that you're out, and a lot of people are asking about you. Hope you recover soon. But if you have any free time and want to go have some fun, give me a call.'' I was like, ''Oh, he just feels sorry for me.'' But my mom was like, ''Call him.'' He finally bumped into me on the street, and he asked me out. We eloped four months later. And we've been married 13 years.
KOURLAS -- Having kids seems only to have improved your dancing.
NICHOLS -- It was the best thing that happened to me besides marrying David. It made me realize that my dancing's important, but not as important as I was making it. I had to come home and tend to my little one, so it didn't matter if I missed a double pirouette. But I do enjoy my dancing so much now. It's a time for myself.
KOURLAS -- How did you make the transition when Mr. Balanchine died?
NICHOLS -- It was very bizarre because we were all so used to him being there. I think it made us feel good dancing his ballets. It felt like he was still alive in us. I think we did that for a long time. At least I did.
KOURLAS -- His centennial marks something of a landmark for you, too. Were you looking forward to that?
NICHOLS -- I wasn't thinking about my personal goal of getting to 30 years. What appealed to me more was to dance the ballets one last time in such a concentrated way.
KOURLAS -- How has your body lasted this long?
NICHOLS -- Pilates has been the biggest thing for keeping me onstage, especially after having babies. It has made a world of difference in my dancing. I have so much more strength and flexibility than I ever had.
KOURLAS -- Do you have a plan about how much longer you'll dance?
NICHOLS -- I wish I could say. I keep saying, ''Oh, after that season.'' My goal is to get through these next two seasons and then see. There will probably be one performance where I'll go: ''O.K., that was it. See you later.''
KOURLAS -- It will kill everyone if you do that.
NICHOLS -- You know what I'm scared of? That I'll have a bad performance. And I'll go, ''Wait, can you bring all the flowers back up and let me do it one more time?''
DANCE Gia Kourlas is the dance editor of Time Out New York.
