Some time this month, leaders in Albany are expected to decide whether to once again limit where vendors can sell their wares in New York City. The vendors -- many of them disabled veterans who sell leather belts, perfume and other goods -- have been largely blamed for the overcrowding of Manhattan's sidewalks, especially during the recent holidays. Albany had allowed a previous vending law to expire in March and then failed to vote on a new one in time for the Christmastime crush.
Before they consider the issue once again, though, lawmakers should try to come up with a more thoughtful solution. While there are undoubtedly more vendors, particularly in Midtown, they are hardly to blame for New York's congested sidewalks. Nor is limiting their numbers year-round the humane response in a city with a rich history of helping those who have served their country well.
The issue goes back to 1894, when the State Legislature granted physically disabled veterans from the Civil War exemptions from municipal laws limiting hawking or peddling. The gesture has had a powerful impact ever since, benefiting soldiers who fought in the two World Wars, Korea and Vietnam. For most disabled veterans, there are better alternatives to working outside. But there have always been some whose wounds make it impossible for them to adjust to the formal economy. Through sidewalk selling, they have found a way to make a living.
Then in 1991, as soldiers returned from the Persian Gulf, Tom Cusick, the president of the Fifth Avenue Association, struck deals with city and state officials that in effect restricted the veterans' numbers in Midtown by making the most congested sidewalks, particularly those on major avenues, off limits. In exchange, the association contributed $400,000 to veterans' groups and agreed to offer jobs to every veteran holding a peddler's license at that time.
When the measure expired some nine months ago, more disabled veterans (nobody knows how many, but my own rough canvass shows 70 or so) began selling goods in Midtown. Along with them came sellers of books and artworks who, the courts and city law say, can set up on blocks where the veterans do. But even with them, the impact of vendors on the city's sidewalks was minimal, especially on major thoroughfares like Fifth Avenue.
A closer look indicates that the problems lie elsewhere. Consider the heavily traveled Herald Square area. Take a walk down the west side of Broadway between 33rd and 34th Streets, where there isn't a single vendor on the sidewalk (a parking lane there has been set aside for them). Nevertheless, this is one of the city's most congested blocks. Why? Start counting the large potted plants. There are 27 planters on the sidewalk there. Since the early 1990's, they have become the dominant strategy used by Business Improvement Districts to reduce the number of legal sidewalk spaces for vendors. Think of it this way: it's easier to install a planter than to fight a First Amendment battle against vendors and artists.
The strategy worked. But unlike some other policies by the Business Improvement Districts that have greatly enhanced city life, this one hasn't. It has made walking down the street difficult, especially since planters are just one of the many kinds of ''street furniture'' that increasingly dot blocks. News boxes and broken phone booths also eat up chunks of pedestrian space. Then there is scaffolding, which has proliferated over the past few years. It is supposed to stay up only for facade repair and construction, but often remains in place long after work is completed. Building owners can make money from the advertising posted to the scaffolding or cut costs by leaving it in place between different phases of projects.
Amid all this, vendors have been trying to wedge themselves into the remaining nooks and crannies, giving the false impression that they are the problem. Then the holidays arrived and with them came the throngs of tourists and shoppers. In the absence of any meaningful examination of sidewalk life, the vendors became the easy target among city officials and business owners who were concerned about overcrowding.
Let's hope the extra time the State Legislature is spending on the new law will allow everyone to think more clearly about the matter. As it stands now, though, things don't look promising. The proposal in Albany apparently seeks to keep the vendors off major avenues, approximately from 30th to 64th Streets, throughout the year. And this time around, there have been no high-profile reports indicating that the business community is offering either jobs or aid to disabled veterans in exchange for limiting their livelihood.
Lawmakers need to go back to the drawing board and come up with an overarching sidewalk policy based on a systematic study of current needs and uses. Much of the overcrowding can be solved simply by addressing the block-by-block narrowing of sidewalk space by street furniture. The city could also designate some parking lanes for vending, as it did between 33rd and 34th Streets. These moves alone can make walking down congested sidewalks less like an Olympic event.
One has to wonder whether state legislation is even necessary. By using those measures and by closing certain streets to peddlers during peak times of the holiday season, the city could effectively deal with the situation. In fact, most vendors want stable spots where they can work year-round. If congested areas like Rockefeller Center, the Empire State Building and the narrow crosstown streets around Grand Central Terminal were off limits around Christmas, the ban would discourage vendors from setting up shop there other times of the year.
No one is arguing to protect the scores of unlicensed vendors who sell counterfeit goods. But cracking down on them should not come at the cost of stripping away the longstanding right of disabled veterans to make a living. It's hard to imagine that state lawmakers would want to find themselves doing just that, especially at a time when our country is at war. With the number of seriously wounded in Iraq far higher than that in the first gulf war, is the most humane and prudent thing to limit their options before they even return home? Neither Albany nor City Hall can afford to underestimate this moment -- not just for the sake of disabled veterans but also for other vendors and artists who are carving out a living on the sidewalks of New York.
Americans often measure patriotism by how vocal our support is for our troops when they are fighting abroad. Perhaps the better test is what we do once they return home to face a future they never anticipated. This isn't the time to abandon them.
Op-Ed Contributor Mitchell Duneier, a sociology professor at Princeton and the City University of New York Graduate Center, is author of ''Sidewalk.''
