I KNOW I'm approaching nirvana when the kitchen catches fire.
''No, it's fine, really,'' I reassure my guests, gamely tossing a glass of water (after a panicked reach for olive oil) to douse the flames dancing from stove to parchment paper to cake.
It is Day 3 of the Perfect Week, as dictated by Rita Konig in ''Domestic Bliss: Simple Ways to Add Style to Your Life'' (Fireside). ''The perfect hostess,'' she instructs, ''makes everything seem like a total breeze (but does scream when she burns herself on the oven door).'' The cover of the book describes Ms. Konig, a London style specialist and domestic-advice columnist, as ''the Carrie Bradshaw of domesticity,'' and the book as ''a low-stress, high-fun way to entertain, shop, decorate and indulge your way to domestic nirvana.''
The last time I planned a party -- a year ago -- I was sent out of town the day before the event and had to beg a few hours off work just to attend. I have spent time and money making my apartment look nice, only to treat it very, very badly. The architect who renovated my kitchen teases me that he loved dropping by when I was away because the abandoned shoes splayed inside my front door greeted him like dozens of ladies waiting to dance.
Ms. Konig seemed to offer the possibility of order and fabulousness, all in 30 minutes or less. ''Most of us lead chaotic lives, with little time or space for luxury, or for fluffing around the house making it look fabulous,'' she writes. ''We need to learn how to gain the most benefit from the little free time we have -- and that involves really enjoying our relaxation time and making the best of life's chores.''
Simple, however, depends on definition. To follow Ms. Konig's prescription, it is not enough to light scented candles. You must match them to the color and purpose of the room. You must color-code your sweaters. Iron your sheets and pillowcases. (As she says, you don't want your bedroom looking ''like downtown Kabul.'') ''Make sure there is something delicious in the cupboard for those nights in when you are exhausted from a long week,'' pâté and caviar, for example.
Some things in the book I ignore: I will not line my lampshades in tobacco-colored paper. I will not go camping, because Ms. Konig insists it be done with linen sheets and an eiderdown. I will, however, aspire to the Perfect Week, even though it requires being the host to no fewer than four parties in seven days.
My transformation begins on a snowy Saturday morning. As instructed, I wake up and set about my housecleaning in my underwear and ''best high heels.'' Ms. Konig explains: ''It is much easier, and boys love it.'' She insists that two hours ''domesticating'' is more gratifying than working out at the gym. Climb enough step stools in three-inch slingbacks (boys, try it, too) and you will understand what she means. By afternoon, I have bought flowers and scented candles, making my apartment a veritable Covent Garden right down to the lavender sachet in the closet.
Sunday is easiest. Go to a movie or have a plate of spaghetti with a friend. Monday should be a cinch, too: bath, candles and a home-cooked dinner in front of a video. By the time I have rented the movie and taken the bath, I am too tired to cook.
Tuesday is the first of the parties. A spontaneous dinner for eight is not my idea of low stress, but Ms. Konig insists it can be: just pasta and salad, chocolate cake and coffee, and plenty of wine.
I leave work an hour early to shop and cook (this week, this is my job). The cake comes out of the oven with an hour left to go, and I begin to believe.
''It looks like the 'Queer Eye' guys were here,'' the first guest says suspiciously, noting the carefully stacked soaps in the bathroom, the candles twinkling everywhere.
Too busy trying to douse the fire in my kitchen with an attitude of zany charm, I wave it off when a guest spills red wine on my white dining chair. Such stains, Ms. Konig reminds me, are merely a reminder of a good night. Indeed, everyone wants seconds of everything. They stay until midnight.
For Ms. Konig, Wednesday should be reserved for a more formal dinner, and Thursday ''is the night to have a party if you are thinking of having one.'' (And who wouldn't be, having been host the two previous nights?) I cheat, however, and use those nights to attend other people's parties, which is probably a good idea because it is now my kitchen resembling Kabul.
Friday is meant to be spent at a hotel bar with friends, then ''see what happens,'' which in our case is beer and burgers somewhere far less polished. Saturday night must be a night out, so Ms. Konig recommends plenty of rest during the day, but also lunch out with a friend.
I have a quick lunch, abort plans to finish some work and rush to a wedding, where I had invited some guests to lunch at my house ''with the Sunday papers'' the next day (as per Ms. Konig's suggestion).
Thankfully, no one remembers to come, as I wake up with glands as sprawling and polluted as Los Angeles. My body, it seems, may not be quite ready for nirvana.
On Monday, however, (by which time the glands have become a fever) I get a whiff of the promised life when a few thank-you notes arrive saying how much they enjoyed Tuesday's dinner. ''How stylish my friends are!'' I think, and immediately start making mental lists of guests for more parties.
Do I really have to color-code my sweaters?
