Late one Tuesday evening, Joe Ednie sat on a stack of TV supplements from France-Amérique, a New York-based French publication, and surveyed the buzz of activity in the loading dock of Stellar Printing in Long Island City, Queens. ''The amount of newspapers that exists is staggering,'' said Mr. Ednie, a foreman at the plant.
Indeed. A few steps away, the distribution manager of an English-language Jewish paper called Hamodia chatted with the distribution manager for a Yiddish newspaper, Der Yid. Elsewhere in the building, a team of Mexican workers operated one of the company's five presses, churning out, in the following order, the American edition of the Albanian paper Bota Sot, the New York-based English-language newspaper Muslims, and what was for them the evening's highlight: Diario de México.
The publications stuffed into the recycling bin represented so many nationalities that the container looked as if it had been rescued from an Olympic village.
Stellar is not the only press in New York that specializes in community and ethnic newspapers, but like the rest, it is one of those ''only in New York'' businesses; it publishes about 100 newspapers, in at least a dozen languages: Spanish, Chinese, Korean, Hindi, Russian, Portuguese, Romanian, Bulgarian, Yiddish, Hebrew, Arabic and Turkish. Ken Akulin, 59, previously ran a printing company in Chinatown, using the presses of a Chinese-language paper during its idle hours. Eighteen years ago, Mr. Akulin and two partners founded Stellar on Ninth Street in Long Island City. Stellar runs seven days a week, 24 hours a day, printing ethnic and community newspapers. Most of them, whether thriving institutions like Novoye Russkoye Slovo, the city's only Russian daily, or publications that fail after one issue, have circulations of 1,000 to 50,000 copies.
Although many immigrants now get the news from home online, the local ethnic press is thriving. In New York City, for example, there are about 300 ethnic newspapers, according to Abby Scher, director of Independent Press Association-New York. ''When we first heard about the Internet,'' Mr. Akulin said, ''everybody said, 'This is it; we're out of business.' But in fact there has been a boom.''
The reason: the ease of importing timely news from abroad. ''You have someone on that side that sends you stories, and you put it together on a Mac,'' he said. ''Two or three people can put together a daily newspaper.''
Technology has also made it easier to process foreign scripts, although there is still the danger that text will be printed in mirror image. To avoid this, workers look for page numbers or the few English words that appear, often in ads, to make sure that pages are in the right order and are not mirror images.
The workers themselves, however, must still interact with a dizzyingly polyglot clientele. Simplified English and hand signals are useful; it also helps that everyone is in the same business. ''You know how it is when you go to a foreign country and you're hungry?'' Mr. Akulin said. ''That's how it is. No one is talking philosophy. They say, 'I want it red.'''
The diversity also brings a reminder of American liberties. When immigrant publishers ask Mr. Akulin where to get their government permit to run a newspaper, he gives them a quick lesson on freedom of the press.
The only thing he won't do is print pornography, but only because someone down the block does it cheaper. ''And you can't talk about the violent overthrow of our government,'' he said. Then he backed off. ''If you do, you pay cash.''
SETH KUGEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: LONG ISLAND CITY
