On Wednesday at midnight, the venerable New York subway token completed its final circulations through the city's turnstile system. Its birth and death dates are now set: 1953, when 48 million were minted, each one good for a 15-cent ride, to 2003, after which the token was replaced by the MetroCard.
Compared with the flexible MetroCard, the token was dumb. But it had a totemic durability, even as it passed through seven styles, from the original with the small cutout Y to the more recent brass and metal alloy bull's-eye.
Ric Grefé, the executive director of the American Institute of Graphic Arts, an advocacy group for good design that has an office on Fifth Avenue, spoke to Jim O'Grady about the loss of this symbol of the city.
''What there is to lament is that there are very few enduring icons of urban culture. The token was one. Although it may not seem like an extraordinary aesthetic object, it was something that was immediately recognizable.
''There are very few objects that have that kind of branding. It was ahead of its time. Branding became an important concept in the 70's and 80's, when the token already had worldwide recognition. It generated a visceral response. Nobody ever mistook a New York City token for a São Paolo token. Nobody ever said, is that a Denver token?
''Its image was sustained because it was used over and over again. There are very few brands that have had this enduring impact. Nike is certainly a global brand. The Ford logo, dating to the 20's, is another because they never changed the script. The Yankees logo. General Electric. I.B.M.
''But there is very little in the public sector to rival those identities in the way that the token did, except maybe the American dollar bill. With the token, as with the greenback, the object is the brand. For a while, you could go to the Transit Authority shop in Grand Central Terminal and see the token in a museum case, which is pretty shocking because you could also go downstairs and buy the thing for $1.50.
''One recent token had steel in the middle. But the token was best when it was a single piece of brass, especially the one with the 'Y' punched out of it. That's when it had design integrity.
''There's a term in the restaurant business, when you pick up a melon, that 'it gave good weight.' Well, the subway token gave good weight. It did not feel trivial. It was of a scale that when you reached in your pocket, you could normally distinguish it from the other coins in there. Its sustainable reuse was pretty impressive.
''And now it's gone. The demise of the token is part of the end of an era of everyday objects. Soon the only brassy artifact of New York culture will be the attitude itself.''
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: NEW YORK OBSERVED -- AN APPRECIATION
