MUTUAL fund fees have been a sore subject. So when Alliance Capital Management recently settled government complaints of improper trades in its funds by agreeing, among other things, to cut its fees, many investors probably cheered.
Fund fees, after all, have been rising in general, and the industry has been racked by scandals arising from the practice of allowing some well-connected customers to trade at the expense of others.
But before taking too much solace from the idea that fund expenses are at last under attack, remember Freud's self-serving perspective on fees: he regarded them as therapeutic, because a paying patient had an incentive to take therapy seriously and to get better sooner. Believe it or not, mutual fund fees are therapeutic, too. We might be better off if they were higher.
That's because the lofty fees and expenses of actively managed funds encourage investors to put their savings into low-cost, passively managed index funds. The evidence that more investors should be indexing is overwhelming. Index funds, which robotically seek to duplicate the returns of an index like the Standard &amp; Poor's 500 or the Wilshire 5000, regularly produce better returns than the vast majority of stock funds. While some funds beat the indexes now and then, hardly any do so consistently over the long run.
Consider that the average expenses for domestic stock funds run about 1.5 percent annually; index funds often charge just 0.25 percent or less. That is a difference of 1.25 percentage points, year after year.
Even if active managers moderate their fees, they are unlikely to erase all or even most of the cost advantage of index funds, and that is to say nothing of all the trading costs now buried in fund returns. Index funds, by contrast, trade very little.
Because they have low portfolio turnover, index funds are also more tax-efficient. Generally, they generate fewer taxable gains for their investors than do funds that trade more often but generate the same pretax return. As the saying goes, what counts is not what you make, but what you keep.
Indexing also costs less in investor effort. An index investor decides how much of his portfolio belongs in stocks and then parks that amount in an index fund. Choosing among the thousands of actively managed funds, by contrast, requires a considerable chunk of time. That might even discourage investment in the first place, which would be bad for investors and the economy. The data suggest that most of that research time would be wasted anyhow: past performance is a poor indicator of what's to come, and the hot fund of today may become tomorrow's dud.
I suspect that index fund investors are also less likely to trade among funds, a practice that does little to bolster returns. And indexing makes diversification easy. Choose a Wilshire 5000 index fund, for example, and you automatically get large companies and small companies, value stocks and growth stocks, in one easy step.
Raising the fees charged by actively managed funds -- perhaps by means of a tax -- might even raise overall investment returns by sending more investors scurrying for the cover of index funds. The challenge is to persuade investors to pay enough attention to fees.
The right approach is to emphasize disclosure. The more investors know about high fees, the more likely they are to turn elsewhere.
When there is full disclosure, the Securities and Exchange Commission doesn't have to worry about fund directors justifying their fees. Investors can look at all the data and decide for themselves whether paying the fees is better medicine than avoiding them. Higher fees on actively managed funds may help investors make the right decision: to take their money and run for the nearest passively managed index fund.
ON THE CONTRARY Daniel Akst's column tilts at conventional business wisdom and appears the first Sunday of each month. E-mail: culmoney@nytimes.com.
