IN ''House of Sand and Fog,'' the new film based on Andre Dubus III's novel about an Iranian family struggling to re-establish itself in northern California, Shohreh Aghdashloo plays Nadi, the wife of a former colonel in the Shah's military (Ben Kingsley). Like Nadi, Ms. Aghdashloo, 51, fled Iran during the revolution and ended up in California. Yet while Nadi is more seen than heard in the movie -- bowing her head in deference to her husband, scuttling out of the room -- Ms. Aghdashloo is an outspoken feminist and political commentator, who for 10 years was host of an opinion show on the Los Angeles-based Iranian television station, Jaam-e-Jam. Although she has a long history in Iranian theater and film, ''House of Sand and Fog'' is her first major American feature. Last month she spoke with Nicole LaPorte, a film reporter for Variety, over coffee in Los Angeles, where Ms. Aghdashloo has lived since 1987.
NICOLE LaPORTE -- What was it like during the 1970's in the Tehran Drama Workshop, where you got your start?
SHOHREH AGHDASHLOO -- We were a pretty provocative crew. We did Jean Genêt's ''The Maids'' with the women wearing bodysuits. The audience could not believe we were wearing leotards with short skirts -- you can imagine the atmosphere we were working in. It took the West 400 years to get from Shakespeare to Pinter. We didn't have Shakespeare. We jumped into Pinter.
LaPORTE -- What happened to the workshop during the Islamic revolution?
AGHDASHLOO -- Something you see in ''House of Sand and Fog'' is a trait of all Middle Easterners: saving face. So we tried to save our face. We tried not to listen to the people shouting in the streets, burning the shah's picture, and kept going to the drama workshop every morning. We had a routine: dancing first, working on our bodies and then rehearsing the play of the day. One morning I went to the workshop, and I saw the door was blocked with cement. That was in 1978. They had put bricks into the cement. Right at that moment I decided to leave Iran. I knew that if they had closed this door on me with cement it meant forever.
LaPORTE -- Where did you go?
AGHDASHLOO -- There were rumors that the Ayatollah was going to come to Iran, so the prime minister had closed the airport. We drove from Iran to Turkey, Turkey to Yugoslavia, Yugoslavia to Venice, Venice to Calais, Calais to London. I knew London. My mother used to take me to London and leave me with these old ladies who taught me how to say pleasantries in English. ''How are you?''  ''I'm fine, thank you.''
LaPORTE -- What did you take with you?
AGHDASHLOO -- We couldn't take too much, otherwise they would have thought, ''Hey, you have a suitcase, where are you going?'' I brought a few pictures, the first dress I wore on stage as Strindberg's Madame X, some jumpers -- it was cold, February -- and my jewelry. The jewelry was my bride's savings. It had been given to me by the members of my family on my birthdays and at the time of my first marriage. The minute I arrived in London I went to a pawn shop and traded it for a good price -- £13,000. About $20,000.
LaPORTE -- That must have been painful.
AGHDASHLOO -- Honest to God, no. It saved my life. It made me a different person.
LaPORTE -- In England you got your degree in international relations and gave up theater. What brought you back to the stage?
AGHDASHLOO -- I wanted to become a journalist in order to become more educated and find out what was really going on. But after three years what I learned was that I knew nothing. When I graduated we had a big party and a friend of mine from Iran, a playwright, said he'd written a new play with a lead in it for me. It was about an Iranian man who is accused of being a member of the shah's elite circle and therefore his life is in danger. I found it really moving and thought that maybe through acting I could be more useful and make the media pay more attention to what was going on in Iran.
LaPORTE -- What brought you from London to Los Angeles?
AGHDASHLOO -- We took the play on tour, and one night in L.A. we went to see another play by someone else who had worked at the drama workshop. I fell in love with the play and the playwright, my husband Houshang Touzie. I was a bit afraid to get myself involved in marriage, family. I wanted to fight, for women's rights, human rights. But I realized he was like me. When I arrived back in London, his postcard was waiting for me by the door. It said ''bia'' (''come'') about 500 times. I still have it. I immediately returned to L.A. That was in 1987.
LaPORTE -- Before leaving Iran you played the lead in Abbas Kiarostami's film ''The Report,'' and you've appeared in a number of Iranian plays and films since. But until ''House of Sand and Fog'' your American work has been limited to roles like playing the foreigner working at a dry cleaner on ''Matlock'' or in little-seen indie movies. Has that been frustrating?
AGHDASHLOO -- No, I'll tell you why. In Iran we have a spiritual path. The Sufi path is a journey you need to travel through, but at the same time you know that you are always going through phases and that those phases are not forever. You have to focus on doing the right thing and realize that you're just going through a phase. Therefore I never felt offended.
LaPORTE -- Are there roles you refuse to play?
AGHDASHLOO -- A terrorist. I think all these TV series and movies which are being made by people in the United States who are sophisticated and educated, they're teaching terrorists how to make a bomb. My agent says, ''Well, Shohreh, usually cinema imitates life.'' I'm still against it. I still say better not made.
LaPORTE -- Had you read the book ''House of Sand and Fog'' before you got involved with the movie?
AGHDASHLOO -- I used to watch Oprah at 2 p.m. On her book club, two, three years ago, she mentioned this book and said: ''Buy two copies. One for yourself and one for your friend.'' I bought one for myself and one for my friend Zha Zha. We've been friends for 30 years. When I read it, I was in awe of this non-Iranian author and how well he had absorbed the culture. I told my husband that it would be really unfair if one day they made a movie out of the book and did not give me the role of Nadi. My husband said, ''Stop dreaming, Shohreh, they're not going to make a movie.''
LaPORTE -- As an educated, outspoken Iranian expatriate, how do you relate to the role of a subservient, traditional wife in ''House of Sand and Fog''?
AGHDASHLOO -- Although I have not lived the same way, unfortunately, I have witnessed, I still am witnessing, women like Nadi -- not only in Iran, but in England and the United States -- traditional wives who have been brought up to marry as soon as possible, to obey their husbands, dedicate themselves to family life. In other words, to have no life of their own. I am pretty familiar with the portrait.
LaPORTE -- Censorship laws have loosened somewhat since President Mohammad Khatami's election in 1997, which has affected how women are portrayed in movies there. Negin Nabavi, who teaches Iranian film at Princeton, recently said that Iranian cinema has become one of the most important outlets for challenging the status of Iranian women. Do you agree?
AGHDASHLOO -- I praise Iranian filmmakers for what they do today. Making movies under heavy censorship is not an easy task. But I'm afraid I'm not satisfied with these shallow changes on the surface. I am seeing more and more women in the film industry in Iran, but the truth of the matter is that a woman who is bound to wear the veil and wear gloves -- let me put it this way: when you wear a scarf, your hearing is worse than when you are not wearing a scarf. And when you are worried about your scarf, and it not showing your body, how can you possibly concentrate 100 percent on what you're doing?
FILM
