''THE word metrosexual is not going to appear in this article, is it?'' David Matthews asked, his voice rising warily. For good reason. Mr. Matthews, a 36-year-old screenwriter from Baltimore, is no Wall Street peacock slathered in face cream and bronzer; nor is he an obvious candidate for a television makeover. Dressed in an understated argyle sweater and jeans on a recent shopping expedition to Dinosaur Designs in Lower Manhattan, he stood transfixed by the contents of a jewelry case.
''This is my first foray into jewelry; I don't generally believe in it,'' Mr. Matthews confided. Nevertheless, there he was slipping on a chunky silver ring. ''This is very male without being macho,'' he murmured appreciatively. ''It doesn't seem like jewelry at all.''
Mr. Matthews is one of a growing number of American men who have lately overcome a psychic allergy to jewelry, expanding their repertory far beyond the tie bars and cuff links their fathers might have worn. According to jewelry store owners surveyed by the Jewelers' Circular Keystone Group, the publisher of Luxury International, a jewelry trade magazine, 18- to 30-year-old men are increasingly supplementing traditional items with more adventurous conversation pieces: outsize rings, bracelets and pendants in unorthodox materials like titanium mixed with leather and wood.
Stylistically these men span the extremes, ''from the Masters of the Universe, who still find expression in cuff links and watches, to creative types who've abandoned tradition and love the funk factor of pendants or bracelets,'' writes Carrie Soucy, an editor, in the Fall 2003 issue.
Though the time frame is too short to yield meaningful sales figures, some New York retailers report that the number of men buying jewelry for themselves has climbed sharply in the past year, with sales especially robust in the mid-priced category, from several hundred to several thousand dollars. ''More men have been coming in just in the past several months, to purchase silver bracelets or necklaces for themselves,'' said Katja Steffes, the manager of the Versani shop on Mulberry Street.
Magazines focusing on young male style are also featuring more jewelry than they have in the past. ''Nothing is off limits -- and these days that extends to jewelry,'' said Alan Katz, the publisher of Cargo, a new shopping magazine directed at men. Along with electronic gadgetry and other more conventional categories, the magazine's premiere issue in March will highlight baubles for men. ''Clearly more guys think that's O.K.,'' Mr. Katz observed.
Many younger men now flaunt diamonds without fear of being branded a Tony Soprano, or at the other extreme, a fop.
Some get their courage from a roster of new role models. ''Justin Timberlake and David Beckham -- they represent a whole genre of people with a subtle way of wearing jewelry that demonstrates, 'I can be cool and still wear diamond studs,' '' said Joe Zee, the editor of Vitals, an upscale competitor to Cargo to make its debut next fall (like Cargo, it will be published by Advance Publications, the owners of Fairchild and Condé Nast). ''These guys may not represent a populist majority,'' Mr. Zee conceded, ''but their numbers are rising.''
Male advertising executives, artists and athletes are among those gravitating to stores like Works Gallery on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. ''We try to treat them as a separate animal,'' said Whitney Boin, whose rings are showcased at the store. ''We're introducing black diamonds mixed with rubber or leather, things that take jewelry out of the women's domain.'' At Objets du Désir, a jewelry boutique in downtown Manhattan, Soledad Lowe, an owner, said, ''Rockers and surfers like our bracelets and sculptural pendants, but we also see the guy in the nice Gucci suit who decides to spice up his look with a funky ring.''
Her husband, Justin Lowe, 33, is typical, a dapper hedge fund manager who rarely leaves the house without his platinum wedding ring, wide as a cigar band. He makes his selections with a connoisseur's eye, amassing rings the way some men collect wines, favoring weighty pieces in worked silver with black rubber accents. So far his choices have raised no eyebrows, Mr. Lowe said. ''But women notice them a lot.''
Jeffrey Lu, 23, a medical research technician from Boston, is just as discerning. Mr. Lu wears a black ear hoop made of 14-gauge titanium wire. ''I deliberately asked for a heavier wire -- I wanted something with real meat to it,'' he explained. And it didn't hurt that the color matched his hair. ''The statement is subtle, not flashy'' Mr. Lu said. ''It reflects my own security.''
