LAST year was great for stocks and good for bonds.
Robert D. Arnott, manager of the $1 billion Pimco All Asset fund, is not pessimistic about the stock market's prospects this year. But he likes other types of assets better.
Last week, he talked about his views of 2004 and beyond. Following are excerpts from the conversation:
Q. The All Asset fund is up about 30 percent since its start 17 months ago. Where have you been making money?
A. We have had a bond tilt. Not a tilt toward mainstream Treasury and corporate bonds, but toward the Treasury's inflation-protection TIPS bonds, as well as emerging-market debt and high-yield junk bonds. And we have made some timely shifts in and out of stocks.
When we started the fund, our equity position was under 5 percent of the portfolio. When stocks fell off a cliff in August and September of 2002, we went up north of 20 percent. Currently, our stock allocation is between 20 percent and 25 percent. But we are not allowed to go above 50 percent.
Q. Has the easy money been made in both the stock and bond markets?
A. Stocks have rallied very handily since a year ago in October. By the same token, emerging-market and high-yield bonds have similarly soared. So there are not as many easy decisions now as there were a year and a half ago. The low-hanging fruit has been picked, and we are left with a more spare roster of investment choices.
Q. What continues to attract your interest?
A. I have had a longstanding enthusiasm for the Treasury's inflation-indexed bonds. I also think emerging-market bonds look very promising, partly because they offer a material yield premium compared to developed-country debt of comparable maturity, and partly because these countries remain heavily dependent on commodity prices, which have been rising. The risk of default by these countries is much less now than it was three years ago.
Q. That sounds pretty defensive. Do you think the stock market is poised for a big drop in 2004?
A. I don't think the bull market we have been in is necessarily over, and I wouldn't be surprised if the stock market rallied further. But we are well over halfway to the top of this bull market.
I think 2004 will probably be a reasonably benign year because the economy is going to be fine. The Federal Reserve and the Bush administration will do their best to hold everything together through the election and will continue to flood the economy with liquidity.
Q. Do you see the decline in the dollar as a risk to the fixed-income or equity markets?
A. I am less worried now about the dollar than I was a year ago. The plunge in the dollar relative to the euro has brought it to sensible levels.
Q. What are your longer-run concerns?
A. I see four risks for equities over the next 10 to 20 years.
The longest-horizon risk is demographics: baby boomers will be liquidating assets to pay for goods and services in retirement.
Valuation is a second risk. By any conventional metric, the market is not inexpensive: $100 invested in stocks today buys you $3 to $4 of earnings, or a P/E ratio of 25 to 30. That is not a lot, especially when you can get $5 of income from a government bond.
Third, the risk premium of stocks relative to bonds is a problem. Right now, stocks yield 1.5 percent, while inflation-protected TIPS yield 2.4 percent. Historically, stocks have had the advantage that dividends and earnings grow about 1 percent faster than inflation. That means that if stocks and TIPS have the same yield, which they don't, stocks should do a bit better than TIPS.
The last risk is the most immediate: the quality of corporate earnings is poor.
The average corporation is assuming an 8.5 percent to 9 percent return on its pension assets at a time when bond yields are around 5 percent and stock yields are around 1.5 percent. That is an unrealistic assumption.
The expensing of management stock options is probably coming, and that will not be free. To pretend they will cost nothing is flat wrong.
And, in general, accounting at most companies is aggressive.
Add all of those things up, and about 30 percent to 40 percent of today's earnings are fictitious. I think people are waking up to this.
Q. Are there any areas of the stock market that you like?
A. Stocks which have a good yield have been ignored, and look interesting. On a long-term, secular basis, drug stocks look interesting. Because of the yield, companies in the utility sector are interesting. And companies in basic industries are still interesting. That said, I would underweight equities broadly. I think a somewhat cautious posture, with broader portfolio diversification than normal, makes sense.
MARKET INSIGHT
