Travelers headed to countries affected by last year's SARS outbreak should not count on travel insurance for a refund if the disease reemerges and they decide to cancel their trips. So far, Taiwan has confirmed one patient who has developed the illness this winter, a SARS virus researcher who is believed to have contracted it at work.
Although travel insurance policies that provide medical benefits would typically cover a policyholder who contracted SARS while traveling, representatives of insurance companies said canceling a trip altogether would not be covered.
''Anyone who contracted SARS, it would be an illness and they definitely would be covered,'' said Christina Hopper, president of The Berkley Group, a travel insurance provider. But that would not generally be the case, she said, ''if someone is canceling because of fear due to SARS.'' The exception, she said, would be some policies the company sells through cruise lines giving customers the option to cancel for any reason and receive credit toward future travel.
Dan McGinnity, a spokesman for Travel Guard, in Stevens Point, Wis., said that in some situations, trip-interruption benefits would apply. ''Let's say you were quarantined and there were additional expenses,'' he said, such as missing your flight home or running up travel expenses because of an extended stay. ''Any additional expenses you incurred as a result of being quarantined would be covered under the policy.''
That doesn't help Dr. Albert Lowenfels, a professor of surgery at New York Medical College in Valhalla, N.Y. He is scheduled to give a speech at a conference in Shanghai in July, and considered buying travel insurance in case the meeting is canceled because of SARS. ''It seems like this would be a reasonable thing to insure against,'' Dr. Lowenfels said, but he discovered insurance would not apply if he canceled his trip.
Jim Grace, president of Insuremytrip.com, which sells travel insurance policies from multiple companies, said he was not aware of any company that will cover trip cancellation due to concerns about SARS. ''It takes a while for things like that to filter into policy wording,'' he said. ''It's a very tough thing to price and make an underwriting judgment on -- they have no data.''
SUSAN STELLIN
TRAVEL ADVISORY
