THE luxury housing market on Long Island appears to know no bounds and prices are soaring, according to builders and real estate agents on the North Shore, where most of these homes are sold. These days, they say, a $1 million house may not make it into the luxury category.
''There doesn't seem to be an end to where the numbers are going,'' said Clifford Fetner, the owner of Jaco Custom Builders in Hauppauge. ''Despite the economy, it doesn't seem like the real estate market will come crashing down. Where the top is I don't know.''
''In the past two years the market has skyrocketed, and it's all driven by the price of land,'' said Mr. Fetner, who builds homes primarily on the North Shore in Nassau County. ''To stay in this market, you have to pay the price.''
In the North Shore area, historically called the Gold Coast, where large estates were created in the early 1900's from Great Neck to Huntington, the prices of buildable lots can range beyond $4 million, real estate agents say.
Daniel Gale Real Estate, a Huntington-based company with 14 offices in Long Island, eight of them in Nassau County, primarily sells in North Shore communities between Manhasset and Stony Brook, where home sales average $827,000. The company, which is the North Shore affiliate of Sotheby's International Realty, recently published its first luxury market report.
From Jan. 1 to Sept. 30, 2003, the report says, 234 homes were sold for more than $1.5 million each in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, compared with 140 in the corresponding period of 2002. The highest price, in Centre Island, was $7.75 million; a year earlier, the top price was $6.2 million for a property in Lattingtown.
Using $1 million as the starting point for the luxury category ''doesn't really do it any more,'' said Patricia J. Petersen, the president of Daniel Gale. ''The results would be even more startling if we had kept it to $1 million.''
Mr. Fetner said, ''The increase in the value of houses always amazes me.'' He gave as an example a six-lot subdivision in Dix Hills that he began developing in 1998. At that time, the 4,200-square-foot houses on one acre sold for $800,000 and $900,000, but as the stock market went up, so did the house sizes, he said. By 2001, he was building a 6,000-square-foot house that sold for $1.2 million.
''Now I am coming back to finish the last lot and am building a 6,000-square-foot house and asking $1.6 million,'' Mr. Fetner said.
THE $1-million-and-over market represents just under 10 percent of the 5,600 homes built on Long Island last year, said Robert Wieboldt, executive vice president of the Long Island Builders Institute in Islandia, a 650-member trade organization. ''It is a good healthy market,'' he said. ''All our custom builders are busy.''
''There are always people with enough wealth or who decide to put more money into home equity,'' Mr. Wieboldt said. ''It's not a market that is sensitive to interest rates. These buyers usually come in with a large chunk of cash from various means, such as stock portfolios.''
Ms. Petersen said: ''The buyers are not just from Wall Street as in the past. There has been a broad spectrum of top officials from Long Island-based corporations, in retail, the media and sports.''
''People are investing in real estate, in a lifestyle they've always wanted, and they just won't wait,'' she said.
''Some are influenced by low mortgage rates, but most have taken money out of other financial vehicles like the stock market and invested it where they want to build their dream house.''
''We are seeing young families stepping up into the $1.5 million price,'' Ms. Petersen said. ''They want to take advantage of the great public and private schools, the proximity to New York City and the water, and the active golf and equestrian styles -- all that made the North Shore's Gold Coast what it was. And it's still there.''
At the Legends at Half Hollow in Dix Hills, where Spectrum Communities is custom-building 42 houses on 52 acres, ranging in price from $1.6 million to $2.8 million, the average buyer is 34 and either ''an entrepreneur or a professional,'' said Mitchell C. Hochberg, the company's chief executive.
''There is a strong demand in this price range, if you can give buyers the value for what they want,'' said Mr. Hochberg, whose company is based in Valhalla in Westchester County. ''Our niche is that we can customize their houses from our on-site design center. The custom house is appealing to the up-and-coming buyer. We find customized options run over $300,000 a home.''
Barbara Candee, a vice president of Daniel Gale and a director of Sotheby's International Realty, said that buyers in the over-$1-million market are typically looking for a house with a traditional style and are often changing from contemporary or postmodern styles.
''One family wanted a traditional home with a lot of charm and detail, such as moldings,'' she said. They found what they were looking for in a brick 1930's Georgian-style manor in Brookville and purchased it for $3 million.''
The Huntington architect Michael Jay Wallin primarily designs homes along the North Shore in Nassau that cost about $3.5 million and range from 5,000 square feet past 12,000.
''The luxury market is still on the upswing,'' he said. ''The market is growing and people are more educated on what they want. They are not necessarily looking for larger spaces but for more variety of space, such as billiard rooms and a seating area off the kitchen.''
''They don't want contemporary styles,'' he added. ''For the amount of money they are spending, they want something more classical, which is timeless.''
In the upscale market, much depends on what is put into the home, but the primary cost is the land, Mr. Fetner said. ''If land costs $1.5 million and you build a 6,000-square-foot house, it will sell for $3.2 million, not counting upgrades. They are all priced differently, but you can add another $1 million for waterfront property.''
According to Ms. Candee, land sales have increased significantly in the last two years in areas that are zoned for one house on two to five acres. For example, in Centre Island, which has three-acre zoning, building lots sell for $3 million to $4 million. In Old Westbury, a four-acre building lot costs $1.5 million to $2 million.
There is not much land left, she said, but some tracts belonging to former estates are for sale. A 160-acre parcel in Old Westbury called Spring Hill, which is part of a large estate, is listed for $35 million. ''There is no house, just barns and stables,'' Ms. Candee said. ''It will be interesting to see how that will work if 10 people come in and want to divide it up. We'll see. It's creating a great deal of interest.''
ASIDE from the Hamptons, which is a second-home market, Long Island's multimillion-dollar homes traditionally range along the North Shore, but there are pockets of them wherever there is waterfront, including areas like Hewlett Harbor along the South Shore, Mr. Fetner said.
On the rural North Fork, the prices of luxury homes have increased in the town of Southold because waterfront property is scarce, according to Robert Scalia, an owner of Century 21 Agawam Albertson Fine Homes and Estates, which has four offices on the North Fork and two on the South.
In all of 2002, seven residences sold for more than $1.5 million in Southold,'' he said. In 2003, seven had been sold by Oct. 30.
Bayfront property in good areas is selling for $1.2 million to $2.5 million. A 6,200-square-foot home being built by Hurtado Development on 1.1 acres with 170 feet of waterfront along Long Island Sound in Orient is selling for $2.9 million, Mr. Scalia said.
In the Region | Long Island
