THE DOCTORS' PLAGUE
Germs, Childbed Fever, and the
Strange Story of Ignac Semmelweis.
By Sherwin B. Nuland.
191 pp. New York:
W. W. Norton &amp; Company. $21.95.
IF the fox knows many small things -- to twist a phrase coined by the soldier-poet Archilochus -- and if the hedgehog knows only one big thing, then Ignac Semmelweis, the peculiar Hungarian doctor at the center of ''The Doctors' Plague,'' was the essential hedgehog of 19th-century medicine. Between 1847 and 1862 -- over a span of 15 years -- Semmelweis, an obstetrician on the staff of the general hospital in Vienna, single-mindedly gnawed away at the roots of one of the most controversial puzzles of his time: the etiology of childbed fever, an agonizing lethal infection that struck women soon after childbirth. Semmelweis nearly found the answer -- and so nearly invented modern germ theory -- but he never managed to convince his peers. It would take at least another decade, and a bewildering trio of giants, Joseph Lister, Louis Pasteur and Robert Koch, finally to lay the groundwork for a unified theory of medical microbiology. By then, Semmelweis was almost forgotten. Reviled and packed off to backwater Budapest, he spent his last years succumbing to Alzheimer's disease, disappearing quietly into that ultimate hedgehog hole, until he finally vanished altogether in August 1865.
Sherwin Nuland's book is meant to be a history of this discovery (it's part of a series called ''Great Discoveries''), but its punchiest plot is not so much the discovery itself as the intense response to it. Part of the reason for this response, Nuland points out, was that the theory itself was unsettling. Childbed, or puerperal, fever, Semmelweis argued, was actually a disease created entirely by doctors. It was, quite literally, a doctors' plague, a plague transmitted by physicians and medical students who scurried busily between putrid autopsy rooms and the maternity wards, dissecting gangrenous cadavers in the morning and then examining childbearing mothers in the afternoon, all the while carrying infections between patients on their unwashed hands. Semmelweis didn't know what the contaminant was (with the perspicacious ambiguousness of a true genius, he called it simply ''cadaver particles''). But unlike the powdered professors of Vienna, Semmelweis wouldn't wave away the problem by attributing it to miasmas and hysterias, those ghostly culprits that seemed to haunt women's health. Instead, Semmelweis argued that his contagion was something distinctly material. And it could be halted just by making doctors scrub their hands with diluted bleach, a practice he instituted, greatly reducing the toll of the disease.
Had Semmelweis been a better scientist -- had he taken even a few minutes to examine the particles under a microscope -- he would almost certainly have found millions of bacteria teeming under his lens. But Semmelweis was a lopsided genius. His singular talent lay in sorting through reams of data and finding subtle patterns squirming beneath -- all the while ignoring the essence of the infection lying within his fingers' reach. In Semmelweis, an insightful epidemiologist seemed to have collided with a blind pathologist. And unfortunately, the more he struggled to make the two prongs of his scientific inquiry meet, the more desperate and unreasonable he seemed to become. His book on childbed fever, written at the end of his life, reads more like a manic manifesto than a treatise. Scientific history never seems to have forgiven him for it.
All of this makes excellent material for a romp through 19th-century medicine, and Nuland, a surgeon by training and author of ''How We Die'' and Lost in America,'' among other books, has a knack for bringing the steely internal debates of Semmelweis's department alive, as if he were reporting from a recent surgical conference. The result is a compact, well-researched book appropriate for historians of science and medicine and for physicians. But it is also a book that raises a thornier question: What makes this specific footnote in medical history important? Why read this particular story? Why now?
The answer, I think, lies in the title. ''The Doctors' Plague'' carries, within itself, an important and humbling idea. Semmelweis may have missed his mark on germ theory, but what he did discover was a phenomenon just as remarkable: the idea that physicians may themselves be responsible for the morbidity and mortality of patients. The father of antisepsis, or infection prevention, was, in fact, the father of iatrogenesis -- physician-induced disease.
To the post-Thalidomide generation of doctors -- to doctors inured to the fact that a medicine or procedure can itself be toxic -- Semmelweis's discovery may come as no surprise. But, as Nuland reveals in some of his most reflective paragraphs, for the high-minded physicians of Vienna and Budapest this was a deeply unsettling premise, for it struck directly at the self-image of their profession. Doctoring was supposed to be a do-good business. It wasn't supposed to make young mothers die of preventable illnesses. What Semmelweis had managed to expose was a hidden anxiety within medicine itself, doctors' ''horror at the possibility that they had been killing their patients for years.''
It is this anxiety that still haunts us. In 2003, 150 years after Semmelweis, some of the most disturbing pieces of medical news involved iatrogenic complications -- doctors' plagues, if you will. The first -- SARS -- was an infection that was spread through hospital wards, often carried by doctors, much like the infections that had vexed Semmelweis in the 1850's. The second -- the so-called million-women study, which revealed the toxic side effects of hormone replacement therapy -- marked a moment of deep introspection in women's health, making doctors question their cavalier willingness to push theories and medicines on patients long before the evidence on them had accumulated.
Like Semmelweis himself, Nuland's book is short, intense and single-minded, and these larger themes and implications are left teeming underneath the text, for readers to peer in closely and uncover. ''To receive his due of honor,'' Nuland writes, Semmelweis ''had to be rediscovered.'' ''The Doctors' Plague'' succeeds for exactly that reason: in telling the story of childbed fever, Nuland has managed to rediscover a critical moment in the history of medicine, the anxieties of which, although somewhat attenuated, persist today.
Siddhartha Mukherjee is a fellow at the Dana Farber Cancer Institute/Harvard Medical School in Boston. He writes on medical issues for The New Republic.
