Bandbox
By Thomas Mallon.
306 pp. New York:
Pantheon Books. $24.95.
THOMAS MALLON is a historical novelist -- or, if that sounds a touch too middlebrow, a literary novelist of historical bent. The nomenclature gets more sensitive as we pull closer to genre: it hardly seems to matter that Marguerite Yourcenar, William Kennedy and Leo Tolstoy could all be called historical novelists. Maybe we should forget these fine distinctions and just say that Mallon is a writer who brings to life the places and atmospheres of the American past.
History, for this author, is a preserve for imagination. In an essay entitled ''The Historical Novelist's Burden of Truth,'' he once wrote: ''We can e-mail and instant-message a thousand people we've never met in Katmandu. . . . There is less and less need to imagine anybody or any place; we can just access them. We are . . . becoming sick of one another. The past is the only place to which we can get away.''
Mallon's preferred strategy of novelistic escape is to loot history's appendixes; which is to say that he tends to look not to the capital-E Event for his subjects but to the side, to situations and circumstances that refer to it. In his 1994 novel, ''Henry and Clara,'' for instance, he gave us the story of two step-siblings who happened to be with Lincoln at Ford's Theater on the night he was assassinated -- a plot in which the foreground tragedy of American history was cunningly recessed.
''Bandbox,'' Mallon's new novel, his sixth, once again fuses the actual and the imagined, but with a slightly different twist. Setting events in the magazine world of New York City in 1928 -- in the turbulent months before the market crash -- he has cooked up a situation that allows him to make playful reference to a magazine war of more recent vintage, one he witnessed from the inside.
''Cuddles Houlihan got clipped by the vodka bottle as it exited the pneumatic tube.'' Not exactly ''It was the best of times, it was the worst of times,'' but Mallon's opener does its job, plunging us not only in medias res -- into the midst of things -- but also, applying torque to the phrase, into what becomes a media race. We know right away what kind of tale to expect.
''Bandbox'' is a fast-paced burlesque, crowded with familiar characters and familiar chatter. Indeed, I had just finished the novel when I happened to zap my way into a late-night showing of Woody Allen's film ''Bullets Over Broadway.'' I was amazed. There on my television screen was what felt like the very same place and period, along with a similar set of garrulous caricatures making much ado about crises that, seen from a somewhat more removed vantage, are not much at all. I had slipped from one kind of dream into another.
While ''Bandbox'' isn't set in the theater, it brings to life what feels like the psychologically adjacent subculture of high-end magazine publishing. The fact that some of the characters from Allen's fanciful riff could easily have found work in Mallon's world -- a world of boozy curmudgeons, slick schemers and brassy ladies with hearts of brass -- suggests a shared nostalgia for a time before pixels and the digital orchestration of almost everything.
The premise of the novel, like the premise of all burlesque -- I did not say ''genre'' -- is a simple one. The vodka bottle that ''clips'' that writer named Cuddles Houlihan has been dispatched in a fury by his drunken boss, Jehoshaphat (Joe) Harris, editor in chief of Bandbox, a monthly men's magazine. Bandbox has enjoyed great popularity but is now under threat from the newly ascendant Cutaway, a magazine edited by Jimmy Gordon, a former Bandbox star who, as Harris once told him, was someone he thought of as his own ''bastard son.''
If Gordon's defection has generally enraged the crusty, high-living Harris, the younger man's latest affront has put him into such a lather that he has hurled the wrong cylindrical object into the interoffice mail chute. Gordon has, it appears, snagged a photograph of the notorious killers Leopold and Loeb sitting together on a bunk in Joliet State Prison ''avidly regarding the latest issue of Bandbox,'' holding it open ''like a box of candy they were sharing on a back-porch swing.''
With this slap, this public-relations threat -- ''Would make a great ad, said the inked message on the back of the photograph'' -- Mallon jump-starts the Rube Goldberg machinery of a comedy that features schemes and sabotages carried out by the bustling loyalists from both sides. At times it's hard to remember who is who in the large cast of ambitious, double-dealing and dissolute (but, of course, lovable) characters who jostle through the offices and corridors of the novel. There's a wide-eyed boy from the Midwest -- everyone's favorite innocent -- who is kidnapped by mobsters; a gloriously swan-singing film star throwing tantrums over a photo spread; a fanatical animal lover who shanghais the pathetic creatures being used as props for fashion shoots. There are exes and mistresses and star-crossed couples of every persuasion -- insult and intrigue everywhere we look.
''Bandbox'' is slight but enjoyable, with enough sweet froth to put a mustache on the most finicky sipper. Readers who know little or nothing of the tempestuous teapot struggles in the New York magazine world will be gratified by the period detail as well as the pace. Though I have to wonder: did everyone in 1920's New York bark and quip so expertly? But there's also another level.
Insiders who handicap the media races will know that Mallon has worked as a literary editor and books columnist for GQ, and that a few years back the crusty, high-living GQ editor in chief, the late Art Cooper, saw the defection of his right-hand man, David Granger, to a rival publication, Esquire. (For which -- in full ignorance of these doings -- I once worked as a books columnist.) They will find all sorts of nods and winks to chuckle over.
But even the uninitiated will know that darts are being hurled. As here, for instance, where we find Houlihan wondering if there's any point in saving Harris from his rival. ''True, the two men weren't much alike,'' he reflects, ''Jimmy lacking 'Phat's sweet, chewy center -- and their magazines, for all that they followed the same formula, weren't indistinct. Jimmy couldn't keep Cutaway from hectoring its readers: every other page was a pronouncement about the best and worst of this or that, a list of rules the au courant reader had damned well better learn if he didn't know them already. . . . But even so: the war between the two men and magazines was still a matter of novelty jousting with novelty -- in a time when novelty itself had lost its newness.''
If novelty had lost its newness in the late 1920's, what can we say that things are like now, when the rotations of the image wheel are so rapid as to make the spokes look solid? We need our escapes, our little places of pause. Mallon's good-humored, romping scenes offer just that. They charm us into accepting the old illusions -- that the good guys get the girls, hatchets get buried and everything at last comes out right.
Sven Birkerts teaches in the Bennington Writing Seminars. He edits the journal Agni.
