JANUARY can send even the most balanced yogis off kilter. In yoga studios all over town, the Resolution People arrive, seeking new selves for the new year. Classes that are already crowded become packed to the gills.
The newcomers, unaware of yoga etiquette, stroll into class while oms are being chanted. They commit other karmic faux pas, like chitchatting in class, cracking gum or putting their smelly sneakers and used tissues by their mat, right where your nose goes when you start doing chaturangas, the yoga version of push-ups.
The yoga faithful breathe deeply and try to be, as one yoga teacher encourages her students to be, ''tolerant and respectful of other people's humanity.'' After all, everyone was a new yogi once.
I am, I admit, a high-holiday churchgoer: about the only times you'll find me in a pew are on Christmas Eve and Easter. At church, I am a visitor, an outsider. At yoga class, though, I am a regular. I went at first just to stretch, but I soon found myself going for other reasons. I learned to sit. I learned to breathe. The teachers tell stories, using language to find connections between body and spirit. I go for their stories, which begin grounded in the world and then take flight. One recommends movies (''Calendar Girls'' prompted a theme of breaking out of a chrysalis); another talks about his grandmother's passion for ikebana.
And although the focus of yoga is largely internal, increasingly I go to be part of a group, a sort of yoga party, with others whose family and friends don't quite get this yoga thing we do. We've gotten to know each other over the years, registering new children, vacations, job changes, other interests. Andy, for example, whose handstands we all admire, spends Thursday nights juggling on the Lower East Side. Maya, whose pregnancy we watched, has a beautiful new baby.
The teachers welcome the Resolution People, reviewing the basics of sitting and breathing. The yoga faithful make room for them, as the congregations make room for me when I get to church.
Some will stay, but most won't. They'll decide yoga wasn't really what they were looking for.
JAN BENZEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: URBAN STUDIES/RESOLVING
