A close friend and I are looking for work. I came across an ad for a position and applied for it without consulting my friend, knowing that he was already applying for a job at the same place. Now that I've been offered the position, I'm certain it is the same one my friend applied for. Should I offer to decline it in the hope that this will increase his chances of getting it? I made no effort to consult with him before applying for it initially.
Anonymous, New York City
If it was coincidental that you and your friend applied for the same job, you have no more obligation than he to withdraw. It would be altruistic of you to do so, but hardly required, and as you know, doing so would not guarantee his being hired.
That said, if you take the job, it may well strain your friendship. (That's the great thing about ethics. Even if all meet their obligations, things can turn out miserably. It's so modern, so Samuel Beckett.) Thus you must be as candid with your friend as he has been with you. If you're lucky, he'll wish you well in your new job; if not, he'll wish you a more dire fate. Then you'll face a tough decision: although forswearing this job is not an ethical obligation, do you still want it if it undermines your friendship? After all, there are plenty of other jobs out there (except for those three million that have vanished in the last three years).
After working for a radio show with a well-known host, I wrote an essay about it, without naming the host or show, although anybody who'd heard the show could have identified both. I did not vilify the host but characterized him with amused detachment. When I mentioned the essay to a friend who works for an organization associated with the show, he implied, without reading it, that publishing it would be wrong. Would it? A.B.S., New York
It depends on what you wrote.
Something temperate and insightful about your own experience? Go ahead and publish. Something gossipy and malicious about your celebrity boss? A case could be made for restraint. (Although you'd find no shortage of readers.) It is impossible to judge the ethics of your essay independent of its content.
It is entirely reasonable for you to write about your life. It is also reasonable for people engaged in a group endeavor -- a radio show, a shared vacation house, a marriage -- to desire privacy. One solution is for you to write with honesty, tact and sensitivity to the feelings of your co-workers. But that will get you only so far. Even the most astute description of, say, your husband's morning shower is apt to make him feel unfairly exposed. What you call ''amused detachment,'' your boss may call ''grotesque caricature'' (and his lawyer may call something even uglier). Indeed, he may feel that by revealing his private behavior in any way, you betray his trust, even if you are not bound by a nondisclosure agreement or other legal or professional constraints (like a doctor's obligation to protect a patient's privacy). Even flattery will not save you; no subject of a profile has ever felt he was overpraised. And yet, the subject's exasperation is not in itself sufficient reason to forestall a writer. One practical consideration might be enough: the ethical publishing of even the most inoffensive essay is unlikely to advance your career in radio. Honorable acts can have untoward consequences.
There are less risky solutions. You can write fiction, or you can write -- or at least publish -- later, allowing time to pass before revealing your radio secrets. After all, what's the life expectancy in America? Seventy-eight years? Eighty years? Patience is a virtue.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 1-4-04: THE ETHICIST
