The Islanders kept the penalty box warm for the first two periods against the Boston Bruins on Saturday night. Once they stopped paying penance, the Islanders surged back from a two-goal deficit in the third period to squeeze out an improbable point with a 3-3 tie at the Fleet Center.
Facing two months without the injured Aleksei Yashin (wrist) and Mark Parrish (ankle), the Islanders (20-16-3-1) showed they could muster the most desperate kind of offense.
''You have to do the little things to create chances,'' forward Trent Hunter said.
One of those things is getting scoring from unlikely sources. Defenseman Adrian Aucoin glided to his right and fired in a 40-footer as traffic cleared in front of Bruins goaltender Félix Potvin, tying the score at 3-3 with 8 minutes 10 seconds left in the third period. It was Aucoin's second goal of the season.
Four minutes earlier, the rally started when a more expected scorer, Hunter, cut the Bruins' lead to 3-2. Hunter leads N.H.L. rookies and the Islanders with 15 goals.
Islanders goalie Garth Snow made four difficult stops in overtime.
The Islanders accrued 17 minutes of sitting time on 7 penalties in the first 40 minutes. While Shawn Bates sulked behind the glass on the sixth call, the Bruins broke through. Patrice Bergeron, the Bruins' precocious rookie, pounced on a rebound and snapped it in from beyond the crease to regain the lead for the Bruins, 2-1, late in the second period.
''You can only worry about the thing we can control, not the referee calling the penalties,'' Bates said.
Except for an Oleg Kvasha slap shot off the post and a thwarted Justin Papineau rush, the Islanders did not offer much offense in the second period. The strain of not having Yashin and Parrish began to show.
In the first period, the Islanders held their breath when defenseman Kenny Jonsson and Papineau had to be helped from the ice. Papineau had a sore knee after a hit from Doug Doull. That inspired the Isles' Eric Cairns to seek retribution twice. Cairns got the best of Doull in the more active second confrontation, and the Islanders seemed to ride the momentum. Papineau and Jonsson returned.
Radek Martinek intercepted a Bruins exchange and tapped the puck to Mariusz Czerkawski, who skated down the middle and fired in his own rebound to tie the score, 1-1.
The Islanders fell into a quick 1-0 hole when the Bruins' Sergei Samsonov swept a rebound past Snow 32 seconds into the game.
A 3-2 victory over Toronto on Thursday broke the Bruins' nine-game slide without a victory at home. But the depleted Islanders did what was necessary against a club that might end up challenging them for a playoff spot.
''We weren't going to give up tonight,'' Hunter said.
HOCKEY
