The Mets planned to be patient this winter, expecting to find hidden treasures on the free-agent market when the pool of players expanded in late December. When the Florida Marlins did not offer a contract to reliever Braden Looper, the Mets pursued him aggressively. Now they have him.
The Mets announced yesterday that they had reached a contract agreement with Looper, pending a physical exam. The contract is for two years with a club option for 2006, and two officials said Looper was guaranteed about $6.5 million. Looper will have his physical tomorrow in New York, one official said.
''Braden is very excited about the opportunity to play with the Mets, as he plans to become their closer,'' Looper's agent, Randy Hendricks, said in an e-mail message.
The right-handed Looper, 29, lost his job as the Marlins' closer last summer when Florida traded for Ugueth Urbina. But Looper converted 28 of 34 save opportunities over all and was the winning pitcher in Game 4 of the World Series, snuffing a Yankees rally in the 11th inning by getting a strikeout and a popout with the bases loaded.
The chance to return to closing was especially appealing to Looper, who was a closer at Wichita State and in the St. Louis Cardinals' minor-league system. Looper was traded to Florida in 1998 in a deal for shortstop Edgar Renteria.
''That's what he likes, the closer role,'' said Benny Looper, Braden's uncle, the Seattle Mariners' vice president for player development. ''He's well suited for it. I know that's what he wanted to do, be a closer again.''
Benny Looper said that he saw Braden in Oklahoma over the holidays, when the Mets were making a strong push for him. The two talk roughly once a month during the season.
''Braden and I have been close for a long time,'' Benny Looper said. ''First and foremost, they're getting a quality individual. He's going to be a good guy on the ball club, and he's got a lot of ability.''
Looper, who throws a fastball up to 98 miles an hour, is the third major addition for the Mets this off-season, joining shortstop Kazuo Matsui and center fielder Mike Cameron, a former Mariner. Because Matsui came from Japan and Cameron and Looper were not offered contracts by their previous clubs, the Mets will not lose any draft picks for the signings.
BASEBALL
