IN the stands, a purple-clad fan held up a sign that said: ''1st Raven in the Hall of Fame: Art Modell.''
It was a nice gesture, in a grand old city where Modell has found a second life in football, but Modell did not get what he really wanted yesterday.
His Ravens, Baltimore's second-time-around romance, were dumped out of the playoffs by the Tennessee Titans, 20-17, on a low, dying-quail 46-yard field goal by Gary Anderson with 29 seconds left.
Modell, who will soon sell his majority share of the Ravens, witnessed the game from his private box and was beaten by a fellow geriatric owner, Bud Adams.
Adams, who has 44 years with his transplanted franchise, born as the Houston Oilers, came out ahead of Modell, who is completing his 43rd and last year with the franchise that used to be the Cleveland Browns.
The biggest honor Modell received yesterday came before the game. With the sellout crowd of 69,452 looking on, Modell was introduced from his luxury box, and a banner was hung below the upper deck, initiating him into the Baltimore Ravens' Ring of Honor.
At age 78, after a heart attack and a stroke in the past year, Modell is selling his share of the team to Steve Bisciotti, who has been the minority owner for three years. Modell has said that he is selling his share to provide long-term financial security for his family.
Even though he was a leader in the National Football League's first lucrative financial and television dealings and won Super Bowl XXXV with the Ravens in 2001, Modell has not been voted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in Canton, Ohio.
Other builders of the league are recognized -- George Halas, Wellington Mara and Art Rooney, for example. Modell may deserve it for his long career, but he lost considerable support after moving his franchise to Baltimore from Cleveland in 1996. He is one of 25 candidates this year for the Hall of Fame, and the new members will be announced at the Super Bowl in Houston.
In the gloomy locker room yesterday, Modell's son, David, the 42-year-old team president, begged to differ with the omission.
''There are owners in the Hall of Fame who have moved teams,'' David Modell said. ''There is no blackball for owners who relocate. I don't see how there should be.''
Among owners in the Hall who have relocated teams are Lamar Hunt, who moved the Dallas Texans to become the Kansas City Chiefs in the old American Football League; George Preston Marshall, who moved the Redskins from Boston to Washington; and Al Davis, who has flown the Raiders up and down the California coast often enough to become a million-mile flier. If the litigious Davis is in the Hall, there doesn't seem much ground for excluding Modell, who once changed conferences and gave up old rivalries to make it easier for the A.F.L. and N.F.L. to merge.
Besides, Cleveland now has the Browns back, courtesy of the N.F.L., which allows owners to move franchises but no longer the name and the colors and the history.
The league, which promotes parity through shared network television receipts and weaker schedules for weaker teams, is surely pleased with the success of the carpetbaggers.
The teams have met 13 times since the Oilers moved to Tennessee in 1997, with the Ravens holding an 8-5 advantage, including the past five games before yesterday.
The Titans played in Memphis in 1997 and at Vanderbilt Stadium in 1998 as the Oilers, then moved into their new home as the Titans in 1999. They went to the Super Bowl in the 1999 season, went to the playoffs again in the 2000 and 2002 seasons, and are back now, a very nice way of forging tradition.
Baltimore has a Super Bowl victory by the Ravens, but there is no doubt that most people over a certain age in this traditional old town would say they would prefer to roll back the clock and have Johnny Unitas throwing to Raymond Berry all over again.
But on a lovely warm afternoon yesterday, aside from the statue of Johnny U outside the handsome new stadium and one fan wearing a purple Unitas No. 19 shirt, it was hard for the naked eye to detect the ancient love affair with the Colts, long gone to Indianapolis.
The statue could not help the Ravens generate offense as Jamal Lewis, who gained 2,066 yards this season, the second-highest total in league history, made a season-low 35.
As a result, Art Modell still has a rooting interest in Super Bowl week, but, for this major builder of pro football, there are no games left.
Sports of The Times
