Dean's Odds? Surely, 50-50
WHETHER you consider a half-century of history or listen to the claims of his rivals, it looks as if Howard Dean has a 50-50 shot at winning the Democratic presidential nomination in July.
Since 1952, Democrats have tried 10 times to put a new president in office. (We're not counting the campaigns of 1964, 1980 and 1996, when the Democrats renominated an incumbent president.) In 5 of those 10 campaigns, the candidate leading in the national polls in January, like Dr. Dean, went on to win the nomination: Adlai E. Stevenson in 1956, John F. Kennedy in 1960, Walter F. Mondale in 1984, Bill Clinton in 1992, Al Gore in 2000.
The other half of the front-runners did not make it. In January 1952, Estes Kefauver was favored by nine percentage points over President Harry S. Truman, but after Mr. Truman withdrew, the Democratic nomination went to Mr. Stevenson. Heading into the 1968 campaign, Robert F. Kennedy and President Lyndon B. Johnson were essentially tied for first, but after Mr. Johnson dropped out and Mr. Kennedy was assassinated, the nomination went to Hubert H. Humphrey.
Edmund S. Muskie was overtaken by George S. McGovern in 1972, and in 1976 Jimmy Carter won the presidency after trailing Edward M. Kennedy in the January polls. (Three years later, in the fall of 1979, Mr. Kennedy was once again ahead in the polls, by a wide margin, but by January 1980 President Carter had regained the lead and would be renominated.) In January of 1988, Gary Hart and Jesse Jackson were at the top of the polls, but Michael S. Dukakis went on to win.
Dr. Dean's rivals predict that he too will stumble, but they have all paid him one compliment. Each of the five other leading contenders has declared this campaign to be a two-person race between himself and Dr. Dean. On Wednesday, after Representative Richard A. Gephardt told The Associated Press, ''I think it's a Dean-Gephardt race,'' Dr. Dean's campaign workers amused themselves by collecting ''just the two of us'' quotations from the other candidates. ''We're flattered by all the invitations,'' one Dean aide said, ''but the slot on our dance card is reserved for George W. Bush.''
Surprise Credentials Of Grocery Guru
THE Grocery Guru of Concord hath spoken. But did the pilgrim appreciate the enlightenment?
On Friday, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman went to a small grocery store near the state Capitol in Concord, N.H., to visit its renowned clerk, Mary Hill. Locals sometimes call her ''the C-Span lady'' because of her frequent appearances dispensing advice to politicians. President Clinton became a pen pal after his frequent visits in the 1992 campaign, when she gave him note cards with suggestions. As president, in 1995 he advised Newt Gingrich, the speaker of the House, to visit Miss Hill ''because she's a wise woman.''
After Mr. Lieberman's visit, Miss Hill, who described herself as sixtyish, said he was her favorite of the Democrats, and she ruminated about his approach to health care.
''Joseph Lieberman says that you should build on what works and fix what doesn't,'' she said while ringing up sales. ''Instead of tearing something down, he thinks you should build on what's there, and to me that speaks volumes. I told him it's the way I see it: if a tree falls in the forest, you can't put it back up again.''
But while she was happy to share her philosophy with Mr. Lieberman, Miss Hill said she was still not ready to guarantee him her vote. In fact, she made a couple of revelations that might cause even a longtime disciple like Mr. Clinton to question her wisdom. ''I'm a registered Republican,'' she said, ''and I'm very fond of George W. Bush.''
Of Mice And Caucuses
THE Dean campaign's Web site can boast another innovation: ''the first video game officially endorsed by a presidential political campaign.''
That is the claim of the game's designers, and who's arguing? The more interesting question is why more than 40,000 computer users, according to the campaign, have tried the Howard Dean for Iowa Game since it was put on the campaign's Web site less than two weeks ago.
To win, you ''make a virtual trip to Iowa'' and quickly maneuver little figures on the screen to drum up sufficient support for Dr. Dean. You start by placing campaigners across a map of Iowa, then send them out to wave Dean signs in people's faces and to knock on people's doors (while surviving barking dogs). The game's co-designer, Ian Bogost of Persuasive Games, said it was intended to ''help citizens understand the experience of outreach.''
Virtual Iowa has certain undeniable advantages over the real Iowa in January -- like no frostbite, no four-hour drives to meet three people -- but some players find it more tedious. So far, the online reviews of the game have ranged from ''awesome'' and ''addicting'' to ''good for about 10 minutes'' and ''the most ridiculous thing I've ever seen.'' One player, who reported a stiff mouse arm from his extensive playing, said the game was proof that ''Dean will always win because Deaniacs are just so much more fun than anyone else.'' Or maybe some of them just have way too much free time.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
