They are Japan's boys of winter: the 200 college long-distance runners who brave blistering cold and strong winds each new year to complete a two-day, 134-mile relay race from Tokyo to Hakone, at the foot of Mount Fuji, and back again.
Their fortitude strikes such a chord with the public that the event, known as the Hakone Ekiden, is something akin to the Boston Marathon, the Final Four and the Super Bowl rolled into one. More than a run for the tape, the race encapsulates the perseverance, pathos and unswerving loyalty the Japanese value so highly.
The race, which takes place every Jan. 2 and 3, is also rich with symbolism. The course retraces the Tokkaido highway, the country's most famous road, which for hundreds of years was the main link between the shogun in Edo and the ancient capital of Kyoto. Runners hand off the sashes that serve as their batons at the sites of the old stations, or shukueki, where travelers of yore rested.
These cloth sashes, called tasuki, are ordinarily used to tie back long kimono sleeves. But on race day, they are endowed with the power of each college's legacy and are even blessed by teams at shrines. In effect, they embody the spirit of the race the Japanese find so appealing.
''The weight of the tasuki is heavy,'' said Atsushi Miyashita, a 30-year-old businessman, who has gone to Hakone to watch the race every year since he was a boy. ''It connects the runners with all those who ran before. This race is not about any one person.''
This year's running, the 80th since 1920, played on all these emotions. The 10-man team from Komazawa University beat 19 other squads from eastern Japan to win its third straight championship, the first threepeat in 15 years. Top-seeded Komazawa built a 3-minute-26-second lead by the midway point, eventually covering the course in 11 hours 7 minutes 51 seconds.
The real drama, though, was between the packs of runners jockeying for position afterward. Hosei University zoomed into second place from sixth at the start of the second day, only to relinquish its gains to the teams from Tokai University and Asia University. Chuo University, which fell to 13th place on Day 1, regained some honor by finishing seventh.
Then there are the athletes just fighting to finish. Runners know that dropping out not only eliminates their team from contention, but also bars them from being seeded next year. With so much at stake, they go to painstaking lengths to complete their portion of the race.
This made Shuta Baba's fifth-stage run up the hills to Hakone all the more poignant. A junior from Daito Bunka University, and one of the early favorites, Baba battled stress fractures in the months before the race and resumed training only recently. His legs wobbly, Baba fell to 16th place after passing the highest point on the course, about 2,500 feet above sea level. Barely jogging the last few kilometers, he collapsed at the finish line and was carried away by his teammates.
Rather than feel pity, fans are impressed by this kind of sacrifice, even though it comes at grave personal cost.
''I like ekiden because everyone together makes their best effort,'' said Masamichi Fukuoka, 46, who watched the race with his 13-year-old daughter at the first handoff point near Kawasaki on the first day. ''It symbolizes that a man cannot live alone.''
Teamwork is one of the race's defining attributes; overcoming obstacles is another. Each leg is 20 to 23 kilometers long, or about 12 to 14 miles. Races are often run in freezing temperatures through gusting winds, ice and snow. The fifth leg approaching Hakone is almost entirely uphill, while the sixth leg starting the second day is the knee-numbing reverse.
Until 1996, runners were not allowed any water, as if the race were an episode of ''Survivor.'' As injuries mounted, the organizers set up water stops about every nine miles and permitted coaches to provide water in emergencies.
Unsurprisingly, many runners suffer from dehydration, fevers and cramps. Yet no substitutions are allowed after each day's lineup is made final, and few runners willingly bow out anyway.
The saddest sight, most fans agree, is when a coach forces one of his charges to retire from the race. To do so, he must jump out of a nearby car and grab the runner. Aware of the dishonor in being pulled from the race, injured athletes play cat and mouse to avoid their coaches. Finally caught, they collapse in tears. Some have written books about not finishing and the shame that has stayed with them for years.
For most runners, though, the ekiden is the highlight of their collegiate careers. Millions of fans line the course, many huddled around transistor radios and portable televisions to follow the race. Brass bands, cheerleaders and college alumni, or old boys, carry banners and team pennants, turning the event into one big tailgate party.
Many millions more watch on television with their families. Ratings have soared since the first race was telecast in 1987; a record 31.5 percent of all viewing households watched last year's event.
''When I was a kid, I watched the race on television and I thought I wanted to run as well,'' Wataru Tamura, a sophomore at Chuo University, said after he completed his first Hakone Ekiden this year.
Someday, Tamura said, he wants to tell his children about the experience.
There are plenty of stories to tell. The original ekiden was a three-day race in 1917 that ended in Kyoto, more than 300 miles away. The Hakone version started three years later, the brainchild of a former Olympian who wanted to develop more marathon runners so Japan could compete overseas. In the days before high-tech running shoes, the competitors wore tabi, or workmen's slippers, even though the roads near Hakone were gravel.
The event was suspended during most of World War II as students turned into soldiers and the military commandeered the Tokkaido highway. For a time, runners raced to the town of Ome in western Tokyo. In 1943, the starting point was moved to Yasukuni Shrine, home to the nation's war dead.
The event's popularity grew after the war as more Japanese went to college and the race was broadcast on the radio. Some runners went on to fame in the Olympics, while others suffered ignominy for their failures.
The field was expanded to 20 teams, and some now include international students from Africa. Coaches have became more calculating, deploying their best runners on the second and longest leg, and others strategically on the hilly legs.
Nothing, though, replaces the simplicity and significance of runners going all out to keep their team in contention, or fighting pain so as not to let down their teammates.
''I feel moved when young people work so hard to pass the tasuki to the next runner,'' said Koji Narumi, a 48-year-old salaryman watching his first ekiden in Kawasaki. ''It is like members of a family helping each other. I think that is why people like ekiden, not just rooting for your favorite university.''
OUTDOORS
