PHILIP RADER, who is paid to be a dentist, not a campaigner for dog recreation, found a novel calling last summer ,when, as a newcomer to Ossining, he came upon a local park with an area set aside for dogs, to which he wanted to bring his mutt. Since he saw so few dogs there, never more than three at a time, he began printing posters and posting them around town to attract more pet owners to the fenced-off area, where dogs could run free, without a leash.
''I thought, 'this is crazy; why aren't there more dogs here? Let me get more people to come,''' Dr. Rader said. ''I was trying to spread the word.''
He added: ''I'm not an activist. I have no connection with the parks department; I'm a dentist. There are so many dog owners in Westchester, this is just for my dog, Morris, to have more friends.''
His plan worked. Now on most Sundays, he counts about 20 dogs in the designated part of Cedar Lane Park. ''It's almost foolish for a place like Westchester not to have dog parks,'' said Dr. Rader, who has been visiting the park about three times a week. ''People are coming even when the park is completely covered with snow.''
In the wide-open spaces of the suburbs, a park for dogs to run off-leash may not seem as necessary as in, say, Manhattan. Yet, the argument goes, if the county has golf courses, swimming pools and nature trails, then why not dog parks? In fact, they are so popular that about 650 have popped up across the nation, according to Vicki Kung, co-founder of Dogpark.com. When her Web site was started in 1997, it listed only 125, she added. While her group had no figures for Westchester, she says there are about 30 dog parks in New York City.
Plans are already being made to add dog-friendly ramps, tubes and mazes at the dog area at Cedar Lane Park next spring. ''It'll be like a doggy playground,'' said Henry Atterbury, superintendent of recreation and parks for the Village and Town of Ossining. ''It was impromptu; a handful of people were asking if they could take their dogs up there in the spring and summer. Once we saw the demand, we said, 'Let's try it out, see how it works.'''
Mr. Atterbury, the owner of two cats, thinks it is working. ''Dog owners from other communities are coming to use this dog park and going back to their communities and saying, 'Why not us?'''
Indeed, in Bedford Hills, dog owners posed that question, then mobilized into Bedford DOG (Dog Owners Group). They are anticipating the opening next spring of a dog park at Beaver Dam Park. It is near Beaver Dam Sanctuary, which had been popular among dog owners before becoming off-limits, said Dr. Marilynn R. Glasser, director of leisure and human services of the Town of Bedford Recreation and Parks Department.
The town board has approved the park, which will have about half an acre for small dogs, about an acre for all dogs, and a transition area where owners can bring their leashed dogs from their cars into the off-leash area, Dr. Glasser said. Whether the area will be for residents only and whether it will impose entrance fees have yet to be determined.
''This is really a place for citizens of the Town of Bedford to come with their dogs,'' said Linda Trepel-Cantor, secretary of Bedford DOG. ''It's socialization not only for the dogs but, most important, for the people, too. This park is offering dogs a place to go other than the open lands in Bedford, which are used by horseback riders of the community.''
No wonder some dog lovers are hooked. Liza Margulies of Chappaqua spends an hour or two nearly every day at a park with her two dogs, sometimes photographing dogs at play. ''It has become an essential part of my well-being,'' she said.
Ms. Margulies would say that: she is a psychotherapist. ''For me, the parks are just so much about the dogs, their sense and mine of the joy, contentment and freedom that these parks provide, and finally, the endless pursuit of capturing all that with my camera lens,'' she said. ''Often I don't know the people's names, just their dogs' names. But you learn a lot about the people while you are walking and talking. It's a very nice community.''
Make that a closed-mouthed community. Many dog owners are not about to publicize their favorite spots, where dogs may or may not be legally allowed off-leash, lest those spots become overcrowded, she said. ''You will probably have to find some uninitiated dog-park denizen who hasn't figured out how to keep quiet about their pot of gold,'' she added.
Ms. Margulies recalled a visit to Ward Acres in New Rochelle, where dogs are allowed, but only on leashes. After she had unwittingly shared information about it, she said that more people began flocking there. Upon hearing of the low attendance at the park in Ossining, she said, ''In six months, it's going to be packed, and people are going to be wishing no one knew about it.''
Places where dogs can roam spring up for a variety of reasons, sometimes not even just for the dogs' sake. One location in Pelham Manor was opened to get in dogs and get out geese that were attracted by grass seed, said Lorri Gorman, one of the trustees of the Village of Pelham Manor. For the past few years, Shore Park, on Long Island Sound, has set aside a fraction of its land for dogs in an unenclosed area that opens onto the Sound.
''The dogs do chase the geese,'' Ms. Gorman said. ''Just their presence is enough. It was one of those quirks of timing that a dog group was looking for a place to go and asked if they could use Shore Park and we were trying to solve the problem with the geese.'' In the dog area, dogs can run off-leash seven days a week, from 7 a.m. to 9 a.m., but it is open only to residents of Pelham Manor.
However, she added, the Village has received word of owners not cleaning up after their dogs and of children being frightened by dogs, so it will review the park issue before spring.
Not everyone likes dog parks, for reasons ranging from noise to dog droppings and fear of dog bites. And dog owners need to take precautions. Before a visit to a dog park, a dog should be inoculated with the regular series that a veterinarian suggests, Ms. Kung of Dogpark.com said. Owners of puppies under 16 weeks old that have not had a full series of shots should wait until the series is complete, she added.
Beyond that, ''Common sense is the best thing to take with you,'' she said. That means keeping an eye on the dog, cleaning up after it and watching for aggressive behavior. ''We don't think there is a better way to introduce a dog to the joy of other canine society than a dog park,'' she added.
PETS
