An Egyptian charter plane carrying 148 people, most of them French tourists, plunged into the Red Sea before dawn Saturday, killing all on board.
The plane, a Flash Airlines Boeing 737, crashed minutes after takeoff from the popular Egyptian resort of Sharm el Sheik on the southern tip of the Sinai desert en route to Paris via Cairo, the Egyptian civil aviation authority said.
In Cairo, Foreign Minister Ahmed Maher quickly ruled out terrorism, saying the crash ''is absolutely not the result of a terrorist act, but is linked to a technical failure of the plane.''
The Egyptian authorities did not explain why they were so sure so soon that the cause of the crash was purely technical.
In Paris, Transport Minister Gilles de Robien was slightly less categorical, although he refused to speculate that it could be a terrorist act. ''We are largely working on the theory that this was an accident,'' Mr. de Robien said. ''Nothing indicates that there could have been any other cause.''
However, Justice Minister Dominique Perben asked prosecutors to open a preliminary criminal investigation, and the Foreign Ministry offered to send a team to help investigate the crash.
The control towers at Cairo and Sharm el Sheik airports received no distress call from the pilot before the crash, a Cairo airport official was quoted by Agence France-Presse as saying. Egyptian authorities have not yet found the aircraft's flight recorder, which might provide clues about the cause of the crash.
The crash coincided with heightened global airline security and the cancellation or delay of several British, French and Mexican flights to the United States during the holiday season because of fears that a plane could be used in a terrorist attack.
Egyptian civil aviation officials said that among the passengers on board the airliner were 133 French tourists heading home after a New Year holiday, a Japanese woman and a Moroccan. Thirteen Egyptians, including six crew members and seven members of a relief crew, were also killed.
Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin and Mr. de Robien met friends and relatives of the victims at a crisis center set up at a hotel near Charles de Gaulle airport outside Paris, where the plane had been scheduled to land at 9 a.m.
President Jacques Chirac called President Hosni Mubarak of Egypt to express condolences and receive information about the tragedy. Mr. Mubarak had been scheduled to travel to Sharm el Sheik later Saturday to meet Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, who was vacationing in the popular Red Sea resort.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell called his French counterpart, Dominique de Villepin, to convey his condolences, the French Foreign Ministry said.
The Boeing 737 is the world's most widely used passenger jet and is considered one of the most reliable aircraft in civil aviation. But the crash was the third of a Boeing 737 on the African continent in fewer than nine months. It came just days after an older Boeing 727 plunged into the sea on Christmas Day after takeoff in the tiny West African state of Benin, killing 139 people.
Flash Airlines is a private Egyptian charter aviation company founded six years ago by Egyptian and Italian businessmen. It operates two Boeing 737-300 twin-engine jets, both manufactured in 1993, according to the company's Web site.
The Flash Airlines plane arrived in Sharm el Sheik from Venice with Italian tourists aboard and took off an hour later, officials in Egypt said. It had been due to make a short stopover in Cairo to refuel and drop off the original crew before continuing to Paris.
Egypt's civil aviation minister, Ahmed Shafik, who traveled to Sharm el Sheik with senior aides and technical experts, told state-run Egyptian television, ''the aircraft had an ordinary technical failure just after takeoff, which caused a loss of control and it crashed into the sea south of the airport of Sharm el Sheikh.'' He did not specify the nature of the failure.
''I hope we can soon determine the causes of the incident in a definitive way, although I repeat that it was the result of a technical failure,'' the minister added.
In Paris, France's junior transport minister, Dominique Bussereau, said, ''The plane had a problem at takeoff and then tried to turn around, and it was at that moment that it apparently crashed.''
Egyptian state television showed Egyptian Air Force planes, navy ships and a helicopter searching the Red Sea coastal waters for victims and debris, while Italian warships stationed there joined in.
An Egyptian Civil Aviation Ministry official said that the search for the aircraft's flight recorder was continuing, according to the state-run Middle East News Agency. The official was quoted as saying that the plane's ''altitude was not high, which made it very difficult for the pilot to save the aircraft and take it back'' safely to the airport.
Egypt has experienced other airline tragedies in recent years. On May 7, 2002, an EgyptAir Boeing 737 crashed outside Tunis, killing 14 people and injuring 48 others.
On October 31, 1999, an EgyptAir Boeing 767 crashed off the United States' Atlantic coast, killing all 217 people on board. Egypt has denied claims by the United States that the plane was deliberately crashed by the co-pilot.
