AN exciting waterfront-development proposal is in the early stages of formal review by the Village of Tarrytown. The proposal, from National Resources, Inc., of Greenwich, Conn., has the potential not only to transform the Tarrytown waterfront but also to redefine the role of developers as leaders in reclaiming contaminated properties on the river.
National Resources has put forth a bold concept for Tarrytown: a mixed-use project including an aquatic center with a swimming pool, a public esplanade along the river, commercial space, a relatively low density residential development and a new Village Hall. Equally exciting, the company proposes to move an existing asphalt plant back off the river to free up the waterfront for public recreation. National Resources, a company that specializes in dealing with contaminated land, brings considerable experience and credentials to the task, with 25 sites across the country where it has cleaned up, and returned to productive use, contaminated properties. One example in Westchester is the adaptive reuse and rehabilitation of the Otis Elevator factory, now known as iPark, in Yonkers.
Recently enacted legislation reforming New York's brownfield law should make it easier to move the Tarrytown land, and other contaminated sites, through the state regulatory process and back into public or private use.
While many developers grudgingly add public amenities and access to the waterfront under pressure from citizens' and environmental groups during the state environmental review process, National Resources has proposed them in Tarrytown before the formal public review has even begun. Tarrytown's mayor, Paul Janos, deserves credit for working with the developer to shape the proposal.
When compared to the proposal for the development of the General Motors property to the north, in Sleepy Hollow -- 1,500 units on a 100-acre site -- and the Ichabod Landing project just to the south of the General Motors site, with 44 units on 3.4 acres, the Tarrytown proposal -- at 128 units on a 30-acre site -- gets points for relatively low density -- about one-fourth that of the other two developments.
But some Tarrytown residents have expressed concern about the proposed density. The village should provide a full and open process for critics to air those concerns, to review the proposed site-cleanup plan, and to address any other concerns residents and interested parties have.
The public review of pending development proposals in Sleepy Hollow and Tarrytown provides a once-in-a-generation opportunity to address congestion along Route 9 and to thoughtfully link the waterfronts of Sleepy Hollow and Tarrytown. Working together, the mayors and planning boards of the two villages can coordinate waterfront access and enhance and integrate rail, bus, and water-based transit to reduce automobile traffic.
Incorporation of ferry service and the addition of a new Metro-North station at the General Motors site, along with a jitney linking the waterfronts and both main streets, can ease the impact of new developments while strengthening ties between the communities and improving the quality of life for residents of both communities. Trails along the river will add significant new stretches to the greenway vision of a continuous walkway along the Westchester waterfront and along the entire river from Manhattan to the Troy Dam.
Scenic Hudson intends to participate actively and constructively in the formal review of the important details of the Tarrytown and Sleepy Hollow projects as they progress. We will work with all the parties involved with the Tarrytown site to explore options to completely relocate the asphalt plant off the waterfront land. We will work with the citizens, the developer and village officials to ensure that the final plans add to the Hudson Valley's growing reputation as a national model for sustainable waterfront development.
SOAPBOX Ned Sullivan is president of Scenic Hudson.
