Dancers With a Dream
Diane Coburn Bruning took on the task of starting a new dance company in Westchester three years ago. The company, Chamber Dance Project, performs contemporary ballet to live chamber music and invites audiences behind the scenes to watch new dance works evolve.
Ms. Bruning, a dancer and choreographer, is winner of a string of enviable major grants and critical praise for her originality. This year both a Guggenheim Fellowship and a New York Foundation for the Arts Fellowship are allowing her to study at Yale with two top theater professionals: Jennifer Tipton, a lighting designer, and Ming Cho Lee, a scenic designer.Chamber Dance Project performs regularly in Manhattan but has been frustrated by the lack of suitable dance space in Westchester. ''W hope to build a small theater on the Hudson someday,'' Ms. Bruning said.
Meanwhile, Chamber Dance Project is looking to develop a home base at the Tarrytown Music Hall, where the company will perform on Jan. 17 at 7:30 p.m. A string quartet led by Christopher C. Lee will provide the music for works by Peter Pucci, Ann Carlson, Victor Quijada (seen here dancing with Lisa Tachick)and Ms. Bruning herself. (The program will also be presented on Jan. 12 at 8 p.m. at Symphony Space in Manhattan.)
The Music Hall will need technical upgrading to make it dance-worthy, but Ms. Bruning said she is determined to ''have a performance that looks like New York shows.'' That means building a solid audience for dance in Westchester. Is that a pipe dream?
''We're continually trying to find out,'' Ms. Bruning said. ''My thesis is if you provide the highest quality, people will come.''
Tickets are $25 and $100, which includes a post-performance champagne reception. Information: (914)631-3390.
For Drama Set to Music
Hoff-Barthelson Music School in Scarsdale has held coaching classes by guest artists since the school began in 1944. Master classes as highbrow entertainment have evolved since then and even have been the subject of a Broadway play.
The cast of characters invariably includes the trembling or supremely confident young virtuoso, the lethally imperious or sympathetic coach and the audience itself, comfortably seated and awaiting blood or tears. Such public trials by fire are not for the faint of heart.
Hoff-Barthelson's series of public master classes will continue through April with the pianist Horacio Gutierrez on Feb. 7 at 2 p.m. at St. James the Less Church in Scarsdale; the violinist Glenn Dicterow on Feb. 8 at 2 p.m. at Hope Lutheran Church in Scarsdale; the jazz pianist Dick Hyman on April 22 at 8 p.m. at the music school; the flutist Paula Robison on April 25 at 2 p.m. at Hope Lutheran Church, and members of the New York Philharmonic on April 26 at 3:30 and 8 p.m. at the music school. All master classes are free. Information: (914)723-1169.
Klezmer in Spoon River
After ''Talmudic Vaudeville,'' what can you do for an encore? For the BAS Teen Players at Bet Am Shalom Synagogue in White Plains, the answer is ''Spoon River Anthology Voices,'' a musical theater piece based on the 1916 book by Edgar Lee Masters.
Winding through the epitaphs of the residents of fictional Spoon River, performed by youngsters aged 13 through 17, will be music by Margot Leverett and the Klezmer Mountain Boys, a professional band that combines klezmer with bluegrass. R. Vincent Park, a member of Bet Am Shalom and a Tony-nominated director who produced and directed ''Voices,'' said the fusion relates perfectly ''to the agrarian nature of the Jewish experience.''
''Voices'' will be presented at the John &amp; Maxine Bendheim Performing Arts Center of the JCC of Mid-Westchester in Scarsdale next Sunday at 1 and 4 p.m. Proceeds from the event will go to the Emergency Fire Relief Fund of the synagogue, which burned down in a four-alarm fire on Sept. 9. Mr. Park said the group hoped to raise $10,000.
Tickets are $18 for students and $36 for adults. Information: (914)834-7011.
ROBERTA HERSHENSON
E-mail: westarts@nytimes.com
