The shot at the buzzer looked good from the moment it left Jessica Foley's hands, but there were still plenty of reasons it should not have gone in. Connecticut does not lose at home, Connecticut does not blow 11-point leads in a matter of 2 minutes 37 seconds and Connecticut does not give one back after Diana Taurasi saves the day with 4.7 seconds left.
Maybe it could happen to some other team, but not to the reigning dynasty of women's college basketball.
But Foley's shot sailed smoothly through the net, sending Duke players crashing to the floor in celebration and UConn players to the sideline in stunned disbelief. Fourth-ranked Duke used a ruthless full-court press and some clutch shooting to erase a 14-point deficit in the final 3:53 Saturday, shocking No. 1 Connecticut, 68-67, before a sellout crowd of 16,294 at the Hartford Civic Center.
''I guess we're human,'' said Huskies Coach Geno Auriemma, whose team led by as many as 20 points late in the first half.
A game that looked well in hand for UConn ended up coming down to the final play. Taurasi, a senior all-American, seemed to have righted the Huskies with a short jumper with 4.7 seconds remaining. But Duke guard Lindsey Harding pushed the ball upcourt and passed to Foley on the right wing. Foley, a sophomore from Wodonga, Australia, had time to set up and launch the 3-pointer over the outstretched arms of Ann Strother and watch in amazement as it went in.
''I set up for the shot well,'' Foley said. ''It didn't feel that good off my hand. I was fading away from the basket and I had someone right in my face. It was a lucky shot, really.''
The loss was the first at home for the Huskies (9-1) since Feb. 2, 2000, when they fell, 72-71, to Tennessee. Having won 69 straight at home, UConn needed one more victory to break the N.C.A.A. Division I record for longest home-court winning streak in women's college basketball. Tennessee also had a 69-game streak, from 1991 to 1996 -- a streak that was ended by UConn. The Huskies had also won 76 straight regular-season games, a streak that included a 77-65 victory last season at Duke.
Wearing new gray-and-blue uniforms, Connecticut appeared ready to make a statement with a dominant victory over the Blue Devils (10-1). The Huskies took a 35-18 lead into halftime and were outplaying Duke on both ends of the court. The Duke all-American Alana Beard was 0 for 7 from the floor and scored just 1 point in the first half, when the Blue Devils shot 21.9 percent.
''I am a shooter and I just told myself that I needed to just keep on shooting,'' said Beard, who scored 20 points in the second half. ''Throughout the game they were double- and triple-teaming me, and I just needed to make sure to create for myself and my teammates.''
Connecticut led by 17 with 7:21 remaining, by 14 with 3:53 left and by 11 with 2:37 to play. Figuring she had to find a way to spark her team, Duke Coach Gail Goestenkors went to a full-court press, and it quickly changed the game. UConn became rattled, and Duke, just as it did last season after falling behind UConn by 28 in the second half, charged back.
''We were not planning on using the press,'' Goestenkors said. ''If anything, we wanted to use it in spurts. It got to the point where we had to do something to change the momentum of the game. You can't full-court press too early because we would just run out of gas.''
UConn, which committed six turnovers over the final 2:02, allowed Duke to tie the score at 65-65 on a layup by Beard with 40 seconds left.
''I can't even talk about some of those sequences without laughing,'' Auriemma said. ''They were so ridiculous.''
But UConn appeared to have escaped. Taurasi, relatively quiet for most of the game, slashed to the basket and hit the short jumper with time running down to give the Huskies a 67-65 lead. But Duke responded with what might have been the biggest basket in the history of its women's program.
''It's tough to be up by 20 and then all of a sudden give it away,'' said Taurasi, who led UConn with 16 points. ''Stunning? Yes, it's definitely stunning whenever you lose a game like that. You lose a game like that and you don't even know where to start. It was a lack of aggressiveness on our part. When you get trapped, you've got to be aggressive and move the ball yourself. We weren't doing that.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
