ELENA TUERO has about 50 paintings hanging on the walls of the small room in her house that she calls her studio, all painted in the last six months. She has, for the moment, run out of wall space, and out of canvases as well.
Forgive her this painting frenzy; she is making up for a lot of lost time. Years of it, lost to the ravages of Parkinson's disease.
Ms. Tuero is a young woman, just 44, but since age 27 she has been fighting against Parkinson's, a chronic and progressive disorder usually associated with people much older. It began quietly enough, back when she was working as an accounting clerk.
''I started making a lot of mistakes,'' she said in an interview at her home in Freehold. ''I couldn't figure out why. I was so good at it.''
It was the beginning of the tremors that are the most familiar symptom of Parkinson's. ''One day my friend noticed my leg was shaking,'' she recalled. ''That's when I started worrying, when people began noticing.''
A doctor diagnosed Parkinson's, telling her she was the youngest patient he had ever seen. It is a cruel condition that affects the area of the brain involved in movement and coordination. In addition to the tremors, it can cause limbs to grow rigid and can impair balance. And it gets worse over time.
A year ago, Ms. Tuero said, her hand use, speech and ability to walk were pretty much gone. She shook so much that she once kneed herself in the nose. When the phone or doorbell rang, she would panic at the thought of trying to answer. Her independence was vanishing.
''I wasn't able to feed myself, I wasn't able to cook,'' she said. ''You have your pride. You want to do things for yourself, but you can't.''
Then, in June, she took a chance on a relatively new surgery called deep brain stimulation. It's not for all Parkinson's patients; for one thing, it's a grueling operation, requiring, in Ms. Tuero's case, six hours of open brain surgery through which she had to remain conscious. And it is not a cure. But it can help Parkinson's sufferers regain some of what they have lost.
The surgery, which was done under the guidance of Dr. Anette Nieves at Robert Wood Johnson University Hospital, involves placing electrodes in the brain and running wires down under the collarbone to attach to a pacemakerlike device. And for Ms. Tuero, it worked a miracle.
Now her speech, though slightly slurred, is back. She can walk fairly well. And, much to her surprise, she can paint.
''I saw a picture of a picture, and I said, 'I'm going to paint that,''' she recalled of the moment shortly after the surgery when she decided to see just what her once-useless hands could do. She bought some canvases and paints on eBay and gave it a try. First a white vase against a red and pink background. Then a fat ballerina. Then an outpouring of flowers, people, cats, abstracts, some of them copies of works by masters like Picasso, others original.
The paintings are pretty good, and the therapeutic value is incalculable. Ms. Tuero is especially happy to be able to show a different side of herself to her daughters Tiffany, 14, and Vanessa, 13, who were born early in the course of her Parkinson's, and whom she has raised for most of those years as a single mother, even while struggling with the disease.
''I don't really remember seeing my mom well,'' Vanessa said. ''I just remember seeing her sick.''
Ms. Tuero said that for years she avoided going to her children's school activities so as not to embarrass them with her physical condition. It depressed her, she said, that the girls had no defining image of her that wasn't dominated by Parkinson's, but since the surgery that has changed.
''Now they say, 'My mother's an artist,''' she said. ''They say it with such pride.''
Ms. Tuero, who came to the United States from Peru when she was 13, knows that the long road she is traveling has more rough spots ahead. Just how permanent the benefits of deep brain stimulation are remains unclear.
''I'm not cured,'' she said. ''The Parkinson's will still progress. I don't know what this will lead me to. We'll see.''
But for the moment she is enjoying the recovery of abilities she thought were gone, and is getting pleasure from giving her paintings to people who have helped her over the years. Her New Year's resolution, she said, is this: ''To inspire whoever needs inspiration. To tell them there's always hope.''
JERSEY
