THE developers of a 425-mile natural gas pipeline that had been scheduled to run through Westchester County are again reconsidering their plans in light of a United States Commerce Department ruling that the pipeline's path across the Hudson River is unacceptable.
Officials with Columbia Gas Transmission Corp. of Fairfax, Va., the primary sponsor of the pipeline, said they were weighing their options carefully, whether to appeal the Dec. 15 decision in federal court or to go back to the drawing board on the plan, called the Millennium Pipeline.
''As part of that process we would expect we would reach out to key agencies in the state and federal governments as we consider what options remain,'' said Karl Brack, director of communications with Columbia Gas. ''We don't know exactly which course we will take, but we do know that the need for the project is as great as it has ever been.''
The project, a $700 million plan to build a natural gas pipeline from Lake Erie to Westchester County, has been a long-running saga pitting the area's need for energy against the wishes of environmentalists, county residents and others who said the route that was finally approved, across the Hudson River at Haverstraw Bay, might threaten fish in the bay and harm the effort to rebuild the waterfront at Croton-on-Hudson. Others feared that an explosion on the gas-line route would cause havoc in a thickly populated area or knock out power to the city. The route was approved by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission in 2001, on the condition that the state and localities approve it.
The state objected, saying the plan would be in conflict with New York's coastal management program. On Dec. 15, the project took a heavy blow when Donald L. Evans, the United States Secretary of Commerce, rejected Millennium's appeal of a New York Department of State ruling that the pipeline should not cross the Hudson River into Westchester County at Haverstraw Bay.
If the company decides not to appeal the ruling, it will need to find an alternative crossing for the pipeline. Officials with the Department of State said they have suggested 10 alternatives, proposals the company said it had examined and rejected.
At least five of those proposals have been deemed unacceptable for environmental reasons by officials in Rockland County.
Although there was a fight two years ago over the route through Westchester, which ultimately led to the location of the pipeline in a less populated area of Mount Vernon, the current debate focuses on the crossing of the Hudson from Rockland to Westchester. ''This is such a tangled web of environmental and economic considerations that it's difficult to predict with any kind of certainty where this goes,'' said state Assemblyman Ryan Scott Karben, a Democrat who represents several riverfront towns in Rockland County.
''I am not opposed to the pipeline itself,'' Mr. Karben said. ''I believe the pipeline is important to strengthening our national energy independence and grappling with the regional energy issues. I do believe it needs to be built in the area where it will cause the least environmental disturbance.''
That concern, along with ones about public safety, have left Westchester and Rockland counties pitted against each other.
''I commend the folks in Westchester who were far better organized,'' Karben said. ''The Westchester advocates were out early on this issue and had a greater role in shaping the debate. Now there's a situation where the United Communities of Westchester have achieved their objective at the potential price of devastating the Rockland waterfront, and that's a price that is unacceptable.''
Specifically, Mr. Karben was concerned about the state's proposed alternatives, four of which cross Piermont Marsh and another that would cross Hook Mountain State Park.
United Communities of Westchester, a Westchester County-based organization that opposes the current route of the pipeline, has suggested the best alternative would be to stop the pipeline at the Bowline power plant in Rockland County. This would allow Columbia to replace old pipelines while providing time to develop a master energy plan for the region.
Members of the organization said their concerns range from any damage the pipeline's construction would have in sensitive environmental zones to the safety issues created as it runs under communities near homes and schools. Officials in Croton-on-Hudson have been particularly vocal about the Haverstraw Bay crossing because the route would go through the village arboretum and through well fields that provide its primary drinking supply. In Briarcliff Manor, there are objections because the pipeline runs within 10 feet of Todd Elementary School.
The pipeline route begins at the border of the United States and Canada in Lake Erie and comes ashore in western New York between Erie and Ripley. Nearly 90 percent of the route either replaces existing gas pipelines in operation since the late 1940's or follows existing corridors.
Eamon Moynihan, a spokesman with the Department of State, said it was up to Millennium to determine the next move.
Mr. Karben said that the fastest way out of the stalemate was for the state to sit down with concerned parties and discuss options. ''At the end of the day I think the pipeline will be constructed,'' he said. ''I just don't know how long the day is.''
ENERGY
