They may be playing for only half of the national title, but Louisiana State or Oklahoma will have to produce a complete effort to claim the Bowl Championship Series crown on Sunday night in the Sugar Bowl.
Southern California (12-1) almost certainly nailed down the No. 1 ranking in the Associated Press news media poll with its dominating 28-14 victory over Michigan in the Rose Bowl on Thursday. But neither the Tigers nor the Sooners bemoaned the fact that college football was heading to its first split championship since 1997, though they sounded a certain note of defiance.
''They got to stay at home, play the lesser team,'' Oklahoma defensive tackle Dusty Dvoracek said of the Trojans' victory over Michigan (10-3) in Pasadena, Calif.
L.S.U. is playing a virtual home game at the Superdome, about 90 minutes from its campus in Baton Rouge. But the Tigers and the Sooners are each 12-1 and mirror each other in their strengths. Both have defensive units that rank among the most suffocating in the nation.
Louisiana State is first in scoring defense, allowing 10.8 points a game, and second in total defense, giving up 259.5 yards a game.
''They have a unique style of blitzing,'' Chuck Long, Oklahoma's offensive coordinator, said. ''A lot of teams are doing it, but L.S.U. does it where it seems there is someone coming at the quarterback on every play.''
The Sooners have given up 14.8 points a game to rank third in scoring defense, and the 255.6 yards a game they have allowed makes them the nation's stingiest defense. They rely on the speed and athleticism of tackles Tommie Harris, an all-American, and Dvoracek, and ends Jonathan Jackson and Dan Cody.
Although the Tigers put up 34.9 points a game, they cannot afford mistakes, especially by Matt Mauck, whose 28 touchdown passes were offset by 12 interceptions. The reason? The Sooners have an explosive offense led by quarterback Jason White, the Heisman Trophy winner, and have scored 45.2 points a game, best in the nation.
''Oklahoma takes a lot of big-play shots,'' Tigers cornerback Corey Webster said. ''They run a lot of deep routes.''
The Sooners convert them, too. White completed throws of more than 45 yards in all but two games and tossed 40 touchdown passes. Beyond L.S.U.'s blitz schemes, the defensive line understands it needs to outmuscle Oklahoma up front.
''We're trying to protect the scoreboard,'' L.S.U. defensive end Marquise Hill said. ''We don't want people scoring on us. Just like you put up a fence in front of your house, if you don't want anybody to score on you, you're going to put up the best fence you possibly can.''
Likewise, the Oklahoma running backs know that picking up the Tigers' blitz will be as important as how they run the ball. ''If they're hitting Jason and Jason is on his butt the majority of the day, then we'll have a long day,'' Sooners running back Renaldo Works said.
So what will ultimately decide who will take home half the national title?
The key for Oklahoma Coach Bob Stoops will be whether his players can bounce back from the 35-7 drubbing by Kansas State in the Big 12 title game and shrug off the talk that the Trojans deserved to play for the B.C.S. title. Stoops said his players were troubled. ''They feel they have a chip on their shoulder or something to prove, and that all of a sudden they're the only team in the country to win 12 games and we're not worthy to be anywhere,'' he said. ''It doesn't sit well.''
L.S.U. Coach Nick Saban said his players had great chemistry all season and needed to pull together for one more outing.
He worries about turnovers, especially because L.S.U. has not played since it won the Southeastern Conference title on Dec. 6. He also worries about Oklahoma's big-play offense. ''I think quarterback efficiency has a lot to do with the outcome of who wins and loses games,'' he said. ''If you don't affect a guy as good as Jason White is, he's going to give you some problems.''
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
