The Two Faces Of Saudi Arabia
IN ''The Dual Monarchy,'' an essay in Foreign Affairs magazine, Michael Scott Doran, an assistant professor of Near Eastern Studies at Princeton, argues that Saudi Arabia is neither an ally nor an enemy of the United States. Rather, it is both. Excerpts follow:
The Saudi monarchy functions as the intermediary between ... a Westernized elite that looks to Europe and the United States as models of political development, and a Wahhabi religious establishment. ... [Crown Prince] Abdullah tilts toward the liberal reformers and seeks a rapprochement with the United States, whereas [Prince] Nayef sides with the anti-American religious establishment that shares many goals with Al Qaeda. ...
On the right ... the clerics and Nayef take their stand on the principle of Tawhid, or ''monotheism.'' ... In their view, many people who claim to be monotheists are actually polytheists and idolaters. For the most radical Saudi clerics, these enemies include Christians, Jews, Shiites and even insufficiently devout Sunni Muslims. ...
The doctrine of Taqarub ... marks the left. Taqarub promotes the notion of peaceful coexistence with nonbelievers. It also seeks ... the political involvement of groups the Wahhabis consider non-Muslim. ...
Last year's suicide bombings in Riyadh forced Prince Nayef to crack down on extremists inside Saudi Arabia. ... In Washington, these operations have helped to support the view that the Saudis have, once again, become our close allies. ... Although this is certainly a positive development ... indications suggest that ... Al Qaeda and the establishment Saudi clerics still share a strong sense of the common enemy.
Al Qaeda's nightmare scenario is that the Americans and the Iraqi Shiites will force Riyadh to enact broad reforms and bring the Saudi Shiites into the political community. There is no question that many hard-line Saudi clerics share precisely the same fears. ...
As Washington struggles to rebuild Iraq it will thus find, once again, that its closest Arab ally is also one of its most bitter enemies.
Simple Solution: Return It
ROSS GITTINS, a writer at The Sydney Morning Herald, online at (www.smh.com.au), explains why economists regard gift giving as foolish. Excerpts follow:
Conventional economics teaches that gift giving is irrational. The satisfaction or ''utility'' a person derives from consumption is determined by their personal preferences. But no one understands your preferences as well as you do.
So when I give up $50 worth of utility to buy a present for you, the chances are high that you'll value it at less than $50. If so, there's been a mutual loss of utility. This astonishing intellectual breakthrough was first formulated in 1993 by Joel Waldfogel ... in his seminal paper, ''The Deadweight Loss of Christmas.'' ...
But ... research has continued apace -- just in case there's some factor the economists have overlooked.
One possibility is that gifts may procure a source of insurance for the giver. Parents, for instance, may give gifts to their children in the hope the children will care for them in their old age. Adult children may give gifts to their elderly parents in the hope of being remembered at that last great gift giving with lawyers present.
The guru Waldfogel has recently refined his calculations ... using a new survey to estimate that, per dollar spent, people value their own purchases 18 percent more than they value items they receive as gifts.
In the course of their inquiries, researchers have discovered that women are much more involved in gift giving than men. ... and are more successful in finding a desirable gift .
Most of this enlightenment comes from a paper by Bradley Ruffle and Todd Kaplan ... which says gift giving makes sense in cases where the giver's knowledge of where to find something the recipient wants is greater than the recipient's own knowledge. Or if the giver is in a position to get it cheaper.
So the rule is that the giver gives a gift only when her ''search costs'' for the gift are lower than those of the recipient. ...
I should tell you Ruffle has opined that the utility from gifts consists of not only the monetary cost and value of the gift, but also the emotions associated with it. ...
Really, it makes you wonder how someone so foolish manages to hold down his job.
Rule Britannia
IN the Claremont Review of Books, Terrence O. Moore, a Colorado school principal, argues that today's young American males are either ''wimps'' or ''barbarians,'' with nary a man among them. Excerpts follow:
Recognizing other barbarians by their ball caps, one barbarian can enter into a verbal exchange with another anywhere. ... This exchange, which never quite reaches the level of conversation, might begin with, ''Hey, what up?'' A traditional response: ''Dude!'' ...
Barbarians do not use words to express thoughts, convey information, paint pictures in the imagination or come to a rational understanding. Such speech as they employ serves mainly to elicit in others audible reactions to a few sensual events: football, sex, hard rock, the latest barbarian movie. ...
Among the most popular barbarian activities are playing sports and lifting weights. ... Playing sports can encourage young males to cultivate several important manly virtues. ... For this reason, superior cultures have invariably used sports as a proving ground for manly endeavor. As the Duke of Wellington said, ''The battle of Waterloo was won on the playing fields of Eton.'' The problem is that many young males of today receive no manly education apart from sports. When the British boys who later defeated Napoleon were not competing in the sporting contests conducted in elite public schools, they were learning how to become gentlemen. They spoke the King's English, carried themselves with an air of dignity, treated women with respect and studied assiduously.
