IN his camouflage jumpsuit, Paul Commesso blended into the leaves and brambles of the Rocky Point Natural Resources Management Area. He gazed through the pines and tall grasses, slowly shifted out of a crouch and took a single step deeper into the scrub.
''When you're stalking deer, you have to take about one step every five minutes or you're going to spook them,'' Mr. Commesso, 43, said, allowing his voice to rise above a whisper when it became clear that a trailing reporter and photographer were making enough noise to alert any deer in the county.
''You ever see how huge the ears are on a deer?'' he asked. ''They put those things up, and it's like radar. They can hear you coming for miles.''
Almost every week from Oct. 1 to Dec. 31, Mr. Commesso hunts deer with bow and arrow, hoping for venison steaks and a trophy to mount on his wall. But with the archery season closing without a big buck in the bag, he's considering another option: participating in a special January season when shotguns and muzzle-loading rifles may be used (high-powered rifles, with ranges far greater than shotguns and muzzle-loaders, are deemed too risky for densely populated Long Island).
The special season opens on Monday and runs 15 days in designated areas of two county parks: Sears-Bellows Pond in Hampton Bays and Theodore Roosevelt in Montauk. The special season stays open five extra days in selected lands controlled by the state Department of Environmental Conservation.
The hunt is one of the few ways in which the region's runaway population of whitetailed deer is kept under some semblance of control. Last year, shooters brought in 621 deer carcasses, or roughly half of the archers' take, in just one-sixth the time of the archery season.
Even so, hunters probably take no more than 15 percent of the overall herd each year. A recent D.E.C. survey placed the herd in Long Island's state-managed lands at roughly 5,600. Working off that number, scientists have estimated that the total for all of Long Island may be as high as 20,000.As the herd grows, it chews its way through everything edible in the woods and becomes a pest to crops, lawns and backyard plantings. To combat the encroachment, last year the D.E.C. awarded nuisance hunting permits to 125 Long Island property owners. That may save some prize begonias. But natural habitats can also be damaged by overgrazing.
''New concerns have arisen over the impact overabundant deer have on the health of Long Island ecosystems,'' said the D.E.C.'s regional wildlife manager, Dan Rosenblatt. ''When overabundant, deer can consume practically all of the mast in an area, as well as everything green within their reach.'' Mast includes acorns and other tree seeds.
Then there are the hazards to humans. Each year, the State Department of Motor Vehicles attributes a handful of traffic fatalities, ranging from two to eight annually over the past half-decade, to deer.
''When the deer population gets out of control, we hear about a lot of serious car accidents as they spill out of the wooded areas into the residential zones,'' said Emily Leogrande, a spokeswoman for the Suffolk Parks Department. ''It's important to keep the numbers down so there's a harmony between people and animals on the Island.''
Under an aggressive strategy to winnow the herd, in 2002 the D.E.C. issued 8,681 deer permits for use on Long Island's state-managed lands. Licensed hunters bagged a total of 2,148 does and bucks. That's nearly double the 1,187 deer taken in 1993. But critics of the government's deer policy say hunters can't keep pace with the animals, which can double their population in two years when foraging conditions are good.
''Deer are not only voracious eaters, they also trample crops indiscriminately or dig them up with their hooves,'' said Joseph Gergela, executive director of the Long Island Farm Bureau, a cooperative of local growers. ''The only method we have to control the population is hunting, and frankly, it's not quite getting the job done.''
The bureau estimates that Long Island deer do $4 million to $5 million in crop damage each year.
Wayne Pacelle, senior vice president of the Washington-based Humane Society of the United States, agreed that reducing the deer population on Long Island was a priority but said that using arrows and bullets was unjustifiably cruel.
''We're concerned about the high wounding rates with archery and muzzle-loaders in particular,'' he said. ''Hunters are causing more suffering to the deer because they want to have fun with their preferred weapon. So it's less a population-reducing exercise than a recreational pursuit.''
Mr. Pacelle advocates nonlethal population control, like immunocontraception (annual birth control injections for does), tall fences to protect property and educating homeowners about vegetation that deer won't eat.
But a contraception program -- sharpshooters firing dart guns loaded with chemical contraceptive -- was tried on Fire Island with little success, and it is generally agreed that the wide-open spaces of mainland Suffolk would be even less amenable to such a program.
East End motorists are familiar with the sight of deer feeding along the roadsides, particularly during their active period between sunset and sunrise.
''If you ride along Sunrise Highway you're bound to see at least 18 or 20 every night,'' said Officer Bob Boden of the Suffolk County Police. ''They're all over the place out there.''
A few weeks ago, Matthew Kavanaugh, 27, a fisherman who often rides to Orient Point after dark, watched in horror as a string of four deer spread across Sound Avenue.
''Suddenly they were so close and so thick that there was no way to avoid a collision,'' Mr. Kavanaugh said. ''In a split second, I basically had to pick which one I was going to hit. I'm just happy I didn't kill two or three that night, or myself.''
After the collision, Mr. Kavanaugh stopped his truck, stepped out and realized that the deer had survived the 50-mile-per-hour impact and was thrashing in the middle of the roadway. He called the police. Ten minutes later, after two other cars ran over but didn't kill the deer, an officer shot it twice and unceremoniously dragged it onto the shoulder.
The scene is commonplace. East Hampton Town recorded more than 200 deer-car collisions in 2003. In New York State, there are about 65,000 deer collisions each year, costing drivers roughly $50 million in auto repairs. With hunters unable to control deer populations and contraceptive programs failing, the only thing limiting the size of the herd is the weather and the volume of forage.
''We are probably no longer seeing increases in the deer population in some areas such as Fire Island or Wertheim National Wildlife Refuge because these habitats have currently exceeded local carrying capacity,'' Mr. Rosenblatt said. In other words, the deer herds are limiting themselves through mass starvation.
