''THE thing about Dennis,'' said Andrew A. Janczak, a Bethpage manufacturer, ''is his unbridled enthusiasm. Give me a bucket of that, and I'll take it over anything else.''
Mr. Janczak was talking about his Massapequa neighbor and new business partner, Dennis M. Lynch. In September, the two men introduced a new product called the Wine Clip. The device, developed by Mr. Lynch and manufactured by Mr. Janczak's company, the Enecon Corporation, is a magnetic filter that fits over a wine bottle. When the bottle is poured, the partners say, the Wine Clip filters out tannins and impurities, improving taste. It retails for about $50.
For Mr. Lynch, 34, manufacturing and marketing gift items represents a new chapter in a young but remarkably eventful career. In 1993, he was washing dishes at Chef's 2 restaurant in Melville when he began repairing and reselling computers. from the basement of his mother's house in Hicksville. From that start, Mr. Lynch built a company, ComputersAgain, that by the end of the decade had 265 employees at Heartland Industrial Park in Brentwood and sales of $27 million. His main resources were charm, moxie and a capacity to work killer hours.
Eventually, the hours and the strain got to him.
In 2000, he was selected as Long Island's Entrepreneur of the Year by Ernst &amp; Young, but by the time he accepted the award, Mr. Lynch had already stepped down as chairman and chief executive.
''I called myself 'chief smart officer,''' Mr. Lynch said. ''I don't really know if I even had a title at that point.''
Fifty pounds overweight, worn out from the struggle to take his company public, he had recently been hospitalized twice for exhaustion. After the second hospital stay, he decided to leave the company altogether.
''I had to do the public offering -- I had to become the I.P.O. multimillionnaire,'' Mr. Lynch said, at once mocking and celebrating his drive to success. ''I was so busy raising money, I didn't have time to run my company.''
He also didn't have time for his family. When his wife, Mary, went into labor with their third child, Mr. Lynch brought a laptop to the maternity ward and fine-tuned a presentation for his board.
''The nurses couldn't believe it,'' Mrs. Lynch said.
As Mr. Lynch explained it, he became an entrepreneur mainly to placate his father-in-law. ''Mary's father didn't want his daughter marrying a dishwasher,'' Mr. Lynch said. ''He didn't want her to marry a loser.''
Mr. Lynch didn't want to be a dishwasher, either.
To realize his childhood dream of playing professional baseball, he flew to Florida to try out with the Montreal Expos. He wasn't signed.
To make ends meet, he accepted an uncle's offer to work in his restaurant, washing dishes. One afternoon, he happened to see a pile of junked computers. Old computers, he realized, could be repaired, reconditioned and resold.
''Computer repair isn't very difficult,'' he said. ''I learned by making mistakes. When I fixed the computer, I sold it. When I made a mistake, I sold the machine to someone who could fix it.''
He soon realized he was better at making deals than making repairs. He convinced I.B.M. to sell him used computers with the stipulation that he did not have to pay for them until they were refurbished and sold. That gave him a competitive advantage, which he pushed aggressively.
ComputersAgain's business boomed. Sales and profits rose. It was the dot-com heyday, when companies without sales, customers or tangible products nevertheless filed public offerings that enriched the founders and their bankers.
Mr. Lynch wanted to run a public company, too. Through his lawyer, he met John Sculley, the former chief executive of both Pepsi and Apple, who invested $1.5 million in Mr. Lynch's company in 1995. His first suggestion: change the name.
''Renaming the company TechSmart was John's idea,'' Mr. Lynch said. ''It sounded better.''
The George Soros Fund took a $2 million position. Several more investors followed. A public offering seemed feasible.
''I was impressed with Dennis, and I invested in him as a person,'' Mr. Sculley said. Both men had grown up on Long lsland -- Mr. Sculley still has a house in Head of the Harbor -- and over a spaghetti dinner, they found they had much in common.
''John sort of took me under his wing, and so much followed,'' Mr. Lynch said. ''He's a marketing genius. He's taught me so much.''
For a while, TechSmart's sales doubled every quarter. But problems loomed. Computers kept improving in performance while dropping in price. Selling reconditioned computers became tougher. Mr. Lynch concentrated on cultivating investors and ceded his role as chairman to Joshua Rush, a partner in RHO Management, his lead investor. For the chief executive's post, Mr. Lynch recruited a Hewlett-Packard vice president, hoping that his credentials would impress investors.
He made the moves against Mr. Sculley's advice. ''I told him he ought to keep those jobs himself,'' Mr. Sculley said. ''But I understood what he was trying to do.''
In March 2000, on a business trip to Hartford, Mr. Lynch collapsed and was hospitalized for two days. The diagnosis, he said, was exhaustion.
In August, vacationing with his family in South Carolina, he was hospitalized again for several days. His fever spiked at 106 degrees.
When he got home, Mr. Lynch looked in the mirror and grimaced.
''I used to be a 190-pound athlete,'' he said. ''Here I was weighing 240 pounds. Something was very wrong, very out of balance.''
The economy was cooling down. The market for new stock offerings was collapsing. Back in his office, Mr. Lynch found himself at odds with the executives he had hired to make TechSmart more corporate.
''I'm a roll-up-your-sleeves kind of guy,'' Mr. Lynch said. ''The new guys took the corporate approach. We didn't work well together.''
In October 2000, shortly after the Ernst &amp; Young ceremony, Mr. Lynch resigned from his company. He said he could not describe the terms of his departure, because of a confidentiality agreement.
A company spokesman said last month that Mr. Rush, TechSmart's chairman, would have no comment. Since then, TechSmart has taken down its Web site and appears to have gone out of business. Two calls to Mr. Rush were directed to the company's legal department and were not returned.
Since leaving TechSmart, Mr. Lynch has concentrated on consulting projects under the auspices of Signature21, a marketing consulting company formed with Mr. Sculley. The Wine Clip is a Signature21 venture. And he shed most of the weight he put on.
Mr. Lynch describes his new venture with a rueful kind of boosterism. While he says he is grateful for this new opportunity and is eager to promote the new product, he still misses his days as a young lion in the media limelight, appearing on business talk shows on CNN and CNBC as an apostle of the New Economy.
"Totally, I feel it's small beer," Mr. Lynch said of his current enterprise.
''But I went to restaurants and watched people's reactions," he said, describing a series of focus groups he set up. "I like being the guy who came up with this idea.''
L.I.@WORK
