To the Editor:
Regarding ''Logging? Not on Mt. Nimham, Locals Say'' (Nov. 23):
The proposal for a forestry and model logging program at Nimham Mountain Multiple Use Area in Putnam County represents a small model forest management plan for a large audience. Put together by professional foresters from the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, SUNY College of Environmental Science and Forestry, New York City Department of Environmental Protection and Watershed Agricultural Council, this model forest plan is intended to educate people about forestry and to provide a viable option to landowners. This plan is about regenerating forestlands that have been altered by deer and invasive plants. It is a plan about watershed protection; it is a plan about land management. Of course, no management is an option and ''let nature take its course'' is also an educational tool. But isn't this ''no management'' option already being practiced on most of our forested public lands in the Lower Hudson Valley?
What we have here is 57 acres that would be actively managed, within a larger area of 415 acres dedicated for this plan, all within a 1,023-acre Department of Environmental Conservation Multiple Use Area. Let's remember that forest management is part of the mission in a State Multiple Use Area. If people would just take the time and consult with the various agencies involved they will learn that recreation, wildlife, public safety and erosion issues are all addressed and will be protected. That is what is in the best interests of the plan's authors. It is consistent with Department of Environmental Conservation policy on State Multiple Use Areas.
I like to think that this plan may influence some people to keep their lands in the Lower Hudson Valley forested and productive, instead of selling it off for development. I know of a large forest landowner in the Brewster area who actively manages her forest well within view of Routes 684 and 84. What you see from these highways is open, green space. She practices thinning, improves wildlife habitat, uses the property for recreation and generates income from timber sales. Look to the west from Routes 684 and 84 and you see a former forested hilltop leveled and now covered with Home Depot, Kohl's and more to come.
I would hope that some of those who distrust public officials might take a second look at this plan and see the big picture. The Lower Hudson Valley is quickly developing and its environment is impacted. The people who put this plan together represent an option for landowners. The model forest plan represents a good land stewardship option for a public multiple use area. It represents a way to educate people on how to keep forests forested in the Lower Hudson Valley.
Ted Kozlowski  Brewster
The writer is the chairman of the Region 3 Forest Practice Board, a volunteer organization for Westchester, Rockland, Putnam, Orange, Dutchess, Ulster and Sullivan Counties, which is part of the State Forest Practice Board, a group that advises the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation.
