No matter where the Carolina Panthers turned this week, they could not escape talk of the drought. It had been seven years since fans flocked to Ericsson Stadium for a playoff game, since Charlotte echoed with the sounds of marching bands and giddy fans turning the usually sleepy downtown area into a postseason party.
The giddiness returned Saturday night to a stadium decked in bright blue and accessorized with fluttering white towels, as the Panthers made perfect symmetry out of their 29-10 wild-card playoff victory over the Dallas Cowboys. That last playoff game here, in January 1997, also resulted in a victory over Dallas.
''This is so sweet,'' Panthers safety Mike Minter said. ''To do this for the first time in seven years, to be at home, with these fans, man, it's awesome.''
The Panthers washed away seven years of frustration with a dominating defensive performance, never letting the Cowboys into the game. The victory sends Carolina to St. Louis for a divisional playoff game next Saturday. The winner goes to the N.F.C. championship game.
On Saturday night, none of the Panthers were ready to look ahead. This was a celebration from start to finish. When the game was over, the team came back on the field and many players performed a victory lap, slapping hands with the fans who had lingered.
''It was incredible to be here and be a part of this,'' Panthers fullback Brad Hoover said. ''To see them waving those towels. I've never been around a crowd that loud, that electric.''
It mattered little that the Panthers' offense kept settling for field goals with touchdowns tantalizingly close. The fans kept howling and Dallas kept going nowhere. The Cowboys managed only 204 yards and did not score a touchdown until the game was out of reach.
''They get the lead and they're a pretty effective team,'' said Cowboys Coach Bill Parcells, whose team was in its first playoff game in four years. ''I think they have a good chance to beat Philadelphia if they play well.''
While the football universe outside Charlotte focused on Parcells's return to the playoffs, people here could not get enough of their star-free team. Panthers Coach John Fox, as low-key as Parcells is bombastic, stuck to his blue-collar defensive roots, relying on what has served him well since coming here to resurrect a franchise after a stint as the Giants' defensive coordinator.
That meant playing a snarling brand of defense and handing the ball to Carolina's bruising running back, Stephen Davis. He carried 26 times for 104 yards.
''We're not the flashiest team,'' quarterback Jake Delhomme said. ''We're going to run the ball and take our chances when we can. That's us. If we can just keep chugging along, that's all right with us.''
The offense kept doing just enough to win. John Kasay kicked five field goals. Delhomme made several big plays and no mistakes among his 18 completions for 273 yards. The defense, though, got things rolling by owning the first half, holding the Cowboys to 69 yards until a 59-yard field-goal drive late in the second quarter.
Trying to build on the game that quarterback Quincy Carter had against the Panthers in the Cowboys' 24-20 victory on Nov. 23, when he passed for 254 yards and 2 touchdowns, Dallas came out throwing. The Cowboys figured they would try the same strategy Saturday night, and their first drive consisted of six straight pass plays, followed by a punt.
The Panthers settled for a short field goal on their first drive, despite a 70-yard pass play from Delhomme to Steve Smith, who was tackled at the 1. After two more field goals, the Panthers finally reached the end zone on a 23-yard run by Davis, who caught the Cowboys off guard by running on third-and-10. He made the score 13-0 with 6 minutes 10 seconds left in the half.
The Panthers were thinking big on their final drive of the half as well, after a 57-yard pass play from Delhomme to Muhsin Muhammad, who fumbled and recovered the ball at the 2 after wrestling it away from linebacker Al Singleton. With time running out, Kasay trotted on for a 19-yard field goal with a second left.
That left the Panthers with a 16-3 lead. They took any potential drama out of the game early in the third quarter, driving for a 32-yard touchdown pass from Delhomme that Smith caught in the corner of the end zone after a spectacular grab over cornerback Terence Newman's head.
The 26-3 lead was more than Carolina needed.
Finally gone was the queasy feeling of a franchise that had struggled to regain the stature it built in the 1996 season. The Panthers were only a second-year expansion team then but showed so much promise, with Kerry Collins, now the Giants' quarterback, at the helm. The Panthers won their division that season with a 12-4 record, beating the Cowboys here, 26-17, in the divisional playoff game before losing at Green Bay in the N.F.C. championship game.
Back then, the boast of the team's owner, Jerry Richardson, that the Panthers would win a Super Bowl in their first 10 years did not seem so outlandish. Seven years later, it was back to sounding ridiculous.
But in a rush of adrenaline in a stadium quiet for so long in January, the Panthers' big dreams returned.
''You have to enjoy these times,'' Delhomme said. ''Because you don't know when they are going to happen again.''
PRO FOOTBALL
