THE Detroit Tigers ended their season a game shy of the modern record for most losses by a major league baseball team. The Lions, with just 5 wins and 11 losses, are sitting out the N.F.L. playoffs.
There is hope, at least, for the Red Wings in hockey and the Pistons of the N.B.A. Hopeful, too, are the roughed-up home teams of the auto industry as they kick off 2004 on their home turf in the rollicking, bruising, cheerleading spectacle known as the North American International Auto Show.
The three Detroit-based automakers -- General Motors, Ford Motor and the Chrysler Group of DaimlerChrysler -- hope to use their local ties to best advantage, with plans for splashy introductions of both production models and the futuristic design studies known as concept cars.
Press events start today at Cobo Center in downtown Detroit, with doors open to the public next Saturday through Jan. 19.
Although it has a German parent, Chrysler is the local company that has lost the most market share to foreign brands, and it has posted disappointing financial results. But at the show Chrysler will look ahead to one of its busiest years, with nine new vehicles coming to market.
Its most crucial new products will be two large rear-wheel-drive cars, the Chrysler 300 and Dodge Magnum. The 300, replacing the Concorde and 300M, is intended to be a flagship sedan for the Chrysler brand. The Magnum, built with the same architecture, is more like a sporty station wagon, and will offer an all-wheel-drive option.
Chrysler's challenge will be to sell the public on rear drive, with its performance advantages, after decades in which Detroit argued that front drive -- which provides better winter traction and more efficient use of space -- was the better choice.
And the Magnum could be a tough sell for another reason, given that wagons are not as popular here as in Europe.
Chrysler will also show its revamped minivans, the 2005 Chrysler Town &amp; Country and Dodge Grand Caravan. Long-wheelbase versions will come with second- and third-row seats that fold flat into the cargo floor; only the third rows can be folded this way in the Honda Odyssey and Toyota Sienna, two of the competitors that have reduced Chrysler's minivan market share to 38 percent, from 50 percent.
Chrysler is also introducing convertible versions of its sporty Crossfire two-seater and its retro PT Cruiser.
Some of Chrysler's concept vehicles illustrate two sides of an internal debate over what to do with Jeep, a brand that has lost momentum as G.M.'s Hummer has made big gains. At one end, Chrysler is showing rugged S.U.V.'s that could take on Hummer, like the Wrangler Unlimited, a production model, and the Rescue concept. At the other end of the spectrum is the Treo, unveiled at the Tokyo show last fall, a youthful interpretation of Jeep characteristics. The question is whether Jeep must maintain its rugged off-road capability, or whether some sort of Jeep Lite would be an acceptable way to attract young buyers.
Ford is another struggling local company that has lost market share, and it also promises a record number of production models and concept vehicles. Having redesigned its best-sellling F-150 pickup last year, the company is hailing 2004 as ''the year of the car.'' [Money &amp; Business, Section 3.]
Ford's parade is led by the GT, a 500-horsepower limited-production sports car that goes on sale this summer for $140,000. The GT is modeled on the Ford racecars that dominated Le Mans in the 1960's, the same period evoked by the 2005 Mustang, which will make its debut as a production car. The new Mustang picks up many of the design features that characterized the first generation, down to the side scoops and the two sets of vertical taillights.
Ford will also introduce the Five Hundred, a full-size flagship sedan that will compete against cars like the Toyota Avalon. The Five Hundred's clean lines and arched roof recall recent Volkswagen and Audi designs. Ford is also showing its car-based Freestyle sport wagon, with flat-folding seats and a roomy cargo area.
Ford will try to revive Lincoln with a new Aviator, this one based on the architecture used for the midsize Mazda 6 sedan and the coming Ford Futura, rather than on the Ford Explorer platform. The Aviator's intended target is the Lexus RX330.
Lincoln is also showing a truck that will be a blend of pickup and S.U.V., as well as a concept car that hints at the division's future direction in styling.
Ford affiliates will show several new models: Aston Martin's DB9 convertible, Jaguar's next S-Type sedan, Land Rover's new sport utility concept and Volvo's redesigned S40 compact sedan and V50 wagon.
G.M., the healthiest of the Big Three, will try to maintain its momentum. The highlight of its Detroit premieres will be the sixth-generation Chevrolet Corvette, with a shorter body, more powerful engine and new convenience features.
The Pontiac division will introduce the G6, a midsize line replacing the Grand Am. Shown in Detroit as a sedan, the G6 will eventually be offered as a coupe and a convertible.
Pontiac is also showing a production version of the Solstice roadster that it unveiled here two years ago. G.M. intends to use the 2006 Solstice and two concept cars using the same architecture -- the Chevrolet Nomad wagon and Saturn Curve coupe -- as examples of how it can efficiently create distinctly different models from common parts.
While the home teams are ready for their game, the visiting teams plan a strong offense, too. With Detroit focusing on the cars it has long neglected, Nissan, Toyota and Honda are shifting their focus to trucks.
Nissan, which boldly invaded Detroit's market stronghold with its Titan pickup, will display the Infiniti QX56, a fancy version of the full-size Nissan Armada S.U.V. that is built on the Titan's platform. Nissan is also showing the next-generation Frontier pickup, Pathfinder sport utility and a small crossover vehicle that would compete with the Ford Escape.
Honda is showing a concept version of a Pilot-based pickup that is said to be close to production.
Toyota is coming to Detroit with a new full-size pickup, too, and hybrid-power versions of the Highlander and RX330 utility wagons.
Toyota's line of Scions, aimed at the young, adds a sporty coupe. Scion, now operating only in California, will expand to other states in June.
The Lexus luxury division will show its new styling direction with the second-generation GS sport sedan.
European automakers are bringing high performance and luxury to Detroit. Ferrari will show its 612 Scaglietti four-seater with a V-12 engine, and Mercedes-Benz will introduce the ornate 617-horsepower McLaren SLR sports car. Other debuts include the next-generation Kia Spectra compact car, the Suzuki Reno car-based utility and sporty concept cars from Hyundai and Mitsubishi.
2004 Detroit Auto Show
