Sue Rooney, like a lot of resourceful third grade teachers, likes to add real-life, practical applications to her English lessons. When the 15 students in her Lawrenceville Elementary School class exchange letters about every other month with Lt. Lawrence Alfano of the Army and his Iraq-based platoon, for instance, they taste the rewards of a dutifully kept-up correspondence. The letter-writing idea came from a former colleague of Ms. Rooney, Elaine Harmon, who is now retired from teaching but has made a mission of supporting the troops.
So far, Lieutenant Alfano has responded to the class on behalf of his 70-man unit with individual postcards and other gifts. In one postcard, to an 8-year-old student, he replied, ''It's elementary, my dear,'' of course he loves Sherlock Holmes stories too. And in November he shipped the class its ''magic carpet,'' a small Persian-style area rug that now cushions the classroom's book nook -- appropriate, Ms. Rooney noted, ''because books can take you very far.''
But maybe the most thrilling result of the class's letter campaign arrived on Dec. 22: a television camera crew. For a spot on ''Lou Dobbs Tonight'' on CNN that was broadcast on Christmas Eve, the students were filmed while writing their latest batch of cards.
''They were very excited,'' Ms. Rooney said, ''but they also got timid. Even the most outspoken boy got shy. He said to the reporter, 'We're helping the soldiers who are helping us.''' Another boy expressed his wishes to ''help the soldiers who are helping to get rid of the bad king.''
In February, Ms. Rooney will sit the class down for yet another batch of letters, this one in time for Valentine's Day. ''We'll double up,'' she said, meaning that each child will write two letters, ''because there's twice as many soldiers as there are students. We'll also send them decorations -- paper hearts and things.'' Ms. Rooney is looking forward to the new assignment. ''It's hard to get third graders to write,'' she said, 'but this is something they love; they get really excited for this.''
Tammy La Gorce
BY THE WAY
