Immediately after the All-Star Game break this season, the San Diego Padres will play a road series against the Houston Astros. One of the games could match the Padres' David Wells against the Astros' Andy Pettitte, with Roger Clemens watching from the stands or, if he resumes pitching and joins his hometown team, from the Astros' dugout.
At that moment, pitchers who made 96 of the Yankees' 163 starts last season would be in the same building. The Yankees will be playing in Detroit.
When Wells jilted the Yankees on Wednesday and signed with San Diego, he left the Yankees with only three pitchers who started even one game for them last season: Mike Mussina (31 starts), José Contreras (9) and Jorge DePaula (1).
The Yankees no longer employ the pitchers who made 122 starts for them last season: Clemens (33 starts), Pettitte (33), Wells (30), Jeff Weaver (24), Brandon Claussen (1) and Sterling Hitchcock (1).
The Yankees are the first defending league champions to lose so many starts from one season to the next since the 1997 Florida Marlins, who went to spring training in 1998 having lost 140 starts from the year before. (That included the starts by Alex Fernandez, who would miss all season with an injury.)
The '98 Marlins lost 108 games, and it is safe to say that the 2004 Yankees will fare much better. But Brian Cashman, the general manager, knows there are concerns.
''Last year the big question was how old our staff was, with two 40-year-old guys,'' Cashman said, referring to Clemens and Wells. ''Now, the new question is going to be, 'You've got new guys in New York -- can they do it here?' We're going to have to test the waters.''
Mussina and Contreras will remain in the rotation, with Kevin Brown, Javier Vazquez and Jon Lieber scheduled to take the final three spots. Without Wells, the Yankees for now have no insurance against injuries besides DePaula, who has only that single career start.
Cashman can fix that problem by signing veterans to nonroster contracts, as he was prepared to do with Wells before Wells bolted for the Padres, who offered him the chance to make $7 million and not be subject to a weight clause.
But even the more intriguing possible additions, like the former Yankee Orlando Hernández, would not change the fact that the rotation is all right-handed. That could be dangerous at Yankee Stadium, where the right-field fence is close and the alley in left-center is distant.
''They need a left-handed starter,'' one major league advance scout said. ''At Yankee Stadium, teams are just going to stack their lineups with left-handed hitters. I don't know who it would be, but you have to have a left-hander there.''
The Yankees have gotten at least 25 starts from a left-hander in every season since 1992, when the left-hander Greg Cadaret started 11 games. From Herb Pennock to Lefty Gomez to Whitey Ford, Ron Guidry to Jimmy Key to Pettitte and Wells, the Yankees have had a steady line of left-handed aces.
That changed this winter, when the Yankees let go of Pettitte and Wells and passed on Eric Milton, a left-hander coming off a knee injury who was traded by the Minnesota Twins to the Philadelphia Phillies.
''There are very few left-handers out there that are quality,'' Cashman said. ''The preference would be to have a nice balance of lefties and righties. But if it comes down to a higher-caliber right-hander versus a lesser-caliber left-hander, I'd go with the higher-caliber right-hander.''
In Brown, Vazquez and Lieber -- and Contreras, who will get a full season in the rotation -- Cashman says the Yankees have found those quality right-handers.
''Kevin Brown, when he's healthy, is a tremendous pitcher -- always has been, always will be,'' Cashman said. ''Vazquez was terrific in the National League, and he'll make the transition to the A.L. Contreras, for the last two months, was outstanding as a starter, for the most part. And we signed Jon Lieber last year to rehab for this exact purpose, to be our fifth guy.''
Lieber missed last season after having reconstructive elbow surgery in August 2002. Even when healthy, he has not excelled against left-handers, who batted .298 against him in his best season, 2001. But the other four starters were tough on left-handers, holding them to a combined .235 average. Brown did not allow a homer to a left-hander in 374 at-bats.
''Everything Brown throws is hard, and his sinker sinks away from left-handers,'' the scout said. ''So he's a little different. Vazquez is a quality guy, but when he's got to face six or seven left-handers in a lineup, it's going to be a grind for him, mentally. It might take away his slider and force him to rely on his changeup more.
''Lieber is a great competitor, but you don't know what you're going to get coming off a year of inactivity. Even when he is healthy, he's not going to strike out a lot of people. He's very durable and he'll give you a lot of innings, but guys hit the ball off him.''
Cashman said Lieber would be at full strength in spring training, and he is also optimistic about the rest of the rotation. But with the old reliables gone, it is an anxious optimism.
''We know we've got high-ceiling, highly capable pitchers for the rotation,'' Cashman said. ''But until they perform and stay healthy and prove they can do it in New York, we'll be anxiously waiting to see how it plays out. It certainly has great potential, but potential means you haven't done it yet.''
BASEBALL
