IT was a mystery, a sound like a broom handle falling to the floor upstairs. David Skelton had heard hunters shooting on Saturday, Nov. 29, around 3:30 p.m., when he was working at his computer downstairs in his Southeast home. He didn't connect them to the noise, which he went to investigate, finding nothing.
It wasn't until the next day that his wife, Gina, was in the guest room upstairs and found a lead 20-gauge shotgun slug the size of a nickel, the dent it had made in the headboard of their guestroom bed and the hole it had made through the wall of their house. Chunks of wallboard were scattered across the bedspread. Her mother and 86-year-old grandmother had been sleeping on the bed the same day the shot entered the house, and the Skeltons' 3-year-old son, Connor, had climbed on the bed that morning to visit with them.
The shooting, which is still under investigation by the Putnam County Sheriff's Department, has raised the question of whether shotgun hunting should be banned in the fast-growing county, as it is next door in Westchester County. Westchester, Suffolk, and parts of Albany County allow only bow hunting, said Maureen Wren, a spokeswoman for the state Department of Environmental Conservation.
Capt. William J. McNamara, a public affairs officer with the Putnam County Sheriff's Office, said it is all too common for residents to call to report or complain about shots fired close to a house. Between Nov. 17 and Dec. 1, there were 40 such complaints, the office reported.
It is rare for homes to be hit, he said, adding that he did not know of any other cases this year like the Skeltons'.
The Skeltons and another neighbor said that in the past four years, four homes in a row in their neighborhood had been hit by hunters.
Ms. Skelton describes herself as a city kid, and she remembers when she first heard shooting near the house, which they moved into in 2001. ''Being urban, I heard that first gunshot, and I looked around and was ready to hit the ground,'' she said. She added that she did not subject herself to three and a half hours of daily commuting to her job in Manhattan as a database administrator to live in the country, only to be shot at.
Mr. Skelton, a conductor for Metro-North, remembers confronting a hunter who was walking on the stone wall at the back of his property, holding a shotgun without a safety on. The couple has also heard shooting at night.
''I don't have a problem with bow or shotgun or pistol or anything,'' he said. ''I have trouble with irresponsible hunting.''
Hunters are prohibited from shooting within 500 feet of a house, but the law can be difficult to enforce, said Tony Hay, the Putnam County legislator representing Southeast.
''It's really a problem in that particular area,'' he said. ''It's right across the border from Westchester, and it's the first area they can use guns. The property owners, the town and the sheriff's office have acted responsibly. All we have to do is get the hunters to act responsibly.''
The Department of Environmental Conservation said that last year, the most recent for which figures are available, there were 2 fatalities and 36 nonfatal injuries in hunting accidents.
John J. Dunford, the Southeast town supervisor, said the town would be holding a public hearing on Jan. 22 to prohibit parking on Nichols Road, where many people park to hunt on a large parcel of land behind Rockledge Drive.
''Once we adopt that, the highway superintendent can go out and post no-parking signs, and sheriff's officers and state troopers can go out and ticket or tow where people are illegally parked, to try and discourage people from going into the woods,'' Mr. Dunford said.
The property the hunters have been using is posted with ''No Hunting'' signs, and the current owners told the town that no one had permission to hunt there, Mr. Dunford said. Lester Greenberg, a Manhattan lawyer for the owners, Salem View Farms, a limited liability corporation, said a security person patrolled the land and had been instructed to keep people off the property.
The town of Southeast is also investigating a law that would allow hunting only with bows. This would need approval by the State Legislature, Mr. Hay said.
The Skeltons' neighbor on Rockledge Drive, Brian Felton, 40, said he would like to see Putnam County opt for bow hunting only.
''It's been developed enough now that there are not enough open areas that I'd say are really safe to hunt,'' he said. ''I live right on the Westchester line, my kids go to Westchester schools, and there are very few parcels of land left that aren't somewhere surrounded by homes.''
After his storage building was hit by a shotgun slug, he does not allow his children, ages 6 and 8, to play outside on their nearby swing set during the fall. He said the homes of two adjacent neighbors had also been shot.
''I know when people's homes are getting hit and they don't have enough comfort to let their kids out, then something has got to be done,'' he said.
DEVELOPMENT
