LIKE those cartoon figures carrying signs declaring that the end is near, two men walked on a grassy strip bordering Route 17 next to the Kids ''R'' Us clothing store here on a recent Saturday, their red and yellow signs telling motorists that great savings could be had in the store.
But the real message was that the store was closing.
The end is near not just for this store but for 145 other Kids ''R'' Us locations. The parent company, Toys ''R'' Us -- a cornerstone of the corporate landscape in North Jersey since the early 1970's -- plans to shut them by the end of January, along with 36 Imaginarium educational toy stores, because of sluggish sales and mounting losses. In addition, three distribution centers, including one in Saddle Brook, will be closing, and a total of 3,800 of the chain's approximately 114,000 employees will lose their jobs.
The company's announcement last month -- coming eerily about the same time that another venerable name in the toy world, F.A.O. Schwarz, was declaring bankruptcy for the second time -- is indicative of the larger problems that Toys ''R'' Us has been facing for years: flat sales, faltering profits and declining stock value.
''By the late 1990's, a lot of customer had soured on Toys 'R' Us,'' Ursula Moran, vice president for investor relations and corporate communications, said in a recent interview. ''A lot said, 'I can't get the right help, I can't get the right price.' We've struggled to turn that around, and it's hard work. It took long, hard years for things to decline, and it's taken long years to rebuild.''
Founded by a World War II veteran, Charles Lazarus, in his father's Washington bicycle shop 55 years ago, Toys ''R'' Us pioneered the big box store concept and went on to prosper, becoming the leading toy retailer in the country. Then another company -- started by a friend of Mr. Lazarus, Sam Walton -- refined the big box concept -- and that company, Wal-Mart, knocked Toys ''R'' Us from its position as the nation's leading toy retailer in 1998 by slashing prices.
Like a child who hits a pothole while learning to ride a bike, Toys ''R'' Us never fully recovered.
The partly filled parking lot at the Kids ''R'' Us on Route 17 may attest to faltering sales. But right across the highway, the parking lot of the Babies ''R'' Us store -- a division with consistently good earnings -- is nearly full. And just up the road, the parking lot at Toys ''R'' Us is packed with motorists waiting for a space to open up, an indication that this particular store, at least, is doing well in what one stock analyst calls ''a battlefield'' in the toy wars.
Sales Remain Flat
After the dust settles, the company will continue to operate 681 Toys ''R'' Us stores in the United States; 569 others around the world; 193 Babies ''R'' Us stores; 4 Geoffreys , which combine the inventory of all the stores for sale in rural areas, and its e-commerce division.
Yet for all of its revitalization efforts, sales have remained flat at $11.3 billion for the fiscal year ending in 2003 as against $11 billion in 2002 and $11.3 billion in 2001.
For now, the company says 15 to 20 Kids ''R'' Us locations may re-open as Babies ''R'' Us. Toys ''R'' Us will also continue to sell children's apparel and the educational toys that were the staples of Kids ''R'' Us and Imaginarium.
''Toys 'R' Us is a children's paradise,'' said Margarita Lemberg, 40, of Greenwood Lake, who spoke almost poetically about her experience in shopping at Toys ''R'' Us stores over the last decade. ''You don't go there just to shop. You go to enter the children's world.''
Jeehye Park, a 37-year old former Manhattan resident who recently moved to Ridgewood, loves the huge Toys ''R'' Us flagship store in Times Square, with its 60-foot working Ferris wheel and 35-foot dinosaur, but has other emotions reserved for the store in Paramus.
''I went in once to Toys 'R' Us for a Halloween costume and they were sold out,'' Ms. Park said. ''And no one was there to help you.''
Stories like that make company officials shudder, especially since the chain says it has tried to train its staff in an effort to improve customer service. To combat complaints like those of Ms. Park, in 2000 Toys ''R'' Us hired a new president and chief executive, John H. Eyler Jr., the highly regarded chairman and chief executive of F.A.O. Schwarz.
Mr. Eyler had his work cut out for him trying to lure back customers who had tired of wandering the stores' vast aisles with a less-than-helpful staff.
In the last three years Mr. Eyler has redesigned the impersonal big box stores by creating cozier environments, opening stores that sell clothing as well as toys, closing others and implementing a series of layoffs.
He also instituted tighter inventory controls, added more exclusive items, teamed up with Amazon.com for Internet sales and emphasized better customer relations from a sales staff that to many shoppers had appeared inexperienced and indifferent.
For his effort, Mr. Eyler -- who is taking on such retailing giants as Wal-Mart, Target and K-Mart -- receives high marks from Walter Loeb, a stock analyst at Loeb Associates. ''Wal-Mart has been selling toys at a discount,'' Mr. Loeb said. ''As a result, this has become a battlefield here. I do believe that Eyler had made some major improvements, making the toy stores more shop-able, adding Imaginarium and other toy classifications to its stores and adding to the general dynamic by adding exclusive toys to Toys 'R' Us.''
As the holiday season drew to a close, analysts were watching to see whether these strategies paid off. Historically, November and December account for nearly half of all toy sales, and these seasonal sales have helped boost Toys ''R'' Us revenue in the past after disappointing earnings earlier in the year. Yet early snowstorms last month hurt merchants, and it is still not clear how much a strengthening economy inspired consumer confidence among lower- and middle-class shoppers. Even Wal-Mart, which began cutting prices on popular toys as early as October, reported disappointing sales last month.
Toys ''R'' Us, a publicly traded company on the New York Stock Exchange, does not plan to make its holiday sales figures available until Jan. 8. Successful holiday sales season or not, no one can say for sure what the future holds for Toys ''R'' Us or Mr. Eyler.
He Saw a Future in Toys
Charles Lazarus was a 25-year-old Army veteran in 1948 when he began selling baby furniture to G.I.'s from his father's bicycle shop in Washington. He quickly saw a future in toy sales, and in 1952 he began opening toy supermarkets, precursors of the big-box stores. By 1957, his stores, which had been called Children's Bargain Town, became Toys ''R'' Us.
The company moved its headquarters to New Jersey in 1973, settling first in Saddle Brook and then relocating in the early 1980's to Rochelle Park. In 1988, it moved into an office building off Route 17 in Paramus, where its headquarters remained until a move to Wayne last October.
''The toy business was kind of an accident,'' Mr. Lazarus said in an interview with DSN Retailing Today, a monthly trade publication for discounters. ''I started out selling a few baby toys and realized that customers didn't buy another crib or another high chair or playpen as their family grew, but they did buy toys for each child.''
By 1980 the company was reporting $480 million in sales. And in 1983, Toys ''R'' Us opened its Kids ''R'' Us stores as well as its first toy stores overseas. (Toys ''R'' Us can now be found in 29 foreign countries.) By 1990, the company had reached sales of $4.8 billion and held a commanding 25 percent market share.
Then in 1994, at age 71, Mr. Lazarus -- who served on the board of Wal-Mart for eight years -- retired as chief executive of Toys ''R'' Us.
About this time the stores were beginning to show their age, and profits and stock returns were starting to slide as competition from major discounters increased.
Still, Babies ''R'' Us opened in 1996. Yet despite that and other attempts at rejuvenation, the chain's problems continued. By 1998, despite closing dozens of stores and laying off thousands of employees, Toys ''R'' Us saw its No. 1 position in toy retailing go to Wal-Mart. Its market share, which had been 25 percent only eight years earlier, was down to 16.8 percent. Since then, the company said, its market share has been edging up, and is now 17.5 percent.
In 1999, the company tried to improve sales through educational toys, and to that end it bought about 40 Imaginarium Toy Center stores in 13 states. Despite high expectations, its Christmas sales were terrible, mostly because it could not keep its stores stocked and could not deliver the toys that had been ordered on its new Web site.
In January 2000, the company turned to Mr. Eyler, who as chief executive of F.A.O Schwartz had made a name for himself because of his merchandising skills and experience in e-commerce.
Eventually given the title of chairman, the 55-year old Mr. Eyler, who lives in Rye, N.Y., is the third chief executive to head Toys ''R'' Us since Mr. Lazarus retired. Born in Seattle, he graduated from the University of Washington and received an M.B.A. from the Harvard University School of Business. Among his accomplishments at F.A.O. Schwarz was breathing life -- at least for a time -- into some moribund stores and improving customer service.
Before arriving at F.A.O. Schwarz, Mr. Eyler held various management positions in the May Department Stores from 1979 to 1983 before moving on to serve as chief executive of Mainstreet, a family apparel unit of Federated Department Stores, and then chief executive of the men's clothing division of Hartmarx Corporation.
''To me, looking at a company like Toys, the first order of business is to agree on strategy and tightly focus on a very finite number of priorities,'' Mr. Eyler told The New York Times after being named to head Toys ''R'' Us.
Mr. Eyler, who declined to be interviewed for this article, made it a point of meeting every store manager and emphasizing better training for employees.
Then he launched a program to make the stores look less like warehouses, with aisle after aisle of toys, by creating clusters of specialty toys called boutiques like Animal Alley for an expanded line of plush toys, Imaginarium for educational toys and the R-Zone for games.
At the same time he increased the number of toys sold exclusively by the company from 5 percent to 20 percent of the inventory and made sure there was a system in place to keep the shelves supplied with top-selling merchandise. He also formed a partnership with Amazon.com to ensure that there would be no repeat of the e-sale disaster of the 1999 holiday season.
In a sense, Ms. Moran said, Toys ''R'' Us had become a victim of its own success. ''If you under-invest and neglect the physical plant and don't provide good customer service and don't make the right decisions, which is what happened to Toys 'R' Us store in the late 1990's,'' she said, ''then the consequences are not going to be pleasant.''
Based on comments from shoppers, said Susan McLaughlin, a spokeswoman for the company, customer relations have improved considerably.
High Profile in Times Square
To further shore up the sagging company, Mr. Eyler also persuaded the board to grab some attention by opening a 100,000-square-foot flagship store -- a combination toy palace and theme park -- at Broadway and West 44th Street in late 2001, a time when the economy was going south and New York was still reeling from the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11.
For now, Ms. Moran said, the company was ''pretty close to making money'' at the Times Square store, but added that the real benefit was from the high profile it gave the company.
''The promotional value in that store is clearly positive,'' she said. ''This year alone more than 10 million people will come through that store. It is one of the top ten tourist destinations in New York at this point.''
Yet while spending money with one hand, Mr. Eyler was keeping a tight fist with the other. In January 2002, the company closed 37 Kids ''R'' Us and 27 Toys ''R'' Us stores considered out-of-date and eliminated 1,350 store jobs and 550 positions at company headquarters. Again in January 2003, the company cut 700 store management and supervisory positions.
Finally, in October -- for the first time in the history of Toys ''R'' Us-- -- the company brought together all of its main divisions under one roof in new corporate headquarters in Wayne.
''There's a lot more communication within the organization, plus a greater sharing of ideas,'' said Ms. McLaughlin.
For the third quarter that ended in November, Toys ''R'' Us reported that total sales were $2.32 billion, up 2.2 percent over a comparable period last year, though there was a net loss of $38 million, or $0.18 per share compared with a net loss of $28 million, a loss of $0.13 a share, for the third quarter of 2002.
In the United States, the company's toy sales declined 3 percent because of lower video game sales, which were down 18 percent. Yet its comparable international sales increased 1.7 percent on top of a 4.1 percent gain last year in the third quarter, and Toysrus.Com sales grew 15.3 percent.
Babies ''R'' Us store sales continued to be one of the company's moneymakers, with an increase of 9.6 percent in total sales -- a 3 percent increase in comparable store sales -- because of loyal shoppers like Jennifer Haveman, 28, of Westwood, who has an 18-month old son, Ethan.
''I shop there all the time,'' Ms. Haveman said. ''I think the prices are comparable to other places. I pay less for Desitin cream there than I do at Shop-Rite. Even juices. There isn't nearly as much sugar in the juice it sells, less than in other stores. It's so nice to be able to get everything you need for your child at one place.''
For all of the euphoria over Babies ''R'' Us, anemic sales at Kids ''R'' Us for the quarter sealed its fate as a free-standing store. Comparable sales were down 11.5 percent, prompting the company to announce their closing along with the Imaginariums. On the day of the announcement of third quarter earnings and the store closings, Toys ''R'' Us stock dropped $1.56, to $11.18.
In 1994, when Mr. Lazarus retired, the company's stock value at the end of that year was $36.50, according to Hoover's Inc., a Texas-based company that provides corporate profiles. At the close of the fiscal year ending in 2003, the price was $9.04 cents, and the net profit margin in those years dropped from 6.1 percent to 2 percent.
The Company Sees Progress
In the face of such stark numbers, company officials insist that progress has been made in the past three years and that Mr. Eyler's strategies will help turn the tide. As for the future, Ms. Moran said,the strategy remains the same: continue to improve product and customer service, make the experience in the store fun and pleasant, keep the stores well stocked and try to sell at a reasonable, competitive price.
Asked whether Toys ''R'' Us could ever hope to recapture its pre-eminence, from Wal-Mart, Ms. Moran's answer was a surprising no.
''We would be deluding ourselves that we are going to grow by taking share back from Wal-Mart,'' Ms. Moran said, noting that Walmart has 20 percent of the market and Target about 10 percent.
''There's still 70 percent for everybody else and that's the share we're going for,'' she said. ''We're number two. Nobody else is close to us at this point. We have held our own against Wal-Mart reasonably well.''
