Dozens of cheeky Nashville Predators fans in the upper deck kept taunting Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur. He has won the Stanley Cup three times, and the Predators have yet to make the playoffs. History did not matter Saturday.
Brodeur was fair game because the Devils were dead-legged and susceptible. David Legwand scored twice for the Predators in their 3-2 victory, and probably the best part of the night for the Devils was the trip home.
''No excuses, but it didn't seem like we had enough energy at times,'' Scott Stevens, the Devils' captain, said.
The Devils (19-8-9-1) have played 9 of 10 games on the road. The travel seemed to wear them out. They are 1-2-2-1 in their last six games. Philadelphia lost Saturday, but the Devils did not capitalize and still trail the Flyers by 5 points.
When asked about the Devils' travels, Brodeur said: ''Well, it's over with now. It's not a fun schedule.''
Beginning Monday, the Devils play 7 games in 12 days, but 5 are at home. The two road games, which include a Jan. 15 game against the Rangers, are in the Eastern time zone.
''It'll be nice to get home and have a normal schedule for a while,'' Coach Pat Burns said.
Legwand put the game away for Nashville (18-14-4-2) with his second goal, at 5 minutes 20 seconds of the third, giving the Predators a 3-1 lead. He swerved around Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski, tapped the puck to right wing Scott Walker, then nudged in a rebound.
John Madden scored with 24 seconds remaining, his seventh goal of the season, after the Devils pulled Brodeur. The Devils finished with 40 shots on goalie Tomas Vokoun.
''We're working hard but not smart enough,'' Devils right wing Patrik Elias said. ''Sometimes we're just running around.''
The Devils, who came into Saturday's game as the least penalized team in the league, played a sleepy and sloppy first period and fell behind, 1-0, on a power-play goal by Legwand at 13:02.
''Probably one of the worst first periods I've seen from our end of it,'' Burns said.
The Devils had just killed off a penalty for having too many men on the ice when Elias was called for holding. Legwand controlled the puck inside the Devils' blue line, flipped a pass to defenseman Jason York, then headed to the goal.
Brodeur made a pad save on a shot by York, but he left a rebound. No Devils picked up Legwand, and he put the puck past Brodeur.
''I thought we played a very smart, high-energy first period, very focused, kept it simple,'' Nashville Coach Barry Trotz said.
The Devils generated only one good scoring chance in the first, and it came in the first five minutes. Vokoun sprawled to stop a rebound shot by Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer with his glove.
''It seems like every goalie plays unbelievably against us,'' Brodeur said.
Nashville defenseman Mark Eaton scored on a long slap shot at 4:48 of the second period for a 2-0 lead. Scott Gomez lost a face-off in the Devils' zone, and Eaton let a shot fly before anyone could react.
Eaton's goal seemed to stir the Devils. Elias scored at 9:46, his 11th of the season, after a rare Devils rush. Elias rammed in the rebound of a shot by Jeff Friesen.
It was only the second goal for Elias in 10 games. But the Devils trailed after two periods for only the seventh time this season. They have won only one of those games.
''It's been a tough stretch of games,'' right wing Brian Gionta said, ''but it would have been nice to get some points.''
HOCKEY
