IT has been almost three weeks since Essie Mae Washington-Williams announced that she was the half-white, half-black daughter of Strom Thurmond, the legendary senator from South Carolina. But the story won't die, at least in the South.
''A college-educated black woman, married to an N.A.A.C.P. official'' wrote Harold Davis, of Ridgeland, Miss., to the Atlanta Journal-Constitution on Dec. 28, ''must have had some insight into the damage dear old dad was doing to the aspirations of her own children. Talk about toxic love.''
In that newspaper on the same day, Adrienne Hasty of Pendleton, S.C., wrote, ''I never could understand the mentality of South Carolina residents who turned such a man as Strom Thurmond into an icon.''
Many people feel Mr. Thurmond has been exposed as a hypocrite -- someone who promoted racial separation and traditional family values, while being true to neither. One Thurmond supporter, for example, told Don Aiesi, who teaches political science at Furman University in Greenville, N.C., that he felt ''betrayed'' by the late senator's behavior.
Mr. Thurmond, who died in June at age 100 after 48 years in the Senate, began as a Democrat, but defected to the Republican Party in 1964. His switch came as white voters in the South were updating their anger, shifting it from Abe Lincoln and the Republicans, for winning the Civil War, to Lyndon B. Johnson and the Democrats, for pushing civil rights.
All this time, Mr. Thurmond kept secret that, in 1925, while a teacher and high school coach in Edgefield, S.C., he had a relationship with his family's teenage black maid, Carrie Butler. She gave birth to a biracial daughter, Essie Mae, at age 16.
Still, Mr. Thurmond remains a hero to many.
''From a moral standpoint, yes, what happened was wrong,'' Roberta Combs, president of the Christian Coalition, said. ''That's not the traditional family. That's not how it's supposed to be.'' ''But,'' she added, ''we're not going to sit around today and criticize Strom. He's helped so many people. He's touched so many lives.''
Dan T. Carter, a historian at the University of South Carolina, said he's heard all this before.
''You know, after all the rage at Bill Clinton for having an affair, I'm always waiting for conservative icons like this who stand for family values to get creamed for their indiscretions,'' Dr. Carter said. ''But look at Newt Gingrich. Or Jimmy Swaggart. It never happens.''
Some people credit the Thurmond family, especially J. Strom Thurmond Jr., the United States attorney in South Carolina, with excellent damage control. Two days after Ms. Washington-Williams shared the truth, the Thurmond family issued a brief statement acknowledging her ''claim to her heritage'' and saying they wanted to meet with her.
But Ms. Washington-Williams said she has been instructed not to divulge which members of the Thurmond clan have welcomed her to the family. The Thurmonds, once again, are telling her to be quiet.
Post-Confession  Correction:  January 11, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about reaction to the story of Essie Mae Washington-Williams, who recently revealed that she was the half-white, half-black daughter of Strom Thurmond, misstated the location of Furman University, where Don Aiesi, who commented on the episode, teaches political science. It is in Greenville, S.C., not Greenville, N.C.
