AS the countdown to the handover of power in Iraq enters its final six months, American officials are focusing on how to create a working democracy. They are trying to walk a fine line between giving ethnic and religious groups the territory, resources and autonomy they demand, and ensuring that such power does not give rise to dangerous nationalisms.
That prospect was evident last week in northern Iraq, when clashes among Arabs, Kurds and Turkmen in Kirkuk left at least five people dead. Arabs are trying to lay claim to the oil-rich city, which Kurdish leaders say should be integrated into a proposed autonomous Kurdish region. That corner of the country seemed to be edging closer to more sweeping sectarian conflict.
To avoid this, some experts say, the American authorities face the challenge of finding compromises: reallocating economic resources, divvying up power between central and regional governments and perhaps introducing a less familiar version of democracy, one that, for example, limits participation by extremist politicians campaigning on ethnic or religious differences.
''By breaking up the country, you're more likely to get radicalism,'' said Stephen D. Krasner, a professor of political science at Stanford University. ''Iraq looks like a very artificial country, but there's no evidence that breaking up countries makes them more democratic. I think the basic rule has to be, you need institutional arrangements that will make people want to stay with something that looks reasonably democratic, reasonably secular, rather than go elsewhere.''
Certainly the various groups within any country are not monolithic. In Iraq, people belonging to ethnic groups, like Arabs and Kurds, and religious groups, like Sunnis and Shiites, differ in the way they view their self-identity. But the seeds of modern sectarianism were planted when British colonial administrators, and then Saddam Hussein, favored certain groups and persecuted others to maintain power.
In recent weeks, political and religious leaders have been widening some of those fault lines. Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the country's most influential Shiite cleric, continues to press for general elections for the transitional government, a demand that, if adopted by the Americans, would favor Shiite politicians, since up to 70 percent of the population in Iraq is Shiite. On Christmas Day, dozens of religious leaders of Sunni Arabs, a minority group favored by the British colonial government and Mr. Hussein, met in Baghdad to form a shoura, or state council, to press for rights.
But the most vexing issue is Kurdish autonomy. The two governing parties in the Kurdish region say they are close to forming a united government that will push American and Iraqi officials to give it dominion over Kirkuk and wide powers throughout the northern region. This view of federalism conflicts with that held by many other Iraqi politicians, who want regional powers granted to smaller provinces.
''The problem is we have many competing thoughts, and all the thoughts are active now,'' said Dhari Rasheed Ali Yasseen, a professor of political science at Baghdad University.
But certain compromises could be worked out that would motivate the Kurdish parties and other political groups to stay part of -- and help build -- a greater Iraq. For example, Professor Krasner said, a Kurdish government given some autonomy but no land with natural resources -- namely Kirkuk's oil fields -- would have an economic incentive to see themselves as Iraqi-Kurds, and remain part of the new Iraq.
Professor Krasner suggested that all Iraqis might feel invested in the new country, and thus bury specific nationalisms, if they each received payments drawn from Iraq's oil revenues. This could be done by placing oil revenues in a trust, similar to the system Norway adopted. This trust would then issue occasional checks to every resident, as the state of Alaska does, or use the revenues for wide-ranging social programs.
''Dealing with the oil revenues is absolutely critical,'' Professor Krasner said. ''They must be used across the country so that it's in the interests of the people to stay together.''
Compromises would also have to be worked out in dividing powers between central and regional authorities to grant constituencies enough of a sense of self-rule to override narrow nationalistic aspirations. Many proponents of federalism in Iraq say the central government should retain control over defense, foreign and monetary policies. But beyond that, the competing groups cannot seem to agree.
The Kurdish parties, for example, want significant authority over all of northern Iraq, but some other politicians want regional powers to be divided among the 18 provinces that exist today.
Mowaffak Rubaie, a Shiite member of the Governing Council, said his preference was to split Iraq into five states: the Baghdad area; the Kurdish region; the largely Sunni Arab northwest; the Shiite holy area that includes the cities of Najaf and Karbala; and the far south, where the culture is rooted in the nomadic traditions of the Arabian peninsula. A joint government would rule Kirkuk.
''This system has a tacit acceptance of the ethnic confessional divide of Iraqis,'' Mr. Rubaie said. ''If Najaf and Karbala want to ban alcohol, so be it. But the Kurdish people like their bottle, so let them vote for it.''
The trick is to find a balance where states do not have so much autonomy that leaders can use that power to stoke separatist feelings. A key seems to be to disarm regional militias, though the handful of political parties in Iraq that have such armies are reluctant to dissolve them, especially given the continuing instability.
In Russia in the late 1990's, Boris N. Yeltsin granted the governors of the provinces wide-ranging powers to preserve their loyalty to the center. Though India does not have a federalist system, the same push and pull between central and regional authorities exist there.
Professor Yasseen, the political scientist at Baghdad University, said that in Iraq, federalism appears to be the first step toward separatism for groups like the Kurds. For that reason, he said, he prefers a weaker form of decentralization.
A crucial decision the Americans might have to make is whether to rein in their view of democracy. If a general election were held in the near future, religious leaders would likely try to gain power by emphasizing sectarian differences. If American officials cannot postpone this election, and at this point it might be too late, then they should try to bar extremist politicians from running, Professor Krasner said. There is historical precedent: Germany, for example, has prohibited Nazi parties from taking any real part in politics.
But there may be no easy way to do that in Iraq without appearing heavy-handed and hypocritical. After all, the United States invaded Iraq to install its vision of democracy, based on free speech and equal opportunity. Many Iraqis, regardless of ethnic or religious background, like to think the Americans will leave them with at least those ideals when they pack their bags.
New Wars in Iraq
