AS several National Guard units in Connecticut prepare to return from the Middle East early this year, many employers said Guard members' absence had not caused any significant disruptions at work.
Police and fire departments, defense-related companies, state and local government agencies and other businesses have generally reported that no more than 1 or 2 percent of their employees had been deployed at any time since the terrorist attacks on Sept. 11, 2001.
There had been concern that the call-ups might interrupt the operations of employers who tend to hire from the ranks of former military personnel, many of whom may be members of Reserve and National Guard units.
Two dozen members of the Connecticut State Police have been deployed with the Guard and Reserve, just under 2 percent of the total force, said Sgt. Paul Vance, a spokesman for the state police. A total of 75 state police employees, 73 officers and two civilian workers, are in the Guard and Reserve.
''We're able to absorb it,'' Sergeant Vance said. ''We move people strategically from troop to troop if necessary to make sure there are no manpower shortages at any one particular barracks, but so far the people who have been called up have been spread out across the state and we've been able to deal with it without any major problems.''
Currently, 1,160 members of the Connecticut National Guard are deployed, about one-third of the total force, as well as almost 700 members of Reserve units based in the state. Most of them are on duty in Southwest Asia -- both Iraq and Afghanistan -- although some are taking part in domestic security details, including providing security at the United States Military Academy at West Point, N.Y.
Six National Guard units that represent the majority of the call-ups will be returning home from March 3 to July 23. At least one unit will be departing soon for up to 18 months, and other units have been put on alert that they could be needed.
The big city fire and police departments seem to be coping, too.
Nancy Mulroy, a spokeswoman for the Hartford police, said that of the 408 police officers in the city, four were on active duty with the Connecticut National Guard. She added that the department graduated a class of 48 cadets in late 2003 and was preparing to graduate a class of 60.
''We're constantly playing catch-up, because of the officers who are becoming eligible for retirement, who joined the department when it was expanding in the 1970's and early 1980's,'' Ms. Mulroy said.
At the Department of Corrections, Stacy L. Smith, a spokeswoman, said that 58 employees had been called up out of a force of about 7,000, which is well under 1 percent.
The department recalled 23 laid-off corrections workers after the deployments and has a class of 63 going through training. All of the soldiers will get their jobs back when they return as well, as required by law, Ms. Smith said.
''The call-ups have created some challenges, but we've used overtime and reassignments to cover everything that needs to be covered,'' she said.
Al Chiucarello, a staff representative for the American Federation of State, County and Municipal Employees, said that unfilled positions were a greater problem. The Legislature's Program Review and Investigations Committee recently found that the prisons were understaffed by an estimated 700 people.
''The deployments are not causing the problem at this time,'' Mr. Chiucarello said. ''When they're short 700 people, what's 58 more?''
Kevin P. Maloney, a spokesman for the Connecticut Conference of Municipalities, said he had not heard of any towns that were particularly hard hit by the call-ups.
''Smaller towns, when they have someone called up, obviously it has a greater impact, because they don't have as many people to fill in,'' Mr. Maloney said. ''If you're talking about a three-person public works crew and one of them gets activated, it's one-third of the staff. But so far towns seem to be getting through it.''
He said only four towns had called for a package of information about how to deal with the call-ups, and of the four, three of them ultimately did not have a single employee activated by the Guard or Reserve.
David P. Sklarz, the superintendent of schools in West Hartford, had one employee deployed: Donald Slater, the principal at William H. Hall High School, who as an Army National Guard major will be supervising 137 members of the 118th Area Support Medical Battalion instead of 1,600 students.
At his going-away party during the holiday season, Dr. Slater told the parents and students that he had planned to retire from the Guard soon, but instead was going to face his first combat mission in almost 20 years in the service. Under the law governing the military, even if he becomes eligible for retirement while he is deployed, he cannot leave the service until his deployment ends.
''That's probably the greatest kind of loss,'' Dr. Sklarz said of the principal being deployed. ''Not that you can't find a replacement, but because of the relationship between a principal and students, and between the principal and teachers, it's a much more personal and painful kind of separation.
''These are the kind of positions that you wish the military would say, 'Well, we'll take them for a school year,' or 'We'll get them back in time for graduation.'''
He said the director of guidance had moved into the principal's position until Dr. Slater returns. And, because the position is being held open, it meant shuffling people around to fill in.
''Even filling in for one person in our case it has affected five people,'' Dr. Sklarz said.
At Electric Boat in Groton, which has just under 10,000 workers, about 15 percent of the employees are formerly of the military, said Robert Nardone, vice president of the company. But as of late 2003, the company, which builds submarines, had 20 employees who were on active duty with the Guard or Reserve.
Since Sept. 11, 2001, the company has had 37 employees called up, which represents under 1 percent of its workforce.
''In general, we've tried not to replace people because we want to be able to put them right back into their old job when they get back,'' Mr. Nardone said. ''Peers and co-workers have had to pick up the slack, but it gives the person who has been activated one less thing to worry about.''
