ARETHA MARTIN is quite pleased with her 2,700 square feet of space in the Bar Building in downtown White Plains. But she has yet to put up a permanent sign for her salon and day spa.
''They told me not to invest any more money into the business because the building is coming down,'' Ms. Martin said not long ago, recalling what city officials told her when they visited her last spring.
That was news to Anthony Longhitano, co-owner of the building at 199 Main Street, who has invested more than $1 million in the building since he bought it in 1998. The building, built in the 1920's and featuring Art Deco and Gothic influences, was in bad shape when he got it, he said.
It took much of a year to get the building shored up, he said. Supports for the brickwork over 400 windows had to be taken out and replaced, the corners of the building had to be rebuilt and a 12-foot section of chimney redone. New roofs were required and the inside was rehabilitated.
As new tenants arrived, he said, an average of $20 a square foot was spent on renovations.
Mr. Longhitano, who has invested in several other older office buildings downtown, said he was particularly interested in the building's development potential because of plans to extend Court Street to Hamilton Avenue, which would create a thoroughfare along the side of the building.
Mr. Longhitano said his 199 Realty Corporation, which he owns along with his brother, Frank Longhitano, would like to take advantage of the change by extending the building's decorative facade around the side, creating space for shopping at street level and building more stories on the rear of the building -- it has 10 stories with a penthouse in the front and four on the back -- for additional office space.
But the future of the building is in jeopardy. The developer Louis Cappelli, whose projects have changed the face of downtown White Plains, has a plan for another building: 221 Main Street, a $350 million hotel and condominium project next door to the Bar Building. His current plan includes demolishing the Bar Building to make way for the hotel's entrance. There are also alternative proposals that would remove only the rear section of the Bar Building.
Mr. Cappelli has said he will not build his project without the removal of the Bar Building. He has received support for his plans from the city's Urban Renewal Agency as well as the Design Review and Planning Boards.
Mr. Longhitano said he has not been approached by Mr. Cappelli about buying the building and says it is not for sale. Mr. Cappelli says that he met with Mr. Longhitano nine months ago and that he was told the building could be purchased at a price of $12 million. But Mr. Cappelli wants the city to acquire the property through eminent domain, a process by which the building is condemned, a market value established and the owner bought out.. A behemoth of a project, 221 Main Street dwarfs the Bar Building. The developer's plans call for two 35-story buildings between Main Street and Hamilton Avenue. In addition to the hotel and condominiums, it would include retail and office space. Having just opened the $320 million City Center project just a block away, Mr. Cappelli has a lot of clout around town these days. He recently placed a full-page newspaper ad urging residents to support his new project.
''The Renaissance of White Plains. Let's Finish What We Started,'' says the ad, which features color photos of his recently opened City Center and old black-and-white photos of sites like the abandoned Macy's and deteriorated Fountain Park. Mr. Cappelli said he is uncertain whether he will go forward with his project if the Bar Building remains.
''It's definitely an inferior project built around the Bar Building,'' he said. ''I need to build a superior product. The amount of money we're spending, $350 million, is so enormous you have to second-guess yourself when you're not building the best possible project.''
He also questioned how all of a sudden the building became thought of as historic, when in the past there has been no effort to document it as such. He also says his project will pay over $4 million in taxes and create nearly a thousand construction jobs and about the same number when it is done.
But Mr. Longhitano questions the need for such a big development. He says he has met with nothing but roadblocks when it comes to trying to get approval for his more modest plans at 199 Main Street.
''I'm being shoved aside,'' Mr. Longhitano said. ''But when I came here basically you couldn't give these buildings away.''
A public hearing on Mr. Cappelli's site plan and special permit application for 221 Main Street is scheduled for Monday. The city said it has no timeline; Mr. Cappelli said he needs to have some response within the next 60 days as he anticipates that interest rates may begin to climb, which he said could change his business plans. The Cappelli project, which is also called Renaissance Square, has met with considerable public opposition, with opponents complaining that its massive size is not in keeping with the area and will lead to traffic and parking problems as well as increased pollution. In addition, there is a contingent fighting to save the Bar Building. Among them is J.J. Sedelmaier, who owns an animation production company that occupies its penthouse.
''The reason we're in the building is because its one of the few buildings left in White Plains that has any character,'' said Mr. Sedelmaier, whose company produced the animation for the first season of the MTV show ''Beavis and Butt-Head.'' ''It's a refreshing, visibly pleasing structure. I'm involved in an industry that's very creative. To be in a cookie-cutter modern structure wouldn't be my first choice.''
The building was the tallest in Westchester when it was built in 1926. Located across the street from where the old County Courthouse was located before it was torn down in 1977, the building was home to many lawyers as well as architects, real estate and insurance brokers and other professionals.
But city officials say it has little historic significance beyond the date it was built.
''The fact of the matter is the building under the current guidelines has no historic value,'' said Paul Wood, economic development coordinator for the city of White Plains. ''The fact that it is old is true; the architecture is subjective.''
Supporters argue that the Bar Building and a handful of others built along or near Main Street in the 1920's help give the town its character.
''Those buildings may not be overly historically significant on their own, but they give us a sense of community, a sense of place and some extra character to that section of Main Street,'' said Jack Harrington, who until recently was president of the White Plains Historical Society. ''It's one thing to say let's change the face of the city. All you do is draw up the plan and call in the bulldozers. But changing the heart of a city is much more difficult. There's no simple way to bulldoze attitudes.''
In addition, with the office vacancy rate still hovering around 20 percent in the city, questions have been raised about whether such a massive development is viable.
Beyond those arguments, tenants say the Bar Building its important because it is more affordable than many other buildings in the city. The average price per square foot is $18 to $20, Mr. Longhitano said, while other space averages $26 to $28 elsewhere.
Ms. Martin, who has a 10-year lease, says she hopes she doesn't find herself shopping around soon.
''Where am I going to go?'' she said. ''The rents everywhere else are sky high and this is such a perfect space.''
IN BUSINESS
