ANTICIPATION always runs high when Chevrolet enters the maternity ward to deliver a new Corvette. Based on the four previous times one generation has given way to the next, enthusiasts have come to expect epic leaps in design, engineering and performance.
But the keepers of the flame had different priorities for the sixth-generation car, which will be unveiled today in Detroit: instead of inventing a whole new Corvette, Dave Hill, the chief engineer, concentrated on fixing small glitches in the old one.
The new car, known as C6, is slightly shorter in length, but taller and narrower. Mr. Hill says it slips through the air with less drag and less cockpit turbulence when the removable roof panels are stored in the smaller but more functional cargo compartment. The wheelbase is stretched 1.2 inches (to 105.7), not because the car needed more space between its axles, but to facilitate the sharing of parts with the Cadillac XLR roadster built in the same Kentucky plant.
The most notable changes in appearance are the first exposed headlamps on a Corvette since 1962, and a new grille designed to force air through the radiator and into the engine. Sharp creases atop the front fenders and across the flanks replace the previous model's gently sculptured surfaces. The tail section, widely unloved in the fifth generation, has new proportions and more interesting details.
While there are no significant powertrain changes, the V-8 engine is slightly larger and now produces 400 horsepower, up from 350. That, in conjunction with the reduced aerodynamic drag, means the new Corvette will be incrementally faster.
Placing the catalytic converters closer to the engine improves fuel efficiency and reduces emissions. Minor improvements were made to both transmissions, the six-speed manual and the four-speed automatic. The tires, brakes and suspension were tweaked for better performance.
New gadgets and creature comforts abound. Electric assists disable the anti-theft system, unlatch the doors, heat the recontoured bucket seats, secure the rear hatch, raise and lower the convertible top and allow the engine to be started at the punch of a button. A new navigation system responds to voice commands. The heads-up display, which projects information onto the windshield, can be programmed to report cornering g's, or lateral acceleration -- the car's grip of the road. The interior trim is better; a second cup holder has been added.
The C6 will arrive this fall as the first new Corvette in which user-friendly endearments outranked engineering strides on the priority list.
