'All That Glitters'
Islip Art Museum, 50 Irish Lane, East Islip, (631)224-5402. Through Jan. 25.
Yes, it is true: Gold is not the only thing that glitters. The artists in this group show prove the old saying by using a variety of shiny, lustrous and gleaming materials, of which gold is only one.
For Mary Boochever, Max Gimblett and Paul Hunter, gold leaf is the subsurface layer that illuminates their paintings by reflection. All three play down gold's precious nature and emphasize its luminosity.
Mr. Hunter's imaginary landscapes glow with hazy, indirect light filtered through translucent pigments. Subtle variations in sky and earth tones are caused by different shades of gold leaf. Ms. Boochever uses a similar technique in pairs of gilded panels and textured canvases, contrasting matte surfaces with metallic sheen. Mr. Gimblett's quatrefoil-shaped wood panels are based on intersecting and overlapping circles. This ancient motif is enlivened with gilding and glossy varnish.
The opulence of pure gold and its sensuous appeal are exploited by Martin Cary Horowitz, who applies it to found and fabricated objects. In ''Floor Curve'' and ''Center Bend,'' minimal wood and bronze shapes are treated to a rich coating of 24 karat leaf, like priceless artifacts from a Pharaoh's tomb. The gilding on ''Gold Bomb I,'' a deadly missile encased in an iron cage, makes it appear too valuable to destroy.
The show's other artists use plastic glitter flakes, cellophane, aluminum foil and fake gemstones in works that range from subtly understated to deliberately garish. Maura Robinson's ''Speechless'' series of rhinestone-encrusted wood panels looks like the remains of a set from ''The Wizard of Oz.'' For Daniel Dueck, glitter recalls the starry skies and aurora effects he experienced in his native Canada, while Jamie Vasta uses it to simulate the sparkle of flames.
'A Gift of Art'
Graphic Eye Gallery, 301 Main Street, Port Washington, (516)883-9668. Through Feb. 1.
Although the frenzy of holiday gift-giving is over, this exhibition suggests that art is a suitable present for any season, and one perhaps best chosen without deadline pressure.
Stephanie Bloom's ''Squirrel,'' a two-part abstraction of dancing shapes, its granular surface shimmering with reflections, would be right at home in the Islip show. The metallic sheen of silver ink brightens Judith Huttner's ''Mind Your P's and Q's,'' a watercolor that uses sinuous calligraphy as an abstract device. Fragmented lettering is collaged into Shellie Schneider's ''New Terrain Series V,'' in which strips of earth-toned paper suggest a landscape littered with broken signs.
The geometric framework of Mara Szalajda's ''Out of Focus'' keeps the structure paradoxically in focus, while the colors are allowed to soften and dissipate, validating the gouache's title. In a looser but no less regular grid, José Luis Seligson plays lively variations on textured shapes formed by combing through one painted surface to reveal another. Meg Pierce also plays variations on a geometric theme in ''Winter,'' a series of squares collaged with buttons, pearls and other found objects to suggest ice crystals, no two of which are quite alike.
A late-season snowfall is memorialized in Evelyn Kandel's ''Spring Storm,'' which combines the artist's poem with a small shrine to the unexpected event. The spirit of spring emerges tentatively in Roz Udow's romantic etching, ''Primavera with Bird,'' while Gloria Cunnick's ''Summer Day'' is all sunshine, stylized waves and sandy dunes, heralding the return of warm weather.
'Small Works'
Gallery Merz, 95 Main Street, Sag Harbor, (631) 725-2803. Through Feb. 28.
With a large number and a wide variety of works this show suits many tastes.
While there is no one theme, several pieces deal with female stereotypes. A familiar icon of glamour makes more than one appearance -- in Susan Zises's ''Barbie Can-Can,'' a relief painting that parodies peep-show tawdriness, and in Kathleen Bifulco's color photographs that focus on the doll's sexy details. Veronica Mezzina's collage, ''On Her Own,'' wittily reprises the stock image of the career girl forced to choose between her job and marriage.
The figures in Michael Yurick's ''Shadow Series No.1'' are elongated and broken into angular segments, forming a fascinating collage of organic and geometric shapes. Stan Brodsky also bases his compositions on natural forms broken up into separate components, but in his paintings, like ''Sun and Soil XV,'' they float as if suspended in luminous pools of pigment. Brenda Branch is a bit more literal in ''Sag Harbor Seascape,'' with its undulating blue lines and liquid blots of drifting color. Using translucent oil paint on wood, Jennifer Cross makes the tangible seem ethereal, so that her still lifes and landscapes have an otherworldly quality.
Scraps of salvaged driftwood take on human character in Keith Long's relief sculpture, ''Figure, Rising No.9,'' and Gary Schatmeyer refashions flashing signal lights into quirky creatures. Charles Waller pays homage to Sag Harbor's history as a whaling port with a primitive rendering in patchwork sheet metal of a whimsical whale with fierce but fanciful clamshell teeth.
ART: REVIEWS
