ONCE again, Martin Robins is all revved up.
That is not so out of character for the 61-year-old Mr. Robins, director of the Alan M. Voorhees Transportation Center, a research organization for transportation policy at the Edward J. Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy at Rutgers.
On this recent day he was talking about the need to replenish the state's Transportation Trust Fund and the recent failure of Governor McGreevey and State Legislature to do so when they shelved a plan to raise the gasoline tax -- topics that usually send people running away, responding to a sudden urge to rearrange their sock drawers.
Not so for Mr. Robins, who has a reputation for relishing the chance to delve into such arcane matters with an acuity and persistence that are offset by an easygoing manner. From his vantage point, New Jersey's transportation network is headed for calamity -- a breakdown in project development, the loss of experts in engineering and construction who will quit or be laid off, and increased financial strain on New Jersey Transit, to name a few problems -- unless the governor and Legislature act soon to find the resources for capital projects involving bridges, roads and mass transit.
''As of July 1 2005, it will run out of funds to pay for capital projects,'' Mr. Robins said of the Transportation Trust Fund, which was created in 1984 as a dependable pay-as-you- go source of financing for long-term transportation construction projects. ''It will reach a point where the amount of revenues and the debt service converge, and then there will be no longer any money left to either pay for projects directly or serve as the revenue stream to pay for new bonds.''
His vantage point normally is an office at Voorhees Transportation Center at Rutgers, where he was named director in September after serving five years as founding director of its Transportation Policy Institute.
But on this rainy afternoon of a holiday season, he was at his home in this Union County community, specifically the family room and study, where there is a bulletin board filled with news articles and scores of family photographs.
Mr. Robbins -- who helped to create New Jersey Transit -- was one of the first people to sound the alarm that the Transportation Trust Fund was in danger of going broke. In November 1999 he wrote an article on the subject for the New Jersey Reporter, a policy magazine, and published another in June 2000 for the New Jersey Policy Perspective, a public policy research group.
In the latter report, he called for the creation of a commission to explore ways to fix the fund. In the 1990's the state began borrowing heavily to pay for projects, and now the fund devotes nearly two-thirds of its $745 million operating budget to debt service.
Not long ago Governor McGreevey did exactly what Mr. Robins had proposed, appointing a bipartisan panel to study the issue, and he made Mr. Robins a consultant. In November the panel issued a report saying the fund would run out of money unless there was a 12.5- to 15- cent increase in the gasoline tax, which is now 14.5 cents, the fourth lowest in the nation.
In the recent lame-duck session of the Legislature, the governor and Democratic lawmakers tried to rally Republican support with the hopes of pushing through an increase in the gas tax, but as opposition from some legislators and motorists grew, aides to the governor sweetened the prospect of a gas tax increase by linking it to the elimination of tolls on the Garden State Parkway. But last month Mr. McGreevey, who faces a difficult re-election campaign next year, put the plan aside, saying he thought it would stall economic recovery in the state.
Looking at it from the governor's point of view, trying to get the measure passed by a lame duck Legislature seemed a good tactical move, Mr. Robins said. But looking at it from his viewpoint, he said, the governor's strategy did not provide enough time for the kind of debate that would have enlightened the public about how the trust fund works and the need to save it.
''All the discussion focused on the gas tax,'' he said.
He added: ''A clear implication from the governor's action is that there won't be any action until after the gubernatorial election in 2005. After that, you can't predict what will happen.''
Martin E. Robins was born in Brooklyn on May 4, 1942. When he was 10, his father, a purchasing agent for an industrial heating company, followed its relocation to New Jersey and settled in Linden.
After graduation from Linden High School, Martin Robins earned an undergraduate degree in 1964 from Princeton and a law degree in 1967 at Harvard. He joined a private law firm, and served as an assistant prosecutor in Hudson County from 1970 to 1974, when he joined the state Attorney General and worked on transportation issues.
''After a while, I found that although I had this legal training, what I really loved was the policy side of it,'' he recalled.
In 1976 he jumped to the state Department of Transportation, where he eventually became director of policy analysis. While there he befriended Louis J. Gambaccini, who was director of the PATH rail line for the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
In 1978, Mr. Gambaccini was appointed Gov. Brendan T. Byrne's transportation commissioner, and he quickly hired Mr. Robins to lead a task force that created the legislative framework for the creation of New Jersey Transit in 1979.
Mr. Robins served as acting executive director of New Jersey Transit for six months -- until a permanent director was named -- and he then took the post of deputy executive director. His aide, George Warrington, who today is executive director of ther transit agency, said of Mr. Robins in a 1983 interview: ''Public transportation to him is almost a moral commitment. 'Passionate' is probably the best way to describe it.''
In 1983, he was named director of planning and development at the Port Authority, and in 1988 he returned to New Jersey Transit to head the office developing the Hudson Bergen light rail line.
From 1994 to 1998, he headed a panel that explored the feasibility of building a new railroad tunnel under the Hudson River.
Then in 1998, when Rutgers received a bequest to form a transportation center, James W. Hughes, the dean of the Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy, picked Mr. Gambaccini as its director, and Mr. Gambaccini invited Mr. Robins to create and direct its policy analysis arm.
''Martin has just been a dynamo in bringing the center along, and he's become a major player in the state who people turn to now when there are transportation and policy analysis issues,'' Dr. Hughes said.
Then in 2001, Mr. Robins, who succeeded Mr. Gambaccini as director of the Voorhees Center in September, helped write a study critical of New Jersey Transit for diverting 70 percent of its capital finances to operate the agency, a situation brought on by a fiscal crisis that still threatens bus and train service.
Sitting in his family room, Mr. Robins says that the depletion of the Transportation Trust Fund will leave New Jersey Transit especially vulnerable and interrupt ''very vigorous project development.''
''You break the continuity, and that is something we haven't had happen in 20 years,'' he said. ''It takes a long time to figure out what to do on a project, how to solve the engineering problems, how to solve environmental problems. And if you break that continuity on projects, you pay a price.''
If state officials delay acting on the trust fund until after the election, he warned, they must find an alternative, possibly an interim bond issue.
As he speaks, there is a noise at the door.
''This is my wife, Leslie,'' he says, making introductions.
''I'm going through the old story about the debt service,'' he adds, laughing sheepishly. She laughs too. She has heard this before.
IN PERSON
