Four young Palestinians were killed by the Israeli Army here on Saturday, one during the funeral of the others, as an Israeli incursion into this ancient city entered its second week.
''How can you talk to the people of Nablus to calm them down and work for peace when their children are being shot and homes destroyed?'' asked Mahmoud Aloul, the city's Palestinian Authority governor. He spoke at his temporary offices; Nablus's main government office building was reduced to rubble by the Israeli Army nearly two years ago.
Nablus has been a center of militant activity since the current cycle of violence started in September 2000.
An army spokesman said the operation, the largest now under way, was intended to dismantle a terrorist network in Nablus, after 18 attempted terrorist attacks against Israeli civilians originated in the city over the last month. Thirteen of the thwarted attacks, including planned suicide bombings and shootings, were against Israelis in Israeli territory, the spokesman said. He said Saturday's shootings in Nablus, including those at the funeral procession, were in response to rock throwing and sightings of firebombs or handguns among the Palestinian youths.
Last month, Palestinian gunmen attacked Orthodox Jews making a clandestine visit to a tomb here that many Israelis believe is the burial site of Joseph, the Jewish patriarch. Seven Jews were wounded in that attack. Also last month, a suicide bomber from a village near Nablus killed four people when he detonated his explosives at a bus stop on the outskirts of Tel Aviv. Nearly a quarter of the suicide bombers who have attacked Israel in the last three years have come from Nablus.
The continuing violence bodes ill for efforts to get Palestinian factions to agree to stop attacking Israeli soldiers and civilians -- a precondition for progress for the so-called road map to peace, backed by the United States, the United Nations, the European Union and Russia. The Egyptian government has been trying to mediate a Palestinian cease-fire, but the mood in Nablus on Saturday suggested that those efforts faced stiff resistance.
''We don't need help from the Egyptians or anybody else,'' said Qais al-Masri, the father of the Palestinian killed during the funeral procession. Mr. Masri spoke at the hospital, where his son lay in a coma before being pronounced dead.
Many people on Nablus's streets and at its hospital said the continued killing of Palestinians had increased support for the militant group Hamas, which has so far refused to stop its attacks against the Israeli military. Hamas is one of the main factions blocking a deal among Palestinian groups to stop the violence and give the road map a chance.
''If it stopped its attacks, Hamas would lose its popularity,'' said Dr. Moawiah al-Masri at the hospital, where the halls are plastered with posters of the dozens of young Nablus men who have been killed since the second intifada began.
The governor, Mr. Aloul, said more than 400 residents had been killed and 6,000 wounded by the army during that time. He said it was the highest number of casualties of any town in the West Bank or Gaza.
The Israeli soldiers patrol in armored jeeps with wire mesh over small bulletproof windows. The army said the soldiers responded with live ammunition on Saturday because they felt threatened by young Palestinians throwing a boulder, wielding firebombs and displaying handguns, but witnesses disputed that rationale.
Osama Bustami, 40, said he saw Amjad al-Masri, 15, shortly before 8:30 a.m. Saturday, watching rock-throwing youths from the tin roof of a shed before he was fatally shot.
''He wasn't throwing anything, just watching,'' Mr. Bustami said.
According to the army's account, however, Amjad al-Masri was seen ''throwing large rocks'' at the soldiers, ''endangering their lives.''
''The force identified him on the rooftop and opened fire and identified a hit,'' the army spokesman said. The spokesman said two other Palestinians were shot in the city center around the same time.
The Israeli Army has often shot unarmed Palestinians, though its rules of engagement require restraint until soldiers believe that their lives are in danger. Shooting incidents are rarely investigated; disciplinary action for an unwarranted shooting is even more rare. But the military has come under pressure recently to re-evaluate its policy after the shootings of a British peace activist last year and of an Israeli protester last month. It denies that it has separate policies for Palestinians and non-Palestinians.
Amjad al-Masri was taken to the hospital by neighbors but died shortly after arriving there. Of the other two youths shot about the same time, the army said one had been seen brandishing a lighted firebomb and the other a pistol.
Doctors at the hospital identified those two as Amer Arafat, 19, who died of four gunshot wounds shortly after arriving, and Rawhi Shouman, 21, who died of a single shot to the chest at the scene.
Shortly after the deaths, hundreds of shouting men accompanied the bodies, wrapped in the green-and-white flags that honor Islam, through the streets from the hospital to a cemetery for burial. About midway, witnesses said, shots rang out again.
The army said two men were shot when they broke away from the procession toward army vehicles, one carrying a handgun, the other a homemade bomb.
But Muhammad al-Masri, 50, said Muhammad Qais al-Masri, 18, was beside him in the crowd helping to carry the body of their 15-year-old relative when a bullet struck the young man's head.
''His brain was coming out. and I tried to keep it in,'' said a shaken Mr. Masri, who helped carry the stricken man to one of several ambulances following the procession.
At the hospital, Muhammad Qais al-Masri lay beneath a beige wool blanket, his head and eyes wrapped in gauze. Much of his brain lay in a nearby plastic garbage can. One of the doctors pointed to a CAT scan of the young man's head, which showed bullet fragments scattered through what brain remained.
''These are dum-dum bullets,'' the doctor said, meaning high-velocity ammunition that often breaks apart upon impact. ''The soldiers don't shoot to wound; they hit them in the head or chest to kill.''
