Central America is about to get its first grandmaster. When 15-year-old Alejandro Ramirez of Costa Rica tied for first place in the Santo Domingo International Open, it was his third grandmaster norm, and he simultaneously broke 2500 points in his rating. Together they make up an ironclad grandmaster qualification, and it is expected that his new status will be announced at the next official meeting of the International Chess Federation.
Ramirez was the only one of the nine players tying for first place who wasn't already in possession of the title. He will be the youngest grandmaster in the Americas and one of the youngest in the world. The first-prize winners besides Ramirez were Vadim Milov of Switzerland, Liviu-Dieter Nisipeanu of Romania, Alexander Moiseenko of Ukraine, Petr Kiriakov of Russia, Neuris Delgado of Cuba, Daniel Campora of Argentina, Dennis De Vreugt of the Netherlands and Bartosz Socko of Poland. Each scored 7 1/2-2 1/2 in the 10-round, 146-player Swiss-system tournament.
Ramirez's victory over the German grandmaster Igor Khenkin in the eighth round showed his sophisticated style. Khenkin kept nudging him toward endgame play, but Ramirez was not afraid to tackle his more experienced opponent on such a battleground. Khenkin, under heavy pressure, blundered his queen and could offer no more resistance.
When people get tired of trying to beat the Caro-Kann Defense by 3 Nc3 de 4 Ne4 Bf5 and find out that it is a stubborn formation, they look in other directions. One is the Panov-Botvinnik Attack with 3 ed cd 4 c4. This is not manna from heaven, but it does take the Caro-Kann into patterns characteristic of queenside openings like the Queen's Gambit or the Tarrasch Defense, and maybe you can occasionally find opponents who are less comfortable there.
The point of 6 . . . Bb4 is that Black wishes to obtain the exchange with . . . Bc3 bc to achieve some reduction of material to make it easier to operate with his lesser control of terrain. Already, this setup could have resulted from a Nimzo-Indian Defense.
After 10 a3, it is reasonable for Black to retreat with 10 . . . Be7, but many players like to exchange pieces with 10 . . . Bc3 11 bc, as Khenkin does here, to give White a rigid pawn formation. This is what the former world champion Mikhail Botvinnik enjoyed. He had a flair for exploiting it.
After 11 . . . b5 12 Bd3 Bb7 13 a4, Ramirez operates with the idea of demonstrating a weakness in the black queenside pawn structure. All of this is standard procedure and is clearly well known to him.
After the forced 15 . . . ba 16 Ra4, the a6 pawn becomes a target.
After 25 c4, Khenkin could not keep his position together, so he gave up a pawn with 25 . . . Bc6 26 c5 Nd5 27 Bc6 Qc6 28 Qe6 to blockade the c5/d4 pawn couple on the dark squares.
The threat was now 29 Ra4! Ra4 30 Ra4 Qa4 31 Qc8 followed by mate.
After 28 . . . g6, Khenkin was still stubbornly fighting a lost cause, but with 29 Re1 Kg7?, he lost his queen to 30 Bf8 and gave up.
CHESS
