ST. JOHN'S 72, NIAGARA 65
St. John's had shown little ability to stop Niagara forward Juan Mendez, and with the Red Storm clinging to a 5-point lead with little more than two minutes to play, Niagara tossed the ball to Mendez one more time.
But this time, St. John's rushed a double-team at Mendez, and when he moved to the next option, Red Storm guard Elijah Ingram was already there. Ingram swiped Mendez's pass on the run and coasted ahead for a layup, part of an 11-3 run that put away a 72-65 victory for the Red Storm last night in the last of four games at Madison Square Garden.
In trying to salvage a season that cost Mike Jarvis his job as coach, the interim coach Kevin Clark took the ball out of the hands of his best player and point guard, Ingram, and had him swap places with shooting guard Daryll Hill in the previous game, a victory over Holy Cross.
But when it mattered most, the ball seemed to be in only Ingram's hands. Ingram said he and Hill decided on their own to revert to their familiar roles down the stretch.
Ingram contributed 21 points and Hill pitched in with 9 points, 6 assists and just one turnover, a marked difference from the last game, when they combined for 12 turnovers.
But the biggest question has been not how Ingram and Hill would play in their new roles, but how they would accept the change.
''I didn't have to put my ego aside,'' Ingram said. ''I had no ego about it. When they said that's the change that was going to be made, I said O.K. At the end of the games I'll probably be running the point in crucial situations. We take a lot of pressure off each other.''
Clark said that with Hill handling the ball a little more, Ingram was freed up to be more of a scorer. ''It also takes pressure off him so down the stretch of games he can make plays,'' Clark said of Ingram.
And with two straight victories and a 2-2 record under Clark, the Red Storm (4-6) can begin its Big East schedule with a glimmer of hope.
''I think we're in the process of finding ourselves,'' Clark said. ''We haven't found ourselves yet. We will be tested now with the Big East schedule starting. It's still going to take a while.''
The Red Storm raced to an 11-2 lead but appeared to collapse under the inside play of Niagara as Mendez pounded St. John's for 11 points and 14 rebounds in the first half. Mendez, slowed by an ankle injury sustained late in the first half, finished with 20 points and 16 rebounds.
By halftime, Niagara had a 34-32 lead and then stretched it to 8 points early in the second half. But St. John's recovered, running off 8 straight points to tie the score at 46-46 and begin a back-and-forth battle down the stretch.
Ingram gave the Red Storm the lead with 6 minutes 11 seconds remaining, and he and Hill combined for 13 points from that point. It led to a victory they said would not have come a month ago.
''No,'' Hill said. ''We'd have played hard, but our execution wasn't so good back then.''
REBOUNDS
In earlier games, Michigan easily beat Fairfield, 66-43, led by BERNARD ROBINSON JR.'s 19 points; Marist held off Holy Cross, 59-55, getting a pair of free throws from WILL McCLURKIN with 11.4 seconds left to seal the victory; and St. Francis of Brooklyn rallied from a 4-point deficit with a 17-2 burst in the second half to top Quinnipiac, 74-69.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
