As officials decide whether criminal charges are warranted against firefighters who are accused of trying to cover up an altercation between two Staten Island firefighters that left one critically injured, a firefighter familiar with the investigation said the dispute began with a caustic exchange.
On Wednesday around 6 p.m., Michael R. Silvestri strolled into the kitchen of Engine Company 151 and Ladder Company 76 in Tottenville, Staten Island, to begin his shift, the firefighter said. There, Firefighter Silvestri, 41, saw a group of firefighters talking and laughing after having fought a one-alarm fire that afternoon. Among them was Robert Walsh, 40, the injured firefighter, whom Firefighter Silvestri was known to call derogatory names, the firefighter familiar with the investigation said.
According to this account, Firefighter Silvestri used a homosexual slur to refer to Firefighter Walsh, and then Firefighter Walsh responded. He said that Firefighter Silvestri had taken advantage of his colleagues by coming to work on Thanksgiving Day on overtime pay after having arranged for a junior colleague to cover his normal shift, the firefighter familiar with the inquiry said. Then Firefighter Silvestri picked up a chair and swung it at Firefighter Walsh, who remains in a medically induced coma at Staten Island University Hospital's north campus.
The incident that began as a typical sort of banter that firefighters call ''busting chops'' has left the Fire Department reeling as it investigates whether company officers participated in a cover-up by failing to fully inform superior officers about how Firefighter Walsh came to be injured. The inquiry has expanded to the city's Department of Investigations, while the police and the Staten Island District Attorney's office are still building the criminal case against Firefighter Silvestri. He was arrested on Thursday and pleaded not guilty on Friday to charges of assault and harassment and possession of a dangerous weapon.
Investigators are also looking at whether the actions of any firefighters in the Tottenville firehouse on Wednesday night might warrant criminal charges of obstruction.
A fire official said it was likely that the department would lodge disciplinary charges against members of the firehouse, including a captain, Terrence Sweeney, who, the fire official said, lied to superiors about how the injury was sustained; falsified an entry in the company journal by recording that Firefighter Walsh had been injured in a fall; and allowed him to be taken from the quarters without an ambulance, which is against department protocol. The fire official said that Captain Sweeney, whose shift ended at 6 p.m., lied to a chief of the Eighth Battalion early in the evening. According to the official, the captain told the chief that one of his officers had been injured in a fall.
The swift and sweeping nature of the Fire Department's inquiry also has officials taking a closer look at Firefighter Walsh. A blood test done at the hospital on Wednesday evening revealed a trace amount of alcohol in his blood, the fire official said. Another official said the department was also looking into whether Robert Walsh lives in New Jersey, which would be a violation of department regulations.
The brother of Firefighter Walsh, Jim Walsh, said the family had no knowledge of a blood test. But he said he resented any information leaked by the department about alcohol in his brother's blood, as it detracted from the fact that his brother was the victim. ''Bob's not been charged with any crime,'' Jim Walsh said yesterday outside the hospital. ''To be honest with you, I'm outraged that they would say that.''
A senior police official involved in the investigation said the police found no evidence of alcohol at the firehouse at 3:30 a.m., after fire officials alerted them to the incident. A fire official who arrived at the scene shortly before the police arrived said there was no odor of alcohol in the firehouse or on any firefighters.
Still, the presence of alcohol in Firefighter Walsh's blood raises more questions for investigators, as drinking alcohol while on duty is strictly prohibited by department regulations.
