WATCHING the world's newest teenage drivers file slowly out of the Dodge/Skip Barber Driving School in Lakeville, some losing their pants to gravity, others in jeans so tight their ability to motor onward was compromised, one watched and wondered: Are the roads safe for society?
Coping with adolescence, fighting off pimples and trying to impress the opposite sex rate high on the priority list for 15 to 19 year olds. Keeping your eye on the road and your foot high on the accelerator is lower on the list. That is, at least according to statistics from the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.
The statistics show that teenagers were involved in far more fatal crashes per 100,000 people than any other age group in 2002, at 64.8 percent.
With cold weather and compromised driving conditions, encountering a hormonally unruly teenage motorist may be likened to bumping into a gasoline tanker truck.
On a chilly fall day, 50 seniors from Housatonic Valley Regional High School engaged in their school's annual one-day driving seminar at the Skip Barber Driving School, not to be confused with the Skip Barber Racing School, which trains race-car drivers.
On the grounds of Lime Rock racetrack, the driving school shared its unconventional educational approach with the students: learn how to drive in a crisis.
''This is a big playground, all the better to let them experiment and learn their limitations,'' said Andrew Torres, Skip Barber's marketing director. ''We follow the philosophy that unexpected events will occur on the highway, so better to be prepared.''
The teenagers hopped in the drivers' seats of Dodge Neons and Dodge Dakota trucks, maneuvering the cars through a wet skid pad, obstacle courses and various braking exercises. Those who don't believe teenagers drive faster than other motorists should hear Amro Elsarafy, 17, discuss his take on driving.
''I can't go slow,'' he said. ''I don't think half the time I realize how fast I'm going, because it's fun.''
If the students' perspectives were hair-raising, their driving was more so. On one track, a tennis ball was placed in a bowl secured to the hood of a Dodge Neon -- the school hid the Dodge Vipers from the students for the day, the better to keep them from temptation. The point of the exercise was to see how smoothly students could steer the car around the cones on the course, keep the ball in its bowl, and make the best time.
Heather Albarazi jumped in the driver's seat. She hit the gas hard and the ball promptly propelled out of the bowl and onto the grass. Ms. Albarazi hopped out of the car, grabbed the ball and placed it back in the bowl. Precious seconds were lost. Moments later, as the car rounded a curve, the ball popped out with such force it severed its connection to its string and bounced through the grass. The audience of students moaned in disbelief. Ms. Albarazi dropped to her hands and knees to locate it.
''My mom signed me up for this,'' Ms. Albarazi said after her dash around the track. ''She wants me not to drive fast.''
In the midst of the exercises, the students took a short classroom course on vehicle dynamics given by the school's main instructor, Bob Green. Mr. Green dazzled them with complex math equations: the weight of a car on its tires once it enters a skid, combined with the speed of the vehicle, combined with the condition of the road, and so on.
''The average car weighs 3,200 pounds,'' Mr. Green told the students. ''Do the math: 60 miles per hour at 3,200 pounds. You have to understand what is happening in a car when you're braking.''
Race cars zipped by the windows of the classroom, careering around the curves of Lime Rock. But the students were riveted to their seats, as the voluble Mr. Green indulged in automotive noises, anecdotes and pratfalls to make his point.
''Awesome'' was the word of the day, as student after student figured out how to handle a truck in a skid, brake hard and recover, and ease up on a sharp turn. As spine-tingling as a spinout on a skid track may be, though, the teenagers also learned what they and the vehicles couldn't do. Sometimes they skidded uncontrollably, spinning off the track onto the grass.
Sarah Brennan, 17, had already met up with her driving limitations some months earlier, when she lost control of her Saab while driving with friends from Millerton to Sharon. The car skidded, barely missed hitting a tree, then fishtailed and flipped.
''We were wearing seatbelts,'' she said. ''I think that's what saved us. The car was totaled.''
Such stories fail to faze the instructors at Skip Barber, who have a kill switch and a hand brake in each vehicle.
Still, some students were more -- or less -- prepared than others.
''I've had a couple of fender benders, so this seemed like a fun thing to do,'' said Robert Fife, 17. ''But the skidding information was too much to comprehend at once.''
He proceeded to skid wildly through the course, and in the end, deemed himself a failure at successful skidding.
Luckily, the only victims at Skip Barber are the vehicles, which take so much abuse their lives are significantly shortened. The school runs through a set of tires per Dodge Dakota in two days, the driving-school instructor Rob Slonaker said. Not a problem, as the Michelin tire company donates the tires for free. The trucks last a year at the school before they are considered too banged up to drive. Dodge then destroys, and replaces, them.
A driving instructor at the Connecticut State Police Academy was visiting the Dodge/Skip Barber school for the day, and he marveled at the instructional techniques the school used.
''Standard driving schools are teaching how to pass the test, not how to really drive,'' said Peter Marcucio, who lives in Washington, a little western Connecticut town of about 4,000 that lost three teenagers to car wrecks in a six-month period spanning last fall and winter. ''I'd like to see more skills work in driving school. So I'm teaching my 17-year-old son how to drive, then I'm sending him here.''
Some driving schools bristled at the criticism, drawing a line between the basic skills classes they teach and the advanced skills taught by the Skip Barber Driving School.
''We take driver with zero skills and we teach them the basics, parking maneuvers, signage, defensive driving, to assist them in acquiring their first license,'' said Jack Sousa, the president of the Driving School Association of Connecticut, who owns several driving schools throughout the state, including the Academy of Driving and the Sears Driving Schools.
''Skip Barber takes an experienced driver and teaches them advanced skills. Their criticism would be better directed toward state and legislative bodies that mandate requirements for driving.''
Mr. Sousa supports a requirement that all beginning drivers take advanced level courses.
''Skip Barber could not teach advanced skills to students who did not already have the basic skills we teach,'' he said
At Lime Rock, Erin Kinsella, 17, testified to Mr. Sousa's sentiments as she watched a fellow student weave a Neon around a track.
''Driving school was so basic, how to put the car in gear and go,'' she said. ''This is more about how to keep you alive.''
