BUT for his 9-millimeter pistol and leather police jacket, Sgt. Arthur Pendzick of the Suffolk County park police could have been mistaken for a salesman pitching all-terrain vehicles.
''Look at this baby right here,'' said Sergeant Pendzick, pointing out a gleaming black Suzuki Quad Runner impounded and stored last week in a crammed virtual showroom of A.T.V.'s at a location the police would rather keep secret. ''This is a $10,000 piece of equipment, totally digital. Got a little computer on it and everything.''
The Suzuki, with a 500-cubic-centimeter engine, capable of speeds of more than 60 miles an hour and in this case barely two days out of a real showroom, was not even mud-splattered when its hapless owner ran into police on A.T.V. patrol in the backwoods of Suffolk's expanses of pine barrens and other open spaces.
The patrols, with officers riding their own A.T.V.'s, are often mounted by the interagency Pine Barrens Law Enforcement Council. County park police, deputy sheriffs, state forest rangers, State Department of Environmental Conservation officers and sometimes town and Suffolk County police sweep through areas illegal A.T.V. riders are known to frequent.
The goal of the get-tough policy is to protect woods and fields, and particularly core areas of the 100,000-acre Long Island Pine Barrens Preserve, from dangerous and self-endangering riders, and to curb the damage caused by the four-wheel A.T.V.'s, and to a lesser extent by the off-road motorcycles known as dirt bikes. Authorities say they are also deluged with noise complaints from residents living near illegal riding areas.
The Suzuki owner, like nearly 150 others caught in the county crackdown during 2003 aimed at stemming an epidemic of illegal A.T.V. riding, will have to pay a $500 redemption fee, double the old $250 fee, to get his machine back.
The owner will also face county fines of at least $250 for riding illegally. In Suffolk, county law bars A.T.V.'s from all public lands and allows them on private land only if riders are carrying written permission from the landowner.
If he is like most riders the police encounter, the A.T.V. owner will also have been cited for state vehicle and traffic violations for not being registered, failing to display a license plate, not having insurance and not wearing a helmet.
''When you count everything, you're looking at an average of close to $1,000, if not more,'' said Sergeant Pendzick, a 6-foot-7 park police veteran who patrolled the pine barrens for most of his nearly 33 years on the county force and now sends others on patrol.
The riders complain that there are no areas where they can ride legally. One group, the Long Island Off-Road Vehicle Organization, is urging Suffolk officials to create a legal riding ground.
Thomas Riker of Miller Place, a group member who said he had been riding a dirt bike for over 35 years, said his group opposed illegal riding and believed a legal trail-circuit riding area would help limit it. ''If they put half the effort they put into enforcement into finding a place to operate legally, they would see the pressure alleviated,'' he said.
Mr. Riker said the group, which has about 1,000 members, was asking for the same accommodations hikers, equestrians, mountain bikers and other user groups had on county and state lands. ''We are not looking for an environmentally sensitive parcel of land,'' he said. ''Obviously that's not suitable for what we are talking about. We are trying to do the right thing and show the county there is a need.''
Andrew Crecca, a Republican county legislator from Hauppauge, has proposed a task force that would explore the feasibility of a legal riding area. Mr. Crecca said he hoped to bring the matter to a vote when the Legislature meets on Jan. 27. ''I think there is a profound need for it,'' he said.
But others said A.T.V.'s were so damaging to the landscape that there was no good place for riding in Suffolk. ''The ecosystem quite frankly cannot handle it,'' said George Fernandez, the chairman of the trails committee for the Ridge Civic Association and the pine barrens trail maintenance coordinator for the Long Island Greenbelt Trail Conference.
Mr. Fernandez said that state land in Manorville where the State Department of Environmental Conservation allowed A.T.V.'s in the 1980's still showed the extent of the damage they caused.
''The damage is irreparable,'' he said. ''You have erosion on the trails six feet in depth as a result of what happened in the 1980's. They had their chance.''
The police contend that A.T.V.'s pose a hazard to others in the woods. ''We've had near missies galore,'' Sergeant Pendzick said. ''You have people walking on a narrow trail, and all of a sudden you get this A.T.V. coming at you at 40 miles an hour around a sharp turn.''
Others said the engine noise was obnoxious. ''You go out to enjoy nature, and all you hear is this incessant noise,'' said Christine Sosik, the president of the Ridge Civic Association. ''These things are so big, and suddenly they are coming at you, and you have to scurry into the woods.''
Mr. Fernandez said the riders frequently cut new trails when the old ones became so eroded that they were impassible even for A.T.V.'s. He added that Mr. Crecca was ill advised to propose a
task force on A.T.V.'s and a legal riding area. ''They should take this man by the ear and show him what they do,'' he said.
While the debate continues, a cat-and-mouse game is playing out in the woods. The riders, nearly all of them aware that they are riding illegally and subject to impoundment, fines and redemption fees if they are caught, frequently elude patrols by taking off at high speed when they sense that the police are near. Groups also often stay in touch with one another by cellphone.
''When they see any type of law enforcement, officer or even a strange quad out there, they run,'' said Sergeant Pendzick, who deploys park police in groups of two or three on crackdowns.
The police refrain from high-speed chases, and in some cases they would be outmatched anyway. John Galvin, a Suffolk park police officer riding a Suzuki with a 300-cc engine on a patrol last Monday, said he sometimes encountered riders on A.T.V.'s with 600- and 700-cc engines. ''Those guys we're not catching even though most of us are better riders than they are,'' he said. ''They have got a lot of juice.''
Officer Galvin, 25, learned to ride an A.T.V. when he was growing up in the Ridge area at a time when the machines were still permitted on some lands. Now he rides for the county, concealing his police badge and pistol and trying to look like any other rider.
''We ride undercover,'' he said. ''We kind of sneak up on them and take the key out of their bikes so they can't take off. Then you pull out your badge and explain to them that they're sunk.''
At other times officers stake out trucks or trailers waiting to pick up riders, then move in when the riders return.
On the Monday patrol, Mr. Galvin and his riding partner, Ronald Brockmann, another park police officer, impounded two A.T.V.'s from riders from Holbrook, one 21 and the other 18. The young men looked on sheepishly as the officers loaded the machines onto a trailer hauled by a park police officer, Michael Malone, the patrol's third member.
Sergeant Pendzick said that riders ranged in age from children riding mini-A.T.V.'s to people well into middle age. He said most riders were in their 20's and 30's. Most lived in Suffolk, but riders of some recently impounded vehicles came from Nassau County and as far away as Astoria, Queens.
He said a disturbing pattern was the relatively high number of police officers among the illegal riders. Earlier this month, a Sunday sweep netted about 18 A.T.V.'s, 5 of them ridden by off-duty police officers. ''It's becoming a big problem for us,'' Sergeant Pendzick said. ''They are out there riding these things illegally, and most of them know it, unfortunately.''
Comments about police sweeps appear on the off-road group's web site. ''It is sad how we are seen as common criminals now,'' a correspondent with the alias of stevo1376 wrote in a note posted in November.
A posting from banshee962000 talked of learning from a friend about a police sweep in ''a very popular spot'' that netted 35 of 40 A.T.V.'s. ''Good thing I decided not to ride that day, or I might have been an unlucky one,'' the note said.
In December 2002, the county increased from $250 to $500 the redemption fee that owners pay to retrieve an impounded A.T.V. or dirt bike. In addition, owners face fines of up to $500 for a first offense of riding illegally as well as additional fines for failure to register the vehicle or to display a license plate.
Two-time offenders face fines of up to $1,500 upon conviction. A third conviction carries a fine of $5,000 and up to 16 days in jail. In addition, the police may seize the A.T.V. for use by the county or for sale at auction. A.T.V.'s that are not forfeited then cost $3,000 to redeem.
Department of Motor Vehicles figures show that A.T.V. registrations rose from 3,452 in 2001 to 5,403 in October 2003, the latest month available. In Nassau they increased from 1,486 to 2,394 over the same period. But Sergeant Pendzick said about 80 percent of impounded A.T.V.'s were unregistered.
Mr. Fernandez said illegal A.T.V.'s were the scourge of the woods. ''It's so frustrating because people are afraid to go out there,'' he said. ''And it's so magnificent in there. It's really beautiful.''
