It did not take long for word to reach the Broke Spoke that Big Irv was in trouble. There was a Chevy pickup with an extra cab in a ditch about a mile up the road on State Highway 43/603. It was late afternoon on a Sunday, the time Irvin Favre usually wandered into this honky-tonk for a beer and talk about the N.F.L. games, which were winding down on television.
With his brush-cut head sitting like a boulder atop a mountainous body, Big Irv would slide onto a stool at the end of the bar and everything from the brassieres and underpants hanging from the ceiling to the good feelings of a Gulf Coast community tilted his way. Here he was more than the daddy of Green Bay quarterback Brett Favre.
He was the legendary high school football coach and warmhearted neighbor, who often sat on his former students' porch swings, visiting with their folks. Big Irv was the kind of guy who just a few months ago rousted a former player, now a young man, out of bed and drove him 30 miles to pick up fresh crabs so he did not embarrass himself at an important business function.
At least once a week, Big Irv swapped stories at the Broke Spoke and made promises that he kept. ''Then he'd put that finger up in the air, twirl it around and say, 'I'm gone,' '' said the bar's owner, Stevie Haas, demonstrating Big Irv's farewell. ''And then he'd vanish.''
By 6:30 p.m. or so on Dec. 21, most everyone at the Broke Spoke and Dolly's Quick Stop, as well as the whole of this bayou town, knew that Big Irv, 58, was gone for good. He had a stroke or a heart attack before running his pickup off the road and could not be revived.
The Kill, as folks call this town of about 2,000, has been in mourning ever since. In a place where family means the extended kind and the good times are remembered more than the bad, grieving encompasses a fair bit of marvel and laughter.
By now, everyone knows how Brett Favre played the night after his father's death and turned in a magical performance with 399 yards passing and 4 touchdowns in a 41-7 victory over Oakland. Most suspect, too, that it had to be Big Irv's divine intervention that allowed Arizona Cardinals quarterback Josh McCown to throw a desperate 28-yard touchdown pass as time expired to defeat the Minnesota Vikings, 18-17, last Sunday and put the Packers in the playoffs.
Those feats, and any others Favre and the Packers achieve in the playoffs, which they begin Sunday afternoon against Seattle in a National Football Conference wild-card game, will become part of N.F.L lore. But Big Irv's legend belongs here in the Kill and reaches far beyond the fact that he reared a future Hall of Fame quarterback. The old coach even has a street named after him -- Irvin Farve Road, which was inexplicably misspelled -- an honor that is bestowed on beloved citizens who had made a difference here over the years, like Sister Mary Ellen and Old Joe Moran.
Make no mistake: people here are proud of Brett. The sign on the edge of town welcoming visitors to the ''Home of Brett Favre'' attests to that, as do the green-and-gold mural painted on the side of Dolly's Quick Stop and the foam cheeseheads and Green Bay banners that dot nearly every business in this spit of land in Hancock County.
A Family Bound by Sports
Before Brett Favre became a three-time N.F.L. most valuable player and Super Bowl-winning quarterback, the Kill was merely an overlooked crossroads, named for the kilns that the original French settlers used for making charcoal. The town's history was steeped in its reputation for making moonshine par excellence during Prohibition. And long before it became a destination for worshipful Green Bay fans, it was the home of Big Irv, the football coach at Hancock North Central; his wife, Miss Bonita, a special-education teacher; and their four children.
He was the leathery disciplinarian, she the genial hostess. Big Irv was responsible for the trophies shoved here and there in their modest cottage on 52 acres of pine and oak trees, bordered by the Rotten Bayou and Mill Creek. The trophies belonged not only to Brett, now 34, but also to his brothers, Scott, 37, and Jeff, 30, who also played for their father. There are also mementos from two generations of Gulf Coast boys who were in Big Irv's charge in the fall for football and in the summer for American Legion baseball.
When the Favre boys were growing up, Hancock North Central housed grades 1 through 12, so the family traveled to school in one car early in the morning and returned home together late in the evening after practice. It meant balls were thrown as soon as the boys could pick them up, film was watched as soon as they could comprehend the game, and mopping the gym or locker rooms became an everyday chore. Earlier this week, Jeff Favre was drawn to the school grounds, where he walked around for hours and was struck by the realization that, outside of home, he had spent the bulk of his childhood there.
''Sports was his life -- they were our lives,'' Jeff Favre said as he sat in his father's office off the living room. ''We talked it, played it and loved it, nearly every minute of every day.''
Big Irv was hard-nosed. All three of his boys were quarterbacks, but that didn't stop him from running the ground-oriented Wing T. He accepted no excuses for missed practices, short of a broken bone sticking through the skin. Enduring pain is a family trait embodied by Brett, who has started 206 consecutive games despite a variety of ailments, most recently a broken thumb on his throwing hand sustained on Oct. 19.
Big Irv practiced what he preached, said Jeff, who cannot suppress a smile when remembering some of his father's painful pratfalls. There was the time he was trying to remove a fallen tree limb from a bridge near Mill Creek and flipped into the water, chainsaw in hand. There was a frightening and bloody tumble from the roof of the house onto the concrete lid of the septic tank.
''He stumbled around out in the yard for 30 minutes trying to get his bearings,'' Jeff remembered, a chuckle escaping through his grin. ''He wouldn't go to the hospital. The next thing you know he is back up on the roof.''
Big Irv believed his players should follow his lessons and was not beyond paddling home his point. Ryan Lee, 29, remembered the day he told Big Irv he had skipped a summer weight-lifting session because he was playing baseball later that night and did not want to be too tight.
''He brought out a paddle with a hole drilled in the middle of it, in front of the whole team, and told me to put my hands on the wall,'' Lee said. ''He cracked it in half on me with one swat, then hung the thing on his office wall.''
But off the field at the impromptu parties thrown by Miss Bonita, Big Irv displayed his softer side, sort of. Before the family opened a restaurant a couple of years ago, Favre's on the Bayou, the family compound on the misspelled road was the place to watch Packers games via satellite television. Everyone was welcome as long as he or she brought a covered dish and left soon after the game ended.
Big Irv offered beers and knowledgeable, if concise, commentary. Miss Bonita and their daughter, Brandi, 26, oversaw the crawfish and crab boils, and mingled easily with the crowds that could range from several dozen to 100. But when the party was over, Big Irv let everyone know. If it meant snatching the banana pudding off the table, he did so. More often than not, however, it meant firing up a gasoline-powered leaf blower and running them off.
''We ought to get that blower bronzed,'' said Haas, who also played for Big Irv and matched him in bulk if not hairstyle -- a braided rat tail snakes down his back to his trademark overalls. ''The party was over when Big Irv said it was over.''
Straight Talk and a Helping Hand
After retiring from the high school in 1994, Big Irv was even a more relaxed presence around the Kill, except when the Packers played at home and he went to Green Bay to see his son play. He doled out his recipe for spicy corn stew and made the porch-swing-to-porch-swing circuit to check in on his neighbors.
''This place is about family and roots,'' Tom Necaise, who was in Brett's high school class, said. ''He made sure everyone knew that around here we were a big family and he'd do anything to help.''
A few months ago, Big Irv ran into Lee at the Favres' restaurant. Lee was bemoaning the fact that the insurance agency he owned was having a crab boil for local businesses the next morning and that he did not know the first thing about putting it together.
''He called me early in the morning and told me he was coming to get me,'' Lee said of Big Irv. ''He had arranged for the equipment I needed, drove me 30 miles down the coast for the crabs, and stayed until I had it all set up.''
Big Irv also settled into the celebrity that came with being the father of Brett Favre. In the week before the Packers defeated New England in Super Bowl XXXI in New Orleans, the Kill became a must-stop for thousands of Green Bay fans determined to make the hourlong trip from the Big Easy.
The Broke Spoke was open nearly 24 hours a day, with beers spilling inside on its concrete floors and outside on the gravel parking lot. Big Irv held court from his bar stool, telling stories and signing autographs until his hand cramped.
''He loved the people from Wisconsin and spent as long as they wanted with him,'' Haas, the bar owner, said. ''He sure helped business in here.''
The fans appreciated Big Irv's straight talk, a skill he found a home for this season as host of a weekly radio show from Favre's on the Bayou. Jeff Favre winces and then laughs when he remembers that on a Wisconsin radio show early in Brett's professional career, Big Irv made a funny but inappropriate comment about one of the Packers' receivers.
Jeff Favre, who works for a casino company in Missouri and oversees the restaurant and other family ventures, said they had talked about ways to improve the show the night before his father's death. Now their broadcasting enterprise is over.
The Old Coach and the Playoffs
Last weekend, Jeff's son, Jackson, turned 1 and Miss Bonita gave a party for family and friends. The food was wonderful and laughter filled the compound, ''but it wasn't the same without Big Irv,'' Haas said.
Whether or not the old coach is responsible for Green Bay's improbable run to the playoffs, people around here would like to think it is true. Last weekend, after the Packers earned the wild-card berth on Arizona's miracle touchdown, Brett Favre conceded that, yes, there might be an angel at work.
On Wednesday, however, Favre was talking like a coach's son. He said his father had fired up the high school team with pregame oratory about how the opponent had mocked the Hancock North Central Hawks by referring to them as Chicken Hawks. ''We had guys in the locker room chewing on boards,'' Favre told reporters. But emotion can carry you only so far, he said, and the Hawks ended up losing. ''You can't make it any bigger than it really is,'' Favre concluded.
The Broke Spoke will be jammed on Sunday with people from the Kill hanging on Green Bay's every play, as they do every N.F.L. weekend. They are hoping that Brett Favre throws a scoring pass or two and that he raises his arms to signal touchdowns as he always does and that the Packers get to play another week. And another. And twice more after that.
It would be comforting, but not as comforting as seeing Big Irv raise that index finger, twirling it in the air and saying he was gone one more time.
PRO FOOTBALL
