After Friday night's ''Michael Jackson Number Ones,'' the question is not why CBS paid Mr. Jackson millions as part of a package deal for this music special and a warm-up ''60 Minutes'' interview. Why didn't Mr. Jackson pay CBS to show his infomercial?
Mr. Jackson did not make an appearance on the one-hour extravaganza, which CBS postponed when word first surfaced of his arrest warrant on child molestation charges in November. The network waited for the media frenzy to abate, then tried to neutralize any criticism by having Ed Bradley interview him on ''60 Minutes'' last month. CBS officials have said that Mr. Jackson was not paid for the interview.
Instead of showcasing Mr. Jackson as he is now or was then, the special allowed stars like Jennifer Lopez, Beyoncé Knowles and Quincy Jones to pay lavish, yet self-referential armchair homage to his past glories between hurried, short clips of classics like ''Billie Jean'' and ''Thriller.'' At the end, choked out like an embarrassed cough, was a glimpse of his latest video, ''One More Chance,'' a ghastly pop idyll of flowers, forests and farouche children.
It is true that nobody can moonwalk the way Mr. Jackson once did. Few will dispute his musical talent or dancing ability. But an hour of worshipful encomiums sounded like a presentation for a sentencing judge. And at times, like a fashion retrospective. (It turns out that everybody once owned a red leather jacket like the one Mr. Jackson wore in the ''Beat It'' video.)
It is hard to get too indignant about CBS's lapse after a year that included the Jessica Lynch disgrace (CBS News sent Ms. Lynch, the former Iraq P.O.W., a letter suggesting that a news interview would be rewarded with other lucrative media contracts within the Viacom empire) and the cancellation of the mini-series ''The Reagans,'' after a lobbying effort by right-wing groups who never saw the film. But given those incidents, it is remarkable that CBS would take any chances in 2004 with one of its oldest and most respected news shows, ''60 Minutes.''
Preliminary ratings taken by Nielsen Nielsen Media suggest that the special did respectably -- about 10 or 11 million viewers -- but not spectacularly enough justify the reported six million dollar price tag -- or the criticism. The special paled next to the ''60 Minutes'' interview, which attracted almost 19 million viewers.
The special was also insulting to Mr. Jackson's true fans, who obviously have more faith in his remaining talent than he or CBS does: the reason a 2001 CBS special was such an unexpected hit was that it was a concert special at Madison Square Garden. (Then, the star did take the stage.) This was a canned retrospective, best suited to a 50th anniversary roast.
And that may explain the mystery. CBS, which has over and over raided its Golden Age vaults to secure high ratings, most recently pulling out all the stops and surviving stars for its 75th anniversary celebration, cannot leave old footage alone. And though its ratings have been respectable with new shows like ''C.S.I.'' and ''Without a Trace,'' the network is never satisfied. The result is that CBS has once again damaged what is left of its tattered reputation to promote this joyless plea for help dressed up as a music special.
Television Review
