JOHN SNYDER has made his name in the recording industry as a producer of jazz albums. He has worked as an independent and for major labels like A&amp;M Records and Atlantic Records. He has put out albums by luminaries including Chet Baker, Dizzy Gillepsie and Stan Getz, and has been lead producer on five Grammy Award-winning recordings.
But these days, he is trying to branch into a less glamorous world, creating educational CD's and videos in an operation run out of the basement of his home in Norwalk. And a core part of his effort is to provide the material in a form that can be traded over the Internet, a move that puts him at odds with the approach of the recording industry.
This past spring, Mr. Snyder's company, Artists House, released about half a dozen two-disc recordings that include a CD of music plus a DVD with two digitally enriched mixes of the musical program; downloadable music files, or mp3s, for sharing on the Internet; a documentary of the recording sessions; artist interviews; instrument lessons; and transcripts of the songs printable as sheet music from a personal computer.
The releases, which range from a collaboration between the jazz trombonist Bob Brookmeyer and the pianist Kenny Wheeler to ''jam band''-style rock sessions led by the bassist Oteil Burbridge of the Allman Brothers, sell for $16.98, comparable to the price of one CD.
Although other record companies have put out enhanced CD's with video clips and documentary footage, Mr. Snyder is unusual in providing the downloadable files, which his customers can trade without charge on the Internet, as can anyone who picks them up from the Internet. He is also unusual in letting the artists who record with his company retain the copyright to their music and the ownership of the master recordings.
His main goal for the company, he said, is to spread knowledge, especially for students interested in careers in the music business.
''Right now the arts, in general, are treated like some kind of secret society, and even at the university level very little practical information is dispensed,'' Mr. Snyder said. ''Vocal students aren't taught anything about microphones, for instance, and piano students are never introduced to electric keyboards. All of the knowledge it took me a lifetime to be exposed to is out there and ready to be passed on.''
In February, Artists House is scheduled to release ''I Love the Trumpet,'' a four-hour DVD that features Warren Vaché, a trumpet virtuoso on the faculty of The Julliard School. The DVD sends viewers through different instrumental programs, from beginning to master classes, and includes a virtual tour of the Yamaha trumpet assembly factory in Grand Rapids, Mich., plus interviews with several trumpet students.
Mr. Snyder said he wanted to provide instructional material on DVD's for aspirants on all kinds of musical instruments as well as for people interested in careers in music and the arts.
''I hope to have a full spectrum of educational materials on streaming video on a Web site someday,'' he said.
Mr. Snyder considers the Internet a perfect way for information to become almost universally accessible. Earlier this year he argued the case in favor of free downloading of music on the Internet against Cary Sherman, president of the Recording Industry Association of America, which takes the opposite view.
So far, the Artists House CD/DVD packages have sold miserably, Mr. Snyder said, and he pays his bills with occasional production jobs for major record labels. Still, he said,he is heartened by the more than 20,000 hits his Web site, www.artistshouse.com, has received this year, an indication, he thought, that his efforts are getting noticed.
The recording and video production for Artists House occurs in studios around the country. Mr. Snyder's modest suburban home here, which overlooks the valley between Norwalk and Westport, is the operations center for the business, which has three full-time employees, including him.
Hanging on the walls leading to the basement, where Mr. Snyder has his main office, are framed photographs of many of the musical greats he has worked with, and certificates of his five Grammy Award-winning recordings. In the basement are more than 10,000 record albums, plus thousands of CD's, all carefully, alphabetically shelved.
The office also contains hundreds of baseballs autographed by musicians with whom Mr. Snyder has worked over the years, among them, Stevie Wonder, Cecil Taylor, Sun Ra, Art Blakey and Gerry Mulligan. Mr. Snyder began bringing baseballs to recording sessions in 1988, and asking the musicians working there to sign them as a memento.
Mr. Snyder, 55, was born and grew up in North Carolina. Trained as a classical trumpeter, he graduated with music and law degrees from the University of North Carolina.
In the early 1970's, he became the assistant to Creed Taylor, the jazz producer and founder of CTI Records in New York City. This apprenticeship gave him, he said, a thorough education in the music business, from studio production to manufacturing, and also provided him with the kind of practical knowledge that he said he wanted to pass on.
Around this time, he worked with the jazz saxophonist and composer Ornette Coleman, who ran a performance space in Manhattan called Artists House. When the operation closed, Mr. Snyder received permission from Mr. Coleman to start a record label under the same name. The label went out of business in 1982, but Mr. Snyder retained the rights to the name.
Over the years, Mr. Snyder worked for most of the major record labels. In the 1990's, he was a staff producer at Telarc, a record label based in Ohio.
Mr. Snyder reincarnated Artists House two years ago; it became a nonprofit organization last year. It has received grants for its present work from the Norman and Rosita Winston Foundation and the Herb Albert Foundation.
''One of the problems with our arts culture is that it's mostly in the hands of people interested in making money,'' said Jan Krukowski, one of the directors of the Winston foundation, which is based in Manhattan. ''John is doing something marvelous and unique at Artists House, and we're happy that his broad vision includes education in the arts. I hope the commercial interests out there see what he's doing and offer to help.''
Herb Albert, president of A&amp;M, where Mr. Snyder worked in the 1970's and 1980's, said, in a telephone interview from Los Angeles, ''John's pointing the way for the rest of us.''
He added, ''His motives are pure, and he's reaching out to all musicians.''
Mr. Albert said he learned a great deal from ''I Love the Trumpet.'' ''Apparently I've gotten into a few bad habits over the years,'' he said.
Mr. Snyder is preparing for Artists House's next project, video interviews with recording studio professionals and music executives around the country. He has also begun trying to negotiate with Loyola University in New Orleans and colleges in California on whether the materials from Artists House can be incorporated into their arts curriculum.
''The power of art and music is something we don't fully understand, but I believe it can change and affect all of us in positive ways,'' Mr. Snyder said. ''Kids seem to be drawn to the arts, as if it's part of the biological makeup to do so. But creative thinking is not always encouraged in the schools, I think, so what I'm trying to do is to foster the educational process for music students at every age level.''
Correction:  January 11, 2004, Sunday  An article last Sunday about John Snyder and his company, Artists House, which produces educational CD's about the music business, misspelled the surname of a co-founder of A&amp;M Records. He is Herb Alpert, not Albert.
The article also misstated Mr. Alpert's relationship with A&amp;M. He is not the president; he was a co-chairman until 1990, when the business was sold.
The article also misstated the Web address for Artists House. It is www.artistshousemusic.com.
