I am one of those who will not officiate at any kind of religious ceremony between gays. In contrast to many of my colleagues, though, I welcome legalization of gay marriage in New Jersey and other states where this issue is percolating in the courts. Civil marriage for gays can actually serve as one component of a compromise that could avoid a cultural meltdown in this nation.
Under my compromise, clergy would welcome and even advocate civil marriage of gays. They would encourage their parishioners to take the same attitude, and to oppose efforts for a constitutional amendment to limit marriage to a contract between one man and one woman. In return, gay rights groups would agree to rescind their advocacy of changes to the doctrine of Episcopal, Presbyterian, Jewish and other faiths to sanctify religious ceremonies between gays.
The few ministers and rabbis who favor religious acknowledgement of gay relationships -- whether marriage or commitment ceremonies -- could volunteer to sign the civil marriage license of gays, but as agents of the state, as they now do in heterosexual marriages. This minority would agree to abide by the normative dictates of their churches, which usually prohibit religious sanctification of gay unions.
Of course, not all who oppose gay civil marriage are religious. And neither are all who advocate it. But because the roots of the conflict are religious, a comprehensive compromise that bridges both the religious and the secular has the best chance of avoiding a societal rift.
Surely, purists on both sides of this issue will not accept compromise. Rabbi J.B. Sacks Rosen, a gay activist who served for nine years as rabbi to Congregation B'nai Jacob in Jersey City, says he entertains compromise only because it ''affords the civil rights of marriage to those who should be receiving them in any event.'' But he laments ''its refusal to allow clergy to follow the dictates of their conscience regarding their particular religious tradition.''
The Rev. Howard John-Wesley, senior pastor of St John's Congregational Church in Springfield, Mass., says: ''What you propose as a compromise is nothing more than a total sell-out. 'We release ourselves from being moral voices of truth for fear of pressure from gay rights groups in our faith.'"
As with all compromises, though, this one would appeal to moderates in both camps.
There is precedent in our churches and synagogues for this kind of tacit recognition that some behaviors that are not religiously approved are nonetheless acknowledged because they are legal. Consider common-law marriages, which are recognized in 13 states and honored by other states under the "full faith and credit" clause of the Constitution. Couples in these relationships have the legal status of married couples but no married religious status in most faiths. Nevertheless, practically speaking, when parties to common-law marriages attend many of our churches and synagogues, we treat them as married. We call them Mr. and Mrs., acknowledge their anniversaries and extend their children religious rites and education in the same manner as children born of religiously sanctified marriages.
In the debate over gay marriage, the possibility of different venues of marriage and varying degrees of legitimization opens the door for possible give and take.
What would be achieved with this arrangement? Religious leaders will acknowledge that gay marriage is here to stay -- in a civil context. And homosexuals will acknowledge that normative religious sanctification of gay marriage is virtually impossible and will not happen.
Church and state will remain separate but will collaborate in forging an overall solution for what is both a religious and civil dispute. Because the bulk of marriages in the United States are solemnized under religious auspices, it is we clergy who should initiate this compromise in the hope of avoiding a religious and secular slug fest in which there will be no winners.
SOAPBOX Gerald L. Zelizer is rabbi of Congregation Neve Shalom in Metuchen.
