FOR an hour every Wednesday evening, a church basement in Peekskill shivers with the rhythms beaten out on djembes, djun-djuns, sangbas, kenkenis and other African drums, until even the air seems unable to deny the pulse.
The drummers, a group of 10 to 20, are men and women, black and white, ranging in age from early 20's to mid-70's. They come from throughout Westchester and as far away as Beacon, and include a nursing student, a carpenter, a college professor and a computer executive. They are the students of Kazi Oliver, a master African percussionist, teacher and performer, who shares with them what he calls ''the transforming power'' of African drumming.
''African drumming is a vehicle for self-realization, self-expression and the release of whatever is constricting you emotionally, spiritually and even physically,'' said Mr. Oliver, 42, who lives in Newburgh with his wife, Jeri Baker, two of their children and, he said, ''about 70 drums.''
''Its rhythms are nourishing in many ways,'' he added.
Traditional rhythms include Yankady and Funga Alafia, both from West Africa. Yankady is played in celebration of the full moon. Funga Alafia is a welcoming rhythm offering peace and unity. Each is comprised of complex combinations of individual beats.
''When the separate parts are played in unison,'' Mr. Oliver said, ''it creates a surprisingly melodic tone that sometimes sounds like someone singing.''
These sophisticated rhythms are played with the drummer sitting, using his hands on djembes, which are goblet-shaped drums that rest on the floor and are supported by the knees, or with the drummer standing, using wooden sticks to play free-standing cylindrical drums like djun-djuns, sangbas and kenkenis. A djun-djun, the largest in the family, is equivalent to the bass drum, while sangbas are midrange and kenkenis, the smallest of the three, are higher-pitched.
For six years, Mr. Oliver has been conducting classes and workshops in schools, camps, colleges and corporations. In his third year as an artist in residence in the Lakeland Central School District, he works with elementary, middle and high school students. Before teaching his evening class in Peekskill, Mr. Oliver conducts a weekly session for children in the afternoons, followed by an African dance class taught by Ms. Baker, with accompaniment by Mr. Oliver and some of his more accomplished students.
One of those students, Paul Mesches, 53, a guitarist and music teacher in the Lakeland Central School District, began drumming with Mr. Oliver three years ago. Mr. Mesches, a Briarcliff Manor resident, now teaches his own brand of African drumming using a collection of found objects. Called ''Trash Bash,'' his drumming class is offered at the summer camp of the Northern Westchester Center for the Arts, and is being taught this year to special needs adults at the center in Mount Kisco. (Northern Westchester Center for the Arts is at (914)241-6922 or www.nwcaonline.org.)
As both drumming student and teacher, Mr. Mesches maintained that the impact of African drumming is better experienced than explained.
''For me, it is not a question of whether it's my culture or not, or whether I'm black or white,'' he said. ''African drumming is based on internal rhythms that we all share, that can be found in Latin and Indian music as well. It is nonracial and human, and it connects me on a primal level to the greater world.''
Through her company, the Music of Business, Saragail Benjamin, 50, a composer, vocalist and performer who lives in New Rochelle, conducts workshops, using African drumming as a model for team building, communication and leadership development. (She can be reached at 914-633-5894 or www.themusicofbusiness.com)
''Drumming is an ideal metaphor for the dynamics of the workplace,'' Ms. Benjamin said, giving examples: ''You have to listen, you have to communicate, and each person has a specific job to do. One drum alone isn't so special, but when the whole group drums, it sounds terrific. By the same token, if one drum doesn't keep the beat, the whole drum circle can fall apart.''
Describing her percussion circles as appropriate for ''ages 5 to 90,'' Ms. Benjamin said she travels with enough instruments for every participant to produce the required rhythmic clacking: drums, bells, shakers, maracas and claves. Her clients include the New Rochelle-based mortgage lenders, Withers and Company; the Westchester chapter of the American Society of Training and Development; UBS Paine Weber; Deloitte and Touche; and Sharp Pharmaceuticals. Her children's division, Joyful Noise, takes workshops in drumming to schools, camps, libraries and birthday parties.
Many of Mr. Oliver's students come to class with their own drums slung over their shoulders in brightly patterned African print carriers. Drums can be bought online, Mr. Oliver said, but he warned that the quality of such Internet purchases can be unpredictable. He makes and sells his own drums, stretching goat or cattle skins over bases he imports from Africa. The price of djembes, for example, ranges from $150 to $500.
Kazi Oliver and Jeri Baker will lead a drumming and dance workshop from 2 to 3 p.m. on Jan. 19 as part of the annual celebration of Martin Luther King Jr. Day at the Westchester County Center in White Plains. The King event, sponsored by the White Plains-based group African American Men of Westchester and Legacy Magazine, features programs for all ages including gospel music, a health fair and crafts. Information about this event: (914)995-9463. 050. Mr. Oliver can be reached at (845)863-0975 or (914)525-0573 or at www.kazioliver.com.
