It came crumbling down last season for the Pacers after the All-Star Game break, as family tragedies (affecting Jermaine O'Neal and Jamaal Tinsley) and an ill temper (Ron Artest's) sacked what began as a promising campaign. Over the summer, Indiana's new president, Larry Bird, believed that firing Isiah Thomas as coach was the answer, but a similar decline, albeit with different causes, has occurred this season under Rick Carlisle.
After opening the season 14-2, Indiana won only 7 of its next 15 before winning four straight after last night's 91-84 victory over New Orleans.
The schedule toughened a bit in December, but the Pacers' struggles seem to be internal. Several players, including O'Neal and Al Harrington, recently offered unsolicited criticism of Carlisle's deliberate offense.
Artest was more blunt. He called it boring after Indiana's 22-point loss at Minnesota on Dec. 20. A week later, he hoisted three 3-pointers outside the flow of the offense during the first quarter of a loss to the Nets.
Carlisle benched Artest for the second half of the Nets game for what he termed ''conduct detrimental to winning.'' Afterward, he called his young team immature and wondered aloud how Reggie Miller could put up with the players' lack of professionalism. Artest then missed last Monday's shoot-around before meeting with Bird, Carlisle and the team's chief executive, Donnie Walsh.
The Pacers claimed that all disputes were behind them, but only time will tell if they can avoid the underachievement that befell them last season, when they went 11-19 down the stretch.
''Whatever happened before, happened before,'' Carlisle said after Tuesday's victory over Cleveland. ''The important thing for us as a team was to move on to the next game and to move on to basketball.''
Carlisle has slowed the offense drastically to control tempo. After scoring 96.8 points a game last season, the Pacers were averaging 88.8 this season entering yesterday's games, better than only seven teams in the league.
Carlisle has focused more on defense, but Indiana's defense has actually declined. A year ago, the Pacers held teams to 42.8 percent shooting. This season, opponents are shooting 43.5 percent.
Carlisle, who alienated people in the Detroit Pistons' organization so much that he was fired after consecutive 50-victory seasons, knew there would be growing pains, but he said he believed his style wins in the playoffs.
''It's tough to go to a winning team and change their style of play because they've won games doing it a different way,'' one Eastern Conference scout said. ''This is not a team that won 20 games last season.''
The return of Tinsley from the injured list has helped the Pacers put last week's distractions behind them. Tinsley, a starter the last two seasons who was benched early this season, is more comfortable in an open-court game, and his style has clashed with Carlisle's. But in last week's games, Carlisle was forced to start Tinsley because of injuries to Kenny Anderson and Anthony Johnson.
Tinsley responded with sparkling play that invigorated the Pacers' offense to the tune of 92.3 points a game. The players have not been shy about voicing their support of Tinsley.
''Jamaal is our most talented point guard,'' O'Neal said. ''A lot of people don't know that. He's a guy that can really put a defense in a bad way. He doesn't give a defense an opportunity to get back and set up. They miss, we throw him the ball and it's out, we've got to catch up with him. Defenses don't have an opportunity to set up zones off missed shots.''
Carlisle seems willing to compromise by opening the offense a bit under Tinsley. He might not have a choice.
Bucks Fans Are Enjoying This
The Milwaukee Bucks were on the auction block, there were rumors that Michael Jordan would buy the team and move it out of town, Gary Payton had been lost to free agency and Ray Allen, Glenn Robinson and Sam Cassell had all been traded. Naturally, apathy among the fans was rampant.
But two months into the season, attendance is up, the city is abuzz, the team is no longer for sale and the Bucks are in the playoff hunt.
''Everybody was a little skeptical at the beginning, but now they're buying into what we're doing,'' General Manager Larry Harris said. ''At the start of the season, I talked to a lot of season-ticket holders and longtime fans, and they just wanted to see a team that played hard every night. Now people around the city are very excited about the effort our guys are giving.''
Just two years removed from his playing days, Coach Terry Porter, who assisted Rick Adelman in Sacramento last season, has turned the Bucks into one of the league's biggest surprises. The biggest change Porter has made is on defense. Under Coach George Karl, Milwaukee's goal was to outscore its opponents, and the Bucks often used gimmick trapping defenses that stopped few teams. This season, the Bucks play a fierce man-to-man and Porter holds players accountable.
The Bucks' defensive rank has risen to 11th from 27th last season.
''I just believe that at this level, you've got to have some accountability,'' said Porter, who played 17 N.B.A. seasons. ''You've got to guard guys and do things individually but also in a team concept. I try not to do too many gimmick things with a zone. We just zero in on man-to-man, and if you get beat you get some weak-side help.''
The Bucks still look to run whenever possible, and though their scoring has dropped, they are the second-highest scoring team in the Eastern Conference. In addition to the exciting point guard T. J. Ford and sharpshooting Michael Redd, the talented small forward Tim Thomas is finally beginning to fulfill his potential. He is averaging a career-high 15.9 points.
''I think a lot of it for Tim is just mind-set,'' Porter said. ''He and George Karl bumped heads a lot. So coming to the gym was not as enjoyable for him as it is now. Now, he feels more than ever that he's going to get regular minutes and the quality touches he needs to establish himself.''
Double-Doubles at a Discount
Everyone knows the Cleveland Cavaliers have one of the league's richest endorsers in LeBron James, but how many know they also have one of the league's greatest bargains? Carlos Boozer, a rugged 6-foot-9, 260-pound power forward, is making $563,679 this season, yet he is averaging 13.2 points and 10.8 rebounds while shooting 51.9 percent (second best in the league).
Boozer is one of eight N.B.A. players averaging a double-double. Among the other seven, only Portland's Zach Randolph ($1,172,160) is in Boozer's salary range. The closest after that is Golden State's Erick Dampier, who is being paid $7.482 million for his 11.3 points and 11.3 rebounds a game.
Boozer is in for a hefty raise. He could become a free agent after the season. The Cavaliers hold an option on his contract and will probably work out an extension to keep him. ''I'd love to be here my whole career if I can,'' the 22-year-old Boozer said.
Boozer, the 35th pick of the 2002 draft, was never a tenacious rebounder at Duke, where he averaged just 7.2 boards. He credits the former Cavalier Tyrone Hill for giving him pointers during his rookie season.
''He gave me little secrets here and there on how to push your man at the lower waist, where the referees wouldn't see it,'' said Boozer, who averaged 10 points and 7.5 rebounds last season. ''Then you can go up for the rebound and they'll be off balance while you're going toward the ball.''
Fans Overlook Cassell
Could this be the year Sam Cassell, an 11-year veteran, finally makes the All-Star team? Long regarded as one of the league's top clutch players, he has never received the honor despite averaging 19 points and 7.4 assists over the past six seasons.
This season, the 34-year-old Cassell has played as well as any guard in the Western Conference, averaging a career-high 20.3 points and 7.5 assists for Minnesota. His career-best .501 field-goal percentage, 13th in the league, makes him the only guard in the top 20.
Nonetheless, Cassell is not one of the top 10 vote-getters among Western Conference guards in fan balloting.
INSIDE THE N.B.A.
