WATERZOOI PETITE BRASSERIE says it all. It's a small, casual Belgian spot with beer at its heart. If the restaurant were wine-centered it would be called a bistro, and indeed there is bistro paper atop the white tablecloths.
The Rockville Centre newcomer is the baby brother of Waterzooi in Garden City. Both are winners, but I prefer the atmosphere at the latest entry. It is cozy and snug rather than cavernous. Its rustic look is created by floors and rafters of wood, red leather banquettes and Gothic sconces, which cast a red glow against the black walls. Similarly styled amber lamps adorn the bar, which is set up for dining.
The culinary dictionary defines waterzooi as a ''creamy-rich fish stew.'' It takes center stage on this menu. The dish was loaded with salmon and cod, three giant shrimp and a load of exemplary mussels. Three crayfish served as a garnish. Also found in the creamy tarragon-fennel broth were fingerling potatoes, baby carrots and haricots verts. The meal was both substantial and delicious.
Alongside the namesake dish, the menu offers almost every food encountered by visitors to Belgium: mussels, French fries (perfected by the Belgians, not the French), endive, carbonade flamande (beer-spiked beef stew), brussels sprouts, asparagus, waffles and, of course, beer.
Sample the fries. They are crisp, well-seasoned, greaseless and accompanied by a small container of mayonnaise, the condiment of choice for pommes frites in Europe. They are served with two of the entrees, all of the sandwiches and all of the mussels. Those plump mussels arrive in big pots (about two pounds) with a choice of seven different steaming broths. The portion is huge and would make a nifty meal for two, with the great, chewy French bread as an accompaniment.
The steamed mussels were much better than the baked mussel platter that we tried. The seafood was tasty with its lemon zest, white wine and garlic, but an avalanche of breadcrumbs smothered it. Better starters were the flavorful lobster croquettes running with gooey cheese, and the brandy-laced lobster bisque with its splash of anisette crème fraîche. The shrimp cocktail was pricey ($16) but first class: four firm monsters poached in ale and served with a wasabi-spiked cocktail sauce.
Salads were other fine openers. Three that scored were the autumn greens tossed with Gorgonzola, candied pecans, Asian pear slices and cipollini onions in a creamy horseradish dressing; baby arugula and endive with lots of smoked salmon, blistered cherry tomatoes and small chunks of Brie in a Dijon vinaigrette; and the marvelous asparagus salad. The last included still-warm, fat spears and a generous amount of chopped shrimp mingled with a few salad greens in a cracked pepper-tarragon hollandaise.
The two fish we tried were both beautifully cooked: roasted salmon mated with truffle whipped potatoes, sautéed baby spinach and a spiffy fried caper beurre blanc, and caramelized Chilean sea bass over a creamy butternut squash risotto.
Don't miss the herb-roasted organic chicken. It consisted of a very moist breast with a mini-drumstick bone attached, paired with a wonderful sauté of thick-cut country bacon, mushrooms and brussels sprouts -- all atop mashed potatoes. Our server described those potatoes as being ''laced with nutmeg, roasted garlic, a puree of cabbage and onions.. It was as good as it sounds.
Another memorable entree was a special of fall-away-tender short ribs accompanied by those wonderful Belgian mashed potatoes, baby carrots and tiny brussels sprouts.
Steak au poivre, from the menu, also hit all the right notes: a juicy filet mignon in a brandied peppercorn sauce with a topper of tomato confit and a side of those great fries.
Dessert was a letdown. Besides sorbets and gelati, there were only three: a no-surprises crème brûlée, a warm chocolate ooze cake, gooey and good, and the Belgian sugar dough waffle. The last was pleasantly chewy and caramelized but also a bit burned.
Waterzooi Petite Brasserie  12 South Park Avenue,  Rockville Centre, (516)255-9191.  Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Cozy Belgian brasserie.  SERVICE -- Attentive.  SOUND LEVEL -- Loud when full.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Steamed mussels, lobster croquettes, shrimp cocktail, lobster bisque, autumn greens salad, arugula and endive salad, asparagus salad, waterzooi, salmon, sea bass, chicken, steak au poivre, short ribs, chocolate ooze cake.  WINE LIST: A short, mainly American list with only three of its 24 choices under $30. But the big drink is Belgian beer. There are six on tap ($5 to $5.50) and 28 in bottles ($5 to $18).  PRICE RANGE -- Steamed mussels (with French fries), $15 to $25; sandwiches with fries, $9 to $19; appetizers, $7 to $16; entrees, $18 to $31.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.  HOURS -- 5 to 10 p.m. Sunday through Tuesday, to 11 on Wednesday and Thursday and to midnight Friday and Saturday.  RESERVATIONS -- None accepted.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Fully accessible.  REVIEWED BY THE TIMES -- Jan. 4, 2004.  RATINGS -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING OUT E-mail: lidining@nytimes.com
