India's prime minister, Atal Bihari Vajpayee, stepped onto Pakistani soil for the first time in four years on Saturday, his mere presence here feeding the hopes for peace between India and Pakistan.
While Mr. Vajpayee has come for a regional meeting, the first gathering of seven South Asian leaders in two years, it is Mr. Vajpayee's interaction with Pakistan's president and army chief, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, that will be most closely watched. After four years of strain, relations have been improving since April.
''The situation is about as hopeful as at any time'' since the two countries fought a mini-war in 1999, said a Western diplomat based here.
K. Shankar Bajpai, a former Indian ambassador to Pakistan, agreed. ''There is hope and it is widespread,'' he said. ''People really do think something may happen.''
In truth, he said, that may reflect the deep longing for a solution to the half-century standoff between the countries more than concrete evidence that one is at hand.
But in a press briefing on Saturday, Pakistan's foreign minister, Mian Khursheed Mehmood Kasuri, suggested those hopes might help create change. ''There is a very strong feeling among various segments of the population in both countries regarding the desire for normalization,'' he said. That, he said, ''generates a certain momentum.''
In the seven months since Mr. Vajpayee extended a ''hand of friendship'' to Pakistan, people of both countries, from parliamentarians to businessmen, have demonstrated what Najmuddin Sheikh, a former Pakistan foreign secretary, called a ''pent-up demand for people-to-people contact.''
That demand is putting public pressure on leaders in both countries, he said, although he was quick to note that ''in Indo-Pak relations, it is never safe to make any assumptions about how it will pan out.''
India, with a Hindu majority, and Pakistan, with a Muslim one, were born from the partition of the British Empire in 1947. They have been rancorous neighbors, with Kashmir, the border region now divided between them, at the heart of their animosity.
They have fought two-and-a-half wars over it, and since 1989 Pakistan has backed -- the two countries dispute whether in spirit or substance -- an Islamic insurgency in Jammu and Kashmir, which is India's only Muslim-majority state.
The meeting -- of the South Asian Association for Regional Cooperation -- will not address Kashmir. It is intended to focus on multilateral issues, including a free-trade agreement that the two nations' foreign ministers made Friday. But it could provide a further lubricant to improving relations -- provided it does not make them worse, given the previously poor personal chemistry between General Musharraf and Mr. Vajpayee.
Mr. Vajpayee has not yet, at least publicly, requested a separate meeting with General Musharraf, as have the leaders of the other nations taking part -- Bangladesh, Nepal, Maldives, Bhutan and Sri Lanka. Mr. Vajpayee's national security adviser, Brajesh Mishra, arrived early, a suggestion that arrangements for a meeting might be under way. In an interview with Pakistan television broadcast Saturday, Mr. Vajpayee spoke about the prospect of a dialogue with Pakistan and described General Musharraf as ''someone we think we can have talks with.''
Mr. Vajpayee was last in Pakistan in 1999, when he took a bus to Lahore to meet Nawaz Sharif, then the prime minister. Few knew it would come to seem a halcyon moment.
Five months later came Pakistan's incursion into the peaks of Kargil, and the mini-war. Then came General Musharraf's coup.
In July 2001 a meeting between Mr. Vajpayee and General Musharraf in India ended in acrimony. Six months later, India's Parliament was attacked by a suicide squad made up of what India called Pakistan-backed militants.
India severed air and land links, and mobilized hundreds of thousands of troops along the border. Pakistan followed suit, and the nuclear-armed neighbors poised for war.
But late last year, India began withdrawing its troops, and the freeze gradually began to thaw. In April, Mr. Vajpayee vowed to make what he called one last attempt at peace. The two countries have since restored transit links and taken other confidence-building measures.
The steps were met with a rush of popular good will. Delegations of journalists, politicians, artists and businesspeople began crossing the border, and divided families joyously reunited.
In November, Pakistan announced a unilateral cease-fire along the so-called Line of Control that divides Kashmir, the Indo-Pakistan border and the Siachen glacier, where the two countries have been in an expensive standoff for years.
India responded in kind, and Mr. Vajpayee confirmed he would attend the regional meeting. Last year's was canceled because of the tensions between the countries.
In an interview with Reuters several weeks ago, General Musharraf appeared to go even further, suggesting that Pakistan's half-century insistence that the Kashmiris vote in a plebiscite to decide which nation they wanted to belong to could be set aside -- if India showed flexibility.
Meanwhile, the sculptures of nuclear missiles that adorned Islamabad have been removed, as have, in time for the summit meeting, signs that refer to Kashmir as ''the jugular of the nation.''
Many Pakistanis say it is India's turn to offer something of substance -- perhaps the dialogue that Pakistan has long sought. General Musharraf, they note, is moving at considerable risk, defying both militants and sectors of the army devoted to separating Kashmir from India. He survived two assassination attempts last month.
There is no evidence that the military, Pakistan's most powerful institution, would support a shift on Kashmir; it has long viewed support for holy war there as part of its defense strategy against India.
''Musharraf has taken more initiatives and riskier initiatives than Vajpayee,'' said Michael Krepon, founding president of the Henry L. Stimson Center in Washington and a South Asia expert. ''This is not sustainable.''
One of India's demands has been an end to the infiltration of insurgents from Pakistan. Officials in New Delhi and Jammu and Kashmir said that infiltration into Indian-held Kashmir had declined significantly recently -- although it often drops in winter -- and that militant attacks had fallen off sharply.
''In fact now at the Line of Control people from both sides are shaking hands,'' said Muzaffar Beig, the state's minister of finance. ''Leaders should see to that and continue the process''
New Delhi. meanwhile, is quietly laying the groundwork for talks with separatist political leaders in Kashmir.
Each side faces domestic pressures -- General Musharraf from extremists and the military, Mr. Vajpayee from more hawkish cabinet members and Hindu nationalists. But this week, the magazine India Today published an interview with Mr. Vajpayee in which he said that until Pakistan ''changes its perception about Jammu and Kashmir -- that because it is a Muslim-majority state, it should be a part of Pakistan -- no meaningful discussions can take place on this matter.''
But both men seemed prepared ''to move farther and faster than many in their governments,'' as the Western diplomat put it.
With India heading toward elections as early as this spring, Mr. Vajpayee at least appears to believe he can take both his party and people with him. In an interview with the Pakistani newspaper Dawn, he laid out why it was in both countries' interests to move forward.
He cited ''overwhelmingly positive'' popular sentiment, the need to remove barriers to economic development and the changing priorities of a post-cold war world.
''And finally,'' he said, ''for how long do we want the world to look at India-Pakistan relations either as a threat to global peace or as a promising laboratory for new experiments in conflict resolution?''
--------------------
Pakistan Arrests 6 Suspects
LAHORE, Pakistan, Jan. 3 (Reuters) -- Pakistani security forces arrested six Islamic militants on Saturday in connection with two suicide bombing attacks last month aimed at President Musharraf, intelligence officials said.
The men belonged to Jaish-e-Muhammad, an Islamic militant group that renamed itself Khudam-e-Islam after being outlawed by General Musharraf in 2002, they said.
