Time was running out for the constitutional grand council, or loya jirga, on Saturday as representatives once more failed to agree to final amendments. Officials warned that they risked failure of the three-week effort to approve a new constitution.
''It is deplorable that we have not been able to reach agreement today,'' the chairman, Sebaghatullah Mojadeddi, told the assembly at the end of the day. ''There is a minor issue, only one word in fact, that cannot be agreed this way or that.''
He adjourned the session until 9 a.m. on Sunday, saying he was praying that there would be an agreement by then.
''If tomorrow we cannot finalize it, we will announce to the world that we have failed,'' he said in a flash of anger as he stood to leave.
The last unresolved issue was a demand by Uzbek and Turkmen ethnic minorities for their Turkic-based languages to be made the third official language, after Pashto and Dari, in the areas where they are the majority. The debate has highlighted the deep ethnic divisions within Afghan society and the strong emotions that stem from the tribal and ethnic rivalries.
Although most members from ethnic minorities supported the Uzbek request, there has been opposition from Pashtuns, traditional rulers of Afghanistan and the largest ethnic group, and from government ministers who see it as a divisive measure. Pashtuns won on two major articles: the national anthem will be in Pashto, and the former king, Mohammad Zahir Shah, will be granted the symbolic title Father of the Nation.
A late proposal to try to break the impasse by declaring the Turkic language the third language, omitting the word ''official,'' was rejected by the Uzbek and Turkmen delegates.
''We did not accept it -- this is our right,'' said Hedayatullah Hedayat, a doctor from the northern province of Faryab. ''We have no school in our language, we cannot write in our language. Day by day we are isolated, and we will lose our language. A part of our culture is being eradicated.''
He singled out Finance Minister Ashraf Ghani and Hanif Atmar, minister of Rural Development, citing them as divisive opponents of the article. ''They are not working for the unity of the country,'' he said.
Delegates had gathered in the afternoon in the vast assembly tent in expectation of an agreement on the last 17 amendments that have been the source of intense negotiations for the last two days. The government had abandoned a plan to vote on the last amendments after nearly half the assembly boycotted the vote on Thursday.
The boycotters were mainly from the ethnic minorities of northern Afghanistan, Tajiks, Uzbeks and Hazaras. They argued that their minority rights would not be reflected in a vote carried by a simple majority, and they asked the United Nations to mediate a solution.
Loya jirga officials urged delegates to resolve everything before the end of the day on Saturday. ''Let's not give an opportunity for failure to be celebrated by our enemies,'' said Safia Siddiqui, a deputy chairwoman for the loya jirga. ''Let's give our hand to each other and finish the job started. We should be careful to leave with something in our hands for future generations.''
Many of the last political issues had been resolved already in the meeting on Friday, reflecting compromises on both sides, deputy chairman Muhammad Azam Dadfar said. The government gave in to demands for a constitutional commission. It would be an independent commission to oversee putting the constitution into effect, with members appointed by the president and approved by Parliament, Mr. Dadfar said.
Parliamentary elections would be held six months after presidential elections, and Parliament would then set powers for provincial councils -- formulations that got around two other sticking points. President Hamid Karzai and his top ministers, who want a strong centralized government, have had to concede some powers to Parliament.
''But the most important thing is that the integrity of the presidential system has been maintained,'' said Qayum Karzai, brother of the president and a delegate.
By late afternoon one of the most contentious issues -- whether dual citizenship would be banned for ministers and high-level officials -- was finally resolved. A minister should have Afghan citizenship, and if he holds dual citizenship, he must be approved by Parliament, said Wali Massoud, a delegate who is the ambassador to Britain.
