PERHAPS the surest bet in sports took a headfirst dive into oblivion yesterday when the University of Connecticut women's basketball team devolved before Geno Auriemma's disbelieving eyes into a team that could not cross halfcourt.
''A total breakdown,'' Auriemma said after the same team that won the national championship nine months ago coughed up leads of 18 points in the second half and 11 in the last two minutes and lost to Duke, 68-67, on a 3-point shot at the buzzer by a shooting guard from the recruiting hotbed of Wodonga, Australia.
Told that her high-arcing jumper over Ann Strother had ended UConn's 69-game home-court victory streak and caused its first defeat at the Hartford Civic Center since 1986, Jessica Foley had this to say in her distinctive Aussie twang: ''Pretty amazing.''
College basketball's regular season is essentially four months of warm-up drills, and it's a long way to the Final Four in New Orleans. But it was more than amazing to watch UConn turn the ball over on six of seven possessions in 91 panicked seconds under the strain of Duke's desperation press. It was, said Auriemma, ''mind-boggling, ridiculous, unexplainable.''
Until the Huskies prove this to be nothing more than a case of a steamroller blowing a gasket, we'll have to assume that the ambiguity derived from the mad contrivances of the Bowl Championship Series have infected one of America's last dynastic athletic sanctuaries.
''Today we were exposed for some of the things we're not very good at,'' Auriemma said after the Blue Devils scored 50 second-half points and sent the usual UConn sellout crowd into the streets of downtown Hartford wiping away disbelief and more than a few tears. ''I guess we're human, huh?''
Not for losing to the fourth-ranked Blue Devils -- ''the most athletic team in the country,'' Auriemma rationalized -- but more for the way they lost. Duke's Alana Beard is, after all, nearly Diana Taurasi's equal as a nationally celebrated star. Then again, when Auriemma lost just one game last season and won a second straight national championship after losing four starters to graduation and with Taurasi as the only experienced holdover, there was suddenly an aura around him as -- the female coaches who loathe and envy Papa Geno may want to close their eyes or hold their nose -- the most famous contemporary face in American women's sports, this side of Serena.
Be it about Tennessee during the 1990's or Connecticut the last few years, there is always the debate of whether one program's total dominance is good for this still-developing sport. Would the parity that has become a staple of the men's game create more widespread interest across various regions of the country? Or does the women's game best attract attention with the U.C.L.A. effect, with the kind of star attraction so brilliant that it pulls in viewers who previously had little or no interest?
My best guess is that there is no definitive answer, and that the needs change from year to year. In 2003, Auriemma, Taurasi and UConn may have carried their sport and answered an even greater calling, filling a void when the overall American women's sports movement was suffering from one-step-forward, two-steps-back syndrome.
This was the year when the women's professional soccer league folded and the United States national team lost the World Cup, when franchises in the Women's National Basketball Association were cut loose by their N.B.A. big brothers and later died, when the Williams sisters dropped off the pro tennis tour with injuries and left dwindling television audiences to watch battling Belgians.
It was also the year, mind you, that Martha Burk's protest of Augusta National's exclusion of women as members, after commencing with great promise, wound up as a parking-lot footnote to the standard festivities.
This morning, Auriemma cares little about the crusade, only with his team's stunning carelessness. There were 19 UConn turnovers yesterday, but it was the 6 between the 2:02 and 31-second marks of the second half that sent Duke back to Durham, N.C., with the belief that this year's national tournament is going to be an open book.
We can argue about the time frame, but, in the final analysis, that has to be what the women's game strives for. Viewers never walk away feeling cheated when Goliath goes down, especially on a buzzer-beater.
New heroes and heroines emerge every couple of years, with only some of the historical knowledge that the longtime fans retain. Jessica Foley, for example, said she had heard of the former Dukie Christian Laettner, but it was news to her that he had beaten the Connecticut men in the 1990 Eastern Regional final with a jumper at the buzzer from the left wing.
Her own game-winner was set up by the swiftness of the Duke point guard, Lindsey Harding, who high-tailed it from her own baseline to the key area in less than four seconds, drew the defense and found the open Foley, a sophomore who grew up on the other side of the world, one that is not so big, basketball-wise, anymore.
She played against the Huskies in Storrs, Conn., with a touring Australian team in November 1999, against Shea Ralph, Svetlana Abrosimova and Sue Bird. ''They beat us by 35,'' Foley said. ''They were really good.''
UConn still is. It just isn't a sure thing, not even with a big lead late, at home in Connecticut, which was left in a misplaced state of shock.
Sports of The Times
