I was midway through my morning cup of black coffee when my wife popped the question. ''What do you think about what they decided in Massachusetts a while ago?''
Trying to remember something they decided in Massachusetts a while ago, I recalled a conservative former boss of mine who hailed from the Bay State. When he wasn't extolling the virtues of Ronald Reagan, he would rant that the commonwealth's worst decision since it adopted an income tax in 1916 had been to re-elect Ted Kennedy as senator.
I looked at my wife. ''You mean their decision to re-elect Ted Kennedy?'' I asked. ''He's not so bad.''
''I'm not talking about him,'' she said. ''I'm talking about their decision that it's O.K. for gays to marry.''
I racked my brain. Why would she care? Our friends Bob and Jake are gay. But my wife thinks they're cute together. I like talking with Bob, but I can't fathom his affection for Jake, whose insistence on yakking about Devils and Nets games drives me up a wall. Then it hit me.
''I know where you're going with this,'' I declared. ''If Bob and Jake go to up to Mass to get married and invite us to their wedding, sure, I'll go. But you're not going to get me to wear a tie and a suit.''
''That's not what I meant,'' my wife replied. ''I'm concerned about. You know. About allowing gay marriage. New Jersey might be next!''
''Great! Let's buy stock in liberal churches,'' I told her. ''They'll make a bundle from marriage fee revenue. We're talking about two or three generations of pent-up demand about to explode!'' I pumped my fist. ''As our president said, 'Bring 'em on!'''
She pushed me away. ''Churches don't issue stock!'' she retorted. Her voice quavered as she looked down at the floor. ''What'll happen to us? They say if gays can marry, it'll threaten the sanctity of marriage.''
I excused myself to look up ''sanctity'' in a dictionary. It led me to conclude that ''they'' mean to warn us that allowing gays to marry will compromise the ''sacred'' and ''inviolable'' ''quality or condition'' of our marriage. I couldn't understand how anything could compromise something that was inviolable, but my wife apparently could. I returned to the kitchen, placed my hands on her shoulders and looked lovingly into her eyes. ''Hon, we've been married about 20 years. I promise you that even if some guy proposes to me, I won't leave you for him.''
''You can't even remember how long we've been married,'' she said, then pushed me away and left for work.
She called just before noon. ''Can you call back later?'' I asked. ''The meter reader for the gas company is here.''
''You tell him to finish his reading pronto and leave! I'm staying on the phone with you until he's gone.''
''It's a lady meter reader,'' I assured her.
''Oh, well, that's a relief.''
She came home two hours late, smiling. ''I stopped for a drink with a girlfriend from work,'' she said, and giggled when I gasped. ''I was just kidding,'' she said. ''I really went to have my hair done. I knew you wouldn't even notice.''
I realized that what she had been hinting at all along was true.
''I've been thinking,'' I said. ''You're right. Allowing gays to wed would threaten our marriage. We need a constitutional amendment against gay marriage to protect our own.''
That got me an energetic hug and kiss. But deep inside, I longed to ask her, ''Are you sure we can't buy stock in one of those liberal churches?''
SOAPBOX Marc Grobman is a freelance writer who lives in Fanwood.
