Jack Sprat could eat no fat
His wife could eat no lean
And so betwixt the two of them
They licked the platter clean.
WITHOUT setting some food-related goal, what would the New Year be?
In my house, that is no easy task. The food wars that have been in the headlines all year are an everyday debate for us. This year we can't even agree on what eating goal would be ideal. More meat? Less pasta? More fruit? Less sugar?
My husband, Peter, is a 100-percent-low-fat kind of guy. Not that he couldn't lose a tad around the waist, but he is committed to a low fat-philosophy. He has naturally high cholesterol and started on his first Statin back when his peers began tasting their first beers.
He is very serious about his food intake and I give him credit for it, but it doesn't make my life easier. Low-fat food involves so much chopping. And washing. And planning.
As with many things in my life, my cholesterol is average. My favorite food is the kind that is already made and on the table. I could probably follow an Atkins diet -- it's simple, fast, and effortless -- but it would surely mean divorce.
Thus, it was nice to find out recently that our dinner table is not the only one that's chaotic.
In 20 percent of American homes, there are at least two main dishes on the table at dinner, according to the 18th Annual Eating Patterns in America Report, issued in December by the NPD group, a market research firm.
If one-fifth of Americans are serving more than one dinner to keep peace in the family, is it dysfunction? Or is it a culture shift?
Until now, I was reluctant to discuss my family's dinner habits. But now that I realize I am in the forefront of a culinary movement, I feel a sense of duty.
On weekdays, I am the main cook in our house, mostly because Peter gets home later than I do. I am the first to admit that I have no great talent for cooking, but I can grill a burger, make a roast or throw together a reasonable stew. Trouble is, of course, Peter won't eat meat.
I can make a lasagna or ziti, but Peter doesn't eat cheese. I could grill salmon or tuna, which I often do, but the kids turn up their noses. Not to mention the mercury question.
Most nights, for the children and myself I cook something meaty and rib-sticking with zillions of grams of fat. Then, as long as we're not running to Cub Scouts, or acting lessons, or band practice, we clean up. Peter comes home in time for the second seating and cooks some pasta and beans, or squid and tofu -- something arty and strange with carbs galore. Then he cleans up.
If the kids don't like what we are having, it's hard to force them to eat what's on their plate. The moral heft of ''children are starving in Africa,'' is weakened somewhat when the parents can't agree on their own meal. The moral high ground in our house sounds more like a whine: how about some peanut butter and jelly?
It is a meal situation that I am somewhat ashamed of. And, until I gave up my ideal of ''The Family Dinner'' and accepted the reality of ''my family's dinner,'' it was the source of many many arguments. I always thought family meals should be events where people eat family-style. There should be big serving bowls passed around a long boisterous table, and siblings squabbling over the last delicious crumb: just as in those Italian movies.
In contrast, my dinner table is the Automat. Put in a nickel and get just what you want, nothing more, nothing less, and, most of all, no surprises. The person next to you uses his own nickel and pulls up his own chair.
It may not be perfect, but it beats fighting. You can still talk about the day and your life, even if you are not eating the same food. For that matter, you can still spend quality time together even if you are not eating together at all.
I have come to a point of acceptance, but deep down I know our dinner patterns are deviant. My children think eating just what you want is normal.
So, my goal for this New Year's family menu has less to do with what we eat than how. I resolve for my family to eat one meal together at least three times a week, and no splitting portions like Jack Sprat and his wife.
COUNTY LINES
