China has accused one of its largest and richest state-owned companies of negligence in the gas well disaster that killed 233 late last month, as the authorities moved with unusual speed to assess responsibility for the accident.
State television announced Friday evening that investigators had found a series of safety violations by the China National Petroleum Corporation, the country's main domestic oil and gas producer, and threatened legal action against company executives deemed responsible.
''This was an accident due to negligence,'' said Sun Huashan, deputy director of the State Administration of Work Safety. ''Those people who were responsible will be dealt with.''
The verdict on the accident, China's biggest industrial disaster of recent years, was publicized just 10 days after it happened on Dec. 23. During a drilling operation late that night, a gas well burst and spewed toxic fumes over farming villages in a 10-mile radius. Many victims died of poisoning or chemical burns in their homes or while trying to flee the area on foot.
The accident capped another horrendous year for safety in China's mines and factories. The authorities say 11,499 people died in workplace accidents in the first nine months of 2003, a 10 percent increase over the same period the year before, and in the last three months of the year, there was a spate of major fires, explosions and building collapses.
Officials have emphasized the importance of work safety. But the Communist Party has put a heavier emphasis on producing the goods and raw materials to keep the economy growing quickly, which officials see as essential to maintaining social stability and their hold on power.
The gas well, situated within the municipality of Chongqing, in southwestern China, was an especially high priority project because China needs natural gas as fuel to mitigate serious energy shortages in some parts of the country. Natural gas is also needed to replace heavily polluting coal-burning stoves in major northern cities.
But safety officials now say China National Petroleum cut corners as its workers sought to tap a deep vein of gas in the area.
Safety equipment was not readily available at the site, investigators said. The drilling crew improperly dismantled equipment designed to prevent blowouts. Workers also misjudged the amount of gas in the well, and failed to recognize the extent of the accident when it occurred.
Officials said that if the crew had followed safety instructions they would have immediately set fire to the gas to prevent it from spreading. In fact, it took hours for them to ignite the gas, allowing the highly toxic mixture of natural gas and hydrogen sulfide to escape.
Chinese officials often seek to hold local officials or company executives responsible for safety problems, but usually only after an accident occurs. The government has had trouble reducing workplace deaths because it puts far less emphasis on safe production before accidents happen, Chinese safety experts say. China also forbids workers to organize independent unions that might make safety a higher priority.
Some local news reports made it clear that not just the company, but also local and national officials, had done little or nothing to prepare for an accident of this kind, though such well bursts are not uncommon.
Although the People's Liberation Army has a special chemical and biological disaster unit, it took until Dec. 26 for the unit to reach the scene. By that time, almost all the deaths had already occurred.
Correction:  January 12, 2004, Monday  An article on Jan. 4 about a Chinese government investigation of a Dec. 23 gas well explosion that killed 233 people in southwest China referred imprecisely to an official statistic on accidental workplace deaths. It covered only accidents in industrial workplaces like mines and factories, not all workplaces. The article also misstated the number of such deaths in the first nine months of 2003. It was 11,449, not 11,499.
