THE process of learning a foreign cuisine is a slow one. Take Thai cuisine, which is currently making inroads on the American food scene. Innocent to the differences between regional Thai cuisines and home, restaurant and palace styles of cooking, we're getting to know the food through a trademark collection of dishes that we recognize on restaurant menus: satays (skewered meat) with peanut sauce, tom-yum goong (a searingly hot shrimp soup soured with lime), pad thai (stir fried rice noodles) and Thai curries.
The flavors of certain exotic ingredients -- kaffir lime leaves, lemongrass, coconut milk, fish sauce and holy basil -- define the cuisine for us, too, much as soy sauce, garlic, ginger and sweet and sour preparations defined our early experiences of Chinese food.
In Thai restaurants we get to relive the process of learning a new Asian cuisine, this time with thebenefit of 40 years of ethnic food savvy. Now we have a context for comparison: we recognize similarities and differences between stir-fries, dumplings and curries from Thailand, Indonesia, India, Vietnam and Japan.
I've discovered that a comparison of two restaurants is a useful way to learn your way around a new cuisine. You really get to know the dishes by eating two renditions of the same. In the differences you discover your own preferences as to how you like the food cooked, independent of its authenticity. (This peculiar reliance on preference before authenticity is what makes American cuisine.)
I've been eating a lot at two Thai restaurants on the shoreline. They are both very good and rather different from one another. In my next two columns, I will be writing a comparison of the two restaurants -- mostly soups and appetizers this week -- in the hope that you may be inspired to make your own comparisons.
Siam Orchids on Route 1 in Branford is a pleasant, understated contemporary restaurant, minimally decorated with photography and Thai artifacts. Som Siam, just off the green in Guilford, is a tiny jewel. Tables are covered in lengths of embroidered fabric and the waitresses dress in traditional long-skirted Thai dress. The place is richly colored with painted Thai woodwork.
An essential difference between the restaurants is one of style: while the cooking at Siam Orchids tends toward delicate and subtle, the food at Som Siam tastes more hearty and robust. In some cases -- the wonton soups, for example -- I like both versions. (Thai wonton soup is similar to the Chinese, but the Thais add a lot of rough-cut vegetables, which makes for a great soup.)
At Som Siam in Guilford, the broth is rich tasting, complex, a little sweet and savory. (A bit of fish sauce?) At Siam Orchids, the broth is lighter (even in color) and more delicate; I particularly like the soup at Som Siam for its richness, but both are well made.
Sometimes one rendition does seem better made than the other. Tom-kha gai is a rich coconut-chicken soup; I prefer the subtlety of Siam Orchids' version. The delicate taste of the lemongrass and kaffir lime perfumes the soup as much as flavors it; a lighter touch works best. I also prefer their Vietnamese-style fresh spring rolls (soft, translucent rice pancakes stuffed with herbs, lettuce and rice noodles); they taste very fresh -- more greenery, more crunch.
In the case of the thin sautéed rice noodles (pad thai), I like bits of both: at the Branford restaurant, the noodles are a perfect texture -- tender with tooth -- but the flavoring is monochromatic -- too sweet. In Guilford, I like the taste of the dish but the noodles need more texture.
Each restaurant does some appetizers particularly well. The steamed seafood dumplings (mai tai) at Siam Orchids are superb: delicate and rich flavored, with bits of sautéed garlic on top.
The fried spareribs at Som Siam can be simple and delicious (sometimes dry), as are the tender curry puffs (curried chicken turnovers), and the yum ped grob (crisp duck salad with lime and chiles) -- very, very spicy.
Siam Orchids  899 West Main Street, Branford  (203)483-6993
Very Good
ATMOSPHERE -- Informal, airy, contemporary.  NOISE LEVEL -- Moderate.  SERVICE -- Friendly, helpful.  RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Mai tai, fresh spring roll, steamed mussels, winter shrimp, all soups, papaya salad, green garden, shrimp him-ma-parn, pad kra-tiem prik thai goong, wild boar basil, tamarind duck, mango with sticky rice.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers and soups: $3.25 to $6.95; Salads: $2.95 to $7.95; Main courses: $7.95 to $14.95.  CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards accepted.  HOURS -- Lunch: everyday, 11:30 a.m. to 3 p.m.; Dinner: Sunday through Thursday, 4:30 p.m. to 10 p.m.; Friday through Saturday, 4:30 p.m. to 10:30 p.m.  RESERVATIONS -- Never been necessary, but gets busy on weekends.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESSIBILITY -- Good.  Reviewed by The Times Jan. 4, 2004.  Ratings -- Extraordinary, Excellent, Very Good, Good, Satisfactory, Fair, Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
DINING
