Iran's lukewarm response to overtures by the United States stemming from American assistance for the Bam earthquake victims fueled a widening debate on Saturday on the Islamic Republic's relations with its longtime adversary.
Hard-liners who have always viewed adverse relations with Washington as a pillar of the Islamic revolution are dismissing the American statements as just more ''trickery from the Great Satan,'' while reformists fret aloud that Iran is about to miss yet another opportunity to end its international isolation.
Neither side appreciated President Bush's repeating of American demands on Iran in the same breath as his promise to amplify aid to quake victims, but the debate here appears likely to become an important issue in parliamentary elections just six weeks away.
''I think it is a kind of missed opportunity for achieving a rapprochement in Iranian-U.S. relations,'' said Elaheh Koulai, a reformist member of the foreign relations committee in Parliament. ''I don't think this kind of rejection serves our interests.''
On Friday, Iran rejected an offer from Washington to send a delegation to assess the need for further assistance and to help with the distribution of relief supplies in Bam, where 30,000 people were killed and tens of thousands were left homeless in an earthquake on Dec. 26. Officials in Washington said Iran cited the difficult conditions in Bam as the reason for not accepting the delegation, although Tehran did not close the door to a future visit.
Conservatives quickly condemned the American offer and attacked Iranian officials who welcomed it. Measures included dispatching 81 aid workers to Bam to staff a hospital and to survey the damage, as well as the temporary suspension of some economic sanctions to allow private donations to Iran.
''If these officials favor resuming ties with the United States, they must not speak so eagerly, instead they should speak in a way to get advantages and force the other side to abandon its overpowering tone,'' said an editorial in Jomhouri Islami, a newspaper close to the supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei.
Analysts here believe the timing of the American offer probably led to its rejection. By late next week the Guardian Council is expected to announce the names of the thousands of Iranians allowed to run in parliamentary elections on Feb. 20. Reformists swept the elections four years ago, but conservatives were hoping to retake the body this year.
In municipal elections last year, voters stayed home in droves as a kind of protest toward economic stagnation and lack of political change. Conservatives thus dominate most municipal councils. They expected to do the same with parliamentary elections and would like try to stave off anything that might change that plan, analysts believe.
''I think it is too much of a sudden change for the conservatives to get themselves reorganized on such an issue,'' said Sadegh Zibakalam, a political scientist at Tehran University. If relations improved, it would mean abandoning a central tenet of the Islamic revolution, while if talks quickly fell apart, then voters might punish them, the professor said.
It is generally acknowledged that the Iranian public would welcome relations with the United States. Economic sanctions hobble the country's economic development, limiting foreign investment and curbing access to much needed equipment like modern airplanes and computers.
''Iranians feel that it is a new opportunity that should be capitalized on and accepted for solving the longstanding problems between the two countries,'' said Davoud Hermidas Bavand, also a political science professor at Tehran University.
Reformist newspapers were quick to try to seize the opportunity to point out that keeping the United States at arm's length might backfire on the conservatives, as voters dismayed by the policy might find reason to go to the polls after all.
But Iranians from both camps were dismayed that President Bush had repeated American conditions for improving ties with Iran, including more democracy and cooperation on preventing terrorism.
''I think these matters are internal affairs,'' said Ms. Koulai, the member of Parliament.
One government official suggested that Iran's strategic interests in the Persian Gulf and its economic interests -- especially developing its lagging oil industry and delivering advanced consumer goods to more than 60 million Iranians -- run parallel with those of the United States.
''They are always pointing a finger at Iran and accusing them of these things and that becomes a big hindrance to improving relations,'' one official said.
One reformist newspaper marveled at the apparent repetitive pattern in relations, comparing it to an ancient Iranian love tale in which two ill fated lovers, Ramy and Veis, continuously try and fail to unite, leaving each lobbing bitter recriminations at the other.
''For the past 25 years this scenario of Ramy and Veis keeps repeating itself,'' said an editorial in the Yass-e-na daily. ''Through all these years neither country has been able to erase the other from its dreams or its future plans.''
