SOME 14 years ago, Andrea Leibman by her own admission was living a life of dull domesticity. ''I was a mom with a minivan and two kids,'' said Mrs. Leibman of West Hartford, adding, ''I felt dowdy.''
Then Mrs. Leibman came into a bit of money and acquired a butterfly tattoo, a sexy white '89 Corvette and a vanity plate, reading ''MIDLFC,'' short for midlife crisis. Her husband, she joked, said it was better than acquiring a boyfriend.
''I really was making fun of myself,'' said Mrs. Leibman. Yet, driving the new car with its funny plate, even with her 4-and 6-year-old crammed inside, ''made me feel spirited. I felt like I had a waistline again.''
Mrs. Leibman and thousands of other Connecticut residents are increasingly using vanity plates to express their life events, passions, character traits, and sense of humor to an audience of curious, amused and sometimes puzzled onlookers. While the Connecticut Department of Motor Vehicles doesn't track exactly how many vanity plates are on the road, it does have data showing a steady growth over the past decade in vanity plates issued for all kinds of vehicles, with more than 8,000 plates issued in fiscal 2002-2003, up from about 5,000 in fiscal 1995-1996.
Many plates become ''personal symbols,'' relating in a sound bite something about their owners, said Dr. Jim DeGiovanni, a psychologist in the mental health division at Hartford Hospital.
In Lisa Butterfield's case, her ''IMLATE'' plate reveals her fun-loving personality and problem with punctuality. ''I'm tall, blonde, and I'm late a lot,'' said Mrs. Butterfield, a busy Marlborough mother of two and real estate agent. ''Sometimes, I'm a day late.''
The best part about the plate,'' she added, ''is when I have a young kid behind me and I see the parent point to the plate, and they laugh.''
Terry Maitland of West Hartford has an ''ONTYM'' plate on her weathered Subaru. Ms. Maitland got the plate to celebrate her championship status as a competitive sports car driver though she said ''I am also punctual.''
Some plate-holders see their markers as emblems for their zest for life.
''CLIMHI'' is affixed to the BMW motorcycle ridden by Dr. Donald Hight, an avid mountain climber and director of pediatric surgery at Connecticut Children's Medical Center in Hartford. ''I like vanity plates,'' said Dr. Hight, whose other plates include ''MYYAK,'' referring to the Nepal practice of using yaks on climbing expeditions, and ''RXKIDS.''
''It is just part of how you live your life,'' said Dr. Hight, comparing them to tattoo images, which ''are either done impulsively or have a real connection to your life.''
Sarah Herzig of West Hartford was getting a divorce several years ago when she applied to the State Department of Motor Vehicles for the plate ''NULIFE.''
The agency reviews all requests for vanity plates, scrutinizing submissions for hidden obscenities, racial slurs and other provocative topics. Mrs. Herzig's request sparked a D.M.V. inquiry.
''People have tried to get all kinds of offensive combinations on their plates,'' said William K. Seymour, an agency spokesman, adding that Mrs. Herzig's request was questioned because of its possible anti-abortion inference.
Mrs. Herzig said that when she explained her personal situation, agency staffers said, ''You go, girl!'' Her request was granted. A few years later, Mrs. Herzig met her current husband, a Northeast Utilities employee. Seeing her license plate, ''He thought it was destiny,'' she said, assuming the plate referred to his employer's abbreviated name, N.U. Today, they still have the plate, ''because he has a new life with me,'' she said.
The plates cost $90, and a vehicle must be registered before its owner can apply for the vanity plate. Regular registration fees vary from $150 for newer cars (2002-2005 models) to $110 for the not-so-new, said William K. Seymour, spokesman for the D.M.V. Vanity plates applications are available at the agency's Web site and at its offices. The applications take three to six weeks to process, he said. Applicants can list in order of preference up to six choices for their plate.
By design, some owners keep the meaning of their vanity plates a mystery. Dr. Robert M. Weiss, a dentist in Avon, got ''HTOOT'' as a ''joke'' in 1970. Seen in a rear view mirror, the mystery unfolds: TOOTH.
''They're a blessing and a curse,'' said Dr. Weiss, explaining, ''everyone knows your business.'' Some years ago, Dr. Weiss and his brother, who had long hair, were riding in the ''HTOOT'' car. ''Someone calls to tell my wife that there was a women in the car with me,'' he said.
Other plates also cause a stir. Nelson Veiga, a European-trained wine sommelier who has homes in Waterbury and Palm Beach, drives his sports utility vehicle with ''WINEBOY,'' using a Florida plate with seven spaces (Connecticut allows a maximum of six spaces.). ''People beep at me on the road,'' said Mr. Veiga, as he makes the I-84 commute from Waterbury to his job at Dotcom Wines and Spirits West in West Hartford. ''I get these crazy girls, passing on I-84, yelling, 'I love wine','' he said.
The plate of Joseph B. Sappington of West Hartford also brings responses. Framed with the Red Sox baseball team logo, his plate ''NXTYR'' has drawn thumbs ups, beeps, windshield wiper notes and ''Bronx cheers'' from opposing fans. ''I don't think it's my driving,'' Mr. Sappington said.
Vanities also are a way of communicating something their holders are proud of, often their professions.
''UOME,'' (You owe me) rides on the back of the sky blue 911 Porsche owned by David Fishman of the Better Loan Society of Wethersfield.
''I get a lot of 'I love your plates' in parking lots mostly,'' he said.
Alan M. Rothstein, an accountant from Avon, displays ''DEDUCT'' on his '91 Jeep Wrangler. He deducted the plate's cost as a business expense.
Dr. Michael LeGeyt, an orthopedist who practices in Bristol and Southington, carries ''BONES'' on his black BMW. ''I've dedicated most of my adult life to doing orthopedics,'' he said. ''It's a way to show how proud I am to repair people who are injured and restore people's anatomy.''
But Dr. LeGeyt,'s plate has other connotations that he didn't think about when he got it. ''Bones is a moniker for a certain kind of drug,'' he said, referring to marijuana. He also said that some older people have thought the plate referred to dice, as in ''roll them bones.''
Vanity plates tend to run in families. Joel Goodman, a dentist from West Hartford, also a father of four, displays ''FMLYMN'' on his green van. His daughter, Tamara, who practices with him, has ''NODCAY,'' and a third family car (a little red Mercedes) has ''INDYJ,'' an Indiana Jones salute to Dr. Goodman's adventurous spirit. John Patrick Lowe, owner of John's Cafe in Mystic, is known around town by his ''HIMSLF'' plate, which he said means ''head of the household'' in the Irish culture. His wife ''thinks it's a wonderful thing,'' he said in his brogue, adding, ''she's thinking about getting ''HERSLF.''
Some plates are so obscure only the true cognoscenti know their meaning. Dr. Barry Zaret, a cardiologist at Yale-New Haven Hospital has a plate that reads ''LVEF.'' A gift from his wife, the plate is an abbreviated medical term for a diagnostic and prognostic tool for hearts that Dr. Zaret helped pioneer.
The plate of Bill Schumann of West Hartford, an Ironman competitor, is ''SWBKRN,'' shorthand for the grueling events' swim, bike and run elements. ''Most people don't have a clue as to what it means,'' except other competitors, Mr. Schumann said.
''DINO'' is the plate of Dr. Larry Goldstein, senior attending psychiatrist at Hartford Hospital and passionate devotee to Ferrari race cars. The plate is homage to Dino, the son of the Italian automaker Enzo Ferrari.
Another puzzling plate is ''DSFA.'' Acquired more than 20 years ago by Louise C. Kieffer of Maine, who lived in Connecticut at the time, the plate is now held by her friend Joan Hurwit of West Hartford. (The D.M.V. allows such transfers). The plate is a mild putdown of vanity plates.
''Everyone tries to guess,'' said Mrs. Hurwit. It means ''Doesn't Stand For Anything.''
