In his first minutes of fatherhood, Thomas Russell stood nervously in his girlfriend's hospital room, watching her hold his newborn daughter. The consummate bachelor, he had rarely been around children, much less infants. But just before the nurse spirited his daughter away, Mr. Russell asked if he could hold his first-born.
Though he tried to mimic what his girlfriend did, when he held Mariah that first time on Dec. 14, 2001, his inexperience and anxious excitement were evident. His hands seemed too big, and his baby girl too small.
''I was shaking when I held her, and I was scared to death,'' he said. ''I probably cried more than her.''
Whatever fear and instability Mr. Russell felt that day has been replaced by confidence in the last year. And with help from the Children's Aid Society, one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, Mr. Russell, 47, of the Bronx, has become an attentive single father.
But the transition was not easy.
Weeks after Mariah was born, her parents began to stumble. Her mother, who had spent much of her pregnancy in jail on drug charges, ''kept messing up,'' Mr. Russell said. And he simply felt ill equipped for fatherhood. His work at a furniture rental company dominated his days.
Meanwhile, his feelings for Mariah's mother kept leading him back to her. He believed her promises to do better and quit using drugs. And she kept breaking them.
''I guess I should have known,'' Mr. Russell said. ''But I just didn't face it.''
By April 2002, Mariah was in foster care with an aunt, and Mr. Russell and the girl's mother were charged with neglect.
''Initially, he wanted the mom to get it together so they could be a family,'' said Joanna Joseph, Mr. Russell's caseworker. But when he realized that she was unable to do so, he decided to plan on his own.
And plan he did. On his lunch breaks Mr. Russell visited his daughter at her foster home. After work, he rushed over to see her in the evenings. During those visits, Mr. Russell was not only getting to know his daughter, he was also learning how to take care of her.
Mariah's aunt, Luz Rodriguez, helped Mr. Russell feed Mariah and showed him how to change diapers. Mr. Russell was eventually awarded weekend visitation privileges.
Yet there was still some fear and anxiety.
''When she was little, I was scared, and I didn't know what to do,'' he said. ''I thought I'd put her diapers on too tight and that she would cry.''
Determined to become a better father, Mr. Russell took the Parenting Journey class offered by the Children's Aid Society. He completed the 13-week course in January 2003. He was the only man in the class, and the butt of many jokes. But he learned valuable lessons about Mariah, not just how to change diapers.
''I learned that you have to let a child be a child and not to be afraid,'' he said. ''I was reluctant and scared, but they gave me a lot of confidence.''
With that confidence and added know-how, Mr. Russell was able to regain custody of his daughter in March. Ms. Rodriguez baby-sits for Mariah while Mr. Russell is at work.
More recently, Mr. Russell was able to move into a bigger apartment, using $460 from The Neediest Cases Fund, after his studio apartment was damaged by rain.
And on a recent evening, as Mariah, 2, padded around the new place in red teddy-bear house shoes, Mr. Russell, talked about his newfound skills as if he were bragging about a nothing-but-net jump shot.
''I dress her, I pick her clothes out and buy her clothes,'' he said, as he adjusted Mariah's pink suede belt. ''You see how pretty she looks?''
Dressed in a pink turtleneck and baggy jeans with pampers peaking above her belt, Mariah climbed around her father as if he were her very own jungle gym. She played with his shoes, scaled his legs, then tugged on his ear. And Mr. Russell, who has a tough-guy mustache and a shaved head, took it all in stride.
''Daddy, Daddy, Daddy,'' Mariah said.
''You want some candy, Mama?'' he asked her.
Eyeing the purple candy from the second Mr. Russell began to unwrap it, Mariah settled into her father's lap. She shoved it in her mouth, and licked her fingers to make sure she didn't miss anything. Mr. Russell rocked her gently, and she eventually drifted off to sleep.
''He's always been loving towards his daughter and very careful,'' Ms. Joseph said. ''He was very nervous at first, but he's very comfortable now. He's grown a lot and made a lot of progress.''
And as he walked to the room he shares with Mariah to put her in her white baby bed, he sounded like a man committed to making a good life for his daughter.
''I'm not the greatest cook, and I don't have the greatest job, but I'm trying,'' Mr. Russell said. ''I'll do what I have to do to take care of her, and we'll do all right.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $5,422,350.21  Recorded Wednesday: 215,206.02
Total: $5,637,556.23
Last year to date: $5,985,811.29
