The Federal Election Commission has asked former Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani to explain more than $8,000 in expenditures last summer from campaign funds left over from his United States Senate race in 2000. The commission said some of the money appeared to have been used for ''personal'' expenses.
The commission, in a letter to Mr. Giuliani's Senate fund-raising committee, said a financial report issued last fall by the committee, which had $2 million in residual assets, listed disbursements ''that appear to constitute personal use of campaign funds by the candidate,'' which would violate federal law.
The letter, published on the commission's Web site and described as routine by a commission spokesman yesterday, asked for explanations of 15 expenditures totaling $8,250. Nearly all were for airline tickets, car rentals and other travel expenses, a hotel bill and $560 to ''Yankee-Nets, Inc.''
The commission gave the committee, Friends of Giuliani, a deadline of Dec. 26 to supply the explanations, but the letter was sent to the wrong address and the commission granted an extension to Jan. 11.
The commission's request was reported yesterday in The New York Post.
Sunny Mindel, Mr. Giuliani's spokeswoman, called the request ''much ado about nothing.'' She said almost all of the expenses were related to a trip Mr. Giuliani took to Vienna last June, at President Bush's behest, to attend a conference on anti-Semitism and two trips to Washington, with aides, for meetings to prepare for the conference.
All 15 expenses were listed as having been paid on Aug. 20. The largest, for $1,461, was for Austrian Airlines. Mr. Giuliani led a United States delegation, composed of members of Congress and Jewish leaders, that went to the two-day conference.
Spending for the trips, including $617 for a stay at a Washington hotel, were ''donations to the federal government,'' Ms. Mindel said, not personal expenses. The $560 for Yankee-Nets may have been a bookkeeping mix-up, she said.
Mr. Giuliani left the race six months before the election and began treatment for prostate cancer.
