When the Nets confronted Byron Scott in their locker room last month, he was forced to make one season-altering choice: he could join the shouting or turn a cheek and listen.
His future depended largely on his reaction.
After Jason Kidd lambasted the staff following a 47-point loss in Memphis, Scott vowed to apply Kidd's suggestions to his coaching. Three weeks later, many players say Scott has made good on his promise, significantly changing the way he approaches practices and handles pregame activities. The Nets have responded by winning 11 of their past 14 games and reclaiming first place in the Atlantic Division as they head to Madison Square Garden tonight to face the Knicks.
''The staff has done a wonderful job being creative and doing different things to motivate guys,'' Kidd said. ''When everything came out a few weeks ago, they took the challenge -- and so did we.'' Asked the secret to the Nets' turnaround, Kidd smiled and said, ''Maybe we just needed a tirade.''
Kidd had been upset with the coaching staff for a variety of reasons, but several players said they were most concerned that the joy of defending their Eastern Conference title was slipping away. They were weary of Scott's public criticism and his ultraserious approach to this season. They were tired of long and tedious practice sessions that made them feel more like a rebuilding team than a two-time conference champion.
''It had been getting repetitive and boring,'' shooting guard Lucious Harris said. ''When you've been doing it so long, it starts to feel like work, and even though it is work, you want to enjoy your job. We get paid a lot of money, but sometimes you don't like your job, regardless of how much you get paid.''
A coach recognized for his stiff demeanor has shown some flexibility. In the first practice after the Memphis meltdown, Scott conducted relay races and jump-shot drills, getting the players to laugh and compete at the same time. The next day, he had the team's smallest players scrimmage the team's biggest. He even ordered coaches to get on the court and team up with the players.
''It's definitely changed,'' Harris said. ''We've been having a lot more fun now and the atmosphere has become more relaxed. We have a young coach who's maturing, and when you've got a young coach, he might do some different things. It's worked.''
Instead of taking public embarrassment personally, Scott played it down and ultimately defused it. It is unclear whether Scott has won back his locker room, but he is at least working on it. During a recent shoot-around, he mingled with almost every player on the team, strolling with Kidd, chatting with Kenyon Martin and cracking up Richard Jefferson. Like Larry Brown, his former coach and mentor, Scott is trying to open lines of communication, which could prevent future outbursts.
One starter said Scott had recaptured the attention of key players by helping them set individual goals and showing them exactly how they can achieve them. He has also provided more incentive for the team by laying out a rewards program that provides small perks for success. If the Nets win a certain amount of games in a row, Scott indicated that he might take them bowling, miniature golfing or paint-balling. The field trips are a way to improve team chemistry and also build some well-earned respites for a team that has played into June the past two seasons.
''I had been putting too much pressure on these guys,'' Scott said after practice yesterday. ''I was so regimented, it wasn't fun. The guys got to a point where it was like pulling teeth. I had to say, 'Enjoy it.' ''
Heading into this season, Scott had a feeling it might be his most difficult one. Not only did his top assistant, Eddie Jordan, take the head-coaching job at Washington, but Scott did not receive the contract extension he sought. He struggled to inspire a laid-back team that went to the N.B.A. finals the past two seasons and that appeared uninterested in early games.
Scott initially tried to force-feed improvement, saying the Nets played scared after a loss to San Antonio, screaming at them after a rout at Sacramento and ripping the reserves after a victory over Seattle. Since he became the target in Memphis, however, players say Scott has lightened up considerably and his positive energy has rubbed off. When Kidd was pressed to list his New Year's resolutions, tops on his list was ''no more tirades.''
''Byron has done different things -- even his approach to the pregame speech,'' the backup point guard Robert Pack said. ''Guys are relaxed before the game now and it's carrying over. He's made us more relaxed, but also more competitive. A lot of teams would have tightened up after the Memphis situation. We loosened up.''
The next time the Nets are blown out or if they lose a few games in a row, their loyalty to Scott will most likely be tested again and his status will come into question.
But if players and coaches could sustain some of their newfound good feelings, Scott might be able to survive a season that so recently looked like his undoing.
REBOUNDS
The Nets, who have won 10 of their past 11 meetings against the Knicks, are hoping the backup center AARON WILLIAMS (pulled groin) returns for tonight's game.
PRO BASKETBALL
