The Rangers finished a four-game trip through four time zones with three victories and a loss after a 4-1 victory Saturday over the Pittsburgh Penguins.
But the score was deceptive. The Rangers had to hold off the struggling Penguins (9-22-5-3), who are 1-6-1-0 over their last eight games.
''I don't think it's anything we can sit here and overanalyze,'' said Mark Messier, the team's captain, who had two assists as the Rangers improved to 16-14-5-3 for 40 points. ''Our three worst games on the trip, we won. The game we probably played best, we lost. So who knows what to think of it anymore?''
Messier, who will turn 43 on Jan. 18, was named the game's first star. But that distinction probably belonged to Jussi Markkanen, the Rangers' backup goaltender, who made 40 saves. He may not be a backup much longer.
Markkanen stopped Pittsburgh's Eric Meloche on a penalty shot at 8 minutes 38 seconds of the second period, the first penalty shot he had faced in the N.H.L.
''Alex gave me a tip he might try to go five-hole,'' Markkanen said, referring to his teammate, Aleksei Kovalev, a former teammate of Meloche's with the Penguins. The five-hole refers to the space between the pads on a goaltender's legs.
''It was a good tip,'' said Markkanen, who snapped his pads shut to preserve a 1-0 lead as Meloche fired from the center of the slot.
Meloche eventually scored Pittsburgh's only goal, at 13:28 of the third period, to cut the Rangers' lead to 2-1. But just 1:05 later, Bobby Holik pounced on the puck behind the Penguins' goal after goaltender Sébastien Caron wandered from his crease to try to play a dump-in. Holik passed to the rookie Jed Ortmeyer for a tap-in to restore a two-goal lead.
Holik added an empty-net goal, and Dan LaCouture and Petr Nedved also scored for the Rangers. LaCouture scored 1:50 into the game, and Nedved scored at 15:00 of the second period after coming out of the penalty box.
Mike Dunham has faltered as the Rangers' goaltender over the last two months, and Markkanen is 6-0-1 over his last eight starts with one no-decision.
In 14 appearances this season, Markkanen, who was obtained from Edmonton in the off-season, is 7-4-1. Two of his defeats have come since Dec. 26 in relief of Dunham, including Thursday night's 5-4 loss to the St. Louis Blues, in which Dunham allowed 4 goals on 12 shots.
The Rangers had started the trip with overtime victories in Phoenix and Los Angeles.
For the moment, the Rangers appear to have more confidence in Markkanen, who also stopped Matt Bradley on a short-handed breakaway early in the second period and helped the Rangers kill a two-man advantage for two minutes early in the third.
Rangers Coach Glen Sather stopped short of saying he had a goaltender controversy, but he did acknowledge that Markkanen's play could not be ignored. The Rangers play host to the Calgary Flames on Monday night, and it is uncertain whom Sather will start in goal.
''You have to have two good goaltenders,'' Sather said. ''One's not playing as well as he can, and the other is. That's the way it is.''
Regarding the Rangers' play Saturday, Sather said: ''I think this was more of a last game of the road trip, let's get it over with, get out of here, and try to do it the easiest way possible. If it hadn't been for Jussi, then we probably could have lost.''
SLAP SHOTS
The Rangers played without TOM POTI (sore hip flexor). DARIUS KASPARAITIS returned after missing two games with a pulled rib-cage muscle. JOEL BOUCHARD dressed in Poti's place but strained a hamstring after playing two shifts in the first period. Bouchard played another shift in the second. . . . Pittsburgh's DAN FOCHT sustained a concussion in the first minute of the game when ERIC LINDROS hit him with a shoulder check. . . . The Rangers have won all three games against Pittsburgh this season, by a combined score of 14-4. . . . The Rangers were 0 for 4 on the power play and are 3 for 31 over the last seven games.
HOCKEY
