THE two buildings just across the railroad tracks and inside the metal gates have a sort of Hansel-and-Gretel quality. They are prim white with green shutters and trim, with lush, forest-like vegetation all around. The building to the right has a cute A-frame roof and a road beside it, where you can almost imagine a trail of goodies leading into the woods.
For golfers, truly, that trail beside that A-frame is a road to Valhalla, as Pine Valley Golf Club is perennially rated the top course in the country. But for the 20 residents of Pine Valley, the borough that surrounds the golf course, the cute A-frame building is police headquarters, next door to Steiniger Hall, the borough office building, where you can often find Robert Mathers, the clerk of Pine Valley, one of New Jersey's least-populous towns.
''We operate in the same respect as any other town in the state. We are small in stature, that's all,'' Mr. Mathers said recently. ''We have a construction department as far as meeting state codes. We have a police department - four regulars and three part-timers. We have an assessor. And me. And there is always something that needs to be done.''
Small as New Jersey is, it has 566 municipalities, a vestige of the state's independent character. Some, like Newark, Jersey City, Paterson and Trenton, are large and have myriad bureaucracies and services. But others have barely enough residents to fill an auditorium. There are Cape May Point (population 241) and Diamond Beach (population 218) in Cape May County, Rockleigh (population 391) in Bergen County and Loch Arbour (population 280) in Monmouth County. Altogether, there are 30 incorporated towns in New Jersey with fewer than 1,000 residents, according to the 2000 census. Four of them have fewer than 50 souls: Walpack (41) in Sussex County, Teterboro (18) in Bergen County and Pine Valley and Tavistock (24) in Camden County.
''New Jersey is a perfect example of creative localism,'' said Michael Aaron Rockland, the chairman of American studies at Rutgers University. ''From way back, the hallmark of freedom and liberty in the state was to keep things small and decentralized - the idea that the more you centralize, the less you have citizen involvement and caring on local issues. We have long been an involved state.''
Just about everyone in Tavistock is involved, to be sure, and always has been. Actually, Tavistock is infinitely larger today than it was when it was founded in 1921.
''It was a town without residents when it was formed,'' said Kathy Tassini, the librarian of the Historical Society of Haddonfield, the town that borders on and provides most services for Tavistock. ''Basically, it was made to play golf on Sundays.''
Frank Middleton, who owned the old non-working Gill farm in Center Township, next to Haddonfield, was upset that he and his buddies were thwarted by Blue Laws from golfing on Sundays at the Haddon Country Club in Haddonfield. They formed a committee and, given easy secession laws as they were in New Jersey at the time, Mr. Middleton donated his land for the new town. In time, a few houses were built adjacent to Tavistock Country Club. Though the official figures from the census note 24 people, Ms. Tassini says there are really only 11 residents, making it New Jersey's smallest town, beating out Teterboro by 7.
''They must have counted the houses on the other side of the street, which are really in Haddonfield,'' she said.
Everyone in Tavistock gets to be a part of town government. The eight registered voters elect three commissioners, who then select a mayor among them. George J. Buff III is only the third mayor in the borough's history, and he has been in office 10 years. Mr. Buff appoints a five-member school board, which meets once a year to pass a budget - basically sending payments to Haddonfield for the borough's three schoolchildren. The commission meets every fourth Tuesday - in the borough hall at the 10th hole of the Tavistock golf course.
The idea that places like Tavistock had to have a school board without having any schools - or even that there should be a place as small as Tavistock at all in New Jersey - so confounded the late Assembly leader Alan Karcher that he wrote a book about it, ''New Jersey's Multiple Municipal Madness'' (Rutgers Press, 1998) that experts cite as the best on the subject. One chapter, for instance, is called ''Shrewsbury, the Incredible Shrinking Township,'' and shows how, one after another, 74 other municipalities separated themselves over the 19th and early 20th century from Shrewsbury, so that now, the original township has only 56 acres.
One of those split-offs was Ocean Township. Seaside real-estate developers there found in 1849 that their interests conflicted with the farming and industrial ones of the western end of Shrewsbury. Eventually, places like Eatontown, Ocean Grove, Asbury Park and Interlaken broke away from Ocean Township because of liquor laws or a desire for fancy houses or connections to a railroad stop. The final comeuppance for Ocean Township, though, came in 1957.
Developers wanted to build a condominium complex on the beachfront in the Loch Arbour section of town. The few homeowners there tried to stop it, but were initially unsuccessful -- until they decided to secede from the township. The Village of Loch Arbour was formed, the last new municipality in New Jersey. When it seceded, it took with it the last piece of oceanfront in the now ironically-named Ocean Township.
Today, Loch Arbour has but 280 residents, making it the seventh-smallest town in the state. As such, it needs help from other towns to keep services up. It sends school students to Ocean Township, does recycling with Allenhurst, sends sewage to Asbury Park and gets snowplowing from Deal.
''Over the years, we have investigated merging with other towns, but it is mostly when taxes come out and people think we could keep them down otherwise,'' said Lorraine Carafa, who serves as village clerk, treasurer, recycling coordinator, tax collector ''and a few other things if I think hard enough.''
Various laws since the 1960's have made it much more difficult for sections of towns to split off as Loch Arbour did. But only one town, Pahaquarry, has disappeared -- and that only because the federal government finally acquired all that Warren County township's land in 1997.
''We made a huge advance, from 567 to 566,'' James Hughes, the dean of the Edward Bloustein School of Planning and Public Policy at Rutgers, said with a laugh. ''Consolidation would do wonders for services, but no one seems to have the energy to try it. They might consolidate some services, but everyone seems to want to control their own destiny, so we have these little towns.''
They don't get much smaller than Teterboro, which was created in the early 1900's out of parts of Lodi, Little Ferry, Moonachie and Hasbrouck Heights -- none very big themselves -- by William Teter, who wanted to create a residential community. World War I and a recession thwarted him. But the postwar fascination with airplanes brought the Witteman-Lewis Aircraft Company to Teterboro's flat fields. The Bendix Corporation bought the business and expanded and actually renamed the town Bendix. The few houses that were built in town have continued to be occupied, but Teterboro remains primarily its airport and related businesses.
''You've got to remember that 100 years ago, no one thought that each municipality would have to provide so many services, so it was no big deal to split off and have your own town,'' Mr. Hughes said. ''Now, when you think of schools and sewers and roads and police, well, it might be virtually impossible.''
COMMUNITIES
