FOR the past 175 years, the Old New-Gate Prison and Copper Mine in East Granby has been a popular tourist destination, attracting as many as 18,000 people a year. But in 2003 no one passed through its stone walls or climbed down into the cool subterranean caves where Tory prisoners were once held because state budget cuts forced the museum to close.
Now, a group of dedicated museum volunteers and others who enjoy the country's only colonial-era prison plan to ask the General Assembly to transfer ownership of the 60-acre property to a new nonprofit organization that plans to reopen it in the spring.
''It's unique in this country. It's a connection with 300 years of our past and that's important,'' said State Rep. Richard Ferrari, the East Granby legislator who plans to introduce the measure. ''The longer it stays closed and unused it will just fall apart. That's what we don't want to happen.''
When budget cuts threatened the museum in 1988, a 140-member volunteer group called Friends of Old New-Gate Prison came to its aid, volunteering their time to staff the museum and raising money through golf tournaments and the sale of souvenirs. When the budget cuts closed the museum this year, it was the Friends group that came up with the idea for the transfer. The group's president, Bill Vibert, is now the chairman of Old New-Gate Prison and Copper Mine Inc., the nonprofit group seeking ownership of the prison. He said the group needed to raise $150,000 over the next three years to operate the museum. Admissions and souvenir sales will provide the rest of the budget.
Mr. Vibert said he expects questions about the ability of his nonprofit organization to run the museum. He said the group has developed a detailed business plan while educators and others who have volunteered at the museum over the past 15 years will staff it. The group also plans to expand educational programs and events. Information about the effort can be found at www.oldnewgate.org.
Mr. Ferrari said he does not expect opposition to the transfer but said the legislature may not make a decision until May because of other pressing business. If that happens, he said, it could be difficult for the museum to open in 2004. He said he has asked legislative leaders to deal with the issue at the beginning of the session.
Mr. Vibert said that if the transfer occurs, those who care about the prison will no longer be at the mercy of the state budget.
''This place has a big story to tell and we don't want to lose that,'' he said.
UPDATE
