TURN into any side street off Beekman Avenue and, like painted flats of a small town in a stage set, this busy main drag in Sleepy Hollow disappears. Behind the commercial facade is a tree-lined residential neighborhood, and two blocks into it, on tiny Clinton Street, stands Carlos' Place.
For a restaurant, the location is unexpected and unusual, and unless one were looking, the place could easily go unnoticed. But in an area where parking spaces are at a premium, Carlos' offers a large adjoining parking lot, a big plus for nearby residents who have discovered this cheery, unpretentious Italian bistro, Italian the way it used to be over here, before the designer invasion, and the way it still is over there.
Note the 1950's décor. A year ago, Carlos de Agustini, the owner, spruced up what was once a pizza shop with blond wainscoting, warm earth-colored walls and a few movie posters. Soft lighting from sconces, and flowers and sparkly candles alight on every table (not on only those that are occupied, a cheap habit in so many dreary dining rooms) reflect the owner's pride in his establishment and are as welcoming as the owner himself.
The short menu is appropriate for this small dining room, yet there's plenty to choose from. Dishes, like the décor, are far from trendy but very much a cut above meatballs and spaghetti, although this kitchen's way with pasta would probably work wonders in restoring that old chestnut.
Carlos' Place is like the informal restaurants found on the back streets of every town in Italy. Begin, perhaps, with a drink from the full bar or with some wine. There's no list; rather than recite his stock, Carlos presents his half-dozen reds or whites at the table for the diner's inspection. (In Italy, they might have come from his own or a neighbor's vineyard.) The priciest among them was $32. By the glass, a generous goblet of deep, dark Chilean cabernet (Concha y Toro) cost only $8. All wines made a good match with the food served here.
Splendid bruschetta appeared almost immediately, the toasted bread piled high with a salad of chopped tomato, garlic and oil. It didn't sate, but merely whetted the appetite.
If your main dish will be pasta, and that's probably the smart way to go, then starting with one of Carlos' sprightly salads -- all carefully dressed -- might be a good idea: house salad with romaine and endive; grilled portobello on mixed greens; special radicchio and orange with Dijon dressing. Seafood salad of shrimp and loads of supple calamari had been soaked gently in oil and lots of lemon. Or begin with light, baked crespelle, a wafer of eggplant wrapping a core of spinach and creamy ricotta. Minestrone, however, was thin and weak, and special breaded artichoke hearts were watery.
Pasta dishes shine. Terrific, meaty Bolognese sauce was smoothed by a shot of cream. The sauce went beautifully with a number of pastas: spaghetti, rigatoni or tortellini. Or try rigatoni amatriciana, that is, with sprightly tomato sauce enriched by bits of bacon, onion, garlic and sweet basil. Julienne of sweet red pepper, zucchini, carrots, mushrooms, broccoli and peas brought a riot of color to a nest of slender capellini, so easily and often overcooked elsewhere, but perfectly al dente here. Lumpy, fat and floppy homemade ravioli thrived under fresh tomato sauce or shrimp sauce.
Other entrees could be as fine as simply herbed riblets of good lamb -- avoid them tarred with thick, intense balsamic reduction -- and splayed, pan-roasted Cornish hen, crisped yet succulent. Others were less successful. Overcooking took the moxie out of dry chicken Gorgonzola, as well as texture and flavors from salmon and tilapia.
Don't bother ordering dessert. It simply appeared, in cuts of cool fresh fruits and a small sampling of exceptional cakes. Both provided the perfect ending to a meal with such assertive flavors and character.
Carlos' Place  60 Clinton Street, Sleepy Hollow (914)332-0134
GOOD
Atmosphere -- Formal table appointments in an old-fashioned simple but cozy dining room. Excellent, careful service and exuberant welcome.  Recommended dishes -- Crespelle (eggplant) alla fiorentina, seafood salad, house salad, special radicchio salad with orange and Dijon dressing, pasta bolognese, rigatoni amatriciana, homemade ravioli with tomato and seafood sauce, capellini primavera, herbed lamb riblets, Cornish hen, fresh fruit, cakes.  Prices -- Dinner, main dishes, $15 to $28.  Credit cards -- Major cards accepted.  Hours -- Dinner only, Mondays through Fridays, 5 to 10 p.m.; Saturdays, 5 to 11 p.m.  Reservations -- Accepted.  Wheelchair accessibility -- Ramp from the parking lot.  THE RATINGS -- Excellent. Very Good. Good. Satisfactory. Poor. Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction primarily to food, with ambience and service taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.  Reviewed Jan. 4, 2004.
DINING OUT E-mail: westdine@nytimes.com
