IN an effort to prove it is serious about the important California market, General Motors was the only automaker to introduce high-volume products at the Greater Los Angeles Auto Show last week.
During the show's press preview, held between Christmas and New Year's Day, G.M. unveiled the 2005 Chevrolet Cobalt, which will replace the Cavalier compact car and compete with the Honda Civic and Toyota Corolla, among others.
The Cobalt sedan and coupe are based on G.M.'s front-drive Delta architecture, shared with the Saturn Ion. Chevy will produce Cobalt SS versions, including a supercharged model aimed at the young import ''tuners'' who tend to favor Hondas.
G.M. also unveiled the 2005 Buick Terraza and 2005 Saturn Relay, two members of a new line of family haulers and the first minivan-type vehicles to bear the Buick and Saturn names. With the option of all-wheel drive, they have S.U.V. styling cues like a high-set body and an upright front end, but the minivan-style interiors have three rows of seats.
The Terraza and Relay will be joined by the Chevrolet Uplander, which replaces the Venture minivan, and the Pontiac Montana SV6; those versions will be unveiled at the Chicago auto show in February. All go on sale this fall.
Hummer showed its H3T pickup concept, built on the architecture of the Chevrolet Colorado pickup. Aimed at young buyers, it is expected to go into production in 2005 as a smaller, less expensive Hummer.
G.M's Saab division unveiled its 9-2X, a wagon that shares its underpinnings with the Subaru Impreza. G.M. owns a stake in Subaru's parent, Fuji Heavy Industries of Japan.
The Lotus Elise, which has been available in Europe for years but was never certified for sale in the United States, made its American debut. Morgan, the small British maker of old-style sports cars, said it planned to offer its Aero 8 to Americans this year for about $95,000.
Mercedes-Benz said it would produce a version of the Vision CLS ''four-door coupe,'' based on the E-Class sedan, that it showed last fall in Frankfurt. BMW showed its big 6 Series coupe; a convertible version is making its debut in Detroit.
MICHELLE KREBS
