HE played down the capture of Saddam Hussein. He called Osama bin Laden innocent until proven guilty. And Howard Dean is still leading in the polls?
The major Democratic candidates chasing after Dr. Dean may be wondering what it will take to knock him from his pole position. Unfortunately for Messrs. Gephardt, Kerry, Lieberman, Edwards and Clark, history holds few clear answers to this riddle.
Yes, it is still early, and no votes have been counted, and anything could still happen in Iowa or New Hampshire, and (insert your caveat here). But no insurgent candidate in modern times has entered the primary season with so great an edge in money and grass-roots support.
That is not to say that history is a useless guide. It is just that most of the historical examples would seem to apply more to tackling Dr. Dean's opponents than to defeating him.
Patrick H. Caddell -- who worked for the underdogs George S. McGovern, who upset the front-running Edmund S. Muskie in 1972, and Gary Hart, who came close to defeating Walter F. Mondale in 1984 -- said the crucial question is whether ''you're really trailing or if it's just artificial.'' In those races, he said, ''the front-runner really wasn't the front-runner. There was a yawning vulnerability.''
Particularly to outsiders with clear messages, Mr. Caddell added. ''The difference is Dean's a strong outsider front-runner,'' he said. ''Usually when a challenge has emerged, it's emerged from the outside, exploiting a real opening. But that's part of the problem: knocking off a front-runner, you've got to have a larger message to do it -- and larger than, 'We can win and he can't.'''
Unusual this race may be. But there are still plenty of political consultants charging the contenders big money based on their experience, and lots of veterans offering their own free advice. So here are a few (if marginally useful) suggestions from the ringside, in the spirit of promoting a good fight:
Survive the first cut. A fairly obvious tack being taken by every candidate, though most blatantly by Joseph I. Lieberman and John Edwards. John Kerry is counting on coming in a close second to Dr. Dean in Iowa to knock out Richard A. Gephardt and turn New Hampshire into a two-man race. Mr. Gephardt is counting on edging Dr. Dean in Iowa, thus knocking out Mr. Kerry, and winning a few states on Feb. 3 to become the alternative to Dr. Dean. Gen. Wesley K. Clark is counting on Dr. Dean beating Mr. Gephardt in Iowa to derail both Mr. Gephardt and Mr. Kerry, leaving himself to surge in New Hampshire and emerge as the alternative.
Of these scenarios, there is little chance of anyone knocking Dr. Dean out before the votes start pouring in -- and, for some candidates, trickling in, said Ann F. Lewis, who was Bill Clinton's communications director in 1996. ''It's easier to knock off a front-runner in a clearly defined field,'' she said, just as the second-place finisher often wins a runoff by putting together the votes of those lesser candidates he defeated.
''There's nothing you can do to change a pro-Dean vote right now,'' said Bob Beckel, who, as Mr. Mondale's campaign manager, hung the ''where's the beef'' line around Mr. Hart's neck. ''The thing is, can you make his vote less impressive, and position yourself to pick up the bodies left on the road from Iowa?''
Stake out the core. Whatever that is. ''The strongest territory to occupy in a primary is the core party principles, and the candidate who gets there and defines it is going to be in the strongest position,'' said Ms. Lewis.
Mr. Clinton, for example, knocked off Paul E. Tsongas in 1992 by questioning his commitment to Social Security in the Florida primary, she said. e In 1984, Mr. Mondale showed the depth of his support among labor unions, who validated his positions on core Democratic issues. And Al Gore beat Bill Bradley in 2000 largely by arguing that Mr. Bradley's health care plan would leave too many people uncovered.
Again, easier said than done this year: ''Because Dean was so early identified with the issue around Iraq, it's been harder for anybody else to dislodge him,'' Ms. Lewis said. ''Even when they tried to use issues like Medicare that worked in the past.''
Another wild card is that the politics of the party's core is now an open question, as Dr. Dean made clear when he recently questioned Mr. Clinton's legacy of third-way centrism.
Rise above, or at least try. With Dr. Dean's rivals looking like a pack of terriers yapping at a Rottweiler, and with about the same result, Mr. Beckel said, he could not understand why one of them had not yet tried to float above the fray and question whether Dr. Dean was ready to be president -- ''not in anger, but in sorrow.''
''Every time they all dump on Dean, they make him look like Custer, and his supporters are getting more and more angry with the Democrats,'' Mr. Beckel said. And for crying out loud, he added, don't let anyone know you are colluding with any other Dean rival, as the Kerry and Gephardt campaigns reportedly have done.
Hope the front-runner gets ''brainwashed.'' When all else fails, there is always dumb luck, though by all accounts Dr. Dean has monopolized that, too, this cycle. In 1968, George Romney shot down his candidacy by saying he had been ''brainwashed'' by way of explaining his support for the Vietnam War.
Mr. Kerry, who was an early front-runner in this season, might be said to have shot his lead in his foot, albeit in slow motion, for agonizingly explaining his support for the Iraq war over and over to no one's satisfaction but Dr. Dean's.
Do not count on the other party to help exactly. Mr. Muskie was supposedly dealt a near fatal blow when he wept while defending his wife, after an infamous letter attacking her, written by a Nixon operative, appeared in The Union Leader in New Hampshire. But in an interview Mr. McGovern recalled that his own polls showed a backlash in Mr. Muskie's favor. Similarly, Republicans loudly licking their chops at Dr. Dean's early dominance could experience a backlash, too, by riling his easily riled supporters.
Don't count on anything, including any of the above. Things can change at any time. Then again, they also might not. As the historian Robert Dallek pointed out, Lyndon B. Johnson initially ran for re-election 1968 despite his inability to appear in public without getting heckled about the war. And even after he withdrew in March, Mr. Dallek said, he worked behind the scenes to try to swing the Democratic convention that summer to his side. ''He was the smart politician,'' Mr. Dallek said. ''He was hoping that something would change that would break his way and he could get back into the race.''
