The new year in politics brings a reconstituted Legislature, some fresh leaders in the State House, and, inevitably, promises of programs designed to set the stage for the gubernatorial election in 2005.
To hear some political insiders tell it, however, there's something else going on in state politics that could overshadow the freshly minted legislative agendas of both parties. Three active investigations focusing on friends and allies of James E. McGreevey could make the governor's life miserable in this crucial year before his re-election campaign.
Of course, investigations are not an unfamiliar presence in New Jersey politics. But in this run-up year to what promises to be a hotly contested gubernatorial election, the investigations may take on extraordinary significance -- particularly when the main investigator, United States Attorney Christopher Christie, is being mentioned as the strongest Republican candidate.
A federal grand jury in Camden is looking into the business affairs of two former McGreevey aides -- Gary Taffet, his chief of staff, and Paul Levinsohn, his chief counsel. Investigators are trying to determine if the men used their political connections to help their billboard business, which they sold before going to work for the governor.
In the meantime, the governor's top fund-raiser, Charles Kushner, remains the focus of a federal investigation into his personal and business finances. And investigators are also looking into the affairs of another former administration official, Roger Chugh, who raised $1 million for Mr. McGreevey's gubernatorial campaigns. Merchants in Woodbridge's Indian community insist Mr. Chugh used a heavy hand in collecting political contributions.
Should any one of these investigations end in indictments, Mr. McGreevey could again find himself on the wrong end of a bad headline.
''The specter of Bill Cahill haunts Jim McGreevey,'' said Alan Steinberg, who was executive director of the Meadowlands Commission under Gov. Christie Whitman. Mr. Cahill, a Republican, was elected governor in 1970 but lost his re-election bid in a primary to Charles Sandman amid a series of high-profile scandals.
Alex de Croce of Morris County, who was recently elected the Republican Assembly leader, seemed to acknowledge that some of his fellow Republicans are thinking about the political effect of the investigations.
''Obviously there has been some concern with regard to people close to the governor and the problems they seem to run into on a steady basis,'' he said.
One Democratic insider snickered over these remarks. ''If that's the best the Republicans can do, they're going to have a hard time defeating Jim McGreevey,'' he said. ''Their election strategy in 2003 was aimed at the governor, and they suffered a historic loss. The governor is not under investigation, and this is not an issue that will stick.''
Ross Baker, a political scientist at Rutgers, said he doubted whether voters would even take notice if indictments were handed down.
''Investigations seem to coincide with every election cycle in New Jersey,'' Professor Baker said. ''That causes New Jerseyans to feel that nothing changes very much.''
Terry Golway
UP FRONT: WORTH NOTING
