THE type of Long Island that citizens will see in 25 years will be determined by the decisions that we make in this upcoming administration. The future of Suffolk County is not a matter of chance; it is a matter of choice. It is therefore the charge of this administration to implement policy initiatives that place dynamic innovation, long-term planning and maximum efficiency as priorities.
We will start by leading by example. Cars will be for business use, not personal use. Sick days will be reserved for when we are really sick, not to cash out upon retirement. The incoming executive's office will spend less than the peak operating expenditures of the last administration, despite the creation of a new management team within the office.
We have selected the best and brightest to work within this new government. Positions have been filled based on talent and merit rather than party affiliation or proximity to the political clubhouse.
Within a few days a letter will go out to all exempt employees requiring them to report any outside businesses they are conducting so that we may weed out potential conflicts. Soon thereafter we will ask the Legislature to approve the appointment of a director of ethics who will promulgate seminars, rules and regulations to enhance ethical standards in county government.
These changes come in the wake of a transition report indicating that Suffolk County is facing its largest deficit in history next year, a whopping $240 million. To place this in proper perspective, our entire general property tax levy is a mere $52 million. If we sit on our hands, 2005 will mean large tax increases and draconian cuts to services. We will not sit back! We will weed out travel junkets, the do-nothing jobs and the no-bid contracts.
We will regionalize by buying in bulk with other levels of government and coordinating with Nassau County on economic development, tourism and shared service where possible.
We will seek innovative revenue sources through private-public partnerships. We will obtain advertising revenues from our Web site, collect our outstanding warrants, employ smarter contractual and leasing arrangements and enhance our sales tax enforcement operations.
While we paint a gloomy revenue picture for our general fund, we fortunately have a dedicated fund available to preserve our precious open spaces. To signify my commitment to the program, I made Michael Deering, my new environmental director, the very first appointment of my administration.
The scenario is simple: buy the land now or lose it forever. To facilitate this massive undertaking, I will ask the Legislature to work with me in consolidating our environmental positions under a single Department of Environment that will cost not a dollar more in bureaucracy but will ensure that matters related to open space, recycling, energy planning and awareness of the links of environment to cancer development will be under the auspices of our dedicated environmental expert.
We will also endeavor to show that environmental preservation is not mutually exclusive to solving our other major need, affordable housing.
I will therefore be establishing a Suffolk County Commission on Affordable Housing, with representatives from local government, builders, environmentalists and community leaders, to map out our county to distinguish those lands that should be preserved from those that should be the source of our housing needs.
We will identify predeveloped abandoned sites for redevelopment. We will bring the towns in on the front end to allow for needed zoning changes, get commitments from builders who will have proper incentives, and buy, or even condemn, these dilapidated structures, only to have the builders buy them back from us once they have their permits.
Our affordable houses will be the nicest on the block and pay taxes back into our economy.
In our democracy, public officials are often insulated from the people they are elected to represent. We are dedicated to a course that will open the doors of county government. Our forms will be made more accessible. Our waiting areas will be made more hospitable. Requests for public information will be honored. You shouldn't have to file a lawsuit to get documents that would otherwise be made available through a Freedom of Information request.
We are eager to set in motion some very basic tenets that will form the basis of our future governance. It's not brain surgery. Simply say:
Yes to hard work. No to excessive perks.
Yes to high ethical standards. No to conflicts of interest.
Yes to courtesy and respect to our constituents. No to a faceless bureaucracy.
Yes to bipartisanship. No to petty partisan politics.
Yes to reform. No to stagnation.
Yes to that which is for the overall good. No to special-interest domination.
Yes to a county government that puts the people first.
SOAPBOX Steve Levy is Suffolk's new county executive.
