Just before Christmas, a federal appeals court blocked a new Bush administration rule that would have weakened existing law governing pollution from power plants and other industrial facilities. Having opposed the rule as little more than a gift to the utilities at the expense of public health, this page had no quarrel with the decision. Even so, it served as a reminder that clean air policy is increasingly being made by administrative fiat and by the courts -- a ruling one day, a reversal the next. This is not productive. The public is deprived of cleaner air; industry is deprived of the regulatory certainty it needs to make wise investment decisions.
The time has therefore come for Congress to update the 1970 Clean Air Act, last significantly revised in 1990 by President Bush's father. The point would be to simplify the regulatory maze, while at the same time ensuring big new reductions in major pollutants, including carbon dioxide, the main global warming gas.
This is asking a lot of the present Congress, which has shown little appetite for enlightened legislation. But surely even it can see that clean air policy is hopelessly stalemated. The latest ruling, for example, saved from immediate extinction a useful provision of the Clean Air Act that the Clinton administration and state officials like Attorney General Eliot Spitzer of New York had used to sue companies that failed to install pollution control equipment when they upgraded their plants. But as a practical matter the provision is in limbo.
A parallel situation is developing with respect to mercury. In early December, the Environmental Protection Agency proposed new (and industry-friendly) rules governing mercury emissions from coal-fired power plants. This proposal, too, seems to be on shaky legal ground. Even the administration's recent and generally well-intentioned proposals to limit smog and acid rain in the Eastern United States may be open to challenge.
The courts' job is to swat down bad ideas. But that does nothing to end the policy stalemate. And here is where Congress could make a difference. There are three serious proposals on power plant emissions on Capitol Hill. Each offers essentially the same regulatory framework: a market-based scheme that would set national ceilings on specific pollutants but let companies figure out how best to meet them.
Where they differ is on the ceilings. The administration's are unacceptably high; we are better off with current law, despite its administrative complexities. A second proposal sponsored by Senator James Jeffords of Vermont is much tougher, and a third proposal by Senator Thomas Carper of Delaware is somewhere in the middle. The Jeffords and Carper proposals have the further advantage of imposing limits on global warming gases, which appeals to the more enlightened utilities because it allows them to make their investment decisions with all the major pollutants in mind.
Before the debate can really move forward, President Bush will have to drop his stubborn opposition to regulating carbon dioxide. But somewhere in this mix lies a more certain clean air strategy than the one we are living with today.
