AS a gardener, I like to think of myself as both nurturing and parsimonious. In the fall I dig up the tubers of my favorite dahlias, storing them for the winter in a shoebox filled with peat moss. I also collect seed from my purple hyacinth beans for sowing the next year. But until last year I never saw a need to save an amaryllis bulb.
This may have been related to the fact that the standard amaryllis is crimson, and this is a color I've never seen the need for in my home or garden. As with most movement forward in my life, it took a confluence of events to bring about a change in my habits.
Several years ago at the Philadelphia Flower Show, I saw a spectacular award-winning specimen of the amaryllis Pamela, bearing dozens of star-shaped flowers. Ray Rogers had nurtured this entry for more than eight years, allowing the original bulb to develop offsets, which then formed a clump of bulbs, each sending up spectacular stalks with bright scarlet flowers. Mr. Rogers, I learned, has been wildly successful in using this technique with a variety of miniature amaryllis hybrids, even some that weren't red.
As if this weren't inspiration enough, Jo-Anne Ohms, whose family business, John Scheepers Inc., has been importing bulbs since the early 1900's, shared comments from customers who described amazing flowers that arose from bulbs they had been nurturing for years.
Most plants become more beautiful as they mature, and in this case there is an added factor: to meet the Agriculture Department's standards for importing bulbs into the United States, cultivators must clean the soil from amaryllis, removing many of the roots in the process. Unlike the roots on a tulip bulb, the ones on an amaryllis live from year to year, so their decimation requires some recovery time. So after the second or third season, a result is more -- and bigger -- flowers.
The final push came from my neighbors. When they asked how to care for the amaryllis I gave them for the holidays last year, I was shamed into caring for the ones in my own possession.
The plants we know as amaryllis are natives of South America. They are merely one member of the Amaryllis family and belong to the genus Hippeastrum.
They proved easy to cultivate once I understood their needs. Last January, after mine finished blooming, I simply cut the flower stalks off above the nose of the bulbs. I put the remaining strappy-leaved plants in a warm location with brightly filtered light. I watered regularly, applying a water-soluble fertilizer every two weeks (time-release fertilizer is a good alternative). This allows the bulbs to replenish their food reserves before the next bloom cycle.
Potted plants can be moved outside for the summer, provided nighttime temperatures have stabilized at 55 degrees or warmer and the soil is kept evenly moist.
These steps will maintain an amaryllis's foliage, but the bulb requires a dormant period to bloom again. In September I forced mine by withholding water and setting the pots in a cool, dry place: a cupboard with a Post-it on the door reminding me to take them out 10 to 12 weeks later.
In November, I cut off the old, dried-out leaves and replenished the soil, scraping some of it out of the pot and adding fresh potting mix amended with coarse sand. A third of the bulb should be exposed, and although amaryllis like being crowded, they should be repotted when the bulb's diameter is within two inches of the pot's diameter.
I placed the pots in filtered light and watered and watched as the bulbs pushed up their flower stalks. I gave the pots an occasional quarter turn to keep the stalks growing straight. Although bloom time depends on the cultivar, most bulbs flower in 8 to 12 weeks -- in time for a midwinter show.
Leo Berbee, a Dutch bulb grower whose company provides a fair share of the more than five million amaryllis bulbs that enter the United States each year, explained that bloom time is not the only variable that differentiates the cultivars. The soft pink of the early-blooming Dutch hybrid Apple Blossom, the chartreuse flowers of Lemon Lime and the fragrant double white flowers of Jewel prove that the form and colors of amaryllis are moving well beyond the standard crimson. The color range will expand next year with the introduction of the aptly named Yellow Pioneer and Yellow Mountain.
I guess I should be thankful that between plant hybridizers and my attentive neighbors, there's no chance of my going dormant. And as the days lengthen in the month to come, I will busy myself with collecting orphaned amaryllis plants, and who knows, maybe I will even adopt a red one.
Help at Hand
Amaryllis bulbs can be ordered in a variety of colors from McClure &amp; Zimmerman, www.mzbulb.com or (800)883-6998, and from John Scheepers Inc., www.johnscheepers.com or (860)567-0838. Leo Berbee &amp; Sons bulbs are available from www.amaryllis.com.
For more information, try ''Amaryllis'' by Starr Ockenga (Clarkson Potter, 2002).
CUTTINGS
