Antonio McDyess had fluid removed from his surgically repaired left knee this week, alleviating some of the pressure, but the procedure did nothing to drain his guilt, doubt and frustration.
McDyess admitted with a heavy sigh Saturday that he was discouraged about his progress 17 games into his return to the court after a layoff of nearly two years. McDyess has had three operations on the knee.
''Right now, I'm so down on myself,'' he said. ''I got teammates, coaches and everybody trying to pick me up, and I know they understand what I'm going through. I just got to get through this and get back to playing the way I used to play.''
Since he scored a season-high 19 points and grabbed 10 rebounds against Atlanta on Dec. 20, McDyess has felt soreness and swelling in his knee and has averaged 4 points and 4 rebounds.
McDyess's lowest point came Friday night when he missed both shots he took, scored 1 point and grabbed 1 rebound in the Knicks' 104-99 loss to the Chicago Bulls. His performance coincided with the absence of the injured starting backcourt of Allan Houston and Frank Williams, highlighting the team's fragility.
''I don't think he looked at the rim last night at all,'' Coach Don Chaney said Saturday, a telling indication that McDyess, who averaged 20.8 points and 12.2 rebounds in his All-Star season, 2000-1, is not close to that level. ''It may be a while before he gets back to that point,'' Chaney said.
McDyess agreed that his missed jump shots were affecting him. ''After I miss a couple of shots, I get mad and don't want to shoot,'' he said.
Saturday was a better day, the first time McDyess had a full practice since Isiah Thomas took over Dec. 22 as the team president for basketball operations; Chaney said McDyess moved well.
''That's what I've been missing; that's important for me to get my timing,'' McDyess said.
Houston, who had his surgically repaired right knee drained Friday night, did not practice Saturday, only shooting at one end of the court. Williams, who has a strained groin muscle, did not practice either. Houston said he planned to play Sunday against the Nets at Madison Square Garden. Williams is questionable.
McDyess feels that way lately, too.
''He's a very sensitive guy; he's very much aware of hurting the team,'' Chaney said. ''If he's not carrying his weight, that bothers him.''
His teammates are pained to watch him.
''We understand how much he wants to play, to be there to help the team, but at the same token, you're asking yourself, 'Is he O.K.?' '' center Dikembe Mutombo said. ''You can't keep asking him every day; it's like you're bothering him. We've been trying to have a soft approach.''
McDyess will become a free agent this summer. That status, coupled with Thomas's comment that the team's success does not hinge on McDyess, increased speculation that Thomas would be willing to trade him.
''I try not to think about it because I've got so much other stuff to think about right now,'' McDyess said. ''I love playing here and hopefully I can end my career here.''
REBOUNDS
KEITH VAN HORN said he did not think that the Nets, his former team, were the team to beat in the East. ''I think last year they were the team to beat,'' he said. ''I think right now you got to look at Indiana, Detroit and them. I don't think that there's been necessarily one standout team other than Indiana.''
PRO BASKETBALL
