FACING a crushing debt of $40 million with the first principal payment due in 2004, Southampton Hospital is being urged to seek some form of government assistance through an affiliation with the state-owned Stony Brook University Hospital.
Kenneth P. LaValle, who represents the East End in the State Senate and is leading the effort to persuade Southampton to seek affiliation, said it was an idea that the small private hospital has been resisting. ''But it's clear they have hat in hand,'' he added. ''Southampton wasn't willing. Now they're ready.''
The Southampton Hospital president, Annette Leahy, who met last month with Mr. LaValle and the South Fork's assemblyman, Fred W. Thiele Jr., said that any talk of a broader level of state aid through an affiliation with Stony Brook ''was Ken's story, not mine.''
The largest employer on the South Fork, Southampton Hospital has a budget of about $80 million a year, of which $3 million is spent to service a $40 million loan it negotiated five years ago to maintain its solvency. The hospital borrowed the money to dig out of a hole that board members were stunned to discover after they hired a new auditor in 1998. The former chief executive, Dr. John Ferry, was fired during that crisis, which the board of trustees president blamed on ''massive mismanagement'' and faults in the hospital's accounting and reporting systems.
Now ''it's crunch time'' again for the hospital, Ms. Leahy said, because in addition to the interest payments it must begin this year to pay off the principal in annual installments of $500,000.
There's concern about the hospital's future in Southampton Town Hall. ''The general conception is hospitals don't go out of business,'' said Dennis Susskind, a town councilman. ''That isn't true.'' He said that the towns of East Hampton and Southampton and the South Fork's villages ''should get together and have a conversation about this'' to see if there's a way to help the hospital survive.
For more than a year, Mr. LaValle said, he has been urging Southampton and the East End's other two other private hospitals -- Central Suffolk in Riverhead and Eastern Long Island in Greenport, which with Southampton make purchases and conduct some other administrative functions through the Peconic Health Network -- to explore an affiliation with Stony Brook. As a state institution with 4,000 employees and 500 beds, Stony Brook University Hospital is the largest single-site employer on Long Island, and far larger than Southampton with its 800 employees and fewer than 160 beds. Stony Brook could provide the smaller hospitals with services, including cancer treatment and open heart surgery, that many East End patients now go farther west to receive.
Unlike the three hospital conglomerates up-Island -- Manhasset-based North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, Mineola-based Winthrop South Nassau University Health System and Rockville Centre-based Catholic Health Services -- Stony Brook University Hospital currently has no network of community hospitals. Stony Brook ''would love to grow a program on the East End and get, for instance, the coronary care and cancer business rather than have it leap over them'' to the big hospitals in Nassau County and New York City, Mr. LaValle said.
In direct competition with Southampton, Stony Brook already has made an entry in the East End health care market with its outpatient facility in Hampton Bays, which offers consultation services in a variety of specialized areas, including gastrointestinal, pediatric and vascular surgery.
Now that Southampton is at least willing to explore the idea of some sort of affiliation, Mr. LaValle said, it ''could very well come to the table with Central Suffolk and Eastern Long Island and say, 'We're ready for the state to help.'''
Southampton Hospital has a limited affiliation with North Shore-Long Island Jewish Health System, but Mr. LaValle described it as ''a juicy contract that turned out to be rotten'' for the smaller hospital. ''North Shore can't send money into Southampton,'' he said. ''That has not happened.''
''It comes down to the question of how can we help meet Southampton's capital needs and debt services needs,'' Mr. LaValle added. ''It's the job of the Legislature to try and be creative and find ways of making that happen.'' He and Mr. Thiele said any mechanism to provide a regular source of state money to Southampton would require new legislation in Albany.
Mr. Thiele was far more guarded than Mr. LaValle about their recent meeting with Ms. Leahy and Mr. LaValle; former Southampton Town Councilman James Needham, an accountant and former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, also attended as a private citizen. Mr. Needham has been warning local officials that the hospital was in trouble and that it was time to look into some sort of public assistance to prevent the hospital from closing.
''I would describe it largely as a very preliminary meeting to outline what the issues were, what she saw as the future and ways the state might be helpful,'' Mr. Thiele said. It would be ''premature,'' he said, to publicly discuss how the state might help.
''The senator and I want to be helpful and there are potential ways to do it,'' he said. The group would be meeting again after Jan. 1, he said.
Like Mr. LaValle, Mr. Thiele said he was ''very impressed with Annette Leahy. She does have the management skills to turn this around. We have a confidence in her and want to work with her to institute management and administrative changes to make state assistance possible.''
Stony Brook University's communications director, Patrick Calabria, said that ''any discussions that would have taken place'' involving an affiliation with Southampton ''would have been purely exploratory. It's really early in the process.''
