THE lights start coming on at the Derk house in Evansville, Ind., at 5:30 in the morning. Waking early is a habit left over from the years several of the children spent in an orphanage, where no one really ever got much sleep. They are all old enough now to put on their clothes, and while they do, their parents, Kimberly and Jim, are downstairs doing the daily scramble of making the breakfast, walking the dog, packing the lunch bags.
By 7:30, everyone is headed to school or to work.
This morning scene is made possible by a policy drawn up in a boardroom nearly a decade ago. In many ways, it was a minor little plan, costing a corporation a few thousand dollars here and there, one of countless small changes that together created the work/life sea change of recent years.
The story of the Derk family -- Jim and Kim and their children Colleen, 23; Brandon, 11; Kristian, 10; Willie, 9; Adam and Ava, both 7; Cary, 5; and Kristiana, 3 -- is an example of how work and life can sometimes balance very well.
Ms. Derk learned of the policy when she took a job in the communications office of General Electric in 1997. She and her husband had just married, and each had a child from a previous marriage. They knew from the start that they wanted to adopt, she says, and were looking overseas. She was thrilled to learn that her new company had started offering employees financial assistance for such an adoption. (The amount has increased over the years, to $4,000 currently from $2,000 in 1997; more than 1,000 employees have used the program.)
One afternoon, in the summer of 1997, Ms. Derk came across a Web site of an adoption agency in Hungary that featured a family of four children -- 1-year-old twins and two older boys, ages 3 and 4 -- in need of a home. If they were not adopted within weeks, she learned, the two older children would be passed the age to be eligible for adoption.
After a few sleepless nights, Ms. Derk approached her new boss and asked for a leave. Within weeks, she and her husband had left their two oldest children with relatives and were living in a rented house in Hungary, slowly getting to know the four children who would become theirs. They were also getting paid and getting work done -- via laptop, telephone and modem. When they landed back home, near midnight, a month later, they were met at the airport by co-workers holding bouquets of balloons.
Every day after that became a balancing act. Needing a bigger house, the Derks increased their commute. Ms. Derk took a new job within the company -- she is now global community relations and communications manager for GE Plastics -- meaning she has conference calls at 6:30 a.m. with Europe and 10:30 p.m. with Asia, but she can spend more time at home.
Her husband, liking the flexibility he saw in his wife's office, also went to work for General Electric, and is now a project manager for global information technology. They networked their home computers (with help from their employer) so they can both go online after the children are in bed. They have learned to check each other's calendars before scheduling a conference call from home.
The Derks have a nanny who comes every day after school, and the children are enrolled in a variety of therapeutic programs to make up for disabilities they were born with and others created by their time in the orphanage. The Derks also try to have dinner every night as a family. ''It's not the Norman Rockwell kind of dinner,'' Ms. Derk says of the cacophony and chaos. ''But we're all there together.''
While eating Thanksgiving dinner in 1998, the telephone rang. It was the adoption agency with word that the biological parents of the children had abandoned a fifth child, a boy. Mr. Derk and his laptop spent several more weeks in Hungary. A year and a half later, there was another call. The children had a baby sister. Again, G.E. gave Mr. Derk a leave, and the family grew once more.
The Derks say they could not pull off their eight-child balancing act if they did not work at a flexible company. That said, they try to keep from asking for too much support. ''Work-family balance doesn't mean that the work has to give all the time,'' Ms. Derk says. ''I always try to respect the fact that my husband and I made the decision to adopt these children, my co-workers didn't. And it's my responsibility to avoid infringing on their willingness'' to help.
She is also learning, she says, not to expect too much from herself. '''Work-family balance' also doesn't mean that the scales are perfectly weighted every minute of every day,'' she says. ''Sometimes home needs more of my attention, other times, work.''
LIFE'S WORK
