A Rabbi in Jail, A Family in Pain
The imprisoned rabbi, convicted of arranging his wife's murder but still insisting on his innocence, nurses the hope that an appeals court will overturn the verdict and order a new trial, one of his lawyers says.
The couple's grown children and the dead woman's siblings nurse ineradicable feelings of bitter loss, one of her brothers says.
Last January, in a highly publicized New Jersey case that combined themes of spiritual leadership, spousal infidelity and murder, Rabbi Fred J. Neulander was sentenced to life in prison after being convicted of hiring a friend to kill his wife, Carol Neulander, 52. She was bludgeoned in the couple's Cherry Hill home in 1994.
Prosecutors said the rabbi had wanted to continue an affair with another woman and avoid a divorce that could have exposed his adultery and threatened his position at Congregation M'Kor Shalom in Cherry Hill, the Reform synagogue that he had built into one of South Jersey's largest synagogues.
The rabbi admitted the affair but denied involvement in the killing of his wife. A trial in 2001 ended with a hung jury, but he was convicted in a second jury trial a year later. The rabbi, 62, must serve 30 years before he is eligible for parole.
''He's certainly doing his best to do his time and not become a problem,'' the lawyer, Michael E. Riley, said last week. Rabbi Neulander is in the New Jersey State Prison in Trenton, where he is assigned to help a social worker.
The appeal arguments will include a challenge to a ruling by the trial judge that Mr. Riley maintained had improperly restricted his effort to attack the credibility of the hired killer, Leonard Jenoff, who had confessed and was the major witness against the rabbi.
Mr. Jenoff and Paul M. Daniels, a man who admitted helping Mr. Jenoff beat Mrs. Neulander with a lead pipe, were permitted to plead guilty to manslaughter in return for aiding the prosecution; they are serving 23-year sentences. In November, an appeals court rejected Mr. Jenoff's effort to have his term reduced.
Edward Lidz, a brother of Mrs. Neulander, said that the rabbi's conviction had brought some relief, but that ''nothing can possibly change the feeling of loss.''
''It brings a degree of closure, but doesn't bring complete closure,'' he said. ''Nothing could. That's not possible.''
Arts Institution Puts Ugliness Behind It
Two years ago, city tax authorities and the Manhattan district attorney's office began looking into possible financial crimes at the National Arts Club, the Gramercy Park South institution founded in 1898 to foster the arts and public interest in them.
The manager of the club's dining room, Joseph Frappaolo, later pleaded guilty to grand larceny for stealing $163,000 in sales taxes levied on meals.
John T. James, the brother of the club's president, O. Aldon James Jr., pleaded guilty to criminally misusing the club's tax-exempt status to buy millions of dollars worth of jewelry without paying sales tax, then selling it for personal profit. He was placed on probation for five years and agreed to pay more than $500,000 in back taxes and fines.
Two months ago, the investigation ended after the club, without being criminally charged, agreed to pay $150,000 in hotel occupancy taxes, the district attorney's office said last week. The club's lawyer, Andrew S. Fisher, said club officials had not been aware that they were required to charge the tax when renting transient rooms to members and other visitors.
Following Up
