To the Editor:
Re the Dec. 28 On Politics column:
I was dismayed to see that the Legislature's action declaring 2002-2011 National Bone and Joint Health decade was singled out in support of the argument that the legislature isn't doing anything important. It is vastly important to raise awareness about bone and joint health, although this proclamation alone will not do the trick.
Arthritis is the number one cause of disability among Americans 15 years and older, affecting over 2.1 million people in New Jersey. Children are affected, too. There are 300,000 cases of juvenile arthritis in the U.S., accounting for about 9,000 to 12,000 children in New Jersey. This number may be higher due to the lack of proper diagnosis.
Recent Center for Disease Control statistics tell us arthritis is at epidemic proportions -- 70 million people are affected in the U.S. and this number will only increase as the baby boomer generation ages. Now, more than ever, funding is needed to support programs and research initiatives surrounding this disease. Yet, funding under the Arthritis Quality of Life Initiative Act signed into law by Governor Christine Whitman in 1999 has been cut from $634,000 to $464,000 for the 2003 fiscal year and to $232,000 for the 2004 fiscal year.
Arthritis also represents a large financial burden. It accounts for 39 million doctor visits and 500,000 hospitalizations each year. Combined with prescription drug costs, this disease results in an estimated national economic impact of $125 billion annually, including $3.8 billion for New Jersey. And, there are still many others not seeking treatment.
Research tells us that early diagnosis is the key to combating arthritis, which encompasses more than 100 different diseases including well-known forms such as rheumatoid and osteoarthritis, and extending to gout, lupus and fibromyalgia. More than half of the people with these and other arthritis-related conditions are under the age of 65 -- mostly women -- and experience symptoms from minor stiffness to so severe they're unable to walk, dress or bathe on their own.
We offer over 100 community-based programs throughout the state to help people manage arthritis. If the New Jersey legislature wants to publicly support people who are raising awareness about Joint and Bone Health, I say it's one of the most powerful things they can do this year.
Dennis Hirschfelder  Iselin
The author is president of the New Jersey chapter of the Arthritis Foundation.
