British Airways resumed its afternoon flight from London to Washington on Saturday, after canceling it for security reasons two days in a row, but a British minister warned that air travelers should expect similar disruptions for the foreseeable future.
The cleared flight took off several hours after its scheduled departure; the airline said the delay was caused by additional security checks. The flight landed safely about eight hours later at Dulles International Airport, The Associated Press reported.
The transport secretary, Alistair Darling, told the BBC's Radio 4 program on Saturday that British Airways had canceled the prior flights because British authorities had received ''specific information'' and concluded the information was credible. Passengers were questioned but no one has been arrested.
''We look at the intelligence ourselves,'' Mr. Darling said. ''We evaluate it, and we then decide what the appropriate action is.''
''The reason that different flights are either grounded or there is increased security varies from time to time,'' he said. ''Of course Britain and the United States have access to similar intelligence, and we share information. We do so with other countries as well. You would expect us to do that.''
Meanwhile, Saturday's 1:35 p.m. British Airways flight from London to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia, was canceled, as was its Sunday return, after the airline received ''security advice'' from the British government.
Jo Devereux, a spokeswoman for British Airways, said the cancellations of the 3:05 p.m. flights to Dulles International Airport outside Washington were based on these specific threats and had nothing to do with the question of whether to allow armed air marshals on the planes. ''It was not because the pilots refused to fly or that we did not want air marshals on board,'' she said.
The United States said last week that it would not allow certain suspicious flights into its airspace without armed air marshals on board. While Britain has recently stepped up security at its airports and on its airplanes, the question of armed guards is a contentious one and is opposed by the powerful pilots union.
Citing a British Airways statement, Ms. Devereux said the company was in talks with British authorities over how best to deploy air marshals. Those talks are expected to conclude shortly, she said.
As it stands now, British Airways will accept armed police officers ''if we are satisfied that safety would be enhanced to an acceptable level for the flight to take place,'' Ms. Devereux said. If there are specific credible threats that put passengers at risk, British Airways ''will not operate that flight.''
While it opposes the use of armed guards on planes, the British Airline Pilots Association said it was negotiating with individual airlines over the training and deployment of the marshals. The union has already reached an agreement with Virgin Atlantic and is in discussions with all other airline companies.
''We think air marshals will do more harm than good, but we won't block the idea,'' said Keith Bill, a spokesman for the union.
The Bush administration increased efforts to protect American airspace after the United States was placed on high terror alert on Dec. 21. Since then seven international flights have been canceled, among them flights run by Air France and Aeromexico. In some cases, planes were escorted to United States airports by American fighter jets.
Mr. Darling said he expected the security disruptions to continue for some time because of the state of heightened alert, an accommodation that foreign airlines are willing to make to protect the public from a Sept. 11-style attack. American intelligence officials have said they had picked up electronic chatter relating to the canceled flights.
''The threat that we now face is likely to endure for many years,'' Mr. Darling said. ''We are dealing with a different order of magnitude of threat.''
