He played on a pogo stick at the University of Kentucky, scoring, dunking and earning all-American honors. So when the Knicks selected him with the fifth pick of the 1986 draft, they believed Kenny Walker would become the next Bernard King.
Walker, a 6-foot-8 small forward with the nickname Sky, never did, averaging 7 points over his five seasons with the Knicks. But he had his moments.
In the final game of the 1987-88 regular season, Walker deflected a last-second shot by Indiana's Steve Stipanovich to preserve a Knicks victory and send them to the playoffs for the first time in four years. The following season, he won the dunking contest during All-Star Weekend only days after the death of his father. He received a standing ovation a few days later at Madison Square Garden. The ovation touched Walker, showing him that New York had accepted him..
''With Bernard King being such a popular guy and me trying to step up to replace him, I put additional pressure on myself,'' Walker, 39, said last week. ''And I certainly felt pressure from the fans and the media to be Bernard. Those first couple of years were bad, tough. I had never gone through anything like that. But after a year or two, I decided I was not going to try to be Bernard anymore. I was just going to be myself.
''Later, when we started to win some ball games and my role changed and people embraced me for who I was, I felt better about who I was. The slam-dunk contest had a lot to do with that.''
Walker's career with the Knicks ended in 1991 and, after playing in Spain and Italy, with the Washington Bullets and in Japan, he left the game in 1998. Upon retirement, Walker returned to his place of glory, Lexington, Ky., where he has lived for the past five years.
Walker, who earned a degree in communications from Kentucky, is a self-described sports junkie who wants to remain around the business as either a broadcaster or a scout for an N.B.A. team. He does pregame and postgame wrap-ups for Kentucky football and basketball games on two radio stations and sells corporate sponsorships for Collegiate Sports History, a company that produces college sports publications. His name helps his sales, though few remember his time with the Knicks.
''When Kentucky fans run into me, they always know me from my days at U.K.,'' Walker said. ''When it comes to the N.B.A., I'm most known for winning the dunk contest. Then people will say, 'Oh, yeah, didn't you play with the Knicks?' ''
Then and Now
