ONLY six weeks into his new job as a salesman with Baillie Lumber in Hamburg, N.Y., Brian Fox faced a parent's nightmare. His 22-month-old son, Andrew, fell into a pond and had to be hospitalized. His son clung to life for a month before he died.
When Mr. Fox got to the hospital, he was almost immediately comforted by Stanley Kent, a Methodist chaplain working for Baillie. Mr. Kent helped Mr. Fox that month, and Mr. Fox has stayed in touch with him in the three years since the accident. ''I'm a guy; I don't dwell on issues,'' Mr. Fox said, ''but it was nice having somebody around that knows what you've been through.''
Corporate chaplains have long been employed by a smattering of companies, mostly in the South and West, representing a range of mostly Protestant denominations. But now the phenomenon is spreading as companies add chaplains and companies that employ chaplains make acquisitions. According to Rev. Robert Vickers, the former director for chaplaincy evangelism at the Southern Baptist Convention, anecdotal evidence suggests that use of chaplains in business and industry is growing more than 10 percent a year in the United States.
For employers, the motives can range from simply wanting to help their workers in a time of crisis to trying to bring religion to workers who are receptive to such discussions. For some employees, the chaplains not only can provide comfort during hard times, or friendly conversation in normal times, but they can end up performing at special events like weddings or funerals.
Still, some religious scholars and experts on religion in the workplace find the presence of company-sponsored religious officials a disturbing trend.
Counseling workers in difficult times is a very worthy goal for an employer, said J. Randall Nichols, director for the doctor of ministry program at Princeton Theological Seminary. But he said he was concerned about possible abuses of such programs. ''The question is, 'Are they offering pastoral care and support to someone in need of assistance with no strings attached, or is this a subtle way to sneak a sermon in?''' he said.
Two of the biggest companies that contract chaplains, Marketplace Ministries, based in Dallas, and Corporate Chaplains of America in Raleigh, N.C., have mainly Protestant chaplains on the payroll, although they do provide referrals for rabbis or imams when requested.
These companies say that in addition to keeping track of how many workers they counsel through crises, they can also produce a report tracking how many workers have ''found Jesus Christ'' if employers request it. Marketplace Ministries calls the tally it can provide employers an ''evangelical report.''
But these companies stress that they are not in the workplace to push religion. ''We don't go in preaching with big crosses or carrying Bibles,'' said Gil Stricklin, president and founder of Marketplace Ministries, who retired as a colonel in the United States Army Chaplain Corps and has worked with the Rev. Billy Graham. ''The last thing we want to do is to do things that are seen as things done at church. We help bring stability in the workplace, help bring love. Everyone needs someone to talk to sometimes, a confidential ear.''
Companies that use chaplains range from small private concerns to large publicly traded companies like Tyson Foods in Springdale, Ark., and Allied Holdings, a transportation company in Decatur, Ga.
The chaplains dress in everyday clothing and walk through workplace, often once a week, stopping by assembly lines or the desks of employees to chat or discuss problems.
Some chaplain programs are employee driven, like one administered by the United Auto Workers and run by 200 locals nationwide.
But in most cases, business owners and executives are the driving force behind the chaplains, said Carroll Lachnit, editor of Workforce Management magazine, which has reported on workplace chaplains.
Pilgrim's Pride, a poultry processor in Pittsburg, Tex., has been bringing in chaplains for its 17,000 employees since 1991. When the company acquired Wampler Foods, another poultry processor in 2001, it extended its chaplaincy program to Wampler's 7,500 workers, who were mainly in Virginia and Pennsylvania, said Cliff Butler, president and chief executive of the company.
Pilgrim recently bought ConAgra Foods's chicken processing division, and the chaplaincy program began there in mid-November. ''We felt like many workers didn't have a church home or anyone to go to in times of crisis,'' Mr. Butler said. ''So we put in a third-party chaplaincy to help them with that or get counseling in case of a death or a drug problem.'' Pilgrim's has 120 chaplains and plans to add another 100.
Many companies that supply chaplains are expanding rapidly. Corporate Chaplains of America employs 50 full-time chaplains and plans to add 50 more by the end of 2004 because of demand, the company's founder, Mark Cress, said.
Marketplace Ministries, with 1,351 part-time chaplains on the payroll, added 350 chaplains this year, Mr. Stricklin said. The number of chaplains is expected to reach 1,500 soon.
Misael Franqui, a Marketplace Ministries chaplain assigned to several New York companies, said he counseled everyone from factory workers to executives. Mr. Franqui said he was a Pentecostal, but that he was ''not pushing religion.'' He added: ''I don't get up on a soap box and say 'Jesus is the way' even though that's my personal view.''
Employees who do not want to talk to workplace chaplains are not obliged to do so, said Dianna Johnston, assistant legal counsel with the United States Equal Employment Opportunity Commission. But there are no laws that prohibit the presence of a chaplain, she said. ''While some employees might be annoyed or offended just by the mere presence of a chaplain -- and let's face it, people annoy us all the time -- that doesn't make it illegal,'' she said.
Indeed, the workplace has become anything but a religious-free zone. Changes to the labor laws in 1972 included requirements that employers make religious accommodations for employees if they did not interfere with business. And, Ms. Johnston said, ''the employer certainly has the right to be free of government interference with its own religious belief.''
Still, Connie Wong, managing director of CSW Global, a corporate training and consulting firm in Sandy Hook, Conn., said that business leaders ''sometimes don't realize the tone they're setting.''
Earlier this year, six California firefighters sued the California Department of Forestry and Fire Protection to shut down its chaplain corps because they felt the evangelical minister who ran the program was improperly pushing religious faith in a government workplace. The program was disbanded.
Phillip Clemens, the chairman of Hatfield Quality Meats in Hatfield, Pa., said, ''we do want to show people that faith does mean something in peoples' lives.'' A small number of workers expressed concern about the program when it was started, he said. ''Some said, 'Are you here to push your religion?' I said, 'If you find that we'll have them out of here in a heart beat,''' he said. The program is purely voluntary, he said.
