CAROL ANN O'CONNOR has had it.
''Parents are asked to support quite a lot,'' said this mother of five children, all of whom are currently in the Mount Pleasant public schools. ''I get it from all five, and this year, got hit with a lot.''
Fund-raising fatigue is everywhere. In many districts, it starts on the first day of school, when brochures for wrapping paper come home in the backpack, and extends through the fall bake sales, flea markets, T-shirt sales, book fairs, pizza parties, holiday bazaars, magazine subscriptions and entertainment books. Before long, many parents feel as if they never have a chance to put away their checkbooks.
''This year seemed to be the worst,'' said Liz Healy of Thornwood, who has four children, three of whom are in the Mount Pleasant school system. ''It was one on the heels of the other. It's a constant stream from September through now. There's so much at the beginning. ''
It's not just a perception that the first few months of school are so demanding on parents' purses.
''In the fall, we're raising money for programs,'' said Marla Hurban, an officer of the Yonkers Council of PTA's. ''The holiday shows are funded by the PTA's. Every building has its own unit so the money goes back to our children. The spring is less about fund-raising.''
Supporting the schools isn't as simple as voting in favor of the school district budget.
There are the traditional, and familiar, PTA fund-raisers, most of which finance cultural arts programs and assemblies, student scholarships and teacher grants . Besides the popular wrapping paper, many PTA organizations also sell pies for Thanksgiving, or hold family bingo nights. Some PTA's also sell flowers in the spring.
In Eastchester, there are fund-raisers like a parent dinner-dance. Westlake High School in Mount Pleasant held a holiday poinsettia sale. In Harrison, the middle school PTA sponsors an annual house tour, followed by a luncheon at the Brae Burn country club
Other requests punctuate the calendar, and diminish the family checkbook: sponsorships for walk-athons to support any number of worthy causes; raffles to help underwrite specific events, like a special class trip; and, for parents of graduating seniors, ads for the yearbook or other fund-raisers to help underwrite the senior prom. The parental pot is only so big, however.
''I go back and forth at board meetings,'' said Mrs. O'Connor, a vice president of the elementary-school PTA. ''I don't feel there's a need for so many of them. Because there was the pie fund-raiser, wrapping paper didn't make as much in sales. This year, in the middle and elementary schools, the fund-raisers were down. There's a sense that people are tired, that every time they turn around, they're asked to sell and buy something else.''
By the end of the year, some families, especially if they have two or more children in the schools, estimate that they have spent anywhere from $200 to $1,000 on fund- raisers.
In more affluent communities, the stakes can be even higher. There, parents are not so much nickel-and-dimed to death as they are strongly encouraged to shell out big bucks for splashy fund-raisers. The Irvington Education Foundation's gala last month, for example, raised $60,000 from people who bid on tickets for the Simon &amp; Garfunkel concerts and Broadway shows.
Some parents point out that the increase in fund-raisers arises from the desire to keep school taxes low.
''If people agreed to have their taxes raised, the district would have money for some of these programs,'' Mrs. O'Connor said.
Nor can parents take much comfort from thinking that once they are past the elementary school stage things will improve.
''It doesn't seem to end,'' said one Hawthorne resident, Sue Amoruso, a mother of three, one in college, one in high school and one in middle school. She estimates that she spends about $1,000 annually on fund-raisers for the public schools.
''I wish they'd ask for one check at the beginning of the year. How much can you hit up your family with all this stuff?'' she said. ''It's gotten to the point where I just say, 'tell me what you need.' When my college-age son was in elementary school, the schools had more funding. It doesn't end, the 12 years you're there.''
IN THE SCHOOLS E-mail: wested@nytimes.com
