There was a red carpet, a famous one at that, but not a movie star in sight to glide across it. Instead, yesterday this signature event of the annual film awards season featured a group of middle-aged men and women arrayed around a table with quick access to coffee and sandwiches in a back room at Sardi's, the restaurant near Times Square.
(Some people might recognize this scene as the 38th annual announcement of the awards from the National Society of Film Critics, and those particular people might have trouble handling any further suspense. They will be relieved to learn that ''American Splendor'' was chosen as best picture.)
As glamour and substance traditionally work in inverse proportions in the movie business, the down-to-work atmosphere was apt. The National Society of Film Critics gathered to decide and announce its choices for the finest films and performances of the past year.
The society, which comprises 55 professional movie-watchers in the employ of newspapers, magazines and Internet publications, has a reputation for picking artistic, thoughtful works, and its choices tend to serve as an indicator of which films will not win Academy Awards.
Since the society's founding in 1966, its choices for best film have corresponded to the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences' picks only three times, according to records maintained on the Internet by Tom O'Neil, who posts betting odds on show business awards. Last year, for example, the society picked ''The Pianist'' as best picture, and the Oscar went to ''Chicago.'' In 2000, the society chose a Taiwanese movie, ''Yi Yi,'' while the Academy picked ''Gladiator.''
The proceedings that unfolded at Sardi's, much like film criticism itself, involved a lot of sitting and handling of little pieces of paper. At the end of the red carpet, where no one stood poised to ask the participants who had designed their clothes, an elevator was poised to carry the participants back and forth from their meeting table.
The whole affair seemed to eschew glamour.
''There is no awards party,'' read a terse statement from the society. ''Any film that opens in the U.S. during the year 2003 is eligible for consideration. There is no nomination process.''
The voting took a few hours, and the critics, apparently to keep themselves in suspense, started with the sort of categories that watchers of televised awards shows tend to associate with trips to the bathroom or discovering what is on the Lifetime network. Two film companies, for example, Kino on Video and Milestone Film and Video, were chosen for an honor called the Film Heritage Award.
Eventually, after multiple ballots, the critics settled on ''American Splendor'' for the top honor.
''American Splendor'' is an adaptation of autobiographical works of the same name by the comic-book author Harvey Pekar. Directed by Shari Springer Berman and Robert Pulcini, it received 29 votes, besting ''Mystic River,'' which received 27 votes, and ''Lost in Translation,'' which received 19.
The choice differs from the one announced last month by the New York Film Critics Circle, which gave ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' its highest honor.
Among the society's other awards were: best actress, Charlize Theron, for ''Monster''; best actor, Bill Murray, for ''Lost in Translation''; best foreign language film, ''The Man Without a Past''; best director, Clint Eastwood, for ''Mystic River''; best screenplay, Ms. Springer Berman and Mr. Pulcini, for ''American Splendor''; best nonfiction film, ''To Be and To Have''; and best cinematography, Russell Boyd, for ''Master and Commander: The Far Side of The World.'' Peter Sarsgaard was chosen as best supporting actor, for ''Shattered Glass,'' and Patricia Clarkson was picked for best supporting actress, for ''The Station Agent'' and ''Pieces of April.''
Peter Rainer, chairman of the society and the film critic for New York magazine, said the selection of ''American Splendor'' belied fears that a rule banning studios from sending screening copies to critics would adversely affect the chances of recognition of films that do not receive abundant theatrical release. The rule, affecting what are known as screener tapes, was lifted by court order last month.
Mr. Rainer said that the selection was also significant for several other reasons, including that it honored a movie directed by a team steeped in documentary filmmaking and that the selection might draw attention to the film's stars, Hope Davis and Paul Giamatti.
The winners will be sent scrolls, according to the statement from the society.
