THE teddy bears are gone, but the police tape is still there.
''Yeah,'' said Vera Barksdale from her front steps on Parker Street here, opposite the house where the police found the body of Faheem Williams -- the 7-year-old boy who, in death, many credit with helping change a troubled child welfare agency that failed him in life. ''I think they left that up there so nobody would break into the place.''
Sorrow came to Parker Street a year ago today, when the police found two of Faheem's brothers starving but alive in a locked cellar. The next day, searchers recovered Faheem's mummified remains in a purple plastic container.
In those first few days after the discovery of the boys -- before a raft of child welfare changes inspired by the case -- Ms. Barksdale watched as a memorial of cards, balloons, candles and teddy bears bloomed on the sidewalk in front of their house.
The shrine was taken away months ago, but on Friday strands of yellow tape marked ''Police Line Do Not Cross'' remained, spooled almost delicately around the wrought-iron gate and banister. The message ''R.I.P. Faheem,'' scrawled in fading ink, was still visible on a pair of railings. And, to Ms. Barksdale, something else has lingered.
It seems to her that over the past year, residents in this struggling section of Newark's North Ward near Branch Brook Park have paid a little more attention to their neighbors -- studying unfamiliar faces, watching over one another's homes and, especially, one another's children.
Ms. Barksdale readily concedes that she may be overly optimistic. In neighborhoods everywhere, and especially here, it is easy, and sometimes even preferable, to simply live in a cocoon where next-door neighbors do not even know one another's names. And, she said, that still holds true for many here.
But after the horror of last January, Ms. Barksdale said, from her perch on Parker Street at least, something has changed.
''Everybody's speaking; everybody's getting connected,'' said Ms. Barksdale, 42, who works as a school bus aide in neighboring East Orange. ''That's what we're doing now as far as watching out for people's houses, who's leaving, who's coming. We don't want to get in nobody's business, but when it comes to kids, we're going to look out for whoever's around here.''
It is an echo of the kind of closeness Ms. Barksdale witnessed as a child growing up in a small town in Virginia. While that kind of familiarity may not return, she said, she hopes the spirit behind it can be rekindled. ''These kids are scared of love,'' she said. ''How can you feel it if you never had it? These kids need love.''
It was too late, Ms. Barksdale said, when residents here realized that that was what Faheem Williams needed. She said that because of their proximity to the case, she and many of her neighbors have watched the changes in the state's child welfare system with particular interest.
WHILE praising the efforts of Gov. James E. McGreevey, who acknowledged years of problems in the State Department of Human Services and has sought to correct them by enlarging its staff and budget, Ms. Barksdale agreed that much work remained to be done.
The bulk of the charge to improve the system falls to the human services agency, whose task often seems Sisyphean: while adding more than 250 new child welfare workers over the past year, the agency's caseload has grown by nearly 15,000.
''The challenge,'' said Ed Rogan, a department spokesman, ''is to run the system while you're rebuilding the system from top to bottom.''
Challenges remain, too, for Kevin Ryan, the state's child advocate -- a position created by the governor in the fall.
''It's not just the happiness and well-being of the children in the system,'' Mr. Ryan said. ''But it's about whether we're going to give meaning to the lives of children who died violently or through neglect this year or whether we're going to let them be meaningless.''
Back on Parker Street on Friday, Ms. Barksdale continued doing her part to ensure that the former holds true. She was talking about the bond between neighbors here when a man with ponytails and a down jacket walked by.
''Hey, Papi,'' she called out. ''How's the baby?''
''Getting big,'' the man with ponytails called back. ''You know, we're moving.''
His family is off to Bethlehem, Pa., he said, adding that despite its difficulties he would miss a lot about city living and being so close to New York.
''Hey, you've got to do what you've got to do,'' Ms. Barksdale said. ''Whatever you have to do to take care of the babies, right?''
Our Towns
