THE private ferry company that connects the South Fork and Shelter Island via Route 114 has asked the Suffolk County Legislature for a rate increase that the company's owner calls ''radical'' because it would do away with charges for passengers in vehicles, even buses.
The rate increase would hit nonresident drivers the hardest. For them, the round-trip fare would go up by 50 percent, from $8 to $12 per car. The one-way fare would rise only $1, from $8 to $9 per car.
Charges for vehicle passengers, even those in buses, would be eliminated, which could save drivers several dollars on each trip. Currently, each rider costs another $1.
Resident discount books for 10 one-way trips would rise from $40 to $50, an increase of 25 percent. Nonresident discount books for 10 one-way trips would rise 20 percent, from $50 to $60. Commuter fares for five same-day round-trips would go up 22 percent, from $18 to $22.
Buses would be charged $80 round-trip instead of $55, but since the current $1 charge for individual passengers would be eliminated, this would be a wash for many bus owners.
Fees for most commercial vehicles like dump trucks and tankers would go up about 10 percent. The round-trip fare for bicyclists would rise from $4 to $5 and from $6 to $7 for motorcyclists. The $2 round-trip charge for passengers on foot would remain the same.
The new fares, which must be approved by the county legislature, would give the company, South Ferry Inc., an overall 11.3 percent increase in revenues, its application said. Its last fare increase was in 1997.
Clifford Clark, the company's president, wants to eliminate the charge for vehicle passengers to make way for what he calls an ''E-ZPass-style'' automated collection system within the next few years. Commuters, residents and visitors with discount passes would be issued electronic tags that could be read by sensors carried by deckhands.
Under the current system, deckhands collect fares individually from each driver, rider or foot passenger as the ferry crosses the half mile of Shelter Island Sound between the two terminals, in North Haven and on Shelter Island, a trip of about five minutes. On the largest ferries, it's hard for the deckhands to make collections during the crossing, especially in the busy summer months when the boats are crowded and vehicles tend to have more passengers.
South Ferry has four boats in regular service. The Sunrise and Southern Cross carry a maximum of 20 vehicles, the Capt. Bill Clark carries 12 to 14, and the North Haven carries 9.
A few Shelter Islanders have complained about the proposal, writing letters to the editor of the local paper, arguing that residents, who tend to carry fewer passengers than summer transients, should not subsidize vacationers and tourists. Residents who travel alone ''are being penalized,'' wrote Richard Krause, who says he spends $2,000 a year on the ferries.
Mr. Clark, the ferry company's president, said that regular riders who buy discounted books of tickets would pay very close to the company's actual average cost of transporting a vehicle. Based on 2002 revenues of $3,245,445, divided by a total of 715,327 vehicles carried, the average cost came to $4.54 each way, Mr. Clark said.
Transients, who have no reason to buy discount books, will bear most of the burden of the increases, said Mr. Clark, who lives on Shelter Island himself. ''My philosophy since I got here in 1976,'' he said, ''is to move as much of the burden as possible onto the tourists and the transients and give as much of a break as possible to commuters and year-rounders.'' The Clark family has run a ferry service since the 1700's, and after completing an Air Force career, Mr. Clark took over the company from his father.
The County Legislature will hold a hearing on the rate increases at 2:30 p.m. on Jan. 27 at the William H. Rogers Legislative Building in Hauppauge. Michael Caracciolo, the county legislator whose district includes Shelter Island, said last week that he would wait until after the hearing to decide whether to support the increase. He added that the Legislature's Budget Review Office would be studying the company's books and its rate proposal and would issue its recommendations sometime in January.
