THE legend of Bill Parcells can mercifully take a breather for an off-season after the Cowboys' revival tent finally folded up last night at Ericsson Stadium.
They're still line dancing in Texas, though, now giddy with hope for the 2004 season. What piece of heaven will Parcells deliver next?
One day, Texans will have to pay for these euphoric Tuna times. One day, Parcells will no doubt leave them, having squeezed the last drop out of their 10-gallon team. The pattern of abandonment is well established: whenever Parcells exits a franchise, nothing but the picture hooks remain.
They will have to cope with whatever epiphany moves Parcells, just as New England, the Jets and even Tampa Bay have been forced to do in the past.
So, consider his genius a traveling exhibit. For too long, opposing coaches have treated Parcells the same way, many left awestruck to the point of immobilization in their attempts to coach against his glorious presence.
Carolina Coach John Fox had a second chance to relax in Parcells's shadow during the National Football Conference wild-card game last night. He has professed to be respectful of Parcells but unmoved by the specter of Tuna, even though Fox's timidity and conservative nature cost his team a loss at Texas Stadium in late November.
At the time, Parcells was the innovator and Fox the intimidated. At the time, Parcells eschewed his ball-control philosophy to befuddle the hyper Carolina defenders with the short pass while Fox's lone star, Stephen Davis, abruptly smacked into the Cowboys' run crushers with the force of a bird into windowpane.
But with another chance, Fox would not become another coach tricked by Parcells's pattern of unpredictability in big games, particularly playoff games.
Fox countered Parcells's sneaky first-down pass calls with clever first-down throws by Jake Delhomme to overwhelm Dallas, 29-10.
''It was the same plays, we just executed them,'' Fox said after the game, trying unsuccessfully to diminish his team's surprise tactics. ''It wasn't a matter of trickery.''
Perhaps deception is a better word. The Carolina strategy of illusion did not always work to perfection, but it did set up Parcells's meticulously prepared Cowboys to be uncharacteristically duped.
''They knew what we were going to be doing,'' Dallas cornerback Terence Newman said. ''We pretty much didn't know a lot of what they were going to do.''
When the Cowboys' top-rated defense expected a safe pass on third-and-3 in the third quarter, Delhomme dropped a 32-yard touchdown spiral into the cashmere-soft hands of receiver Steve Smith.
On a third-and-9 at the Dallas 23 in the second quarter, the pass-happy Panthers suddenly kicked the tires on Davis, handing him the ball, then watching him dart outside for an unimpeded touchdown run.
And, with Carolina certain to run out the clock in the first half with 1 minute left and the ball on their own 28, Delhomme dropped back and dropped jaws, passing repeatedly until he hit a wide-open Muhsin Muhammad for a 49-yard gain to set up a field goal, giving the Panthers a 16-3 halftime lead.
Safe calls were for suckers on this night. Although Fox had the superior players and the home-field advantage, he could have easily been vanquished by Parcells's aura. In a season when Parcells made opposing coaches look like second-string commanders, Fox was not about to be outcoached, not again.
''There's no question, in the stats and on the scoreboard, these were two different games,'' Fox said of the comparison.
Whether Fox would concede this or not, Parcells inspired the Carolina coach's creative side. Instead of coloring inside the lines, Fox drew outside the box, even lining up Davis at wide receiver on one play.
Sometimes, it is impossible to embrace Parcells -- the girth of his self-importance alone makes it difficult -- but he has to be credited as a wonderful coach and master motivator.
The latter does not only apply to players who lip-sync Parcells's message, but to opposing coaches who may find their own buttons pushed by Tuna.
Great coaches respond. Unheralded and unassuming, Fox was more Parcells than Parcells was in this game. The body snatching was jarring.
Maybe the Cowboys would be outplayed, but Parcells outcoached? With so much success behind him, Parcells is the rare leader who is empowered by his own myth, freeing him to take chances others would never put in their playbooks. The confidence Parcells has in himself is transferable to every one of his players on the field.
''I trusted him right away,'' quarterback Quincy Carter told The Dallas Morning News recently. ''It was like I was standing in front of Vince Lombardi.''
Perhaps Fox was taken aback by the same vision in November, but with the wild-card game on the line, he was the unexpected genius who brought down the curtain on Parcells's traveling legend -- at least for an off-season.
Sports of The Times
