Celebrating Dvorak
Antonin Dvorak came to America in 1892 to serve as director of the National Conservatory of Music. At the time, the country was completely enamored with European music, viewing its own indigenous musical traditions -- Native American and African-American -- as unworthy of serious consideration.
But when Dvorak heard Harry Burleigh, a black conservatory student from Pennsylvania, sing ''Go Down, Moses'' and ''Deep River,'' he had a revelation about what could constitute the basis of a truly American classical musical vernacular. He offered Burleigh a job as his assistant, and later threaded both African-American spirituals and Native American themes into his ''Symphony No.9 in E minor (From the New World),'' now known as the New World Symphony, which had its premiere in December 1893 at Carnegie Hall.
The New World Symphony is one of many pieces that will be performed as part of ''The Dvorak Centenary--Inspiring America,'' the New Jersey Symphony's Winter Festival 2004, in honor of the 100th anniversary of the composer's death.
Beginning on Wednesday night, and running through Jan. 25, the festival programs will be performed around the state.
''It took a European to pedigree American music,'' said Joseph Horowitz, a consultant to the festival who is also directing a national education project on Dvorak, sponsored by the National Endowment of the Humanities.
This past semester, the project provided educational material on Dvorak to 100 New Jersey students, from 6th to 11th grades, in three public schools -- South Orange Middle School, Columbia High School, Maplewood/South Orange and Malcolm X. Shabazz High School in Newark.
''This program gives us all a different perspective on the origin of American music -- jazz, rap, rock and roll, everything,'' said Hassan Williams, a music teacher at Malcolm X.
The Dvorak concerts will be led by guest conductors -- Anne Manson, Vassily Sinaisky and Stanislaw Skrowaczewski. Other festival participants include the Eroica Trio and the violinist Gil Shaham. Information: www.njsymphony.org or (800)255-3476.
A Film Class in the Suburbs
For years, Ira and Meryl Ehrenkranz of Morristown attended Richard Brown's popular film class, ''Movies 101,'' at the New School for Social Research in New York City. At the class, new films were shown before their theatrical releases, and participants enjoyed discussions with the director, producer or cast members.
Ten years ago, Mr. Ehrenkranz said to his wife, ''I'd like to start one of these.'' She advised him to speak to their son, Mark, who works for Ingram Entertainment, a distributor of movies and video games on VHS and DVD. And so the series ''NY Film Critics'' was born.
The series presents movies 24 weeks a year in New Jersey, with audience discussion led by film critics and appearances by people who worked on the film. Critics who have participated include Peter Travers of CNN and Rolling Stone magazine and David Edelstein of slate.com and National Public Radio. Aidan Quinn, Jennifer Jason Leigh, Edie Falco and John Turturro have attended past screenings.
''We do it for the love of film,'' said the senior Mr. Ehrenkranz, who retired as an insurance broker in 1993.
The 2004 winter series will take place on Jan. 19 and 26, and on Feb. 2 and 9, at Teaneck Cedar Lanes Cinemas, 503 Cedar Lane, in Teaneck. Films under consideration include ''Eternal Sunshine of the Spotless Mind'' written by Charles Kaufman and starring Jim Carey and Kate Winslet, and Bernardo Bertolucci's ''The Dreamers'' starring Michael Pitt, who grew up in West Orange. Information: (973)539-8785 or www.nyfilmcritics.com.
A Competition
The artist Willie Cole will judge the Monmouth Arts Council's 25th Annual Juried Art Show and Sale. Artists age 16 and older are invited to submit up to two pieces in any medium to the competition. Submissions are due by Jan. 13. Information: www.monmouthartscouncil.org or (732)212-1890.
Michelle Falkenstein
