Napco Says It Has Met Nasdaq Deadline for Filings
Napco Security Systems (Nasdaq: NSSCE) of Amityville, a supplier of electronic security equipment that is struggling to remain listed on the Nasdaq market, said last week that it had fired KPMG, its auditor, and that it had met Nasdaq's deadline for filing financial reports for the previous fiscal year, which ended June 30.
Kevin S. Buchel, the senior vice president for finance and operations, said that the company dismissed KPMG two weeks ago because the auditing firm was ''too slow'' and not because of any accounting disagreement. Tim Connolly, a spokesman for KPMG, cited client confidentiality and said the firm would have no comment.
Two months ago, Nasdaq officials warned Napco that it faced delisting because of its filing delinquency. It has now filed results from the last fiscal year, but Marcum &amp; Kliegman, a Woodbury accounting firm hired last month to replace KPMG, had insufficient time to audit them, Mr. Buchel said. He would not say if the company expected any adjustments.
Mr. Buchel attributed the filing delay to ''an issue involving accounting treatment'' of the company's factory in the Dominican Republic. ''The tax matter that has been causing the delay has been resolved,'' he said, but he would not say how.
''The new auditors focused on the problem right away, and we resolved it,'' he said.
In the unaudited filings released last week, the company reported its profit for the last fiscal year was $1 million, down from $1.64 million for prior year. Sales increased to $57.34 million from $55.84 million. Mr. Buchel said a ''tax provision'' was the reason the company showed profits falling while sales rose.
Napco has asked for an extension until mid-February for filing financial results for the fiscal first quarter, which ended Sept. 30.
Gentiva Sees Higher Profits
Gentiva Health Services (Nasdaq: GTIV) of Melville, a home health-care provider, said last week that its profits for 2004 would be stronger than its earlier predictions. It revised its guidance for investors, predicting that dividends would range from 57 cents to 63 cents a share, up from 55 cents to 62 cents a share.
Gentiva said the reason for its revised prediction was a new national contract signed with its biggest customer, Cigna HealthCare.
Compiled by Warren Strugatch
E-mail: libiz@nytimes.com
