From the start, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina has been dogged by two questions about his bid for the Democratic nomination: Is he old enough and does he have the experience to be president?
Mr. Edwards sought to put those doubts to rest in a two-day swing here by emphasizing his age, 50, and by seeking to turn his inexperience into a virtue.
''People will say to me, 'Now wait a minute, how old are you?' '' Mr. Edwards told voters on Saturday at a home in Portsmouth, flashing the boyish grin and wrinkle-free face that are a blessing and a curse. ''I am 50 years old. I want everybody to know that.''
Mr. Edwards, a first-term senator who has spent most of his adult life as a trial lawyer, said his long years outside Washington were actually an attribute that helped distinguish him in a crowded field of nine candidates, many of them promoting their long résumés in government or, in the case of Gen. Wesley K. Clark, the military.
''I have a question for you,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''Do you think that most people who have spent most of their life in politics or have been in Washington for decades are going to change this country? If you do, there are lots of other candidates to choose from.''
If the point still was not clear, on Saturday Mr. Edwards returned to the spot where John F. Kennedy began his presidential campaign and delivered a heavily promoted speech promising that ''together we can change America'' by instilling optimism and bridging the divide between ''two Americas,'' one rich and the other poor.
Mr. Kennedy, who was 43 when elected, ''came here to talk about hope, optimism, the future of America,'' Mr. Edwards said on the steps of Nashua City Hall, with a commemorative bust of Mr. Kennedy several feet in front of him.
''He did not come here to talk about anger,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''He did not come here to talk about cynicism, because John Kennedy knew that cynicism did not build America. Optimism built America.''
In an interview, Mr. Edwards said he needed to draw a sharper contrast between himself and the other candidates.
''I had a very powerful and compelling experience before I went to the Senate and during the time I have been in the Senate,'' he said. ''I want to make sure people know what the difference is between me and them.''
Mr. Edwards has struggled to break out of the middle of the pack of candidates and to establish himself as the moderate most likely to stop Howard Dean from winning the nomination. He has lagged in polls here, climbing no higher than fifth or sixth place despite intensive campaigning.
His advisers say he needs to finish third or better in this state's primary, on Jan. 27, and in the Iowa caucuses, on Jan. 19. Strong finishes, they say, will give him momentum for the South Carolina primary on Feb. 3, which begins a set of Southern primaries that Mr. Edwards is depending on to stop Dr. Dean.
''Let's win -- '' Mr. Edwards blurted at the end of one speech, quickly amending that to ''do well in New Hampshire.''
Political analysts say Mr. Edwards's centrist views -- he voted for the war in Iraq -- play better with working class voters, who tend to be moderate or conservative. But he has lost ground with liberals who have flocked to Dr. Dean.
''He's barely made inroads with liberals, and chances are liberals will be half of the electorate,'' said Dante Scala, an associate professor at the New Hampshire Institute of Politics at St. Anselm College. ''And he has been fighting for moderates and conservatives with four other candidates.''
That dynamic was on display as Mr. Edwards campaigned over the past two days in the state.
On Saturday he found himself in a protracted exchange with a self-described liberal who plans to support Dr. Dean or General Clark. The voter asked how Mr. Edwards could have been ''snookered'' by Mr. Bush into supporting the war against Iraq, even though no unconventional weapons have been found.
''This is not an issue of being snookered,'' Mr. Edwards countered, saying he had believed Saddam Hussein posed a serious threat to the country. ''I did what I thought was right and responsible.''
Mr. Edwards no longer raises Iraq directly in his stump speech. Instead, he is heading into the final dash to the early primaries by contrasting his optimistic message with the sniping of other candidates, and by arguing that his years fighting big corporations and insurance companies in the courtroom prepared him to take on President Bush.
''I am so ready for this fight,' Mr. Edwards said on Friday night. ''I have been preparing for this fight my entire life, and you have got to give me a shot at George Bush.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
