WITH all the big-name entertainment available in New Jersey -- McCarter Theater Center, Paper Mill, the Atlantic City casinos, arena rock -- it is easy to forget that some of the most widely attended, most innovative shows in the state are done for audiences of 6-year-olds.
Winter, when indoor activities overtake outdoor ones, is a prime season in the world of performing for children. Snapshots of five people or groups working in this world show that it is a place where casualness mixes with commitment, where careful planning and an ability to ad lib are equally important, where the audience can be brutally honest but the rewards can be more heartening than any standing ovation.
Getting Face-to-Face
Ray Andersen may have the hardest-working knees in show business. That is because Mr. Andersen, better known as Mr. Ray, likes to get face-to-face with his fans, and his fans are generally three feet tall.
And so on a recent Friday evening at Forrestal Village, a food-and-shopping complex in Princeton where Mr. Ray performs regularly, he was on his knees sharing the microphone with youngsters of 5 or so, offering them the chance to belt out a favorite song. His audience used to be older; he spent several years in the band of the rock star Meat Loaf. But his persona began to change in 1994, when his wife, Patti Maloney, who was working at a preschool, asked him to bring his guitar to school and play a few songs.
Now Mr. Ray has a CD (''Start Dreaming''), a DVD and an army of young fans who yell out requests for his original songs (''Boo-Boos Go Away'') and his covers of kiddie standards, like an Elvis-influenced ''Hokey Pokey.''
Mr. Ray, who lives in North Brunswick, has the gaunt look of a Goth rocker, but his music could not be more benign. By e-mail, he answered two questions about his work, as did the other performers profiled here:
Q: What has been your most embarrassing moment performing for children?
A: The standout moment has to be when I invited a kid to come up and sing a solo on my microphone, and before the cute 5-year-old started to phonetically dissect ''Take Me Out to the Ballgame,'' he proceeded to tell the audience that his Mommy was calling his Daddy some bad names that day. I cut him off, tenderly.
Q: What has been your most touching or gratifying moment?
A: Performing at a carnival for this beautiful little girl named Maddie who has cancer. It was organized to raise funds for her medical expenses, and it took everything in me to keep from crying midsong as her parents walking towards me, held that beautiful little girl, with tubes hooked up to her face.
A Juggling Act
Running the Pushcart Players is like trying to assemble a vexing three-dimensional puzzle: lots of pieces, but they have to go together just so.
Pushcart, based in Verona, is entirely a touring company; all its shows have to be designed so that actors and scenery can fit into a limited number of vehicles. The casting has to be just as flexible. With at least a half-dozen shows in the repertory and multiple bookings on many days, several different actors might have to learn each role, and within a play each actor might have to perform several parts.
Pushcart has been managing that juggling act for almost 30 years. Ruth Fost, the artistic director, said the group now does about 400 shows a year, performing for tens of thousands of children. A scroll through the schedule on the company's Web site is dizzying: ''Not Quite Hamlet'' one day, ''Stone Soup'' the next, ''Red Riding Hood'' the next, hundreds of miles of traveling in between.
''It's really the versatility and talent of the actors that make it work,'' Ms. Fost said.
It was all working nicely at the Matthew Jago Elementary School in Sewaren two days before Christmas break. At least 300 children were entranced by ''Peter and the Wolf,'' and afterward would not let the actors escape without explaining their stage tricks. How did they keep the bottles on their heads during the bottle dance? Velcro.
Ms. Fost answered the questions on behalf of the group:
Q: Most embarrassing moment?
A: An innovation of our company is the ''rolling base,'' on which we can hang or mount a variety of set pieces and move them around easily to create new settings within a show. Imagine our surprise when we arrived at a theater to find a dramatically raked stage. (They were doing ''Cat on a Hot Tin Roof'' that week.) Undaunted, we set up our show, placing bricks here and there to provide stops for the rolling bases as needed.
All was going well until one of the rolling bases somehow freed itself of the brick. As one of us ran downstage to retrieve it, of course another base began to roll, gaining speed, with another actor chasing it. As each of us recovered one or another base, yet another seemed to find its way downhill. It was definitely a scene from ''Noises Off'' long before that play was ever produced.
Q: Most gratifying moment?
A: One of the pieces in our repertory is ''The Last, the Very Last Butterfly,'' a gentle introduction to the Holocaust and related issues. It is based on poems and artwork created by children of the Holocaust who were in a concentration camp known as Terezin in Czechoslovakia from 1942 to 1945. Very few survived.
In June 2002 we were invited to perform ''The Last, the Very Last Butterfly'' in Terezin, in a small, recently restored auditorium that was actually used by the children of Terezin during that sad chapter of history. Performing in that space, surrounded by many of the landmarks that we knew from the drawings and written descriptions of the children, was a precious moment in time that none of us who were there will ever forget.
'A Big Hug Afterward'
Joe Joy does not take it personally if he does not hear a lot of applause after he sings a song. Many of the children in his audiences are physically unable to applaud.
Mr. Joy was a teacher's aide in Gloucester County's Bankbridge Regional School, a school for disabled students, when about three years ago he offered to bring his guitar in and sing for a few youngsters. Mr. Joy, who in another life has a band that plays at weddings and such, was surprised to find that his growly voice and laid-back style somehow got through to children with a wide array of problems. The Joe Show was born and has spread to all segments of Gloucester County's Special Services District.
''It outgrew the classroom, it outgrew the library, and it outgrew the cafeteria,'' said Eileen Shute, who handles public relations for the district. ''That's why it's now in the gym.''
Mr. Joy performs for young children with autism or Down syndrome one week, and for teenagers who just got out of the juvenile court system the next. He fielded the questions just before Christmas break.
Q: Most embarrassing moment?
A: My most embarrassing moment came just yesterday when, in the middle of a Joe Show, I took my guitar off and proceeded to hit myself in the eye with it and bleed profusely to the astonishment of 150 screaming children.
Q: Most gratifying moment?
A: It has to be witnessing a young student, who wouldn't speak or allow himself to be touched one year ago, sing and dance for a large audience, high-five the front row and give me a big hug afterward.
Growing Up to Join the Show
A few years back, Growing Stage in Netcong put on a ''Wizard of Oz'' that represented everything the group stands for. Not only was it good entertainment for young and old, but it also featured a Dorothy who, years before, had gotten her first exposure to theater in a bit part on the very same stage.
''It's part of our mission that we try to create an educational experience both on the stage and in the audience,'' said Stephen Fredericks, the group's executive director, explaining that casts generally mix Equity actors and actors from the community, including children.
Growing Stage has a touring arm -- among its current offerings is ''Tales From the Garden,'' about New Jersey history -- but its most elaborate work is staged in the old Palace Theater, a vaudeville-era house it acquired in 1995.
The group has just finished ''The Chronicles of Narnia'' there and opens ''The Snow Queen'' on Jan. 30, followed by ''Charlie and the Chocolate Factory'' in March. Mr. Frederick, though, is especially anticipating ''A Boy Named Cinder,'' due in the spring, a sort of role-reversed ''Cinderella'' that he is writing. He replied to the questions:
Q: Most embarrassing moment?
A: That would have to be the time we were performing ''Babes in Toyland'' when Tom-Tom began to sing a beautiful piece to Bo Peep, and just as he began to hit this difficult high note, when everyone was silent and filled with expectation at this tender moment, a child sitting in the front row (naturally) began to lose her entire pre-production party contents right at his feet.
Q: Most gratifying moment?
A: I now have the satisfaction of seeing the children who used to attend or perform at our theater grow up and pursue their own dreams in the arts, education and other fields in which they use the skills and self-confidence they credit the arts with giving them. It is also incredibly gratifying as they return now with their own children.
From Pooh to 'Rocky Horror'
December must have been an odd month to be an actor for the Forum Theater Company in Metuchen. Their grown-up production was ''The Rocky Horror Show.'' But by day some of the same actors who were cross-dressing in ''Rocky Horror'' were in front of hundreds of schoolchildren, costumed as Winnie-the-Pooh characters and performing a musical version of ''A Christmas Carol'' set in the Hundred-Acre Wood.
Forum, established in 1983 in an old-style movie theater with about 500 seats, has been doing children's theater only since 1995, but the children's side of the operation is becoming dominant. Youngsters from all over the state traipse to Metuchen to see the shows, many of which are original works.
The school buses come not just from the affluent suburbs, but from the cities. And so in addition to being large, the audience one recent weekday was notable for its racial diversity, which would have been the envy of every adult theater in the state.
Peter J. Loewy, the producing artistic director, said the theater strives for diversity on the stage as well. Occasionally a child will notice -- ''Dorothy's brown,'' was one's reaction to a ''Wizard of Oz'' last year -- but most often, none will. ''That's teaching the parents, too,'' he said.
''Snow White,'' ''Schoolhouse Rock,'' ''The Three Pigs'' and ''Alice in Wonderland'' are scheduled in coming months. Paul Whelihan, Forum's director of programs and services and the author of its ''Winnie the Pooh'' Christmas show, said he was beginning to think about an adaptation of ''Treasure Island'' that would mix spoken and sign language. He fielded the questions.
Q: Most embarrassing moment?
A: One of the funniest moments happened during a production of ''Charlotte's Web.'' Charlotte got one of her eight legs caught in the spider web. She lost her balance and fell off the platform into the pig's trough, left wearing nothing but a pair of tights and her left shoe (just about). Nothing was hurt but her pride.
Q: Most gratifying moment?
A: Seeing three (or more) generations of a family -- grandparents, parents and children -- come to the theater together and all have a memorable, uplifting time.
Here are telephone numbers and Web sites for the children's performers discussed in this article: Ray Andersen, www.mrray.com; The Pushcart Players, (973)857-1115 or www.pushcartplayers.org; Joe Joy, Gloucester County Special Services District, www.bankbridge.k12.nj.us; Growing Stage, (973)347-4946 or www.growingstage.com; Forum Theater Company, (732)548-0582 or www.forumtheatrecompany.com.
