LONG ISLAND'S sidewalks are here, there, everywhere and nowhere. Sidewalks begin and end in the middle of a block, sometimes picking up only a few feet later or perhaps around a corner. They are overgrown with grass or buckled by tree roots. Some streets have curbs but no sidewalks. Or they have neither sidewalk nor curb, turning garbage cans into traffic cones on trash pickup day.
No matter what the situation, Long Islanders have a love-hate relationship with their sidewalks. Steve and Destiny Paglino each had a wish list when they moved to their high ranch in Commack six years ago. ''Steve wanted a two-car garage,'' Ms. Paglino said recently, ''and I wanted a sidewalk.''
They both got what they wanted. Ms. Paglino, 30, who grew up in Sea Cliff with no sidewalk out front, recalled her mother's near-constant chant -- ''Watch out for cars!'' As she watched her husband power-wash the walk in front of their home last summer, she said they see the sidewalk ''as an extension of the yard'' that provides an added safety zone for Gianna, their 2-year-old.
''It feels much more like a neighborhood,'' Ms. Paglino added. ''It's more of a family atmosphere with kids riding their bikes on the sidewalk.''
But for every homeowner who is happy to have a sidewalk out front, another wants nothing to do with them.
''Residents, by a ratio of 2 to 1, generally don't want sidewalks,'' said Frank Derubeuis, director of Smithtown's planning department. ''Yet when we talk to people concerned about their kids traveling to schools and to other activities, people want them. There's an inherent contradiction we're dealing with all the time. They don't want them in front of their homes, but they want them in front of other people's homes.''
Consider Robert and Joyce Slomovitz, who bemoan the lack of sidewalks along the two miles they regularly walk between their Plainview home and the Mid-Island mall in Hicksville. Mr. Slomovitz, 67, pined for his youth in the Bronx, where he played ''hit the penny'' and ''king,'' sidewalk-centric variations of handball. He sung a few bars of ''Sidewalks of New York.'' ''I'm nostalgic for the city sidewalks,'' Mr. Slomovitz said.
Less sentimental than her husband, Mrs. Slomovitz recounted when her mother broke a hip after her heel got stuck in a crack of a Bronx sidewalk. And when it snows there's always the issue of shoveling an odd-shaped section of sidewalk in front of their house. Because it gets little foot traffic, they said, they leave it unplowed -- a serious violation of etiquette in many neighborhoods.
Long Islanders' mixed passions about sidewalks only partly explain why the Island's network of sidewalks is so haphazard. Nassau and Suffolk would do nothing but pour concrete if they did not leave sidewalk regulation and repairs to municipalities. Nassau, for example, is more than a year behind schedule on sidewalk repairs along roads under its jurisdiction, said Dina Miller, the county's deputy commissioner of public works. That underscores the need to share the burden with municipalities, she said.
At the local level, reaching consensus on sidewalk design is no easy task, particularly when trees are part of the equation. Highway and traffic departments, for instance, argue that trees along sidewalks are traffic hazards whose leaves clog storm drains. They butt heads with planning officials who see a line of curbside trees as providing an additional buffer between cars and pedestrians and creating a space where plowed snow can pile up without impeding foot traffic.
''It's a lose-lose situation,'' said Joe Morreale of the Smithtown Parks Department's concrete crew, kneeling near wooden forms where concrete was being readied for another replacement sidewalk. ''You can't kill the tree, and the roots keep lifting the sidewalk up.''
Mr. Morreale was referring to the Island's biggest sidewalk headache: buckled concrete slabs, typically from maples and sycamores whose roots run close to the surface. For new plantings, the town uses pear trees, which do less damage. It removes older trees whose roots are surfacing only when they are dead or threaten to fall.
Smithtown is one of the few localities to take on the responsibility for repairing sidewalks of its residents, who ultimately foot the cost via tax bills. In 1987, the town bought the first of its two concrete mixers and built its own cement silo after finding it could stretch its dollars further if it stopped hiring private contractors to do the work.
The job has made detectives of sorts out of the town's concrete crew, who have learned to spot the clues. A particularly green lawn, for instance, might hasten damage to a sidewalk if a tree's roots, impeded by a strong curb on one side, seek nourishment from the lawn's fertilizer and water on the other.
''This was probably repaired four or five years ago,'' said Ken Kopek, the town's concrete crew foreman, pointing to a patch of sidewalk near a 40-year-old sugar maple. ''You can see it's starting to lift up again. In two or three years, it will definitely be a hazard.''
Mr. Derubeuis, the Smithtown planning director, said many residents along Meadow Street opposed sidewalks, only to lobby intensely for them when their children grew old enough to ride bikes and walk to nearby schools. So, five years ago, Smithtown officials gave the same Meadow Street residents who once rejected a sidewalk a $250,000 quarter-mile stretch of concrete. To do the job, the town moved landscaping, utility wires and mailboxes.
To stave off similarly high-priced fickleness, Smithtown decided that it would not grant waivers for sidewalks on school routes, along major roads and in areas where leaving no sidewalk would breach consistency.
''It was a very expensive job to put in the sidewalks afterward,'' Mr. Derubeuis said. ''We realized at that point that we just couldn't randomly entertain waivers. Some streets need sidewalks.''
But in most other cases, he acknowledged, the planning board does not require sidewalks. The result is that about 200 miles of sidewalks snake through the town -- a quarter of what the total would be if every property owner had a sidewalk, Mr. Derubeuis said.
Many villages on the North Shore don't have to wrestle with such issues because they have no sidewalks at all. ''People enjoy the open feeling without sidewalks,'' said Mayor J. Leonard Samansky of Saddle Rock, which occupies a nook on the Great Neck peninsula.
In other villages like Rockville Centre officials have come up with a compromise to share the burden of sidewalk repairs with residents. Until about 10 years ago, they were solely responsible for sidewalk repairs. This prompted residents on the same block to pool resources and seek volume discounts from contractors.
Rockville Centre officials realized they had to rework large portions of older streets and began repairing sidewalks for residents in those areas. Where homeowners remain responsible for sidewalk maintenance, the village notifies residents if their sidewalks need repair. If residents do not respond, the village repairs the sidewalks and sends a bill: $500 to $2,000 per home, plus a $250 surcharge.
''Most people get it done in time,'' said Eugene Murphy, Rockville Centre's mayor.
A. Thomas Levin, a municipal lawyer for seven Nassau villages, including Great Neck Estates and Thomaston, said most municipalities shift responsibility for sidewalk maintenance to residents to avoid liability if someone falls -- the basis for the most common municipal lawsuit on the Island, he said.
''The issue with sidewalks is related to who is responsible when someone gets hurt,'' Mr. Levin said. ''That is usually the homeowner. That does not necessarily get the municipality off the hook. It just sort of gives them a co-conspirator.''
Sidewalks may be coming back into favor again as more of the housing industry embraces pre-World War II designs of tight-knit developments, where homes, shops and parks are clustered around plentiful walkways.
For all the differences that make their way into Long Island's sidewalk layout, building a sidewalk can be a remarkably precise, even scientific endeavor.
That was evident on a fall day along the southbound lane of the William Floyd Parkway in Shirley, where Suffolk County was building a new sidewalk. A cement mixer that can pour 10 cubic yards of concrete delivered a well-defined blend of materials to the Flowerhill Drive corner: 10,260 pounds of sand, 20,100 pounds of gravel, 6,060 pounds of cement and 9.4 pounds of an agent that adds air bubbles to help the dry concrete flex with changing temperatures.
Workers laying the sidewalk had to meet equally precise county specifications (similar to those in effect in Nassau). Suffolk-built sidewalks are five feet wide. Five feet separates each contraction joint --  3/8-inch-deep spaces that prevent cracks in one square, or flag, from spreading to another. Set every 20 feet are  1/2-inch-deep gaps, called expansion joints, that keep sidewalks from buckling in the summer heat.
The concrete in the sidewalks is 4 inches deep. At corners and driveway aprons, it is 6 inches deep and reinforced with wire mesh. Similarly, to withstand the inevitable beating from cars, curbs are 18 inches deep with 6 inches showing.
The county was building the sidewalk along the six-mile stretch of the five-lane William Floyd Parkway after tallying 77 bike and pedestrian accidents, including two deaths, there between 1988 and 1997.
Michelle Wilkinson, 37, who has lived at the Flowerhill Road corner for six years, welcomed the concrete buffer. ''I always had a fear that a car would flip into the house,'' she said, ''and my kids' rooms are on that side. Almost every day in the summer there are accidents on that corner.''
As Mrs. Wilkinson spoke, a sport utility vehicle sped by with a sticker slapped onto its plastic bug deflector: ''So Many Pedestrians, So Little Time.''
