He left office nearly three years ago, but Bill Clinton, the youngest ex-president in modern times, is still the go-to guy in Democratic politics.
All of the party's major candidates for president say they call on Mr. Clinton for advice. They say the former president always seems eager to talk politics, and one says the former president sometimes seems to relish the calls as an excuse not to work on his memoirs.
''He said to me once, 'I shouldn't be spending this much time, I've got to be writing my book,' '' this candidate said. ''But if you get him at home or in the office and he's not traveling, he has the time. And he loves it.''
The candidates said they were seeking advice on tactical and substantive matters. As they tussle over the direction of the party, they are also consulting former Clinton aides to help flesh out their policy proposals. Robert E. Rubin, Mr. Clinton's treasury secretary, and Gene Sperling, a senior economic adviser in the Clinton White House, are particularly popular.
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who calls himself the former president's ideological heir, said, ''He's brilliant, both on policy and politics.''
''We'll talk about where we are on some issue, and maybe this is the way to deal with it,'' Mr. Lieberman said.
Representative Richard A. Gephardt said Mr. Clinton had helped with ''the whole construct'' of his campaign.
Mr. Gephardt added: ''He always said to me, 'One of your advantages is your experience,' and he said, 'That's something you obviously need to talk about and make an asset, not a negative.' ''
When Gen. Wesley K. Clark, a fellow Arkansan, entered the campaign in September, the re-emergence of Clinton loyalists like Bruce Lindsey fueled speculation that Mr. Clinton and his wife, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York, were backing General Clark as a way to stop another candidate, Howard Dean. General Clark said the Clintons had encouraged him to run, but the Clintons have said they would not endorse anyone in the primaries.
Moreover, the Clintons have said positive things about many of the candidates, leaving General Clark to compete for a public blessing. His campaign did some elaborate planning last month to have Mr. Clinton issue a one-sentence tribute to General Clark to rebut Slobodan Milosevic at the former Yugoslav president's war-crimes trial in the Hague.
General Clark said that Mr. Clinton had helped him make the transition from the military to politics. ''The biggest thing is in terms of dealing with people who question you,'' General Clark said.
He said Mr. Clinton had also advised him that ''you have to have positive energy in the campaign, you have to fight hard but you don't want to get negative.''
A Clinton friend, Linda Bloodworth-Thomason, the television producer who with her husband, Harry Thomason, made the campaign video ''The Man From Hope'' for Mr. Clinton in 1992, has made the similar ''American Son'' for General Clark.
Last week, the Clark campaign became the first with a commercial that included a picture of Mr. Clinton, though Mr. Gephardt noted that he was the first to refer to Mr. Clinton in a commercial, in September.
When Mr. Lieberman heard about the Clark commercial, he sounded a bit miffed that he had been beaten to the punch.
''Has President Clinton now become public property so that we can do it without his permission?'' Mr. Lieberman asked reporters in a conference call.
Even Dr. Dean, who has made statements perceived as critical of Mr. Clinton, mentioned the former president and his wife in an interview: ''I talk to both him and the senator fairly frequently.''
Dr. Dean added: ''Sometimes they call me, but it's usually me calling them. Sometimes I ask Hillary for advice on how she would respond to some stuff. He and I talk about strategy and the campaign.''
Three of the candidates, Dr. Dean, General Clark and Carol Moseley Braun, followed in Mr. Clinton's footsteps last week, going to South Carolina for the New Year's retreat of movers and shakers known as the Renaissance Weekend.
''Clinton remains a protean force in the Democratic Party,'' said Thomas Mann, an expert on politics at the Brookings Institution.
''All of the candidates would like to emulate his success and to contrast the economic success of the 90's with what Bush has done,'' Mr. Mann said.
But as Al Gore found in 2000, the Clinton legacy is complex, and running with it can be just as perilous as running from it. Polls show that Mr. Clinton retains enormous influence with the traditional Democratic base but causes consternation among swing voters and independents.
For that reason, the Democratic candidates are more likely to try to trade on the Clinton brand during the next few months of Democratic primaries than during the general election campaign.
There are multiple theories about the role that Mr. Clinton, who declined to be interviewed for this article, is playing in the primaries.
Mr. Mann said that he had been less kingmaker and more ''kibitzer in chief.'' Once a nominee became clear, he said, Mr. Clinton would take the lead in trying to unify the party.
Conservative commentators, among others, have said that Mr. Clinton is trying to steer the party toward a weak candidate who will lose to President Bush to clear the way for Senator Clinton in 2008.
The candidates, Mr. Clinton's former aides and other political observers do not dispute the idea that Senator Clinton is on the launching pad for the presidency in 2008. Though many said they had perceived Mr. Clinton as neutral, they were also watching to see if he put his thumb on the scales for or against anyone.
''The question is not whether he will endorse, because he won't,'' a senior adviser to one candidate said. ''The question is whether he will be using intermediaries to send signals.''
There seemed to be signals last month when some of Mr. Clinton's former aides publicly questioned Dr. Dean's candidacy, saying the former governor of Vermont was too angry and seemed to reject Mr. Clinton's moving the Democratic Party to the political center. The extent of Mr. Clinton's concern about Dr. Dean is not clear, but some of his former aides said that Mr. Clinton would do what he could to help the eventual nominee against Mr. Bush.
''It's more important to him to beat Bush than who beats him,'' said a former official in the Clinton White House, who noted that the personal strains between the Bush family and Mr. Clinton run deep.
''He likes Dean fine,'' this person said. ''The only issue is whether he is the right guy to beat Bush.''
Dr. Dean stirred his party's ire last month when he delivered a domestic policy speech in which he called for ''a new social compact for working families'' and seemed to suggest that the Clinton era was too accommodating to the Republicans.
Rivals and party moderates swooped down on Dr. Dean, denouncing what they said was a cheap shot at the first Democrat who had been re-elected since Franklin D. Roosevelt and who had presided over the longest economic expansion in American history.
Dr. Dean said in an interview that his rivals had twisted his remarks. ''The other guys were so desperate, they just made that up out of whole cloth,'' he said. ''There is no distance between me and Bill Clinton.''
But Dr. Dean said Democrats had to distinguish themselves from Mr. Bush. ''Centrism was fine, but you can't keep moving right,'' he said.
Some thought Dr. Dean had learned a lesson.
''This was a fight that Howard Dean doesn't need and doesn't want,'' said William A. Galston, who was Mr. Clinton's deputy assistant for domestic policy and is now a professor of public policy at the University of Maryland who supports Mr. Lieberman for president.
''It's one thing to take on the Congressional Democrats and to appeal to the perception among Democratic activists that their opposition to Bush was too tepid,'' Mr. Galston said. ''Bill Clinton never persuaded the activist wing of the Democratic Party that his was the way to go. But it's a very different thing to take on a successful, two-term Democratic president.''
And yet, after calling Mr. Clinton to clear the air, Dr. Dean came back a few days later and criticized Terry McAuliffe, Mr. Clinton's close friend and hand-picked chairman of the Democratic National Committee.
Dr. Dean suggested that Mr. McAuliffe was too weak to have prevented the Democratic contest from becoming vituperative and compared him unfavorably with a previous chairman, Ron Brown.
Dr. Dean, who subsequently called Mr. McAuliffe to clear the air, said, ''I made those remarks mostly out of frustration, and I shouldn't have compared him to Ron Brown.''
He added, ''I think Terry's trying to be helpful.''
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts used Dr. Dean's attack on Mr. McAuliffe as an opportunity to burnish his own Clinton bona fides, though he and Mr. Clinton were never particularly close.
Senator Kerry cited Mr. Clinton's warning to the candidates that they had to get together after the primaries, and added: ''It's time Howard Dean realized this campaign isn't about him, it's about our country. It's time he rereads that page from the Clinton lesson book.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER PRESIDENT
