FIVE 12-year-old boys sat by a crackling fire in a cozy living room here one afternoon recently, gathered around a large metal bowl filled with microwaved popcorn, with their mostly 40-ish fathers sitting alongside. Although it was a Sunday afternoon in December, this manly group was not watching football.
Instead, they were talking about ''The Thief Lord,'' the book they had just read for their Larchmont father-son book club, which is now in its third year.
Like these boys, many other exceptionally busy children in Westchester County have yet another activity to add to their extracurricular sports practice sessions, religious school classes and music lessons: monthly book club meetings with mom or dad, an increasingly popular activity that has spread like Starbucks outlets across communities countywide.
Parent-child book clubs have become so common in some places that, as a teenage girl in Larchmont put it, ''you're not cool if you're not in one.'' Some parents feel obliged to join several book clubs, one for each child.
Barely a decade ago, few parent-child book clubs existed. But after Shireen Dodson wrote ''The Mother-Daughter Book Club'' (Harper Perennial, 1997) with Teresa Barker, a guide for parents on how to set up and organize such groups, thousands of them sprung up nationwide.
While there is no exact count of the number of parent-child book clubs in Westchester, dozens meet in private homes across the county, and at least nine of Westchester County's 38 libraries offer them. There are three monthly book clubs at the Chappaqua Public Library for third- to eighth-graders, a monthly mother-daughter, parent-child and a father-son book club, for instance, and a monthly club for parents and fourth- to sixth-grade children, at the Greenburgh Public Library, for which 55 people signed up.
Typically, parents who join such clubs have good intentions: they want to share their joy of reading with their children, they want to establish lines of communication, they want to create a setting in which their children feel comfortable talking to adults.
But sometimes inattention, inexperience, the foibles of human nature or even competitive parenting can turn multigenerational book clubbing into something stressful, members say. After all, as one mother pointed out, book club parents ''are the same people who are out on the soccer field.''
For example, parents may select what others in the group may consider age-inappropriate books to demonstrate how well their children read, in a kind of book group one-upmanship. In addition, by limiting club membership, parents provide a lesson about social exclusion that is mirrored in some adult clubs. And finally, parents who do not bother to read the book offer an example of irresponsibility that may undermine the group's purpose.
But happiness with the experience is common. The Larchmont fathers, for instance, are avid readers, and proud to be sharing their love of reading with their sons. They also agreed that by belonging to such a club, they hoped that their sons would continue to talk to them, both during and after puberty.
''It helps us keep a finger on the pulse of our kids,'' said Kevin Crowe, 49, whose son, Daniel, is a member of the Larchmont group. ''Our boys have great ideas, and it's fun to get to know them better.''
Orly Shachar, a professor of mass communications, is in two Larchmont book groups, one with her 13-year-old son and another with her 10-year-old daughter. ''It's almost like a window into their world that usually I don't get to see,'' Ms. Shachar said. ''You get to hear their opinions, which can sometimes surprise you, and you learn to respect their personality.''
Susan Putterman of Larchmont, who was in a book club with her daughter, Sasha Mann, for three years, said, ''It's a great way to keep girls talking to you, or at least to another adult, and it keeps the dialogue going.''
Ms. Putterman's club disbanded when the schedules of Sasha and the other girls became so crowded that they could not find a time to meet when everyone could attend, a common fate of book clubs.
Sasha, who is now 16, loved being in the club with her friends and their mothers, she said. ''We talked about things I don't normally talk about, and it was cool to get the moms' point of view.''
Experts agree that such clubs give parents a special entree into their children's thoughts and feelings.
''You can talk about life issues through books,'' said Ms. Dodson, ''and you can put your own spin on their morals and values in a nondirective way.''
Mary Broughton, an assistant professor of literacy studies at Georgia State University in Atlanta, agreed. ''Giving girls a chance to talk about books in an open way helps them learn about who they are,'' said Ms. Broughton, who conducted a study of girls in a sixth-grade book club. ''It's not enough to have them read a book and answer questions about it. They need an opportunity to relate books to their own lives.''
There can indeed be trouble in paradise, though. If parents try to force their own agendas onto their children's book clubs, their good intentions may backfire.
Parents sometimes choose books that are too advanced for their children to read, when simpler books dealing with the same themes are available, said Kate Colquitt, a children's librarian at the Greenburgh Public Library, who has been running a parent-child book club there for eight years. For example, she said, ''To Kill a Mockingbird'' deals with racism, but so does ''Holes,'' which may be more appropriate for fourth graders.
Public book clubs, which are usually run by librarians, tend to select reading material that is easier to read and less ambitious, especially for younger children.
For the December meeting of the Greenburgh club, Ms. Colquitt chose ''Be a Perfect Person in Just Three Days,'' by Stephen Manes, a 76-page book with pictures that several sixth-graders in the group bragged was easy to read. Still, the group had a lively discussion about the book's themes.
''It's a story that has a moral -- that no one's perfect and you're wasting time trying to be perfect,'' said Amber Jackson, 10, who rushed to the Greenburgh book group on a cold December night with her mother, straight from swim-team practice, her damp hair protected by a jaunty beige cap.
''In school, we read a book and we do a work sheet, but here we discuss the book and it's really interesting,'' she said, smiling and a bit breathless with excitement.
Ms. Dodson concurred that some books might not be appropriate for younger children, although ''I don't think there's any inappropriate subject in a mother-daughter book club.''
''It's a safe place where you should be able to talk about tough issues,'' she said, adding that, nonetheless, ''I do believe in censorship.''
Nine-year-olds, for example, ''are not ready to read about incest,'' Ms. Dodson said.
In her original 10-mother, 10-daughter club, if a mother objected to the content of a book the group wanted to read, Ms. Dodson said, the group would honor her wishes and pick something else. Still, one of the mothers used to black out passages in a book that she did not want her daughter to read, according to Ms. Dodson.
''Her daughter would just borrow other copies of the book,'' Ms. Dodson said.
Ms. Putterman's mother-daughter group foundered for a similar reason, when the group chose to read ''Catcher in the Rye'' when the girls were in seventh grade, and some mothers believed that the girls were too young.
''I thought it was totally appropriate as a coming-of-age book,'' Ms. Putterman said, although two mothers who were uncomfortable about the choice eventually left the group. Public parent-child book groups rarely founder over book selection because they rely on the judgment of professionals; in addition, they tend to be more diverse than private clubs.
''Being in a public forum, the group is less homogeneous and there is more racial and gender mixing than in a private club,'' Ms. Colquitt said.
By contrast, private groups select members based on the preferences of the founding parents, who are usually friends. Some people must be left out so that the group stays at a manageable size. Nearly all the parents who belong to private book clubs agreed that smaller is better, and that a group cannot include everyone who wants to belong.
When Ms. Dodson started a second book club with her youngest daughter, for example, there was a groundswell of competition to get in. One mother, whose daughter was not invited to join, asked Ms. Dodson to pretend that she and her daughter had been invited, adding that the mother would then say they could not attend, so that the girl's feelings would not be hurt. Ms. Dodson refused, telling the woman that she should start her own club.
Shauna Perlman, 16, who was in Ms. Mann's Larchmont book club, said that the club began with five mothers, five daughters, and a teacher. Her group was very diverse, she said, because ''it wasn't a best-friends' club.'' Nevertheless, she has one friend who is still hurt that she was not included, seven years later, and she recalled that so many people wanted to join that ''we had an imaginary waiting list.'' They never used the list because they did not replace members who dropped out, Shauna said.
In library book groups, members may be more compelled to read the book because the event is less social than one that is held in a private home. When members of private clubs routinely fail to read the assignment, it can irritate those who do.
Joanne Chang, 43, who lives in Pleasantville, belongs to a mother-daughter book club with her daughter Caroline, 13. (They also belong to another club in Brooklyn Heights, where they used to live, which meets about four times a year.) She said that one mother in the Pleasantville club rarely reads the books and does not have much to add to the discussion, ''but I don't want to put her in a position to feel bad about it.''
Others are not as sympathetic.
Lorrie Larsen-Strauss, 45, is in a Pelham-based mother-daughter book club with her 12-year-old daughter, Olivia. Ms. Larsen-Strauss said that in at least one group she knows of, members send notes to those who do not read the books, requesting that they resign. That would never happen in her group, she said, which is very collegial, even though some of the mothers ''can't get the book done.''
Although the book club she joined with her mother no longer meets, Sasha would never consider not reading the assignment. In fact, she was so enamored of the idea of group reading that she and some friends started a teenage book club, with boys, that meets whenever the 12 or so members can get together. The group is much less structured and more rambunctious than it was when mothers were included, Sasha said, because ''a mom is different from a teenage boy.''
Still, Sasha said that some day, if she has a daughter, she would love to belong to a book group with her, because ''I want to be as close with my daughter as I am with my mom.''
Suggested Book Club Reading List
Here are books for parent-child book clubs recommended by experts, based on children's ages. Although clubs for high school students are rare, several suggestions for older readers are included.
4th through 6th Grade
''Absolutely Normal Chaos,'' Sharon Creech
''A Wrinkle in Time,'' Madeleine L'Engle
''A Year Down Yonder,'' Richard Peck
''Be a Perfect Person in Just Three Days,'' Stephen Manes
''Bigger,'' Patricia Calvert
''Bud, Not Buddy,'' Christopher Paul Curtis
''Ella Enchanted,'' Gail Carson Levine
''Gathering Blue,'' Lois Lowry
''Half Magic,'' Edward Eager
''Holes,'' Louis Sachar
''How to Eat Fried Worms,'' Thomas Rockwell
''Joey Pigza Swallowed the Key,'' Jack Gantos
''Mick Harte Was Here,'' Barbara Park
''Missing May,'' Cynthia Rylant
''Morning Girl,'' Michael Dorris
''Number the Stars,'' Lois Lowry
''One-Eyed Cat,'' Paula Fox
''The Great Eye,'' Phyllis Shalant
''The House of Dies Drear,'' Virginia Hamilton
''The Hundred Dresses,'' Eleanor Estes
''The Robber and Me,'' Josef Holub
''Running Out of Time,'' Margaret Peterson Haddix
''The Thief Lord,'' Cornelia Funke
7th through 9th Grade
''Among the Hidden,'' Margaret Peterson Haddix
''Hope Was Here,'' Joan Bauer
''Stuck in Neutral,'' Terry Trueman
''Tangerine,'' Edward Bloor
''The Man in the Ceiling,'' Jules Feiffer
''The Sisterhood of the Traveling Pants,'' Ann Brashares
''The View From Saturday,'' E.L. Konigsberg
10th Grade and Up
''Born Confused,'' Tanuja Desai Hidier
''Catalyst,'' Laurie Halse Anderson
''Imani All Mine,'' Connie Rose Porter
''Playing Without the Ball,'' Rich Wallace
''The Lightkeeper's Daughter,'' Iain Lawrence
''Way Past Cool,'' Jess Mowry
Keeping the Book Dialogue Alive
Ten tips for smooth parent-child book clubs:
1. The children are in charge. Choosing the book, and a related activity, like serving food related to the book's theme, should be left to the children, said Shireen Dodson, author of ''The Mother-Daughter Book Club.'' The children will become adept at facilitating discussion, she said, to the point where they can have a one- or two-hour discussion on just one paragraph.
2. Agree on the club's purpose. If the club is a social one, then the goal is mainly to get together and chat. But if the club has a more serious, intellectual purpose, then members should read the books and focus on the topics at hand.
3. Keep it small. Ideally, clubs should include no more than 10 to 12 parents and children, said Michelle Capozzella, a librarian for young adults at the Chappaqua Public Library who leads parent-child book clubs there. With a limited group, everybody gets a chance to speak.
4. Set meeting dates and times, and stick to them. You can't always accommodate everybody's schedule; if you try, you're doomed to frustration. The best strategy is to meet on the same day and time every four to six weeks, an interval long enough that members can finish the book, Ms. Dodson said. This way, members know in advance to keep that time free.
5. Read the book. If you don't have time to actually read the book, listen to it on tape, but make an effort to finish the assignment, not only as an example to your child, but so you'll have something to say, Ms. Dodson suggested.
6. Let children speak first. It is a parent-child book club, but the children should have their say first so parents can hear their children's reactions uninfluenced by parental opinion.
7. Encourage discussion, but keep on track. You are there to talk about the book, not about your future vacation or remodeled kitchen, said Nancy Buehler, a book club facilitator in Northbrook, Ill. She is paid $200 a session, mostly ''to keep everybody talking about the book,'' she said.
8. It's not a competition. Don't try to pressure your child to show off how witty and sophisticated she is, Ms. Dodson said. Likewise, don't try to wow the group with your brilliance. This is a give-and-take discussion, not a college lecture.
9. Keep the children's needs in mind. Don't extend the meeting longer than the children's attention spans, and give them time to chat or play together first, Ms. Dodson said.
10. Avoid written agendas. Don't make the club seem like another place where children get homework, or you'll turn them off instantly, Ms. Dodson said.
CARIN RUBENSTEIN
