THE job of keeping the late Woody Guthrie's spirit alive became a mother-daughter act a year ago, based in an office here on East Main Street that is home to the Woody Guthrie Foundation and Archives.
Since opening the office, Nora Guthrie, who is the folksinger's daughter, and her daughter, Anna Canoni, have become involved in new concert projects arising from the discovery during the past few years of thousands of pages of unpublished writings and song lyrics by Mr. Guthrie, best known for ''This Land Is Your Land.''
Just before Christmas Ms. Guthrie and Ms. Canoni, along with Ms. Guthrie's husband, Michael Kleff, met at the foundation office to go over some last-minute arrangements before closing for a holiday break. Ms. Guthrie was suffering from a touch of the flu, and both women admitted they were exhausted, for good reason: The previous week they had each worked more than 70 hours to help present ''Holy Ground: The Jewish Songs of Woody Guthrie,'' a concert of new Guthrie songs performed by musicians including Arlo Guthrie (Nora's older brother), the Klezmatics and Susan McKeown at the 92nd Street Y in Manhattan.
This followed a Nov. 26 concert at Carnegie Hall starring Arlo Guthrie, the Weavers, Peter, Paul &amp; Mary and Theodore Bikel that paid tribute to Harold Leventhal, the folk music impresario who helped establish a trust fund for Woody's children after the singer's death from Huntington's Disease in 1967. Proceeds from the concert went to the Woody Guthrie Foundation.
''For the past few months the phone hasn't stopped ringing,'' said Ms. Guthrie, 54, a longtime resident of Mount Kisco who began working at the Manhattan office of the Woody Guthrie Foundation in 1990. Six years later she was instrumental in the opening of the archives, which is run by the foundation, to scholars and others.
Next on the agenda for Ms. Guthrie and Ms. Canoni is support for ''Ribbon of Highway - Endless Skyway,'' a traveling musical production celebrating Guthrie's songs and life. The show features Jimmy LaFave, a Texas-based singer-songwriter, and pulls into the Irvington Town Hall Theater next Sunday. The program, narrated by Bob Childers, includes performances from a constellation of well-known folksingers, including Slaid Cleaves, Eliza Gilkyson and Ellis Paul, as well as Sarah Lee Guthrie, Arlo's daughter, and her husband Johnny Irion.
''Things have really picked up at the foundation and archives in the last five years,'' Ms. Guthrie said. ''There's been so much creative activity relating to Woody, and so we've been working with a number of writers and musicians. Also, everyone under the sun with a cause seems to come our way, and they're all good causes, so we try to meet their requests. In fact, we were just joking the other day whether Bob Dylan's office gets as many requests as we do.''
Mr. Guthrie, an Oklahoma native who came to national prominence in the 1930's and 1940's with his Dust Bowl ballads, is regarded today as one of the beacons of American folk music in the 20th century.
The foundation, started in 1972, existed mostly as an adjunct of Mr. Leventhal's artist management business, handling day-to-day tasks concerning royalties and permissions. Nobody tackled the big job of sifting through dozens of sealed boxes containing Mr. Guthrie's effects, which had been donated by Marjorie Guthrie, the singer's second wife and Nora's mother.
Finally, in the early 1990's, Ms. Guthrie began to catalog the more than 15,000 items saved from her father's life -- notebooks, diaries, letters, drawings and more--with the help of Jorge Arévalo, a music archivist. The breadth and importance of this collection became especially apparent, Ms. Guthrie said, when she came across the original manuscript of ''This Land Is Your Land'' in a sheaf of papers and was scolded by Mr. Arevalo, now the chief curator of the Guthrie archives, for having a document ''up there with the Constitution'' unprotected from the wear of time.
While preparing the archives, which opened in 1996, Ms. Guthrie uncovered more than 3,500 song lyrics her father wrote but never recorded. Since then, she has been selecting different artists to put music to them. The most successful effort commercially has been Mermaid Avenue, a CD collaboration between the British folksinger Billy Bragg and the country-rock group Wilco, released in 1998.
''What I love about Woody Guthrie is something I see in Billy Bragg and others I've worked with, and that is they are honest people, no different onstage than they are offstage,'' said Ms. Guthrie, whose title of executive director of the foundation means she does ''whatever needs to be done.''
In the end, she said, ''It's not like running a business, but more like being part of a big family that loves Woody Guthrie.''
Val Denn, a musician and music promoter from Texas who worked with Mr. LaFave in developing ''Ribbon of Skyway - Endless Highway'' for the stage, said: ''The Woody Guthrie Foundation helped us several ways, most importantly by sustaining us until our feet were on the ground and by steering us toward material in the archives. They're always keeping abreast of our work and championing it.''
The increase of activity at the foundation required more staff help, and, on cue, Ms. Canoni arrived. Never one to ''get a leg up from being a Guthrie,'' Ms. Canoni, who had been working at TV Guide, became interested in her mother's projects at the foundation and from there, the logical next step was a fulltime job.
''The reason I'm at the foundation is to work with my mother, but what job could be better than learning about your own family?'' said Ms. Canoni, a 25-year-old Sleepy Hollow resident, who met her husband, Scott Canoni, a Web designer, while they attended Horace Greeley High School in Chappaqua.
''Ribbon of Highway - Endless Skyway: A Concert in the Spirit of Woody Guthrie'' will be presented on next Sunday at 2 p.m. at the Irvington Town Theater, 85 Main Street, Irvington. Tickets: $25. Information: (800) 595-4849 or www.mainstageentertainment.net
