MORE than six years later and not a single foundation has been laid for the new homes planned for the intersection of Kissam Lane and Glenwood Road. That's partly because the owners, Ralph and Lucia Pisciotta, have had to tangle with the Town of Oyster Bay and the Nassau County Planning Commission to obtain zoning and subdivision approvals, said the couple's lawyer, Judy L. Simoncic. But additional complications arose in May when Patrice Benneward, president of the Glenwood/Glen Head Civic Association, announced during a public hearing that the two-story house on the two-acre property could be historically significant to the unincorporated hamlet.
In an interview last week, Ms. Benneward said that the structure had served as a carriage house in the late 1800's to the Townsend family, one of the earliest settlers in the area. Ms. Benneward said that as far as she knew, the carriage house and an icehouse on School House Hill Road, about a block away, are the last standing structures belonging to the Townsend family. And that's what makes them worth preserving, she said.
''I have a lot of affection for that house,'' said Ms. Benneward, 51, who grew up in the hamlet. ''It's sort of what I think of as the character of Glenwood Landing.''
Ms. Simoncic, who is a partner in the firm of Forchelli, Curto, Schwartz, Mineo, Carlino &amp; Cohn in Mineola, said the house was merely the group's ''issue du jour.'' She said that the civic association consistently finds new grounds to try to derail the project.
The current development plan calls for razing the existing house, leveling two adjacent sloped properties, carving a cul-de-sac around them and building five single-family homes, she said. The lot where the carriage house stands, facing Glenwood Road, will retain its commercial zoning, said Ms. Simoncic, noting that the civic association had successfully challenged a plan to rezone the lot from commercial to residential status. Retaining walls will be built around the homes to shore up the land.
None of this has sat well with the civic association, Ms. Simoncic said. After challenging the rezoning of the commercial lot to residential, the group took issue with the idea of retaining walls. Now there's the issue of the existing house.
She said Mr. and Mrs. Pisciotta have hired a preservation consultant to do his own evaluation. In a Dec. 16 memorandum to Ms. Simoncic, the consultant, Zachary N. Studenroth, wrote that ''the Pisciotta house does not appear to embody the level of architectural or historical significance that is typically associated with designations as a local, state or national landmark.''
Ms. Benneward disagreed, and said she had hoped the town would conduct its own investigation. Instead, she said, town asked the civic association to conduct a title and archeological study on the property. Ms. Benneward said she's trying to raise the money to pay for the archaeological study, which is likely to cost thousands of dollars. In the meantime, the civic group has hired Donna Ottusch-Kianka, a trained archaeologist, to complete a title search.
Mrs. Ottusch-Kianka said the Nassau County Assessor's Office has listed the former carriage house as built in 1863. Citing Mr. Studenroth's memorandum, Ms. Simoncic said the more accurate date is 1890 to 1910. However, Mrs. Ottusch-Kianka, who hasn't been inside the house to assess the period of architecture and structure, said that 1863 appears to be reasonable. Mrs. Ottusch-Kianka declined to comment on whether the house is worthy of preservation. ''I've only seen the house from the street,'' she said. ''I can't get close enough to see the architectural details.''
Nevertheless, Ms. Benneward said she plans to ask the town's landmark commission in January to grant the house landmark status. She noted that a June 2003 report conducted by Eugene Boesch, an archaeologist hired by the Pisciotta family, said the land contained concentrations of pottery and fire-cracked rock. Mrs. Ottusch-Kianka said the presence of such artifacts would increase the property's chances for listing on the national landmarks registry. But Ms. Simoncic said the artifacts will be excavated before construction begins and taken to a local museum.
When will the construction begin? Ms. Simoncic said she isn't sure, since the Nassau County Planning Commission is not scheduled to vote until Thursday on whether to permit the subdivision.
