At Osprey's Dominion in Peconic, Adam Suprenant, the winemaker, thinks big.
There's nothing shy and very little inward about three of Mr. Suprenant's 2000 reds. Helped by a strong vintage, they seem intended to be crowd-pleasers.
To get the full impact of Mr. Suprenant's full-throttle style, Osprey's Dominion's 2000 cabernet sauvignon, 2000 reserve cabernet sauvignon and 2000 cabernet franc should be tasted side by side, in that order.
The dark, chunky regular cabernet sauvignon ($18), blended with 21 percent merlot, is the most subdued of the three. It is front-loaded with lush fruit, especially black-currant flavor, held slightly in check by firm tannins. Anise, raisins and a light smokiness from the barrel dominate the bouquet, and chocolate infiltrates the flavor.
The gushing, almost candied flavors of both the plump reserve cabernet and the cabernet franc are especially winning, particularly when inhaled and drunk from a glass with a large bowl. Their fleshiness and charm call attention to themselves, whereas the regular cabernet sauvignon shifts your appetite's focus to the accompanying plate of food.
With an almost sweet, confectionary bouquet, the reserve cabernet sauvignon ($35) is voluptuous, splashy and spicy. You get a sense that the grapes were superripe and bursting with flavor. This red caters to indulgent wine lovers -- or, to put it another way, to noshers.
My favorite wine was the plush, let-it-all-hang-out, earthy cabernet franc ($18), which gained softness from its 15 percent merlot. This dark wine is awash in black currants, the flavors of fresh young beets and pure beet juice, toasted oak and herbs.
Osprey's 2001 gew端rztraminer ($20), one of a handful made on Long Island, is no less dramatic than the reds. By nature, the grape and its wine are bold. Mr. Suprenant has captured its primary, dominant flavor: litchi. In fact, the wine is almost a tangy, smooth litchi syrup, except for its bouquet of raisins.
This gew端rztraminer was Mr. Suprenant's first. It takes a string of vintages to refine gew端rztraminers and, on the East End, to catch up with Lenz's standard-setting version. Osprey's Dominion's gew端rztraminer gets the fundamental idea right, and now, in the next round, needs to pay more attention to the nuances.
HOWARD G. GOLDBERG
LONG ISLAND VINES
