Mad cow rocked the cattle markets of the heartland once again last week, but it did little to deter the Burger Club. Yesterday, as it does twice a month, this group of hardy carnivores convened for lunch to talk about its favorite sandwich and indulge a taste for beef.
As the name suggests, the Burger Club is dedicated to the procurement and consumption of the finest burgers New York City has to offer. The club is only four months old, and yet its members swear allegiance to the classic standards of a prelapsarian burger-eating age.
Today's burger, it would seem, is quite unlike the burger of yesteryear. Its size, for one, has gradually expanded into awkwardness, even as a faddish trend for condiments has overwhelmed the underlying flavor of its meat. The modern burger is also made of heretical ingredients, the members say. These include turkey, chicken, mushrooms, and inevitably, soy.
''We're purists,'' said Joseph Bavuso, a 40-year-old lawyer, and a charter member. ''Myself, I'm looking mostly for high-quality meat, rare to medium-rare. The burger should be unadorned, too, so you can taste a balance between the char and the beef.''
The Burger Club was founded by a gamine, 37-year-old burger connoisseur named Elyse HF Maxwell, who tracks her own obsessive interest in the burger to a breathtaking specimen she ate on vacation in the British Virgin Islands at the tender age of 8.
''It was just the most amazing burger,'' Ms. Maxwell said, with nostalgia in her voice. Her favorites in the city now include the burger served at a little-known lunch counter in the Parker-Meridian Hotel (''Fresh meat, a really nice char'') and the succulent six-ounce standard served at yesterday's selection, the Blue Smoke Restaurant on 27th Street.
The iconic burger joints of New York City are mostly a fraud, Ms. Maxwell said. She took a demystifying swipe, for instance, at the Corner Bistro in Greenwich Village, which serves what she described as a ''tasteless, big, fat, nothing, boiled burger.''
So far, her quest has taken the club to Molly's Restaurant on Third Avenue, the Tavern on Jane on Jane Street, the Parker-Meridian, and to the Landmark Tavern, which had Ms. Maxwell's favorite burger, or at least until she recently found the meat there ''not particularly fresh.''
Her colleagues are mainly middle-aged white-collar types who may, or may not, have a professional stake in meat. One founding member is Sherri Jackson, 27, who was raised in a grain-growing family near Mansfield, Ohio. Ms. Jackson claims that she can distinguish grain-fed steer from their grass-fed brethren with a single telling bite.
Other members lack such talents. Mark Hesse, for example, is an unemployed chemical engineer with no real expertise in beef. Mr. Hesse, 50, mostly comes for the company, he said, although he also comes in part to put to rest the ghost of burgers past.
''I still think my best burger ever was the one I cooked in Boy Scouts,'' he explained. ''That was Troop 750, in Washington Heights.''
Suzanne Fass, 55, is the unofficial statistician. She can be counted on to bring the cooking scale and meat thermometers to lunch. A freelance cookbook editor, Ms. Fass is a notorious stickler for the details. She records these on the club's evaluation sheets, each of which has entries for the burger's ''Diameter,'' ''Weight,'' ''Total Height,'' and ''Patty Height.''
Ms. Fass is quick to say that the single most important aspect of a burger is getting the temperature right. To that end, she often brings a stopwatch to clock how long it takes between the placing of the order and the arrival of the plate.
''If it's too fast, it means the kitchen partially precooked the burger,'' she said, and produced a knowing smirk. ''If it's too slow, we all get very testy because we're hungry.''
As it happened, the waitress, Molly Lariccia, brought the burgers out on time, although Ms. Maxwell's burger was a little off.
''This is not medium-rare,'' Ms. Maxwell told a second waiter with the slightest quiver of impatience. ''Cheddar? Medium-rare? Thanks.''
Her words were, of course, heard by the entire Burger Club. The table was completely silent now, the burgers having finally arrived.
Correction:  January 12, 2004, Monday  An article on Jan. 4 about the New York beef enthusiasts of the Burger Club misspelled the name of a hotel they favor. It is Le Parker Meridien, not Parker-Meridian.
