A white towel flapped and shook against the right leg of Steve McNair every time he backed into the pocket and searched for teammates in a maze of purple.
McNair, the Tennessee Titans' quarterback, had not looked this hurried all season. He was unsure on fragile legs, error-prone against a Baltimore Ravens team that had decked the Titans five games in a row and sent running back Eddie George to the locker room with a dislocated left shoulder in the second quarter.
But with less than two minutes to play, McNair and George delivered a clinic on resiliency. They marched the Titans into position for the 44-year-old Gary Anderson to kick a 46-yard field goal with 29 seconds to play, lifting Tennessee to a 20-17 victory at M&amp;T Bank Stadium in an American Football Conference wild-card playoff game Saturday.
'''Our passing game wasn't up to par, and we put the running game to use,'' McNair said.
With the victory, the Titans advanced to the A.F.C. divisional playoffs next weekend.
If the Indianapolis Colts defeat the Denver Broncos on Sunday, the Titans will face the top-seeded New England Patriots in Foxboro, Mass., on Jan. 10, and the Colts will meet the Kansas City Chiefs, seeded No. 2, at Arrowhead Stadium on Jan. 11.
If the Broncos defeat the Colts, Denver will face the Patriots on Jan. 10 and the Titans will meet the Chiefs on Jan. 11.
Last week, Ravens linebacker Ray Lewis said that George no longer possessed the combative running style that defined his career. It was a typical barb passed between these two teams, former rivals in the old A.F.C. Central.
But after George dislocated his shoulder while tackling Ravens safety Ed Reed after a McNair interception, George jogged to the locker room, put on a shoulder brace and returned in the second half.
''It was all the way out,'' George said of his shoulder. ''I told them on the sideline, 'Put a harness on it and let's go.' ''
George carried 25 times for 88 yards (44 yards after the injury) in helping Tennessee to 165 rushing yards, the most Baltimore had given up all season.
''Eddie got the best of Ray today,'' Tennessee tight end Frank Wycheck said.
Lewis, who finished with 11 solo tackles, said: ''I'll tell you, Eddie is going to fight, I'm going to fight. It's always competitive between me and Eddie. Hopefully, it'll give them the encouragement to keep going.''
McNair, who on Friday was named the league's most valuable player, along with Colts quarterback Peyton Manning, threw a season-high three interceptions. But McNair completed all of the key passes after the Ravens had tied the score at 17-17 on a 35-yard touchdown pass from quarterback Anthony Wright to tight end Todd Heap with 4 minutes 30 seconds to play.
McNair hit George for 9 yards, receiver Derrick Mason for 13 yards and tight end Erron Kinney for 6 yards before George rumbled 1 more yard to the Ravens' 28.
From there, Anderson, who had missed a key field goal as a member of the Minnesota Vikings during the National Football Conference championship game against the Atlanta Falcons five years ago, nailed the kick.
''We have guys of great character and integrity on this team,'' the soft-spoken Anderson said before letting loose. ''I feel great to help this monkey off our backs.''
Just six days ago here, on an evening as loud as rock concert, Ravens running back Jamal Lewis motored across the field into history as the fifth player to surpass 2,000 yards rushing in a season.
But on Saturday, the Titans' No. 1-ranked rush defense battered him about the head, the shoulders and the body, limiting him to a season-low 35 yards on 14 carries. The Ravens as a team amassed just 54 yards on the ground.
''Brian Billick said they were going to run it down our throats,'' Titans defensive end Kevin Carter said of the Ravens' coach. ''Well, it didn't happen that way. Have a nice off-season.''
Tennessee safety Lance Schulters said he felt confident that Tennessee's defense could handle Jamal Lewis and the Ravens' top-ranked rushing offense.
''It's not luck that we've shut down the top rushers in the league,'' Schulters said.
The Titans were able to boast, but McNair's erratic play almost did them in.
In the first quarter, from the Tennessee 36, McNair tried to thread a pass to Mason through a phalanx of purple jerseys at midfield. Reed deflected the ball to safety Will Demps, who snagged the interception and began sprinting down the left sideline.
The Ravens defenders turned into blockers as Demps weaved his way through bodies and outraced the Titans into the end zone for a touchdown that tied the score at 7-7.
McNair, who missed two of Tennessee's final three games with a strained right calf muscle and a sprained left ankle that also has a cracked bone spur, did not appear gimpy until he limped away from a tackle early in the fourth quarter. But he did look out of sorts at times.
''When you have a speed defense like they do, and a leader like Ray, they are going to get turnovers,'' said McNair, who atoned for his errors with a 49-yard touchdown pass to Justin McCareins that put Tennessee ahead, 14-10, midway through the third quarter. ''They did everything to confuse us.''
But confusion was not enough to beat the Titans.
PRO FOOTBALL
