HUNDREDS of children from countries across the globe will converge in the port city of New London next summer for the fifth International Children's Conference on the Environment.
The conference, which operates under the United Nations Environment Program in Kenya, has been held in England twice and once in Kenya and in Canada.
Last year, New London was chosen to play host to the event, bringing it to the United States for the first time.
''The mission of the conference is to create generational ambassadors for the environment,'' said Barbara Morgan, the executive director for this year's event. ''Basically, we're creating the environmental leaders of tomorrow.''
At the conference, which is being held July 19 to 23, children from 100 countries will get a chance to learn about environmental issues through workshops and field trips. More important, the organizers say, national governments will get a chance to learn about the concerns and opinions of the 600 young delegates, who will include one child from each of the 50 states in this country, the organizers hope.
''It's almost like the Olympics,'' said Michael Van Leesten, the chairman of the conference, which is held every two years. Coordinating logistics includes everything from arranging security to securing travel visas, he noted, adding, ''It's a complex international event.''
The United Nations organizers chose New London as the host city after being approached by the Mashantucket Pequot Tribal Nation, the owners of the Foxwoods Resort Casino, which formed a board and a local organizing committee to bring the conference to Connecticut.
The tribe has committed $600,000 toward developing the event.
''We heard about this conference that was never held in the U.S. before,'' said Mr. Van Leesten, the chairman of the event and the executive assistant to the tribal councilor, Kenneth M. Reels. ''We made an inquiry to the U.N. and expressed our interest in being the host. We submitted a business plan. They visited and checked in to get a feeling for the capacity.''
In making their pitch, tribe members also emphasized their particular link to the environment.
''We let them know that the philosophy of the Mashantucket Pequot tribe was deeply committed to this on the basis of historical and cultural interests and commitments that Native American people have to the land,'' Mr. Van Leesten said. ''It's deep in the soul of indigenous people, not just at Mashantucket, and they liked that idea.''
Though the conference, on the Connecticut College campus, will be closed to everyone but the delegates and their chaperones, the organizers decided they also wanted to find a way to connect the conference to the public. The organizers decided to play host to a Tall Ships Environmental Festival, as well as an exposition, with booths and dockside displays on environmental issues.
The organizers expect the public events to draw 250,000 to 350,000 people to the city during the conference.
Still, there are many challenges left, including raising the $3.6 million needed to run the event.
The organizers say that so far they have $600,000 from the Mashantuckets and $1.5 million in contributions from business and government sponsors. They are hoping another $1.5 million will come from local and state businesses.
''There are a lot of doubting Thomases on the scene,'' Mr. Van Leesten said. ''But we're totally convinced this is a good thing for everybody, good for the region, and we're going to make it happen. The momentum will build.''
