HIGHLIGHTS
POLAND: GHETTO EXHIBITION -- Financed by a grant of some $40,000 from Steven Spielberg's Shoah Foundation, a new exhibition documenting the history of the Jewish ghetto in the southern Polish city of Krakow under the Nazis is to open this summer, The Associated Press reported yesterday. Boguslaw Sonik, a Krakow councilor, said the exhibition would be housed in a former pharmacy in the heart of the district where 17,000 Jews were forced to live from 1941 to 1943 and where a thousand were killed in the streets when the Nazis decided to empty it on March 13, 1943. The survivors were sent to the Plaszow labor camp, where Oskar Schindler, above, the focus of Mr. Spielberg's Oscar-winning 1993 film, ''Schindler's List,'' used influential friends and bribes to save 1,200 of them.
MUSEUM PRESIDENT NAMED -- Stuart N. Brotman will become the president of the Museum of Television and Radio on March 1, according to an announcement yesterday by Frank A. Bennack Jr., its chairman. Mr. Brotman, most recently the president of Stuart N. Brotman Communications, a global consulting concern in Lexington, Mass., succeeds Robert M. Batscha, who served as president of the museum in New York and Los Angeles from 1981 until his death last year.
FOOTNOTES
Beginning tomorrow with a 10-day screening of ''The Magnificent Ambersons,'' Film Forum will devote an eight-week retrospective to the career of Orson Welles as director and actor. From now through April 15, it will present more than 35 films directed by or featuring Welles. . . . With 22 features from Argentina and Burkina Faso to Pakistan and South Korea, the 33rd New Directors/New Films series, presented by the Museum of Modern Art and the Film Society of Lincoln Center, will run from March 24 through April 4. . . . Jane Monheit, the jazz singer who is to perform at the Motion Picture Academy's Governors Ball after the Oscar presentations in Los Angeles on Feb. 29, has signed an exclusive contract to record for Sony Classical. Her first recording under the deal is to be released in the fall.
