Stephen Sondheim was in the opening-night audience at the Young Playwrights Festival at the tiny Cherry Lane Studio. This year the festival, which Mr. Sondheim founded in 1982, offers three intriguing, highly enjoyable plays about taboos. The subjects are a high school boy's suicide, a cannibal with a basket full of goodies and a teenage girl who isn't sorry that she had an affair with her English teacher.
When the festival says young, it means young. All three of the winning playwrights were 18, the maximum age to enter the competition, when they submitted their plays.
The evening begins with Travis Baker's moody, poignant ''Thick.'' Two boys come to their childhood meeting place in the forest to think about disturbing things. Johnny (Geoffrey Molloy) tells apocryphal stories, like the one about a farmer who came home to find an empty crib and a blood-soaked dog. He kills his beloved dog only to learn that the baby is fine. (The dog had killed an intruding wolf to protect it.) Johnny and Patrick (Billy Wheelan) are trying to sneak up on the real horror on their minds, the suicide of a high school classmate.
''We are making a legend, story, a joke out of this kid's death, and that is the gratitude we offer,'' says Patrick. Gratitude for what? ''For giving us another local legend that will stick for years and years. For making us kids again, helping us to believe again in ghosts.''
Halley Feiffer's ''Easter Candy'' isn't the most impressive work of the evening, but it is the most delightful. Again we have two close friends, Munker (T. Cat Ford) and Annie (Carol Halstead), in serious conversation. Munker keeps offering Annie treats from her basket, and Annie finally asks what must be a logical question in the universe that these two live in: ''Munker, are you fattening me up to eat me?'' Munker admits the truth but defends herself, explaining that there's nothing wrong with cannibalism; it's no different, really, from the desire to squeeze a baby's little, round cheeks.
The evening's finale is Caitlin Montanye Parrish's ''View From Tall,'' which has only one problem. It's much too long, at least in the context of this three-work evening. Otherwise Ms. Parrish gives us a formidable, smart, mostly gripping comic drama about statutory rape from the minor's-eye view.
This is the story of Justine's (Jen Drohan) interactions with her psychiatrist. She loves John Irving novels and hates her affluent parents (whom she describes as ''indifferent drunks''). The doctor has demons of his own, including his father's suicide. Revelations are exchanged, and the relationship changes.
Each of these young artists is assigned a dramaturge to help shape the work, and the directors are experienced professionals, so there's no question that these three plays have been through a boatload of tweaking. But then so have most of the shows on Broadway. The program continues through Saturday.
THEATER REVIEW
