President Vladimir V. Putin oversaw one of Russia's largest strategic military exercises in years for a second day on Wednesday, and, for a second day, something went wrong.
An intercontinental ballistic missile fired from the nuclear submarine Karelia in the Barents Sea veered wildly off course 98 seconds after the launching and self-destructed, a navy spokesman, Capt. Igor V. Dygalo, said. The cause of the malfunction, he said, would be investigated.
The missile was supposed to have crossed the Arctic and landed in a missile range in Kamchatka in the far eastern region, but instead exploded in the upper atmosphere over the Barents.
On Tuesday, two missiles from the submarine Novomoskovsk in the Barents also failed to launch -- for reasons that are still in dispute -- as Mr. Putin watched from the deck of another submarine.
Officials had described the planned launchings on Tuesday as a centerpiece of the exercises, which involved Russia's strategic nuclear forces. On Tuesday, Adm. Vladimir I. Kuroyedov denied initial reports that the missiles had malfunctioned.
He said that the missile tests had always been planned as simulations, not as live fire exercises. But Kommersant and Izvestia both reported Wednesday that the launchings were aborted because of a malfunction in one of the missiles. Both newspapers reported that the navy was trying to cover up an embarrassing failure.
Mr. Putin's visit to the exercises -- much publicized and intensely covered by state television -- came three and a half weeks before the presidential election on March 14 and appeared intended to highlight his role as the commander-in-chief of a revived Russian military.
Pavel Felgenhauer, a military analyst and journalist, said the glitches in the exercises reflected the aging of Russia's ballistic missiles, many of them nearly 30 years old.
''With such old missiles, mishaps do happen,'' he said. ''They have happened before. This time the P.R. surrounding the president and the presidential campaign meant more attention was paid. They demonstrated quite the opposite of what the Kremlin wanted.''
