LONE STAR NATION  How a Ragged Army of Volunteers Won the Battle for Texas Independence -- and Changed America  By H. W. Brands  Illustrated. 582 pages. Doubleday. $29.95.
The history of Texas would seem to be a natural subject for the popular historian H. W. Brands. For one thing, Mr. Brands, biographer of Theodore Roosevelt and Benjamin Franklin, is a professor at Texas A&amp;M University. For another, the much-vaunted wildness and wooliness of Texas' story would seem to lend itself to Mr. Brands's accessible, personable approach.
But a funny thing happens on the way to the Alamo. This material proves to be far knottier and more diffuse than Mr. Brands's earlier subject matter. (He also wrote ''The Age of Gold,'' a lively chronicle of the Gold Rush published by Doubleday in 2002.) Its outsize figures, the kinds of Texans who have cities named after them, are participants in a shifting and complex historical narrative. And ''Lone Star Nation'' winds up akin to the region it describes: big, sprawling, heterogeneous and in some places quite dry.
The book begins at a time when ''to find Texas, one had to be looking for it'': the beginning of the 19th century. During that period, Moses Austin saw his lead-mining business collapse, and he struck out for the Spanish territory west of the Mississippi. Austin was 58 when he embarked on the fateful journey that would lead to the first American settlements in Texas. And when he died, he had this wish for his son: ''Tell dear Stephen that it is his dying father's last request to prosecute the enterprise that he had commenced.''
As that may indicate, some firsthand sources used in ''Lone Star Nation'' are considerably more florid and genteel than the usual stuff of Texas folklore. We read of a man who is thrown from his horse, ''thereby bringing his nasal appendage into such intimate association with Mother Earth as to draw forth a copious stream of the sanguinary fluid.'' As he cites such documents, Mr. Brands helpfully injects his own opinionated voice, though more of it would have been welcome. Of Stephen Austin, ''a poet rather than a pioneer,'' he opines, ''If not for his father's deathbed request, he likely would have pursued a career of solid innocuousness.''
Instead, the younger Austin went west to become Texas' American founder. (Already present: Indians, including the Comanches, whose name translated as ''anyone who wants to fight me all the time'' to a rival tribe, the Utes.) When Austin inherited a Spanish charter buffeted by the Mexican revolution, he found himself in the midst of a typically Texan morass. ''Lone Star Nation'' describes the endless vicissitudes that made Texas a Mexican territory, the site of a failed uprising that would have turned it into the Republic of Fredonia, and a pawn in the territorial maneuverings of President Andrew Jackson. ''It didn't take much imagination,'' Mr. Brands writes, ''to guess that Texas would be fought over before its fate was settled.''
The author is so conversant with the intricacies of his subject that he assumes a degree of familiarity in the reader. So there are long treks and many skirmishes here without much in the way of illustrations, and with only one sketchy map. Even so, his narrative emphasis might have singled out the most vital episodes, but ''Lone Star Nation'' is evenly paced. And it devotes as much attention to the number of ladders used at the siege of the Alamo as it does to describing the battle's conclusion:
''The last redoubt of the defenders was the chapel. Its thick stone walls stood proof against the cannons the attackers now leveled against it, but eventually its oaken doors were splintered by the 18-pound balls of the fort's large gun. The attackers surged through the entrance and didn't stop shooting and hacking till all resistance had ceased.''
Of the legendary characters who died there, Mr. Brands is notably clear-eyed. ''In life, Travis and Bowie and Crockett were hardly the sort to inspire reverence, hardly the kind parents would name their sons after,'' he writes. The famous David Crockett was a prominent 49-year-old politician at the time of this 1836 battle. (Those who ponder the mystery of exactly how Crockett died will not find it solved here.)
''He had small side whiskers, inclining to sandy,'' one witness wrote. ''His countenance, although firm and determined, wore a pleasant and genial expression.'' This is a far cry from the bear-killing braggadocio that made Crockett's autobiography so popular.
''Lone Star Nation'' tells of how James Bowie smuggled slaves, and how William Barret Travis fled his wife, famly and debts to become a Texan. It also describes the colorful debauchery of Sam Houston, Texas' president and liberator; his liquor supply was so vast that he was mistaken for a smuggler, until he explained that he kept these barrels for his own use. Along with Houston, the most captivating figure here is Antonio López de Santa Anna, the Mexican general to whom Mr. Brands ascribes Napoleonic ambitions. The book works hard to weave their separate stories together.
The nature of battle in Texas, Mr. Brands argues, can be seen as a template for subsequent demonstrations of the American spirit. His book describes the contentiousness, independence and sense of entitlement that eventually turned Texas, however briefly, into a free and self-contained nation.
''Some were for independence; some for the constitution of 1824; and some for anything, just so it was a row,'' wrote an immigrant named Noah Smithwick, as Santa Anna's army posed a mounting threat. ''But we were all ready to fight.''
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
