WHEN it comes to his TV viewing, Jakob Nielsen has what he describes as a perfectly average household setup, with six remote controls -- or, viewed another way, 239 buttons -- to choose from.
Last week, at a reporter's request, Dr. Nielsen, a member of the Nielsen Norman Group consulting firm who sizes up user interface designs for a living, sat down and took a cold, hard look at the devices cluttering his coffee table. He focused on the four he uses most often: the remotes for his Pioneer DVD player, Sony TV, ReplayTV recorder and Comcast cable TV box, with a sum total of 160 buttons.
''It's the first time I've systematically looked at them,'' he said. ''I've always known that the user experience is very clearly one of frustration, and now I've discovered why.''
First came the dozens of inscrutable labels. Buttons named Angle, FAV and Condition challenged Dr. Nielsen to a degree he considered unreasonable. ''Watching television should be one of the most relaxing experiences you can have,'' he said. ''It's astounding that something this simple has to be encoded in a made-up language that only a electronics engineer could love.''
Color contrast was another target. ''It's truly annoying that so many remote controls have very low color contrast between the labels and the background, making them hard to read under poor lighting conditions,'' he said.
The Pioneer DVD control failed miserably in this area, but ReplayTV scored well.
Furthermore, said Dr. Nielsen, too many of the buttons are identical in shape and color, differentiated only by their labels, which can be hard to read. He gave high marks to the Pioneer DVD control for its Play button, which is three times longer than the other buttons, making it easy to find. ''You don't have to look at the label,'' he said.
Then he took aim at the way numbers are laid out for channel selection. Dr. Nielson strongly favors a telephone keypad layout. ''People already have a feel for a telephone keypad,'' he said.
Remotes for the Sony, ReplayTV and the Comcast cable box controller (issued when his cable company was part of AT&amp;T) use the telephone keypad, but the Pioneer's does not, Dr. Nielsen said.
As for the use of rockers, the type of button often found on a volume or channel control, Dr. Nielsen said they cut complexity in half because they allow you to do two things with one button. He had particular praise for the cable-box remote, which has vertical rockers. ''That makes it so obvious,'' he said.
''It just makes it so easy to do things like control the volume,'' he said. Plus and minus symbols, on the other hand, are less intuitive, especially when laid out horizontally.
Dr. Nielsen was struck by the lack of universal standards for remotes, most noticeable when it comes to the simple power button. ''The No. 1 feature is just to turn the thing on, and that's indicated in three different ways'' on three different remotes, he said.
''One obscure remote control is bad enough,'' he said, ''but when you add them all up, the multiplying complexity would overwhelm anybody. I can certainly testify from personal experience that having a Ph.D. is not enough to conquer a roomful of remotes.''
