Russia's economy is more deeply dependent on oil and gas than previously thought, with energy making up an estimated 25 percent of output instead of the 9 percent attributed to it in Russia's own accounts, the World Bank said on Wednesday in an economic report.
Russia's greater dependence on oil also meant that the country's extremely successful recovery is ''much more vulnerable to fluctuations in international oil prices,'' Christof Ruehl, chief economist for the World Bank in Moscow, said at a news conference here.
Since the United States-led invasion of Iraq, oil prices have been climbing. Brent crude oil for March delivery rose to $35.88 a barrel on Wednesday, its highest level since Jan. 20.
Russia's economy grew 7.2 percent in 2003, and Mr. Ruehl said that roughly 3.2 percentage points of that growth came from oil revenues.
Officials at Russia's state statistics committee could not be reached for comment after business hours.
Mr. Ruehl said the reason for the discrepancy between the report's estimate and the official accounts was that many large Russian oil companies sell oil at low prices to affiliated or shell companies, which export the fuel at much higher world prices, and then book the profits. The practice, known as transfer pricing, is one way oil and gas companies avoid paying higher federal taxes, he added.
Official figures are thus distorted, giving greater weight to the resellers as services, and less weight to energy producers, the World Bank report said.
Some economists agreed that oil represented a much bigger slice of Russia's gross domestic product.
''Actually, it is not a surprise,'' said Vladislav Oreshkin, an economist with the United Financial Group investment bank in Moscow. ''But I don't agree with the conclusion that the service sector is not expanding and cannot be the economy's future engine.''
Mr. Oreshkin pointed out that services as a share of Russia's gross domestic product stabilized at about 50 percent from 1997 to 2001 and then rose to 54 percent in 2002, a year when the price of Brent oil grew less than 1 percent.
''It couldn't be that the service sector expanded due to transfer pricing'' by oil and gas companies, Mr. Oreshkin said. ''Quite the opposite, it was a real expansion of services.'' He added that Russia's official statistics agencies still have huge problems putting a value on the country's ''gray economy,'' or businesses that do not exist officially.
Mr. Ruehl did note that Russia's economic boom has started to lift millions of people above poverty. The percentage of Russians living in poverty dropped to 22 percent, or about 31 million people, in 2003, from 27 percent in 2002.
''Russia's higher growth has finally reached the poor,'' Mr. Ruehl said.
Russia's president, Vladimir V. Putin, has vowed to pull Russia out of its economic collapse at the end of the 1990's. To a large extent, he has succeeded: in 1998, Russia defaulted on its debt and devalued the ruble, but from 1999 to 2003, Mr. Putin's first term, Russia's economy rebounded 38 percent, Mr. Ruehl said.
Despite the success story, a concentration of ownership in oil and gas companies and the lack of economic diversification suggest there is much reform work to be done, Mr. Ruehl added.
''Higher oil prices are actually leading to complacency, and slowing further reforms,'' he said. ''Why not do it now when the money is there?''
