With typical bluntness Sue Johanson tells older men and women to get over body image: the ''turkey neck,'' the ''wear and tear,'' the hormonal deficiencies. But in her cheerful, no-nonsense style she adds that there are creams, patches and pills to help them, and if all else fails, that they can always kiss and cuddle.
''You can still have a great deal of fun,'' she said recently in a rare speech before a United States audience, a group of sex-toy saleswomen at a conference in Las Vegas.
Ms. Johanson, who won't reveal her age but looks like a 70-something grandmother who knits and makes sourdough biscuits (she does both), is having a lot of fun herself just talking about sex.
A registered nurse from Toronto, Ms. Johanson became known as a sex educator on Canadian radio and television before the Oxygen Network began an American version of her live call-in show in 2002. Now in its second season, ''Talk Sex With Sue Johanson,'' at 11 p.m. on Sundays, has become one of the most popular shows for Oxygen, a cable channel whose target audience is women 25 to 45. (During the rest of the week Oxygen broadcasts reruns of ''Talk Sex'' or of her Canadian show, ''The Sunday Night Sex Show.'')
One indication of Ms. Johanson's rising profile in the pop culture landscape: just last month ''Saturday Night Live'' lampooned her in a skit in which a Sharon Osbourne impersonator crowed over ''this sexy old lady.'' She has also made the late-night talk show rounds, appearing with David Letterman and Conan O'Brien. Late-night channel surfers may find her in the middle of untangling the contents of a ''fantasy restraint kit'' as she rates new sex products. Or looking deep into the camera through wire-rimmed glasses as she tells the dissatisfied Linda from Gloucester, Mass.: ''Hey, I got to be honest with you. Most guys won't last 15 minutes. Sorry!''
Ms. Johanson, better known as Sue, may remind viewers of another sex adviser of a certain age, Ruth Westheimer, who proselytized for healthy sex on her own television and radio shows in the 1980's and early 90's. But Ms. Johanson functions in a changed cultural landscape, where the Internet and television have made sex talk ever more bold. Yet even in these sex-saturated times her brand of sex education is still the exception, some sex experts noted, perhaps because of more conservative government policies in the United States and an entrenched reluctance among Americans to talk about sex as a normal activity.
''There's a bit of a cultural schizophrenia around sex and sexuality,'' said Tamara Kreinin, president and chief executive of the Sexuality Information and Education Council of the United States, a nonprofit organization based in New York. ''American culture, which has become more open, still has a hesitancy around sex that other cultures don't have.''
Ms. Johanson said she could not ride the subway or stand in a grocery line in Canada without being approached to answer the kind of question that would make even the frozen chicken blush. But in the United States, a much bigger market, her growing fan base seems almost bashful but mostly grateful. ''I find that Americans are so polite and so respectful that being recognized is wonderful,'' she said. ''People will look at me and say, 'Hi, I love your show.' And that's where it ends.''
Shame, fear, guilt and ignorance all get in the way of good sex, Ms. Johanson said, adding that based on the calls she receives, many Americans lack basic knowledge. Some young women, for example, still ask whether they can become pregnant through oral sex, and they have more than a few misconceptions.
A common one, she said, is ''that women always have to have an orgasm every time they have sex.''
A sampling of recent shows indicates that viewers in both countries ask her about rashes and discharges, about sexual dysfunctions and positions, about performance anxieties and relationships. Anal sex and G-spot orgasms are the topics of the day.
On a recent show a woman asked: ''I'm having these dreams that I'm having sex with women or I'm watching women have sex. Why is that?''
A man asked: ''If condoms are left in a car and they freeze, are they still good?''
On television Ms. Johanson's creased face may register concern, empathy, surprise, even horror, but never judgment. Despite her grandmotherly image, she can be graphic enough to make readers of a family newspaper squeamish. Her repertory of reactions includes funny dramatizations of ecstasy or disgust, as well as folksy terms like ''tatas'' (for breasts) and clinical explanations. (''Can we pull up a female frontal on the screen, please?'')
The author of three books on sex, Ms. Johanson is married to a retired electrician and has three grown children and two grandchildren. She found her calling as an educator in the 1960's when a friend of one of her two daughters thought she was pregnant and sought her help. Ms. Johanson ended up opening a birth control clinic for adolescents at her daughters' high school in 1970; she ran it for 18 years.
She entered graduate school for courses on human sexuality and counseling (she does not have an advanced degree), became the host of a sex call-in show on Canadian radio in the mid-1980's and later started a show on public-access cable. Nine years ago she gained a national audience in Canada with ''The Sunday Night Sex Show'' on the W Network.
In 2001 she received the Order of Canada, the country's highest honor for lifetime achievement. Ms. Johanson travels at least three times a week to give talks in schools and colleges throughout Canada but says she also finds time to sew, knit, walk, swim and make bread and biscuits from a sourdough culture she has used for more than 35 years.
So does a woman who travels to presentations with a ''hot stuff'' bag, who jokes that she always carries condoms in her purse ''in case I get lucky,'' have a healthy sex life herself?
''I will just say yes,'' she said with the emphatic speech of a teacher, ''and leave it at that.''
''Sex Talk,'' which moved to 11 p.m. from midnight for its second season on Oxygen, has done well with its intended audience but also attracts male viewers, said Debby Beece, the network's president for programming. In January ''Sex Talk'' tied with Oxygen's 8 p.m. movie as the network's top-rated show, attracting a total of 4.2 million viewers that month.
Ms. Johanson receives 80,000 to 100,000 calls each show, her producer, Julie Smith, said, though only 12 to 20 go on the air. (The show has a Web site: www.talksexwithsue.com.) The behind-the-scenes crew of 17 includes screeners who weed out drunks and repetition, as well as a few volunteers who try out sex toys for Ms. Johanson's reviews.
Ms. Johanson said she relied on constant research and a bank of specialists for the questions that stump her.
But Deborah Tolman, director of the Center for Research on Gender and Sexuality at San Francisco State University, said the short-answer television format could be misleading. (Ms. Johanson sometimes elaborates on an answer or corrects herself on later shows after being alerted by viewer e-mail messages.) And Ms. Tolman said some of Ms. Johanson's answers were too limited to the individual questioner and did not take into account broader issues like sex roles and cultural expectations.
Still, she praised the show for ''defusing the taboo nature of just speaking about sexuality.'' Ms. Johanson said she intended to encourage people to know what they were doing and never to ''let sex just happen -- always practice safer sex.''
''I regard sex as a gift from God,'' she added. ''We're the only ones that really are able to enjoy sex, so we have an obligation to learn about it and enjoy it.''
