The United States is totally democratic, but Britain is in part aristocratic.
That statement sounds political, for Britain does have a hereditary monarchy and a selected, unelected House of Lords, but it refers to bridge organization.
Unlike the practice on this side of the Atlantic, the teams that represent England, Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland are chosen largely by selection, with some input from trials to which the best players are invited. Many events at the local and national level also depend on selection rather than on qualification. The most important of these is the Lederer Memorial, named for a great figure in British bridge in the early years of the game.
The 57th Lederer was staged in London in October. The eight invited teams included Britain's best as well as some international stars who were en route to the world championships in Monaco. The winners were Phil King, Andrew McIntosh, David Bakhshi and Brian Senior, who have the Gold Cup that corresponds to America's Vanderbilt Knockout. The diagramed deal was named the best-defended hand.
Most players would pass the East hand, in second position at unfavorable vulnerability. A few aggressive people would open three clubs, and David Burn did that. After a takeout double, David Price bid three diamonds with the West hand. He wanted a diamond lead if North became the declarer.
That plan was thwarted when North-South maneuvered to four hearts from the South position via a cue-bid of four clubs. South guessed to bid hearts rather than spades, which was superficially right. The partnership hit a nine-card fit rather than an eight-card fit.
West decided that he might be able to arrange for a diamond lead from his partner at the second trick rather than the first. He therefore made a fine decision to underlead his club ace. East won with the jack and after some hesitation shifted to the diamond 10. West took his two tricks in the suit and led a third round. That settled the issue by promoting a trump trick for the defense for down one.
East offered an apology for hesitating before shifting to a diamond at the second trick. ''I knew you wanted a diamond, partner,'' he said. ''But it was a while before I realized that my jack had won the first trick.''
North-South then discovered that they would have done better to play in four spades, which was unbeatable. They lost 10 imps, for in the replay East did not open, and four hearts by South succeeded after West led the spade 10.
This column on Monday misstated the year that the Fall Nationals were played in Phoenix. It was 2002, not 2003. (They were played in New Orleans last December.)
BRIDGE
