THE deaths of two people on Sunday in an apartment building in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan are attributed to a killer so stealthy it can render its victims powerless without ever being seen, heard, smelled or felt. A naturally occurring byproduct of combustion, it is so ubiquitous it is often found right where people live, eat and sleep.
As news of the deaths spread, the culprit, carbon monoxide poisoning, moved up the list of big-city fears, joining flying manhole covers and electrified sidewalk plates as causes of free-floating urban anxiety.
But not to worry, said Ken Giles, a spokesman for the United States Consumer Product Safety Commission, which has been fielding calls from panicked homeowners. The solution, he said, is simply to buy a $50 carbon monoxide detector, install it correctly and check regularly to make sure it works.
''There are about 125 carbon-monoxide-related deaths from fuel-burning appliances each year,'' Mr. Giles said, and most are preventable.
''Every home should have a carbon monoxide alarm,'' he said.
Alarms are triggered when dangerous amounts of carbon monoxide are generated within a given time -- when the level remains at 70 parts per million for 180 minutes, for example, or at 400 parts per million for 15 minutes.
The commission recommends installing carbon monoxide detectors outside sleeping areas. (Smoke alarms should go on every floor and in all bedrooms, Mr. Giles said.) It is counterproductive to put detectors near furnaces or cooking appliances, where they generate false alarms.
In New York, where apartment residents often have only foggy ideas about the status of basement furnaces and neighbors' appliances, detectors are suddenly must-haves. Edgar Rodriguez, who works for Lumberland, a hardware store in Murray Hill, said, ''Everybody seems to be buying them.'' Yesterday afternoon the store had one plug-in type and just a few battery-operated models left, he said.
Virtually all of the models in stores meet standards set by Underwriters Laboratories or international standard-setting organizations. (Look for a seal of approval on the package.) And while all but the most elaborate models can be installed by homeowners, some detectors must be hard-wired by an electrician.
The battery-operated Senco Model One, highly rated by Consumer Reports, sells for about $50 (www.sencosensors.com). It has three distinct alarms, low, high and ''crisis,'' and a test function that displays instant readings.
Another highly rated detector, the Kidde Nighthawk Premium Plus, plugs in and has a battery backup and a display screen that provides a constant readout of carbon monoxide levels. It retails for about $46 (www.kiddeus.com for retailers).
The first line of defense, of course, is to keep appliances in good working order. The commission recommends having a professional check the heating system every fall, before it is turned on, and having a chimney sweep check for blockages or defects, which can be caused by birds' nests or cracked liners, before using a fireplace or wood-burning stove.
Finally, Mr. Giles said, homeowners and renters should keep any kerosene and propane heaters, barbecues and generators out of enclosed rooms.
Deaths from improper use of generators started climbing after homeowners bought them in anticipation of millennium-related power failures, Mr. Giles said. Once those fears relaxed, people started using their generators as backup power sources in basements and carports, causing about 25 deaths last year.
