When Fernando Meirelles was directing ''City of God,'' he assumed it would be largely for a Brazilian audience because of the subject. Using Portuguese street slang, the movie is about crime among children growing up in the slums of Rio de Janeiro.
To his surprise, this subtitled art-house film has become an international critical and commercial success. It was nominated for four Academy Awards, including the one for best director.
The co-director, Kátia Lund, was not nominated, and made clear in an interview with The New York Times that she believed she deserved more recognition, saying she and Mr. Meirelles had worked closely together and ''discussed every single scene.''
Harvey Weinstein, whose Miramax company is one of the film's producers, responded to the Oscar nominations with an advertising campaign and has rereleased the film nationwide. After ''Cold Mountain,'' Miramax's major release in 2003, received fewer nominations than expected, Mr. Weinstein seems to have shifted part of his public relations machine to ''City of God.''
Because that movie opened in the United States in January 2003, Mr. Meirelles was not prepared for this renewed attention. He had moved on to other projects, beginning with his film of John le Carré's ''Constant Gardener,'' starring Ralph Fiennes. ''I thought, 'O.K., this page is gone,' '' Mr. Meirelles (pronounced may-RELL-es) said during a recent stopover in New York. ''And the phoenix comes back from the ashes.''
Actually this phoenix has been flying since the movie was completed in 2002. When it was shown at the Cannes Film Festival that year Mr. Meirelles went there expecting to do a few interviews. But the movie was a sensation. ''I did hundreds of interviews,'' he said, ''and we sold the picture to 42 countries.'' Since then it has gathered dozens of awards.
He credited Mr. Weinstein with ensuring the film's longevity. Originally the DVD and VHS were to be available last July or August, but Mr. Weinstein said he thought the film could have a continuing theatrical life. ''I resisted video,'' Mr. Weinstein said in a telephone interview. ''I just believed in this movie.'' While keeping it alive in theaters for than a year, he said, he felt ''like Don Quixote tilting at windmills.''
In November the film had a limited rerelease, and Academy voters received video versions. This was not possible with ''Cold Mountain,'' which did not open in theaters until Christmas Day. When the Oscar nominations were announced, and ''City of God'' received nominations for best director, adapted screenplay, cinematography and editing, Mr. Weinstein gave the movie a major rerelease. He estimated that it had earned $30 million to $40 million worldwide.
Mr. Meirelles, at 47, is no neophyte, having a wide background in film and television. From an early age he was making cartoons and experimental videos, and for 10 years he was one of the most prominent directors of television commercials in Brazil. ''Just name a product,'' he said, ''and I did it.''
He often thought about directing features and collaborated on two. About four years ago, he said, he read the novel ''City of God'' by Paulo Lins, bought the movie rights and decided to ''tell the story with an inside point of view.''
But as an entrepreneur born into the middle class in São Paulo, he knew little about Rio slums. He enlisted Bráulio Mantovani as screenwriter, and with Ms. Lund he opened an acting school in the slums without telling the students that their work might lead to movie roles. After six months he chose the best to act in the movie. As a test for the feature he made a short with Ms. Lund about slum life called ''Golden Gate.''
In making ''City of God,'' Mr. Meirelles said, he was influenced by such diverse directors as Mike Leigh, Ken Loach, Pier Paolo Pasolini, Robert Altman, Paul Thomas Anderson and Martin Scorsese. ''City of God'' owes a debt to Mr. Scorsese's ''Goodfellas.'' In both, a young man acts as a guide to a world of gangsters.
But ''City of God'' has its own voice and look, a jagged jump-cut into an urban nightmare. The film resonates with gritty reality, as children carry and fire guns as casually as if they were toys, and it also makes vibrant use of music, especially samba.
The actors were not given scripts. Instead a scene would be described and they were told their characters' intentions. Then they would improvise, and what was good was used in the film. It took eight weeks to shoot, and cost about $3 million, Mr. Meirelles said. The first cut ran for three hours. Almost an hour was edited out. ''To be honest, we went too far,'' he said.
Although the movie is about violence, Mr. Meirelles emphasized that it was not graphic violence, as in a Quentin Tarantino film. ''You don't see blood,'' he said. ''There is a rape, but you don't see it.'' Still, the brutality and the hopelessness are no less clear.
Except for Rocket, a young photographer who is the film's narrator, the characters seem trapped by their circumstances. As they grow up (the movie spans three decades) they remain gangsters. In real life many in the cast have gone on to careers as actors, cameramen, editors, grips or in fashion.
Since Cannes, Mr. Meirelles has been flooded with offers, and he has projects lined up for several years. He and Mr. Mantovani are working on a script about globalization, with the working title ''Intolerance: The Sequel,'' and they plan to film it in six countries. With that script still incomplete, Mr. Meirelles looked for a project to do first, and ''The Constant Gardener'' came his way.
That film is being produced by Simon Channing-Williams. Mr. Weinstein said that on the basis of the script he had decided not to be involved in the film, but that he had talked with Mr. Meirelles about a future collaboration.
In reworking the script, Mr. Meirelles said, he wanted to return to the novel's nonlinear structure, but he has a different political approach from Mr. le Carré. The novel is about the insidious activities of major pharmaceutical companies in Africa. For Mr. Meirelles, the movie will be less accusatory; he said he was trying to ''avoid naming bad guys'' and preferred to deal with ''the gray areas in the middle.''
After ''The Constant Gardener'' he plans to return to ''Intolerance,'' he said. Then he may do another low-budget film in Brazil and a big-budget disaster movie about the destruction of Pompeii (for Universal). And then he might direct a romantic comedy.
But first there are the Oscars on Feb. 29. He said that his editor, Daniel Rezende, is a strong candidate, but he has no illusions about his own chances as best director. That, he said, will be a clear victory for Peter Jackson and ''The Return of the King,'' the last in ''The Lord of the Rings'' trilogy. If the name in the envelope reads ''Fernando Meirelles,'' he said, ''I'll faint.''
