Wanted: General manager for the world's largest opera house, someone as comfortable planning a season of more than 200 productions and stroking the egos of divas as balancing a budget of nearly $200 million and bargaining with labor unions. Only those with ample experience and fortitude need apply. Salary and benefits currently about $1 million.
Wanted: Executive and artistic director of one of the world's premier concert halls who simultaneously program three stages -- including one whose offerings range from the music of the Andes to Anna Deavere Smith to John Adams -- as well as cultivate donors, unify a staff and sell a lot of tickets. Only diplomats with backbone need apply. Current total compensation: nearly $400,000.
Wanted: Producer of one of the leading nonprofit theaters in the country undaunted by programming six stages plus a summer season in Central Park; who will carry on a tradition of developing new voices and building new audiences. Only charismatic artistic leaders comfortable sharing power with business managers need apply. Current salary and benefits: about $214,000.
This is an unusual moment in the cultural life of New York. With the death of Robert J. Harth, executive and artistic director of Carnegie Hall on Jan. 30; the announced retirement of Joseph Volpe, general manager of the Metropolitan Opera, on Feb. 9; and the announced departure of George C. Wolfe, producer of the Public Theater, on Feb. 11, three major jobs have opened in the top ranks of the city's arts institutions.
In the rarefied world of high-profile nonprofit arts organizations, jobs like these are sought after but increasingly demanding. In interviews with about two dozen people in executive and creative positions many of the same issues arose: Buying patterns have shifted from dependable subscriptions to impulse-driven single tickets. Foreign tourists and arts donations have not returned to pre9/11 levels. And sophisticated home entertainment options are eroding audiences for live performances.
THE METROPOLITAN OPERA -- The drop in foreign tourism and overall decline in charitable giving that followed the terrorist attacks have left the Met with deficits of $10 million two years in a row (though it hopes to break even this year), and houses that are 80 percent sold, rather than the usual 90 percent.
Without the Pavarottis and Domingos of the past, opera cannot easily compete with the pop stars captivating today's young audiences, classical music experts say.
The Met's next general manager might have to consider marketing more and maybe even presenting less. With so many productions a year and prime seats selling for nearly $300 each, the old model may need revision. ''We're in a different world where we have to look at the season's repertoire,'' said Sarah Billinghurst, the Met's assistant manager for artistic issues. ''Should we do more operas and fewer performances? Less of the ''Bohèmes'' and ''Toscas'' and more of the unusual repertoire?''
Ms. Billinghurst, widely considered the only inside candidate for Mr. Volpe's job, said that, at 61, she was not interested in the post. Many arts executives interviewed last week said the Met should look to candidates in their 40's or 50's who could commit to at least a decade at the institution.
That would rule out David Gockley, general director of the Houston Grand Opera, and William Mason, general director of the Lyric Opera of Chicago -- both in their 60's -- although several classical music professionals mentioned the two as leading contenders. Yet even experienced directors like these, arts executives say, would be unprepared for the scale of the Met's demands. The Lyric, for example, presents about 80 performances of eight operas during a 26-week season; the Met presents 222 performances of about 25 operas during a 32-week season. ''Chicago is not exactly chopped liver,'' Mr. Mason said. ''But we don't have that intense scrutiny that you have in New York.''
Other names frequently mentioned include Plácido Domingo, who runs both the Washington Opera and the Los Angeles Opera, and Michael M. Kaiser, president of the Kennedy Center, who is widely credited with turning around the finances of the Royal Opera House in London, American Ballet Theater and Alvin Ailey Dance Theater. A few European names have surfaced, including Sir Peter Jonas, director of the Bavarian State Opera in Munich; Pierre Audi of the Netherlands Opera and Gérard Mortier, former director of the Salzburg Festival, who is about to take over the Paris Opera. But many opera specialists say foreigners accustomed to government subsidies for the arts would be ill prepared for the considerable fund-raising duties of the job or for the union negotiations.
Carnegie Hall
Mr. Harth's replacement will in large part have to keep up the good work, arts experts say. In just over two years at Carnegie Hall, Mr. Harth rebuilt staff morale strained during the short reign of Franz Xaver Ohnesorg, kept the budget balanced and juggled the additional programming responsibilities of the institution's new underground stage, Judy and Arthur Zankel Hall.
At the same time the job has grown since Mr. Harth took it on; in producing more concerts, Carnegie Hall's budget has increased to more than $70 million from $65 million, said Klaus Jacobs, Carnegie's vice chairman and treasurer. And the hall's audiences, too, are buying fewer subscriptions and more single tickets.
In part because of considering a merger with the New York Philharmonic last summer, Carnegie Hall has become doubly committed to varied programming, even as it seeks to satisfy traditionalists.
Among the names circulating as possible candidates for Mr. Harth's job are Jane S. Moss, the vice president for programming at Lincoln Center; Thomas W. Morris, executive director of the Cleveland Orchestra; Zarin Mehta, executive director of the New York Philharmonic; Deborah Borda, president and chief executive officer of the Los Angeles Philharmonic; Joseph H. Kluger, president of the Philadelphia Orchestra; Mark Volpe, managing director of the Boston Symphony Orchestra; and George Steel, executive director of the Miller Theater at Columbia University, which presents traditional and contemporary classical music.
Mr. Jacobs, who is serving as acting director and leads the search committee, said Mr. Harth would be a hard act to follow.
''As far as personal characteristics go, my role model is Robert Harth,'' Mr. Jacobs said. ''He was a very able leader with great interpersonal skills.''
Public Theater
At the Public the position of producer has so far been sui generis. Joseph Papp, who founded the theater in 1954, became a legendary theatrical force.
Joanne Akalaitis, the theatrical director who was Papp's handpicked successor, lasted only two years in the job. Mr. Wolfe proved to be Papp's true heir, continuing to discover, nurture and promote new playwrights -- like Suzan-Lori Parks, Nilo Cruz and Diana Son -- directing numerous productions himself, often with great success.
But Mr. Wolfe was never much of a business manager, and the Public moved through several unsuccessful attempts at installing a business counterpart before settling on Mara Manus, formerly a program officer at the Ford Foundation. Since Ms. Manus became executive director in 2002, the Public has become financially healthier. Because Ms. Manus appears to represent the Public's first real attempt at two-pronged leadership, the theater's next producer may not have the kind of artistic autonomy that Mr. Wolfe and Mr. Papp enjoyed.
Mr. Wolfe said that his replacement should be someone who can cultivate underground theatrical talent as well as established artists. ''It's the smashing together of those impulses that I think makes the Public Theater exciting,'' Mr. Wolfe said.
Among those often mentioned are James Nicola, the artistic director of New York Theater Workshop; Doug Hughes, former artistic director of the Long Wharf Theater in New Haven, Conn.; Des McAnuff, the artistic director of the La Jolla Playhouse in California; Philip Seymour Hoffman, the actor and director who is also a co-artistic director of the Labyrinth Theater Company; Oskar Eustis, the artistic director of Trinity Repertory Theater in Providence, R.I.; Robert Falls of the Goodman Theater in Chicago; and Peter DuBois, who in November stepped down as artistic director of the Perseverance Theater Company in Alaska to become associate producer at the Public.
Tony Kushner, the playwright, said he hoped the next producer at the Public will continue Mr. Wolfe's commitment to multicultural, socially conscious theater. ''What you're seeing on the stage of a nonprofit theater should be a genuine reflection of America,'' Mr. Kushner said. ''More than any other director in the United States, George took that mission seriously.
