Polling my party of five Monday afternoon, with Tremblant Resort disappearing over our shoulders in the rearview mirror, I said, ''What was your favorite part of the weekend?''
One voice mentioned Saturday night's dinner at a bustling, lively creperie. A second voice talked about La Source Aquaclub, an entertainment complex of pools, hot tubs and saunas. A third voice brought up the charm of an old-world base village, with quaint walkways and boutiques close to dozens of accommodations.
Mon Dieu! Who are these people and how do I get them out of my car? Hey, what did we go all this way for?
Finally, a voice blurted out ''Flying Mile,'' a reference to a delightfully entertaining trail of changing expert terrain on Mont Tremblant's south side. Thank goodness, someone mentioned the skiing and riding.
My vote, naturally, was also for the abundant and diverse terrain (it seemed gauche to mention my other first thought, which was whether I saved money on the exchange rate to the Canadian dollar).
In any case, in a matter of seconds, the point was made about Tremblant. For the last seven years, Ski Magazine has been similarly polling its readers about their favorite resorts, dividing the rankings by east and west in North America. For seven consecutive years, the winner in the east has been Tremblant.
It has won for all the reasons evident in our car conversation. Tremblant is the whole package in one place. Even on Presidents' Day Weekend, when every room is taken and the place is hopping, there was the sense that the place is big enough to keep everyone happy and small enough that you do not feel lost in the crowd.
This has been accomplished with some deft planning. Mont Tremblant was once a sleepy little place known for impressive terrain, a lack of grooming or snowmaking and cold temperatures. The Intrawest Corporation bought it in 1991 and started an overhaul by creating an old-style European village pretty much from scratch. Some might say you cannot build authenticity that way, but as someone who skied Tremblant 20 years ago, let me say that authenticity is highly overrated when the aging lifts freeze and stop running, your hotel room does not have a television and the late-night restaurant in town closes at 9 p.m.
The Tremblant makeover does not mask the greater goal -- real estate development -- but it has provided more than a striking village of balconies and colorful tin roofs where the trails run out. Perhaps the greatest gain is -- again -- the improvements on the mountain.
The essence of Mont Tremblant is that its central lifts take you to a summit where you can ski to a system of trails on either side of the peak. There are also additional lifts reaching other parts of either mountain face with terrain servicing a variety of skiing or riding levels.
The lifts are all new and fast. They have ample snowmaking, though by late January they do not need it anymore. They groom the places where they should and ignore the places that should remain gnarly. There is a gondola for warmth. It is not the perfect mountain; there are flats in spots near the bottom when you are longing for one more elevation drop, but frankly, Tremblant never truly disappoints.
And when you are done, some would say, the real fun begins. Not that I would say that, mind you. But I did happen to notice that there was a natural allure to the village and its après ski choices. Here, the atmosphere is decidedly not about having a beer before you ruck your gear to the parking lot. People are staying a while, walking to their lodging, then taking a dip in one of the many heated pools and making their dinner plans. And the dining options are voluminous. I know people who go to Tremblant merely to eat.
There also tends to be a young and old crowd with strolling a noted avocation -- teens can actually do it without their parents, and vice versa. And for Americans, there is no escaping the magnetism and appeal of being in another country with a distinct culture.
Clearly, Tremblant is farther away than virtually all the other popular resorts in the eastern United States, unless you live in Montreal, which is 90 minutes away by car. It is a seven-and-a-half-hour drive from New York City, for example. Flying to Montreal is an option.
But if you have the time, especially for a longer stay, the extra effort to reach Tremblant will be worth it. My guess is, on the way home, you will be well past the Canadian border before you run out of good things to say about your trip.
Please, remember to say something good about the time you actually spent on the mountain.
THE SKI REPORT
