Deep underground near a town called Cepu on the Indonesian island of Java lies more than 600 million barrels of crude oil, $20 billion worth at current prices and enough to increase daily output in that impoverished country by 15 percent.
But Exxon Mobil, which has an exclusive contract to extract the oil at Cepu (pronounced CHEH-poo), will not pump a drop. Since finding much more oil than expected in 2001, Exxon Mobil has been locked in negotiations with Indonesia's national petroleum company, Pertamina, which has demanded that Exxon Mobil share more of the bounty.
So it goes with oil investment in Indonesia, Asia's only member of the Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries. Indonesia this year assumed the rotating presidency of OPEC, which on Feb. 11 announced production cuts to stabilize prices. Indonesia will not have to cut: it already falls short of its OPEC quotas, and analysts say that falling investment is hastening an end to Indonesia's days as a net oil exporter.
''This is a critical issue for Indonesia,'' said John G. Phipps, senior director for Indonesian affairs at the U.S.-Asean Business Council in Washington, which led a delegation of American oil executives to Jakarta in January to meet President Megawati Sukarnoputri and members of her cabinet. ''They need to move forward and develop their resources.''
Indonesia's oil wells are drying up faster than new fields are being tapped. Having already exploited its largest and most accessible deposits, Indonesia is trying to persuade oil companies to explore smaller, more remote sites. But faced with concerns about security, corruption and local unrest, oil companies are holding out for a more stable political and regulatory climate and more favorable terms.
Oil is one of Indonesia's largest exports and one of the largest sources of government revenue. Oil exports were instrumental in pulling Indonesia out of recession after the Asian financial crisis of 1997-98. Now that the country has exited from the supervision of the International Monetary Fund and the deficit financing it included, the government needs oil revenues even more.
Production of natural gas, another important source of government revenue, is not rising enough to offset the decline in oil production. The government expects combined oil and gas revenues this year to drop by more than 25 percent.
Last year, Indonesia produced 1.1 million barrels of oil a day, short of the government's projected 1.27 million barrels and well below the 1.56 million barrels Indonesia was pumping five years earlier. Indonesia imports a million barrels of oil a day, and investment in new sources is declining.
Indonesia's oil has traditionally been extracted by foreign companies under 20-year revenue-sharing contracts with Pertamina, which until recently doubled as partner and regulator. Under these contracts, foreign companies typically keep a minority of the oil revenues, and Pertamina and the government take the rest.
Suharto, who ruled Indonesia for 32 years until he was ousted amid the riots of 1998, used oil revenues to develop the nation and to enrich his family. An audit of the company's books ordered by the I.M.F. and covering just two years, 1997 and 1998, found that corruption and other ''inefficiencies'' cost Pertamina at least $4 billion. Pertamina executives did not respond to requests for an interview.
Indonesia has taken steps to clean up the company, replacing its top management and forcing it to run as a corporation instead of a government agency. In 2003, the government created a new agency, BP Migas, to take over Pertamina's regulatory role. Pertamina is scheduled to be privatized by 2006.
The government also sweetened terms for oil investors under an oil and gas law passed in 2001. Licensing rules have been eased, tenders for exploration rights made more transparent and revenue sharing has been made more generous. Oil executives say companies can now get at least 35 percent of production revenues. Though such incentives are attracting some new investors, largely companies from Indonesia and elsewhere in Asia, many others have been pulling out. Among the departed are three American companies, Devon Energy, Kerr-McGee and Occidental Petroleum; along with Repsol-YPF of Spain and Statoil of Norway.
Efforts by Jakarta to decentralize political power to the provinces have added a whole new and unpredictable layer to investment negotiations. Once completely cut out of oil revenues, provincial governments are now entitled to as much as 15 percent.
New assertiveness in the provinces and the fall of the Suharto government have also emboldened villagers to demand more money and jobs from foreign investors. A ChevronTexaco unit, Caltex Pacific Indonesia, has seen its share of trouble, from villagers burning company vehicles to farmers lighting bonfires at its wells. Caltex, which produces half of Indonesia's oil, still suffers routine pilferage of its equipment but otherwise says it is operating normally.
Then there is the continuing threat of insurrection and terrorism. Troops were brought in to restore order when attacks against Exxon Mobil's employees in the restive province of Aceh forced the company to shut down its operations for four months in 2001, but attacks have continued. And after the terrorist bombing in Bali in late 2002, the authorities warned oil companies that terrorists planned to attack their offices and facilities.
More worrisome to investors than civil unrest, however, is the legal uncertainty surrounding oil investments in Indonesia. Nearly three years after passing its current oil and gas law, Indonesia has yet to issue all the necessary regulations. Executives anticipate little progress until after national elections in April and May.
There is also considerable confusion surrounding Pertamina's replacement as regulator by BP Migas. In many cases, companies say, Pertamina still behaves as a regulator. And BP Migas has inherited many commercial responsibilities. BP Migas did not respond to requests for an interview.
Investors are also worried that Indonesia is no longer observing a customary right to contract extensions they had enjoyed under Suharto, a fear sparked by the government's decision in 2001 not to renew the contract on a field Caltex had operated for 30 years. Instead, Pertamina and the provincial government got the contract.
''That came as a bit of an unpleasant surprise,'' said Bruce Macfarlane, senior vice president of ABN Amro's integrated energy group in Singapore.
Some oil companies are now clamoring for early extensions. BP, for example has asked the government to extend a contract that does not expire until 2010. Pertamina has already told Exxon Mobil that it will not renew the Cepu contract when it expires in 2010. Though oil was discovered at Cepu years ago, Pertamina considered the fields largely depleted. So it sold the rights to scour them to a son of Suharto's, Hutomo Mandala Putra, who is known as Tommy, under a contract that gave him a much greater portion of the oil revenues than the usual 15 percent. No one will say exactly how much larger.
Tommy's company, unable to recover oil either, eventually sold the contract to Exxon Mobil. Exxon Mobil discovered in early 2001 that far from being depleted, Cepu was a gusher. The discovery left Exxon Mobil controlling an unusually large portion of one of Indonesia's most significant oil resources.
Exxon Mobil offered Pertamina 10 percent, but Pertamina asked for 35 percent, and then 50 percent, arguing that Tommy had forced it to sell in the first place. Exxon Mobil agreed to sell 50 percent of its current contract to Pertamina for half of its development costs, which it estimated at $450 million. Pertamina accused Exxon Mobil of inflating the figure. Exxon Mobil executives declined to be interviewed for this article. Faced with the prospect of losing Cepu entirely, Exxon Mobil has agreed to negotiate a new contract, a 50-50 joint venture with Pertamina, to take over when the current contract expires.
Pertamina is also in a tight spot. It could not extract oil from Cepu before, and if it cannot reach a deal with Exxon Mobil, analysts say, it will have to woo a new partner.
