A lingering dispute over the director's credit on the Brazilian film ''City of God'' has found new life in Hollywood as voting for the Oscars intensifies before the awards ceremony on Feb. 29.
Fernando Meirelles, the 47-year-old director of that vérité-style drama set in the slums of Rio de Janeiro, was nominated last month for best director, one of four nominations for ''City of God,'' a Miramax film.
But the movie has a co-director, Kátia Lund, who was not nominated. Ms. Lund, in a telephone interview on Wednesday from São Paulo, spelled out how she had worked closely with Mr. Meirelles. ''He and I would go to the set and home every day together, talk about what we'd done,'' she said. ''We were behind the monitors together the whole time. We discussed every single scene.'' In an interview this month with The Guardian of London she said, ''If I was not directing, what was I doing?''
She acknowledged in the telephone interview, however, that ''he had the final say, he put the money in, his portion is bigger than mine.''
Mr. Meirelles expressed dismay at the suggestion that he had hogged credit. ''She didn't do all the jobs that a director has to do; she did only part of the jobs,'' he said from London. ''You can't direct a film without talking to the director of photography, choosing the music, editing. This is co-directing, but not directing. This is the pure truth.''
The movie was put forward last year, too, by Brazil as a candidate for the Oscar for best foreign film, but it was not nominated.
The Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which awards the Oscars, did not recognize a co-director credit, said a spokeswoman, Toni Thompson, and after reviewing the question the academy decided that Ms. Lund ''did not do the job of what we consider to be in the scope of director.''
A spokesman for the Directors Guild, Morgan Rumpf, said that because the movie was made in Brazil it was not covered by guild guidelines, which discourage using a co-director credit. Further confusing matters, Harvey Weinstein, Miramax's co-chairman, said on Wednesday: ''We are extremely sympathetic to Kátia on this issue. She has been part of the P.R. campaign for the film and has been very supportive. I urged Fernando and Walter'' -- Walter Salles, a co-producer -- ''that should Fernando win best director, he should bring Kátia onstage to recognize her contribution to the film.''
A Miramax spokeswoman, Amanda Lundberg, said the studio had asked the academy about the credit and was told there was no provision for it. ''In a perfect world we'd love them to acknowledge Kátia's credit,'' she said.
Ms. Lund said, ''My credit fell through the cracks because there's no category for it.''
''City of God'' depicts a group youths caught in a drug war in the favelas, or slums, of Rio de Janeiro. Mr. Meirelles credits Ms. Lund, 37, with training and directing the actors, who were local residents, not professional actors. But he said that he worked for four years on the project before her involvement, and that he gave her the co-director credit only because she insisted on it.
''She asked me for co-director, and I agreed because she was helping me a lot,'' he said. ''We were a bunch of people working together, very happy. I said, 'I'll give you this credit, but you'll be mentioned with the crew, not with me.' ''
Ms. Lund gave a different account, citing their collaboration in opening an acting school in a Rio slum and their work on a short, ''Golden Gate,'' a dry run for ''City of God.'' Ms. Lund shared credit evenly with Mr. Meirelles on that short.
''There might have been a misunderstanding'' about the credits, she said. ''The first time he said, 'I'm going to put a ''co'' in front of your name,' the school was already together, the cast was already together, and we'd already shot the short. I was thrown off by it, but I decided to accept it because he in fact was carrying the film financially, and his was the last word.''
Mr. Meirelles is a prominent director and producer in Brazil with hundreds of commercials; he was co-director of two feature films. Ms. Lund, an American, has devoted her career to filming in the Rio slums, starting in 1996 when she helped Michael Jackson shoot a music video there. She has since filmed a documentary about the social problems in the favelas, along with several music videos.
Ms. Lund and Mr. Meirelles met through Mr. Salles, who suggested that she would be invaluable because of her knowledge of the slums.
Mr. Meirelles acknowledged Ms. Lund's importance to the film but said that did not mean their roles were equal.
''Everyone who was there knows who was directing,'' he said. ''Her work in fact was very, very important for the film. She spent four months working with the boys. The boys are the soul of the film. She was like a mother for all the crew, with such an important input that we decided to create this credit. But it was very clear for us that it's like a pilot and a co-pilot.''
He added: ''I'm so sad this is happening.''
