Every now and then a cliché sheds its skin in American comedy to reveal something raw and unsettling. Think of what Jonathan Demme did to the screwball love story in the movie ''Something Wild,'' or how Tracy Letts found a machete's edge in hicks-in-the-sticks buffoonery in his play ''Killer Joe.''
Cultural anthropologists and savvy theatergoers should know that this molting process is now occurring at the John Houseman Theater, where a sharp-tongued, broken-hearted and seriously funny new play called ''Roulette'' opened last night. Written by Paul Weitz, the co-director (with his brother Chris) of the first ''American Pie'' gross-out movie, ''Roulette'' would initially appear to be nothing more than a by-the-numbers dysfunctional-family sitcom.
I'm talking about the kind of show that became a television staple after ''Mary Hartman, Mary Hartman'' in the late 1970's and that by the 90's had gone from spiky and strange to smooth and predictable. In entertainment Tolstoy's famous dictum from ''Anna Karenina'' no longer applies. It's now the unhappy families that are all alike.
Certainly ''Roulette,'' an Ensemble Studio Theater production directed by Trip Cullman, has the standard ingredients of wacky domestic prime-time fare. Embodied by an excellent cast, the characters include a dizzy, distant dad (Larry Bryggman); a sweet, adulterous, alcoholic mom (Leslie Lyles); a steroid-hyped son (Shawn Hatosy); and a wise-cracking, substance-abusing teenage daughter (the Oscar-winning actress Anna Paquin).
And of course there's that obligatory crazy couple next door, played by Ana Gasteyer (of ''Saturday Night Live'') and Mark Setlock. She's a seizure-prone agoraphobe; he's having an affair with Ms. Lyles's character, whom he likes to call Mommy in moments of passion.
Yet slowly and surreptitiously Mr. Weitz turns a once subversive, now familiar formula on its head. His squabbling characters don't exist just to make fun of the old ''Father Knows Best'' stereotypes. Within their addled heads, those myths of the cozy nuclear family are still stenciled, like fading, atavistic tattoos.
''Everyone knows they're supposed to act in a certain way,'' Jon (Mr. Bryggman), the play's increasingly disengaged paterfamilias, says of holidays like Christmas. ''There are forms and rituals. Of course that's the case on a daily basis, too.''
While Mom, Dad and the kids occasionally try to approximate the old, ideal patterns of togetherness, this just makes them feel all the more disconnected. A comedy of loneliness, in which each dysfunctional family member is dysfunctional in his or her own isolating way, ''Roulette'' turns out to be as much a descendant of ''Long Day's Journey Into Night'' as it is of ''Married With Children.''
The title refers to Russian roulette, and the opening scene finds a solitary Jon engaged in this game over the breakfast table. Mr. Bryggman's bland matter-of-factness as he takes a gun from a briefcase and holds it to his head makes flirting with suicide seem as everyday as reading the sports section.
Jon is suffering from the kind of existential crisis that has been descending on white-collar American heroes since two other Johns, Cheever and Updike, began publishing. What makes his predicament feel fresh is how it plays out as a hilarious and sad theatrical collision course, once Jon abandons his artificial role as Dad.
''Roulette'' is as antic as any lover of farce might desire, right down to characters' leaping out of closets and being discovered in compromising positions. But even as they swap the sort of put-downs usually accompanied by laugh tracks, a profound wistfulness hovers. You start to realize that they all have their ways of withdrawing from life, whether it's drugs, sex, working out or retreating into the bathroom. Jon's is only the most extreme example.
With a less thoughtful and idiosyncratic cast, ''Roulette'' might not come across as the original jewel that it is. But with the exception of Mr. Setlock, a last-minute replacement who is still finding his feet, each performer is pretty close to perfect. Mr. Bryggman's artful underplaying conveys the crucial sense of a man always in some way absent, even when Jon goes flamboyantly crazy in the second act.
Ms. Lyles's abstracted mother is wonderful, a combination of fizzy warmth and acerbic harshness. But then so is Ms. Gasteyer's anxious neighbor, a woman so socially self-conscious that even sitting down becomes complicated. As the smart-mouthed daughter, wounding and wounded in one breath, Ms. Paquin, of the ''X-Men'' films, confirms the promise of her stage performance in the recent ''Glory of Living.''
As her brother, Jock, Mr. Hatosy, a young movie actor, turns in a marvelously inventive, combustibly physical performance that brims with equal measures of hostility and childlike hopefulness.
It seems safe to assume that Jock has the lowest I.Q. of the play's characters, which in the world of ''Roulette'' means that he's the only one who acts as if he believes that his family can turn back into a Family. ''If we just pull together now, it'll all work out,'' he tells his skeptical sister. ''I've got it under control.'' Of course he does have this disruptive habit of turning psychopathically violent when things go wrong.
No one has it under control in ''Roulette.'' But whether they admit it or not, these characters are all at least slightly in love with the romance of the family that pulls together. As the last line of Hemingway's ''Sun Also Rises'' puts it, ''Isn't it pretty to think so?''
ROULETTE
By Paul Weitz; directed by Trip Cullman; sets by Takeshi Kata; costumes by Alejo Vietti; lighting by Greg MacPherson; sound by Aural Fixation; composer, Michael Friedman; production stage manager, Lori Ann Zepp; production manager, Peter R. Feuchtwanger. Presented by the Ensemble Studio Theater. At the John Houseman Theater, 450 West 42nd Street, Clinton.
WITH: Larry Bryggman (Jon), Ana Gasteyer (Virginia), Shawn Hatosy (Jock), Leslie Lyles (Enid), Anna Paquin (Jenny) and Mark Setlock (Steve).
THEATER REVIEW
