Norah Jones has given the ailing music industry a boost as her new album sold more copies during its debut week than any other release has managed to do in more than two and half years.
Ms. Jones's second album, ''Feels Like Home'' (Blue Note), sold 1,022,000 copies during the week ending Sunday, the best performance since 'N Sync released ''Celebrity'' in July 2001, according to Nielsen SoundScan.
Ms. Jones was not the only musical act to flourish last week, as the hip-hop duo OutKast, the R&amp;B singer Beyoncé and rock groups Evanescence, Coldplay and the White Stripes benefited from their appearances on the Grammy Awards. ''The College Dropout'' (Roc-A-Fella), the first album by the rapper Kanye West, sold 441,000 copies during its first week of release, putting it second on the SoundScan list. Legal sales of downloadable songs topped two million units for the first time last week. (By contrast Eric Garland, a spokesman for Big Champagne, a company that tracks file-swapping, estimates that about 250 million songs in the MP3 format are being traded each week through the most popular services for sharing downloads illegally.)
Two anticipated records, a rock album from Courtney Love and a pop album from Kylie Minogue, had disappointing debuts, at 33,000 and 43,000. But sales for the week of Feb. 9 to 15 were the highest of any Valentine's Day week since 1991, when SoundScan began tracking music sales. Sales were up 25 percent over the same week last year.
''Everybody was expecting that sales would be strong -- it's always a strong week,'' said Rob Sisco, president of Nielsen Music, which operates SoundScan. ''But particularly the sales on Norah going over a million and the strength overall, I don't thing it was anything anybody was expecting.''
Bruce Lundvall, president and chief executive for jazz and classics at EMI Music, which owns Blue Note, said that Ms. Jones, a jazz artist who has achieved pop star numbers, had the potential to ''change the whole musical culture of what people are listening to, and wanting to buy.''
The strong week comes as the music industry is trying to recover from a three-year slump that record labels trace largely to Internet downloading and CD copying. Year-to-date sales for 2004 are up 13 percent over the same period last year, continuing an upward trend in the last quarter of 2003. Still, on Tuesday, the Recording Industry Association of America continued to fight online music file-swapping in court, filing lawsuits against 531 computer users.
The industry is still suffering through major restructuring. A merger of the major label groups owned by Sony and Bertelsmann is awaiting approval by regulators. Time Warner is in the process of selling Warner Music Group to private investors led by Edgar Bronfman Jr. And Tower Records recently filed for bankruptcy protection.
