JAY VANCE has always been something of a musical control freak. Drums had to be pounded perfectly in time. Guitar licks had to scream just so. Drinking before a show was strictly verboten, in his view. And smoking pot in the van -- that was out of the question.
For years, Mr. Vance tried to find musicians who would live up to his exacting demands. None ever did. So finally, he decided ditch human beings altogether and build himself an all-robot backing band.
Motorized musicians have been around for more than a century, predating even the earliest player pianos. But with Captured! By Robots, or C!BR, the 32-year-old Mr. Vance has created an entirely mechanical touring rock band.
''I got so tired of playing with people: so many egos, so many drugs,'' said Mr. Vance, who is based in San Francisco. ''I thought, 'If I build robots, maybe they'll do what I say, do what I want.'''
He was wrong. According to C!BR's mythology, Mr. Vance's inhuman progeny enslaved him shortly after they were created. And now, they force Mr. Vance -- aka JBot -- to take them around the country on tour so they can utterly humiliate him in a different city every night.
When Mr. Vance, who wears a black mask and chains on stage, tries to talk to the crowd, Drmbot 0110 -- a bulging-eyed, accordion-necked rhythm machine -- shouts at him to keep quiet. When Mr. Vance tries to riff, Gtrbot 666 -- a spindly armed player of a double-necked flying V guitar -- informs the audience of his vastly superior robotic chops.
In between the bickering, C!BR plays a mix of speed metal, classic rock and old-time funk. Each tour has a different theme; last fall it was ''The Ten Commandments,'' with JBot as Moses -- actually, as Charlton Heston in his film role as Moses -- and Gtrbot as Yul Brynner playing the Pharaoh.
It takes months for Mr. Vance to program the new tunes, and the results can be a little uneven. The robots' take on funk is a little, well, soulless. Heavy metal seems to suit the metallic creations better.
''The overall quality of the music isn't near what it would be if you had real musicians,'' said Brian Cors, a 31-year-old systems administrator from Ypsilanti, Mich., who is a fan nonetheless. ''I'm a nerd by trade, and to see these robots make music on their own, it's pretty impressive.''
Mr. Vance has been tinkering with instruments ever since he tried to build a guitar from a 2-by-4 in seventh grade. By the time he began studying jazz at DePaul University in Chicago, he had rewired broken speakers and built pickups for his upright bass.
''He was amazing at his instrument,'' said Tony Aimone, who played with Mr. Vance in the 1990's in the Blue Meanies, a Chicago-based ska band. ''The thing is, he thought he was amazing at everyone else's instrument, too. He'd tell everybody else what to play.''
A stint with a San Francisco group called Skankin' Pickle was no more harmonious. Mr. Vance says he quit after his band mates, in a drunken stupor, handed their instruments over to some locals in the middle of a set in Fort Collins, Colo.
For his new musical vision, he tried out a dozen or more guitarists, to no avail. That's when he realized he needed to end the auditions and begin building his ultimate band.
There was a slight problem, however: he didn't know a thing about robotics or computer programming.
It took him about three years of on-again, off-again efforts to teach himself what he needed to know and then build his lineup. First, he needed to learn machining skills, from welding to milling to metal fabrication. Then he delved into electrical engineering, figuring out how to custom-build circuit boards. He had to master the audio editing and sequencing programs that are now commonplace in music studios but were rarer in the 1990's. And he became a skilled enough programmer to create an application for controlling the robot's actions.
The result, strangely, is in some ways a throwback to the earliest days of automated instruments.
Paul Lehrman, a composer and authority on mechanical and electronic music, said that in the late 19th and early 20th century, compressed air, or pneumatics, was used to power mechanical organs, woodwinds -- even violins.
Today, C!BR is controlled in much the same way. A series of computers activate air valves that allow compressed air to pour through in controlled bursts. Those blasts push and pull mechanical fingers that hit guitar frets, and sticks that crash into snare drums. Pneumatics also power the robots' movement, giving them a disturbingly human sway.
But the robot musicians are more than just eye candy for the audience. In an age when many composers are turning to sampled and computer-generated music, Mr. Vance likes the natural feel of his unnatural group.
Drum machines, for example, are out of the question. ''You've got to hit those drums for real,'' he said. ''That's the way I want it.''
