THE cast-iron radiator that sat disconnected in my kitchen last year during a renovation was different from the others in the house in one respect. The others were all covered in cracking white paint. This one, for whatever reason, was covered in cracking black paint.
Before having my plumber reinstall it, I had a few choices: I could leave it looking shabby, I could lamely apply another coat of paint or I could have the paint removed and the radiator either repainted or restored to its original finish, which is what I finally chose.
When renovating an old house heated by cast-iron radiators, you will probably address them last, because they are problematic. You have to disconnect them and reconnect them, so you will need a plumber to shut down the system and drain it.
Obviously, it's best to have the job done in the warm months. Mid-April or so is a good time to start lining up your plumber and looking for someone to restore the radiators. Ideally, you would be finishing, rather than starting, the process by August.
My radiators all date to 1910 or so. Cast-iron radiators first started to appear in about 1870 and tended to be ornate, with arabesque accents feathering their individual sections or fins.
The level of ornamental detail was the main reason I decided to restore it. If it had been one of the plainer ribbed versions, which began to appear in the 1920's, I may have repainted it. But I wanted to see the relief up close in its original gunmetal color. That anyone ever painted such a lovely piece of industrial art seemed slightly idiotic, but in the 1950's and 60's, before the preservation craze took hold, interior fashions dictated as much.
On a tip from my plumber, I took my radiator to Bob Reed, who owns the Stripping Workshop, in the wholesale-market section of Washington.
He specializes in restoring old metal and wood architectural elements by ''solvent-stripping'' them in a powerful chemical mixture consisting mainly of methlyene chloride and alcohol, removing rust from them and then polishing and either painting or sealing them.
Cast-iron radiators are heavy. The first one I had cleaned is relatively small, three feet tall and seven fins wide, but it weighs about 300 pounds. I swore I felt the wheels of my pickup rubbing the truck bed as we hauled the radiator over to the shop. Mr. Reed just pulled it off the truck, strapped it to a cart, and down we went to his large, grimy basement space, where he has six huge tanks, several of them brimming with solvents.
I could have sandblasted the radiator. But sandblasting would not remove paint in hard-to-reach areas, and old paint or rust left on the metal tends to undermine new coatings. Besides, sandblasting risks wearing away parts of the ornamental relief. ''You lose some of the definition,'' Mr. Reed said.
Clem Labine, founder of The Old House Journal, a restoration magazine published in Washington, said that most major cities have at least one stripping shop. ''Dip-strippers are not unusual,'' he said. But, he added, most of them use lye because lye is a lot cheaper than other stripping chemicals. Solvent strippers like Mr. Reed are harder to find; he does not use lye because it can harm the very wood it is stripping.
Removing paint from metal usually requires an acid solvent. So while there are still a fair number of dip-strippers out there, many of them have stopped treating metal objects because of the cost and environmental regulations.
The stripping is just the beginning of the job. Once he hoists a radiator out of the acid bath, Mr. Reed and his four-man staff scour it with a rotating wire brush hooked up to a motor before rubbing it perfectly clean for up to an hour. ''It's always good to apply paint to really clean surfaces that haven't had time to sit around,'' he said.
Then, of course, comes the finishing coat. Mr. Reed's customers divide nearly evenly among the three main types of treatment he offers. About a third have him repaint the stripped radiators with a metallic paint (as some had when they were new, making them look like big metal ingots) and with a protective glaze; another third ask for a shiny coat of paint that, say, matches their moldings. For the rest of the customers, like me, who want to see the cast-iron itself, Mr. Reed applies a clear lacquer.
Of course, a stripper can remove paint from practically anything. Besides radiators, people bring Mr. Reed metal furniture, ceiling medallions, stair rails and various forms of ornamental iron. They also bring wood, in the form of windows, furniture and fireplace surrounds.
Last month, Mr. Reed returned 200 shutters dating to the 1850's to the Capitol. ''Beautiful handmade pine, the most incredible louvered things,'' he said. They took a long time to strip, he said, because they had layers of old calcite paint, which resembles plaster. To remove it, he switched from the alkaline solvent he normally uses on wood to an acid solvent, which he ordinarily reserves for stripping metal objects. Acid dissolves wood's cellulose fibers, so he did not leave it on too long.
Not that many of his customers stick around for chemistry lessons. A lot of people ''just want to get them done,'' he said. ''So they don't even come down and look.'' When customers come to pick up a finished radiator, Mr. Reed said, they unfailingly admire the way it looks in the harsh fluorescent light of his shop. ''But then they get it in their house,'' he said, ''and they swoon.''
Fin Counts And Acid Baths
IF you are planning to have your cast-iron radiators refurbished, do it in spring or summer, when the heat is off. Moving radiators is a problem all its own. Most stripping shops move radiators for a fee or can tell you whom to call for the service. Either way, you will save about $25 per radiator if it is disconnected and waiting on the first floor. If you decide to move it yourself, be careful: cast-iron radiators are heavy and they shatter like glass.
Most people who restore, clean or sell cast-iron radiators charge you by the section, or fin. For example, Bob Reed of the Stripping Workshop in Washington (202-544-1470) charges $10 to $30 per fin to strip and paint or seal a radiator. Prices vary depending on the type of new coating, if any, is applied to the metal. Having them painted and glazed will cost more than leaving them bare and simply sealing them with a clear lacquer.
Alternatively, you can have your radiator sandblasted. The cost is approximately the same, but sandblasting is unlikely to remove all the paint from hidden surfaces and, besides, it may wear down the radiator's ornamental detail.
BRADFORD McKEE
TRADE SECRETS
