AFTER renovating his one-bedroom apartment last fall, Steve Gordon, a 28-year-old bond trader, wasn't thinking of selling. With new kitchen countertops and bathroom fixtures and restored hardwood floors, he said, ''I wanted to spend time enjoying it.''
But when he received a persuasive letter from Elaine Clayman, a Manhattan real estate broker who was touting five recent sales of similar apartments in his doorman co-op with a roof deck on East 54th Street, he agreed to meet with her.
With buyers jamming open houses and losing out in bidding wars, Ms. Clayman's approach is just one of dozens of ploys that New York's real estate brokers are using to woo sellers to satisfy buyer demand. They are promising high prices, stalking couples on the verge of a nasty split and cajoling owners with the claim that there will never again be as good a time to sell (not in the next few months, anyway).
In Mr. Gordon's case, Ms. Clayman eventually convinced him that because of surging demand for one-bedroom apartments and dwindling supply, he could get a good price. So in January, only 18 months after he had bought the apartment, Mr. Gordon put it on the market. Last weekend, he signed a contract with a buyer. He said he made a 15 percent profit on the sale.
Mr. Gordon could have waited and gambled that he would receive a higher price. ''The grass is always greener,'' he said. ''You never know what the future holds.'' But, he added, ''I was worried that more supply in the building would come online and people would have more options.''
Of course, homeowners have been receiving marketing pitches from brokers for years. But in the last few months, frantic real estate agents have ratcheted up the quantity and intensity of their mailings with promises of untold riches. For the few who have so far taken them up on their offers, the profits haven't necessarily been that high.
Some send screeching fliers peppered with capital letters and exclamation points. ''IF NOT NOW -- WHEN? THERE HAS NOT BEEN A BETTER TIME TO SELL IN THE LAST 10 YEARS!!!!'' wrote Mel Lisiten, a Halstead agent, in a monthly newsletter he is mailing to residents of the Corinthian, an 800-unit condominium on East 38th Street.
And in about 500 postcards sent to apartment owners on the Upper West Side in January, Irene Kruglova, a broker with Bellmarc Realty, urged apartment owners to ''Get Rich Now! Retire to Florida! Move to L.A.! You will not believe these prices! I will get you the top dollar!'' Ms. Kruglova said some people were not aware of what their apartments were worth. ''When they are made aware they might be very willing to sell,'' she said. She admits, though, that no sellers have taken her up on the pitch.
Other brokers are sending more targeted mailings. When clients identify specific buildings where they want to buy, Elizabeth Sheehan, a broker with Coldwell Banker Hunt Kennedy, sends out a postcard and a $5 Starbucks gift certificate to owners in particular buildings. In one recent postcard to 32 owners in a Greenwich Village building, Ms. Sheehan wrote as if trying to get a first date: ''My clients Sarah and Michael currently rent in your neighborhood,'' she said. ''They love your building and were especially interested in your line with a balcony,'' she added, referring to similar apartments on different floors. So far, Ms. Sheehan has not recruited a seller.
With mortgage rates lingering at record lows for the past year, buyers have scooped up everything on the market. After peaking at the end of the first quarter of last year, the inventory of available co-ops and condos for sale has been dropping for the last nine months, according to Jonathan Miller, president of Miller Samuel, a real estate appraisal firm.
On the last day of January, there were 4,321 co-ops and condos listed for sale in Manhattan south of 116th Street on the West Side and 96th Street on the East, Mr. Miller said. That compared with 6,113 on the same day last year, a 29 percent drop. Just in the month through Jan. 31, he said, the number of listings contracted by nearly 11 percent.
With so many owners having sold in the past year, there are very few sellers left. ''People that were already on the fence about selling have already sold,'' Mr. Miller said.
Even those attracted by the steep appreciation in the value of their homes are reluctant to sell, simply because they won't have any place to move. ''There are plenty of people who would be glad to put their apartment on the market once they find what they're looking for, but they just can't,'' said Frederick W. Peters, president of Warburg Realty in New York.
When Tom Grauman and his wife, Caroline Grauman-Boss, who have lived in their one-bedroom apartment on Morningside Drive since 1991, heard that a neighbor was recently offered $440,000 for an apartment, they realized their home was worth about four times what they paid for it.
The couple, who have a 5-year-old daughter, would like another bedroom. But even if they made a hefty profit on a sale, they aren't sure they could find a bigger place within their price range in Manhattan. ''It seems like everybody is sitting on properties that are worth a lot more than when they bought them, but nobody can afford to move within the areas that they want to live,'' Mr. Grauman said.
In San Francisco, where the number of single-family houses and condos available for sale is half of what it was in January of last year, some brokers are trying to woo sellers by giving them plenty of time to find a new place.
Rick Turley, manager of the San Francisco Lakeside office of Coldwell Banker Northern California, said agents now list properties contingent upon the buyer allowing the seller to rent back the house for up to 90 days after a sale closes.
In Manhattan, the notoriously scrappy real estate industry is marshaling its usual tricks. ''You have to be a detective in this market,'' said Michele Kleier, president of Gumley Haft Kleier, a firm specializing in luxury properties. ''You have to call all your friends in every building and say, 'Who's fighting in the elevators? Who's getting a divorce?' ''
Others are calling people to whom they have sold apartments with promises of skyrocketing values. ''That can kick in the 'My God, I paid $2 million and I can sell it for $3.5 million' '' reaction, said Hall F. Willkie, president of Brown Harris Stevens Residential Sales in Manhattan.
Brokers may also use pressure tactics to make sellers think time is running out. Christopher Thomas, president of William B. May Brooklyn, said agents are telling sellers that with interest rates likely to stay low only through the presidential election, ''it could be a closing window of opportunity to sell.''
Apartments are not stocks, though, and most owners need a compelling life change -- like a marriage, a new baby or a new job -- to be willing to move. And in New York, many people just bought and have not finished remodeling the kitchen. ''We had another peak of the market in summer 2000,'' said Jacky Teplitzky, a broker with Douglas Elliman in Manhattan. ''People in New York City traditionally hold their properties for five to seven years. We are not yet in the cycle where people are ready to move.''
Nevertheless, a well-timed pitch can persuade some sellers. When Rich Bonati, a dentist, received a letter from Ms. Clayman saying she had a buyer interested in a one-bedroom apartment in his building, he called her.
Because Dr. Bonati is opening an office on Long Island and plans to close his Manhattan dental practice over the next six months, he figured it was a good time to sell his Park Avenue South apartment. Rather than troubling with advertising or open houses, he decided to sell directly to Ms. Clayman's client, Neil O'Halloran, a lawyer who wanted to buy in the building.
After two weeks of negotiations last fall, Mr. O'Halloran agreed to pay a little more than $250,000 for the apartment, which has monthly maintenance fees of more than $1,600. He moved in earlier this month. Mr. O'Halloran said he was relieved not to have to bid on numerous properties. ''We knew going in that if they decided to sell, I was assured that I was the only one who was going to bid,'' he said.
For Dr. Bonati, though, it was not a lucrative deal. After taxes, fees and commissions, he said, he and his wife, Gina, ended up losing about $15,000 on the sale. He said that because he wanted to sell quickly, it was worth the loss. ''You're kind of paying for this opportunity,'' he said.
Sometimes, the promises of high prices work almost too well. When Ms. Kleier sent a letter to eight residents of a Park Avenue co-op where a nine-room apartment sold for $3.9 million in December, one owner responded -- with a $5 million selling price.
Ms. Kleier figured her clients, who had been outbid on the $3.9 million apartment, would balk. To her surprise, they swallowed the 28 per cent price increase, and bid on the new apartment. Now, though, the sellers say they won't sign a contract until Ms. Kleier finds them a six-room apartment to buy. Her challenge?
''They want to get it at last year's prices,'' she said.
TURF
