Officials at Molson Inc., the venerable Canadian brewer, will be keeping a close eye on what Brazilian revelers choose to drink during the Carnival street party beginning Friday.
Their choice of beer will help determine whether Molson can rescue an ambitious investment that aimed to propel it into the big leagues of global brewers.
Since Molson made that investment two years ago, spending $765 million for an 80 percent stake in Cervejarias Kaiser of São Paulo, Kaiser has slipped from second to third among Brazilian brewers, and the poor performance in Brazil is hurting the larger company. Molson executives told analysts in late January that they might write down the value of the investment if there was no improvement soon.
To try to claw back market share, Kaiser has signed up as the official sponsor of Carnival events throughout the country, including the nationally televised samba parade in Rio de Janeiro. Kaiser will also sponsor Brazilian broadcasts of the Olympic Games in Athens later this year.
''By the time we finish, Kaiser will have a new image that will last in consumers' minds for at least the next three to four years,'' said Washington Olivetto, owner and managing director of the W/Brasil advertising agency in São Paulo, which is overseeing the new campaign with an initial annual budget of $60 million.
Molson, a 218-year-old company based in Montreal, bought into Kaiser after a worldwide search for an investment that would help it break out of its relatively small and slow-growing home market, where its brands have a share of almost 44 percent.
''If you look at the big brewers, they're either in the United States or they go beyond their own frontiers in order to grow,'' said Daniel J. O'Neill, Molson's chief executive. Among those, he said, are Interbrew of Belgium, the Foster's Group of Australia and Heineken, a Dutch group that owns the other 20 percent of Kaiser.
Brazil is expected to overtake Germany within the next few years as the world's third-biggest beer market, after the United States and China. Kaiser's sales volumes made up 54 percent of Molson's total in the three months to Dec. 31, overtaking its business in Canada.
Nevertheless, Kaiser's sales volumes have dropped by almost a quarter in the last year, and the brewery's overall market share in Brazil, the only place it is sold, has shrunk to 12.1 percent, compared with 17 percent at the time of the Molson takeover.
''It must be terribly disappointing because it was a huge stepping out for Molson,'' said Harry Schuhmacher, editor and publisher of Beer Business Daily, a newsletter based in San Antonio.
Michael Van Aelst, an analyst at CIBC World Markets in Montreal, said that Molson had been aiming for a 20 percent market share in Brazil within five years of the Kaiser takeover. ''I do believe there's potential there, but we haven't seen the potential,'' Mr. Van Aelst said.
Kaiser's poor performance is compounding the problems of intense price competition and lower volumes in Canada. Molson's net earnings shrank to $43.6 million in its third fiscal quarter, which ended Dec. 31, a 34 percent drop from a year earlier. Sales in the United States make up 7 percent of the total.
Mr. O'Neill, 51, who speaks Portuguese and worked in Brazil for four years as a marketing executive with Johnson Wax, said of Brazil that ''there's no doubt that the challenge is tough - maybe tougher than I expected.''
Kaiser's slippage started before Molson bought it, when Brazil's two main brewers merged in 1999 into the giant Companhia de Bebidas das Americas, known as AmBev, which owns Brazil's top three brands, Skol, Brahma and Antarctica, and controls more than 60 percent of the market.
The slide in market share has accelerated in the last two years as Brazil's economy -- and beer market -- stalled and another rejuvenated competitor, Schincariol, emerged.
After gradually increasing market share from 5.6 percent in 1996 to 9 percent in 2001, Schincariol last year spent more than $60 million on an aggressive television advertising campaign and sprinted past Kaiser, grabbing 14 percent of the market to 9.6 percent for Kaiser's name brand in January. ''We achieved in three months what we had hoped to achieve in three years,'' Adriano Schincariol, one of the brewer's owners, told the business weekly Istoé Dinheiro recently.
Analysts at Bear Stearns say Kaiser's problems include its failure to halt a drop in sales in São Paulo, Brazil's main consumer market; its distribution through Coca-Cola Femsa, which is a franchisee of the Coca-Cola Company and perhaps not inclined to give top priority to supporting Kaiser's weakened brand; and the success of Schincariol's Nova Schin brand after heavy advertising and the modernization of an important plant in Rio Grande do Sul.
Kaiser's chief executive, Robert Coallier, takes solace from the fact that Schincariol's surge seems to have stolen more sales from AmBev than from Kaiser.
Since arriving in Brazil 18 months ago from Molson Canada, Mr. Coallier has streamlined Kaiser's operations, reducing the number of plants from 13 to 9 and cutting operating costs by more than $40 million.
''We've changed as a group over the past 18 months,'' he said. ''From the foundations up, we checked what needed to be reinforced, and reinforced it.''
To address its distribution problems, Kaiser has hired 1,200 sales people dedicated to its own brands, half of them in São Paulo, and has renegotiated its agreement with Femsa. While the Coke franchisee, the largest Coke distributor in Latin America, will continue to distribute Kaiser products in São Paulo, Kaiser will train and manage the sales force.
Molson also shifted Kaiser's advertising account from Bates Brasil to W/Brasil and gave the Kaiser brand a fresh ad campaign.
''Our task is to grow market share by several percentage points, solid percentage points,'' said Mr. Olivetto, the W/Brasil executive. ''Of course it's easy to win market share by spending madly, but we won't be doing that. Our brief is to win back market share for keeps.''
Analysts say that they are looking to see if Kaiser can get Coca-Cola Femsa to distribute its beer quickly and efficiently and if the new sales force can wean the company off low-margin supermarket sales by increasing sales to bars and restaurants, particularly in São Paulo.
''It will be tough, but I think they have the clout to do it midterm,'' said Sergio Oliveira, a consumer goods analyst at the São Paulo office of the A.T. Kearney consultancy. ''There's a major group behind them and they are refocusing, investing in the name, in the brand.''
In spite of recent talk of a possible write-off, Mr. O'Neill says success in Brazil is still assured, though it may be delayed. By the time Carnival is over at the end of this month, he said, ''we'll be firing on all cylinders.''
