On the bleak, frozen plains of southeastern Afghanistan, the United States Army's 10th Mountain Division has established a heavily fortified compound of tents, cement buildings, howitzer platforms, artillery storage areas and helicopter landing pads. With its concertina wire and security maze entrance, the compound is conspicuous amid the mud huts of the barren valley.
The division is responsible for securing the area -- which borders Pakistan and tribal lands that are a well-known refuge for Al Qaeda -- and simultaneously winning the hearts and minds of the locals, many of whom fled during the Taliban's rule. On a recent trip to Afghanistan and during earlier assignments in Iraq I was struck by the delicate balance between those roles, which are not always compatible.
The security mission often means brusque treatment of ordinary citizens; after all, terrorists and suicide bombers emerge from the general population with disturbing regularity. At the same time, the helmeted, heavily armed soldiers are expected to be the front-line ambassadors of good will.
In the trading town of Orgun, the Army is justifiably proud of its role in providing medical checkups and money for schools and road and water projects. But those same soldiers subject residents to identification and vehicle checks, and on the narrow roads Army Humvees force traffic off to the side. How long will it be before these liberators are resented as occupiers?
However well behaved or well meaning American soldiers may be, their very presence is a powerful symbol. An American doctor in Afghanistan told me that when the United States military sends representatives to community meetings on women's health issues, the soldiers show up in full combat gear. ''It's just inappropriate,'' he said, more in resignation than anger.
Yet who can blame the military? Wherever they go the soldiers are at risk of being attacked. Meanwhile, qualified civilians are in short supply. When I asked a high-ranking American official in Afghanistan why more civilians aren't involved in nation-building, he said: ''It's not easy to get good people all the way out here where there are no schools for their kids and no medical care. And it's dangerous.''
But it's unfair to put all the burden, and the risks, on the military. A United States general told me he was worried that Americans back home didn't appreciate the challenges and sacrifices of his troops. ''Where are the victory gardens?'' he asked, referring to the World War II home-front effort to show solidarity by growing fruits and vegetables so more food could be shipped to soldiers overseas.
Conditions in Afghanistan won't get a lot better any time soon. The military is expected to be involved in a big spring offensive against Al Qaeda that will probably mean more combat and less time for community projects. The participation of civilians, then, seems all the more important. But if it's too dangerous for them to be on the ground in Afghanistan, why not find other ways for them to participate? There are no ready models, but modern technology may be part of the answer.
Here's one idea. American corporations, service clubs, education and health organizations could adopt villages and provide each with a generator to power donated computers and large-screen televisions. Then American and Afghan doctors, teachers, carpenters, soccer coaches and the like could appear in instructive software, videotape or television programming to supplement military efforts. Another possibility would be to convert one of those go-anywhere Afghan trucks into a classroom. Load it with computers and conferencing equipment and go from village to village.
Such a program would not replace the Army, but it would add a civilian face to the efforts to build a civil society. It would also tighten the bonds between the military and the American people. It could be the 21st century equivalent of a victory garden.
Tom Brokaw is managing editor of NBC Nightly News.
