EMILIE READY, a 74-year-old mortgage escrow officer and a member of a local women's club, vividly recalls the day seven years ago when Santiago Calatrava, the renowned Spanish architect and engineer, unveiled his design for a glass and steel footbridge across the Sacramento River to members of the Rotary, Kiwanis and Lions Clubs assembled for lunch at the Doubletree Inn.
''I thought, 'Gee, whillikers,' '' she said. '' 'It's a nice design.' But a lot of us were wondering whether it would fit in Redding.''
Many people in this far-flung outpost of 85,000 between Sacramento and the Oregon border still wonder whether the bridge -- known as the ''Sundial Bridge'' for the slanted pylon that will function as a sundial pin and glow with the noonday sun -- will fit in. This is a city that measures itself by the natural wonders in its midst, by the Trinity and Cascade mountains, pine forests and alpine lakes. The most striking piece of architecture around is arguably a dam.
But before Mr. Calatrava went to Athens, where he is designing buildings for the Summer Olympics and a laminated glass roof for the main stadium, or New York, where his design for the World Trade Center PATH Terminal was recently unveiled, or even Milwaukee, where his extension for the Milwaukee Art Museum was completed in 2001, he alighted in this obscure spot where the fast-food nation and the wilderness meet. It's a sweltering summer pit stop on the interstate about four hours north of San Francisco where, in the words of Bob Nash, president of the local farm bureau, ''people come to go camping or buy gas so they can leave.''
The bridge is Mr. Calatrava's first free-standing bridge in the United States. Scheduled to open in April, it is already poised to alter the image of a conservative, decidedly unaffluent community that has struggled with its identity since the decline of the timber industry in the early 1990's. Shaped like a reclining harp with an aquamarine glass deck, the bridge threatens to bring high romance to a river whose niche in the popular American imagination has never rivaled that of the Hudson or the Mississippi.
''Though it is not the center of the world, it is a very beautiful environment for a bridge, with volcanic mountains and dense forests'' Mr. Calatrava said in a telephone interview. ''It will be not only a passage but a place to sit and observe the water.''
Metaphorically, at least, the bridge, which links a new natural sciences museum with an arboretum and a 32-mile network of trails along the river, has spanned troubled water. At a cost of $23.5 million, it has been financed almost entirely by the private McConnell Foundation in Redding, which persuaded Mr. Calatrava -- who at the time had designed no major structures in the United States -- to visit the town.
With a $344 million endowment, the foundation wields tremendous clout in civic affairs and has been controversial here, partly as a result of a perception that its projects, including the bridge -- whose delays and rising costs have been chronicled in detail in the local press -- are elitist. In an area where the child poverty rate is 21 percent, almost five percentage points higher than the national average, many agree with Mr. Nash, who calls the bridge ''the epitome of waste -- you can't even drive a car on it.''
Like many towns in the Central Valley, Redding had turned its back on the river, first by building a downtown shopping area, now moribund, and later with malls and subdivisions with names like River Knoll sprawling on the hilltop. ''Art and culture have never been high on the agenda,'' said Carol Whiteside, president of the Great Valley Center, a nonprofit regional public policy organization in Modesto, Calif. ''Many rural places don't understand the value of landmarks.''
Mr. Calatrava's bridges, which number 20 worldwide with 5 more under construction, are famous for their ''swerve'' -- an appearance of arrested flight or movement that has been compared to the balanced posture of a discus thrower just before the release.
''A bridge adds energy to the landscape,'' Mr. Calatrava has written. ''Building a bridge is a symbolic gesture, linked with the realities of the people crossing and the surmounting of an obstacle.''
The obstacles in Redding have been formidable. The city itself has contributed $3 million to the project, including $1.5 million in federal highway beautification funds. It had wanted to build some sort of footbridge since the mid-90's, to join the arboretum, now under construction, and the new Turtle Bay Exploration Park, a museum dedicated to the natural history of the river and designed by the firm of Bohlin Cywinski Jackson. Both of those projects have been largely subsidized by the McConnell Foundation, whose founders, local entrepreneurs named Leah and Carl McConnell, were committed to community projects. Their fortune was based on timely purchases of stock in the Farmers Insurance Group in 1928 by Mr. McConnell's parents.
Mrs. McConnell, who died at 90 in 1995, outliving her husband by 10 years, grew up in the nearby mining camp of Humbug and was known as a shrewd businesswoman who favored $5 watches while keeping her jewels in a safe deposit box. But the foundation's ''big-time-itis,'' as one correspondent put it in a letter to The Redding Record Searchlight, has not sat well with many in the community. Since Redding's founding as a railhead for miners in the 1880's, it has prided itself on its cowboy-style independence, which manifests itself in things like the municipal power authority, generating power separate from the state power grid. ''We're as far away from California as you can be in California,'' said Ken Murray, a former mayor and the host of ''Murray in the Morning,'' a radio talk show here.
Many people would have preferred something more folksy, like a covered bridge. ''It doesn't fit in with the natural surroundings,'' said Tom Keffer, an archaeologist biking along the river recently. ''You could build a decent bridge with 55-gallon drums for 500 bucks.''
The rallying cry among proponents of the bridge was ''Calatrava, Not Caltrans,'' referring to the kind of scenery-obliterating bridge that the California Transportation Department often builds. Initially, the search committee, which included city council members and the foundation and museum boards, did not approach Mr. Calatrava, whose practice is based in Zurich, assuming he would not be interested in Redding, ''a bit of an architectural wasteland,'' in the words of John A. Mancasola, the foundation's executive vice president. After months of deadlock over who would design the bridge, however, Mr. Mancasola picked up the phone.
It was the river that lured Mr. Calatrava. ''I caught a very beautiful impression of an untouched landscape,'' he said. This portion of the Sacramento, known as the Redding Reach, is home to one of the most heroic spectacles in nature: four runs of Chinook salmon that thrust 300 miles upriver to lay their eggs here. Because the runs are endangered, the bridge could have no structures, permanent or temporary, in the river -- a major engineering challenge. Most of the parts were made at a steelyard in Vancouver, Wash. Then, supported by cables stretched from the pylon, they were welded together piece by piece above the water. With its angle and weight, the pylon, through those cables, provides the counterweight to support the suspension bridge.
The idea for the sundial -- Mr. Calatrava's first such bridge design -- was also suggested by the river. The orientation of the banks led him to realize that the pylon, with its 40-degree tilt, could be a gnomon -- a shadow-casting stile. ''We erected the pylon on the north side, so that the shadow becomes a kind of sundial,'' he said. ''So then people can learn to read the hours of the days, the month of the year according to the height of the sun.'' At noon, the sun's angle will illuminate the pylon's hollow interior, causing it to glow. The shadow will fall on ceramic markers on the ground.
Already, the bridge, white as an egret's wings, cuts a striking profile on the landscape, rising daggerlike over billboards on Market Street and Interstate 5 cloverleafs. At dusk recently, a fly fisherman waded in the riffles just upstream, rod glinting, as ducks flew swiftly downriver, skirting the heads of workers on the bridge. ''It's a reflection of nature that happens to be designed by people,'' said Buford R. Holt, an environmental ecologist who lives here and is an authority on the river.
With the bridge's ethereal presence now a reality, local attitudes may be mellowing, especially among younger people like Tim and Emma Greer, 32 and 24 respectively, who were shopping for a stove top at the hilltop Sears recently. ''It adds class to the area,'' Mr. Greer said. ''It will give downtown a little extra oomph.''
Ken Murray, the former mayor, said: ''What the malcontents fail to realize is it ain't our money. Fortunately, we had a blank check. What we got was a piece of art.''
''But personally,'' he said of Mr. Calatrava, ''I wouldn't hire that dude for anything.''
Like the Eiffel Tower, which was lambasted by Parisian intellectuals, time will probably work in the bridge's favor as it becomes a glass path taking bikers, hikers, skaters and strollers from the center of Redding to trails that lead into the wilderness.
Not surprisingly, tourism officials are already considering ways to turn the bridge into ''golden arches'' for the 23,000 motorists a day barreling along Interstate 5. They are planning billboards featuring the bridge and the slogan ''Redding: California's Natural Getaway.''
''Just like the Hollywood sign and the Golden Gate Bridge,'' said Bob Warren, manager of the city's convention and tourism bureau, ''10 years from now when people see this image they'll say, 'Oh, that's Redding.' ''
Dean Roesner, a structural engineer who has spent four years working on the bridge, has noticed subtle changes in its riverine neighborhood. When the bridge first went up, he said, ducks and geese flew above the cables, unsure about the obstacle in their path. But recently, he has noticed them gliding and dipping beneath the bridge, among them an occasional raptor with a trout in its talons. ''They're getting used to it,'' he said. ''They're learning how to navigate.''
And so it may be with people. ''Right now the river flows through town, and nobody notices it,'' said Ric Apple, who, along with his wife, Connie, has just opened America's first ''Calatrava bridge inspired'' bed-and-breakfast along the water in anticipation of the grand opening, on the Fourth of July. ''This bridge makes the river whole.''
