For Vermonters, the portrayal of their centrist former governor as the left-winger in the Democratic presidential race was the second biggest surprise of Howard Dean's brief span of political glory. The biggest was the apparent transformation of a campaign clod into a fiery orator who inspired a movement.
He never tried that at home.
In Vermont, Dr. Dean was never a very good politician. He was quite a good governor. He was a prudent steward of the state's finances. He expanded social services while reducing taxes. During the debate over civil unions in 2000, he not only kept his word but he also kept his cool.
On the campaign trail, though, Dr. Dean was a dud. Here was a man with neither a thirst for the political jugular nor a sense of timing.
For years, Dr. Dean didn't have to be good. He was lucky. Though he was only a junior legislator, he got elected lieutenant governor in 1986 largely because no one else wanted the job. When Gov. Richard Snelling died of a heart attack in August 1991, the doctor most Vermonters had barely heard of was their governor.
From the start, Dr. Dean's centrism proved a political boon. His first major decision was to allow Governor Snelling's temporary tax increase on upper-income earners to expire on schedule. Here was a fiscally prudent Democrat who could win the votes of independents and even centrist Republicans.
In 1992 no major Republican wanted to challenge him. So John McClaughry did. Mr. McClaughry is a libertarian, meaning he opposes federal milk price supports and minimum-wage laws, not recommended in a low-wage state full of small dairy farms. He managed 23 percent of the vote.
In 1994 and 1996 the Republicans found two men willing to stand for governor. And stand is pretty much all they did. David Kelley, a lawyer, won 19 percent of the vote in 1994. John Gropper, a businessman, managed 22 percent two years later.
Ruth Dwyer really ran in 1998. An energetic state legislator, Ms. Dwyer appealed to rural Vermonters angry over many of the education and environmental laws those liberals down in Montpeculiar had been passing. But she was also a deeply flawed candidate prone to outrageous statements, such as likening a state logging regulation to the Holocaust. She won 41 percent of the vote in 1998.
So she tried again in 2000, but despite anger over the civil unions law, she did worse. Dr. Dean actually had to campaign against Ms. Dwyer, and met her and the Progressive Party candidate, Anthony Pollina, in debates. Mr. Pollina won them all. Dr. Dean was almost always stiff.
So what made him so much better as a candidate for president? Well, practice makes better, if not perfect, and Dr. Dean improved. Besides, after his February 2003 speech to the Democratic National Committee, when he asked why so many Democrats in Washington weren't standing up against the war in Iraq, he had a following.
Millions of rank-and-file Democrats had been wondering the same thing, and they flocked to the Dean cause. For months, he drew adoring crowds. He was on a roll, and as long as it lasted, he was a good campaigner.
But he did not react well to adversity, perhaps because he had known so little of it. When the Rev. Al Sharpton challenged him about his all-white Vermont cabinet, or John Edwards criticized his remarks about Southern voters, he could have responded with a flash of candor or wit, which probably would have defused any controversy.
The experienced national political reporters wondered why he blew it. Up here, no one was surprised.
Jon Margolis, a former national political reporter for the Chicago Tribune, is a contributor to ''Howard Dean: A Citizen's Guide.''
