IN the universe of hi-fi loudspeakers, where bigger is often equated with better, the Bang &amp; Olufsen Beolab 5 more than holds its own. It's just over three feet tall, weighs 134 pounds and, with amplifiers inside it capable of producing 2,500 watts of power, can make enough noise at a party to ensure a visit from the police.
Yet for all its brutish qualities, the Beolab 5 has a warm and fuzzy side as well. With the press of a button, it gets in touch with its inner self.
The speaker, Bang &amp; Olufsen's top-of-the-line model (with a top-of-the-line price tag, $16,000 a pair), is equipped to overcome a common audio problem. Design engineers may be able to control most of the elements that make for great sound from a pair of speakers, but they have no control over perhaps the most important one: the person who buys them. That consumer may have a living room with poor acoustics or may otherwise harm the sound by hiding the speakers behind furniture or shoving them against the walls.
''Especially in the low-frequency region, placement of the speaker has a big influence on sound,'' said Poul Praestgaard, senior technology manager of Bang &amp; Olufsen, which is based in Struer, Denmark.
Audiophiles who want to optimize their speaker setup often use a microphone placed in the listening area and a computer to analyze the sound and then adjust the response over ranges of frequencies, a process called equalization, to compensate for the room's deficiencies.
The Beolab 5 does a similar job on its own. As its downward-facing deep bass driver, or woofer, emits several test tones, an onboard microphone at the bottom of the speaker picks them up. Then a servomotor moves the microphone several inches so that it protrudes from the bottom and can pick up reflections from the room, and the tones are emitted again. A signal-processing chip within the speaker analyzes the difference between the two tests and digital equalization circuitry, also on board, adjusts the sound.
''They're really very tiny differences,'' Mr. Praestgaard said. ''But they are big enough to calculate the impact of the room.''
The calibration is done only with sounds below 300 hertz (middle C is about 262 hertz), because these long-wavelength tones are much more affected by room acoustics and speaker placement than high-frequency, shorter-wavelength ones. At any rate, the speaker uses other tricks, two acoustic lenses, to ensure faithful reproduction at the higher frequencies.
Acoustic lenses have been used with loudspeakers since the 1940's, said Edgar Villchur, a home-audio pioneer who with Henry Kloss was responsible for introducing the acoustic suspension driver, which is now the standard in loudspeaker design. Early lenses consisted of a series of multicellular horns that were intended to spread the high-frequency sound around so that it reflected off room surfaces.
''When you listen to a loudspeaker in a normally reverberant room, a major part of what you hear is the sound reflected from the walls, floor and ceiling,'' Mr. Villchur said. If a speaker sends most of its high frequencies directly in front of the speaker with little reflection, he added, ''the sound you hear will be dull.''
The Bang &amp; Olufsen speaker uses a different kind of acoustic lens that sits atop an upward-facing high-frequency driver, or tweeter. The elliptical walls of the lens's casting help radiate the sound evenly in a horizontal semicircle.
The lens is the work of David Moulton and Manny LaCarrubba, partners in Sausalito Audio Works, a California company that licenses the technology to Bang &amp; Olufsen. Designing it has been a long-term project: Mr. Moulton started developing the concept in 1981, and, he said, ''had a big cognitive breakthrough about the validity of what we were doing in 1985.''
Mr. LaCarrubba invented the lens in its current form in 1990. He and Mr. Moulton installed it on some speakers and demonstrated it at audio engineering shows. ''We realized we had a winner here,'' Mr. Moulton said. Bang &amp; Olufsen was interested in the concept and cooperated with Mr. Moulton, who works out of his own audio studio in Groton, Mass., and Mr. LaCarrubba to adjust the design.
Mr. Villchur said that an acoustic lens could improve a speaker's performance by dispersing sound. But even more important is ensuring that the reflected sounds have adequate tonal response, he said, and for that, a lot of power is needed. ''If they start out with a speaker that has adequate high-frequency energy, then a dispersing lens might help it,'' he said.
Bang &amp; Olufsen takes care of the power issue by including four amplifiers in each speaker -- 1,000 watts each for each speaker's deep- and midbass woofers and 250 watts apiece for the midrange and high-frequency tweeters.
That's enough to provide window-rattling volume, but Mr. Praestgaard said that wasn't exactly the point. ''You only need that much power for a fraction of a second,'' he said. ''You don't need it all the time.''
HOW IT WORKS
