SONIC HEROES  Developed by Sonic Team and published by Sega for the GameCube, the Xbox and PlayStation 2; $49.95; for all ages.
STAR WARS REBEL STRIKE: ROGUE SQUADRON III  Developed by Factor 5 and published by LucasArts for the GameCube; $49.95; for ages 13 and older.
APPARENTLY my impatient approach to playing video games is hereditary. After showing my mother how to play the solitaire game Free Cell, I watched her start a new game every time it took her more than 10 seconds to find a card. I'm a little more determined than that, but I will never be one of those gamers who boast of weeks spent replaying a single impassable video game level over and over.
True to form, I gave up on Level 4 of Sonic Team's arcade game Sonic Heroes after perishing a mere six times at the brutal end of the fourth level of what had until then been a pretty easy game. Hard-core gamers might sneer, but there it is: it's genetic.
Until I reached that nasty room in which the molten lava kept rising as I had to maneuver rapidly up a series of platforms, I was having a lot of fun with Heroes, the first Sonic game in years that seemed to match the breathless excitement of the original games of the early 1990's.
Sonic the Hedgehog has had a career somewhat analogous to that of Buster Keaton. A huge star in the silent-film era, Keaton adjusted well to sound, but each movie was more poorly conceived than the one before. While it was sound that ruined Keaton, Sonic's downfall was the third dimension; after racing through a series of electrifying two-dimensional side-scrolling games, Sonic stumbled as he stepped into the 3-D world and has been hobbling along listlessly ever since.
The original Sonic games took full advantage of the linear 2-D form to create a character that would dash through tunnels and over land in a mad rush, often becoming a rolling blue ball racing across a roller-coaster landscape. When the third dimension suddenly allowed Sonic to move in any direction, he did just that, and the early 3-D games had him wandering this way and that, his momentum gone.
While subsequent games were faster and tighter, they never came close to being as fun as the originals.
Heroes succeeds by confining Sonic for the most part to the narrow bridges and pathways that always brought out the best in him and recaptures that dizzying sense of speed that distinguished the early games. When Sonic races up a ramp into a giant loop, then launches himself toward a distant ledge, it brings back everything that made me love him in his youth.
Of course, game developers do not spend years working on a game just to recreate the past, and Sonic Team has satisfied its desire to create something new by adding a team play element. In Heroes, Sonic travels with two companions who have different capabilities. Sonic is fast, Tails can carry the team up to high ledges by spinning his tail like a helicopter blade, and Knuckles can break through granite obstacles. Each character also has an individual attack that can be used to destroy the monsters that block the way; Sonic, for example, can run around fast enough to create a whirlwind, while Tails can throw his teammates at high-flying opponents.
Getting stuck on the fourth level exposed one of the game's major flaws: the levels are fairly static. The old 2-D Sonic games always seemed to have several different routes through different landscapes. Jump across a chasm, and you could take a mountainside path; miss the jump, and you would run through the valley below. You could play these levels repeatedly and rarely take the exact same route.
But while in Heroes you occasionally come to a fork in the road, you are likely to find yourself running basically the same trail every time you go through a level. This is disappointing, and especially surprising considering the team play element. With three characters whose different abilities let them overcome different challenges, it would make sense to have dozens of areas per level where the various characters can lead you to different paths. But the game too rarely capitalizes on this potential.
While I repeatedly got stuck when I played with the team made up of Sonic and his friends, Heroes allows you to select other teams with varying difficulty levels. Restarting the game with Team Rose, who ran through slightly easier versions of the same levels, allowed me to make my way to other levels in which the characters bounce around a pinball machine or run along a series of winding, looping tracks. But I never did get past Level 4 with the Sonic team because I just could not bring myself to play the same 15 minutes yet again to try to beat the level's last evil minute.
Sonic's developers could learn something from Factor 5, whose action game Star Wars Rebel Strike: Rogue Squadron III achieves an ideal balance: hard enough to make you sweat but not so hard that you throw the controller down and start swearing at the screen.
In Strike, each level is a learning experience. The first time I played it all the way through, I was often confused, and would drift around trying to figure out what to do before my fighter plane was shot down. But with each subsequent run I would get closer to winning until finally I could blast through the same mission in a couple of minutes, amazed that I had ever had any difficulty.
While the previous Rogue Squadron games were flight games, Strike has varied the game play: you will now often exit your X-Wing fighter to ride a high-speed scooter, an alien animal or a walking tank. This adds quite a bit to the game and allows for some entertaining missions, like dodging trees while racing through a forest trying to stop fleeing soldiers.
Rogue Squadron also lets the player go on foot, running through bases shooting bad guys. The developers have far more experience with vehicles than pedestrians. While all the fighters, scooters and tanks are beautifully done, it's hard to believe anyone on the development team has ever played a third-person shooter before because the missions on foot are utterly abysmal.
You can only take aim at enemy soldiers by running directly toward them, and the only reason you can survive when heavily outnumbered is because, as is generally the case in the ''Star Wars'' movies, the bad guys are all terrible shots.
Almost all of these missions are so poorly designed that they are a waste of time. Fortunately, most of the game is considerably more enjoyable, like racing through the sky in your fighter and blasting away at the enemy, or riding your walking tank through a forest while directing the friendly Ewoks to trigger booby traps that will knock out your opponents.
Between missions, there are cinematic sequences pulled from old ''Star Wars'' movies. I suppose they are intended to supply some sort of story, although if so, they are too disjointed to be easily comprehensible.
Strike is a short game, but while I wish it were longer, I appreciate that, unlike Sonic Heroes, it allowed me to get to the end without beating my head against a wall. As for those of you who read this review and snicker because you do not think the fourth level of Sonic Heroes is especially difficult, well, blame my mother.
GAME THEORY E-mail: Herold@nytimes.com
