IN scoring a baseball game, each play has its symbol. K for strikeout, HR for home run, for example. And E for error.
When Graig Nettles was the Yankees' third baseman with a flashy glove -- he's now the tutor for Alex Rodriguez -- his self-deprecating sense of humor extended to his automobile license plate: E-5, the E for error, the 5 for his position number as a third baseman.
With that in mind, it's coincidental, if not eerie, that Gary Sheffield's name surfaced in the e-mail message of an affidavit by Barry Bonds's personal trainer, Greg Anderson, in which Anderson told federal agents that he gave steroids to several baseball players.
Score that an E for error by the United States attorney's office, along with an E for Sheffield's entanglement. Not that he's concerned, yet. Asked yesterday at the Yankees' camp in Tampa, Fla., if he was surprised that his name had emerged, he said: ''I was surprised, of course, but I have no comment otherwise. It's nothing even to worry about.''
Maybe not. Then again, maybe there's plenty he should worry about.
In releasing documents via e-mail to The New York Times and other news agencies, the attorney's office inadvertently revealed that Sheffield, the Yankees' new right fielder, sent mail to the supplements laboratory, the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative, or Balco, that is under investigation as a source of steroids.
The documents do not allege steroid use by Sheffield, who was among several professional athletes who testified before the San Francisco grand jury in recent months. Sheffield's name, however, is the first to surface since the grand jury handed up indictments last week against Anderson and three others, all on charges of illegally distributing anabolic steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs to dozens of professional athletes.
The disclosure of Sheffield's name also sharpens the arrow pointing at Bonds, the Giants slugger who began working with Victor Conte Jr., the Balco founder, in 2001, and who that season hit a record 73 home runs. Sheffield has often acknowledged having worked out with Bonds in the San Francisco area in the off-season. Sheffield, 35, led the National League with 132 runs batted in last season with the Atlanta Braves while batting .330 and slugging 39 home runs.
Bonds, who has repeatedly denied taking steroids, has credited Conte for reminding him to take nutritional supplements and Anderson for his adherence to workout sessions.
So just when the Yankees' deal for A-Rod had everybody talking baseball again, one player has been identified in the steroids scandal that could be baseball's most embarrassing situation since eight members of the Chicago White Sox, alias the Black Sox, were indicted for having dumped the 1919 World Series to the Cincinnati Reds.
In both scandals, the common denominator has been the convening of a grand jury to hear testimony under oath -- in 1920 in Chicago, recently in San Francisco.
Just as the investigation into Balco became public after federal and county agents raided the company's offices in Burlingame, Calif., the Black Sox scandal began with a grand jury issuing subpoenas regarding rumors that a game Sept. 21, 1920, in Chicago between the Cubs and the Philadelphia Phillies had been fixed for betting purposes.
Hardly any evidence developed until a New York Giants pitcher, Rube Benton, testified that Hal Chase, a Giants first baseman in 1919 who had been suspected of fixing games for years, told him that the White Sox had conspired to lose the 1919 Series. Benton said he won $3,000 betting on that tip.
Three days later, in a Philadelphia newspaper, the gambler Billy Maharg charged that Eddie Cicotte, the White Sox' ace right-hander, had told him and Bill Burns, a Texas oilman who had been a left-handed pitcher for several American League teams, that the fix was in for the Reds to win the Series.
The next day, according to Eliot Asinof's classic book, ''Eight Men Out,'' Cicotte confessed to the White Sox' owner, Charles Comiskey, and then to the grand jury. Later that day Joe Jackson, who batted .382 that season as the White Sox' premier player, confessed to the grand jury.
Six other players were also indicted: the left-hander Claude Williams, who was known as Lefty; third baseman Buck Weaver; first baseman Chick Gandil (the ringleader of the scheme); shortstop Swede Risberg; center fielder Happy Felsch; and the utility infielder Fred McMullin. All were immediately suspended from baseball.
When their trial was about to start, the grand jury testimony could not be found. The case never went to court, but the eight players' lifetime suspensions stuck.
Just as big oaks from little acorns grow, big scandals from persistent rumors grow, especially when a grand jury, testimony under oath and indictments are involved.
What began quietly concerning rumors regarding an obscure Cubs-Phillies game grew into the Black Sox scandal, which still haunts baseball, which is responsible for the ''No Gambling'' signs in every major league clubhouse that Pete Rose ignored, which prompted the hiring of Kenesaw Mountain Landis late in 1920 as the first commissioner.
Now the current commissioner, Bud Selig, is confronted with the growing steroids scandal that threatens the integrity of some of baseball's marquee players. One name is out of the box. More will follow.
Sports of The Times
