India and Pakistan have agreed on what officials call a ''road map for peace,'' Pakistan's foreign secretary said Wednesday, setting a six-month schedule for discussions on a range of issues, including their longstanding dispute over Kashmir.
The announcement concluded three days of talks, a resumption of a dialogue suspended in 2001. The two countries, one Hindu-majority, one Muslim, have fought three wars since they achieved independence in 1947, including two over Kashmir, and nearly fought a fourth in 2002.
In a diplomatic breakthrough in January, President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan and Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee of India agreed to a dialogue on all issues, including Kashmir, and Pakistan agreed to curb any terrorism emanating from its soil.
That promise seemed to signal an end to state support for the jihad, or holy war, that Pakistan-based militant groups have been waging in Indian-held Kashmir for 15 years.
But just two hours after the press briefing on the talks came a sign that the jihad still has some life. In an open field in a prosperous part of Islamabad, more than 400 men gathered to mourn a militant from Jamaat ul-Dawa, an Islamist organization, who they said had died fighting in Kashmir on Jan. 29.
The gathering suggested either a signal from Pakistan to India that jihad remained an option, or the inability or unwillingness of Pakistan's security forces to limit militant activity.
In an interview last week with The New York Times, General Musharraf said, ''All jihadi groups or those under the garb of jihad who are spreading extremism or terrorism inside Pakistan or going outside Pakistan will not be allowed.''
In December, he survived two assassination attempts that have been linked to a Kashmiri militant group, Jaish-e-Muhammad, which is banned.
On Wednesday, General Musharraf delivered a speech urging Muslim religious leaders to curb Islamic extremism. ''We have no extremists or terrorists, but we have to prove to the world that we are a moderate Islamic country where the moderates are in absolute majority,'' state-run media quoted him as saying.
Yet the gathering to mourn the militant was held in the center of the capital. Pakistani officials have previously attributed their reluctance to crack down on militant groups to a desire to avoid creating martyrs or driving the groups underground, and have said the groups' statements are not illegal.
The anti-Indian speeches at the park were a pointed contrast to what Pakistan's foreign secretary, Riaz Khokhar, described Wednesday as the ''very constructive'' atmosphere at the talks between him and his Indian counterpart, Shashank, who uses only one name.
They agreed to meet again in May or June for talks on confidence-building measures and on Kashmir. Talks on other issues, including terrorism and economic and commercial cooperation, are to take place in July.
Significantly, the two sides also agreed to expert-level talks on nuclear issues, signaling the revival of a memorandum of understanding signed in 1999. Among other provisions, that memorandum committed them both to ''undertaking national measures to reducing the risks of accidental or unauthorized use of nuclear weapons under their respective control.''
