Under cross-examination at his trial on criminal fraud charges, Mark H. Swartz, the former chief financial officer of Tyco International, acknowledged yesterday that no documents existed to support the version of events he offered last week about millions of dollars in bonuses he received in 1999 and 2000.
In his first full day of cross-examination by prosecutors, Mr. Swartz was quiet and composed. He did not disagree when Marc Scholl, an assistant district attorney, pointed out that he took millions of dollars from Tyco at the beginning of the company's 2001 fiscal year under a bonus program explicitly designed to reward executives based on full-year financial results.
''You can't possibly know what the results are going to be until you reach the end of fiscal 2001,'' Mr. Scholl said.
''No, you cannot,'' Mr. Swartz replied.
Manhattan prosecutors have charged Mr. Swartz and L. Dennis Kozlowski, Tyco's former chief executive, with stealing $170 million from the company by hiding details of their pay packages from the board. Mr. Swartz and Mr. Kozlowski are also accused of stealing $430 million by selling Tyco stock after artificially pumping up its price.
The trial has moved slowly; prosecutors rested their case early this month after presenting evidence for four months. So far, Mr. Swartz has been the defense's only witness.
He told jurors last week that he and Mr. Kozlowski received their bonuses legally, under a program that rewarded senior Tyco executives if company profits exceeded certain levels. Mr. Swartz said Tyco's compensation committee agreed that the bonuses should be based not just on operating profit but also on one-time gains that the company realized if it sold subsidiaries.
In general, investors prefer companies to reward executives for producing recurring income, not one-time gains. Tyco's incentive plan, which was created in 1994, does not explicitly say whether one-time gains should be included or excluded in the calculation of bonuses.
In 1999 and 2000, Mr. Swartz received about $30 million in special bonuses. Mr. Kozlowski took home roughly twice that, about $60 million. Prosecutors have maintained that those bonuses were not approved and were hidden from the board.
Tyco is based in Bermuda, where it avoids United States taxes. But most of its directors live in the United States, so board members regularly had informal meetings in the United States, referred to as huddles, at which no notes were taken. The compensation committee, which set pay for Mr. Kozlowski and Mr. Swartz, also sometimes met in the United States but took no or fragmentary notes.
At those unrecorded meetings, the board approved the outlines, and sometimes the details, of the special bonuses, Mr. Swartz has said.
But yesterday, under questioning from Mr. Scholl, Mr. Swartz said he could not point to any hard evidence that Tyco's compensation committee had agreed with his view about the bonus plan. In addition, he acknowledged that his testimony implied that the board had regularly changed the bonus plan without asking shareholders or fully documenting those changes in its minutes.
''Were shareholders told that compensation plans might be changed on a regular basis?'' Mr. Scholl asked.
''Not that I recall,'' Mr. Swartz said.
A few minutes later, referring to the board, Mr. Scholl asked, ''It's your testimony that they could vary this as they so pleased?''
''Yes, it is,'' Mr. Swartz replied.
Aside from those semi-dramatic exchanges, the trial reverted to its usual routine. In the morning, Mr. Scholl jumped from subject to subject, asking in the span of a few minutes about a real estate trust used by Mr. Swartz, Tyco's merger with ADT and the name of Tyco's legal counsel in 1997. And more than once, he even seemed to change his tack, or lose his train of thought, before he finished a question.
''The proxy statements contained information that the shareholders -- '' he started at one point before pausing, then concluding, ''Withdrawn.'' A few minutes later, he began, ''And in addition to the compensation of certain executives, these proxies were,'' before again saying, ''Withdrawn.''
The cross-examination will resume this morning.
