Jenny has always been two kinds of vamp. Promiscuous yet pure melody. A temptress but also a tune.
And even though it has been more than two decades since her glory first began to fade, men still howl her name in the night. They still try to call her, too, only to find themselves futilely dialing a myth.
Because for all her apparent allure, Jenny is also elusive. Calling her on the phone has rarely been as satisfying as simply bellowing her number out loud, over and over and over. Because Jenny, ultimately, is a chorus girl, seemingly accessible yet hopelessly remote, in a chorus that goes like this:
Jenny, I've got your number
I need to make you mine
Jenny, don't change your number
867-5309, 867-5309
867-5309, 867-5309
If it lacks in print the impact it has when accompanied by bass, drums and guitar, perhaps you are not among a certain demographic particularly appealing to advertisers these days, the kind of customer Cingular wireless hoped to draw when it recently used the song -- the mundane yet irresistible refrain of a 1982 hit single by the band Tommy Tutone -- in a commercial promoting telephone number ''portability.''
And if all of that is true, you probably are not the kind of customer a New York law student named John imagined would indirectly earn him a tidy sum when, at the beginning of what became a very strange week in his world, he auctioned off Jenny's number -- his number now, at least in its 212 incarnation -- on eBay.
At the end of that week, after offers soared toward $100,000, after eBay had cut short the auction, after John's telephone company had admonished him for trying to sell a number it says he does not own, after staffers at the Federal Communications Commission searched the rules for clarity, he continued to make the case that, rather than exploiting pop culture in order to be paid, he was helping define new parameters of ownership and commerce.
And he is not necessarily giving up.
''I bought a piece of land and there was oil in it,'' said John, who spoke on the condition that his last name not be used. Before he got the number, which in the song was written on a wall, he said, ''It had probably been assigned to someone who didn't like the prank calls and didn't realize its value.''
John, who agreed to meet with this reporter near Times Square this week, said it all began ''as a lark,'' when he called the number for kicks last fall and was surprised learn it was not in service. He contacted the phone service provider Verizon and paid to have the number, then unassigned in the part of Manhattan where its 867 prefix would typically place it, forwarded to his apartment in Midtown.
Calls soon came in -- the late-night drunks, the shy hang-ups, the would-be suitors handed false numbers. There were three to five a day, as many as 30 on Saturday nights. And, John said, he soon had an idea.
''Number portability has allowed me to put this up for sale,'' he proclaimed on eBay beginning last Thursday. ''You can be anywhere in the world and actually have Jenny's number.''
Bidding began at $250 but, after Internet postings and news coverage increased interest, the bids rose to $80,000 and perhaps higher, with more than 170 bids, according to Hani Durzy, an eBay spokesman. The site pulled the listing late Tuesday afternoon because, Mr. Durzy said, ''there is still some question as to who owns that phone number.''
According to Michael Balmoris, a spokesman for the F.C.C., most phone numbers are ''public resources'' that ''are not owned by carriers or their customers.'' He did not rule out that John could sell the number as part of a business.
Regardless, Jenny never lived in New York, anyway. She was from California. Or so recalled Tommy Heath, 55, the lead singer and namesake for Tommy Tutone. He still sings ''Jenny'' for audiences a few dozen times a year. Mr. Heath did not write the song -- Jim Keller, a former band member, co-wrote the song with Alex Call -- but his vocals inspired one of the most popular pranks among youth of the 1980's.
''I think I added some depth to it,'' Mr. Heath said by phone. He said he had not tired of singing the band's only hit. ''It's our calling card.''
