Pet owners living at the Ruppert Yorkville Towers Condominium say their buildings have become a dog's police state. Here, they say, just look at some of the new rules:
$(6$)Dogs will be required to wear special tags on their collars or leashes identifying their owners and apartment numbers.
$(6$)Owners will be charged a $100 fee and must register their dogs by Feb. 27, submitting proof that they have been spayed and neutered and given the inoculations for rabies and other conditions.
$(6$)No visiting dogs are allowed.
$(6$)Owners are responsible for paying for whatever damage their animals cause, and preventing nuisance behavior defined in part as ''making noise continuously and/or incessantly for a period of 10 minutes or intermittently for one hour or more.''
$(6$)Violations will be subject to fines -- $100 for the first infraction, $250 for the second, $500 for the third and permanent removal of the pet within 30 days for further breaches.
Dr. Judith Dattaro, a physician who lives there, was incensed. ''I am being told that I can't do what I have always done: walk peacefully through the lobby without the prospect of someone stopping me and checking my pet's credentials,'' she said.
Yes, it is another confrontation in the pet wars, those impassioned fights that put owners against condo or co-op boards or landlords. This time, the battleground is the Ruppert Yorkville Towers, four brick towers in two buildings stretching from 90th to 92nd Streets between Second and Third Avenue in Manhattan. Until last January, the towers were under the umbrella of the Mitchell-Lama moderate income housing program.
There were, everyone agrees, hundreds of dogs living at the complex when the buildings converted under a noneviction condo plan. The offering plan specified that dogs already on the premises could remain, but their owners would be barred from replacing them without management's consent.
Now RY Management, with the backing of the condo board, has sought to add teeth to that measure by enacting a stringent new set of limits. Residents received letters this month on the policy. Like a match to a tinderbox, the reaction was instantaneous.
Condo owners and renters retained Maddy Tarnofsky, a lawyer who specializes in pet issues. They held a meeting in a resident's apartment on Feb. 10 that spilled out into the hall. At an open condo board meeting two nights later, the first since the conversion, discussion of the matter became so heated that the topic was relegated to the end of the evening to not distract from more subdued considerations of tax abatements and laundry room renovations.
As Henry Kallan, president of the board, sees it, the policy was written to improve the ambience of the buildings, which have 1,257 apartments, 825 of them condos.
''The general idea is that there are way too many dogs in the building and we were trying to create a policy where everyone can hold on to their dogs, but we have to make sure that dogs behave so they don't diminish the quality of life for everyone in the building,'' he said in a telephone interview. ''There is nothing wrong with dogs. The problem is people.''
Howard Schechter, the lawyer for the board, said that ''for the small minority of people who feel they can't abide by the civilities that good neighborliness requires, the fines give the board a method to get their attention and require compliance short of going to court.''
To dog partisans in the buildings, the policy smacks of a dictatorship.
''They asked us to sign and comply with rules that, in my opinion, violate our civil rights, override what could be legally enforceable by law and threaten fines that could put someone in financial hardship or cause them to lose their pet,'' said Jane Colton, a former flight attendant and a 27-year renter in Ruppert Yorkville, who has two elderly Dalmatians and a sick bird.
No one disputes that there is a problem: a distinct aroma of urine at the complex that is especially noticeable in the summer. In part, it is believed to be trapped by the scaffolding that has been in place for months as renovations are done and in part, residents say, by inadequate cleaning.
At the board meeting, Mr. Kallan said there would be a referendum on the policy but did not say when.
In fact, the board has already rescinded one provision in the new policy, that owners may not walk their dogs on East 91st Street, which, although it is a public thoroughfare, is closed to traffic.
But this has done little to quell the controversy. Ms. Tarnofsky is telling people that, should they be apprehended for not having the tags on their pets, to ''be courteous but resistant and carry identification and a cellphone when you go out.''
To Bruce Steibel, who breeds his yellow Labrador retriever, the regulation that dogs be spayed or neutered is unthinkable. ''He is a show dog,'' Mr. Steibel said. ''How can they arbitrarily tell me to neuter him? I won't do that.''
Allison Rolontz, who is divorced, said the policy would cause her multiple hardships. ''I have two small Malteses who live with my husband, but I have visitation rights every other weekend,'' she said. ''Now they won't be able to visit me.''
Ms. Rolontz also has a Rottweiler that is walked by a dog walker. ''She sometimes brings other dogs with her and would not be able to enter the building with them,'' Ms. Rolontz said. ''So my dog would not be able to play with his friends.''
Some people are concerned about the effects on the value of their apartments, not an unreasonable concern, said Steven Goldschmidt, an associate broker with Warburg Realty Partnership.
''I have had open houses at which some people leave when they realize there can be no pets,'' he said.
Indeed, Michael Renz, a cat owner who was at the board meeting the other evening, said: ''The only reason I moved here was because I was told it was dog friendly, and I have friends with dogs here. I don't have a dog now, but I intend to get one when I retire a year from now.''
