A leading Republican senator charged Wednesday that the Federal Bureau of Investigation may have long tolerated egregious, even criminal conduct by some of its agents, including rape, embezzlement and extortion.
The senator, Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, released an internal report prepared by the F.B.I in 2000, which examined 107 instances of serious and sometimes criminal misconduct by its agents over a 16-year period.
The study found that the agents accused of wrongdoing often had a history of disciplinary proceedings and that the F.B.I. had hired some agents despite ''a checkered past'' and negative recommendations.
F.B.I. agents have been hit with a number of espionage and criminal scandals in recent years, with a former internal affairs official sentenced just last week to 12 years in prison in Texas for child molesting. But the internal report suggested that many cases of wrongdoing had never before been made public.
''The shocking report is a laundry list of horrors,'' Mr. Grassley said in a letter to the F.B.I., ''with examples of agents who committed rape, sexual crimes against children, other sexual deviance and misconduct, attempted murder of a spouse, and narcotics violations, among many others.''
Cassandra Chandler, an F.B.I. spokeswoman, said that the agency ''takes seriously its commitment to holding its employees to the highest standards of conduct'' and had taken strong steps to strengthen its disciplinary process.
An F.B.I. official who spoke on condition of anonymity said: ''This is an old report, and a lot of this stuff has been dealt with and people have been prosecuted. You won't find any organization that doesn't have problems. People have weaknesses, and when the bureau becomes aware of that, we act on it.''
Even so, the F.B.I.'s disciplinary process continues to undergo scrutiny. Robert S. Mueller III, director of the F.B.I., became so concerned about an ''erosion of trust'' in the process that he appointed an outside commission last May to study the problem. The commission's report is due to be completed soon.
But Mr. Grassley, a senior member of the Judiciary Committee who has pushed for tougher oversight of the F.B.I., charged that the bureau sat on results of that review and sought to ''cover up'' the findings of its 2000 report by slowing the research and blocking its release. Bureau officials denied the accusations.
''While it's laudable that the F.B.I. does fire agents who commit such terrible acts,'' Mr. Grassley said in his letter, ''these findings raise concerns about whether the F.B.I. was dealing with problem agents soon enough and rigorously enough, possibly because of a reluctance to impose severe discipline.''
The internal report in 2000 studied agents who had been fired by the bureau or left under investigation of wrongdoing from 1986 through 1999. The study found that dismissals for egregious behavior were generally ''infrequent,'' averaging about 8.5 agents a year, or a rate of less than one in 1,000. A similar number of agents resigned under inquiry or retired abruptly in those years.
The fired agents were generally not newcomers. They averaged more than 10 years on the job before the misconduct, and 70 percent had received commendations for their work. About 65 percent of the former agents engaged in ''long-term misconduct,'' and about 45 percent had a history of disciplinary problems, including suspensions.
While the report did not list names or dates, it did describe 77 cases in which agents were fired and, in some cases, sent to prison.
For instance, a former agent with gambling and alcohol problems was found to have stolen more than $400,000 in bureau informant funds and went to prison. An agent who sold cocaine was also imprisoned. And a third agent was found to have raped a subordinate.
