No one had seen Lawrence Frank sweat, seen him conjure a play when his team absolutely needed a basket, seen him rack his brain in search of a way to motivate his Nets on a night when their play was a bit stale.
Until Wednesday night, Frank's brief professional coaching career had included nothing but routs, fast-break clinics that left opponents gasping for breath and the Nets well in front in the game's waning minutes.
But the Atlanta Hawks, emboldened by the recent acquisition of Rasheed Wallace, put Frank and his Nets to the test at Continental Arena, placing their 10-game winning streak in doubt until the last few possessions.
In the end, Frank proved to be more than a front-runner. Whether a blowout or a close call, he still comes out a winner.
With the Nets scoring 11 of the final 16 points to break open a game that was deadlocked with three minutes remaining, Frank entered the National Basketball Association record book.
The Nets' 98-92 victory made him the first coach in the league's 57-year history to begin his head coaching career with 10 straight victories. Frank had shared the record with Buddy Jeanette and Kurt Rambis.
''It's unbelievable,'' said Jason Kidd, who had 15 points, 13 rebounds and 10 assists in recording his eighth triple-double of the season. ''You couldn't ask for a better script. People would say that it's impossible, but with Coach Frank and this team, nothing's impossible.''
The victory was the Nets' 11th straight over all -- Byron Scott won his final game before being fired on Jan. 26 -- and that ties the franchise record set in 1982-83, when Larry Brown was the coach.
Frank's one loss of the night, and in fact of the season, was his shot at tying Red Auerbach's 57-year record of 10 straight double-digit victories. Despite the closeness of the game, the Nets had a shot at extending that streak, but Stephen Jackson's 3-pointer with 28 seconds left ended those hopes.
As has become his custom, Frank played down his record.
''We're not looking to break records, necessarily,'' the 33-year-old Frank said. ''We're just looking to win every single game we play. All those milestones and records are in the past. We don't go out and say: 'We've won 10 or 11 in a row. Let's break the Nets record.' It's more incentive than that.''
Frank, whose smallish stature and nonathletic background are becoming the stuff of legend, has developed creative ways of providing his team with incentive, of fighting off complacency as the streak grows.
He does it with his pregame speeches, which have been entertaining, educational and inspirational. Already having spoken to his players about the Battle of Midway, Frank entered the locker room before Wednesday night's game with a four-legged stool.
''He was like, 'What does a lion tamer bring into the cage with him?' '' said center Jason Collins, who returned after missing three games with a sprained left toe. ''A whip, a chair and a tranquilizer gun. He was like, 'Why the chair?' And he said when you hold up the chair, the lion focuses on the four legs, and that paralyzes the lion because he can't focus.''
The lesson?
''Don't be the lion,'' Collins said. ''Don't get distracted by the legs of the chair. Don't get distracted by what we did last week or by the next opponent or by what's going to happen next week. Focus on one thing -- tonight's opponent, the Atlanta Hawks. Go out and get the win. Don't be the lion. When he came up with Midway and now this, I can't wait for the next one.''
Kidd said: ''You always learn something new with Coach Frank. He had Bobby Knight's book up there. I thought he was going to bring that out, too. But I guess he's saving that for later. I want to see Coach Frank get out there with a chair and a stun gun to see which one he uses on the lion.''
Frank, who said before the game that he was getting too much credit for the winning streak, made light of his oratorical skills.
''I probably lulled them to sleep,'' he said.
The Nets did look a bit weary for much of the night. With Wallace, whom the Hawks acquired in a trade with Portland last week, showing the Nets what a Western Conference big man looks like, Atlanta threatened to pull off the upset.
The 6-foot-11 Wallace, sinking turnaround jumpers over Kenyon Martin, scored 20 points, grabbed 6 rebounds and blocked 5 shots. With the Nets forced to pay attention to Wallace down low, the Hawks' starting guards combined to make 10 of 15 3-pointers. Jackson, a former Net, was 5 of 7 from long range in scoring a game-high 25 points. Jason Terry, hitting 5 of 8, scored 22.
A 3-pointer by Terry tied the score at 87-87 with 3 minutes 12 seconds remaining, but Rodney Rogers put the Nets in front for good by sinking two free throws 22 seconds later. Rogers, seemingly drawing motivation from a late-game altercation with Atlanta's Joel Przybilla, scored all 10 of his points in the fourth quarter.
The Hawks missed five of their next six shots, while Martin (21 points, 10 rebounds) and Kerry Kittles scored back-to-back layups. With Kidd and Richard Jefferson (24 points) sinking five of six free throws in the last 52 seconds, the Nets escaped unscathed.
And Frank remained unbeaten.
''If we can win by half a point, then we'll win by half a point,'' Frank said. ''We'll take the W's any way we can get them.''
REBOUNDS
LAWRENCE FRANK said he had spoken with BYRON SCOTT a couple of times since replacing him as head coach on Jan. 26. ''I've called him and he's called back,'' said Frank, who assisted Scott during his three and a half years as the Nets' head coach. ''Byron's a super guy, a very special guy. Probably with many people the tendency would be for it to be hard. But we've had free-flowing conversations and he's very supportive of the team. He's a very unique individual, a first-class guy.''
PRO BASKETBALL
