Mohammad Reza Khatami's revolutionary credentials are impeccable.
Nineteen at the time of Iran's Islamic revolution in 1979, he was part of the group that stormed the American Embassy and took its diplomats hostage for 444 days.
He volunteered to fight in the war against Iraq during the 1980's and was wounded in the leg. He returned to medical school, and married a granddaughter of the founder of the revolution, Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini. Since 1997 his older brother, Mohammad Khatami, has been president of Iran.
But none of that could prevent the younger brother, now a 44-year-old kidney specialist, and his wife, Zahra Eshraghi, from being disqualified to run in the parliamentary elections to be held on Friday.
Today he is part of the growing ranks of architects of the revolution who are challenging the Islamic system they helped create, warning that it is veering toward religious despotism. He leads the Islamic Participation Front, the major reform party and the top vote getter in the last elections four years ago.
This time his conservative opponents were taking no chances. In January, along with more than 2,000 other candidates, Mr. Khatami was informed by the Guardian Council, the government watchdog group, that he was not considered loyal to the supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and was barred from running for office.
Despite her revolutionary bloodline, his wife was told she was rejected because of an interview she gave last year to The New York Times and because she had greeted the 2003 Nobel Peace Prize winner, Shirin Ebadi, an Iranian human rights activist, when Ms. Ebadi returned from receiving her award.
The two brothers have risen politically together and remain close, the younger Mr. Khatami says. He said he wrote his brother's speeches during the president's first two years in office. But since 2000, when Mohammad Reza Khatami became the leader of their political party, differences have emerged.
Like many of the president's supporters, Mr. Khatami has encouraged Iranians to shun the coming election and blames his brother, 16 years his senior, for his hesitancy in the current crisis and for acquiescing in a vote that critics say is fundamentally flawed.
''The president believes that he needs to compromise to keep reforms alive,'' Mr. Khatami said, ''but I believe that this is a killing poison for it. We all know what people want, and they won't give up on their demands.''
In an interview, Mr. Khatami said he worried that the reform movement might now be crippled by the disqualifications and consigned to the political sidelines for years. Even so, he says, a broader awakening is taking place in Iran that even exclusion from the election cannot undo.
''Society is more conscious of its rights,'' he said, ''and there are many civil institutions that we can use.''
Mr. Khatami is representative of the evolution that many in the reform movement have undergone. After the revolution in 1979 he shared the animosity toward the West common in the political vanguard and advocated limiting social and political freedoms, particularly for women, to raise a generation devoted to revolutionary ideals.
But with the death of Ayatollah Khomeini in 1989, many of those close to the leader were marginalized by supporters of his successor, Ayatollah Khamenei, in much the same way the reformers have been pushed aside today.
Mr. Khatami said he had come to realize since then that the country needed to emerge from its political isolation to move toward greater development and democracy. He and others, including his brother, took that time to rethink their political agenda, he said.
''There were a series of ideals at the time of the revolution which were forgotten right away,'' Mr. Khatami recalled. ''We think the revolution should have put the country on the course toward democracy. That was the need, and we have to adopt modern methods to move that way.''
Mr. Khatami himself lived for a year and a half in London on a postdoctoral fellowship and left his medical practice to return to politics when his brother entered the presidential race in 1997.
He said that at that time the reform group, not yet a political party, was not seeking power. ''We just wanted to use the election as a platform and spread new ideas about democracy and civil society,'' he said. ''We did not have a good understanding of society and were caught by surprise when people so overwhelmingly supported our ideas.''
The party's Western-style campaign, with concerts and promises for more political and social opening, attracted young people who were frustrated with the religious strictures. His wife became the first wife of a politician to campaign along with her husband.
Since then the party suffered many setbacks at the hands of its conservative opponents, including the exclusion of its candidates from the current election. Still, he says, whether or not the reformers sit in Parliament, their movement is not going away.
''We learned that we cannot believe the whole world is against us,'' he said. ''We can have common interests with other countries and can collaborate with the world.
''We learned that human rights, which we argued was a political instrument against us, was indeed a value. We learned that we cannot limit people's freedom for the sake of independence.''
