The Bush administration backed away on Wednesday from a forecast it made public only last week predicting average job gains of more than 300,000 a month for 2004 but said it remained confident of robust though unspecified job growth for the year.
In two news briefings, the White House press secretary, Scott McClellan, repeatedly declined to endorse the forecast, which was in the Economic Report of the President, a 417-page book sent to Congress last week under Mr. Bush's signature.
''The president is not a statistician,'' Mr. McClellan said at one point.
Asked why he would not stand behind the forecast, Mr. McClellan replied: ''I think what the president stands behind is the policies that he is implementing, the policies that he is advocating. That's what's important.''
The shift opened the door to an attack by Democrats, who said that as the presidential campaign heated up the administration was being forced to acknowledge that its economic prescription of tax cuts and free trade had failed to generate the jobs Mr. Bush had promised.
A day after Treasury Secretary John W. Snow signaled the administration's unease with the specific job-growth predictions by distancing himself from the forecast, the White House tried to avoid being held to a particular figure for employment growth for this year.
But it was left scrambling to counter the impression of disarray within its economic team and grappling with a new political headache after weeks in which Mr. Bush's re-election campaign has been knocked off balance by a variety of issues. They include the failure so far to find banned weapons in Iraq and questions about the president's service in the National Guard more than three decades ago.
Along with the war in Iraq, the economy is sure to be a determining issue in the presidential race, and although the economy is rebounding by many measures, it has so far not generated new jobs in the numbers that would be expected at this stage of a recovery. Mr. Bush, answering a reporter's question in the Oval Office, said the economy was growing and getting stronger, and he cited figures showing that the economy had created 366,000 jobs since last summer. But he did not directly respond to the question of whether the economy was strong enough to meet the projections in his forecast.
The forecast projected that the average level of nonfarm payroll employment in 2004 would be 132.7 million, up 2.6 million from an average of 130.1 million in 2003. But because the figures were averages for the full year, they implied that employment at the end of 2004 would be substantially higher than 132.7 million, probably around 134 million, economists said. Outside economists calculated that the economy would have to generate an average of at least 300,000 jobs a month this year to meet the forecast, assuming relatively steady employment growth.
White House officials did not dispute those calculations. But they said their forecast was completed Dec. 2, based on employment data through October, and they suggested it was already out of date by the time the report was published this month. The economy created 83,000 jobs in November, 16,000 in December and 112,000 in January, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, well below the pace necessary to meet the administration's projection.
''If you ask what is the official administration projection today, the answer is there hasn't been one since Dec. 2,'' said N. Gregory Mankiw, the chairman of the White House's Council of Economic Advisers. ''We expect a robust job market in 2004.''
A Republican with close ties to the White House said Mr. Snow and Commerce Secretary Donald H. Evans, who are barnstorming on the West Coast selling the administration's economic policies, had been instructed to distance the administration from the projection. The forecast had provided Democrats a concrete benchmark of the White House's own making against which to measure Mr. Bush's economic record.
''They deliberately had Snow back away from the numbers,'' the Republican said. ''Snow was not off the reservation, and neither was Evans.''
Last week the White House endured another political storm over the economy when Mr. Mankiw said there were economic benefits from the forces that had led some jobs to migrate from the United States to nations with lower labor costs. The White House's reluctance on Wednesday to embrace its own jobs forecast led Democrats to question the foundation of Mr. Bush's economic policy, that sweeping tax cuts would lead to substantial growth in employment.
''Apparently, George Bush is the only person left in the country who actually believes the far-fetched promises he's peddling,'' said Senator John Kerry, the front-runner for the Democratic nomination.
Since Mr. Bush became president, the economy has lost 2.3 million jobs. Mr. Bush has blamed the recession that was beginning as he took office, the terrorist attacks of 2001, the effects of the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and corporate scandals.
But the White House has repeatedly been overoptimistic in its projections. Economists at the Economic Policy Institute and the Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, liberal groups often critical of the administration, said in a recent report that while the administration projected last year that average payroll employment for 2003 would rise by 1.7 million above its level for 2002, it declined by more than 400,000.
