Why Is Our Bag Missing That Trip to Vegas?
''Please call me to discuss your talent before extending invitations to clients,'' reads the e-mail message that the celebrity wrangler LORI LEVINE of Flying Television sent out to a select number of press agents around town this week.
And what event or performance might that client be considered for?
The Entertainment Weekly Academy Awards viewing party at Elaine's. Or perhaps we should say the gift of celebrity gift bags worth more than $45,000 that will be given to those celebrities who choose -- or are chosen -- to attend the Entertainment Weekly viewing party at Elaine's.
(Yes, Columbia Journalism Young 'Uns, it is quite common for a celebrity to be lured to an event these days by a little gift. And if anyone ever says to us, when we ask her on the red carpet what brought her there, ''I don't know a soul here, I came because they promised a limo and dinner, and of course one can always use the face time on 'Entertainment Tonight,' and if you think I'm returning this dress to ROBERTO CAVALLI you're nuts,'' we will clutch our hearts and fall to the ground in cardiac arrest. A gift bag of $45,000 is, however, impressive.)
The wrangle sheet first sent out by Ms. Levine, in fact, listed a Celebrity Gift Bag with ''Value Approx: $35,000'' written on it. That included, of course, limousine service. Plus a note that ''Designer Outfit can be arranged.''
Within a few days, however, the gifts (i.e., the free product placement and advertising) escalated. The Entertainment Weekly Oscar Party 2004 Celebrity Gift Bag now included a three-night weekend for two in South Beach, with first-class air travel, spa treatments and personal security guard (Value Approx: $15,000); a similar trip for two to Las Vegas (Value Approx: $17,500); a year membership at Bikram Yoga Union Square (Value Approx: $1,700, but with the mention, they've just gotten their money's worth); VTech phones with color picture screen ($200); two Fantasy Tan Corporation tanning sessions. ''Still pending,'' according to Flying Television's alphabetized list, is a long list of items, including espresso maker, hot-air-balloon rides, microwave oven, snowboards, surfboards, TiVo, trip to Jamaica, trip to Arizona, Uggs, ''virtual body scan/M.R.I.,'' and washer-dryer.
Whether or not you get to keep your Oscar night outfit is a matter decided, we were told, case by case.
The V.I.P. (that is to say, Schlepper) Goodie Bag, which we calculate to be worth about $1,000, includes a gift certificate for a dozen Krispy Kreme doughnuts. For those who receive this bag, and not the other, Boldface suggests downing them all in one sitting.
We Must Try That Sometime With the Publisher
''Clothes, they give me clothes!'' sang out PATRICIA CLARKSON, who appeared at a Soho House party in her honor in a black ALBERTA FERRETTI slip dress and candy apple red heels that matched her lipstick. The people she was referring to are designers. ''These are STUART WEITZMAN,'' she added, of her shoes. ''You know, I was going to wear these strappy sandals, but it's just too darn cold. And so I put on my hot red pumps.'' She laughed. ''And my red lipstick.''
And why is Ms. Clarkson getting the free stuff, Columbia J. School Young-'Uns? Because she's been nominated for an Academy Award for best supporting actress for ''Pieces of April,'' in which she plays the cancer-stricken mother of a hipster daughter. The cocktail party at Soho House was given by Ms. Clarkson's friend, JULIANNE MOORE. The crowd included a network of film people who are perfectly comfortable hailing their own taxis: OLIVER PLATT; JOHN CAMERON MITCHELL, in a red henley with a button-down shirt tied around his waist; Ms. Moore's husband, BART FREUNDLICH, in jeans and a black long-sleeved T-shirt; STANLEY TUCCI; PHILIP SEYMOUR HOFFMAN; and MIKE POTTER, Ms. Clarkson's makeup artist from ''April.''
But to the guest of honor, Ms. Clarkson. She has the perfect, swingy movie-star hair, a bit longer than shoulder length. She is fine boned as Limoges. Her voice is warm. And, like the Southern lady she is, she knows how to conjure a compliment.
''What is with the schoolboy tie?'' Ms. Clarkson asked JACK TURNER, a scruffy vice president of productions and acquisitions at United Artists, who was wearing a diagonally striped tie with his pinstriped suit. ''But it works, because you're just so hot and sexy.''
with Melena Z. Ryzik
BOLDFACE NAMES
