The leaders of Germany, France and Britain, meeting here on Wednesday to discuss the European economy, dismissed criticism from other European countries that they were making an effort to dictate terms to the rest of the European Union.
The meeting of the three, at which they announced broad agreement on the need for what they called ''urgent action'' to stimulate economic growth and competitiveness, had been overshadowed by sharp complaints in Italy, Spain and other European neighbors that the three countries were trying, as the Italian prime minister, Silvio Berlusconi, put it, to form a ''directorate'' that ''Europe doesn't need.''
''We're not trying to dominate anybody, let alone Europe,'' Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany said at a news conference.
Jacques Chirac, the French president, said: ''I do not understand what people are criticizing, unless you consider that they are embarking on controversy. There are meetings in different formats across Europe, and there always have been.''
Mr. Schröder, Mr. Chirac and Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain, addressing what they called Europe's failure to meet economic targets set at a meeting of the European Union four years ago in Lisbon, called in a letter for the creation of a new post inside the European Commission to oversee economic reform among all European Union member states.
More generally, they said that they had found agreement on the need for all of the European economies to pursue economic reforms that would close the technology and innovation gap with the United States and make the union more competitive.
''We have to be clear about the fact that prosperity for Europe and for Europe's citizens can only be guaranteed if we succeed in implementing new products and implementing new jobs,'' Mr. Schröder said.
In what might have seemed a small matter, compared with the overall question of European competitiveness, Mr. Chirac took the occasion to announce that Mr. Schröder had agreed to allow France to lower its tax on restaurant bills to 5.5 percent in 2006 from 19.6 percent.
''You will smile,'' Mr. Chirac said at the press conference, and, indeed, both Mr. Schröder and Mr. Blair did smile, but the restaurant tax has more than symbolic value at a time when France and Germany are running budget deficits higher than those allowed by the union's rules. The decrease in the tax will make it more difficult for France to lower its deficit, but Mr. Chirac had promised it to his electorate on the ground that it will increase business and jobs in this important part of the French economy.
All three said that most European countries faced similar problems, including low rates of investment in research and development, high unemployment and rapidly aging populations, and that their meeting was aimed at generating new ideas to be presented to the European Commission next month.
''These three nations represent half the population of Europe and more than half of the wealth,'' Mr. Blair said, referring to Germany, France and Britain. ''If we can come to an agreement here to make our economies work better that will be of economic benefit to all of Europe.''
While the three dismissed criticism that they were holding a ''summit meeting'' the fact that the criticism was voiced at all suggested something of the suspicious mood in Europe months after the union was sharply split by the debate over the American-led war in Iraq.
