With Penn State having declined from a national power to a Big Ten also-ran, Coach Joe Paterno's goal of one more undefeated season and a third national championship seems more pipe dream than possibility.
Coming off a career-worst 3-9 record last season, and with three losing seasons in the past four years, Paterno is now reshuffling his staff in hopes of restoring the program's faded glory.
Out is the longtime assistant Fran Ganter, the offensive coordinator and assistant head coach, who was once believed to be the heir apparent to Paterno as head coach. In is Galen Hall, a coach with a record of success and a history of infractions while with the Florida Gators.
Paterno also demoted his son Jay, who will remain as quarterbacks coach but will no longer be the recruiting coordinator. The former Nittany Lions quarterback Mike McQueary, a graduate assistant last season, was named assistant wide-receivers coach and the recruiting coordinator. Both Jay Paterno and McQueary will work with wide receivers after the departure of the assistant Ken Carter to Vanderbilt.
Ganter, who has been with the program for 37 years as a player and a coach, accepted the newly created job of assistant athletic director for football administration.
Paterno, 77, gave no indication yesterday that he was close to retiring after 38 years as head coach and 54 years with the program.
''When it comes time for me to step down, I'm going to step down,'' he said during a news conference at Beaver Stadium. ''When that is going to be, I don't know. Right now, I have no plans to step down.
''I've talked to a lot of recruits and I've told them I'd like to win one more national championship and have one more undefeated season. I've had an undefeated season in every decade I've coached except this one.''
Paterno also reportedly told the incoming quarterback, Anthony Morelli, that he would coach through Morelli's senior season in 2007.
With a 339-109-3 career record, second only to Florida State's Bobby Bowden in victories among Division I-A coaches, Paterno can perhaps choose his own departure date. Penn State is 22-26 over the past four seasons. Much of the blame fell on a young offense, which is why Hall, 63, was hired. He last coached with the Dallas Cowboys in 2002.
Paterno praised Hall, a former Penn State quarterback who was part of two national championship teams at Oklahoma as the offensive coordinator in the mid-1970's and who went on to become the head coach at Florida. With the Gators, Hall was 40-18-1 from 1984 through 1989. He was dismissed after N.C.A.A. violations were uncovered during his tenure there.
Paterno hired Hall as a graduate assistant in 1990; Hall went on to coach in N.F.L. Europe in the 1990's.
''I didn't think he had gotten a good deal at Florida and if I could help him I would,'' Paterno said of Hall. ''I wanted to let people know that I believed in him. Obviously, he's had a lot of success in the areas he has coached.''
For Hall, this is a chance to go home and an opportunity to coach in Division I-A again, something he had not done since 1990.
''I am very excited about the opportunity to return to Penn State,'' said Hall, who had not yet arrived in Happy Valley and participated in yesterday's news conference by telephone.
''That is something I had in the back of my mind probably ever since I left there in my collegiate days a long time ago. It is a dream come true for me to come back home again. I really haven't had a chance to evaluate anything there. I am sure there is talent and we will try to be competitive in a very tough conference.''
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
