A black eye over the Parmalat collapse was the last thing the Dutch trust business needed.
Like many foreign corporations, Parmalat saved millions in taxes by routing many of its financial transactions -- borrowing and issuing bonds, collecting royalties and interest -- through shell companies that it owned in the Netherlands. Some 200 ''trust offices'' in this country, some of them parts of law firms, others freestanding, make a living from the creation and operation of such shell companies. The shells, also known as conduit companies, typically manufacture nothing, sell nothing, employ no one and have no physical existence beyond a mailbox and a file drawer. But they take part in an estimated $1 trillion in transactions each year. Other places with favorable tax laws, like Luxembourg, Malta and the Channel Islands, have similar setups.
For decades, the Dutch trust industry was almost entirely unregulated. But a host of outside interests, ranging from the European Union to the Federal Bureau of Investigation, have become increasingly concerned about the possible abuse of shell companies here and elsewhere for fraud and money laundering, especially after the Enron Corporation and its myriad ''special-purpose entities,'' more than 120 of them in the Netherlands, hit the headlines more than two years ago.
Last December, the Dutch central bank issued a warning that turned out to be prophetic. ''Nationally, as well as internationally, there are signs of risk associated with trust companies,'' said Arnold Schilder, a director of the bank. ''The risks are significant. The reputation of your trust office can be damaged by the actions of your clients.''
Just a few weeks later, Parmalat surfaced as a case in point, raising questions about the role that the trust industry played in the finances of a company that issued some $6 billion in bonds through its shell subsidiaries in the Netherlands. The bonds are now all but worthless. The five shell companies have been declared insolvent by a court in Italy, where Parmalat is based, and their dealings are the subject of a formal securities investigation in the Netherlands.
Now, the trust industry here is about to be scrutinized as never before. On March 1, new regulations will take effect that the government hopes will restore confidence in the industry without threatening the hundreds of trust office jobs it creates and the billions of dollars in taxes it pays to the Netherlands.
For the first time, the central bank will have formal authority to oversee the entire industry. Trust offices will be required to obtain permits to operate, and when money flows through the shell companies they oversee, they will be responsible to a certain degree for knowing where the money is coming from and where it is going.
These rules come on top of European Union guidelines, recently put in place in the Netherlands, requiring that trust offices verify the identities of their clients and report any large cash transactions to regulators. Frits Bolkestein, the European commissioner responsible for financial regulation, warned on Feb. 11 that the union might increase its scrutiny even more. ''The financial services industry had better get its act together and do so fast,'' Mr. Bolkestein told the European Parliament. ''If industry leaders are not prepared to do this, then regulators will have to do much more than perhaps they or we would like.''
The new rules in the Netherlands are meant to address concerns about the trust industry's opacity, which have been building for some time. ''The huge cash flows passing through these companies also bring risks to the stability of the financial system,'' the central bank wrote in a recent report. ''The Dutch offices could be used by people with an interest in remaining anonymous, for reasons that can't bear the light of day. This would impair the integrity of the financial system.''
The global law firm Baker &amp; McKenzie decided three years ago to get out of the trust office business in the Netherlands, in part because of such worries.
''If you don't manage this kind of business well, then it becomes a risk,'' said Maarten L.B. van der Lande, managing partner of the firm's office in Amsterdam. ''You need to know what goes on inside these companies, and you need to assess if there are any risks with the clients. That requires time and due diligence.''
Some financial experts here go further, suggesting that perhaps the Netherlands ought not to be so welcoming to foreign companies that do no tangible business here.
''We have seen with Enron and now with Parmalat that they are used for other purposes, fraudulent purposes,'' said Henk Langendijk, a professor of financial accounting at the University of Amsterdam, referring to conduit companies. ''That is why I question the whole offshore business as a whole.''
Still, no one in the Netherlands has been accused of any wrongdoing in the Parmalat scandal, and Andre Nagelmaker, a board member of the Association of International Management Services, a trade group, bridled at suggestions that his industry bore any responsibility for what went wrong at the company.
''Where have the mistakes been made?'' said Mr. Nagelmaker, whose organization represents 16 large trust offices, including the one that oversaw Parmalat's entities in the Netherlands. ''Not at Dutch trust offices. Not at Dutch companies.''
Dutch law exempts almost all foreign royalty and interest income from withholding tax, but the shell companies do generate tax revenue for the Dutch treasury -- both directly, when they record net profits on their dealings, and indirectly, through the fees they pay to the trust industry.
''The Netherlands has a commercial interest in such conduit companies,'' the central bank says in a brochure. ''They pay tax and provide work for legal firms, banks and notaries.''
Just how much tax they pay is hard to say. A spokesman for the ministry of finance said it had ''no idea whatsoever,'' because officials there do not track tax revenues by industry.
''We don't know what milkmen pay in taxes, we don't know what bakers pay, and we don't know what trust companies pay,'' the spokesman, Roel van Koperen, said.
The central bank estimated that in 2002 the Netherlands took in 1.7 billion euros ($2.2 billion) in tax revenues directly from conduit companies, many of them set up by trust offices for foreign owners.
That figure does not include taxes paid by the trust offices and their employees.
''We are a small country, so in a way, it's producing some employment, but at a cost,'' said Mr. Langendijk of the University of Amsterdam. ''We are providing not only tax savings, but possibilities for fraud, too.''
The Dutch realized long before the Parmalat scandal spilled into the Netherlands that they needed to get a better grasp of the enormous amounts of foreign money flowing through their country. But the principal worries have been over misdeeds more sinister than accounting fraud or tax evasion.
The Financial Action Task Force, established in 1989 by the Group of 7 industrial nations, warned two years ago in a report that trusts and shell companies, ''usually formed and managed by professional service providers, are a common feature of money laundering schemes.'' After the terrorist attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, the F.B.I. voiced concerns that conduit companies might be used by terrorists to funnel money to recruits abroad.
But evidence has been scant of any such abuse in the Netherlands.
''I've been in this business for 15 years and I've only come across one case that you could say afterwards was explicitly criminal,'' said Mr. Nagelmaker of the industry trade group.
He said his company referred the matter to investigators in France, where the parent of the shell company was headquartered.
While the new rules that take effect March 1 may erect some barriers against criminal abuses of conduit companies, it is not clear that they would have been much help in cases like Enron or Parmalat.
In Parmalat's case, securities regulators are just beginning to determine what became of the proceeds from more than two dozen bond issues by the Dutch subsidiaries.
Had the new rules been in effect before, the trust offices that ran the subsidiaries would have been able to tell regulators immediately where the money was initially sent -- say, to a Parmalat account in an Italian bank -- but would not be responsible for knowing what Parmalat did with the money after that.
Bondholders searching for someone to blame for the apparent plundering of Parmalat, or for comparable scandals in the future, may have a tough time holding trust offices accountable in court here.
To establish liability under the civil code in the Netherlands, a plaintiff must prove not only that a trust office intentionally mismanaged the shell company but also that the mismanagement contributed directly to the parent company's collapse.
Far from feeling any culpability in the Parmalat mess, however, the trust industry here sees itself as something between innocent bystander and victim.
''If the whole world was defrauded,'' Mr. Nagelmaker said, ''then I can only say we aren't any better.''
