When Paul Brown coached the Cleveland Browns in the 1940's, he began gauging a player's speed in covering punts by timing how fast he ran 40 yards.
Brown's estimation that the average punt traveled that distance is why modern athletes still run the 40-yard dash.
Six decades later, Brown's simple tool has become the fulcrum within the intricate world of preparation for the National Football League draft, where tenths of a second in a 40-yard dash can gain or lose millions of dollars.
That's why an increasing number of the league's top prospects are training for the annual four-day N.F.L. combine in Indianapolis, which starts Thursday, by rushing from university campuses to distant workout facilities.
So detailed is the fine-tuning at these finishing schools that players have their blood examined to evaluate their diet, and some are even pampered by personal chefs, masseuses and stretch doctors.
All of this is done, of course, to elevate a player's draft status and increase his signing bonus, one of the few guaranteed paychecks given in the N.F.L.
''It's not that different than a high school kid preparing for the SAT,'' Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi said. ''I'd be lying to you if I didn't tell you that a player can make or lose money at these things. It becomes your identity.''
A former Philadelphia Eagles defensive end, Mike Mamula, is widely considered the instigator of the trend, as he leapt from a projected midround pick to the No. 7 overall choice after a stunning performance at the 1995 combine.
Mamula, from Boston College, ran the 40-yard dash in 4.6 seconds and aced the combine's strength and agility tests. Mamula went on to a pedestrian N.F.L. career and retired in 2000 because of knee and ankle injuries with 31 1/2 career sacks.
Mamula had the combine statistics of Trev Alberts, a Nebraska outside linebacker whom the Colts drafted No. 5 in 1994. Mamula worked with Mike Boyle, then the Boston University strength coach, to best Alberts's numbers. A trend was born.
''I guess I'm a trailblazer,'' Mamula said recently in a telephone interview. ''But I had no idea at the time.''
Kenechi Udeze, who finished tied for the N.C.A.A. lead in sacks last season with 16 1/2, played for the co-national champion Southern California and boasts a sculptured 6-foot-4, 285-pound frame.
But Udeze, a projected early first-round pick, knows that his impressive résumé can be tainted by poor numbers. And the difference between being a top-five or a 20th pick can be well over $10 million.
So two weeks after his college career ended on Jan. 1 at the Rose Bowl, Udeze left the campus and drove to Phoenix to work out with Brett Fischer, a trainer who has worked with players in the N.F.L. as well as Major League Baseball and the P.G.A.
Udeze is one of about a dozen players Fischer helps prepare for the combine -- using a regimen that includes everything from providing doctors to examining how food breaks down in a player's blood to testing flexibility in a player's big toe, a key component to running and jumping.
''When you're getting ready to live your lifelong dream of playing in the N.F.L. and make money doing it, there's really no limits to what I'd do,'' Udeze said. ''I'd do anything.''
The cluster of luxury sport utility vehicles parked at an anonymous-looking Phoenix-area office complex offers the only hint that it is a training ground for elite athletes.
Inside, Randy Johnson, the Diamondbacks left-hander, wanders around with a wrap on his pitching shoulder, and autographed jerseys and pictures festoon the walls.
Offensive linemen Travelle Wharton, Drew Strojny and Marwan Hage, who together weigh nearly a half-ton, rumble through interval sprints each afternoon to improve their 40 times.
They are three of the seven prospective draft clients of Jonathan Feinsod, a New York-based agent, who train here. Agents have become key figures in accelerating the trend, using lavish facilities like Fischer's and an array of complementary services as a tool to recruit players.
The players work with a speed coach, Bruce Frankie, who has coached two Olympic-medal-winning sprinters in the 1980's. Sometimes, the entire lesson will revolve around just the first two steps of the 40.
''There's not much sense to it,'' said Strojny, a 6-8, 321-pound tackle from Duke. ''We're linemen. There's never going to be a time that we line up in a sprinter's start and run 40 yards.''
Hage, a center who played at Colorado, arrived in Phoenix on Dec. 16 with a bum ankle and a bum 40 time, 5.9, which he sheepishly admits is worse that most pee-wee players. Healthy and now imbued with proper technique, he is running a 5.2.
''The first couple days here were like learning how to walk,'' Hage said.
The players work out from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. every day to prepare for the combine's tests, which range from how many times they bench 225 pounds to a three-cone drill that tests agility.
Hage said the exercise regimen had changed his body type. A nutritional consultant told him that his blood absorbed too much fat, so he has been relegated to a diet of chicken, turkey and tuna, with red meat allowed only once a week.
''My girlfriend visited and she said, 'Where's the belly?' '' Hage said.
The players get tested mentally as well. A former N.F.L. lineman, Andre Wadsworth, conducts mock interviews with actual questions drawn from combine interviews like ''Do you smoke pot?'' and ''Are your parents divorced?''
The players say they are so exhausted that they go to bed by 10 p.m. They also know what is at stake.
''If I go out there and put up some outstanding numbers,'' said Wharton, a tackle who played at South Carolina, ''it could change my life.''
Nine years after he took the combine by storm, Mamula laughed at how detailed the preparation for the combine had become.
''The most complicated thing we used,'' he said, ''was a stopwatch.''
PRO FOOTBALL
