AT the height of the Vietnam War, Thomas H. Wakeman III had a No. 3 in the draft lottery. Certain to be inducted, he joined the R.O.T.C. in college. After graduation, he was shipped off to Fort Belvoir in Virginia, where he was trained to be a combat engineer. A war, in a distant land, appeared to be an inevitable part of his future.
But in a stroke of what he considers amazing luck, he was sent instead to his hometown of San Francisco as a marine biologist for the Army Corps of Engineers. The perils of war were happily replaced by a detailed study to determine whether deepening a channel for larger ships would harm Dungeness crabs.
Barely avoiding one war should have been enough of a lesson, especially for a man who fervently wanted to stay out of it, but on March 1, Mr. Wakeman will take a leave from the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, where he oversees a $2 billion dredging program, and go to work in Iraq for the Department of Defense.
The last few days, with his departure looming, have been hard. ''There are some real down emotional moments,'' he said, ''including this weekend talking with my sister and wife. I have no desire to be a martyr.''
Mr. Wakeman, 57, will become the principal maritime adviser to the Iraqi Ministry of Transportation. But the word adviser, he admits, is misleading. In fact, he will direct the vast effort to clear Iraq's five main ports, living not in the splendid isolation of the huge compound set up by the Coalition Provisional Authority in Baghdad, but traveling between the southern port cities of Umm Qasr and Basra. He said he was attracted to the job because it was a challenge and ''I want to help.''
''They are getting together some trailers for us to work out of in Umm Qasr,'' he said.
He made the decision to accept the post, he said, the weekend Saddam Hussein was captured.
''It was a moment when it looked like things were turning around,'' he said.
But his continued scrutiny of the news reports out of Iraq shows a country that continues to struggle with chaos and widespread violence.
Not that Mr. Wakeman is new to instability -- just not at this level. He moved frequently growing up. His father, who sold steel for Kaiser Steel, was transferred about every two years to cities in Florida, California, Georgia, Texas and Oklahoma.
''I lived in 14 different places before I graduated from high school,'' he said. ''I would get the California accent down when I would move to Florida. I would get the Texas twang down and move to Oklahoma, where that Texas twang would not work with the Sooners. And then I would be back in California. Friendships had to be made quickly because they ended quickly. I learned to adapt.''
He went to California Polytechnic State University to be a mechanical engineer like his father but was drawn to the ocean and switched his major to marine biology.
''It made my dad very disappointed,'' he said, and then smiled. ''I can hear my dad in my head saying, 'Oh, I wasn't really disappointed,' but he was.''
He is the perpetual student. He went on to do graduate work at San Francisco State University and the University of California at Berkeley. He is now finishing a doctorate in earth systems engineering at Columbia University. He has worked for the Port Authority for the last decade after holding similar positions on the West Coast.
''I will work on my dissertation in Iraq,'' he said hopefully. ''I want to get it finished over there.''
His wife, Rosemary, a history professor at Fordham University, and their two college-age daughters will remain here during what could be an 18-month assignment.
THE scope of what he is about to do seemed at times to unnerve him as he spoke in a conference room at his office on East 18th Street in Manhattan. He stopped, wondered out loud whether he knew what he was getting into, and confessed that he did not know enough about the culture, language, ethnic rivalries, religion or history of Iraq. He has been reading a book called ''Iraq for Dummies.''
There are 800 Iraqis who will work under him, although nearly all are on strike because they have not been paid since Jan. 24. He will have a $40 million budget, but with the condition of the ports, including 168 wrecks from the war with Iran cluttering the Basra waterway, he suspects the cost could run into the hundreds of millions of dollars. The coalition authority recently replaced the director of the Iraqi Port Authority. His job, he concedes, ''will be a steep learning curve.''
He has a list of items he has been told to pack by the coalition authority.
''It is sort of like going off to camp,'' he said. ''You have to bring blankets, towels, a toothbrush and batteries. I want to get a camera. I have a regular system of yoga and stretching. I meditate twice a day to help me stay centered. I will keep these routines to help me cope.''
But when asked about his biggest concern, the talk returned to security.
''I don't want to come home a vegetable,'' he said softly. ''This would not be fair to my family.''
PUBLIC LIVES
