For a while, Fordham stayed with unbeaten St. Joseph's last night. There was Mark Jarrell-Wright driving for a dunk that tied the score at 17-17, and the slam by Michael Haynes a couple of minutes later that cut the Hawks' lead to 2 and had Rams fans believing that nothing was impossible at Rose Hill Gym.
Fordham even seemed to have an answer for Hawks guard Jameer Nelson, a leading national player of the year candidate, who did not have a field goal in the first 10 minutes.
Then reality set in.
Fordham will have to settle for the fact that it did not exactly embarrass itself, at least for the first 12 minutes or so. The Rams' strong start was the only surprise on a night when everything else went according to form. No. 2 St. Joseph's won and won easily, 72-54.
The Hawks (23-0, 12-0 Atlantic 10) wrested control in the final minutes of the first half before pulling away from Fordham (4-18, 1-10). St. Joseph's is now four games away from an unbeaten regular season; Stanford is the only other unbeaten Division I men's team.
The Hawks led by 33 points in the second half before Fordham made the final score more respectable while both teams' substitutes were on the court in the final minutes.
''We just played against a team that we were very, very overmatched against tonight,'' Fordham Coach Dereck Whittenburg said.
But St. Joseph has not convinced everyone it is for real, which does not sit well with its coach, Phil Martelli. When asked if the Hawks deserved to be seeded No. 1 in an N.C.A.A. tournament regional if they stay undefeated, he lashed out at the team's critics, particularly the ESPN analyst and former Fordham coach Digger Phelps.
''The only ones who wouldn't think that would be the nonsensical talking heads who are paid a lot of money and utter complete nonsense,'' Martelli said. ''We have the 20th-ranked strength of schedule. What is the question? What do they want to know? And we've beaten them all.
''They get on there and they talk. The one guy in particular, who happened to coach here -- yeah, that's the guy,'' Martelli said in an obvious reference to Phelps.
As is so often the case, however, St. Joseph's was led by its starting backcourt, Nelson and Delonte West. Shaking off his slow start, Nelson had 18 points, making 7 of 12 shots. West scored 16 points, hitting 6 of 15 shots from the floor. Neither Nelson nor West played the final 9 minutes 50 seconds as Martelli seemed intent on not letting the score get too out of hand.
''At least we got one thing straight, I do know who the best guard in the country,'' Whittenburg said of Nelson, adding, ''He is a great, great player.''
There was energy in the building and a sold-out crowd, two rare occurrences at Fordham.
The atmosphere did not go unnoticed by Martelli, who compared the Rose Hill crowd with what he imagined the environment was for the St. John's-Georgetown game at Madison Square Garden.
''I thought there was a tremendous atmosphere here,'' he said. ''I think it's a great statement for the Atlantic 10 that the best basketball game in this city tonight was in this building. Had you flipped the buildings, we would have filled the Garden and that other league may not have filled this building.''
Whatever effect the pro-Fordham crowd had lasted only so long. Haynes's dunk, which came off an alley-oop pass from Jermaine Anderson, trimmed the Hawks' lead to 21-19 with 7:41 left in the half.
But little else went right for the Rams. St. Joseph's went on a 16-2 run to close out the half with a 37-21 lead.
Things did not go any better for Fordham in the second half. After Jarrell-Wright scored on a jumper in the lane on Fordham's first possession, St. Joseph's went on a 17-0 run for a 54-23 lead.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
