The billionaire matchmaker is at it again.
Today, Bernard Arnault, the chairman and chief stockholder of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton, will name Marco Gobbetti, who runs the Italian fashion company Moschino, to be chief executive of Givenchy Couture, the troubled but once-renowned fashion house, executives involved in the deal said yesterday.
Another announcement, that of a designer to succeed Julien Macdonald as Givenchy's creative director, will not be far behind, they said.
For Mr. Arnault, a 54-year-old engineer who started off dealing with architects in his family's construction business, the pending announcement is part of high fashion's continuing soap opera -- of trying to ''make a match,'' as he said, between a chief executive and a (possibly) temperamental clothing designer.
During his 15 years running LVMH, he has managed to forge a creative bond with John Galliano, whose outrageous collections for Christian Dior have been hailed by fashion critics. He found Hedi Slimane for Dior Homme -- and paired Marc Jacobs with Louis Vuitton in a critical and financial succès fou.
Mr. Arnault said in an interview last week in the LVMH Tower in Manhattan -- overlooking the glossy new Louis Vuitton store that opened last week -- that Givenchy could become a big brand again, like Christian Dior. Although Givenchy's perfume licenses bring in a big chunk of LVMH revenue -- the company will not divulge the exact percentage -- its runway clothes bring in only a tiny part, and the business is struggling to break even. Under Mr. Macdonald and the current chief executive, Marianne Tesler, who has been there since 1989, the Givenchy brand never took off -- despite Mr. Arnault's ministrations.
More than any other corporate fashion mogul, Mr. Arnault relishes the role of impresario: like Louis B. Mayer on the MGM lot, he visits his sets and even weighs in on his cast of characters.
''Without the chemistry,'' Mr. Arnault said, ''there is nothing.''
LVMH, the $12 billion fashion and liquor conglomerate controlled by Mr. Arnault, has not been without recent failures. Analysts still question whether the company's multibrand strategy can be sustained by the appetites of Japanese and American consumers for $3,000 leather handbags and $800 sweaters.
Over all, LVMH's sales were down 6 percent in 2003, which would translate into plus 4 percent if the dollar were stronger, officials said. But Mr. Arnault has predicted publicly that operating profits, when they are announced in March, will be up 7 percent for 2003.
Although he preaches patience, Mr. Arnault has moved to sell off a few of the dozens of brands LVMH has acquired. Many of them were bought in what analysts call the frenzy of the 1990's, when LVMH even tried to buy Gucci. In 1999, for example, LVMH paid $1.5 billion to buy 15 big-brand companies, including the British shirtmaker Thomas Pink, the wine Château d'Yquem, the jeweler Chaumet and the Philips auction house. It also acquired large chunks of both Fendi and Pucci.
Recently, Mr. Arnault sold both Philips and Ebel, the watch company. He paid 150 million euros for Ebel ($167 million) in 1999 and agreed to sell it to Movado for $47.3 million in December. And last week, Mr. Arnault conceded he might be willing to part with Thomas Pink.
But on the other side of the ledger, Sephora, the global chain of perfume and makeup shops, made a profit in the United States for the first time last year. So did the Duty Free Shops, hit even harder than the rest of the hard-hit luxury sector by SARS, Iraq and the uncertain United States economy.
And then there are those tempestuous designers.
Mr. Arnault conceded last week that his own negotiations with Marc Jacobs, a designer trying to juggle his own collection and that of LVMH's most successful clothing and accessory brand, Louis Vuitton, had been rocky lately, although he insisted that such a situation was ''normal.'' And he also conceded that several major talents -- notably Alexander McQueen and Michael Kors -- had left because, he said, ''the DNA wasn't right,'' a phrase also used by his top lieutenants.
''I am like a conductor,'' he said last week in a rare, lengthy interview in New York, ''but of course, you can do nothing if the piano player, or the violin player, is no good.''
Privately, Mr. Arnault is called a bit stiff -- ''cold'' is the word used most often -- by fashion executives who have dealings with him. Negotiations, they said, can therefore be tough but never emotional.
''I think with Alexander,'' he said of Mr. McQueen, who reportedly just turned down Tom Ford's job at Yves Saint Laurent, ''there was always the bet'' that he could turn Givenchy around. ''It was difficult to work with him; he did not want to listen.''
But Mr. Arnault, speaking from Paris yesterday, said there was something else, too. ''The products were not selling,'' he said.
Trained as an engineer at the École Polytechnique, Mr. Arnault worked at the family's construction company for 13 years, becoming president in 1978. Six years later, he left to reorganize a French state-owned holding company, Boussac, which owned Christian Dior. In the late 80's, Mr. Arnault took control of LVMH. The success of LVMH gave him the cash flow to buy Givenchy (1988) and Kenzo (1993), among many others. He has been its chairman and chief executive ever since. Mr. Arnault owns at least 33 percent of the stock outright, and more through a complex web of partnerships.
''Mr. Arnault personally controls Dior S.A., which in turn is the controlling shareholder of LVMH,'' a spokesman said last night.
Starting in the early 90's, LVMH started gobbling up many of the four-star luxury fashion brands that came on the market. The idea of the multibrand strategy was to generate enough cash from the core brand -- in this case, Louis Vuitton -- to nurture the most promising junior or undervalued ones. Louis Vuitton bags and other goods, which typically have quite high margins, make up more than 60 percent of the company's operating profit.
Other companies, notably Gucci and Richemont, pursued the same strategy but LVMH added wine and liquor companies, which, analysts say, can balance off at least some of the erratic performance of the fashion companies.
Although LVMH, like the other multibrand companies, does not routinely break out profits among the individual holdings, one executive said that the profit margin for Dom Pérignon was close to 35 percent.
Now, some executives within LVMH said, the company's strategy includes ''fattening up'' some of the most troubled brands -- like Donna Karan and the Duty Free Shops -- before they can be sold.
''They would fetch very little now,'' the executive said. Both Donna Karan and the Duty Free Shops have recently reported increased sales: Donna Karan because of what critics' have called improved collections; the Duty Free Shops because of a new management team led by Fred Wilson (now the chief executive at Saks Fifth Avenue) and the partial return of the tourist trade.
Mr. Arnault would not confirm or deny the strategy of fattening up certain brands for sale; but he said he planned to keep both Donna Karan and the Duty Free Shops -- ''for the time being.''
Right now, Mr. Arnault is pouring money into Fendi, after reshuffling the management last fall by putting in Michael Burke, previously an executive with Dior, while keeping Karl Lagerfeld as Fendi's design chief. ''Now we have the right team at Fendi,'' Mr. Arnault said last week, ''so we are going to push. They will be the next star.''
And he has reinvigorated Pucci, a small holding whose sales were almost nonexistent when the company bought it four years ago. A reintroduction of its jazzy signature print on down vests and other items sent sales skyrocketing to about $15 million in 2003 from $5.5 million when Pucci was acquired.
The new Pucci collection is shown at both Jeffrey's in New York's meatpacking district and at Bergdorf Goodman, among others; a simple cotton dress can cost $1,200.
In private, LVMH executives acknowledge their mistakes, not only about companies to buy, but about certain matches that, as Mr. Arnault says, did not have the right DNA.
Still, even his critics say he is involved in the creative processes of his company far more than others in the same position.
Every weekend, he and Sidney Toledano, the chief executive at Dior Couture, visit the Dior shop on the Avenue Montaigne.
''I sometimes make modifications,'' Mr. Arnault said. ''Last Friday, we sold 50 of the new Dietrich bag. We tried to figure out how many we could produce -- we were almost out of stock.'' And that same day, he met again with John Galliano, the Dior designer.
Asked about the past, Mr. Arnault said he would rather talk about the future. He likes to tell the story of his latest discovery when his assistant came running into his office a year ago, shouting she had found a young designer, Antonio Marras, whose work so resembled that of Kenzo -- a troubled company that Mr. Arnault acquired 11 years ago. Mr. Arnault immediately demanded to see the videocassettes that make up the designer's portfolio. ''Hmmm. You are right,'' he recalled saying.
Last week, Mr. Arnault said the new Kenzo designer would ''really wake up the brand.''
Why does he like to deal with designers? ''Maybe I feel it well,'' Mr. Arnault said, with a classic Gallic shrug. ''I like fashion. I feel I have a certain aptitude, like a musical ear. Perhaps I have the good eye. To work with John Galliano for six years at Dior -- after finding him we were criticized: the big shows were outrageous, but nothing was wearable. It took time, but now we have taken Dior to star status.''
''To have the right DNA in a team is very rare,'' he said. ''It's almost like a miracle.''
