The only question regarding Rasheed Wallace's future with the Knicks is when he will join the team, not if he will, according to a person close to Wallace.
Wallace, a talented yet controversial 6-foot-11 forward, is so intent on playing for the Knicks that he is willing to turn down millions of dollars from other teams, the person said.
''Rasheed is kind of hooked on the city,'' the person said, speaking on condition of anonymity. ''It's his preference to try to get there.''
Wallace, who was traded from Portland to Atlanta on Feb. 9, played down his interest in the Knicks before last night's game against the Nets.
''Right now, it's about Atlanta,'' said Wallace, who will become a free agent after this season. ''I'm not worried about the end of the season.''
But Wallace's agent, Bill Strickland, admitted that his goal was to have Wallace on the Knicks' roster before today's 3 p.m. trading deadline.
''While I am hopeful, I'm not optimistic that something will happen by tomorrow,'' Strickland said yesterday.
The Knicks, Detroit and Dallas are the main teams in pursuit of Wallace. The Knicks do not have the pieces to get Wallace in a two-team trade and have been trying to get a third and even a fourth team involved.
Two executives in the league said that Utah was interested in brokering a multiteam deal. Because Utah is close to $6.5 million under the salary cap, it does not have to take back salaries with matching contracts, giving the team flexibility. Utah, according to one Western Conference executive, has been indicating it wants to pull off a major deal before the trading deadline.
Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president of basketball operations, has revived their attraction to potential free agents, which sagged in recent years. As a two-time All-Star, Wallace provides the athleticism and toughness that fits Thomas's identity for the Knicks.
The Knicks have seen this issue before -- a high-profile free agent, like Chris Webber, saying he would love to come to the Knicks before the bidding began, then deciding to take the best financial deal.
But in expressing his desire to play for the Knicks, Wallace may also be intending to do what Gary Payton and Karl Malone did last summer: sacrifice a large contract to win a championship.
Wallace, who is making $17 million this season, is 29, and his next contract will probably be his last chance for a relatively lucrative one.
Strickland would not go into detail about Wallace's thinking, but when asked if Wallace would sign with the Knicks for the $5 million midlevel exception even if another team was offering him $9 million or $10 million a year, the person close to Wallace said, ''Yes.''
As evidence, he pointed to Wallace's recent rejection of Portland's four-year contract extension that was worth a reported $35 million to $40 million. Asked if Wallace had a future with the Knicks in mind when he turned down Portland's offer, the person again said yes.
''He's already walked away from some money to put himself in position to play for the Knicks,'' the person said.
Apparently, Wallace's affinity for the Knicks is based on his belief that he can be the final piece in the club's championship puzzle. While the Knicks were hardly even in playoff contention two months ago, the team's performance since trading for Stephon Marbury has turned Wallace into a believer.
''He wants to play with a veteran team that has a chance to challenge and win now,'' the person said. ''He does not want to be part of a rebuilding team.''
While Atlanta, which has positioned itself to be $20 million under the salary cap this summer, is shopping Wallace before the trading deadline, the Hawks have not ruled out attempting to re-sign him.
Atlanta is hoping to pry Kobe Bryant from the Lakers in free agency, and it would seem that its only hope of attracting Bryant would be to have a frontcourt superstar like Wallace ready to join him.
''I don't know how you let him slide through the cracks,'' Hawks guard Jason Terry said before last night's 98-92 loss to the Nets. ''I'd be trying to offer him something if I was doing it. He's a great player. As you can see, we need him. We need something.''
REBOUNDS
Utah is also one team interested in signing MICHAEL DOLEAC, whom the Knicks traded to Atlanta on Sunday as part of the three-team deal. The Hawks put Doleac on waivers, meaning only Utah, Denver and the Clippers can claim him. The Knicks are not allowed to re-sign him until he clears and becomes a free agent.
PRO BASKETBALL
