In the Bush administration, it is considered heresy to suggest postponing the planned return of sovereignty to Iraq. Turning over control by June 30, administration officials say, is crucial to assuaging Iraqi distress over living under American occupation.
Yet in recent weeks, diplomats and even some in the administration have begun to worry that the date reflects more concern for American politics than Iraqi democracy. Their fear is that an untested government taking power on June 30 may not be strong enough to withstand the pressures bearing down on it.
''When we went into Iraq, our plan was to have a government, build a structure and write a constitution that would be a source of long-term stability,'' said an administration official. ''Now that's out the window.''
Many in the administration say that while they have no proof that the urgency to install a government is politically motivated, it feels to them like part of a White House plan to permit President Bush to run for re-election while taking credit for establishing self-rule in Iraq.
''I can make all kinds of arguments about why we need to establish democracy in Iraq on an urgent basis,'' said another administration official. ''But when you hear from on high that this is what we must do, and there can be no questioning of it, it sounds like politics.''
This week, the administration is in the odd position of insisting on Iraqi self-rule by June 30, while awaiting a recommendation from the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, on how the interim government should be chosen and the form it should take.
Mr. Annan's special envoy, Lakhdar Brahimi, went to Iraq to meet with Iraqi leaders, including Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, to work out some sort of consensus on the shape of an interim government.
The United States wants that government to rule while elections are held later in the year or in 2005 for a constitution-writing legislature. Eventually, elections are to be held to ratify the constitution and establish a permanent Iraqi government.
Administration officials say that Mr. Brahimi was told that one option he must not accept is postponement of the June 30 date for the transfer of power.
''It is holy writ,'' said an administration official.
Yet many experts, including some in the administration, also say they are worried that such a rapid transition entails enormous risks. What happens, some worry, if a major crisis were to occur, resulting from an assassination or bomb explosion in which many Iraqis die?
What happens, moreover, if by accident American forces -- which are still likely to retain wide autonomy and authority over security throughout the country -- kill a large number of Iraqi citizens? Would a shaky Iraqi government lacking in perceived legitimacy survive a blow like that?
It makes no sense, many experts say, to set a fixed date to hand over sovereignty before having any idea of what sort of government will be given power on that date.
''This is entirely a schedule dictated by Karl Rove,'' said an Arab diplomat who maintains close contacts with the administration, referring to the White House's political director. ''Anyone who thinks otherwise is naïve.''
One of the paradoxes of the situation is that France, Germany and other European countries were among those who last year pressed for an early transfer of power to an interim Iraqi government and for the United Nations to take over the political process of moving to a permanent democracy.
Now these countries are likely to insist that if the United States hands over power early, it must fulfill the other side of the bargain by agreeing to a central role for the United Nations.
Last year, the administration insisted that there should be no rush to transfer sovereignty to Iraq, citing the need to get a constitution written first. That plan changed on Nov. 15, when L. Paul Bremer III, the American administrator in Baghdad, set the June 30 date.
Administration officials bridle at the suggestion that politics have played a role in Mr. Bremer's announcement.
''All these people who think that not moving the deadline helps Bush politically are just wrong,'' one official said. ''I can't understand why everybody thinks that if the handover is as messy as some say, that would be advantageous to the president.''
According to administration officials, the early date was chosen by Mr. Bremer last fall because of his frustrations at not persuading the American-picked Iraqi Governing Council to agree on a procedure to write a new constitution. The deadline, he is said to have reasoned, would light a fire under the council.
Mr. Bremer, an aide said, telephoned Condoleezza Rice in the fall, reaching her at a Washington Redskins football game on a Sunday, and she urged him to come back to confer with President Bush on changing the date.
''Arbitrary deadlines in Middle East diplomacy are a bad idea, especially when they correspond, however coincidentally, to our electoral schedule,'' said Noah Feldman, a law professor at New York University, who has advised the Iraqi Governing Council on writing its constitution.
''It's not as if the Iraqis don't have television,'' Mr. Feldman added. ''Everybody in Iraq believes that these deadlines are chosen by American electoral politics. Regardless of whether the June 30 deadline originated in Baghdad or Washington, it clearly reflected a coordinated administration policy to jump-start the process. That's an extremely high risk strategy.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE TRANSFER
