When a 13-year-old boy came home from football practice in September claiming that a coach hit him twice across the face and bloodied his nose, his mother called the school, then went to the police. The coach proclaimed his innocence, but he was charged with assault and pulled from his position as a gym teacher for the North Shore schools.
But recently, with criminal charges still pending against him, the coach, David Sanford, returned to his job teaching physical education in this school district that boasts $18,000 per-pupil spending and a 94 percent graduation rate.
Allowing Mr. Sanford back into a classroom violates no state education guidelines, but it is a decision that runs counter to other school districts' policies -- including New York City's -- and raises questions about how schools juggle competing rights when a teacher faces criminal charges.
The decision angered the family of the 13-year-old boy, Anthony Martignetti, an eighth grader at North Shore Middle School. His mother, Jane Martignetti, was outraged when she learned that Mr. Sanford was teaching again. She called the school to complain, and said she was told that the Mr. Sanford was reinstated because the school had to protect its employees' rights.
''That made me sick to my stomach,'' Ms. Martignetti said. ''What about laws to protect students?''
Mr. Sanford's lawyer, Michael DerGarabedian, described him as a dedicated teacher and coach who is ''as solid as they come.''
Warren Richmond, a lawyer for the North Shore Central School District, said the school board and superintendent investigated Anthony's accusations against Mr. Sanford, which were first publicly reported in Newsday on Wednesday, before reinstating him.
''We would not have put him back in the classroom had we thought there was a danger to students,'' said Mr. Richmond. ''That was an action that was taken very carefully and very deliberately.''
But had Mr. Sanford been a New York City teacher, he would still be out of the classroom. Under Department of Education policies, any teacher arrested and charged with a crime like assault is reassigned and not allowed to teach until the criminal case is decided, said Margie Feinberg, a spokeswoman for the department.
''We wait until it goes through the court system,'' she said.
North Shore school officials would not comment on the district's specific policy in such a case, and their lawyer, Mr. Richmond, said, ''I don't think there is one.''
Mr. Sanford has faced criminal charges before this incident. According to Nassau County court officials, he was found guilty of alcohol-related driving offenses three times, most recently in 2001.
Mr. Sanford's teaching position is only one contested point in this case, which began with a routine football practice on Sept. 16. Prosecutors and Anthony's lawyer say Mr. Sanford yelled at the boy, calling him weak and a NATO player (meaning no action, talk only) and then hit him twice, starting a nosebleed.
But two other coaches later said that Mr. Sanford hadn't walked within 10 feet of Anthony that day. The middle school team's head coach, Bill Melillo, wrote in a letter about the incident to Mr. Sanford's lawyer that Mr. Sanford was standing at the football field's 30-yard line when Mr. Melillo noticed Anthony standing at the 5-yard line with a bloody nose. Anthony yelled out, ''I get these all the time,'' Mr. Melillo said.
Mr. DerGarabedian said Anthony had wanted to quit the football team and concocted a story of assault so his father would not be disappointed with him. Anthony's lawyer ridiculed the accusation, saying that the only time Anthony gets nosebleeds is when people hit him.
