Two sports television channels with different ambitions but a similar subject were started last year.
The NFL Network began with the backing of the powerful league and the cinematic acumen of NFL Films. Immediately, it was beamed nationwide to DirecTV's 11.4 million satellite subscribers.
The Football Network started last September with a mandate to be all things pigskin, and its hiring of Pat Summerall provided credibility. But it received only spotty cable carriage, having been available in only a few states, mainly Louisiana, and quickly burned through its insufficient financing, went off the air in mid-December and furloughed most of its 75 workers.
And while it is seeking new investment, its survival is doubtful.
The network, which was set up in Baton Rouge because of an investment package from the state of Louisiana, left employees and freelancers without promised back pay and thousands of dollars in credit-card debt for unreimbursed expenses like car rentals and housing.
''They put me in a huge bind,'' said Victoria Risch, a freelance graphics producer who said she was owed $12,000. ''I can barely make my rent. I'm contemplating going to work in a mall.''
The network needs new investors to repay workers, vendors and Louisiana Public Broadcasting, which it owes $600,000 to rent its studios, and to restart. Jerry Solomon, the president of the network, said he would not want to restart it without at least $15 million.
''I'm sure people are as frustrated as I am,'' said Solomon, a former president of the sports marketing company ProServ, who is married to the figure skater Nancy Kerrigan. ''I guarantee not one of them is owed as much as I am. But if this succeeds, they'll make more money than they are owed.''
Starting a sports network is risky. It requires finding a niche that cable operators need to fill, plus financing of $75 million to $100 million. Deep-pocketed leagues can afford to start an NFL Network or NBA TV.
A network like College Sports Television, which carries a broad swath of collegiate games and studio programming, had $50 million from investors in the bank before its beginning last April.
Another proposed network, the Ice Channel, once hoped to be on the air as early as last fall, but it has deferred its startup until early next year.
''You can't rush through on your own timetable,'' Jay Rosenstein, the Ice Channel's president, said. ''You have to be aware of the strategic timetable of investors, cable systems and advertisers.''
To begin operations, the Football Network raised $9.2 million from private investors and another $1.25 million in a deal for equity with the state of Louisiana. The state crafted a plan that would provide the channel with tax credits for creating jobs; it paid $2 million for studio equipment that was leased from the local public broadcasting station.
Don Hutchinson, secretary of the state's department of economic development, said that the decision to invest in the Football Network was not based on its own analysis of the network's viability or financing. Instead, he said, the state relied on an investor's due diligence, the Bon Carre Business Center.
The Football Network's plan was to feed what it believed was the football fan's insatiable pigskin appetite -- without N.F.L. or Division I-A college games.
Its diet consisted of Division I-AA, high school, flag, women's and Canadian Football League games, and fantasy football and news programs, which had no N.F.L. highlights.
''We knew we'd put on a lot of games the football fan would like to see,'' said Solomon, who added that informational and fantasy programs were the channel's lifeblood.
Still, producing the estimated 70 games became a financial drain, costing an estimated $2.5 million, a former executive said.
Solomon played down the suggestion that the network had significantly overspent on games. But another executive, Rick Gentile, the senior vice president for production, said: ''We shouldn't have done all the games. But the attitude from management, not just Jerry, was that money was coming in, investors were interested.''
The network spent heavily to look more mature than it was, to impress investors and the few viewers watching in Louisiana and other states, some served by Cox Cable.
''No question mistakes were made, but they were aggressive mistakes,'' the announcer Paul Crane, one of the few remaining employees, said.
The network, Gentile said, a former executive producer at CBS Sports, did not want to slow down for fear that it would scare away investors.
But the Football Network's seed money of $10.4 million was running out. Some employees were not being paid on time. Employees found that they were liable for Enterprise Rent-A-Car bills that the network would or could not pay. Freelancers threatened not to do their jobs if checks were not immediately paid.
Jerry Glanville spent three enjoyable months as a game and studio analyst -- except for absence of full payment. ''It's enough to put you into 'O.W.' -- open weeping,'' he said.
In mid-December, the Football Network went off the air. About a dozen laid-off young employees who were not being paid went to work on the expansion of the building the network is housed in. And a Division I-AA all-star game created by the network and scheduled for Dec. 30 was canceled.
''When I kept saying it was time to pay the bills, I didn't like the answers,'' Craig Tartasky, a former network executive who organized the game, said. ''Finally, it came time to pay one particular bill, they said they couldn't and I resigned.''
The Football Network got a small lifeline last week, months after the dormant channel needed it: a deal with Time Warner Cable that lets the network ask individual systems to carry it.
Meanwhile, Solomon believes that the lessons of the failed first go-round will make a restart easier. ''We've had the benefit of a very high end dress rehearsal,'' he said.
But, one freelancer, Raquel Clendenning, who said she was owed $1,300, said, ''Who'd invest in a company that's already in a hole?''
