New Jersey officials presented their long-awaited plan for a top-to-bottom overhaul of the state's child welfare system on Wednesday, charting a course that experts say could transform one of the nation's most troubled agencies for children into one of the most effective.
The plan, which the state was compelled to produce as part of a federal lawsuit, calls for 1,000 additional child-care workers in an effort to lower caseloads that are more than twice the recommended national standard.
Officials said they would put the major components of the plan in place during the next two years. During that time, the plan calls for the agency to create a team of specially trained investigators to look into claims of child abuse; to recruit about 1,000 more foster families and to pay them more; to remove hundreds of children who have lingered in group homes and institutions; and to establish a 24-hour telephone hot line to report abuse.
Although other states have been sued over their child welfare agencies, New Jersey was the first to agree to a wide set of penalties that included giving an independent panel broad powers over the supervision of the system's overhaul. The state has also agreed to return to court for penalties from a federal judge if its changes prove inadequate.
In announcing the plan, Gov. James E. McGreevey did not say exactly how the state would pay for the changes. The plan is estimated to cost $125 million in the next fiscal year, when, Mr. McGreevey has said, the state faces a $5 billion deficit. The governor said, however, that current budget projections indicated the proposals could be paid for out of the state's general fund. Mr. McGreevey also said he had told the state treasurer that failing to implement the plan ''is not an option.''
''For too many years, arguably too many decades, New Jersey has not promoted the right focus on protecting our children,'' the governor said. ''This plan sets us on a corrective course of action.''
A court-appointed panel will review the plan within the next 30 days and could suggest changes to the state. If the state is unable to make those changes, the parties in the foster care lawsuit would return to court where a federal judge could impose virtually any remedies he saw fit.
The plan, outlined in a report nearly 200 pages long, addresses a range of flaws in the system that have led to a series of recent highly publicized child-abuse cases in New Jersey, including the death of Faheem Williams, a 7-year-old found locked in the basement of a Newark home, and the case of four boys from Collingswood who the authorities said were intentionally starved by their adoptive parents.
Officials acknowledged such incidents in Wednesday's announcement.
''This is the day we begin to put the never-ending crises behind us,'' said the acting commissioner of human services, James M. Davy, whose department oversees the State Division of Youth and Family Services.
Although the plan addresses issues that have long been a concern to advocates for child welfare reform, some cautioned that there was a big difference between planning changes and changing policies.
''It is as broad and as ambitious as any plan I have seen, but how they are going to get these things done?'' said Marcia Robinson Lowry, executive director of Children's Rights Inc., a Manhattan child advocacy group whose lawsuit against the state led to a settlement that required the plan. ''You can't just say, 'Guys, try harder tomorrow.' You need something very concrete.''
The state's plan, called ''A New Beginning: The Future of Child Welfare in New Jersey,'' is an attempt to offer a template for tangible changes to come.
The proposal to add 1,000 caseworkers to the current roster is meant to ensure that each worker is responsible for no more than 15 children. Advocates for child welfare reform have long called for such limits on caseloads. The state's goal of 15 children apiece is even lower than the standard proposed by the Child Welfare League of America, which has recommended about 17 children.
Currently, the average caseload in New Jersey is about 40 children.
The plan also calls for creating a team of forensically trained investigators who must respond to allegations of abuse and neglect within 24 hours and complete their reports within 60 days. For years, advocates have complained both of investigations that went on too long or abuse allegations that workers failed to look into. In the Faheem Williams case, officials said a report of abuse involving his family was made 11 months before his body was found in January 2003. The report was never fully investigated.
To assist investigators, the plan also calls for the creation of a centralized toll-free telephone number where abuse can be reported. Currently, those who want to report abuse can be faced with 30 different numbers.
The proposal to raise the current total of fewer than 5,000 foster homes by at least 1,000 over the next 18 months would involve increasing the subsidies paid to foster families. Those stipends, which range from $420 to $500 monthly per child, would go up by 25 percent. The plan also includes more subsidy money for people who are related to the foster children for whom they are caring. Under the present system, relatives who provide what is known as ''kinship care'' can receive half as much as other foster families. Those who have sought to change the system note that the inequity can be a disincentive for those in kinship arrangements.
Under the plan, hundreds of children who have lingered in group homes, shelters, detention centers and psychiatric wards because case workers often have nowhere else to put them would be transferred into more ''familylike'' settings.
The plan contains a range of other proposals, from expanding mental health and substance abuse programs for families to enrolling foster children in H.M.O.'s, that, if put in place, could fundamentally change the way the state manages child welfare.
Even those who have sometimes been at odds with the agency conceded that if the plan is executed, the troubled system would be among the leaders in the nation.
''Right now, it really looks like they're trying to go from being the worst to being a model,'' said Mary Jane Awrachow, executive director of the New Jersey Foster Parents Association.
Other child welfare advocates said that although the plan was a good starting point, much remained to be done.
''I think it's a good plan, but I think we have to be careful to say that this is a blueprint,'' said Cecilia Zalkind, executive director of the Association for Children of New Jersey. ''How do you turn that policy into practice at the field level?''
Ms. Zalkind said that advocates would continue to monitor the state's progress in meeting the high goals it has set for itself. ''We'll be watching,'' she said.
Mr. Davy, the acting human services commissioner, acknowledged that some might be dubious about any planned changes at the troubled agency. ''I can't ask the public to trust us,'' Mr. Davy said. ''They need to see us working.''
