On behalf of all the states that have not yet gone to the polls this year, we're pleased to see that the Democratic primary will still be chugging along when March arrives. True, the crowd has thinned. True, we already know the last man standing is going to be a U.S. senator named John. But in an age when too many elections seem to boil down to a choice between the unimaginable and the hardly bearable, the chance to pick between two perfectly good candidates for the presidential nomination seems like a rare opportunity.
For a campaign that began with a love affair between Howard Dean and the angry Democratic base, things have taken a peculiar and definitely dispassionate turn. John Kerry and John Edwards don't seem to disagree on many policy issues, and until now, they have avoided attacking each other. Voters probably like the positive spin the race is taking, but they may also have a nagging feeling that unpleasant surprises are being deferred: bits of biography, personal tics, hard-to-explain votes. What's best known about the two surviving candidates is that Mr. Kerry is a Vietnam combat veteran who seems like a winner, and that Mr. Edwards is a millworker's son who strikes some as even more electable than the front-runner.
Senator Edwards has a terrific stump speech -- people who see him for the first time frequently come away smitten. People who see him 10 or 12 times will discover that he has a talent for staying on message that makes even George Bush look unguarded. His political résumé is short: the current Senate term he is completing is his first public office. On the plus side, that means Mr. Edwards has a relatively short record of votes with the potential to haunt him during a long campaign. (When he points out, as he now does constantly, that he didn't vote for the North American Free Trade Agreement, Mr. Edwards does not add that when the Senate passed Nafta in 1993, he was still a lawyer in North Carolina.)
Senator Kerry, who has been in the Senate since 1985, has a far longer paper trail and a harder time restraining himself from wandering off into the complexities of an issue. Listeners can find his explanation of why he voted for President Bush's war resolution either deeply nuanced or practically endless. But his gravitas and long experience with foreign policy issues might provide reassurance to a jittery electorate.
Mr. Edwards deserves -- and frequently demands -- credit for speaking so consistently about the problems of the poor and the continuing challenge of racial discrimination in America. He is more conservative than Mr. Kerry about the amount he is willing to commit to a national health care plan. He supports the death penalty, and Mr. Kerry opposes it -- except when it comes to terrorists. Their positions on gay marriage are slightly different and hard to parse, but both come down somewhere in the general area of civil unions.
Both men have shown a willingness to take a dive on principle to advance ambition. Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry both followed up their support for the Iraq resolution with a vote against the $87 billion authorization needed to support American troops there and in Afghanistan. And it's too bad that their fiercest competition is a battle to see who can outpander the other on trade. Mr. Edwards hammered hard on Mr. Kerry's Nafta vote as he wooed blue-collar workers in Wisconsin, and Mr. Kerry picked up the theme, lashing out at George Bush's economic adviser for daring to suggest that there are positive aspects to outsourcing jobs abroad.
Mr. Edwards has won only one primary to Mr. Kerry's 15, but he had a critical victory over expectations in Wisconsin. In the current political culture, nearly winning a supposedly one-sided race counts for a lot. Bill Clinton, after all, became the ''Comeback Kid'' when he succeeded in coming back to second place in New Hampshire. The chances of an Edwards ascendancy still seem minuscule. No candidate with Mr. Kerry's kind of lead has lost a nomination since the modern primary system began.
Still, we have lived through a lot of impossibilities since this time four years ago, and have stopped counting on the normal thing happening. Besides, we are very glad we're getting the chance to vote.
The Presidential Primaries
