Two of the three principal competitors in the hamburger segment of the fast-food market are introducing major campaigns, each coincidentally focused on humorous characters.
Burger King, seeking to reverse a sales slump, is reviving a theme from the 1970's, ''Have it your way,'' in a campaign starting today by Crispin Porter &amp; Bogusky in Miami. It is the first work from Crispin Porter since Burger King unexpectedly hired it last month after firing Young &amp; Rubicam Advertising in New York, part of the WPP Group.
The new iteration of ''Have it your way'' is centered on a group of young office workers who compete in customizing their burger orders at Burger King. The theme ''really stands out as a great 'today' expression of the mind-set of our core customers,'' said Russ Klein, executive vice president and chief marketing officer at Burger King, with young adults ''going through the 'gaining-control' phase of their lives.'' Burger King is owned by a consortium led by the Texas Pacific Group.
Tomorrow, Wendy's International is starting a campaign by McCann-Erickson Worldwide Advertising in New York that introduces characters including ''Mr. Wendy,'' an unofficial spokesman for the company who appoints himself an evangelist for Wendy's, talking up its products from the food court of a shopping mall to the lawn of the Wendy's headquarters in Dublin, Ohio.
The characters ''are not about replacing Dave,'' said Don Calhoon, executive vice president for marketing at Wendy's, referring to Dave Thomas, the founder of the company who appeared in a long-running campaign until his death in 2002.
''Dave sold from the inside out,'' Mr. Calhoon said, ''while 'Mr. Wendy' is from the outside in.'' The character is joined in some spots by his wife, ''Mrs. Wendy,'' who takes a jaundiced view of his unpaid peddling for Wendy's, and in others by celebrities like the actor William Shatner. The campaign is from McCann-Erickson, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING -- ADDENDA
