Dikembe Mutombo finally moved into his new apartment in Manhattan on Tuesday. Until the trading deadline passes Thursday at 3 p.m., however, he will keep his belongings in their boxes.
As the deadline approached, many of the Knicks were insecure, and with reason. Since Isiah Thomas took over as team president on Dec. 22, 10 Knicks have been traded or waived, along with three future draft picks.
While Thomas has insisted that he will not stop tinkering until the roster is good enough to compete for a championship, Allan Houston -- among the few who could relax as the deadline approached because of his big contract and aching knees -- said he believed that the Knicks might be good enough now.
''I'd like to see this group get to the finals and win a championship,'' Houston said on Wednesday. ''That's the goal now, and that's it. I'm sure everybody that's here now hopes to be a part of it.''
James L. Dolan, the Madison Square Garden chairman, said last week that this team as constituted could be a championship group, but on Monday, Thomas tempered that belief. ''It's going to take us a while before you can really start talking about winning the championship this year,'' he said.
Thomas added that it was the Knicks' goal to build a championship team. ''That's what we're in the process of trying to do,'' he said.
The Knicks have won six of their last eight games as they continue to absorb new pieces; Tim Thomas and Nazr Mohammed are the latest, joining the team in the weekend trade that shipped out Keith Van Horn. And it is not just the players who would like to see this unit remain intact.
Lenny Wilkens, who has been the coach since Jan. 14, said: ''You see things and you get excited about it. You say, 'Boy, a little more work, a little more practice, what can we do?' ''
But the Knicks are still listening to trade offers, with the Atlanta Hawks trying to redirect the recently acquired Rasheed Wallace and the Golden State Warriors discussing deals for center Erick Dampier. The most talked-about Knicks pieces -- Mutombo and Kurt Thomas, as well as Frank Williams, Othella Harrington and Mike Sweetney -- are waiting for the decisions to be made.
''I have a job to fulfill,'' Mutombo said. ''I'm enjoying being a part of the Knicks family right now. I just bought a house in the city. I moved yesterday. If it means I have to move again, life goes on.''
Kurt Thomas said trade discussions were between his agent and Isiah Thomas.
''I don't worry about contracts,'' Kurt Thomas said. ''Ever since he's been here I've had nothing but positive remarks from Isiah and everyone. As far as I know, I'll be here. You never know. A blockbuster trade could go down. You never know.''
PRO BASKETBALL
