When New Jersey officials unveiled their dizzyingly ambitious plan to overhaul the state's child welfare system yesterday, their vision won admiration from many of those who had most eagerly awaited it but also generated numerous questions about how it could actually work.
The professors, service providers, foster parents and professionals who will translate the plan from paper to people say too many concrete details of implementation are missing.
Aside from the issue of how Gov. James E. McGreevey would finance the multimillion-dollar plan, a topic that is likely to be taken up with a vengeance in Trenton in the next weeks, these people said the plan set more goals than could be met in the given time frame. ''I liken it to a detailed floor plan for construction, but not the blueprint,'' said De Miller, president of Legal Services of New Jersey, which provides legal advice to many of the parents who have children in foster care. ''There is a lot of next-level, real-world detail that is missing.''
With the ink still wet on the document, those who will be responsible for meeting its numerous benchmarks on a range of matters, including translation services and child abuse investigations, were already trying to figure out if it could be done.
The plan, for example, calls for the state to hire and train roughly 1,000 child care workers in two years at the same time it retrains the current work force of 3,000 in new techniques for managing foster families and assessing risks to children.
''It will be very difficult to do all the training in the time frames set out in the plan, and some of it will be pushed back,'' said Hetty Rosenstein, president of the Communications Workers of America Local 1037, which represents child welfare workers in northern New Jersey.
Ms. Rosenstein added that many of the goals set in the report probably could not be met until the additional workers were hired and trained. For example, the plan calls for a family whose child has been placed in foster care to hold a meeting of supporters within 72 hours of the child's placement. The meeting allows the child's biological parents to gather people who have an interest in the child's future, including religious leaders, relatives and teachers, to meet with the social worker and develop a long-term plan for care of the child.
But in poor families, where transportation and scheduling can be logistical nightmares, organizing such a meeting in 72 hours is not an easy feat.
''You cannot do family team meetings while you have high caseloads,'' says Ms. Rosenstein, who estimates that workloads will not decline significantly until all the new employees are fully trained, at the end of the two-year hiring period. ''Which means that you cannot have family team meetings in 50 percent of appropriate cases by July 2005, which is what the plan calls for.''
The independent panel of experts monitoring the plan promises to allow the public to monitor the plan's progress through ''data-driven accountability,'' with a centralized computer system that not only serves as a repository for each child's case record, but will also track neighborhood resources for needy families and will allow supervisors to evaluate subordinates.
Under the plan, the computer system will also collect data, which will enable the state to know if it is meeting its myriad benchmarks in categories like the number of homes a child resides in during the first year of foster care. The state promised to make benchmark data available on its Web site starting in June.
Richard James Gelles, the dean of the School of Social Work at the University of Pennsylvania, said the complexity of the its task had been underestimated. It took New Jersey 10 years to implement the statewide computer system that merely tracks children's case files, he said.
''What they want to do now will be a massive headache,'' he said, ''because there is no off-the-rack software that will accomplish these feats.''
Others worried that in pursuing the laudable goal of being comprehensive, the state had glossed over some key topics. Mr. Miller of Legal Services argued that adequate housing was a crucial issue for families who lose their children to foster care and for those at risk of losing their children. He praised the state for recognizing the pervasiveness of the problem, but said the resources it proposed to allocate were inadequate.
''One hundred new housing slots will not do it,'' he said, referring to the goal of transferring 100 federal rent subsidy vouchers to families involved in the child welfare system within the next two years.
''Frankly, it is not a drop in the bucket,'' he said, ''and what mechanisms are there for following up and getting new resources when all the resources named in the plan are used up?''
Many worries about the plan, of course, stem from the state's poor track record in following through on previous ambitious agendas for reform, like those suggested by a blue-ribbon panel in 1998.
As the authors of the report themselves noted, ''Building public trust'' will be crucial to the ''long and arduous reform ahead.''
At least some of those present for the unveiling of the plan in Trenton yesterday have decided to reserve judgment for now.
''At this point,'' said Mary Jane Awrachow of the New Jersey Foster Parents Association, '' I just choose to be optimistic.''
