There was a funeral and an interment. Tears were shed, candles were lighted, music was played, and God was said to remain in charge. That was more than two weeks ago.
Since then, there have been more acts of remembrance for Timothy Stansbury Jr., 19, who was shot dead by a police officer on a rooftop of the Louis Armstrong Houses in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn. Pictures of him, captioned with the Tim-Tim nickname used by family members and friends, are plastered in a building entranceway nearly blocked by candles. Someone has spray-painted big red letters on a metal sheet near the basketball court: R.I.P. Drag, invoking Mr. Stansbury's street nickname.
Irene Clayburne, his 73-year-old grandmother, cannot bear to walk through the front door of her apartment, to the right past the curtain of beads, down the short hallway to the door on the left and into Mr. Stansbury's room, where he left behind video games and cellphones and a red bouquet with a heart that says, ''I Love You.''
''It's like it just happened yesterday,'' Ms. Clayburne said.
But of course it did not. Almost a month has gone by since Mr. Stansbury was killed, but his family's mourning has been paired with anger, an emotion that requires its own separate allotment of time. Much of Mr. Stansbury's extended family made a trip to downtown Brooklyn yesterday, accompanied by Councilman Charles Barron, a fixture by their side, to stand in the courtyard outside Borough Hall, confront a bank of cameras and microphones and denounce a grand jury's decision on Tuesday not to indict the officer whose gunshot killed Mr. Stansbury.
Mr. Stansbury's parents and his grandmother took turns at the microphones, saying little of him but speaking instead of the officer, Richard S. Neri Jr.
''Good morning,'' said Phyllis Clayburne, Mr. Stansbury's mother, muttering. Her voice grew in volume and sharpened in tone as she shouted accusations, called for justice, burst into tears, and then turned to Mr. Barron for a hug.
Timothy Stansbury, the dead man's father, took his turn.
''What you've done to my son, it's going to follow you for the rest of your life,'' Mr. Stansbury said.
Behind them stood two dozen family members and friends, stone-faced in heavy coats and winter caps, arms folded, eyes straight ahead. Most of the talking was done by Mr. Barron, Councilman Albert Vann of Bedford-Stuyvesant, and the family's lawyer, Kenneth E. Ramseur.
Roslynn R. Mauskopf, the United States attorney for the eastern district, said in a statement that her office had begun ''a thorough review of the evidence involving the death of Timothy Stansbury Jr.''
When the denunciations of Officer Neri were done, Ms. Clayburne, the grandmother, went back to her apartment building on Lexington Avenue, but she lingered outside for a while, across from a basketball court where teenagers played.
The day of the shooting was fresh in her mind. She recounted making chicken and rice for Mr. Stansbury, watching him eat two pieces before heading off for a shift at McDonald's. She spoke of a widow's experience with grief and the difference between losing a husband to cancer and a grandson to this other thing.
''If I could get some justice, I think I'd feel a little better,'' Ms. Clayburne said.
