Almost $18 million intended for charity was lost in the mysterious collapse of PipeVine Inc., a nonprofit organization that helped companies and workplace fund-raisers like the United Way collect and distribute employee donations, according to reports filed yesterday by the receiver in PipeVine's dissolution.
The losses are more than three times what was predicted in June when PipeVine failed, and there is still no explanation of where the money went. The California attorney general's office is continuing its investigation of PipeVine, which had its offices in San Franciso.
''The receiver's report is distressing,'' Attorney General Bill Lockyer said in a statement. ''The numbers clearly demonstrate the substantial harm caused by PipeVine's conduct to donors, charities and the crucial services they provide our communities.''
Mr. Lockyer said his objective was to see that all money lost was recovered and handed over to charities.
David A. Bradlow, the receiver, unveiled his first effort to that end, a settlement with the United Way of the Bay Area. United Way is PipeVines' biggest creditor, but it also owes the organization about $11 million for various services, two lawyers involved in the case said.
To settle that debt, the United Way agreed to forgo $6 million of the more than $9 million that PipeVine owes it and subordinate the remainder of its claim against PipeVine to all other claims against the organization, including those of employees who are owed benefits.
Additionally, the United Way of the Bay Area will pay $3.45 million to Mr. Bradlow for distribution to other creditors as part of the settlement with him.
The United Way of the Bay Area, which spun off PipeVine in the 1990's, has insisted that it bears no responsibility for PipeVine's failure; in the settlement, it admitted no liability.
Anne Wilson, the United Way chief executive, characterized the payments and subordinated claim as a goodwill gesture. ''We made this contribution as a way of fulfilling a promise we made to stand by our donors in the nonprofit community,'' Ms. Wilson said.
She said the more than $9 million owed to the United Way was not earmarked for any particular charity but rather would have flowed into its community fund, which the charity allocates at its discretion.
''While we invest that money in the community and we believe those investments are important,'' Ms. Wilson said, ''there are no agencies out there waiting for this money.''
The United Way is using its reserve fund to make the settlement payment but said it would still have $3 million to $4 million left in the fund.
Among the funds PipeVine failed to transfer were $4.8 million of donations made by Bank of America employees. Of that, $2.3 million was designated for the United Way of the Bay Area and the rest for other charities.
