A woman who was seriously injured Tuesday night in what the police called a brutal carjacking remained hospitalized in critical condition yesterday, as stunned friends and family members kept vigil by her bedside.
The woman, Caliope Diacantonis, 71, of Maspeth, Queens, was running errands at 8:10 p.m. when she pulled up to the post office on 69th Street near 55th Avenue in Maspeth. A man approached Mrs. Diacantonis's car and opened the driver's door. He grabbed her and dragged her out, causing her to slam her head on the ground, the police said.
The man, who the police said was a blond white man in his 20's, wearing a gray sweatshirt, got into Mrs. Diacantonis's car, a 1995 green Dodge Spirit with the New York license plate CEY5376, and drove southbound on 69th Street toward the Long Island Expressway.
A police spokeswoman said yesterday that detectives had not found the suspect or the car.
Yesterday, family members and friends visited Mrs. Diacantonis, who suffered severe head injuries and remained unresponsive in the intensive care unit of Elmhurst Hospital Center.
''It's just unbelievable,'' said her husband, Nicholas Diacantonis, 80, as he left the hospital yesterday afternoon.
''All we can do is hope,'' said Mr. Diacantonis, a Greek immigrant who is retired from his job as a waiter for a corporate catering company. ''We haven't heard any new developments from the police, and we don't know how many witnesses there were, or if anyone really got a good look at it.''
Neighbors expressed shock yesterday about the episode, calling it a brazen act on a busy pedestrian area in a relatively quiet residential neighborhood with many elderly residents.
The post office is just off a main shopping area in Maspeth, and Mrs. Diacantonis had apparently stopped off to drop mail into the slot, since the branch was closed at that hour.
Mrs. Diacantonis, known as Cally, enjoys traveling and organizing frequent social gatherings with the many relatives and friends she has in and around Queens, family members said. She has two sons and has always remained active, insisting on running her errands herself.
Before retiring, she worked as a teacher's assistant at Long Island City High School. She and her husband are active members of a local Greek Orthodox church and were looking forward to a vacation in Athens with a large group of friends, said her niece Michele Contos, of Oakdale, N.Y.
A longtime friend of Mrs. Diacantonis, Eva Grous, 73, of Jackson Heights, said she and Mrs. Diacantonis grew up together in the Hell's Kitchen neighborhood of Manhattan and were classmates since grade school.
''She is such a wonderful woman,'' she said. ''What a horrible thing. It's hard to believe it could happen in that neighborhood. It's just shocking.''
