Conrad M. Black deceived the board of Hollinger International, both about his intentions regarding the sale of the company's assets and about payments that he and his associates received, the company's interim chief executive testified on Wednesday.
The testimony from the chief executive, Gordon A. Paris, came during the opening day of a trial here in Delaware Chancery Court intended to resolve whether Lord Black can proceed with an agreement to sell his controlling interest in Hollinger International, which owns The Daily Telegraph of London, The Jerusalem Post and The Chicago Sun-Times.
A special corporate review committee made up of independent directors -- who have been running Hollinger International since November, when they disclosed that Lord Black and several senior executives had accepted millions of dollars in unauthorized or undisclosed payments -- contend that Lord Black's sale agreement, reached a month ago with David and Frederick Barclay of Britain, violates a separate agreement he signed with Hollinger International last November.
In filing suit here, Hollinger International, which is incorporated in Delaware, is asking the court to permit it to continue the process of finding a buyer or buyers unimpeded by Lord Black. In a countersuit, Lord Black has asked the court to allow his transaction with the Barclays.
In his questions to Mr. Paris, Martin Flumenbaum, a lawyer representing Hollinger International, sought to show that Lord Black had begun exploring the possibility of selling at least part of his holding in Hollinger to the Barclays as early as last November.
At that time, Lord Black agreed to step down as chief executive of Hollinger International and permit the company to go through the strategic process of finding a buyer or buyers for its newspapers. In the agreement, Lord Black said he would seek to pursue a buyer for his controlling stake -- held through Hollinger International's parent company, Hollinger Inc. -- only if the transaction was needed to stave off the parent company's default or insolvency.
Lord Black's lawyers contend that the parent company was nearing that critical financial predicament.
In his questioning, Mr. Flumenbaum introduced as evidence several letters that Lord Black wrote to the Barclays, beginning in early November and continuing with increasing urgency through early January, in which he apprised them of his negotiations with the special committee and expressed confidence he could navigate an end run.
Asked if he had been aware of any contact between Lord Black and the Barclays in that period, Mr. Paris said he had not. Indeed, he said he had seen none of Lord Black's letters to David Barclay -- several of which were handwritten -- until he was shown them by Mr. Flumenbaum in the witness box.
''I had no idea,'' said Mr. Paris, who was personally recruited by Lord Black to join the Hollinger International board only last May.
Mr. Paris said in his testimony that he had an understanding with Lord Black that should he or the parent company reach the point that there was a cash crisis, Lord Black would sell only a minority stake in Hollinger International. Under sharp questioning by lawyers representing Lord Black and the Barclays, Mr. Paris acknowledged that no such language had been put in writing.
Mr. Paris, who is also the chairman of a special committee set up to investigate the payments to Lord Black and his associates, said he could find no evidence that the board had approved the payments.
The proceeding that began today has its roots in a complaint filed last May with the Hollinger International board by the Tweedy, Browne Company, an institutional investor that holds a substantial stake.
In its complaint, Tweedy, Browne identified payments made in recent years to Lord Black, his associates and their companies that were ostensibly tied to noncompete agreements signed by the company but which Tweedy contended were potentially inappropriate.
In his testimony today, Mr. Paris confirmed the Tweedy, Browne findings and repeatedly characterized those payments -- which totaled more than $15 million -- as ''never authorized.'' In one instance, Mr. Paris said, Mr. Black and his associates had been paid under the premise that they would agree not to compete with Hollinger subsidiaries that had bought newspapers owned by other Hollinger subsidiaries.
Lord Black's lawyers countered that references to at least some of those payments had been disclosed in annual regulatory filings made by Hollinger International, and signed by its board, in 2001 and 2002.
The trial, which is expected to last two more days, is expected to reach its moment of highest drama on Friday, when Lord Black is tentatively scheduled to be called as a witness.
But in his absence, he gave the court one of its lighter moments today.
Since signing the November agreement with Hollinger International, Lord Black has disavowed many parts of it, contending in court papers that it was he who was coerced and deceived into agreeing to step down and to commit to make restitution on some of those payments.
But under questioning, Mr. Paris set a very different mood. He described an almost festive gathering with Lord Black on a night out in Manhattan in November as those negotiations neared their conclusion.
''We went out to dinner as a group,'' Mr. Paris testified.
Where? he was asked.
''Le Cirque,'' Mr. Paris responded, adding, in response to a question, that it was the company that paid.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS
