In the old part of this city, on the block where people come to quench their thirst for beer and spirits, Ahmed Mahmoud pointed to the spot where blood flows more freely than alcohol.
There, masked men leaped out of two pickup trucks last Sunday evening and unloaded their Kalashnikov rifles at a group of sidewalk alcohol vendors, he and other witnesses said.
''I heard a lot of gunfire, a huge barrage of bullets,'' said Mr. Mahmoud, 20, a wiry man who runs a soda stand. ''It sounded like a gun battle between the alcohol sellers and the attackers.''
''I found the dead bodies,'' he added. ''There were bullet holes in their bodies, about five bullets in each body.''
Basra is becoming as dry as the endless desert around it. Nowhere in Iraq are attacks on vendors of alcoholic beverages as common as in the country's second-largest city, 60 miles from the Persian Gulf.
The attack on bustling Old Basra Street, which killed at least five people, was the latest and deadliest in a string of assaults on alcohol salesmen in a city where conservative Shiite movements and political parties are struggling for dominance, possibly with the aid of members of the police force.
Over the summer, stores were firebombed and destroyed with rocket-propelled grenades. A Christian salesman was shot dead on Christmas Eve. In a murky incident on Feb. 1, plainclothes policemen engaged vendors in a gun battle that ended with British soldiers accidentally killing two of the policemen.
The earlier attacks drove owners of liquor stores, both Muslim and Christian, to shut their shops and take their businesses underground, to places like the strip under an overpass on Old Basra Street.
After the attack last Sunday, the most potent drink in that area comes from Mr. Mahmoud's bottles of Fanta. The attack has made some black-market vendors take a second look at the risks of their profession.
One cowed salesman is Tarik Mahmoud, who drives around Basra delivering beer in his Chrysler minivan. ''I'm afraid now,'' he said.
''There are no laws that protect me, and even if a law existed, I would still be afraid because people are used to killing each other, and because the fundamentalists feel strongly about this issue.''
''I stopped after the killings this past Sunday,'' he added. ''I only sell now to people I absolutely trust. I'm thinking of quitting this business.''
Mr. Mahmoud, a Muslim, said he had an Armenian-Christian partner who buys huge quantities of beer in Baghdad and stores the cans around Basra. Alcohol sales are still fairly open in Baghdad, though violence there is on the rise. Several stores have been bombed recently and some owners threatened, and a vendor was shot dead in the Shiite slum of Sadr City in December.
Here in Basra, the mystery surrounding the latest shootings has grown each day. The streets are awash with talk that the men were killed by conservative Shiite groups.
Police officers said in interviews that the attackers were wearing police uniforms and pulled up in two police trucks, raising questions of whether the police are working with the religious groups to impose Shariah, the Islamic legal code based on the Koran, on the city.
One officer at a police station a quarter mile from the crime scene said the killers were members of an intelligence unit of the Basra police.
''Policemen working in intelligence attacked the alcohol sellers,'' Lt. Muhammad Salih said. There were about 10 vendors on the block at the time, he added.
A colleague, Lt. Ahmed Murtada, walked into the room and listened to Lieutenant Salih's conversation with a reporter. ''Please don't say it's the secret police,'' Lieutenant Murtada said. ''The suspects are unknown.''
But witnesses said the attackers pulled up in two police trucks and were wearing police uniforms, said Lieutenant Murtada, the officer in charge of the station on Sunday.
''We don't know what the truth is,'' he added. ''They were wearing police uniforms and had police cars, but whether they were the real police, we don't know.''
The intelligence unit of the Basra police is run by Lt. Col. Khalaf Badran, a former member of the Badr Brigade, and is tolerated by the British, who control this region.
The Badr group serves as the armed wing of the Supreme Council for the Islamic Revolution in Iraq, possibly the country's most influential Shiite party. American administrators say they want to disarm the Badr Brigade, but its members are helping the police throughout Iraq maintain security, said Hassan al-Amari, the leader of the Badr group.
Capt. Shay Marks, a spokesman for the British military, said that he was unsure whether the public sale of alcoholic beverages was illegal but that its regulation ''sounds very much like policing business.''
The police have a blunt view of the matter. ''It's not Shariah and it's illegal,'' Lieutenant Murtada said. ''It's not allowed for people to sell alcohol in Islamic countries in the street. We warned them many times, but they didn't stop.''
During his pro-Islamic campaign in the 1990's, Saddam Hussein shut down bars and enforced a law forbidding Muslims to sell alcohol, but he allowed Christians to do so.
The British military has begun investigating last Sunday's attack. ''Every effort is now being made to determine who was involved and bring them to justice,'' said Maj. Tim Smith, a military spokesman, adding that five people were killed.
Contradictory reports of the incident have emerged. Lieutenant Murtada said six people were shot dead, including possibly some civilians.
Two witnesses, including a 16-year-old boy, Muhammad Issa, who was accidentally shot in the stomach, said the attackers did not have police uniforms but wore masks and drove up in pickup trucks.
Details of the incident on Feb. 1, which took place on the same block, are just as murky. A group of vigilantes had teamed up with plainclothes policemen to chase off the alcohol vendors beneath the overpass, Lieutenant Murtada said. A shootout ensued, and British soldiers fatally shot two policemen, he said.
Captain Marks said that the soldiers had unknowingly come across a plainclothes police operation cracking down on a ''criminal gang,'' and that the soldiers had fired on the police because they seemed to be ''posing the largest threat.''
Lieutenant Murtada said he did not know who the civilians were who were working with the police that day. Basra is a caldron of conservative Shiite groups vying for influence. Many people refer to some of them as vigilante organizations.
Names that come up often in such conversations include the Badr Brigade and the 15th of Shaban Party. The local leader of that group, named for the birth date of a mythical imam, denied any involvement in the attacks but had little sympathy for the victims.
''If a man is selling or buying alcohol, we must tell him it's a bad thing,'' said Muhammad Sharif al-Hachami, the local director. ''If he doesn't leave his job, then we must punish him with 80 lashings. Then he will forget about doing bad things.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: BASRA
