The president of the University of Colorado placed Coach Gary Barnett on paid administrative leave last night for criticizing the former Buffaloes football player Katie Hnida's place-kicking ability when Barnett was discussing Hnida's allegation that she had been raped.
''Rape is a horrific allegation and it should be taken seriously,'' the university president, Elizabeth Hoffman, said at a news conference in Denver last night. She also called Barnett's comments ''unacceptable, inappropriate and insensitive.''
In an unusual move that seemed to recognize the burgeoning seriousness of the allegations against the Colorado football program, Hoffman announced at a late-night news conference that she was placing Barnett on leave. A day earlier, Hoffman said that the university would hire a special assistant to oversee athletics and to investigate the accusations threatening to engulf the football program.
Hnida, a walk-on place-kicker in 1999, said in an interview published this week in Sports Illustrated that she had been raped by a teammate four years ago. Hnida, now a student at New Mexico, also said she had been verbally and sexually harassed and issued a statement through New Mexico saying she was healing from ''horrors endured'' at Colorado.
Barnett, in comments to reporters on Tuesday, said of Hnida: ''It was obvious Katie was not very good. She was awful. You know what guys do? They respect your ability. You can be 90 years old, but if you can go out and play, they'll respect you. Katie was not only a girl, she was terrible. O.K.? There's no other way to say it.''
Hoffman had signaled her displeasure with Barnett earlier in the day, when she was in Colorado Springs to deliver a speech and told The Denver Post: ''I was deeply disturbed by the comments Coach Barnett made, focusing more on her kicking ability than on the message at hand, which is that we really need to address the sexual assault.
''I told him that his remarks were totally unacceptable and I have told him that I do not expect to hear any more such remarks. I have told him in no uncertain terms that that was an unacceptable remark.''
Hnida dressed for Colorado's games in 1999 but did not play for the team. She did not return to the team in 2000.
She eventually transferred to New Mexico and became the first woman to score a point in a Division I-A game, kicking two extra points for New Mexico in a 72-8 victory over Texas State-San Marcos last year.
Barnett said on Tuesday that he did not know about Hnida's rape allegations until this week.
''Not at one time did she ever bring up to me any issue or any problem on our football team,'' Barnett said. Barnett implored Hnida to provide details of her assault or the name of her attacker so the university could investigate the matter.
Hoffman indicated yesterday that the university planned to investigate Barnett's assertions that he was unaware of any misconduct in the recruitment of football players.
Hoffman said she was reserving judgment on Barnett's comments that he had been unaware of wrongdoing.
The Colorado football program has been reeling from accusations involving rapes and enticements to recruits that included trips to strip clubs and alcohol-fueled, off-campus parties. Three women have sued the university in federal court, saying they were raped by players or recruits at or after recruiting parties in 2001. While no charges were filed in those cases, in a recently released sworn deposition the Boulder County prosecutor, Mary Keenan, accused the Colorado football program of using sex and alcohol as recruiting tools.
In the wake of Hnida's published comments, Hoffman acknowledged at a news conference Tuesday that she knew of at least one more assault allegation linked to the Colorado football program that had not yet been made public. That allegation would be the fifth related to the football program in the last three years.
''We are only aware of one, but there may be more,'' Hoffman said. ''And we've said that repeatedly.''
Charges of misdeeds in Colorado's football recruiting practices date to 1997, when a 17-year-old high school student accused a football player of rape after a recruiting party. No charges were filed in that case.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
