Senators John Kerry and John Edwards, the two leading Democrats seeking the party's presidential nomination, differ more in style, tone and experience than on most issues. But surveys after Wisconsin's vote on Tuesday show they are appealing to somewhat different audiences.
Generally, Mr. Kerry's support has come from voters describing themselves to pollsters as angry at the Bush administration and see the economy and its future in fairly bleak terms. He has also appealed to those with the lowest socioeconomic status.
Mr. Edwards's voters are more moderate and have a more upbeat assessment of the economic outlook, their own and the nation's. In Wisconsin, where independents and Republicans could vote in the primary, Mr. Edwards won the support of both.
Following are their stands on other issues:
Abortion
MR. EDWARDS -- Supports abortion rights. Did not vote on banning the procedure opponents call ''partial-birth abortion'' when it came up.
MR. KERRY -- Supports abortion rights. Voted against the ''partial-birth abortion'' ban. Would nominate only Supreme Court justices who support abortion rights.
Death Penalty
MR. EDWARDS -- Supports.
MR. KERRY -- Opposes, except in cases of terrorism.
The Economy
MR. EDWARDS -- Proposes 10 percent tax cut to companies that make products in the United States; tax credit up to $5,000 for first-time home buyers; scale back tax breaks to companies that send jobs overseas.
MR. KERRY -- Proposes $50 billion for states to create jobs; manufacturing tax credits; would cut deficit in half in five years; crack down on trade violations.
Education
MR. EDWARDS -- One year of free tuition at public universities and community colleges for students who agree to 10 hours of work or community service a week. Proposes to increase teacher pay and break up largest high schools.
MR. KERRY -- Tax credits on first $4,000 of tuition every year of college. Proposes a $3.2 billion community service plan for high school students that would let them qualify for the equivalent of tuition at their state's four-year public colleges.
Gay Marriage
MR. EDWARDS -- Opposes same-sex marriage but would let states decide; supports domestic-partner benefits.
MR. KERRY -- Opposes same-sex marriage; supports domestic-partner benefits.
Health Care
MR. EDWARDS -- Would require government-subsidized health insurance for all Americans younger than 21; would cover half of nation's uninsured at a cost of $590 billion over 10 years; would expand nursing work force by 100,000; would restrict drug company advertising.
MR. KERRY -- Would expand the insurance system for federal employees to private citizens; would cover 61 percent uninsured at a cost of $890 billion over 10 years. Would save $1,000 off health care premiums for families through a pool for catastrophic coverage.
Iraq
MR. EDWARDS -- Voted to authorize the use of force; opposed $87 billion for Iraq and Afghanistan.
MR. KERRY -- Same.
Taxes
MR. EDWARDS -- Would eliminate Bush tax cuts for Americans earning over $200,000; would increase capital gains rate on incomes over $300,000; would provide tax cuts to encourage home ownership, savings and parents with newborns and tax credits for working poor.
MR. KERRY -- Would eliminate Bush tax cuts for Americans earning over $200,000. Supports target middle-class tax cuts for college, child care and health care.
Trade
MR. EDWARDS -- Would have opposed North American Free Trade Agreement had he been in the Senate at the time; favors including environmental and labor standards in the texts of such agreements. Voted to accept China as a full trading partner in the World Trade Organization.
MR. KERRY -- Voted in favor of Nafta, but would order a 120-day review of all trade pacts; would put environmental and labor standards in side agreements. Voted to accept China as a full trading partner in the W.T.O.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: ON THE ISSUES
