The Department of Transportation said on Wednesday that it had extended a regulation that rewards car makers for building more vehicles that can run primarily on ethanol as well as on gasoline. The regulation, adopted in 1988, originally was set to run through the 2004 model year.
Environmental advocates criticized the decision, saying that the Bush administration already knew it would tend to increase gasoline consumption, not help to lower it, as originally intended.
The regulation helps automakers comply with federal fuel economy standards for their fleets by granting them what is known as the dual-fuel credit, an incentive to build vehicles that can run on a fuel other than gasoline or diesel -- usually a blend consisting mainly of ethanol.
The credit allows the manufacturers to calculate the fuel economy of such vehicles using a more favorable formula than the one for ordinary vehicles, on the assumption that the alternative fuel would occasionally be used in them. By adding these vehicles to their overall mix of cars and trucks, a company can improve its corporate average fuel economy, without having to redesign their conventional vehicles to get better mileage.
For the model years 2005 through 2008, the boost that a carmaker can give its average fuel economy through use of the dual-fuel credit is limited to 0.9 miles per gallon; previously the ceiling had been 1.2 miles per gallon.
The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration said in a statement that the Department of Transportation extended the incentive in part to decrease the nation's dependence on foreign oil. But environmental groups said that the government's own studies show that the credit has the opposite effect, because so few dual-fuel vehicles are ever actually run on the ethanol blend, while the credit allows manufacturers to make and sell more large and inefficient conventional vehicles than they otherwise could.
''Automakers get a phony fleetwide mileage credit of nearly one mile per gallon for vehicles that almost never run on alternative fuels,'' said David Doniger, policy director of the climate center at the Natural Resources Defense Council in Washington.
In a report to Congress in March 2002 on the effects of the dual-fuel credit, the administration found that only 1 percent of dual-fuel vehicles actually use the alternative fuels they are capable of burning, in part because fewer than 200 of the 176,000 gasoline stations in the country offer the ethanol blend.
Using various assumptions about what percentage of dual-fuel vehicles would use their alternative fuel in the future, the study found that extending the credit would result in consumption of 9 billion to 14 billion more gallons of gasoline over the next four years. ''In all cases, the amount of petroleum used and the amount of greenhouse gases produced increases when the credit is extended to 2008,'' the report said.
Since the credit was instituted in 1988 under the Alternative Motor Fuels Act, which was meant to create a viable mass market for alternative fuels, some 3.4 million dual-fuel vehicles have been produced. But critics say the incentives were applied to the wrong aspect of the problem.
''You can make as many of these alternative fuel vehicles as you want,'' Mr. Doniger said. ''But until you bring the cost of ethanol down and make it easier to refuel, they won't make a difference.''
In the release announcing the extension of the credit, the highway safety agency said it expected the move to give ''Congress, other federal agencies, regional authorities, and the private sector ample time to identify, adopt and implement measures to enhance the alternative fuel infrastructure.''
