By all accounts, the Kremlin does not literally take a black marker to scripts or vet the coverage in advance at the nation's three national networks. Such Soviet-style methods are no longer necessary. Russia's two state-owned television networks and one state-controlled network mostly do the censoring themselves. That means Russia's television news increasingly aims to please an audience of one: President Vladimir Putin. For a nation trying to shed its totalitarian past, this is a treacherous slide in the wrong direction.
Mr. Putin's supporters offer plenty of excuses for what's happening to Russian television, the place where most people get their news. One is that after a period of turmoil, ordinary Russians admire Mr. Putin's strength, making it harder to convince them that they need free and critical news media. Another is that former President Boris Yeltsin also had an adoring press corps, courtesy of several very rich Russian oligarchs who controlled the channels and helped him win re-election in 1996. For next month's presidential election, Mr. Putin has defanged those oligarchs but adapted some of their worst methods of controlling television news.
For the two state-owned stations, nightly news starts the way it often does in dictatorships, with a stiff, formal accounting of the leader's day. Even when presidential campaign events go bad, as they did this week when Russian missiles kept going berserk in front of the cameras, Russian television skews the story. Unlike Western stations, which would churn out embarrassing news, Russia's stations focused on Mr. Putin's promise of future successes. As the news director at one channel explained to Steven Lee Myers of The Times, ''If I were not loyal to Mr. Putin, I would not work here.''
The third channel, NTV, once broadcast the nation's most independent news programs. Its coverage of the war in Chechnya and the use of deadly gas by Russian troops storming a Moscow theater held by terrorists in 2002 ranked as powerful journalism by any standards. But such straight news was apparently too much for the Kremlin, which controls the corporation that now owns the station. The head of NTV was fired shortly after the Moscow siege. Since then, coverage has too often ranged from tame to timid.
Newspapers, Internet sites and Echo Moskvy, a radio station, all offer more skepticism, robust debate and independence. But their audiences are small compared with television's, a fact that may have offered some protection until now. With Mr. Putin's expected re-election, the question is whether he will revert to his Soviet instincts and try to silence even these critics. When people see their news as propaganda, a nightly lie, democracy falls apart. Russia's powerful president would do well to foster a free and sometimes unfriendly media, an approach that has worked well in the rest of the democratic world.
