Secretary General Kofi Annan will endorse the view that the interim Iraqi government to take office this summer cannot be chosen by direct elections, but he will not make his recommendation on Iraq's political future for at least a week, senior United Nations diplomats said Wednesday.
The diplomats, who did not want to be quoted by name, said that Mr. Annan would consult Thursday with his special envoy to Iraq, Lakhdar Brahimi, who is returning from a weeklong examination of the political situation in the country. Afterward, Mr. Brahimi is to discuss his findings in a meeting with the Security Council.
The diplomats said that while Mr. Brahimi has concluded that setting up credible elections by the June 30 deadline the United States set for returning sovereignty to Iraq is not feasible, he will need more time to develop clear options to pass along to Mr. Annan for the transfer of power.
The task of coming up with a recommendation for Iraq's political future is a crucial one for the United Nations, which the Bush administration excluded from participation in the postwar transition. Iraqi leaders complained about the American plans for transferring power and requested United Nations intervention.
Mr. Annan sent in Mr. Brahimi, a 70-year-old former Algerian foreign minister whose reputation for resolving conflicts in the Muslim world was enhanced by his just completed two years' service as the top United Nations diplomat in Afghanistan.
Among those Mr. Brahimi saw in Iraq was Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the spiritual leader of the Shiite Muslim majority, whose demands for direct elections instead of the American formulation for indirect, caucus-based voting caused the Bush administration to rethink its initiative.
The Americans approached the United Nations after Ayatollah Sistani refused to deal directly with them but said he would drop his objections if a United Nations team went to Iraq and decided that direct elections were not feasible in the existing time frame.
While in Iraq, Mr. Brahimi suggested strongly that he thought that was the case, citing the dangers of setting up logistics too hastily.
''Conducting elections without adequate preparations could lead to even more disagreements,'' he said in a news conference before leaving Baghdad.
Carina Perelli, the head of the Election Assistance Division, and her team of experts returned Tuesday from 10 days in Iraq and are preparing a separate report on the technical aspects of holding elections. Officials said it would become an explanatory annex to Mr. Annan's final report.
United Nations diplomats say that they expect the report to conclude that it is important for all sides to stick to the June 30 date. Though the date was once suspect at the United Nations as one directed in part by administration interest in removing Iraq as an issue in the presidential election, diplomats now believe that Iraqis themselves have given the date such symbolic importance that it would be unwise to change it.
A senior American official said Wednesday that the administration would consider nearly any recommendation of Mr. Brahimi as long as it had broad support among Iraqis.
Among the options Mr. Annan will be exploring is a June 30 transfer of sovereignty to an expanded Iraqi Governing Council that would add members in an effort to be seen as more representative by Iraqis who question the legitimacy of the panel appointed by the Americans.
Such a plan would have the advantage of providing political continuity as the country passes into Iraqi control, but Mr. Annan is telling associates that it would only work if the new body looked distinctly different from the present one.
The administration has resisted keeping the council in place, but a senior administration official said that if Mr. Brahimi declares it acceptable, and the council would be in power for only a short time, the United States would not oppose it.
Another option under consideration is advancing the date of full national elections now scheduled under the American plan for the end of 2005 to a point earlier in the year.
The current American transition proposal calls for provincial caucuses to to select an assembly, which would in turn form an interim government. United Nations officials believe that plan has been discredited in Iraq and should be replaced.
Mr. Annan's challenge is to come up with a new plan that guarantees that the interim government reflects Iraq's ethnic disparities while not giving dominant power to the Shiite majority, leaving the Sunni minority, which ruled for years, feeling disenfranchised, or underrepresenting the autonomous Kurds and spurring secessionist sentiment among them.
The United Nations diplomats said the earliest they foresaw a final decision was the end of next week.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: GOVERNMENT
