Jayson Williams's gun collection and his opulent home were put on display during his aggravated manslaughter trial here on Wednesday.
The day's testimony and the introduction of the guns and scores of state police photographs became a battle of image. During a methodical presentation that lasted about 45 minutes, the chief prosecutor, Steven C. Lember, introduced a .30-'06 rifle and four double-barreled 12-gauge shotguns that Mr. Williams kept in a cabinet in the bedroom where a 55-year-old chauffeur, Costas Christofi, was shot and killed in February 2002.
Mr. Lember made no observations about Mr. Williams's owning the five weapons or keeping them in his bedroom. But Mr. Lember argued before the jury last week that Mr. Christofi was killed because of Mr. Williams's reckless handling of another 12-gauge shotgun in his collection and his extreme indifference to the value of human life. Defense lawyers contend that the shooting was nothing more than a tragic accident.
After the weapons were removed from paper wrappings near the jury box, Mr. Lember carried them, one at a time, past the jury of 12 women and 4 men to the witness stand. A state police detective, Christopher Wagner, testified that he had seized each from the gun cabinet after Mr. Christofi had been killed, along with about 50 rounds of ammunition, mostly shotgun shells taken from a mesh shooting vest. Three of the five guns shown to the jurors were found to be loaded on the morning of the killing, Detective Wagner said.
At one point, Mr. Lember took five rifle cartridges -- each about three inches long -- that Detective Wagner said had come from the .30-'06 and placed them on a ledge of the witness stand, in full view of the jury.
During cross examination by a defense lawyer, William R. Martin, Detective Wagner agreed there was nothing illegal about Mr. Williams's gun collection. Mr. Martin said it was not unusual to store five guns in a cabinet. ''Not at all,'' Detective Wagner said.
A few minutes later, Mr. Martin noted that Mr. Williams had a skeet-shooting range at his country estate and said, again, there was nothing unusual about his keeping guns, ammunition and a shooting vest in his bedroom. ''Other than there was a dead body in the room, no,'' Detective Wagner said, referring to the fatal shooting of Mr. Christofi a few feet from the gun cabinet.
As they had last week, the jurors viewed several pictures of Mr. Christofi's body lying on a bedroom rug. They also saw a close-up view of his fatal chest wound, which was about two inches in diameter.
They also got a photographic glimpse of the life that Mr. Williams, a former star with the New Jersey Nets, enjoyed with his wife, Tanya, at their estate, named ''Who Knew.'' The pictures showed the couple's tear-shaped indoor pool surrounded by what appeared to be potted palms, as well as a bar and billiard room, movie theater and indoor basketball court. None of these rooms were a factor in Mr. Christofi's death. But they gave the jury a view of Mr. Williams's wealth.
Another defense lawyer, Joseph Hayden, introduced many of the photographs of the more mundane rooms and argued during cross examination of Detective Ryan that the state police had invaded the Williams family's privacy during its investigation. Detective Ryan denied the contention.
