The players would rather be contenders than spoilers, but Union College's hockey team is doing what it can to scramble the race for the regular-season championship in the Eastern College Athletic Conference.
With four games remaining, the top six teams are separated by only 6 points, and Union (11-14-5, 5-10-3) has emerged as the team not to be taken for granted.
Over the past three weekends, the Dutchmen shellacked Dartmouth, 7-0; beat Clarkson, 3-1; rallied from 2-0 deficits to beat St. Lawrence by 3-2 and to tie Brown, 2-2; and lost at Harvard, 3-2. This stretch came shortly after a nine-game losing streak in which Union was outscored by 43-14.
''We were competing hard, but we weren't able to put the puck in the net,'' Nate Leaman, the Dutchmen's first-year coach, said in a telephone interview from Schenectady, N.Y. ''We don't have the talent that some other teams have, so we're a team that very much has to play a team game. We have to make sure we do a lot of little things well and put ourselves into position to win games.''
The Dutchmen have been helped by the early return of their senior captain, Glenn Sanders, who had his spleen removed after it was lacerated by a seemingly harmless hit during a game in mid-November.
''Glenn is the heart and soul of our team,'' Leaman said. ''He's not a point producer, but he's the guy that sets the tone. He works his tail off and shows the other guys how hard we have to work.''
Jordan Webb, the leading scorer from last season, has rediscovered his touch as well. And the Dutchmen have renewed confidence.
''When we were going through that losing stretch, something would go wrong in a game and a lot of the guys would go, 'Uh-oh,' '' Leaman said. ''It's a lot about character now, and not giving up, and learning to do the little things. Our guys know that we can beat anyone in the league.''
The next visitors to Achilles Center (capacity 2,504) on the Union campus are Colgate (16-9-5, 11-5-2), which is in second place in the E.C.A.C., and Cornell (12-7-6, 10-5-3), which is tied for third. But Leaman is less concerned about spoiling their chances at a title than in readying Union for the postseason tournament.
''We're 1 point out of qualifying for home ice with four games to go,'' he said. ''We've got to win some games in the playoffs to teach the guys how it feels.''
WOMEN  Dartmouth Knocked From Perch
Dartmouth was knocked out of the No. 1 spot in the U.S. College Hockey Online poll after losing twice to No. 4 St. Lawrence, by 3-0 and 3-2.
Minnesota and Wisconsin, the co-leaders of the Western Collegiate Hockey Association, split their weekend series, each winning by 2-1. Wisconsin's victory on Friday came in overtime, on an unassisted goal by Carla MacLeod, the team captain. Minnesota (21-4-1, 14-3-1) moved into the top spot in the poll, while Wisconsin (18-5-3, 14-5-1) dropped to fifth from fourth.
Harvard, which swept No. 10 Brown, moved up a notch to second in the poll. The Crimson (20-2-1, 10-2-0) will be host to St. Lawrence for two games this weekend. The Saints (20-5-1, 11-1-0) have won nine straight. Rachel Barrie, a senior goaltender, stopped 57 Dartmouth shots in the weekend series.
Harvard trails St. Lawrence in the E.C.A.C. by 2 points.
DIVISION III  St. Norbert Earns Top Seeding
St. Norbert won its third straight Northern Collegiate Hockey Association championship and is seeded No. 1 in the eight-team Peters Cup playoffs beginning this weekend. The Green Knights (21-2-2, 11-2-1) of De Pere, Wis., were defeated in an N.C.A.A. Division III semifinal last spring by the eventual national champion, Norwich.
Norwich (20-2-0, 15-1-0 E.C.A.C. East), ranked No. 1 in Division III, ends its regular season Saturday against No. 3 Middlebury. Middlebury (19-3-0, 13-3-0 New England Small College Athletic Conference) won five straight national championships in the 1990's. Norwich won national titles in 2000 and 2003.
Slap Shots
SHORT-HANDED SPECIALIST -- Forward Chris Conner scored a short-handed goal in Michigan Tech's 9-4 victory over Alaska-Anchorage last Saturday, giving him eight short-handed goals this season. He is two short of the N.C.A.A. single-season record (10), held by Michigan's John Madden, now with the N.H.L.'s Devils.
Conner leads Division I in short-handed goals and is tied with Steve Saviano of New Hampshire for the lead in goals with 24.
PLAY-BY-PLAY NIGHTMARE AVERTED -- When Ohio State was host to Nebraska-Omaha last weekend, each team had a Dan Knapp on the roster. The Buckeyes' Dan Knapp, a sophomore forward from Rochester, Mich., had a goal and an assist in each game. Nebraska-Omaha's Dan Knapp, a freshman defenseman from Hermantown, Minn., was on the trip but did not dress for either game.
GOALIE INJURIES -- Matt Hanson, a sophomore goaltender at Vermont, fractured a cervical vertebra in practice last Thursday. On Sunday he was reported in stable condition with normal neurological function after surgery Friday to stabilize the vertebra.
Joe Exter, the former Merrimack goaltender who fractured his skull in an on-ice collision last March and was hospitalized for four weeks, posted his first professional victory Saturday night, a 4-3 overtime triumph for the Wheeling Nailers of the East Coast Hockey League.
HOCKEY: COLLEGE REPORT
