When a Brooklyn grand jury on Tuesday declined to indict a police officer who testified that he accidentally shot and killed an unarmed 19-year-old on a housing project rooftop last month, it was following a pattern in such cases set not just in New York City, but around the nation, according to lawyers, academics and experts on police shootings.
It is a pattern that in many instances has prompted calls for a review by federal authorities and accusations that state prosecutors work too closely with the police to effectively investigate and prosecute such shootings. That is what has happened in this case, in which Officer Richard S. Neri said he was startled and shot Timothy Stansbury Jr. after they came face to face at a rooftop door.
But the failure to bring charges in cases where officers contend they fired by accident also highlights the seeming unwillingness of grand juries to find fault in instances in which officers make mistakes -- even deadly ones -- in settings where they said they either had reasons to be fearful or appeared to be acting in good faith.
Zachary W. Carter, the former Brooklyn United States attorney who has also served as a Criminal Court Judge and a senior state prosecutor, oversaw a federal investigation of police practices in the 1990's prompted by the assault on Abner Louima in a police station house. He said that civil rather than criminal trials in cases like the killing of Mr. Stansbury are far more likely to bring about the kind of changes in training, tactics and policy that can reduce the chances of such killings in the future.
Yesterday, Mr. Stansbury's family angrily dismissed the notion that the shooting on the roof of the Louis Armstrong Houses in Bedford-Stuyvesant was an accident. ''They didn't hear the right story,'' said Timothy Stansbury, the victim's father, said of the panel. ''They didn't hear the truth.''
Roslynn R. Mauskopf, the United States attorney for the Eastern District, said in a statement that her office had ''begun a thorough review of the evidence'' in the case, but several former federal prosecutors said that a case in which an officer fires accidentally does not lend itself to a federal criminal civil rights prosecution. Joel Berger, a civil lawyer who specializes in police misconduct cases, said that families were more likely to find justice by filing a lawsuit in civil court.
Other lawyers and experts said the case also underscored the disparity between the sanctions -- and the standard of proof required for them -- between criminal prosecutions and civil lawsuits. ''There is no doubt it was horrible and no doubt that the family should be compensated, but this terrible accident is not necessarily a crime,'' said Alan Vinegrad, another former United States attorney in Brooklyn who prosecuted the police officers convicted of abusing Mr. Louima. ''There is unfortunately this gap between what the criminal justice system does and what the civil justice system does with shootings that end tragically but don't rise to the level of a crime.''
But Susan Karten, another lawyer who has handled police misconduct cases and represented the family of Anthony Baez, a Bronx man choked to death by an officer in 1994, said, ''This is not a tragic accident, it's a shooting that never should have happened and it indicates to me that something went terribly wrong in that grand jury.''
The gap between the criminal and civil systems could be addressed by police training, which some experts have said appears deficient in light of the shooting; some who have reviewed the case have suggested that Officer Neri may have had his finger on the trigger as he patrolled the rooftop with his gun drawn, a violation of the department's procedure. And some department critics have questioned the policy of allowing officers to patrol on rooftops with their weapons drawn in the absence of any specific danger, a decision that Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly has said should be left to each officer.
The killing of Mr. Stansbury, like the shooting of Amadou Diallo, an unarmed West African immigrant slain in a hail of police gunfire in 1999, probably will result in some changes in police training. Commissioner Kelly tacitly acknowledged as much by appointing a panel to review the issues of tactics and training that emerged from the incident.
But training is only effective when it is consistent and constant. While Commissioner Kelly's predecessors developed new programs after the Diallo shooting, some of them, including increased tactical training for plainclothes officers, were dropped after the Sept. 11, 2001, terrorist attacks, one senior police official said, adding that they had been reinstituted. Another senior official police official, however, stressed that some 37,000 police officers had between 11 million and 12 million contacts with people on the streets each year. ''A lot of it's under adverse circumstances,'' the official said. ''It doesn't excuse it but you can train till the cows come home and still have some aberrational event.''
