Tomorrow, Carl and Clarence Aguirre, 22-month-old Filipino twins who are joined at the head, are scheduled to undergo their third operation to tease apart the network of shared veins in their heads.
In previous procedures, doctors have separated veins at the front and along one side of the boys' heads. They intend to work tomorrow on at least one of two larger veins at the back, said Dr. James T. Goodrich, the leader of the surgical team and the director of pediatric neurosurgery at Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx, where the operation is to be performed.
Holding a plastic model of the twins' fused skulls, Dr. Goodrich pointed out the two large vessels that will be the focus of the operation.
Because of their size, the two veins carry a higher risk of serious bleeding if they are torn or damaged, making the coming procedure the most delicate yet, Dr. Goodrich said.
The sharing of veins has led to the formation of a ''lake'' of blood between the two boys' brains, he said.
''We've made the decision to give the lake to Clarence,'' Dr. Goodrich said. ''What we're trying to do is reverse the flow in Carl and try to get his blood to flow into deeper veins,'' he said.
If all goes well, Dr. Goodrich and Dr. David A. Staffenberg, the craniofacial surgeon working with him, hope to perform a fourth operation in May or later to finish untangling the veins and finally separate the boys.
In the weeks leading up to that surgery, the doctors plan to insert skin expanders under the boys' scalps. These balloonlike devices are to be gradually inflated with saltwater to stretch the skin, so that it will cover both heads. The surgeons inserted skin expanders after the previous surgeries, but infections began to develop and they had to be removed.
Dr. Goodrich said the boys are being separated in a series of operations because it allows their circulatory systems to adjust gradually to the change.
In the first two operations, he was able to divide at least half of their intermingled veins, but he cautioned that he might still come across veins that cannot easily be diverted to one boy or the other.
If blood cannot be diverted to other vessels and instead becomes backed up in the brain, dangerous swelling can occur, Dr. Goodrich explained.
The death rate from surgery to separate conjoined twins is said to be about 50 percent. Of the 30 to 40 pairs of twins who have been separated since the 1920's, many survivors have suffered brain damage or paralysis, according to research.
The partial separation has already improved the health of both boys, Dr. Staffenberg said.
Before, most of the boys' shared veins emptied into Clarence's body, and the extra load on his circulatory system gave him high blood pressure.
It also meant that Clarence did most of the urinating for both boys.
Now that half of the shared veins have been separated, Carl's circulatory system is carrying more of its own load. Clarence's blood pressure has fallen, and doctors have been able to reduce his medication.
