Police investigators searching for a missing Manhattan woman dug up a body yesterday at the former Newark home of a man who fled the country after admitting he had practiced cosmetic surgery without a license.
The woman's identity was not confirmed last night, but investigators strongly suspected that it was Maria Cruz, a 35-year-old market analyst last seen in Manhattan on April 13. Ms. Cruz had been a patient of the man, Dean Faiello, and the police suspect she may have died of complications related to cosmetic surgery.
''We're looking at the possibility that the victim may have died as a result of procedures performed by the individual that he was not licensed to perform, including anesthesia,'' said Paul J. Browne, the deputy commissioner for public information for the New York Police Department.
Law enforcement officials said that Ms. Cruz had breast implants whose serial numbers matched those of implants found among the remains.
But in Maspeth, Queens, Ms. Cruz's uncle Jose S. Navarro said that family members were still holding out hope that the remains were not hers.
''Everyone is so very sure that it's Maria,'' he said last night. ''I'm still clinging to the hope that it's not really her. They'll be doing the autopsy tomorrow morning.''
The discovery of the body -- stuffed into a suitcase and buried in a carriage house under steps made of hand-mixed concrete -- resulted from the merging of two investigations: one, by the New York Police Department, for the missing woman, and the other, by the New York State attorney general, for the missing man, who was arrested in October 2002 and released on $5,000 bail.
Investigators, family and friends of Ms. Cruz seemed deeply mystified by her disappearance 10 months ago. A slip of a woman, standing 5 feet tall and weighing only 90 pounds, she had become a successful senior analyst at Barclays Bank, and had recently moved from a Roman Catholic boarding house on West 44th Street, St. Joseph's Home, to a luxury studio apartment in a high-rise nearby. She was described by those who knew her as a happy, deeply religious woman who attended Mass on the last day she was seen.
Her family offered a $25,000 reward, put up a Web site and invited reporters into Ms. Cruz's empty apartment to generate news media interest, all to no avail.
Meanwhile, Mr. Faiello was in trouble. Complaints to the State Education Department resulted in an investigation of his business, a self-described ''skin and laser center'' on the Upper East Side called SkinOvations. According to a press release issued by the attorney general, Mr. Faiello, 44, advertised such procedures as anesthesia, laser hair removal and tattoo removal.
On June 26, 2003 -- after Ms. Cruz's disappearance -- Mr. Faiello pleaded guilty to practicing medicine without a license and conspiracy, a charge related to illegal distribution of pharmaceuticals, said Paul Larrabee, a spokesman for Attorney General Eliot Spitzer. Mr. Faiello faced one and one-third to four years on the first count, and up to one year on the second.
But in September, according to the Essex County prosecutor's office, which also assisted with the investigation, Mr. Faiello disappeared before he was to be sentenced. He is thought to be in Costa Rica, officials said.
While trying to find Ms. Cruz, Detective Joseph Della Rocca of Midtown North discovered that she may have had an appointment with Mr. Faiello around the time of her disappearance, officials said. Investigating further, he learned of Mr. Faiello's trouble with the law.
Detective Della Rocca found that several bags of concrete had been delivered to Mr. Faiello's home in mid-April, about the time Ms. Cruz disappeared, law enforcement officials said.
Property records indicate that Mr. Faiello sold the property, at 214 Elwood Avenue, for almost half a million dollars last May.
With the new owner's permission, investigators visited the property and found a freshly poured concrete platform in the carriage house next to the main home. The carriage house had been converted to an apartment and garage, and neighbors said Mr. Faiello had rented it out to tenants.
Local law enforcement officials obtained a search warrant, and yesterday found the suitcase containing the body.
One police officer said that the platform was rudely built, and that the concrete had clearly not been poured from a cement mixer. ''If you were trying to hide someone, and you weren't in a hurry, you would have done a better job,'' he said.
The house, by far the largest on its block in the Forest Hills section of Newark, is surrounded by a high wall of brick topped with wrought iron. Until 1982, it belonged to a Czechoslovakian opera diva named Maria Jeritza, who built a theater inside so she could entertain her friends, according to an obituary. It is still known in the neighborhood as ''the mansion'' or ''Madame Jeritza's.''
Neighbors said that Mr. Faiello had lived there for about 15 years. He went to block parties and was described as dark-haired and handsome. One neighbor, who said she had met him only briefly, said: ''He told us he was a dermatologist and he introduced himself. He was barely home. The only times we saw him really outside was when he had parties.''
Andy Nguyen, who said he rented the carriage house from the mid-1990's until June 2003, said that Mr. Faiello had an apartment in Greenwich Village where he frequently stayed, but that he regularly had parties at the Newark house.
Mr. Nguyen, 38, said that Mr. Faiello moved into a nearby one-bedroom apartment with a friend after selling the house. At the time, Mr. Faiello was not working, Mr. Nguyen said, and when he asked Mr. Faiello about his plans, he said he was planning a trip to Europe or the Caribbean.
Mr. Nguyen said the only concrete work he remembered in the carriage house was done to patch some steps.
Correction:  February 20, 2004, Friday  An article yesterday about the discovery of a body buried in a carriage house under concrete steps misstated the name of the neighborhood in Newark. It is Forest Hill, not Forest Hills.
