Newspaper accounts of Martha Stewart's ImClone Systems trade were read aloud in court yesterday as prosecutors tried to show that statements by Ms. Stewart at the time were attempts to prop up the price of shares in her own company.
Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, countered that she was merely trying to address the storm of publicity she and her company were facing over the sale.
The newspaper articles introduced in court were written shortly after Ms. Stewart's name surfaced in June 2002 as one of the investors who sold ImClone shares just before a critical company announcement that sent the share price into a dive.
The statements she made are central to the prosecution's case that Ms. Stewart committed securities fraud by misleading investors in her company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia.
The news media also figured in a ruling by an appeals court yesterday. A three-judge panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit criticized the exclusion of reporters from jury selection by the trial judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Much of yesterday's testimony was from Gregory R. Blatt, former general counsel for Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, who told the court that the flurry of publicity around Ms. Stewart's ImClone trade had an immediate effect on the company's business. Mr. Blatt described a meeting with the company's outside lawyer, Andrew Nussbaum, and Ms. Stewart's spokeswoman, Susan Magrino, along with Ms. Stewart and the company's president at the time, Sharon Patrick, that tried to come up with a public statement.
Responding to a question on cross-examination from Mr. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Mr. Blatt said the publicity brought ''reactions from advertisers and potential business partners,'' adding: ''Our partners were concerned about the effect that the stories were having on our business and, therefore, their business.''
Mr. Morvillo introduced dozens of newspaper articles into the record. ''Would you say that there was a building crescendo of comment in the media?'' Mr. Morvillo asked Mr. Blatt, who responded ''Yes.''
Michael Schachter, one of the prosecutors, also asked Mr. Blatt to read excerpts from some of them, particularly statements from Ms. Stewart.
''Martha Stewart did not receive any nonpublic information regarding ImClone prior to her sale of a small number of ImClone shares,'' the witness dutifully read. ''Her transaction was entirely lawful.''
Mr. Blatt acknowledged that when such statements were issued in June 2002, the share price of Martha Stewart Living was in decline. ''Generally, it was falling,'' he said, in response to a question from Mr. Schachter.
Another witness, Peter J. Melley, an investigator for NASD, formerly the National Association of Securities Dealers, traced the price of Martha Stewart Living shares over that period. On June 6, he testified, the shares closed at $19.01. The next day, newspapers carried accounts of Ms. Stewart's sale of ImClone shares, which were then under investigation. The share price fell overnight, he said, opening on June 7 at $18.15. By the time the market closed on June 7, shares of Martha Stewart Living were down to $17.40.
Ms. Stewart issued a statement late in the afternoon of June 12 in which she explained her trade as the result of an agreement with her broker. That day, Mr. Melley told the court, the shares in her company closed at $15. The next morning, they opened at $16.35, he said.
Another statement came late in the day on June 18, basically repeating the June 12 statement. The shares opened the next morning at $14.40, rising to $16.45 by the end of trading, Mr. Melley said. At a meeting that day, James Follo, the company's chief financial officer, said that he expected revenue growth of ''approximately 15 percent'' and earnings of about 15 cents a share for the second quarter of 2002.
After an article appeared in The Wall Street Journal on June 24 raising questions about Ms. Stewart's account of the ImClone trade, her company's share price dropped, from $15 at the opening bell, dipping as low as $11.75, and closing at $12.50, Mr. Melley said.
Judge Cedarbaum ruled last week that prosecutors may not introduce testimony from expert witnesses about the effect Ms. Stewart's statements may have had on investors.
The government said yesterday that it expects to rest its case by late today or Friday. Mariana Pasternak, a friend of Ms. Stewart who was a passenger on her plane the day Ms. Stewart sold her ImClone shares, is expected to testify today.
The appeals court ruling was handed down about three weeks after arguments over the district judge's move to bar reporters, courtroom artists and others from watching the questioning of prospective jurors, a process known as voir dire. Lawyers for more than a dozen news organizations, including The New York Times, contended that the presence of the defendants during the questioning would have a far more chilling effect on prospective jurors than the presence of reporters.
Judge Cedarbaum had issued the unusual order, citing excessive attention in the case, after a request from the acting United States attorney, David Kelley. The questioning took place in the judge's robing room, with lawyers and the defendants present. Transcripts with juror names and certain personal information excised were made available to reporters, for a fee, after each session.
''The burden is heavy on those who seek to restrict access to the media, a vital means to open justice,'' the appeals court ruling concluded. ''The mere fact of intense media coverage of a celebrity defendant, without further compelling justification, is simply not enough to justify closure.''
The appeals panel, while noting the requirement to balance a defendant's right to a fair trial with the need for openness, found that ''the district judge erred in closing the voir dire proceedings,'' and that the cases she cited to support her decision were not applicable. They overturned the order, even though jury selection was completed weeks ago. The ruling is significant nonetheless because it sets a precedent and the questions raised about reporters' right of access ''is capable of repetition in future cases,'' the judges wrote.
''The ability to see and hear a proceeding as it unfolds is a vital component of the First Amendment right of access not, as the government describes, an incremental benefit,'' the judges wrote. ''Emotions, gestures, facial expressions, and pregnant pauses do not appear on the reported transcript.'' They added: ''In general, openness acts to protect, rather than to threaten, the right to a fair trial.''
In addition, ''the district court did not point to any controversial issue to be probed in voir dire that might have impaired the candor of prospective jurors,'' the judges wrote. Issues like admitting racial bias or harboring fear of retaliation from certain types of defendants might qualify, they wrote, but ''it is, for example, difficult to imagine a person losing his or her job because he or she acknowledged admiration for or animosity toward Stewart.''
Judge Cedarbaum had no comment on the ruling, and a spokesman for Mr. Kelley said he would have no comment.
Nancy King, the Lee S. and Charles A. Speir professor of law at Vanderbilt University Law School, said the judge could have asked for juror anonymity and avoided the entire confrontation. With juror anonymity, ''the press need not rely on a sterile transcript, they can watch the voir dire as it unfolds and report the demeanor and tone of voice of every person in the courtroom,'' she said. ''At the same time, potential jurors can be assured that no one will find out who they are. Mere speculation that juror anonymity won't work in the face of a media onslaught is an insufficient basis for abandoning the Constitution's protections against secret proceedings.''
