Suicide bombers attacked a Polish military base south of Baghdad on Wednesday morning, killing 11 Iraqis and wounding more than 100 others, including soldiers and civilians.
The attack began when two trucks packed with explosives raced toward the military compound in Hillah, about 60 miles south of the capital. Guards fired on the vehicles, causing one to explode. The other crashed into a concrete barrier and blew up, Lt. Col. Robert Strzelecki, commander of the Polish base, told The Associated Press.
Preliminary reports indicated that the 11 people killed were Iraqis. American officials in Baghdad said 102 people were wounded, including 58 soldiers at the base. It was unclear if any of the wounded were Americans. A spokesman for the American military in Baghdad said only 6 of the 58 wounded soldiers remained hospitalized. The extent of the injuries to the Iraqis was unclear, but officials said women and children were among them.
The suicide attack was the third such bombing in eight days, after more than 100 people were killed in back-to-back bombings: of a police station south of Baghdad on Feb. 10, and at an army recruitment center in the capital on Feb. 11. In all three attacks, the overwhelming majority of the dead were Iraqi civilians.
The wave of attacks appears to be aimed at alienating Iraqis who may support the American-led occupation and at the countries supporting the effort with troops on the ground. A multinational force of about 9,000 soldiers is stationed in south-central Iraq, including troops from Poland and Hungary.
''The enemy's strategy is fairly clear,'' Lt. Gen. Ricardo Sanchez, an American commander, told reporters on Wednesday in Tikrit. ''They plan to isolate us from the Iraqi people.''
A senior coalition officer said that while it was not clear who carried out the bombing, the technique was similar to that used by Al Qaeda. The officer said that in suspected Qaeda bombings last year in southern Iraq and in Saudi Arabia, two cars were used, the first one to punch through barriers protecting the target and the second to move in without obstruction.
That the Polish forces were able to largely thwart the attack was a measure of how heavily fortified the occupiers' bases are.
Hillah is a predominantly Shiite Muslim area that has been relatively calm since Saddam Hussein's government fell last April. But American officials are worried that the violence could spread out of the Sunni Muslim-dominated area north and west of Baghdad, which has been in the scene of most of the violence, into the predominantly Shiite areas.
Earlier this month, American officials captured a document they attributed to Abu Musab al-Zarqawi, a suspected Jordanian terrorist. The document outlines a strategy for setting off a ''sectarian war'' in Iraq by striking Shiite targets.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INSURGENCY
