Federal prosecutors have issued a wide-ranging subpoena to the office of Gov. John G. Rowland, seeking a vast array of personal records and documents relating to 15 companies with roles that have led to the accusations surrounding Mr. Rowland's administration.
The subpoena, dated Feb. 16, is broader than those issued previously in connection with the governor, who has been under investigation for possible corruption in the awarding of state contracts. Mr. Rowland received a subpoena for personal records in January, and his wife, Patricia Rowland, received a similar subpoena this month.
The new subpoena seeks records dating to when Mr. Rowland took office in January 1995, and appears to suggest a wide-ranging inquiry into virtually every public accusation made against the governor or his administration.
Ross Garber, the governor's chief counsel, said Wednesday that the subpoena was anticipated and the governor intended to comply with it.
The federal investigation has picked up steam since December, when Mr. Rowland admitted to lying about receiving free work and gifts at his lakeside cottage in Litchfield, Conn., from state employees and contractors. That admission prompted legislators to form a committee that will decide whether to recommend the governor's impeachment.
With its latest subpoena, the government may be seeking to gather up relevant documents before the state impeachment panel starts issuing subpoenas of its own, according to lawyers who have some involvement with the federal investigation.
Mr. Rowland's office has been issued subpoenas in the past, lawyers say, but those related to others in his administration or specific projects.
The latest subpoena is aimed squarely at Mr. Rowland, and includes a blanket request for ''calendars, appointment books and schedules; travel and expense reports; telephone records, including but not limited to cellular phone records; telephone records for the governor's residence.''
The subpoena also requests all documents and records related to 15 companies, some of which have long figured in the investigation and some of which are fresh additions. Among the familiar names are the Tomasso Group and its related entities, which have won numerous large contracts for state work, sometimes without bids. The Tomasso family also controls companies that provided workers who helped renovate Mr. Rowland's cottage. The subpoena also takes pains to mention that any documents related to ''functions, parties and/or other events'' held at the Tunxis Plantation Country Club, owned by the Tomassos, must be submitted.
Another company on the list, Matthews Ventures, is controlled by Robert Matthews, who received a lucrative lease from the state on a building he owns in New Haven. His companies have also received millions of dollars of economic state assistance.
The government has also demanded any information pertaining to 184 Windsor Avenue, property that the state is renting from Mark and Allicia Wertheim, friends of the governor and his wife. Connecticut's attorney general, Richard Blumenthal, has criticized the lease as a "sweetheart deal,'' and four state employees were disciplined for their role in it.
Also on the list of topics under subpoena is Claywell Electric Company. The company is owned by Kurt C. Claywell, a two-time felon who has worked on the Long Lane juvenile detention facility in Middletown, Conn., which has been the subject of previous subpoenas. Mr. Claywell pleaded guilty last year to mail and tax fraud for having his business pick up personal expenses and is awaiting sentencing. He was convicted in 2000 of pension embezzlement, for which he got probation. Both the Wertheims and Mr. Claywell have turned up on lists of donors to the nonprofit conservancy that has lavished attention on the governor's mansion since Mr. Rowland took office.
Prosecutors are also seeking records on Shared Technologies and 960 Main Street, ventures that were backed by Anthony D. Autorino, a Hartford businessman. Mr. Rowland first reported owning shares in one of Mr. Autorino's companies in 1997, the same year he gave Mr. Autorino a leadership role in the redevelopment of Hartford. Two years later, Mr. Autorino redeveloped an abandoned department store at 960 Main Street as a college campus with the governor's support.
The federal subpoena concludes with two catch-all demands for records relating to gifts to the governor's office, and reviews of state business transactions.
Details of the subpoena were released by the governor's office on Wednesday, as legislators voted overwhelmingly to confirm two interim judges who had come under criticism for their personal and professional links to Mr. Rowland. One judge, James K. Robertson, has provided hundreds of hours of free legal work to the governor, who owes Mr. Robertson's firm $100,000 in fees.
But Wednesday, members of the General Assembly's Judiciary Committee praised Judge Robertson's character and credentials and voted, 38-1, to confirm his nomination to Superior Court, saying he had done nothing wrong.
The legislators also voted, 37-2, to confirm another interim judge, Joseph A. Mengacci, who testified last Friday about his friendship with the governor and gifts or favors he may have provided for him.
