IN its latest effort to tap the advertising potential of the Internet, the Toyota Motor Corporation has agreed to become the first exclusive automotive sponsor on eBay, the online auction site, in a deal that promotes Toyota cars and trucks on special eBay pages and in online charity auctions.
The agreement, which lasts through December, demonstrates how far Web sites will go to find new ad revenue, often by offering package deals they say are better and more engaging than scatterings of pop-up and banner ads. The deal also reflects Toyota's desire to stand out in a market that is bumper to bumper with competitors.
More such pacts may be announced soon, analysts said, as high-speed Internet technology improves while traditional television ads continue to leave automakers unsatisfied. To many car companies, the rising cost of TV commercials and the dwindling audience have made depending on 30-second network spots about as appealing as depending on foreign oil.
Instead, the Internet is increasing its appeal with higher-speed connections like broadband, said David Hallerman, senior analyst at eMarketer a research company in New York. ''Broadband increases people's time online, and that time comes out of TV,'' he said.
Executives at eBay say they hope that their alliance with Toyota will start something bigger, even as it dwarfs some previous deals. ''We have run ads from about 10 different auto manufacturers in the past year,'' said Don Albert, senior director for strategic partnerships at eBay. ''But the revenue from those was small in comparison.''
Although he and others involved in the deal declined to provide financial terms, an executive who saw eBay's initial requests for proposals from automakers said that the asking price on the package was $4 million. Toyota spends more online than any other auto company: $14.8 million advertising online in 2001, $22.8 million in 2002, and $35.3 million in the first three quarters of 2003, according to the most recent estimates from TNS Media Intelligence/CMR.
Even if it signs more deals like its alliance with Toyota, eBay will continue to earn most of its revenue from auction listing fees and sales commissions paid by the people who use the site to auction goods, Mr. Albert said.
The Toyota deal pays off for eBay primarily by adding features for car buyers to the site and by building a foundation for a potentially long-term relationship with a big marketer, Mr. Albert said.
''There is not a major push to make this a major revenue stream,'' he said. ''It does bring in some significant high-margin revenue to the company, but again, it's a partnership that we believe adds value to the community.''
Under the new deal, Toyota is the only automaker advertising new vehicles on eBay, and has its banner, animated or interactive ads placed throughout the main eBay.com site and eBay Motors, which is the most-visited automotive site on the Web, Nielsen/NetRatings says. A dedicated mini-site for Toyota called Fueling Desire has been set up on eBay to showcase new vehicles and promotions, and Toyota will donate perhaps as many as four cars and trucks to be auctioned online for charity.
Technology used by eBay, which reports 95 million registered users, will also allow the site to direct certain ads toward users who behave in particular ways, said Mark Simmons, national manager for media and strategy at Toyota's United States division. ''If they're looking at baby furniture, that might suggest a minivan, or some sort of family vehicle,'' he said.
But the sweet spot for Toyota is users who list a car for sale on eBay. ''A lot of people out there listing a car are in the market to replace it with a new vehicle,'' he said. Not that its agency, the Torrance, Calif., office of Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, minds having the eBay playground to itself. ''To lock out our competitors is a big deal,'' said Priya Verma, interactive media director at Saatchi &amp; Saatchi, part of the Publicis Groupe. ''It's a top-tier deal.''
The agency will take pains to protect eBay users from ads that irritate, Ms. Verma said. ''We want to be conservative, because the eBay audience has not seen some of this before,'' she said. ''They're also really community-based, and talk to each other all the time, so we want them on our side.''
In some ways, Toyota is following tracks left online by Lexus, its luxury sibling brand, and by its rival Nissan. Last year, Lexus paid MSN to build and act as host for a site called Luxury for Living, featuring Lexus promotional material but many other offerings, too, including information on topics like luxury hotels and high-technology houses.
This month, MSN and Lexus announced that eight million consumers had visited the site by December 2003. The companies agreed to keep the site (Lexus.MSN.com) running for another year and to add features like video.
''People could ask why we even bother with this,'' said Bill Burris, a Lexus executive whose title is owner- experience manager. ''We're not selling shirts; there's no direct payoff.''
But the Lexus site is part of a large marketing funnel intended to move consumers toward making a purchase, Mr. Burris said. ''We're way up at the top of the funnel,'' he said. ''This is for the brand and the relationship, first and foremost.''
Nissan worked directly with eBay last year, using print ads to urge consumers to visit eBay Motors and check out a make-believe auction for a ride in a Nissan Altima. Those who followed through found the fake auction, as well as links to real Nissan dealers and to Nissan-brand collectible items being sold on the site.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
