A runaway train carrying chemicals and fuel derailed Wednesday in northeastern Iran, setting off a fire and an explosion that killed at least 195 people and injured hundreds more, officials said.
The Iranian Student News Agency quoted officials as saying 195 were dead and about 400 injured, but aid workers were still searching the rubble and the death toll could rise.
Reuters said a document prepared by local officials put the death toll at 295.
The deputy interior minister for security affairs, Ali Asghar Ahmadi, ruled out sabotage as the cause of the incident but said the Interior Ministry had sent a team to investigate, Fars News Agency reported.
Other reports said the train cars were set in motion by earth tremors, which are common in Iran. The head of the country's railroad, Jabar Ali Zakeri, said that the cars may have been moved by heavy wind, according to the Islamic Republic News Agency.
Among the dead were firefighters and several senior officials who had rushed to the scene, including the governor general, mayor and fire chief of the nearby city of Neyshabur.
Earlier, the governor general, Mojtaba Farahmandnekoo, had told the student news agency that train cars had begun moving in the early morning hours and had hit parked train cars that were loaded with fuel.
According to Iranian television reports, the incident began when 51 train cars, filled with gasoline, fertilizer and sulphur products, began rolling down the tracks and picking up speed. Thirteen miles from Neyshabur, 48 of the cars derailed and caught fire.
The deadly explosion occurred hours later, as emergency crews were trying to combat the blaze.
The explosion damaged several nearby villages. The IRNA news agency said that five villages were seriously damaged and windows were shattered six miles away.
Television reports showed train cars that were smashed and burning, with thick black smoke billowing into the sky, as firefighters tried to put out the fire.
People were seen walking in the area wearing face masks to protect themselves from the smoke.
The disaster on Wednesday came as Iran was still recovering from an earthquake in the southeastern city of Bam in December that killed more than 30,000 people.
