George Steinbrenner snapped at a stadium official on Wednesday to help him figure out how to get the elevator to travel to the fourth floor at Legends Field. He berated a Yankees official for failing to get him the Top 10 list for ''Late Show With David Letterman'' earlier so he could study it, and he was blustery in staff meetings.
But Steinbrenner saved his most ferocious verbal darts for the Boston Red Sox and John Henry, their principal owner. Anyone who thinks that the angry rivalry between the Yankees and the Red Sox cannot be spicier has been sleeping for the last few days, and especially Wednesday.
Shortly after Henry sent an e-mail message to reporters stating that the Yankees' stunning acquisition of Alex Rodriguez proved that baseball's economic system is ''woefully out of whack'' and that the Yankees have ''gone so insanely far beyond'' the financial capabilities of other teams, Steinbrenner treated Henry as if he were managing the Yankees and had lost four straight to the Red Sox.
In a statement that public relations officials gave to reporters, Steinbrenner accomplished a lot in four sentences. He ridiculed Henry for failing to complete a trade with the Texas Rangers for Rodriguez, he criticized Henry for not working harder to satisfy the Red Sox fans, he berated Henry for blaming the Yankees for Boston's problems, and he advised Henry to stop being a sore loser.
Steinbrenner was basking in the glow of the Rodriguez trade during the day, but as far as the Henry comment went, ''George was hot about this one,'' said one Yankees official who had spent time with him.
The Red Sox spent several weeks trying to get Rodriguez from Texas, then let the trade die over about $15 million in deferred payments that they had sought.
The Red Sox had voted in favor of the current revenue-sharing system in Major League Baseball; the Yankees were the only team that voted against it. The Red Sox were sensitive when the Oakland Athletics mentioned the sizable difference between their clubs' payrolls during the postseason. But now the Red Sox are grousing about the Yankees.
Henry is irked that the Yankees got Rodriguez at a reasonable price, about $16 million a year, after the Rangers paid $67 million of the $179 million left on his contract. The Yankees wound up pursuing Rodriguez after third baseman Aaron Boone seriously injured his knee, and they consummated the trade in less than a week. The Yankees got the premier player in baseball to agree to switch to third from shortstop.
''Baseball doesn't have an answer for the Yankees,'' Henry wrote in his e-mail message, The Associated Press reported. ''Revenue sharing can only accomplish so much. At some point, it becomes confiscation. It has not and will not solve what is a very obvious problem.''
Steinbrenner, who has never been faced with a debate he did not relish, was irritated that an owner would complain about his financial approach.
The Yankees will have a payroll of about $180 million in 2004, easily the highest in baseball. But the Red Sox payroll will probably be about $125 million, which is second. (The New York Times Company is a minority partner of the Red Sox ownership group.)
Steinbrenner could not resist offering a statement critical of Henry, who was once a limited partner of the Yankees.
''We understand that John Henry must be embarrassed, frustrated and disappointed by his failure in this transaction,'' Steinbrenner said. ''Unlike the Yankees, he chose not to go the extra distance for his fans in Boston. It is understandable, but wrong that he would try to deflect the accountability for his mistakes on to others and to a system for which he voted in favor. It is time to get on with life and forget the sour grapes.''
Yankees Manager Joe Torre listened to a reporter read Steinbrenner's statement, bit his lower lip as he suppressed a laugh and said, ''Guess he said it pretty good.''
The sniping did not amuse Commissioner Bud Selig. Selig spoke with both owners and warned them that any further public bickering could result in repercussions, a baseball official said.
Henry said in an e-mail message that Selig had asked the Red Sox not to comment publicly about Steinbrenner's statement. ''So let's shift our sights to the field,'' Henry added.
Yankees-Red Sox may be the best rivalry in sports. Thrusting Rodriguez into the equation will make games that are must-see baseball even more compelling.
Steinbrenner declined to discuss his statement when he appeared on the field here Wednesday, but he was presumably in a better mood when he stood along the left-field line and polished off Letterman's list. The category was ''Top 10 Good Things About Being a New York Yankee.'' No. 1, of course, dealt with Rodriguez.
''You think this A-Rod deal is good?'' Steinbrenner said. ''I'm about to sign Ty Cobb.''
BASEBALL
