Howard Dean ended his bid for the presidency on Wednesday, leaving John Kerry and John Edwards battling over free trade and jobs as the Democratic presidential contest veered into a more combative two-man struggle.
As Dr. Dean announced that he was abandoning his campaign after losing his 17th state contest with a devastating third-place finish in the Wisconsin primary, Senators Kerry and Edwards moved aggressively to fill the space. They picked the states they would compete in over the next two weeks and argued over Mr. Kerry's support of free trade agreements and his contributions from lobbyists.
''As Senator Kerry himself has pointed out many times during this campaign, records matter,'' Mr. Edwards said in a noisy afternoon conference call with 100 reporters, the number a clear indication of how his status has changed after a strong second-place showing in Wisconsin. ''I think there is a significant difference between us on this issue.''
The White House, too, was consumed with the economy. The Bush administration backed away from a forecast it made public only last week predicting average job gains of more than 300,000 a month for 2004. The administration said it remained confident of robust though unspecified job growth. [Page A14.]
Mr. Edwards, a first-term senator from North Carolina, noted that Mr. Kerry, a four-term senator from Massachusetts, voted in the Senate for the North American Free Trade Agreement in 1993. Mr. Edwards asserted that he would have voted against it had he been in the Senate. He said he would, as president, renegotiate the treaty to provide protections for American workers.
In Ohio, one of 10 states that vote on March 2, Mr. Kerry declared that he and Mr. Edwards held indistinguishable positions on future trade agreements. Mr. Kerry was preparing to return to Washington to accept the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., an event his aides asserted would help rebut Mr. Edwards's challenge on this issue in states like Ohio, as well as California and New York, which also vote on March 2.
''We have the same policy on trade -- exactly the same policy,'' Mr. Kerry said, campaigning in Dayton, where he stood in front of a huge banner that read, ''John Kerry: Protecting America's Jobs.''
''He voted for the China trade agreement; so did I,'' he said, referring to legislation that granted China permanent normal trade relations.
''And we, both of us, want to have labor agreements and environment agreements as part of a trade agreement, so it's the exact same policy,'' Mr. Kerry said, before registering a note of skepticism about Mr. Edwards's commitment on the issue.
''Well, he wasn't in the Senate back then,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I don't know where he registered his vote, but it wasn't in the Senate.''
In Burlington, Vt., Dr. Dean, the former governor there, said he was ending his presidential campaign but gave no indication that he would endorse any opponent.
''I am no longer actively pursuing the presidency,'' Dr. Dean said, adding, ''We will, however, continue to build a new organization using our enormous grass-roots network to continue the effort to transform the Democratic Party and to change our country.''
Both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards spoke to Dr. Dean on Wednesday, and Mr. Edwards said he would welcome Dr. Dean's support.
The exchanges between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry began almost as soon as Dr. Dean gave his final speech as a presidential candidate for 2004. The sparring signaled that the contest had entered a new and more competitive stage. Mr. Edwards appeared to some extent constrained in his attacks, because he has spent much of this campaign criticizing other Democrats for running negative campaigns. He kept many of his challenges to Mr. Kerry carefully calibrated.
At least from the outset, the change of tone in the race appeared to pose a particular challenge for Mr. Kerry. He found himself battling on two fronts as President Bush's re-election operation also fired off attacks on many of the same issues that Mr. Edwards was raising.
The Republican broadsides came after a primary here preceded by a week of intense White House attacks on Mr. Kerry. These included an Internet advertisement that portrayed him as a tool of special interests. Aides to Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards say the attacks might have contributed to Mr. Kerry's unexpectedly modest defeat of Mr. Edwards, by a vote of 40 percent to 34 percent.
Republicans are allowed to vote in Wisconsin's Democratic primary, and they made up 9 percent of the voters on Tuesday, according to a survey of those leaving the polls. Mr. Edwards defeated Mr. Kerry among voters who said they were Republicans, 44 percent to 18 percent.
Aides to Mr. Kerry and some national Democratic leaders suggested that in attacking Mr. Kerry before the Wisconsin vote, Mr. Bush's re-election campaign was trying to end a stream of clear victories that appeared to be building Mr. Kerry into a formidable challenger to the president. The attacks were also intended to encourage Democratic infighting, they suggested.
Mr. Edwards suddenly found himself in a stronger position after placing second in Wisconsin. Although he has won only one contest so far -- in South Carolina, where he was born -- he moved to make the most of his moment and to put Mr. Kerry on the defensive. He had begun to sharpen his differences with Mr. Kerry on trade during the South Carolina primary and continued to do so in his conference call with reporters.
The call came as Mr. Edwards spent much of the day raising money, including in New York, to try to collect the cash that his aides said he would need to be competitive in the 14 states that hold Democratic contests on March 2 and March 9.
In the call, Mr. Edwards said that beyond trade, he would draw attention to other differences between the rivals, including ''the fact that I don't take contributions from Washington lobbyists.''
He also said the candidates had different policies on helping the middle class. He mentioned specifically programs he had advocated to encourage middle-class savings.
Asked about the criticism, Mr. Kerry's press secretary, Stephanie Cutter, responded, ''This is an interesting line of attack from the positive campaign of John Edwards considering that his campaign is wholly funded by trial lawyers, which are widely recognized as special interests and lobbyists.'' Mr. Edwards himself is a former trial lawyer.
In a sign of the new fury of the contest, Mr. Kerry's aides were among the 100 people on the conference call; they e-mailed newspaper clippings to provide a running rebuttal to Mr. Edwards as he sought to contrast the views of the two men on trade agreements.
''Edwards promised to run a positive campaign,'' one Kerry campaign statement read, noting that Mr. Edwards had voted for the China trade agreement. ''But now Edwards attacks John Kerry and runs from his own record.''
Mr. Edwards's aides said he was adding to the number of states where he will try to compete on March 2. They said he would turn his sights to California, a state that he had earlier said was too expensive for him.
Mr. Edwards said in the conference call that California, with its 370 delegates, was impossible to ignore for a candidate who wanted to remain competitive.
And Mr. Edwards planned to campaign heavily in New York as well, where there are 236 delegates. Because of the way delegates are allocated under party rules -- as a percentage of the vote won -- Mr. Edwards is facing intense pressure to compete in as many states as he can. Mr. Kerry now has 497 delegates, compared with 188 for Mr. Edwards.
And Dr. Dean's decision to step aside means that his 119 so-called superdelegates -- for the most part, public officials free to chose any candidate, regardless of the primary vote -- are now back in play. Aides to Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards said they are moving to recruit them.
In seizing on trade treaties as an issue, Mr. Edwards's aides said they were looking particularly at Ohio, parts of California and upstate New York, parts of the country that are reeling from job losses and, they said, would be amenable to Mr. Edwards's argument that Mr. Kerry had cast a vote that cost them jobs.
In attacking Mr. Kerry for his 1993 vote, Mr. Edwards rejected Mr. Kerry's contention that there was little difference in what they would do with future job treaties as president.
''I think your record is an indication of what you'll do in the future and also shows the strength of your convictions on a particular issue,'' Mr. Edwards said.
But Mr. Edwards acknowledged in an interview earlier this week that there was little evidence of his having opposed Nafta before 1997 or 1998, when he first ran for the Senate. He has close ties to the Democratic Leadership Council, a group of moderate Democrats that has pushed for liberalized trade agreements, but he said he had made his views known throughout that campaign.
''What I've said is when I campaigned in '98 -- since I wasn't in the Congress when passed -- I campaigned and I was against Nafta,'' he said in the interview. But he said it was not a major part of his Senate campaign.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: BATTLEGROUNDS
