Before she died from an overdose of the drug Ecstasy almost two years ago, Makayla Korpinen ran away from home, cut her arms with razor blades and performed poorly at school.
The 16-year-old East Hampton girl had received some counseling and had taken part in various programs, but the efforts were scattershot and far too late, according to a report released on Wednesday by the office of the state child advocate.
The case of Makayla, who is believed to be the first teenager to die from an overdose of the drug in Connecticut, is a forbidding example of the consequences of drug use and the spottiness of mental health services for teenagers in crisis, said Jeanne Milstein, the state child advocate.
''Makayla appeared to receive a wide array of mental health services just before her death but she never once received trauma-based therapy,'' Ms. Milstein said.
Tragedy and violence were common threads in Makayla's life. Her father, an alcoholic, died in a car accident when she was 3. She had learning difficulties at school. Her mother's boyfriend was violent. She began experimenting with drugs and alcohol at age 12. At 15, she was raped by two boys. At 16, she attempted suicide.
Unlike most reports issued by the Office of the Child Advocate, this one did not assign blame to a state or private agency. ''Makayla grew up in her mother's care without the assistance of any state agency or program,'' said the report, which was issued jointly with the state's Child Fatality Review Panel. Makayla was one of three children. Her mother was permissive and the family moved frequently when Makayla was young, the report said.
Family and community support and the proper intervention of medical personnel might have saved Makayla, the report noted. For instance, early school tests identified Makayla as suffering from anxiety. She appeared in her doctor's office with signs of self-mutilation. Her relationship with her mother changed significantly. She told her therapists about the rapes. She was treated in outpatient programs for substance abuse, but not for the underlying traumas that led her to it, the report said.
She died of the drug overdose at a house party three weeks after she moved out of her home.
At 16, Makayla fell into a gray area of the law: she was no longer a child, nor was she truly an adult. For instance, when she ran away and her mother failed to persuade her to go home, neither the police nor the juvenile court had the jurisdiction to force her to return. The report criticized the police for not getting involved and trying to return Makayla home, although it admits that the court could not compel her to stay there.
Many parents have asked the state legislature to consider raising the age of a juvenile to 18, said Michael A. Mack, the state's chief administrative judge for juvenile matters. The legislature's Judiciary Committee is expected to receive a report next month that examines the social, clinical and fiscal consequences of such a change, he said.
Today, 16- and 17-year-olds like Makayla cannot be compelled to go to school, live at home or take medicine for mental health.
''I can order a 16-year-old not to drive if they are skipping school, but they can walk out of court and drive away,'' Judge Mack said. ''Nothing can be done because there is no sanction.''
