The standing ovation nearly obscured the large expanses of empty purple seats in the student section and behind the benches. Three overzealous fans plodded onto the court, offering congratulations to any St. John's players they bumped into.
This was not exactly Chris Mullin-Patrick Ewing, but St. John's will take it. With its basketball program in shambles, its reputation in tatters after a strip-club jaunt gone wild, the Red Storm produced perhaps its biggest upset of a season littered with lows. Still undermanned, St. John's beat a woeful Georgetown team, 65-58, last night at Madison Square Garden, proving that for at least one night there was a basketball team in the country worse than St. John's.
''We showed today that if we don't quit, we can still do it,'' said Daryll Hill, who scored a career-high 22 points, including 13 of his team's final 21.
St. John's (6-16, 1-10 Big East) prevented a more lasting scar, avoiding a conference season without a victory. These teams were once the class of the Big East, but those days seem buried in some time capsule with Lou Carnesecca's sweater and John Thompson's beach-blanket white towel.
St. John's was 0-10 in conference play entering last night's game. Only Miami in 1993-94 and Providence in 1979-80 failed to win a game in the Big East.
St. John's also staved off the inevitable. Its next loss will tie the 1993-94 team for most losses, 17, in the program's history.
Numbers cannot describe the horrors of this season. University administrators have vowed to play out the schedule with a decimated lineup after a trip by six players to a Pittsburgh-area strip club after a game two weeks ago last night. That led to a return trip to the team hotel with a woman who agreed to perform sex for cash. When players refused to pay, the woman threatened to accuse them of rape.
She was arrested and charged by the police, three players left school (one was expelled, another withdrew and a third was suspended) and two more were suspended from the team. Another remained suspended until last night.
The freshman Tyler Jones returned last night after missing two games, boosting the St. John's roster to nine, with five scholarship players for the first time since the Pittsburgh game. Phil Missere, who grew up a St. John's fan in Queens and made the team as a walk-on after preseason practices, offered some distraction from the messy turmoil surrounding the team with his play in the previous two games and remained in the starting lineup.
''They've stuck together and done everything we asked them to do, and this is a great reward for them,'' the interim head coach Kevin Clark said.
Curtis Johnson, a 7-foot-3 senior who scored a career-high 5 points, said: ''It's not always easy to believe anything. I think faith comes into play when you've had a season like we've had. We just believe in ourselves. Every day in practice when we come together we just believe we're there for a purpose.''
Georgetown (13-9, 4-7) needed a last-second shot to beat St. John's a month ago in Washington, but it was heavily favored last night despite its 11th place standing in the conference.
''I thought at times in the game we, as a team, were not taking them seriously, and it hurt us,'' Coach Craig Esherick said. ''The very beginning of the game was an issue, and that got them out.''
Carnesecca sat behind the St. John's bench, wearing a jacket and minus his trademark sweater, perhaps unwilling to offer any reminders of what this rivalry once represented.
Games like these were once preceded by jostling at bars outside the Garden, as fans prepared for a few hours of hysteria. Beneath the arena's marquee, those lacking tickets were bargaining with scalpers.
Far from the euphoria of two decades ago, the players' entrance onto the court for pregame drills was met with little response from the crowd of 6,192. By the end, that lack of interest was replaced by a celebration, at least for one night in a long season.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
