Howard Dean dared to bell the cat; he stepped forward from nowhere, far in advance of the Democratic Party establishment, to lambaste President Bush's war policy, even as better-known rivals carefully equivocated. This sense of unvarnished daring ignited his campaign and, even more, laid bare the rank and file's deep passion for a White House victory this fall. Rarely has a party's path been so clearly altered by a politician who then, of course, proceeded to lose every race before him.
Dr. Dean, the former Vermont governor, is entitled to wonder along with the rest of us whether his campaign was a midwinter's imagining: a teasing political figment, comet-like and gaffe-bedeviled, yet, above all, stirring enough to end the party's torpor over the bungled 2000 election. The reality of his collapse became painfully clear in the campaign's remarkable blowing of $40 million in Iowa and New Hampshire. As it turned out, Dr. Dean's signature issue of unequivocal opposition to the Iraq war could not carry him to victory. Primary voters had mixed views about that and, no less significantly, about his relentlessly feisty style on the stump.
Yet the principal survivors now left in the primary arena gained immeasurably from Dr. Dean's combative lead. He transplanted a spine into the presidential campaign. And Dr. Dean hardly hurt their chances by packing up his quest yesterday not with a whimper or a scream, but with a creative call to his followers to stay within Democratic ranks as a driving force for change. For all the establishment's fear of him, Dr. Dean warned against an independent candidacy that might again sap the party's chances against Mr. Bush.
Retreating losers often talk, like Dr. Dean, of their campaigns' somehow transmogrifying into serious grass-roots movements. One difference this time is that party leaders are salivating over the Dean machine's trailblazing knack for attracting hundreds of thousands of newcomers to politics via the Internet, as well as prodigious amounts of campaign donations. Dr. Dean has promised to help Democrats running for Congress and statehouses. But Democrats will wait to see whether he marshals support as well for the presidential nominee.
Three months ago, before anyone voted, Dr. Dean was measured by some as an unstoppable phenomenon. Instead, his campaign turned out to be a humbling experience for pollsters, pundits and, most of all, himself. In the wondrous variables of politics, Dr. Dean was ultimately not popular enough, anywhere he tried. But he will continue to shadow the Democrats' ongoing campaign as an object lesson in daring and tactical innovation.
