Yankees outfielder Gary Sheffield said he was unaware that his name had been revealed as part of a federal investigation of steroid distribution to professional athletes until he arrived Wednesday morning at the team's minor league facility.
In documents released Tuesday via e-mail to some newspapers, including The New York Times, the United States attorney's office in San Francisco mistakenly revealed that Sheffield sent a FedEx package last February to the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative, or Balco, the supplements company being investigated as the source of the steroids.
''I was surprised, of course, but I have no comment otherwise,'' he said. ''It's nothing even to worry about.''
Sheffield was one of several athletes who testified before the grand jury investigating Balco. His name was blacked out in documents given to reporters in San Francisco, but the United States attorney's office said it had been inadvertently revealed in affidavits sent by e-mail.
The documents do not accuse Sheffield of using steroids.
''I came out here to do a job, and I'll do the job regardless,'' said Sheffield, who signed a three-year contract with the Yankees this off-season. ''I'm just thankful to be here.''
Yankees first baseman Jason Giambi also testified before the grand jury investigating Balco.
Manager Joe Torre said that he had followed the Balco story and that the issue of steroids in baseball troubled him. ''It's disturbing,'' he said. ''There's no question it's disturbing.''
Soriano Is 28, Not 26
Alfonso Soriano is 28 years old, not 26, and that did not come as a surprise to the Texas Rangers.
The Rangers knew Soriano was older than had been reported when they acquired him from the Yankees in the trade for Alex Rodriguez.
''The Yankees were upfront,'' Gregg Elkin, a Rangers spokesman, said Wednesday. ''Our people were fully aware of how old he was.''
Elkin said Soriano's date of birth was initially listed wrong when he played in Japan. That information carried over when he signed a Yankees contract.
The Yankees' 2003 media guide and other baseball information list Soriano's date of birth as Jan. 7, 1978. But he was born two years earlier, and he told Yankees officials about the age discrepancy last summer.
(AP)
Boone Has Knee Surgery
Aaron Boone, once expected to be the Yankees' third baseman this year, had reconstructive surgery to repair the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee Monday. He will miss most or possibly all of this year.
Boone, who injured the knee during a pickup basketball game on Jan. 16, was operated on in California by Lewis Yocum, the Anaheim Angels' team physician, said Boone's agent, Adam Katz.
(AP)
BASEBALL: NOTEBOOK
