The Army has charged a member of the Washington State National Guard with attempting to supply intelligence of Army organizations and weapons systems to the Qaeda terrorist network, Army officials said on Wednesday. The intelligence included details about military personnel, troop movement, tactics and ''vulnerabilities,'' the charges said.
Specialist Ryan G. Anderson, 26, a Muslim convert who Army officials said also went by the name Amir Abdul Rashid, was charged on Feb. 12 at the Fort Lewis base south of here with four counts of attempting to supply information to the enemy, but the charges were not made public until Wednesday.
Specialist Anderson was taken into custody at Fort Lewis last week after an investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the Justice Department and the Army found that he had used a computer to try to contact Qaeda cells in the United States, Army officials said.
According to the charges made public on Wednesday at Fort Lewis, Specialist Anderson provided extensive information to military personnel posing as members of Al Qaeda, both in person and via the Internet.
''I wish to meet with you,'' the charges quoted Specialist Anderson as saying on the Internet, to people he thought were members of Al Qaeda. ''I share your cause.''
Specialist Anderson, whose tank brigade is scheduled next month to deploy to Iraq for one year, was raised by a Christian family in Everett, north of here.
Specialist Anderson's case is the latest example of an American military soldier being formally charged with espionage, but military experts said the charges were the result of the kind of sting operation not seen since the cold war. The charges, officials said, stemmed from conduct that occurred from Jan. 22 to Feb. 11. They could carry the death penalty if Specialist Anderson is convicted, according to military Code of Justice.
Members of Specialist Anderson's family declined to comment on Wednesday. A man who answered the telephone at the house of his father and stepmother in Everett said family members would not speak ''for at least four weeks,'' and messages left at the home where Specialist Anderson lived with his wife, Erin, in Lynnwood, a Seattle suburb, were not answered.
Army officials said Specialist Anderson had been assigned a defense lawyer, but they declined to provide the lawyer's name Wednesday night in response to a faxed request.
Specialist Anderson converted to Islam five years ago, people who know him said. He graduated from Cascade High School in 1995 and received a bachelor's degree in history from Washington State University in Pullman in 2002.
While at the university, he attended a local mosque and occasionally participated in a student Muslim group, said Irshad Altheimer, a member of the Muslim Students Association.
Mr. Altheimer described Specialist Anderson as nice and curious about Islam.
Jennifer Seratte, a classmate of Specialist Anderson's at Cascade High School, said he was on the debate team and described him as ''very serious,'' and a very active practicing Christian.
''This whole thing just totally blew my mind,'' she said.
Ms. Seratte added: ''He was on the debate team, he was always debating about government and politics and the laws. He knew the ways the government worked, and he was patriotic. If you were going to go up against him in a debate, you had better know what you were talking about.''
Muslims in the Seattle area said that Specialist Anderson joined a local Muslim e-mail group two years ago, using the Internet names Abdul Rashid and Gunfighter and bragging about being an expert marksman.
The charges against Specialist Anderson said that he had tried to ''aid the enemy'' with sketches of the M1A1 and M1A2 tanks, offering the investigators a computer disk containing his passport photograph and military identification card.
The charges also said he tried to provide detailed information to investigators posing as Qaeda operatives about weaknesses in the military and ''means of killing U.S. Army personnel and destroying U.S. Army weapon systems and equipment.''
Legal experts said the charges were among the most serious they had heard of since the cold war.
''There have been a number of sting operations over the years, but I don't think any have been similar to this,'' Philip Cave, a former military lawyer, said. ''Looking at the charge sheet, it certainly reads as extremely serious.''
