The Islanders logged 8 penalties for 19 minutes Wednesday night against Pittsburgh, and they allowed the lowly Penguins two wide-open goals that gave them a one-goal lead late in the second period.
Suffering from a classic case of playing down to their opponent, the Islanders could have paid a price for their transgressions. But they got a two-goal performance by Mariusz Czerkawski that evoked his play earlier in the season and the go-ahead goal by Roman Hamrlik with 17 minutes 7 seconds remaining.
The Islanders' 4-3 victory before a crowd of 13,570 at Nassau Coliseum will look on paper like just another triumph in their push for a third straight appearance in the playoffs. And it will look like the status quo for the Penguins (11-40-5-4), who have the N.H.L.'s worst record and suffered through their 16th straight game without a victory (0-15-0-1), two short of the franchise record.
On the eve of a Thursday night game against the Rangers, the Islanders (28-21-8-2) were thankful for the result.
''It wasn't pretty, but we got the 2 points,'' Czerkawski said.
The Islanders moved alone into seventh place in the Eastern Conference, 2 points ahead of Montreal, and increased their edge to 5 points over ninth-place Buffalo, which played a 1-1 tie with Florida. The Sabres visit the Islanders on Saturday.
The Penguins' Milan Kraft provided a glitch of tension with a goal to trim the Islanders' lead to 4-3 with 8:35 left, but goaltender Garth Snow (18 saves) and crew ensured that the Islanders would trudge away with a five-game unbeaten streak (2-0-3-0).
It was Snow's first victory since Jan. 30. Andy Chiodo, the Penguins' goaltender, made his N.H.L. debut. He stopped his first 14 shots in two periods before the Penguins collapsed.
Czerkawski notched his first multiple-goal game since scoring two goals against Pittsburgh on Oct. 25. Czerkawski was on his way to scoring 10 goals in his first 13 games, then his production declined.
But after being banished to the minors by Montreal last season, he said he was satisfied with his season total of 21.
Only the score was beautiful for the Islanders, whose home record, 20-8-2-0, is already a point better than last season's.
The teams combined for 18 penalties totaling 42 minutes, and there was an extended fight between the Islanders' Arron Asham and Pittsburgh's Tom Kostopoulos.
The Islanders' lax defense gave the Penguins hope. Four seconds after Cliff Ronning was sent to the penalty box for tripping, the Penguins' Ric Jackman hammered in a slap shot from beyond the left circle to give the Penguins a 2-1 lead with 5:12 left in the second period. Earlier in the second, Tomas Surovy got a gliding start and went through a full windup before ripping a slap shot past Snow from the top of the right circle.
Czerkawski scored on a tip-in to even the score at 2-2 with 13 seconds left in the second period. Early in the period, Hamrlik steamed toward the goal and took a pass from behind the goal line from Michael Peca and knocked it in, and the Islanders avoided embarrassment.
''We were talking that it couldn't happen,'' Czerkawski said, ''that this team has nothing to lose.''
HOCKEY
