Put simply, second place will no longer do.
After Senator John Edwards's closer-than-expected showing in the Wisconsin primary Tuesday, the big question in American politics was whether he could overcome significant financial and political obstacles and actually deprive the front-runner, Senator John Kerry, of the Democratic presidential nomination.
In a series of interviews, strategists, party leaders and even Mr. Edwards's backers said the senator needed to defy not just conventional wisdom but history. Since the rise of state primaries in the early 1970's, no candidate has come back from so far behind in the delegate count to win the nomination.
''It's a tall mountain,'' said Steve Jarding, a former head of Mr. Edwards's political action committee who is now a fellow at the Institute of Politics at Harvard. ''But the other guys have fallen off that mountain and he's still moving up. The reality is that John is not going to raise $10 million in the next 14 days. But he'll raise enough to keep moving on.''
While the Edwards campaign has been frugal with its resources, campaign finance experts say the operation will have to work extremely hard to keep money coming in to compete aggressively in the next contests. Mr. Edwards has raised about $3.3 million since the Iowa caucuses, aides said, but the Kerry campaign has much more money available.
Seeking to turn the jolt of energy from his showing in Wisconsin to replenish his coffers, Mr. Edwards attended two fund-raisers yesterday. He plans another in Florida on Thursday and is expected to sprinkle them in among his campaign schedule in the coming weeks. His campaign said yesterday that it had raised $307,951 online since polls closed in Wisconsin, with nearly a third of the 3,821 online contributors new to his list of supporters.
To counter Mr. Kerry's overwhelming lead over Mr. Edwards in delegates, Mr. Edwards's aides said, he needs to win at least two of three big states in play on March 2 and come in close seconds in others to pick up enough delegates to survive until March 9.
Then, in Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Florida, Mr. Edwards would have a chance at winning and battling Mr. Kerry in a showdown March 16 in Illinois, provided he withstands inevitable pressure from party leaders to end the race sooner.
But some Democrats question whether he can make it beyond March 2. For one thing, in two of the states Mr. Edwards plans to concentrate on, New York and Ohio, he may have trouble counting on the independents and Republicans who significantly fueled his surge in Wisconsin. Wisconsin had an open primary allowing independents and Republicans to vote; Ohio places restrictions compelling Republicans to sign a statement of support for the Democratic Party; New York's primary is only open to registered Democrats.
In addition, both states are heavily unionized, giving Mr. Kerry an edge there because he has endorsements from the A.F.L.-C.I.O. and the Alliance for Economic Justice, a group of labor leaders who had backed Representative Richard A. Gephardt, who has endorsed Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Edwards is seeking to draw a contrast with Mr. Kerry in those states on trade, asserting that he will make clear that Mr. Kerry supported the North American Free Trade Agreement, which unions blame for the loss of millions of manufacturing jobs since its passage in 1993. Mr. Edwards was not in the Senate then but said he would have opposed it and has voted against other trade deals Mr. Kerry supported.
Nick Baldick, Mr. Edwards's campaign manager, said the campaign did not yet have enough money to broadcast commercials in the expensive New York City and Los Angeles media markets, but he added that despite such hurdles, ''we are gaining ground in every state.''
From almost the beginning, the Edwards campaign has relied on a grass-roots, almost underground approach that combines an engaging, almost evangelical speech preaching optimism and an end to ''two Americas'' divided by class.
''When voters see the candidates up close, see what they have to say, they have a powerful response to me,'' Mr. Edwards said yesterday in a conference call with reporters.
But just how much voters may see Mr. Edwards is an open question. He said yesterday that he would like there to be several debates, and his aides say privately that they would prefer one-on-one encounters with Mr. Kerry, where they believe Mr. Edwards could get equal billing with the front-runner and show off his oratorical acumen.
That, experts said, will put pressure on Mr. Edwards to keep money coming in for enough advertising to compete with Mr. Kerry on the air.
''The problem he faces is, once again, he is going to be outspent by Kerry, who will be capable of running everywhere and still has the momentum in this race,'' said Anthony Corrado, a professor of government at Colby College who tracks campaign financing and the delegate war. ''Wisconsin did not do anything to change the basic dynamic of the contest, so he still faces the problem of not being as competitive for delegates.''
Mr. Kerry leads Mr. Edwards in the delegate count 497 to 188; candidates are awarded delegates even if they do not finish first, meaning Mr. Kerry can withstand second-place finishes better than Mr. Edwards can, Professor Corrado said.
''He needs to not just win but he needs to start winning by large margins,'' he said. ''If it is a two-man race, between himself and Kerry, in order to make up the difference between Kerry's delegate total and his own, he does not get much out of barely winning or second place.''
Mr. Edwards will also face pressure to compete in all 10 states on March 2 to prove his national mettle. Mr. Edwards said he planned to campaign in every state, but his associates say he will probably campaign more in a handful of delegate-rich states like New York, Ohio, Georgia, California and Minnesota.
His campaign announced yesterday that he would campaign in New York State the next five days, more visits than any other March 2 state. Three of those days will be in upstate New York, which has been hit hard by factory closings.
''When we have grass-roots support and the candidate is present, I am very confident we can do very well here,'' said Bill de Blasio, who is directing Mr. Edwards's race in New York.
Others, however, are not sure.
Norman Adler, a veteran consultant who is neutral in the race, said that unlike statewide general elections, where upstate and the suburbs play a heavy role, primaries in New York are largely won in New York City. He predicted Mr. Edwards's upbeat message of ''hope and optimism'' would find skeptical ears in the city.
''They are going to want to hear the guy come out swinging,'' Mr. Adler said, ''and if they don't, they are going to think he is a vice-presidential candidate and they are not going to vote for him.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
