It was a small, quiet attempt at remembering. Three men placed candles near a graffiti-scrawled gate in Brooklyn where a Belarussian immigrant had been severely beaten on Jan. 13. A week later, the man died from severe head injuries.
The men -- Police Lt. Eric Adams, who heads a group called 100 Blacks in Law Enforcement Who Care; Anthony Miranda of the National Latino Officers Association; and Norman Siegel, a civil rights lawyer -- said they hoped the tiny ceremony held on Thursday would draw attention to the beating, which is being investigated by the police as a bias crime.
''We'd like to see more outspokenness on the death,'' Mr. Siegel said in Bushwick, where the attack happened. ''No one is taking notice. It's just going away without being spoken of.''
But as the police investigate, and activists like Mr. Siegel campaign, Brooklyn's vast population of ex-Soviet residents has kept almost silent. The death has not served as a rallying point for prominent figures, and aside from the occasional radio show and newspaper article, has been largely ignored.
''I haven't heard one word from the community leaders,'' said Vadim Yarmolinets, a journalist at the Russian-language daily Novoye Russkoye Slovo who wrote an editorial on Friday calling on prominent residents to voice their indignation to the killing of the immigrant, Valery Charnavus, 42. ''I asked the question, where are you guys?''
One of the reasons for the silence is that few agree that the attack was ethnically motivated. In interviews last week, several prominent Russian residents said they saw the attack as an unfortunate isolated incident carried out by a particular group of troublemakers, and not as a signal of some broader tensions between Russian immigrants and Hispanics in Brooklyn.
''It was just this certain group of hooligans,'' said Anatoly Eyzenberg, owner of Brighton King Meats and a member of a Russian-American political organization called Pravo.
''I don't want to inflame ethnic hatred'' with speeches, he said. ''I'm categorically against that.''
Many details of the attack are still unclear. Mr. Charnavus, and four other men, all Russian speakers, tried to buy alcohol about 1 a.m. at a small restaurant on Knickerbocker Avenue, the police and witnesses said. The server told them they would have to stay to drink it, so they went instead to a bodega, the server's sister said.
The trouble started outside the bodega, when a group of seven Hispanic men and teenagers mistook Mr. Charnavus and his group for Poles and shouted ethnic slurs, the police said. A fight ensued, and Mr. Charnavus was critically injured. He died last Tuesday. The other men suffered less serious injuries.
The police have yet to say definitively that the attack was ethnically motivated. It is possible detectives will conclude it was simply a fight between two groups of men, a Police Department spokeswoman said on Friday.
But a person acquainted with the victims said they tried to escape. The victims, the person said, spoke virtually no English, and probably did not understand what was being said to them.
''They weren't robbed,'' said the person, who asked not to be identified. ''They didn't start the fight. When they tried to get away, the bats and knives came out.''
One Bushwick resident, Adam Huertas, 20, who was on the block the night it happened, said the fight was a misunderstanding that got out of control.
''One said something, then the other said something,'' Mr. Huertas said of the encounter. ''It wasn't racial,'' he said.
He added, ''It was wrong.''
But another resident, who declined to give his name, acknowledged ethnicity has been an element in neighborhood disputes. ''A lot of it is turf,'' the resident said. ''It's to say: 'This side is dangerous. Don't come over to this side.'''
Whichever version proves true, the city's Russians are still not turning to public action in this case. The reasons can be traced back to their homeland. Decades of being force-fed politics in the Soviet era, when participation in Labor Day demonstrations and other marches was obligatory have left many who immigrated here extremely distrustful of public forums, said some who were interviewed for this article. And while Brooklyn's ex-Soviet population has prospered and grown, it has remained underrepresented in city government.
''Most people say: 'Politics? Who cares,''' said Oleg Gutnik, a Sheepshead Bay doctor, who ran unsuccessfully in the 2001 City Council election. ''They come from the Soviet Union, where 99.9 percent of the vote was for one party. That philosophy still exists.''
The distaste for public action has meant that indignation about the killing has not spilled over into public pronouncements like Mr. Siegel's, said Leonid Rashkovsky, a spokesman for the Russian American Officers Association, a group of Russian-speaking law enforcement officers. He recently spoke about the beating on a radio show.
''I've spoken to some political activists, but they just don't seem interested,'' he said. ''I got no response. It's sad -- this guy died because he was speaking Russian, and it's going nowhere because we're not organized. There is no political power in the community.''
For many residents in the heavily Russian neighborhood of Brighton Beach, Bushwick is a distant land. When the crimes have struck closer to home, Russian residents have taken grievances to City Council members, representatives and senators, said Mark Davidovich, an immigrant Democratic leader for the 46th Assembly District.
Surf Avenue, where many elderly Russians live and many robberies had occurred, was made safer after Russian-American leaders met with local police officers and city and state officials, Mr. Davidovich said.
Mr. Siegel criticized leaders for holding back. ''The Russian community has been quiet, but silence just condones this act,'' he said.
Dr. Gutnik, the former Council candidate, disagreed that political activism is the answer. ''People are talking,'' he said, ''but to put together a demonstration and block the Brooklyn Bridge, that's not going to do it.''
