Unpenitent pollsters are now confident that John Kerry and John Edwards (sure we voted for the war, but who knew?) will repeat their one-two performance in New Hampshire. And that Howard Dean (I knew, that's who knew, and they didn't) will run ahead of Clinton stand-in Wesley Clark, thereby staying in contention. And that Joe Lieberman may do well with independents, though they are mostly November Republicans.
These assumptions, to be tested soon enough, have Democratic soothsayers predicting a Kerry-Edwards ticket at the Boston convention. What delicious diversity: North and South, with Kerry's fatal Massachusettsism ameliorated by Edwards's Carolina charm; the experience of craggy Kerry enlivened by the passionate optimism of the boyish Edwards.
But the political philosophy these two men have embraced is lopsidedly leftist: In this campaign, they have clawed their way up the greasy pole of politics with a pitch that is pure populism. Both men have risen high in Democratic polls with a brand of class resentment and soak-the-rich rhetoric rooted in the old-fashioned liberalism of Ted Kennedy.
I used to think that the battle within the Democratic Party would pit the centrist Clinton Restoration, using Clark as its sacrificial lamb this time around, against the maverick antiwar, antiestablishment legion that Dean had excited. Though Dean also railed against the rich, his signature attraction was his antiwar anger.
As Dean machine-gunned himself in the foot -- in gaffes that dismayed Iowans weeks before his primal pep talk -- his support did not switch to Clark, the inept amateur handled and financed by the Clintonites. Instead, many disillusioned Deaniacs went to a third faction that has long been lying in the Democratic weeds: the proponents of class warfare propounded for a generation by Ted Kennedy.
Not by John F. Kennedy, the president who cut taxes and would ''bear any burden'' in the defense of liberty. But by the Old Left led by his brother Teddy, scourge of conservative judges and free-market medicine, whose aging acolytes have tried to keep the not-so-hot liberal flame burning under the rich and powerful.
The resuscitation of this long-dormant faction among Democrats surprised me. But with his campaign in the doldrums as Dean's restorative rage invigorated both the new Netties and the Old Left, John Kerry turned to his Senate senior and Massachusetts mentor for succor.
Teddy dispatched his chief of staff, Mary Beth Cahill, to take control of the demoralized campaign from Jim Jordan, Kerry's insufficiently ideological longtime manager. Kennedy's Charles River Gang gave the previously independent-minded Kerry (his initials happily J.F.K.) a stridently populist economic line: that average, hard-working, patriotic Americans are being ripped off by a plundering bunch of robber barons represented by George W. Bush, who has sold out to the predatory ''special interests.''
This sounds a little outdated at a time when the very rich pay most federal income taxes and the poor pay none. But envy still sells to a leftist constituency, especially to Democrats worried at the way Republicans were slavering for a Dean nomination. Kerry caught the spirit as his health recovered. He combined Old Left oratory with memories of his Vietnam valor and subsequent antiwar activism. While Dean started to self-destruct and Clark turned out to be a slow study, there stood Kerry, a tall, serious man with the leonine Ted Kennedy posing proudly at his side.
To buttress my theory of the rebirth of the Old Left, consider the way Kerry's surprise runner-up in Iowa, John Edwards, has broken out of single digits in New Hampshire polls. Though the Southerner's success is attributed to his counter-programmed sunniness, at its heart is the identical Ted Kennedy class message:
''Those Washington lobbyists are takin' your democracy away from you,'' says the Suthrin-talkin' former trial lawyer (avidly supported by the trial lawyers' lobby, which has driven up the price of health insurance). Edwards, though a freshman senator, has decades of experience in appealing to a jury's resentments against corporations, and has honed his ''two Americas'' theme into the smoothest call for enforced leveling since Huey Long's ''every man a king.''
Class warfare may work in primaries but tends to backfire in the general election. Would it work for Kerry-Edwards? Ask Al Gore.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: safire@nytimes.com
