With its smoke-stained walls, paper tablecloths and grandmotherly cooking, Chez Paul doesn't take kindly to change.
But the French government's crackdown on unsafe driving has had a sobering effect on wine consumption at this century-old, street-corner bistro just off the Bastille, as it has at restaurants and bars throughout France.
So Daniel Karrenbauer, the owner, joined what might be called the guerrilla war of the grape. Last month, he introduced doggie bags for wine.
On the bistro's zinc bar, there are all-purpose corks and glossy white shopping bags with wine-colored ribbon handles provided gratis by the Wine Council of Bordeaux to 500 restaurants across the country. Promotional fliers encourage customers to ''prolong your pleasure at home.'' Mr. Karrenbauer hopes to ease the message onto the handwritten menus. ''We have to keep our old habits, to preserve who we are,'' he said as he uncorked a favorite Pomerol. ''But when customers hesitate before ordering a great bottle of wine or that second bottle, we argue that there is an option -- to take it home.''
Historically, the French government has issued mixed messages about alcohol, particularly wine. Red wine is said to combat heart disease, osteoporosis, constipation and even aging.
The drinking age is 16, and there has been no serious effort to raise it or even enforce it. Wines have escaped the drastic tax increases imposed on cigarettes in the past year.
Advertising of alcoholic beverages has long been banned on television, but not on billboards or in the print media, as long as it includes the warning: ''The abuse of alcohol is dangerous for your health. Consume it in moderation.''
But President Jacques Chirac, who broke a leg in an auto accident in 1978, made road security a priority of his re-election campaign in 2002. That meant a crackdown on drinking and driving.
The legal blood alcohol limit in France is 0.05 percent, the equivalent of about two glasses of wine, the same as in most of Europe, but more stringent than in the United States, where 45 states use a .08 limit and 5 others use .10 percent.
In the summer of 2002, France's Ministry of Transportation kicked off a safety campaign with thousands of posters showing a driver's blurry vision through the windshield and the warning that even drinking no more than that limit ''reduces your field of vision.'' Among the ministry's contentions was that alcohol could be considered a drug.
Since then, the government has introduced automatic speed cameras at accident-heavy spots throughout the country, probationary licenses for new drivers, a road safety awareness program in schools, an increase in alcohol road tests and severe penalties, including a maximum two-year prison sentence for serious repeat speeders and drunken drivers.
Official advertising campaigns with warnings have blanketed radio and television. ''Two glasses of wine, beer, whisky or all other aperitifs are hardly anything, you say,'' says the voice-over on one current radio ad. ''Drink hardly anything, and you risk almost everything.''
A poster campaign over the Christmas and New Year's holiday season showed a photo of a motorcyclist sitting with a drink at a bar next to a mangled motorcycle.
Earlier this month, Transportation Minister Gilles de Robien personally got into the act when he was photographed at an alcohol-free evening at the Grisy Apple discothèque in northern Paris.
The campaign seems to have paid off. In 2003, there were 5,732 deaths from car accidents, compared with 7,242 in 2002, a 21 percent decrease.
The French wine producers' association, however, has accused the government of terrifying its customers and prompting a 15 percent decline in restaurant and bar sales in 2003. Debates in the Senate this month on the potential dangers of alcohol captured the resistance to stigmatizing wine consumption.
''Is a weak and moderate consumption of alcohol dangerous?'' said Senator Roland Courteau, who pointed out that the minister of agriculture officially promotes the joys of drinking wine. ''Is a person drinking two glasses of wine already a sick alcoholic?''
In one debate, Senator Anne-Marie Payet, saying that each year 6,000 French children are born with fetal alcohol syndrome, defended an amendment that would have required wine and alcohol producers to add label warnings about the dangers of alcohol to pregnant women.
After some intervention by the health minister, the amendment was defeated, leading Ms. Payet to charge that she was a ''victim of the industry lobby.''
There are no illusions that wine doggie bags will end the problem of drunken driving -- or even catch on.
American safe-driving groups contend that telling people to take their wine home may encourage them to drink it in their cars, which is banned in most states.
Mr. Karrenbauer of Chez Paul said that two out of three customers who asked for doggie bags were not necessarily drivers but foreign tourists who intended to finish their wine back at their hotels.
Finally, the concept of pocketing leftovers has not caught on in France. A sampling of the clientele at Chez Paul at lunchtime last Friday indicated little enthusiasm for the idea of a ''sac de chien.''
Asked whether he would ever take an unfinished bottle of wine home in a doggie bag, Yvan Assioma, 36, a police union representative, replied, ''Why? I don't have a dog! People with the leftovers of their bottle -- this is truly provincial.''
Laurence Martin, his lunch companion and a police officer in the suburbs of Paris, agreed. ''We're not campers,'' she said.
Paris Journal  Correction:  January 27, 2004, Tuesday  A headline yesterday about restaurants in France that are encouraging customers to take home their leftover wine, to combat unsafe driving, referred incorrectly to the wine of the region where the project began. It is Bordeaux. (Bordelais is the term for the region or for its people.)
