Few would argue that the last remaining expanse of undeveloped space in Manhattan should remain a hodgepodge of sparsely inhabited and underused buildings, parking lots and rail yards west of Midtown. So it was welcome news when, early in his administration, Mayor Michael Bloomberg called for dramatic changes to the area commonly known as Hudson Yards. Central to the plan was a stadium that would be home to the New York Jets, additional space for the Javits Convention Center and a setting for the 2012 Olympics, if the Games were awarded to the city. The stadium is being presented as an anchor, but as the plan and its financing have evolved, it is starting to look more like an expensive albatross.
There are good reasons to press ahead with other parts of the plan, starting with an extension of the No. 7 subway line and the creation of parks, which would finally make the area an accessible and desirable place to live or work. An expansion of the Javits Center is needed, but that seems better accomplished by extending the center, not by adding the looming space of an adjacent stadium. It's doubtful that a stadium would attract the kind of regular convention business the city desires. The Jets usually play eight home games a season, leaving a lot of down time to fill.
The Jets need a new home -- their lease to share the New Jersey Meadowlands stadium with the Giants is running out -- and the owners want to return to New York. But that desirable goal does not by itself justify the cost or the compressed timetable of the current plan, which would tie up too many public resources at a time when there are precious few. While the Jets would pay up to $800 million to build the stadium itself, public money would be needed to place a platform over the rail yards, as well as to install the air-conditioning and retractable roof needed for convention business. The public tab would be at least $600 million, and the overall cost more than twice that of other recently erected football stadiums.
The rush to a decision on a stadium is being driven in part by New York's quest to be the host for the 2012 summer Games. One of the best arguments for seeking the Olympics was the impetus it would give the city to push forward on needed projects like parks and subway expansion. But that does not mean it makes sense to build an expensive and possibly unnecessary stadium just to keep the Olympic bid alive. One option would be to refurbish Shea Stadium and move the Olympic dream there. The No. 7 extension should be built as soon as possible, but with maximum aid from the Metropolitan Transportation Authority and federal government. The hurried pace the Bloomberg administration is contemplating could leave the city to go it alone, absorbing an expense estimated to be at least $1.6 billion.
To recover its investment, the city may feel the need to fill the area with overly tall, overly dense office buildings. Taxpayers could find themselves footing the ultimate bill if occupancy falls short of expectations in the development, which would compete for tenants with planned developments in Lower Manhattan and Brooklyn.
The Jets are keen on being in Manhattan and on the Hudson. It keeps them within easy reach of New Jersey fans. More, it would be the prime home turf in the business, perfect for building the highest-priced luxury boxes in the National Football League. The team should get a stadium to call its own, but building it elsewhere -- perhaps in Queens -- would save hundreds of millions of public dollars while also providing a desirable Olympics venue. The current price tag for placing America's most exclusive 50-yard line in Manhattan is too high.
