The sweeping fantasy epic ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King'' was named best picture in the drama category on Sunday at the Golden Globe Awards here, while Sofia Coppola's quiet, low-budget ''Lost in Translation'' won in the comedy category.
Peter Jackson was named best director for ''The Return of the King.'' That film is the final installment of an ambitious and wildly successful trilogy financed by New Line Cinema, based on the books by J. R. R. Tolkien. It is considered a front-runner for the Academy Awards. The trilogy, filmed continuously, cost about $300 million and had well over a dozen main characters.
By contrast, ''Lost in Translation'' by Ms. Coppola, the daughter of the director Francis Ford Coppola, cost just $4 million and had a principal cast of two. Though not a traditional comedy, it also won the award for best actor in a comedy for Bill Murray, who played an American actor having a midlife crisis in Tokyo. And Ms. Coppola won for best screenplay.
Ms. Coppola, visibly shy, accepted her two statues with an understated ''Thank you, Hollywood Foreign Press,'' the 90-member association that gives out the awards.
Miramax, which traditionally dominates the awards season, was nearly shut out at the Globes. It had received eight nominations for its Civil War epic ''Cold Mountain,'' but only Renée Zellweger won a statue, as best supporting actress in a drama, for playing a coarse country girl who takes care of a farm while the men are away at war.
Charlize Theron, who gained 30 pounds to play the serial killer Aileen Wuornos in ''Monster,'' was named best actress in a drama.
HBO's searing mini-series about the AIDS epidemic, ''Angels in America,'' won five of the major television awards. The series, based on Tony Kushner's Pulitzer Prize-winning play chronicling the effect of AIDS on American lives during the 1980's, took the Golden Globe for best television mini-series, as well as a quartet of citations for its stars: Meryl Streep as best actress, Al Pacino as best actor, Mary-Louise Parker as best supporting actress and Jeffrey Wright as best supporting actor.
''I was afraid people might reject it a little bit,'' Ms. Parker said backstage. ''I'm so happy that they don't.''
The movie awards were divided among numerous films. Sean Penn was named best actor and Tim Robbins best supporting actor for their moving performances in ''Mystic River.'' They play friends who have grown up scarred by the trauma of the childhood molestation of Mr. Robbins.
Diane Keaton was chosen best actress in a comedy for ''Something's Gotta Give.''
In television awards, Anthony LaPaglia won best actor in a drama for ''Without a Trace'' on CBS, while Frances Conroy took the Globe for best actress in a drama for HBO's ''Six Feet Under.'' Sarah Jessica Parker won the Golden Globe for her portrayal of Carrie, the lonely, serial dater in HBO's ''Sex and the City,'' now filming its final episodes after seven seasons.
''The Office,'' a droll British series about office life on BBC America, won best comedy or musical television series, and Ricky Gervais, its star, won for best actor.
The awards are voted on by the Hollywood Foreign Press Association, some of whose members are foreign journalists, but many of whom write infrequently for obscure overseas publications. The group has been criticized for being unwilling to open its membership to journalists from major publications abroad and for being open to influence from Hollywood studios eager to cater to the group. This year Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax, called members individually to draw their attention to his movie ''Bad Santa,'' which garnered a nomination for Billy Bob Thornton for best actor in a musical or comedy.
The Golden Globes mark the start of the awards season in Hollywood, and some consider them an influential precursor to the season's main event, the Academy Awards, at the end of February. Actors love to take home the statues -- Sharon Stone had a special case built in her screening room for hers -- and the evening is lubricated by Champagne, which flows freely during the ceremony, making for more of a party atmosphere than the Oscars.
With the date of the Oscars advanced this year from the end of March to the end of February, the Globes arguably will garner even more attention. The Oscar nominations will follow immediately, this Tuesday, instead of several weeks after the Globes.
There was a distinctly unusual cast to the evening. Some members of the Foreign Press were present in the interview rooms and questioned the winners. The winners often know the members individually because these actors must come to news conferences for the membership, and pose for pictures with them.
In recent years NBC has begun promoting the Globes as ''the party of the year'' rather than as a prestigious awards ceremony, and during the preshow commentary Dick Clark and his co-hosts repeatedly stressed how ''unpredictable'' the Globes could be.
This year the Globes' nomination choices differed notably from those of major movie guilds, the Directors Guild of America and the Screen Actors Guild, suggesting that Oscar nominating choices will be far from a sure bet. For example, the Foreign Press gave ''Cold Mountain'' eight nominations, while its director, Anthony Minghella, failed to receive a nomination from his guild. The star of that movie, Nicole Kidman, nominated for a Globe for best actress in a drama, was not nominated by the acting guild.
The Golden Globe event remains extremely popular in Hollywood, partly because it is the one evening that combines the biggest stars of movies and television. They pack the Beverly Hilton Hotel's ballroom in Beverly Hills with celebrity heat, and they party in halls throughout the hotel until the early hours.
Stars bumped up against one another on a jammed red carpet in front of the hotel, and royalty too -- Sarah Ferguson was here to present an award. Ms. Kidman, wearing a backless dress, signed autographs. Mr. Weinstein greeted a silver-haired Michael Douglas enthusiastically. Mr. Clark breathlessly noted the superstar gridlock, and he wasn't exaggerating.
The Foreign Press Association earns millions of dollars off the NBC telecast, and the network benefits from lucrative advertising sales; about 20 million Americans watched the ceremony last year. Variety reported this week that the Globes took in $3.6 million last year for the nonprofit Foreign Press organization.
