Pakistani investigators are looking into the vast real estate holdings of Abdul Qadeer Khan, the father of Pakistan's nuclear bomb, and into Mr. Khan's and other nuclear scientists' bank accounts, Pakistani officials said Sunday.
''Investigators are looking into all dimensions, including financial dimensions,'' said a senior Pakistani official. He said offshore accounts ''are part of the investigation.''
The comments came as a leading Pakistani newspaper, The News, reported that investigators had discovered that millions of dollars were deposited in the bank accounts in Dubai of two senior Pakistani nuclear scientists as nuclear hardware arrived in Iran. The report in The News, citing unidentified government sources, did not identify the scientists.
The newspaper also said a senior scientist had been found to have tens of millions of dollars' worth of financial and real estate holdings in Pakistan and overseas, primarily in Dubai, in the United Arab Emirates. The senior scientist also paid a Pakistani newspaper editor in Islamabad to run a publicity campaign, publish books and organize seminars praising the scientist, The News reported.
The senior government official said he could not comment on the details of the investigation. But a former senior intelligence official with knowledge of the probe said Dr. Khan and a close aide, Dr. Mohammed Farooq, are its focus.
''They are not naming them but we know that the two main suspects are A. Q. Khan and Dr. Farooq,'' said the former intelligence official. ''A. Q. Khan's interests in the real estate have been known to us for quite some time. So this has not come as a big surprise.''
Pakistani officials are expected to announce soon the results of an inquiry into whether the country's nuclear technology was shared with Iran and Libya. The inquiry was begun after Iran gave the International Atomic Energy Agency a list of scientists and middlemen who it said had aided its nuclear weapons program. The agency, the United Nation's nuclear regulatory body, conveyed the list to Pakistan in November.
It included the names of several Pakistanis and Europeans, Pakistani officials have said. Teams of Pakistani investigators have gone to Iran, Pakistan and Vienna to investigate.
The United States has also presented Pakistan with evidence of proliferation, American officials say. American intelligence officials contend that Pakistan has provided nuclear technology to Iran, North Korea and Libya, which would make it one of the world's most active proliferators.
President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan, a general who seized power in a bloodless coup in 1999, said Friday that the government had never approved such transfers or sales, but that ''some individuals'' may have sold technology for their own personal gain.
In Pakistan on Sunday, accusations persisted that the nuclear scientists are being made scapegoats by the country's powerful army. A wide range of Pakistani analysts question how nuclear scientists who were kept under tight surveillance could have transferred technology without the knowledge of the powerful military intelligence agency, Inter-Services Intelligence.
In Rawalpindi on Sunday, several hundred supporters of an alliance of hard-line Islamist parties protested the investigation, The Associated Press reported. A relative of Dr. Farooq, the aide to Dr. Khan under investigation, said in a telephone interview that government officials had the scientist's family under surveillance and are intimidating them.
The relative insisted that Dr. Farooq, who was in charge of overseas procurement at the country's premier nuclear facility and has been in detention since Nov. 22, is being made a scapegoat because he has no connections with the country's powerful military.
''They are following us,'' said the relative. ''They are threatening us.''
