As a Broadway choreographer, Susan Stroman is the queen of pastiche, and in ''Double Feature,'' her first two-act work for New York City Ballet, she delivers a surefire hit, channeling silent-film clichés into a style of her own.
Playful, entertaining, often hilarious and superb in its theatrical timing and its musical irony in relation to songs by Irving Berlin and Walter Donaldson, ''Double Feature'' has been a hot ticket for months before its premiere on Friday night. Anticipation was high at the sold-out New York State Theater and an ovation greeted Ms. Stroman like a conquering heroine.
For the most part she did not disappoint. Her use of the ballet vocabulary is conventional but effective as part of an expressive image. There are also two showstoppers. One is a routine by a live Boston terrier.
The other is a bravura solo by Damian Woetzel, the company's premier danseur, who cuts loose with the virtuosity only classical technique can provide.
There is also a chase scene by scores of brides (some in drag) in pursuit of a groom: it works not because it is familiar but because of its use of space. And there is no more space-devouring dancing than that of Ashley Bouder as an abandoned babe who grows up to reunite with her mother.
Although billed as a full-length ballet, ''Double Feature'' is actually two works, each of which refers to silent films and could stand alone.
Yet those old enough to remember what a double feature was will get the conceit: two movies for the price of one.
Ms. Stroman loses some momentum in the second act, subtitled ''Makin' Whoopee,'' which is inspired by Donaldson's song of the same title and more directly by ''Seven Chances,'' a 1925 Buster Keaton film. But ''The Blue Necklace,'' the first act, set to Berlin's music, is an ingenious distillation of 1920's melodrama. As such, the surprises are not in the plot but in how Ms. Stroman will treat a stock situation.
That is the point of pastiche. As the French, including Proust, have defined it appreciatively in art and literature, pastiche is an art in itself, in appropriating the manner of a master and making it one's own.
It can be an exercise in style and is often a parody. Ms. Stroman, in Broadway musicals and in ''Double Feature,'' tends toward both.
She was invited to choreograph the only premiere of City Ballet's winter season as a tribute to George Balanchine's work in musicals on Broadway and in Hollywood from 1936 to 1951.
Unlike Balanchine, Ms. Stroman has always seen dance as a narrative medium, not as pure form. Storytelling is her gift in the genre she has chosen, and with Glen Kelly's brilliant arrangement of the Berlin and Donaldson songs, shorn of their lyrics, she displays a musical sensitivity that Balanchine could appreciate.
Paradoxically these words cannot be heard in ''Double Feature'' because each act is a make-believe silent film with the narration and dialogue projected on a screen above the dancers.
Yet the familiar lyrics are a silent commentary on the action. In ''The Blue Necklace,'' Berlin's ''Always'' wafts in at different times, its vows of ''loving you always'' sometimes a treacly satirical subtext, but never disrespectful of the material.
''The Blue Necklace'' is straightforward as a gloss on melodrama; only a woman tied up on a railroad track is missing.
In both acts Robin Wagner's evocative décor, William Ivey Long's period costumes and tutus, Mark Stanley's magnificent lighting, as well as Doug Besterman's orchestration add up to instant atmosphere.
''Necklace'' opens with a crackling chorus line on toe that breaks up when Maria Kowroski, as Dorothy Brooks, faints and her top-hatted swain rejects her. Ms. Kowroski, sly in her humor, has a ''dark secret,'' as the screen title announces, and that is what ''Necklace'' is about.
After Dorothy abandons her infant daughter on the steps of a church and puts a blue necklace on her, a Mr. Griffith (Jason Fowler) saves the child and brings it home. But Mrs. Griffith has sent him out to get rid of their own baby. As a villain danced with delicious wit, Kyra Nichols reveals a straight-faced sense of humor. Ms. Stroman knows how to spring surprises. When the young Tara Sorine and Isabella Tobias pop up as 10-year-olds, the effect is delightful. Ms. Sorine is Mabel, Dorothy's child, and Ms. Tobias is Florence, the Griffith daughter. Later Ms. Bouder flies out from behind a sofa as a 17-year-old Mabel. Treated like Cinderella, she is at war with Florence, knowingly danced by Megan Fairchild.
Despite their shabby apartment, Mrs. Griffith and Florence are invited to a ball by Dorothy, now a movie star. There, Mr. Woetzel, as a film heartthrob, steals the show with his elegance and pyrotechnics.
When Mrs. Griffith tries to pass Florence off as Dorothy's long-lost daughter, Florence fails the test because she cannot dance. Her duet with Mr. Woetzel is all marvelous mishap. But it is Ms. Bouder, a party-crasher at the ball, who electrifies all with her pas de chat volés.
In ''Makin' Whoopee'' Donaldson's music has a dance pulse (Busby Berkeley made his film debut with it) and it has been orchestrated with the right wistfulness by Mr. Besterman and Danny Troob.
As Jimmie Shannon, who cannot get up the nerve to propose to Anne (Alexandra Ansanelli), Tom Gold offers a Keatonish star turn, nicely understated in his repeated slapstick. (One can't give away the duet with the Boston terrier.) When told he can inherit $7 million if he marries that day, he tries out a series of candidates.
Ms. Stroman's sure comic touch is felt in this assortments of types. Dana Hanson is more interested in her sandwich and Amanda Hankes is more interested in shopping. Rebecca Krohn (her dialogue is printed in Russian) is an immigrant, Carla Körbes is a floozy and Jessica Flynn is a child.
Unfortunately this act is less of a seamless whole than a series of set pieces. These include solos for Albert Evans, Seth Orza and Arch Higgins as Mr. Gold's confederates, and the chase scene after Mr. Higgins has placed an ad for brides. Something tighter would be better here. Andrea Quinn conducted both acts with, yes, show business pizazz.
CITY BALLET REVIEW
