Even as they scrambled through the final hours of the New Hampshire primary, strategists for the major Democratic campaigns said they were preparing for a long, hard and expensive march through the next five weeks of primaries and caucuses, a far more complicated race than many had predicted just a month ago.
The struggle for the Democratic nomination is transformed after New Hampshire, becoming more of a national race, and putting a premium on competing in many states and steadily acquiring delegates. On Feb. 3, seven states, from South Carolina to Arizona, will hold primaries or caucuses, the beginning of four weeks of contests that will climax on March 2, when 10 states weigh in, including New York and California.
At the start of this year, many Democrats believed that Howard Dean could quickly wrap up the nomination, with back-to-back victories in Iowa and New Hampshire, a huge financial advantage and a wave of political momentum.
But with predictions of a quick Dean knockout now shattered, strategists with the major campaigns say they are now adjusting to a contest that may not be resolved until March 2, if then.
''The only way this was a sprint for us was if we won Iowa and New Hampshire,'' said Steve McMahon, media consultant to Dr. Dean. ''This is a marathon now, and we intend to run the whole way. We trained for it, and we're ready for it.''
Mary Beth Cahill, the manager of Senator John Kerry's campaign, said, ''We have said all along that for us, this is a delegate race, and we're going to try to accumulate as many delegates as possible.''
Speaking of the Democratic convention in Boston this July, Ms. Cahill added, ''We think it's all about the longer game to Boston, and that's the way we're organizing ourselves.''
Even in such an unpredictable year, some Democrats can envision the Kerry campaign moving aggressively through the next few weeks and never losing its dominance. But the campaign faces a calendar that poses a challenge for a Northeasterner like Mr. Kerry as well as several rivals determined to stay and fight for at least one more round.
In the next, sprawling phase of this campaign, strategists will have to decide which states to contest, and how hard to do so. Many of those decisions will be made Tuesday night, after the results of the New Hampshire primary, where the battle for second or third place has been brutal, judging by the polls.
''We're adjusting to a new reality coming off of Iowa, and we may have a totally different reality after New Hampshire,'' said Joe Trippi, campaign manager for Dr. Dean. Mr. Trippi said the campaign halted some of its advertising in the Feb. 3 states, in part to figure out the new lay of the land.
Still, the leading campaigns will have to move quickly, and over a larger field of play. Gen. Wesley K. Clark will leave here on Tuesday for South Carolina. Senator John Kerry will head to Missouri first, and Howard Dean said Sunday that he anticipated visits to South Carolina, Arizona, New Mexico ''and I don't know what else.''
Even if Mr. Kerry leaves New Hampshire with victories in Iowa and here, some leading Democrats say, the intensity of Dr. Dean's support and his fund-raising advantage are indicators of his staying power. Dean campaign officials, who met with top donors on Sunday, dismissed the idea that they were running out of money and expressed confidence that they could raise more.
But campaign officials acknowledged they needed a strong showing here. ''We need to have a solid day in New Hampshire on Tuesday,'' said Steven Grossman, Dr. Dean's national campaign chairman. ''That's critical.''
Southerners like Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and General Clark, who is from Arkansas, are hoping for decent showings in New Hampshire before they move on to more favorable terrain -- particularly South Carolina and Oklahoma, which hold primaries on Feb. 3.
The varied political terrain of Feb. 3 could easily produce two or even three candidates able to claim a win somewhere, several Democrats and analysts said.
Mr. Edwards could win South Carolina, for example, a boost to his argument that he can carry the South, but Mr. Kerry might win Missouri, bolstering his argument about his general electability. Missouri, the biggest delegate prize that day, came into play last week after the withdrawal of its favorite son, Representative Richard A. Gephardt, after a fourth place finish in Iowa.
''February 3 will probably be the height of the uncertainty because we'll probably have multiple winners,'' said Rhodes Cook, a political analyst and expert on the nominating process.
Still, if Mr. Kerry wins New Hampshire, he will enter the next round with a wave of positive publicity that could transform the polls in many of those states, just as his Iowa win transformed New Hampshire. The Kerry campaign is busily trying to manage expectations for the next round of contests, and one Democrat sympathetic to his campaign said: ''There's no state that's a huge lock for him. The good thing for Kerry is this calendar doesn't really favor Dean either.''
The pressures to withdraw for candidates who have yet to win anything by Feb. 3 will escalate quickly. Money dries up for candidates who no longer appear viable, and Democratic leaders are eager for the field to be winnowed, so they can unify the party and prepare for the general election.
Terry McAuliffe, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, repeated his position on Sunday that candidates who have not won anything by Feb. 4 should do some hard thinking.
''If you haven't won in one of the nine states in all the regions of our country, with all the different constituencies involved, then I think it's time to reassess your candidacy,'' Mr. McAuliffe said.
Four days after the Feb. 3 contests come caucuses in Michigan and Washington. Then comes a drumbeat of states before March 2 -- largely considered the ultimate test of staying power, because it costs so much to compete in big states like New York and California.
Still, given how wrong the conventional wisdom has been so far, few are willing to make predictions about how long the race will truly be contested.
''What makes for a drawn-out campaign?'' asked Bill Carrick, who advised Mr. Gephardt's presidential campaign. ''It's usually the ability of multiple candidates to hang around for a while. That requires people with strong constituencies that help them withstand it even when they start losing regularly or people with large amounts of money that allow them to keep going even if not doing well.''
Mr. McAuliffe, in an interview, said he never bought into the idea of a February finish. ''I've always said by March 10, because by that point 71 percent of the pledged delegates will have been chosen,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE STRATEGY
