After conducting some of the most memorable television interviews of the last quarter-century for the ABC newsmagazine ''20/20,'' Barbara Walters has decided to leave as co-anchor of the program.
Ms. Walters has informed the president of ABC News, David Westin, that she will step down from ''20/20'' in September, and plans to scale back her workload to five or six news specials each year, including her highly rated Oscar night interviews, in addition to her regular appearances on ''The View,'' the ABC show she created. ABC News is expected to announce her departure from ''20/20'' today.
''I love the show, and it's been 25 years of doing it,'' Ms. Walters said in an interview late last week in her Fifth Avenue apartment. ''But I had felt for the last year that I just wanted more flexibility in my life.'' She said she intended to spend more time with friends, perhaps write a book, and certainly read for pleasure. ''I can't remember the last time I read a trashy novel,'' she said.
''Because I've done this for so long,'' she added, ''I sort of have the feeling: I've done that already.''
But Ms. Walters -- who has been criticized at times during her career for being a central figure in what has been called the blurring of the lines between news and entertainment -- also said she was unhappy with the changing nature of television news and newsmagazines.
There is increasing pressure to find interviews that appeal to young viewers -- a group, she said, who ''don't know heads of state and they're not interested.''
''We did Castro and it was a huge interview,'' she added. ''But we did much better in the ratings with Courteney Cox and David Arquette.''
At the same time, Ms. Walters deplored the growing trend toward what she called ''package deals,'' the murky ways in which one of the big network-owning media companies with an entertainment magazine show or morning show offers a celebrity an entertainment special or concert in exchange for an interview on its network newsmagazine.
Mr. Westin said he did not try to talk Ms. Walters out of her decision to leave the program. ''It was Barbara's call,'' he said.
Ms. Walters's current contract, estimated to be worth $7 million to $8 million a year, has more than a year left to run. She will negotiate a new deal with ABC News to reflect the changed workload. However, her deal with ABC's daytime division for ''The View,'' which she co-owns with the network, and which is both a ratings hit and significant profit maker, will remain in place.
Mr. Westin said he has concluded that it would be impossible to replace Ms. Walters on ''2o/20.'' Instead, Mr. Westin said, ''I think we'll remodel it into a completely different kind of show,'' one that does not rely so heavily on landing big interviews.
Ms. Walters , who is 74, has been on television since 1963, when she first went on NBC's ''Today'' show; she later was the first woman to be a co-host of the show. She joined ABC News in 1976, becoming the first woman to be a co-anchor of a nightly evening newscast.
But it was primarily on ''20/20'' that she dealt with many of the most prominent newsmakers and celebrities of the last 25 years. Her list of interview subjects includes every American president since Richard Nixon (as well as all the first ladies); world leaders like Margaret Thatcher, Yasir Arafat, Boris Yeltsin and Muammar el-Qaddafi ; movie stars like Katharine Hepburn, Kirk Douglas and Barbra Streisand; accidental celebrities like Donna Rice, Kato Kaelin and Monica Lewinsky; and -- one of Ms. Walters's specialties -- various people who have had brushes with the law, like Claus Von Bülow, Bernhard Goetz, Abbie Hoffman, Mike Tyson, Martha Stewart, Robert Blake and Jean S. Harris.
For all the breadth of her work, Ms. Walters has attracted criticism at times for her interviewing style, being accused by some of focusing too much on emotions and for becoming too personally involved with some subjects.
Ms. Walters has elicited so many tears in her time, it has almost become her signature. Gen. H. Norman Schwarzkopf cried when he talked about his father. Ms. Lewinsky struggled through tears in her 1999 interview, which drew 48.5 million viewers, a record for a single news broadcast. ''I felt like a piece of trash,'' she told Ms. Walters.
And Ms. Harris, the woman who fatally shot her lover, the diet doctor Herman Tarnower, said between sobs: ''I still love him. I wish I were dead. There's not a day goes by that I don't think about him.'' After she had interviewed Ms. Harris twice more, Ms. Walters said, ''ABC would not let me do her anymore because I became so involved.''
Mr. Westin defended her style saying, ''I think Barbara did go after a touch more emotion on interviews, but emotion is often the point of some stories.''
Ms. Walters's willingness to cross over between news and entertainment interviews has always drawn some criticism, but in defense, Ms. Walters has pointed to the model of Edward R. Murrow of CBS, among the most respected figures in television's history, who regularly interviewed both world leaders and stars.
One of her favorite subjects was Mr. Castro, whom she interviewed once in 1977 before joining ''20/20'' and then again for the program in 2002. Several pictures of her traveling through Cuba with him appear on the wall of the hallway in her apartment -- a spot she calls her ''wall of radicals.''
Mr. Castro sent her a personal note after the last interview. She read it out loud: ''To Barbara, in whose terrible hands I fell again after 25 years. I promise I will never try to escape. It's impossible, and I think with affability of our next meeting, arranged for 2027.''
Ms. Walters acknowledged that her decision to cut back so sharply is likely to come as a surprise to critics -- who have often accused her of being too addicted to the glamour of television to ever step back willingly from it -- as well as to her many competitors for interviews.
''I know that everybody has said, they're going to have to carry her out feet first,'' Ms. Walters said. ''And look at Mike Wallace, he's 84 or whatever. And I always knew that was not going to happen to me.''
As for her competitors, Ms. Walters said, ''I imagine there are certain people, not just at ABC, but certain interviewers who do daily shows or weekly shows, who are going to be jumping up and down like Rumpelstiltskin, saying, ''Hooray, we don't have to worry about her anymore.''
The first name to occur to anyone considering such a list would probably be Diane Sawyer, Ms. Walters's ABC colleague and long-rumored bitter rival for the top interviews. Both women have always denied those rumors.
''We haven't had a lot of clashes,'' Ms. Walters said, adding, ''My feeling is always, if I don't get the interview, I hope Diane does - and now she will.''
Ms. Walters -- while acknowledging that her ability to land big interviews, so-called ''gets,'' is ''how I made my reputation'' -- said she had not engaged in package deals, arrangements in which networks are said to have offered promotional ''specials'' to celebrities in exchange for interviews.
One of her most famous interviews, with Ms. Lewinsky after the White House sex scandal, did, however, involve the most complicated series of negotiations Ms. Walters said she could recall.
That was because she had to secure not only Ms. Lewinsky's permission, she said, but also that of Kenneth W. Starr, the special prosecutor. Ms. Lewinsky had been promised enormous fees by other outlets, Ms. Walters said, but ABC did not offer any money. ABC did make one concession, Ms. Walters said: an agreement to limit drastically the use elsewhere of clips from the interview. That allowed Ms. Lewinsky to sell a separate interview to British television.
''It's very new and very worrisome,'' Ms. Walters said of the package-deal trend, adding, ''Even alleged murderers have agents now.''
