Howard Dean was all smiles at a Women for Dean rally on Sunday in Hooksett, N.H., as he stood in front of a crowded room with Judith Steinberg Dean, his politically reluctant spouse who has made few campaign appearances. The couple exchanged loving glances as she read her introduction of him from a laptop computer.
But after the event, Dr. Dean's tone changed, as he said discreetly but audibly: ''Get her out. Get her out. Get her out.''
It could be that Dr. Dean was trying to shield his wife from the crush of supporters. But perhaps he forgot that while most of his supporters, as well as reporters, were out of earshot, C-Span was broadcasting the event live.
New Hampshire is known for its folksy, up-close approach to primary politics. But interested voters need not be within shivering distance of the frigid Northeastern air to catch an intimate glimpse of the Democratic presidential candidates as they power through private homes, restaurants and auditoriums vying for the party's nomination. They need only be as close as their television.
Network and cable news programs, with their so-called embedded reporters and pundits, provide running coverage of each day's events. But political junkies can ''embed'' themselves in campaigns through television vehicles like ''All Politics Weekend'' on C-Span, the public affairs cable channel, which broadcasts political events generally unedited and without commentary.
Even in sunny Miami, where the primary is not until March 9 and the main focus on the White House over the weekend was a ceremony hosted on Friday by President Bush honoring the world champion Florida Marlins, curious Democrats could hole up in front of the TV and get the same experience as the voters in New Hampshire, and often, thanks to wireless microphones, get a bit more.
''You cannot help but be influenced by who is presenting the programs on the news channels,'' said Carlos Ardaya, 34, a social science professor at Miami-Dade College, who assigns C-Span to his students as mandatory viewing. ''At the beginning, C-Span might be boring, but it allows you to come to your own conclusions.''
Without arriving hours early or squeezing through crowds, viewers of C-Span could snag a front-row spot in a hotel ballroom in Nashua, N.H., on Saturday to hear the candidates address the state Democratic Party.
With the benefit of a tight camera shot, viewers might have spotted a seemingly anxious gulp from Gen. Wesley K. Clark when a pause for effect during his speech did not produce the kind of cheers he received earlier at a pancake breakfast in Auburn.
With little effort, viewers could listen to Dr. Dean at a pub and restaurant in Keene, in southwestern New Hampshire. Couch potatoes might have noticed Dr. Dean growing increasingly comfortable in his self-deprecating references to his much maligned concession speech after his stinging third-place finish in the Iowa caucuses, rather than simply seeing the raucous speech played over and over on other channels.
At a meet and greet on Friday morning with the breakfast crowd at Bagel Works, cameras stuck with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut long after he finished an interview with young reporters from the Scholastic News Network. They were still there when the senator tried to woo a former staff member for Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who dropped out of the race after a disappointing fourth-place finish in Iowa.
After watching Mr. Lieberman work to strike the right balance of folksy charm and steadfast confidence with patrons whose main concern seemed to be a cup of hot coffee, viewers might have felt a pang of sympathy when the former Gephardt staff member declined the senator's appeal.
Viewers might have welcomed hearing Senator John Edwards of North Carolina blow out a weary sigh and declare, ''This is so much better than 30 second sound bites,'' after finishing a lengthy interview with ''The Exchange,'' a Public Radio program in New Hampshire.
Watchers perhaps cringed when Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts huffed and puffed his way around an ice hockey rink in Manchester, N.H., with professional players.
Barbara Goolsby, a legal services lawyer in Miami, lounging on the bed in her garage apartment in the northwest Miami neighborhood of Spring Garden was within easy earshot of Mr. Kerry as he spoke at an elementary school in Claremont on Friday, a city near New Hampshire's border with Vermont.
Had it been in a two-minute story on the evening news, she said, Mr. Kerry's exchange over the high cost of health care with a substitute teacher would have been condensed to a descriptive clause. ''For a long time Kerry was just a great stone face,'' said Ms. Goolsby, a liberal Democrat who had been drawn to Dr. Dean. ''It wasn't until I saw him then that he reached me, seemed to be talking to me.''
The candidates' wives, often an afterthought in news coverage, are on frequent display on C-Span.
The easy interactions of Elizabeth Edwards, Teresa Heinz Kerry, Gertrude Clark and Hadassah Lieberman at televised events over the course of the weekend might have heightened viewers' interest in Mrs. Dean when she made her first C-Span appearance of the weekend on Sunday morning.
There are downsides to experiencing a campaign from a living room chair. C-Span camera crews can capture only so many events a day, resulting in tedious replays. The first time Mr. Lieberman mingled with diners at Bagel Works, it felt engaging. By the third replay, though, the scene felt stale.
And with so many opportunities to scrutinize the candidates, by the time the political roadshow winds its way to Florida in March, avid C-Span viewers will have heard Mr. Kerry challenge President Bush to ''bring it on,'' hundreds of times. Dr. Dean's disclaimer that neither he nor any candidate can solve all Americans' problems and that the power to change America is in voters' hands may sound like a skipping CD.
Ms. Goolsby said her own early attention to the campaigns should put her at an advantage later.
''You've had a chance to watch them all evolve,'' Ms. Goolsby said. ''Dean from Mr. Wiseguy to Mr. Humble, Kerry from being kind of rigid to taking his coat off and looking comfortable. I don't want a reporter telling me what's going on. I want to have seen it for myself.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE VIEWERS
