If this economic recovery were like almost any other in the last several decades, President Bush might well be on a classic election-year collision course with the Federal Reserve.
But Fed officials have made it clear that they view this recovery as quite different from those in the past, and they seem determined to continue their policy of offering remarkably cheap money, even though the economy seems poised for its fastest growth in four years.
The Fed's staying of the course would be welcome news to President Bush's re-election campaign. The first President Bush assigned part of the blame for his re-election defeat in 1992 to decisions by the Federal Reserve chairman, Alan Greenspan, to keep interest rates relatively high.
The difference this time is that inflation, running at barely 1 percent and still slowing, is -- if anything  -- lower than Fed officials would like. Job creation, meanwhile, remains weaker than in any recovery since World War II and factory use remains at surprisingly low levels.
Analysts all but unanimously predict that when the Fed's policy-making committee meets on Tuesday and Wednesday, members will leave the federal funds rate -- the interest rate at which banks lend to each other overnight -- at just 1 percent and will probably offer few new hints about rate increases in the future.
Most analysts expect the Fed will essentially reiterate its position that interest rates can remain low for ''a considerable period'' and to say that the balance of risks has not changed since members of the Federal Open Market Committee met in December.
''Federal Reserve officials will convene next week amid growing signs of potentially spectacular divergence between economic growth and inflation prospects,'' Robert DiClemente, a senior economist at Citigroup, wrote on Friday. ''Fundamentals point to a period of very low inflation, keeping the F.O.M.C. sidelined next week and well into the future.''
Economic growth soared at an annual rate of 8.2 percent in the third quarter of last year, and the consensus view among forecasters is that the economy will grow by 4 percent in 2004.
Almost all business surveys point to strong growth in business spending and investment. Orders for new equipment, shipments of manufactured goods and business confidence have all been up. Construction of new homes, which many forecasters had thought would start to fade, is still running at near-record rates.
But Fed officials have been focused on two other factors: the near absence of inflation and the stubbornly sluggish rate of job creation. In the stated view of Mr. Greenspan,  the economy continues to have a great deal of slack in both the labor market and the utilization of factories.
Job creation, which jumped last fall in what seemed like a significant turnaround in the unemployment outlook, cooled to a tepid level in November and essentially halted in December. Though the unemployment rate drifted downward to 5.7 percent in December, from 5.9 percent the previous month, that was almost entirely because as many as 300,000 discouraged workers had stopped looking for jobs.
But Fed officials appear to have been more focused on the outlook for inflation. To the surprise of many forecasters, the core rate of inflation, excluding prices for food and energy, slowed to an annual rate of just 1.1 percent last year.
Although Mr. Greenspan has refused to embrace any specific inflation target, Fed officials have signaled that they are uncomfortable when inflation drops below 1 percent. Fed officials believe prices could be poised to climb at an annual rate of 0.5 percent to 1.5 percent, and many would be happier to see them climb at the higher rate.
In December, Fed officials briefly rattled financial markets by announcing after their policy meeting that the risks of deflation had declined and were now almost equal to the risks of excessive inflation. Many took the Fed's statement as an early signal that rate increases might be in store by late spring. But Fed officials have since driven home the point that the risk of inflation is low enough and that the rise in productivity is high enough that they can afford to be patient.
Until recently, many economists were betting that Mr. Greenspan would start pushing up interest rates by this spring, just as President Bush moved into the height of his re-election battle. That prospect is still possible, but doubtful. Though some economists still predict that the Fed will start to tighten monetary policy by this summer, most predict that rates will remain low through the end of this year.
Although the effects of tighter monetary policy usually lag the economy by six months, Mr. Bush still stands to benefit. Largely because Fed officials have signaled that they will keep the federal funds rate low for quite a while, long-term interest rates and mortgage rates have declined in recent weeks.
Indeed, home mortgage rates are now near the extremely low levels of last summer, when homeowners began a frenzy of refinancing their homes.
But a number of economists are openly uncomfortable with Fed policy, because they worry that inflation is more imminent than the central bank seems to believe.
''We feel that core inflation will be going up in 2004,'' said Richard DeKaser, chief economist at National City Bank in Cleveland. Mr. DeKaser and some other economists contend that labor costs may be poised to grow more rapidly than in the late 1990's. Health care insurance costs are rising at double-digit rates, companies are being forced to make bigger contributions to employee pension funds and far fewer employees are willing to accept stock options in place of higher wages.
So far, the only concrete harbinger of inflation has been a sharp rise in prices for commodities ranging from oil and gold to farm products and steel scrap. But those price increases have yet to translate into higher producer prices or higher consumer prices. And until they do, Mr. Greenspan and other top Fed officials have signaled their willingness to wait.
