Following are excerpts from speeches on Sunday by the Democratic candidates for president in New Hampshire, as recorded by The New York Times.
WESLEY K. CLARK  In Nashua
I did my service. I went to West Point; I graduated as a lieutenant. I served in Vietnam as a junior officer, I was an infantry company commander there. I came home on a stretcher, Silver Star, Purple Heart, and stayed with the military for another 30 years. I'm a veteran, and I'm proud to be a veteran. And I want to recognize all the veterans here today. Stand up veterans; stand up and let us see you. Raise your hand if you're in the back. Raise your hand so we can recognize you. Thank you very much, veterans. Thank you. I want to introduce my son, Wes Clark, former Lieutenant Clark, United States Army. Son, I'm very proud of you for your service. And I just want to say, and I want to say right here and right now, that no Republican and no Democrat is ever going to drive a wedge between me and our nation's veterans. We will take care of our veterans in this country. That's a promise.
HOWARD DEAN  In Manchester
As a doctor, I feel very, very strongly that science ought to be behind making medical decisions and not either theology or political ideology. The president of the United States has cut off funding to family planning clinics around the world if they perform abortions or if they even mention abortions. I do not want, when I go to my doctor -- and I don't think Judy wants, though I don't dare speak for her -- I don't think that Judy or I want somebody from the government telling us what we can tell our patients and what we can't. That's essentially what George Bush has done. If we get any federal funds then theoretically we're not allowed to tell anybody what their options are if they come in pregnant. I don't think we want George Bush practicing medicine on us. So, what I want to do is rescind the gag rule both at home and abroad.
JOHN EDWARDS  In Nashua
We can put an end to these two governments we have in Washington, D.C. I know that you know what goes on there every day. We're debating the Medicare prescription drug bill. Here come the drug company lobbyists, descending on the Capitol. And you know they come over to you and say, ''Can't you give us a little help on this bill and wink, wink, we'll see you at the fund-raiser tonight.'' Let me tell you what we ought to do to these Washington lobbyists. We ought to cut them off at the knees. I made a commitment when I was running for the Senate never to take money from a Washington lobbyist. But that's not enough. We need to stop them from making political contributions. And not only that, we need to stop this revolving door from the government into lobbying firms.
JOHN KERRY  In Hampton
On Tuesday you get to go exercise what is not just a privilege, but it's a responsibility, because the whole world, literally the whole world, is looking to you for leadership. Because they're looking to the United States of America to live up to our values, and our history, and our standards and our aspirations. New Hampshire has the ability to affect the world and make a difference with respect to how or whether we negotiate with North Korea, rather than leave it to become a crisis because we're unwilling to continue a dialogue begun by Bill Clinton. How or whether we'll advance the cause of Middle East peace, or whether we'll simply push it away, defer it to the future. How or whether we will deal with AIDS as a global issue, where we ought to be leading the world given our moral responsibility, not dragging our feet as we continue to.
JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN  In Salem
I know that voters are asking themselves now, who is the person, who are these people and what kind of judgments can I make about what kind of president they'd make? I didn't just get dropped into this race. I have 30 years of experience in public service that will tell you who I am. And I hope, even more important than that, it will tell you that I know who I am and I know what I stand for. And I know how to make tough decisions, and I know how to stick to those decisions when I believe that they're right for the country, even if they're not politically popular.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
