Few would accuse Axel Ganz, the interim chief executive of Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, of neglecting the details. On the contrary, Mr. Ganz, the president of the German company's international division, sometimes uses his commuting time from Paris to New York to circle displeasing headlines and inappropriately spaced text in company-owned magazines like Parents and Fitness.
But Mr. Ganz now sits at the desk of Daniel B. Brewster Jr., whom he fired as chief executive last week, and confronts the kinds of mistakes that cannot be undone with the stroke of a pen.
Mr. Brewster, with the support of Mr. Ganz and the board of Gruner &amp; Jahr, a division of the German media conglomerate Bertelsmann, had promised after his hiring in 2000 to double the revenue at the American company in five years in hope of becoming a force in an era of consolidating magazine publishers like Time Inc. and Condé Nast. Instead, Mr. Ganz takes over day-to-day control of a company that is no bigger or more competitive than it was when Mr. Brewster arrived.
Revenue has slipped since 2000, and profit is stagnant. Mr. Brewster's grand plans -- from the purchase for $360 million of the new-economy magazine Fast Company to the effort to save the struggling McCall's by turning it into a star vehicle for Rosie O'Donnell -- have been embarrassing failures. And the company has been humiliated by revelations that it inflated circulation figures of some of its magazines and kept advertisers in the dark.
Some magazine industry executives suggest that a retrenching Bertelsmann -- which has tempered its global ambitions since its chief executive, Thomas Middlehoff, was forced out in 2002 -- will cut its losses and sell Gruner &amp; Jahr USA. But Mr. Ganz insists that Bertelsmann remains steadfast in its commitment to the American market.
''I have a responsibility to the board of this company and I am personally committed to many of the people here,'' said Mr. Ganz, who plans to spend half his time in New York in coming months running the business and shopping for a new chief executive. ''I want to put this company back on the right track.''
Mr. Ganz, 66, a multilingual executive and self-described Francophile who grew up on the German-French border, began his career as a general assignment reporter for regional newspapers in southern Germany. He now lives in Paris, just across the Seine from the Eiffel Tower in an apartment with a stunning view.
Now several years past 60, the customary retirement age of Bertelsmann executives, Mr. Ganz -- who is described even by his detractors as a skillful fanatic about magazines -- remains interested in running and building them.
He can set his own retirement in part because he has been successful in building up the company's successful international divisions in countries like Spain and Russia.
And he has another, very influential card to play with his bosses: He built the German company's French division, Prisma Presse, from scratch in 1978 into a highly profitable company with revenue of about 500 million euros ($630 million) on the strength of 16 magazines with a focus on celebrities and women's service.
Prisma Presse ''is quite an achievement considering the history of relations between the two countries,'' said John Vinocur, a former executive editor of The International Herald Tribune, adding, ''He pretty much conceived all of the titles, an achievement that is quite remarkable.''
Elizabeth Crow, a former president and editorial director of Gruner &amp; Jahr USA and now the editorial director of Consumers Union, which publishes Consumer Reports, worked for Mr. Ganz for several years after he took up his international oversight duties in 1991. ''He is an expert at the mechanics of making magazines,'' Ms. Crow said. ''He has a bunch of rules about making magazines, and all of them work. Axel is very concerned about making sure that the cutlines on photos and headlines draw the reader in.''
Some editors and art directors, none of whom would allow the use of their names, said Mr. Ganz wielded his expertise in heavy-handed ways, trying to import the cluttered and relatively downscale look of his European magazines while talking constantly of giving the reader ''multiple points of entry'' into every page.
''Even the tiniest image could not run without a caption,'' a former editor at Gruner &amp; Jahr said. ''I don't really think he had any belief in the intelligence of the audience.''
But where others see micromanagement, Mr. Ganz sees craftsmanship.
''Magazines, in the end, are the sum of a lot of details,'' he said, slicing the air for emphasis. ''Magazine-making is about the marriage of ideas and craftsmanship.''
Nonetheless, Gruner &amp; Jahr's success in the United States has been minimal, even with deals like the acquisition of the women's magazines of The New York Times Company in 1994.
Joachim Rosler, who worked directly with Mr. Ganz for a number of years and is now chief operating officer of World Publications, praises his editorial talents, but adds that ''as he has tried to reproduce the success he had in France here in the U.S., he has had a difficult time of it.''
Mr. Ganz has shown an ability to produce magazines oriented toward women that sell well on newsstands in France and elsewhere. But the American magazine market is driven much more by subscriptions and advertising, and the company was chary of the spending and promotion that success required.
Under a previous chief executive, John Heins, a former protégé of Mr. Ganz, Gruner &amp; Jahr USA was criticized for high turnover, less than competitive salaries, a reliance on women's magazines and middlebrow ambitions. Mr. Brewster, a former chief executive of American Express Publishing, was brought in to change that corporate culture in 2000.
He quickly acquired Fast Company for about $360 million, a price that in retrospect seems wildly inflated. And Mr. Brewster went shopping for expensive executive and journalistic talent, while investing $60 million in 2001 into magazines like Child, Fitness and American Homestyle and Gardening to appeal to upscale readers and advertisers. Mr. Ganz signed off on the most significant decisions.
Some of the moves have paid off. Child, Family Circle and Parents have performed well in business terms. Others did not. Fast Company carries a third of the advertising pages it did at the height of the technology boom. American Homestyle, rechristened Homestyle, went out of business.
But it was Mr. Brewster's attempt to salvage McCall's, a struggling women's service magazine that was one of the so-called Seven Sisters, that more than anything else tarnished his and the company's reputation. He entered into a joint venture with Ms. O'Donnell, a successful daytime talk show host, to turn McCall's into Rosie -- hoping to attain some of the magazine success of other celebrities, like Oprah Winfrey and Martha Stewart. But after millions of dollars in losses and battles between Gruner &amp; Jahr and Ms. O'Donnell over the direction of the magazine led Ms. O'Donnell to leave, the company closed Rosie and sued Ms. O'Donnell for $100 million. Ms. O'Donnell countersued.
At the trial, the company's credibility suffered serious damage. It became apparent that Gruner &amp; Jahr had reported newsstand sales beyond those the magazine actually had and that senior executives managed the financial details to keep Ms. O'Donnell from invoking a contract clause that would have allowed her to walk away from the joint venture if losses reached a certain level.
Mr. Brewster said at the time that the variations were within acceptable limits and quite standard in the industry, a stance that infuriated other publishing companies.
Mr. Ganz does not play down the circulation fiasco's effect.
''We will do everything that we need to do to restore our credibility as quickly as we can,'' he said, alluding to the twice-yearly figures issued by the Audit Bureau of Circulations.
As Mr. Ganz works to repair the damage and expand the company -- its earnings dropped about $10 million last year, to about $70 million on revenue around $400 million -- he must find a new chief executive who will be content with Gruner &amp; Jahr USA's streamlined ambitions.
Mr. Brewster had warned that the company needed to become much bigger or risk being crushed, but Mr. Ganz says that view was overheated, the product of a bygone era.
''Size does not always mean quality,'' he said. ''You can be important and do good business without being huge. The growth philosophy was typical of the hype years, and I think that in the meantime, everybody has become more modest. Growth cannot be an objective unto itself.''
Mr. Ganz hopes that once a new chief executive is in place, Gruner &amp; Jahr USA will be able to begin publishing an American version of Gala, an upscale celebrity-focused weekly that has been successful in France. But what seems entirely new in France will face a clutter of competition in this country, where People, US Weekly and others have staked out significant and lucrative franchises.
Mr. Ganz is willing to venture one more solution to what has been a vexing question for the German owners of Gruner &amp; Jahr: how to translate its European success into prosperity in the United States.
''Don't forget that we have some very good brands here,'' he said. ''We just need to find somebody who knows this business, who is down to earth, and has a vision for this company.''
