Despite the travails of the music industry, with CD sales still slumping and record executives still suing suspected Internet pirates, one part of the business is thriving. Royalties paid to songwriters and music publishers from radio and television broadcasts of their songs, and from live performances, are at record highs.
''When it comes to the downloading issue, which is killing record labels and music publishers, we're only indirectly affected by it,'' said Bill Velez, the head of Sesac, one of the leading performing rights organizations in the United States. ''We're able to weather economic storms better than other segments of the entertainment industry.''
In 2003, America's three recognized performing rights organizations -- Sesac, B.M.I. and Ascap -- reported record revenues, which, in turn, have generated bigger royalties distributions to songwriters and music publishers.
Ascap -- the American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers, a nonprofit association -- is the oldest and by most measures the largest of the performing rights organizations in the United States. Its preliminary data indicate that Ascap took in $668 million in 2003, 5.2 percent more than in the previous year. The association plans to release its official year-end results at its annual meeting in February.
B.M.I. -- Broadcast Music Inc., also a nonprofit and the longtime chief competitor to Ascap -- reported that revenue in its last fiscal year, which ended in October, increased 9.7 percent, to nearly $630 million, from $574 million in fiscal 2002.
Sesac -- once known as the Society of European Stage Authors and Composers, now based in Nashville -- is the smallest of the three and the only for-profit organization of the group. Mr. Velez declined to disclose revenue, but said Sesac had gains in 2003 of about 30 percent, which he said continued the pace of the last decade.
Performing rights organizations track and collect royalty fees for public performances of copyrighted music and distribute the money to the copyright owners. Their role is to ensure that songwriters, composers and music publishers are paid for the use of their creations on broadcast radio and on network, cable and satellite television as well as in public places.
Senior executives of the three organizations credited their revenue growth mainly to royalties collected from two relatively robust media: radio and cable television. They also said there were more public performance outlets now than ever: live concerts, restaurants, nightclubs, taverns, amusement parks, shopping malls, health clubs, cruise ships, even telephone on-hold music.
The organizations have expanded their coverage in recent years to more businesses, some of which had once been considered inconsequential or not worth the expense of pursuing for license fees.
''If you had told me 20 years ago that we would get around to licensing funeral homes, I would never have believed it,'' Mr. Velez said.
One of the most rapidly expanding new sources of performance royalties, the executives say, is cellphone ring tones, digitized melodies that play on mobile phones. Last year, 9.9 million people purchased cellphone ring tones in the United States, paying a total of nearly $57 million, according to IDC, a technology research firm.
Downloadable ring tones, typically costing $1 to $2, are the most popular Internet content offered for download, said Dana Thorat, an analyst at IDC, who projected that sales of tones would exceed $1 billion by 2007. Even if performance royalties add up to only a small percentage of that total, the revenue to songwriters and publishers could be tens of millions of dollars.
New technologies, including ''audio fingerprinting'' and music identification software, have helped the organizations track music use around the world more easily and efficiently, trimming operating costs.
Each performing rights organization has a roster of affiliated songwriters and publishers from all genres; they license only the copyrighted works of their artists.
Ascap represents more than 170,000 songwriters, lyricists and music publishers and has a catalog of about eight million musical works. B.M.I. has close to double that number of creative artists and publishers, with 300,000 affiliates, although its song repertoire of 4.5 million compositions is only about half as large. Sesac represents 4,000 songwriters and 3,000 publishers, but counts some widely known artists on its roster, including Bob Dylan and Neil Diamond.
As royalties from album sales decrease, Frances W. Preston, the president of B.M.I., said, songwriters have become more dependent on performing rights organizations to maintain a steady income.
''The bottom hasn't dropped out of the performing rights business,'' Ms. Preston said. ''They look to us for their royalties because the record company royalties, in some cases, are almost nonexistent.''
Approximately 50 percent to 75 percent of songwriters' compensation now comes from performance royalties, according to B.M.I.
The increase in such royalties has been the music industry's ''one saving grace,'' in the view of Carey Ramos, a lawyer for the National Music Publishers' Association, which represents music publishers and songwriters. Mr. Ramos said increased performance royalties had helped songwriters offset some lost income from mechanical royalties, as fees from record sales are known. But, he added, ''I'm quite sure it doesn't make up for the mechanical losses, by any stretch of the imagination.''
From 1996 to 1999 -- the year the file sharing service Napster began -- annual collections of mechanical royalties grew 18.5 percent, Mr. Ramos said, while performance royalties increased 19.8 percent. From 2000 to 2002, he said, mechanical royalties fell 22 percent, while performance royalties kept growing, by 13.6 percent.
''The continued rise in public performance royalties reflects a growing demand for music,'' he said. ''That tends to confirm that the dramatic decline in mechanicals is attributed to Internet piracy, not because there is less demand for music.''
Although the Internet has proved a challenge to the business practices of record labels and music creators, the performing rights organizations recognized almost immediately its potential as a major source of royalty revenues. Ascap, B.M.I. and Sesac have licensed several thousand Internet sites and online music subscription services that use streaming audio technologies.
''After tracking radio and television and cable for all of these years, suddenly you're tracking something much bigger than all of that put together,'' Ms. Preston said of the Internet.
''Where I think a lot of other people in the business were spending time with lawyers trying to find ways to sue everybody,'' she said, ''it was pretty clear to us that the public had accepted all of this new technology. There was no way to kill it even if you wanted to. So, you might as well get out there and embrace it and find out how you can license it and how you can collect from it.''
Still, the expansive and unruly Internet has not been an easy outlet to license, nor has it become the pot of gold that the performing rights organizations had expected.
''Because of piracy, the Internet has not been able to grow as other broadcast venues of entertainment have grown,'' John LoFrumento, chief executive of Ascap, said. Ascap, for example, took in just $10 million in royalties last year from about 2,000 Internet licensees, a pittance compared with the group's overall revenue. Mr. LoFrumento said Internet collections had doubled annually in the last few years, however, and he predicted that the Web, in time, would be a significant revenue source.
Radio and television, meanwhile, are likely to continue providing the bulk of performance royalties.
''It's a growth industry,'' Mr. Velez of Sesac said. ''Unless there's a total catastrophe in terms of a recession, and radio stations and TV stations go out of business in leaps and bounds and can't pay their license fees, unless something like that happens we're going to have a good year every year.''
