BY many measures Canadians are as sophisticated as Americans in their use of the Internet, if not more so. But there is one crucial difference between the two countries' Web habits: Canada is not buying e-commerce.
During the recent holiday shopping season, Canada's online spending decreased from the year before, for the second consecutive year.
Canadians spent $972 million online this past holiday season, compared with $990 million during the 2002 period, which was down from the $1.1 billion spent online during the 2001 holiday season. The data were reported last week by Ipsos-Reid, a Toronto unit of Ipsos, a research and consulting firm.
By contrast, holiday online spending in the United States jumped nearly 60 percent during the same two-year period, according to the online research firm Nielsen/NetRatings.
''We're certainly not Luddites, but for whatever reason, we seem to be stuck in the Dark Ages with e-commerce,'' said Chris Ferneyhough, a vice president of Ipsos-Reid who is based in Calgary and was the report's author.
Mr. Ferneyhough said the results were particularly puzzling because the number of Canadians who had bought something online has reached a new high -- 47 percent of Internet users, up from 39 percent from early 2003. Still, just 25 percent of all Canadian Internet users bought a gift online in the most recent holiday period, according to Ipsos-Reid. Of those who did buy, average holiday spending dropped to $247. That was $20 less than in 2002 and $77 less than in 2001.
The online trend runs counter to overall Canadian retail sales, which have grown -- if slowly -- over the last two holiday seasons, according to Maureen Atkinson, a senior partner with the J.C. Williams Group, a research and consulting firm. Ms. Atkinson said that although 2003 holiday sales data for Canadian retail stores will not be released until next month, she expected to see growth of 3 percent to 4 percent.
Mr. Ferneyhough noted that by some measures Canadians were more willing than Americans to embrace the Internet, pointing out that 51 percent of Canadians who use the Internet now do at least some of their banking online, compared with only about one-third of Americans with Internet access.
Canada also outpaces the United States online in other ways. Seventy-one percent of Canadian adults use the Internet, compared with 68 percent of American adults, according to Ipsos-Insight. And 35 percent of Canadian households with Internet access have high-speed connections, compared with 20 percent in the United States, according to Cable Datacom News, a trade publication.
But the Canadian retail numbers indicate that ''in this country, online shopping will always be a niche activity,'' Mr. Ferneyhough said.
The reluctance of Canadians to make purchases online is not news to many retailers, including the Forzani Group, a sporting goods retailer based in Calgary. Of its seven brands, which include Coast Mountain Sports and Sports Experts, only two -- Sport Chek and Sport Mart -- have Web sites. And only Sport Mart accepts online orders.
In 1999, Sport Chek started an e-commerce operation, but discontinued it after 18 months. Robert Sartor, Forzani's chief executive, said of the Sport Chek Web experiment: ''At the rate of growth we were seeing, it'd be 12, 13, 14 years before we got the returns we're used to. So we dramatically reduced our infrastructure and warehouse and inventory investment, and all of a sudden, it made sense.''
The Sport Chek Web site now features promotions and product information, and has succeeded in helping Forzani build an e-mail list for its bricks-and-mortar stores.
Sport Mart, which started a Web site in June 1999, had established a loyal online customer base by the time Forzani acquired it in August 2001, so the company has kept the online retailing operation running. ''We typically feature a flier on the screen, which you can order from,'' Mr. Sartor said. ''Our cost of operation is so low, we can make money on it.''
Other well-known Canadian retailers have taken similarly conservative approaches to e-commerce. The Hudson's Bay Company, which operates some of the most popular department store brands in Canada, offers fewer than 10 percent of the company's goods online, according to Michael E. LeBlanc, who coordinates the company's Web sites. Of the company's three store brands -- the Bay, Zellers and Home Outfitters -- only TheBay.com accepts online orders, and even then only for gift registry items.
The company formerly offered full-price items from each store on a fourth site, HBC.com. But because consumers seemed mostly interested in the sales items offered on HBC.com, the company decided last year to make marked-down products the site's focus.
Although the company has not attracted legions of Internet shoppers for its full-price goods, Mr. LeBlanc said Hudson's Bay nonetheless considered its online strategy successful. The sites increase store traffic, he said, through sales promotions and by offering services like in-store pickup of items ordered online from HBC.com and TheBay.com.
As to why Canadians are less inclined to shop online than Americans, executives can offer few firm answers.
Mr. Sartor of the Forzani Group said that since Canadians are taxed more heavily than Americans, they have less disposable income. ''And typically, you have to pay for shipping and handling online, and if you return it, you have to pay that again,'' Mr. Sartor said. That means Canadians are unlikely to make purchases online unless ''it's a commodity-type item, where size and styling aren't an issue,'' he said.
That may help explain why Amazon's Canadian Web site, Amazon.ca, offers a less diverse array of merchandise than the United States site, limiting products mainly to books, music, movies and video games. (Amazon declined to comment on its Canadian sales and operations.)
Netflix, an American company focused on online DVD rentals, predicts that its business model will work north of the border. The company said last week that it planned to enter the Canadian market next year. ''We think it will be a great market for us,'' said Reed Hastings, chief executive of Netflix, who said he was ''puzzled'' by the Ipsos-Reid report.
Sales at eBay.ca, eBay's Canadian Web site, have also grown. While the company does not disclose revenues for countries outside the United States, an eBay spokesman, Chris Donlay, said that eBay.ca ''saw double-digit growth in both registered users and gross merchandise sales'' in the fourth quarter of 2003, compared with the fourth quarter of 2002. EBay.ca has not advertised on television, nor has it translated its site to French, as many Canadian sites have.
Whatever the explanation for the difficulty of some retailing Web sites to attract Canadian spenders, e-commerce experts in the United States do not expect the trend to creep southward. Patti Freeman Evans, an analyst with Jupiter Research, an online consulting firm, released a report last week predicting that annual Internet retail spending would nearly double in the United States from now to 2008, reaching $117 billion from a projected $65 billion this year. Of the Ipsos-Reid study, Ms. Evans said, ''I don't see it as a cautionary tale, at least until I figure out what's causing it.''
E-Commerce Report  Correction:  February 6, 2004, Friday  A headline with the E-Commerce Report column in Business Day on Jan. 26, about the decline in online holiday spending in recent years on Canadian Web sites, misstated the comparison of Internet use in Canada and the United States. While a higher percentage of Canadians use the Internet, the total number is greater in the United States.
