Wearing a black beret and using her boombox voice, Janine Boivin shouted to the couple approaching: ''Please don't eat at the Oyster Bar. Seventy-two families have been on strike for eight weeks.''
It was lunchtime on Friday, and some shellfish lovers walked blithely past and entered the restaurant deep inside Grand Central Terminal. But others stopped to talk with Ms. Boivin, an Oyster Bar waitress, and then headed elsewhere for lunch.
''I was thinking this would last maybe two, three days,'' said Ms. Boivin, whose lunch hours are usually spent carrying cherrystones and chowders to rushed customers. ''I never expected it would last eight weeks.''
The strike began on Dec. 5 after the restaurant's owners demanded to cut waiters' wages, to reduce salaries for newly hired dishwashers to $7 an hour from $8 and to eliminate health insurance for part-time workers like Ms. Boivin.
Management also insisted that new hires begin paying health insurance premiums of about $1,500 a year, while current employees would continue paying nothing.
''Their offer was terrible,'' said Ms. Boivin, an immigrant from Uruguay. ''It would be going backward.''
But Michael Garvey, the restaurant's manager, said the Oyster Bar needed those concessions to offset soaring health care costs, which he said were scheduled to rise by $239,000 over three years.
Sitting at the cocktail bar under the restaurant's famed vaulted ceilings, Mr. Garvey insisted that the strike was not having much of a toll, even though each day at lunchtime eight strikers picketed outside, forcing customers to face a verbal gantlet.
Mr. Garvey said the 420-seat restaurant -- opened in 1913 at the same time as Grand Central -- remained profitable. ''Things are good at the restaurant,'' he said. ''It's pretty much business as usual.''
The labor battle inside Grand Central is small by most measures, but it captures what is happening in many contract negotiations nationwide -- a lot of companies, even profitable ones, are demanding wage cuts, higher health insurance contributions and other concessions. With unemployment high in numerous low-wage service industries, and with many immigrants willing to cross picket lines, employers often feel it is an opportune time to try to push down labor costs.
''This is a place that has great-tasting oysters and a very wealthy, old clientele, and if they can't pay a living wage, then no one in New York can,'' said Josh Freeman, a history professor at the City University Graduate Center and the author of ''Working-Class New York.'' ''This shows that management is pushing to get the most it can, even if they're able to afford to pay decent salaries.''
During the strike's first few days, 22 union members crossed the picket line. Amy Jones, a cocktail waitress, was one of those who decided to continue working. She said she did not think management's offer hurt the workers so badly, even though it would have cut waiters' pre-tip wages to $4 an hour from $4.80. Many full-time waiters receive about $40,000 a year in tips.
''I didn't see any reason why anyone would need or want to strike,'' Ms. Jones said. ''Most of us feel loyal to the restaurant.''
But the 72 employees who walked on Day 1 out have held fast. The Metropolitan Transportation Authority has limited how many strikers -- members of Local 100 of the Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees International Union -- can picket inside the terminal near the restaurant.
''They do their best to harass customers and employees going into work,'' Mr. Garvey said.
He acknowledged that the Oyster Bar had lost customers during the strike. Noting that the restaurant averaged 1,300 customers a day before the walkout, Mr. Garvey said business was down 20 percent. (The restaurant was able to remain profitable, he said, because its costs were lower; it pays its 58 replacement workers less in wages and benefits than the strikers received.)
The strikers say that business is down far more than 20 percent. One of them, Ken Hack, the restaurant's fish butcher, also works at the Fulton Fish Market, and he said that he watches how much fish is loaded each night onto the truck heading to the Oyster Bar. ''The truck is carrying 50 percent of the volume it once did,'' Mr. Hack said.
As in any strike, each side has a different story. Mr. Garvey said service was as good as ever. ''The food hasn't changed,'' he said, ''and I get comments that it's much friendlier now than it was before the strike.''
But according to Otilia Cizekova, a waitress from Slovakia, ''Customers tell us, 'I'm really disappointed. I have to wait so long for service, and the food wasn't as good. I'm not going to go back.' ''
Bill Granfield, Local 100's president, said the workers were not suffering undue financial pain because they were getting $200 a week in union strike benefits and would soon begin receiving unemployment benefits as well.
Mr. Garvey said the restaurant could weather a strike for many more months. ''The Oyster Bar closed in the 1970's and was brought back to life ,'' he said. ''We had the big fire in 1997, and we had a tough time after the terrorism attacks with the downturn in tourism. Every time we come back stronger.''
Many customers dislike the strike's rancor and the strikers' clamor. Brian, a lawyer who ate there on Friday and refused to give his last name, said he saw little reason to honor the picket line. ''It's hard to know what the grievances are, and you don't know who is right,'' he said.
In words that would hearten the strikers, he said that service was slower than usual, but in words bound to please management, he said the wait to get a seat was as long as usual.
On Friday, for her first time in a decade, Lori Goodman, a writer from the Upper West Side, headed to the Oyster Bar, to celebrate a friend's birthday. But when she encountered Ms. Boivin and the other strikers, she put aside her craving for shellfish.
''I won't cross a picket line,'' she said. ''I support the union.''
Mr. Garvey said that many strikers misunderstood management's stance. The company that owns the Oyster Bar is controlled by the family of Jerome Brody, the famed restaurateur who died three years ago, having run the Four Seasons and Gallagher's Steak House as well as the Oyster Bar.
Mr. Garvey complained that the restaurant's pension costs are higher than those of its unionized competitors. And like many other executives, he bemoaned spiraling health costs.
''We felt this business shouldn't have to absorb all these increases,'' he said. ''It's hard for a business or anybody else just to keep paying.''
Mr. Garvey said it made sense to demand concessions to offset higher health costs and to ask new hires to pay 25 percent of the $5,600 in annual health insurance costs per worker.
But Mr. Granfield, the Local 100 president, said the union could not accept that, noting that in negotiating with other restaurants, it had beaten back management demands for workers to begin paying health premiums.
''This is economically unacceptable to each worker, and it's institutionally unacceptable to the union,'' he said. ''The problem here is this is a very profitable restaurant, and they want to maximize what they can take out of it. They're just going too far, too fast.''
A major stumbling block is Mr. Garvey's insistence that he will not take the strikers back even if they settle. He said they could return only as replacement workers leave and openings develop.
''I warned them before they struck that we'd hire permanent replacements,'' he said.
Last week, however, Mr. Garvey tried to persuade Luis Iglesias, known as the city's champion oyster shucker -- he can shuck 15 oysters a minute -- to return to work.
''Garvey asked me to come back and I said, 'No thank you,''' said Mr. Iglesias, a 23-year-old from Mexico, who said he was having a hard time feeding his wife and daughter during the strike. ''I can't go back until the rest of my co-workers go back.''
