Only when Patriots quarterback Tom Brady received the itinerary for Super Bowl week on Saturday morning did it hit him. For all of Coach Bill Belichick's protests to the contrary upon the team's arrival in Houston on Sunday, this is far more than just another game.
So Brady turned around in his chair and told his backup, Damon Huard: ''Can you believe it? We're going back to the Super Bowl.''
Brady went to the Super Bowl last year as a spectator, only to chafe when he heard reporters talking about the other teams that were in it.
Safety Rodney Harrison, in his first season with the Patriots, said he was excited when the team bus pulled up and he saw fans and the news media waiting. He admitted that he would struggle to sleep.
But otherwise, the Patriots, who were an hour late to their news conference, assumed the nearly dour approach adopted by Belichick.
''It's a business trip; we have a lot of work to do,'' he said. ''That's all we're here for. That's what every trip is for. We're not here to go sightseeing. I don't know how anybody could take it any differently.''
But when the Patriots arrived, things were clearly different. Brady was immediately surrounded by dozens of reporters.
The Patriots, who won the Super Bowl two years ago, do not want to follow in the footsteps of the Packers and the Rams, who went to two Super Bowls in a short period of time, only to lose when they were favored in their second attempts. Denver upset Green Bay in 1998, and the Patriots upset the Rams in 2002.
''I tell myself I'm not going to be outsmarted out there, I'm not going to be out-toughed,'' Brady said. ''Those reasons you have to lose -- that won't happen. There's not going to be a letdown. It's not anything we take for granted.''
Patriots linebacker Willie McGinest, not appreciating that line of questioning, was more pointed in his response.
''Didn't Denver win two in a row?'' he said. ''Why don't you bring them up?''
Bruschi Hopes to Practice
New England linebacker Tedy Bruschi is receiving treatment on his injured right leg three or four times a day, and he hopes to be able to practice for the Super Bowl.
Bruschi, who has scored three touchdowns on defense this season, hurt his calf in the American Football Conference championship game against Indianapolis.
''He's a lot better than he was last week,'' Bill Belichick said Sunday. ''He's doing everything to get ready. He's a great competitor, a football player, and he will do all he can to be ready to play.'' (AP)
Showing Their Jewelry
Three Carolina Panthers pulled out their most cherished jewelry on Sunday. The three players who won Super Bowl rings with other teams had them on their fingers when they headed for Houston, then laughed about how they were thinking alike.
''I don't know why we all broke them out,'' said center Jeff Mitchell, who won his ring with Baltimore. ''We just kind of showed up with all of them on.''
Receiver Ricky Proehl flashed his championship ring from St. Louis. Tight end Jermaine Wiggins wore his reminder of New England's title two years ago. Offensive lineman Matt Willig was the only Panther with a Super Bowl ring who did not take it along; he won his with St. Louis.
Coach John Fox also had a ring on his finger -- his National Football Conference championship ring from the 2000 season, when he was the Giants' defensive coordinator. He held out his arm and showed it to reporters on Sunday night.
''It's about the first time this one's been out of the box,'' he said.
The only news from the Panthers was that running back Stephen Davis, who did not practice at all last week, will practice this week and will not appear on the injured list. (AP)
PRO FOOTBALL: NOTEBOOK
