If you can't beat your idols, is it possible to join them?
Maybe not, but on Thursday night at Town Hall in Manhattan the Jayhawks spent two hours coming pretty close. The band, based in Minneapolis, is about to celebrate its 19th birthday, and longevity has served the Jayhawks well. They helped popularize the unabashedly old-fashioned genre known as alt-country, which worships age, not youth. Every passing year brings them one year closer to the bygone world their songs evoke.
The current Jayhawks album is ''Rainy Day Music'' (American/ Lost Highway/Universal), another handsome, wistful CD in the tradition of Gram Parsons and other country-rock heroes. The concert began with ''Stumbling Through the Dark,'' which opens and closes the album. Gary Louris's not-quite-falsetto vocals sounded vaguely familiar, like the the song.
Mr. Louris became the band's de facto leader in 1995, when the singer-songwriter Mark Olson left the group. Under Mr. Louris's leadership the band got louder and a bit less traditional, which is good news, except when it isn't. On Thursday night Mr. Louris occasionally interrupted songs with squally guitar solos, aiming to create an atmosphere of hazy bliss but conjuring only haze. More often, though, he sounded like a man who has spent two decades becoming one of those melancholy balladeers he idolizes. He led the three-part harmony during a lovely version of ''All the Right Reasons,'' from ''Rainy Day Music.'' The drummer, Tim O'Reagan, sang an appropriately world-weary version of ''Tampa to Tulsa,'' another fine new song.
The band also spent plenty of time raiding its back catalog, emphasizing the slight stylistic variations. ''A Break in the Clouds'' from 2000 has a sweeping pop chorus that bears a distinct resemblance to Neil Diamond's ''Red, Red Wine.'' The encore included a jaunty version of ''The Baltimore Sun,'' a relatively straightforward country song from ''Blue Earth'' (Restless/Rykodisc), one of the band's best albums, which was released in 1989 and reissued last year.
About halfway through the concert Mr. Louris said, ''This is our last tour of the States for a long time,'' and the announcement added nostalgia to nostalgia. Gently but firmly he was coaxing fans to look forward to the day when this concert, too, would be a fond memory.
The opening act was Josh Rouse, a young singer-songwriter who leans just as heavily on nostalgia. Mr. Rouse recently released ''1972'' (Rykodisc), a softly sung tribute to the year of his birth. He draws from soul and folk-rock to create an appealing hybrid, and the best songs, like ''Rise,'' floated along on placid rhythms and Mr. Rouse's understated vocals.
But his soul-inspired grooves sound better on album than onstage, and the spare arrangements only underscores his weakness for undercooked lyrics. A casual, ill-considered love song called ''Slaveship'' began with an unfortunate metaphor: ''A slaveship, lost at sea/And I'm drowning, your water's deep.'' When he asked listeners to ''spread the love vibration,'' it was somehow deflating to hear him reduce the era he loves to a caricature.
ROCK REVIEW
