Provincial governments in west central Thailand dispatched hundreds of soldiers and prisoners on Sunday to slaughter chickens in flocks infected with avian influenza, as hospitals across Southeast Asia remained on high alert for further human cases of the disease.
Prime Minister Thaksin Shinawatra of Thailand visited farmers and promised government compensation for the millions of chickens being killed in an effort to stamp out bird flu before it spreads further, and a one-year suspension of farmers' debts. But he stopped short of saying how much compensation would be paid.
The government of Vietnam has been paying as little as 10 percent of the market price as workers there slaughter chickens in or near infected flocks. Farmers there are estimated to have quickly sold at markets close to a million chickens that were supposed to be destroyed.
Viroj Na Bangchang, the president and founder of the Consumer Force Association of Thailand, an advocacy group, said anything short of full market compensation for farmers would cause serious financial harm in rural areas. ''They don't have anything left if you kill all the chickens,'' he said.
Workers in protective gear are netting chickens, putting them in plastic bags and burying them alive in 15-foot-deep pits. A senior Thai agriculture official said that 9.1 million chickens had been culled since November, but that laboratory tests had provided definitive proof only late last week of the presence of bird flu in a small area of one province, Suphan Buri. On Sunday, the tests showed that the disease was in an adjacent area of the next province, Kanchanaburi, the official said.
Indonesia reported Sunday that millions of chickens in that country had also died of avian influenza, a further sign that it was spreading. South Korea, Japan, Vietnam, Cambodia, Thailand and Hong Kong had previously confirmed the disease in birds, while Taiwan had reported a less dangerous strain of bird flu in some chickens there.
A Health Ministry spokeswoman said Monday morning that a boy had just died of the disease and another boy with a confirmed case was improving. The are two probable and two suspected cases of illnesses that appear to be avian influenza.
Vietnam reported Saturday that a boy and a girl had fallen ill with the disease, bringing its total number of confirmed cases to seven, and reported no new cases on Sunday. Genetic sequencing by a Hong Kong laboratory of the virus from several of the Vietnamese cases has shown that it is of strictly avian origin.
That is important because it suggests that the virus has not yet recombined with the human influenza virus. Doctors describe this as a necessary step before the disease can spread quickly and easily from person to person.
Sudarat Keyuraphan, Thailand's health minister, said in a telephone interview on Sunday that it would be a couple of days before a genetic sequencing would be available for the two Thai boys' viruses. World Health Organization officials have said all the cases so far appear to have occurred among people, mainly children, who have been in close contact with chickens or their waste.
The W.H.O. is sending Dr. Theresa Tam, a Canadian pediatrician specializing in influenza, to Thailand; she is expected to arrive in Bangkok on Monday night.
Dr. Bjorn Melgaard, the W.H.O.'s chief representative in Thailand, said a side effect of an outbreak of SARS last spring was that Thailand's public health system was very well prepared to detect and report abnormal flu cases. Thai hospitals treated eight cases of SARS last year, all involving people who acquired the disease elsewhere, most notably Dr. Carlo Urbani, the W.H.O. doctor from Italy who first spotted the disease and raised the alarm in Hanoi last March, but was fatally infected while treating the sick.
Thailand stepped up its flu surveillance nationwide, including in rural areas, in response to the first of three SARS cases in southern China last month. ''Everything is mobilized, and the system is quite strong,'' Dr. Melgaard said.
Hong Kong, which took the brunt of the SARS outbreak last spring, has also told hospitals to be on the alert for bird flu, and has required frequent cleanings of poultry markets.
