After deciding that last year was not his goodbye tour, after all, Roger Clemens is embarking on a New York good-will tour. It started last night with a warm reception -- and gentle teasing -- at a Midtown awards dinner.
Clemens, the former Yankee pitcher who came out of retirement this month to sign with his hometown Houston Astros, received the Joe DiMaggio Toast of the Town award at the annual dinner of the New York chapter of the Baseball Writers' Association of America.
''My friend,'' said Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman, who presented Clemens the award, ''you will always have a seat at our family.''
With that, most people in the ballroom at the Sheraton New York stood and gave Clemens an ovation; only a few booed. Florida Marlins Manager Jack McKeon had already needled Clemens for going back on his retirement pledge while accepting his National League Manager of the Year award.
''Jack, I thought I was going to be settling into my couch also,'' Clemens said. ''Everything seemed to change.''
Clemens played in the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic golf tournament in Palm Springs, Calif., on Saturday and took a red-eye to New York. He will appear at three more dinners in New York over the next 10 days.
''I am glad I could make it here so I could personally come before all of you here and all the Yankee fans and everybody, just all the things that I hold so close to my heart,'' he said.
Clemens said his five seasons with the Yankees had a movie-like quality and seemed to unfold ''in slow motion.'' He said repeatedly last season and early this winter that he would retire as a Yankee, but decided to keep playing after the Astros signed his close friend Andy Pettitte away from the Yankees.
Clemens's decision rankled some Yankee fans and was greeted by headlines he noticed from Houston.
''I heard some of the things that were on the back pages, and it was hurtful, and it did bother me, because I poured my heart out and did the best I can,'' Clemens said. ''But, like my mother said, 'You should please some of the people some of the time, not all of the people all of the time.' ''
Clemens sat on the dais between the recently elected Hall of Famer Dennis Eckersley and the American League Cy Young winner, Roy Halladay of the Toronto Blue Jays. To Halladay's left was the Texas Rangers' Alex Rodriguez, the A.L. most valuable player, who received a new title earlier in the day.
After spending much of the winter trying to trade Rodriguez and his enormous salary to the Boston Red Sox, the Rangers' owner, Tom Hicks, named Rodriguez captain yesterday. Hicks, General Manager John Hart and Manager Buck Showalter also attended the dinner, at which Rodriguez received his M.V.P. award.
Rodriguez acknowledged the presence of the club officials and praised Hicks in his acceptance speech. ''I feel privileged to play for such a great owner,'' he said.
BASEBALL
