From his business-class seat on a flight up the spine of Vietnam on Friday, Nguyen Cao Ky, a former South Vietnamese prime minister, peered down on the cloud-covered northern countryside that he had last seen as a pilot on bombing runs during the Vietnam War.
Now 73 and a visitor to a place whose government outlasted the United States and its South Vietnamese ally, Mr. Ky was returning to his home city after 50 years. Mr. Ky, a former staunch anti-Communist, had already spent a busy week socializing, playing golf and sightseeing in Ho Chi Minh City. He said he had been assured of a warm welcome in Hanoi.
The flamboyant clothes that once earned Mr. Ky a reputation as South Vietnam's playboy prime minister were gone, replaced by a sedate cashmere sports jacket and tie. His 1960's full brush mustache was trimmed back, and golf clubs for playing on a newly built course near Hanoi were stashed in the hold.
When his countrymen ask about dealing with Americans, he said, ''I tell them to be open and frank with the good Americans.'' For ''the bad Americans,'' he recommended a forceful kick in the seat of the pants. Asked who the ''bad Americans'' were, the former prime minister declined to be specific.
His visit has the approval of the Hanoi government, which wants to improve relations with the United States, particularly as a balance against China, Vietnam's neighbor and onetime occupier.
But the trip has aroused opposition among a faction of the South Vietnamese exile community in the United States, particularly in California, where anti-Communist sentiment runs strong and where Mr. Ky has spent most of his time as a businessman since fleeing Vietnam after the fall of Saigon in 1975.
Religious groups in the United States have also protested what they call the government's persecution of members of ethnic minorities who have become Protestants.
But Mr. Ky said he believed it was time for reconciliation, and a new chapter. Those Mr. Ky called ''the stupid rulers'' of South Vietnam -- President Nguyen Van Thieu, under whom Mr. Ky served, and President Ngo Dinh Diem, whom Mr. Ky helped overthrow -- are both dead, he observed.
''Younger men, in their 50's and 60's, are in charge in Hanoi,'' he said. ''They know they have to get on with America.''
As well, he said, the Vietnamese want to balance their complicated relationship with China with better dealings with the United States. As China has become stronger in Asia, Vietnam has become more wary, even though the two countries share Communist political beliefs.
''Economically, China can destroy Vietnam, and the government knows it,'' Mr. Ky said. ''Vietnam could become a district of China again.''
Mr. Ky's visit, though informal, comes with some behind-the-scenes encouragement from the Bush administration. Last year, an American official suggested to the government here that it try to mend fences with Mr. Ky as a way to help Vietnam improve its image in the United States. Picking up on the idea, a deputy foreign minister, Nguyen Phu Bin, went to San Francisco last spring and met with Mr. Ky. Mr. Bin, now the Vietnamese ambassador in Paris, suggested the trip to Vietnam.
In the months leading up to Mr. Ky's arrival, Vietnam took several conventional steps to foster better relations with Washington.
A United States Navy vessel docked in Ho Chi Minh City in November, the third such visit in nearly three decades. The head of the Vietnamese military, Pham Van Tra, visited the Pentagon last fall and met with Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld. Deputy Prime Minister Vu Khoan told Secretary of State Colin L. Powell in December that Vietnam would try to meet the requirements needed for membership in the World Trade Organization by 2005.
While the government has begun to open up the economy and completed a far-reaching trade agreement with Washington two years ago, Vietnam remains one of the poorest and most corrupt nations in Asia.
Mr. Ky said the Vietnamese government needed to move faster or risk having the country left far behind. So far he has given two main pieces of advice to government officials: cut down on corruption and narrow the gap between the rich and the poor.
This week he has given this message, he said, to Thanh Vo Viet, until recently a mayor of Ho Chi Minh City and now Mr. Ky's new golf partner there.
In his autobiography, ''Buddha's Child,'' written with Marvin J. Wolf, Mr. Ky gives an unvarnished account of how he fled the country.
As the North Vietnamese were pushing ever closer to Saigon in 1975, he proposed defending the city house to house, person to person.
But when he failed to persuade anyone, Mr. Ky said, he loaded up a helicopter with some colleagues and flew out to sea. As he approached the American aircraft carrier Midway, Mr. Ky said, he ditched the ivory-handled revolver that John Wayne had given him. The Americans would disarm them, and Mr. Ky said he preferred to disarm himself. After Mr. Ky landed, the American sailors unceremoniously pushed his helicopter over the side.
On Friday afternoon such indignities were forgotten.
Mr. Ky embraced two high school friends he had not seen in more than 50 years -- Nguyen To, a professor of Vietnamese literature, and Nguyen Boi Tai, a professor of mathematics. Mr. Ky chose to go south in 1954 when Vietnam was divided into a Communist north and a non-Communist south by the Geneva conference that ended the French war in Indochina. Those two men stayed in the north. On Friday, the three sat laughing about their exploits as lads about town. They then went for ice cream and reminisced about a fat lady who had sold ices from a cart on the street.
