Sanofi-Synthélabo, the French pharmaceutical company, is planning to announce on Monday a $63 billion hostile bid for its national rival, Aventis, executives involved in the bid said. The maneuver, which was blessed by the French government, is likely to ignite a fierce takeover battle as Aventis seeks to thwart the deal.
A successful takeover would create the world's third-largest drug company, behind Pfizer and GlaxoSmithKline, which wouldand become France's new corporate standard bearer. Aventis makes the allergy drug Allegra and the anticlotting drug Lovenox; Sanofi-Synthélabo makes the stroke-prevention drug Plavix and the sleeping pill Ambien.
In an unusual step, the French government has encouraged the offer, the executives said. Motivated by protectionism and national pride, France's finance ministry privately pressed Aventis over the weekend to accept an offer from Sanofi-Synthélabo, the executives said. If the two fail to merge, both could be swallowed someday by Anglo-American rivals. And because the proposed takeover is bound to result in cost cutting, the French government seems willing to accept layoffs in the name of fashioning a French titan.
France's finance minister, Francis Mer, said a merger between Sanofi-Synthélabo and Aventis would be ''rather positive.'' In an interview on the French radio station Europe 1, he said that some of the most successful mergers were created by the ''grouping together of strengths between a certain number of players who share the same values, the same culture.''
But he insisted that the government could not control the fate of the deal.
''It's not a case of giving the green light or not,'' he said. ''They do what they feel they have to do.''
Still, the hostile offer shows that Anglo-American values have already taken over the corporate culture of France, where takeovers were once negotiated quietly and in a refined manner.
Sanofi-Synthélabo executives and their advisers have been holding informal, behind the scenes discussions with Aventis all weekend in an effort to reach a friendly agreement, the executives said. Those overtures by Sanofi-Synthélabo appear to have gained little traction, and the company will make its offer with 20 percent cash and 80 percent shares, executives said. Aventis has assembled a team of Wall Street advisers to mount a defense.
Consumers are not likely to notice many changes as a result of a merger, except perhaps that the combined companies would have more money for advertising. Medicines rarely become unavailable as a result of mergers. Even physicians may have a hard time noticing a change since the combined companies would probably retain nearly all of their sales people.
A merger with Aventis would give Sanofi-Synthélabo a powerful marketing presence in the United States, where the industry makes most of its profits because drug prices there are so much higher than in the rest of the world. Sanofi-Synthélabo will need such marketing muscle to develop the drugs it is shepherding through clinical trials.
A merged giant would probably be forced to sell Arixtra, an anticlotting drug from Sanofi-Synthélabo that competes directly with Aventis' more successful medicine, Lovenox. And it would also probably sell Camptosar, Aventis's cancer drug that competes with Sanofi-Synthélabo's more successful and newer drug, Eloxatin.
Hostile takeovers are almost unheard of in the pharmaceutical business because much of the value of drug companies is tied up in things that are both unpredictable and opaque to outsiders the undisclosed results of clinical trials for new drugs, patents whose scientific and legal underpinnings are often closely guarded secrets and scientists who can leave. Buying a drug company without being able to peek inside its labs and legal files is extremely risky.
Many analysts think that Aventis's pipeline of new drug candidates is uninspiring. In addition, many think that revenue from Allegra, Aventis's biggest seller, will decline gradually this year from $1.9 billion in 2002 and then plunge to $200 million next year, when the drug will probably lose patent protection. Some analysts predict that Aventis's total sales, which were $26 billion in 2002, will decline in the next year, forcing the company to cut staff.
For Aventis managers, these weaknesses might make a takeover a more appealing prospect, but the company has insisted that it wants to go it alone. Why Sanofi-Synthélabo is so eager to force the issue, however, is more difficult to explain and has some analysts speculating that Sanofi may be in worse shape than is widely assumed.
Publicly, Sanofi-Synthélabo seems the picture of health. While its reported sales last year amounted to $10.13 billion -- less than half of Aventis's -- its market valuation is higher because its future appears brighter. Sales of Plavix, a stroke-prevention drug that is the company's biggest seller, grew 40 percent, to an estimated $4 billion. And two drugs in its pipeline -- one for obesity and smoking cessation and another for irregular heart beats -- have analysts excited.
But almost every merger in the drug industry's long history has been found, in retrospect, to have been done because of undisclosed troubles that often left managers looking for outside help. In this case, Sanofi-Synthélabo's Achilles' heel could be its patents on Plavix. Apotex, a closely held Canadian generic company, has filed to sell a generic version of Plavix, saying the drug's patents are invalid. Sanofi-Synthélabo has sued Apotex in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Generic challenges to the patents of branded drugs have become so common that many analysts routinely discount them, especially with a drug as young as Plavix -- it has been on the market since only 1997. But Apotex's chairman, Barry Sherman, insists that his company will win its fight, and some analysts are starting to believe him.
''If Sanofi wants to do a deal this badly, it's probably because they perceive a weakness in their Plavix case,'' said Mara Goldstein, an analyst with CIBC World Markets. A loss in the Plavix case would also wound the Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, which sells the drug in the United States.
Sanofi-Synthélabo may also be pushed into a deal because 44 percent of its shares are held by Total, the French oil company, and L'Oréal, the French cosmetics concern. Total and L'Oréal recently declined to extend an agreement beyond December that had prevented them from selling their shares. A merger would dilute this stake, making a sale less likely to depress shares or lead to a hostile takeover.
An extended fight between the two companies could wound both as scientists and managers become distracted from their work.
Drawn-out mergers in the pharmaceutical business have left a troubled legacy. GlaxoSmithKline's merger in 2000 took nearly a year to complete, a period of uncertainty that many insiders say led to an exodus of scientific talent that devastated the company's pipeline.
Still, analysts say that business considerations are only part of the calculations that will be used to determine whether the deal proceeds.
''French pride is not at all trivial in the matter of consolidation, particularly when you consider that, without a deal, the French may lose a substantial player in the global drug market,'' said Catherine Arnold, an analyst with Bernstein Research.
The decision about whether to proceed with the hostile offer came after a weekend of marathon meetings at which the boards of Sanofi-Synthélabo's two largest shareholders, Total and L'Oréal, met separately to consider how to proceed.
Shares of Sanofi fell 6.9 percent, to 57.75, or $73.42, on Friday in trading on the Paris bourse. Aventis shares rose 1.7 percent, to 57.55. Shares of Aventis have risen nearly 14 percent in the last two weeks as speculation about a merger has mounted.
