The more things have changed with the Knicks in the last five weeks -- five new uniforms and three new sideline suits all governed by one kilowatt smile -- the more they seem to have stayed the same.
In their loss to Miami on Saturday night at Madison Square Garden, the Knicks resembled the December 2003 Knicks, before the arrival of Isiah Thomas, Stephon Marbury and Lenny Wilkens.
The Knicks committed six turnovers in the fourth quarter. Allan Houston sat on the bench for the final 16 minutes because of his sore right knee. Nobody could make a shot in the last four minutes.
On Friday night in Atlanta, Marbury made the game-winning 3-pointer to give the Knicks their fourth victory in five games. But as they wait for Marbury to get acclimated, the Knicks are still trying to overcome inconsistency, injury and poor execution.
After playing six games in nine nights, the Knicks took yesterday off before a four-game stretch against difficult opponents that starts tomorrow, when the defending champion San Antonio Spurs play at the Garden, and finishes Feb. 3 against the Pacers, the top team in the East.
''We definitely need the practice time,'' Keith Van Horn said, ''and I think, considering the stretch that we had, we also need the rest.''
Van Horn went through 12 games, starting on Dec. 20, where he averaged 20.6 points. After scoring 30 and 24 points in Wilkens's first two games as coach, Van Horn has averaged just 10.3 points in the last four.
Houston has been inconsistent, too, and on Saturday his knee problem flared again.
''It's tough because it needs time to get better, and I just don't have it,'' Houston said. ''I don't want to sit out because we're going through a stretch that could really make up some ground.''
The Knicks are 6-5 since the trade for Marbury and Penny Hardaway. But with Hardaway replacing Shandon Anderson in the rotation, and with Wilkens sometimes putting in Van Horn for Hardaway against smaller lineups, the adjustment to the new players has not been fluid.
Under Don Chaney, who was fired Jan. 14, the Knicks allowed an average of 93.3 points. Under Wilkens, they have held opponents to 88 points a game, but they allowed Miami, the worst-shooting team in the league, to shoot 46 percent on Saturday.
''We all need to focus in a little more and play the game a little smarter,'' said the reserve Michael Doleac, who scored 18 points against the Heat. ''Defense is definitely the starting point.''
REBOUNDS
ALLAN HOUSTON has spoken to CHARLIE WARD about Ward's excitement in returning to Madison Square Garden tomorrow with San Antonio. ISIAH THOMAS traded Ward in the STEPHON MARBURY deal, and the Spurs subsequently picked him up as a free agent. ''I know he felt like a burden had been lifted off of him because he put a lot of pressure on what was happening here on his shoulders,'' Houston said. ''I told him, 'It's not your fault.' I think he feels now that he's in a peaceful situation.'' In nine games with the Spurs, Ward is averaging 5.9 points and 2 assists.
BASKETBALL
