Awkward pauses, startled stares into a teleprompter, arrogant speeches and finally genuine shocks: until the presidential conventions, the 2004 Sundance Film Festival awards ceremony will have to do for those seeking such entertainment. The award winners were announced on Saturday night at a televised ceremony whose hosts were the young actors Zooey Deschanel and Jake Gyllenhaal.
The ceremony was carried live on the Sundance Channel and got off to a rousing start with a musical number, ''That's Independence,'' set to the tune of ''That's Entertainment.'' The song and dance mocked and embodied the pointedly alternative elements of indie film and was powered by the commitment of the performers, especially Mr. Gyllenhaal's. He may be ready to step into ''The Producers.''
The revelations continued when two films tied for the short-filmmaking jury prize: Shilpi Gupta's ''When the Storm Came'' and Ryan Fleck's ''Gowanus, Brooklyn.'' The world cinema audience awards for dramatic and documentary entries proved that it is a small world after all: both winners were Canadian. The French-language ''Seducing Doctor Lewis,'' directed by Jean-François Pouliot, took the dramatic category. The documentary winner was ''The Corporation,'' directed by Jennifer Abbott and Mark Achbar. (Mr. Achbar was also one of its writers and producers.)
Larry Gross won the Waldo Salt Screenwriting Award for his adaptation of Andre Dubus II's ''We Don't Live Here Anymore.'' Catherine Tambini and Carlos Sandoval's moving ''Farmingville,'' which they directed and produced, was selected for a special jury prize. That jury bestowed the Freedom of Expression Award to a Korean political film ''Repatriation,'' directed by Kim Dong-won. Cinematography prizes were presented to Ferne Pearlstein for the documentary ''Imelda'' and Nancy Schreiber for her inventive digital camerawork on the noirish-puzzle drama ''November.''
Morgan Spurlock picked up the documentary directing award for ''Super Size Me,'' his film about spending 30 days eating nothing but McDonald's food, meals that did not make him happy; he gained 25 pounds and put his health at risk. Debra Granik received the dramatic directing prize for ''Down to the Bone,'' a melodrama about a drug addict and a title that could describe its low-budget, digital camera filmmaking. Its star, Vera Farmiga, received a special jury prize for her jabbing, intense performance. The director Rodney Evans took home the other dramatic jury special prize for his film ''Brother to Brother.''
The documentary grand jury prize went to the director Ondi Timoner for her groovy alternative music feature, ''DiG!'' The dramatic grand jury prize winner was the experimental ''Primer,'' directed by Shane Carruth, who also wrote, produced and appeared in the picture. ''Primer'' also attracted the Alfred P. Sloan Prize, for films that have a scientific component to their plots; the $20,000 prize was nearly triple the ''Primer'' budget.
Many of the awards show's scripted introductions were such lengthy, recondite mouthfuls that they also seemed eligible for the Sloan Prize. But the winners caught the audience off guard so often that the ceremony reminded attendees that predicting award winners at Sundance is still a long way from being a science.
