On a day when 17,533 fans fought for their team, one man fought for his job.
In the Nets' first home game since they were sold to Bruce C. Ratner, who plans to move the team to Brooklyn, a near-capacity crowd flocked to Continental Arena on Sunday afternoon, bringing with it an air of defiance and desperation.
The fans could certainly relate to the Nets' oft-jilted coach, Byron Scott, who started the game stomping on the sideline and ended it watching from the locker room. When a call did not go the Nets' way in the third quarter, Scott was ejected for the first time since his first season, and he was cheered to the exit.
While Scott listened to the broadcast of the fourth quarter, his top assistant, Lawrence Frank, guided a 110-91 victory over Boston. The Nets snapped a five-game losing streak that had put Scott's employment status back in jeopardy.
Scott began jawing with the referee Luis Grillo in the first half and muttered to Grillo after an offensive foul was called on Aaron Williams with 1 minute 44 seconds remaining in the third quarter. Scott was ejected after only one technical foul. He rushed onto the court and had to be restrained from going after Grillo.
''Was I on edge?'' Scott said. ''A little jumpy? Not really. I just thought they were allowing them to get away with some things. But on one tech? Jeez. Give me a tech and give me another one, but not on one tech.''
When Scott left, the Nets were ahead by 20 points. The team that could hardly make a layup on the road last week shot 50 percent, led by double digits for the entire second half and cracked 100 points by the middle of the fourth quarter. The Nets' 29 turnovers were partly a byproduct of their frenetic pace.
Whenever the Nets are wobbling, the Celtics come along at just the right time to steady them. The Nets' collective desire can usually be gauged by their rebounding effort, and they outrebounded Boston, 55-32, and beat the Celtics for the ninth time in a row.
The Nets are not the only ones who like seeing Boston come around. The Celtics were part of the reason for the inspired turnout Sunday, but they were not much to watch. Although Ricky Davis scored a game-high 26 points, Boston was 4 of 23 from 3-point range and fell two games behind the Nets in the Atlantic Division.
''I hope our fans are getting all the games in while they still can,'' said Kenyon Martin, who had 20 points and 15 rebounds. ''We're still here and we'll keep playing for them. We appreciate it that they came.''
Jason Kidd, who had 11 assists but committed 7 turnovers and shot 2 of 12 from the field, said: ''It's great for New Jersey to still support us. We have nothing to do with the business side. What we can do is play basketball. The crowd was great, and hopefully they will continue to be here.''
Before the game, Scott walked through the tunnel and took a look around. He fully expected his players to win, but he was unsure of the reception they would get. When he saw fans filling the upper bowl, he was taken aback. ''Pleasantly surprised,'' he said.
The Nets might have been equally jarred to see him thrown out. Martin said he was glad that Scott ''stood up for himself.''
Kidd said he was ''proud of Coach.''
Scott insisted he was not trying to make a statement, but it seems clear that if he is going to leave the Meadowlands, he will have to be tossed.
''Everybody was on edge today, and sometimes somebody is going to crack,'' said Lucious Harris, who came off the bench and scored 14 points, his highest total since November. ''That's what we needed -- some fire from everybody.''
What promised to be a circus atmosphere -- with protests outside and speculation about Scott swirling inside -- became significantly more animated. First, a bird got loose in the arena and flew around the stands. Then Martin dunked and flexed enthusiastically for the fans. Richard Jefferson also struck an elaborate pose after a 3-pointer at the third-quarter buzzer.
But the ending was the most surreal scene of all. Frank, who would probably become the interim coach if Scott were fired this season, finished the game that could have finished Scott. A tireless gym rat who is about a foot shorter than most of the players, Frank shouted instructions throughout the fourth quarter.
''It was cute,'' said Jefferson, who scored 25 points. ''He was having a little trouble seeing over everyone, but it was really cute.''
When the game was over, Frank received congratulations from Kidd, a hug from Martin and a slap on the back from Jefferson. In a joking manner, a member of the team's support staff finally said to Frank, ''Get off the floor.''
For now, at least, the team belongs to Scott. No matter what has happened in the past week, he and the Nets found that they still had a place in New Jersey.
BASKETBALL
