A New Jersey appeals court, noting that sex offenders who are involuntarily committed after completing their sentences can face lifelong detention, has authorized the release of those who can establish that they could adhere to restrictions that would substantially reduce the risk of their committing further offenses.
The decision, issued last week, did not order the release of the man who brought the case, a 68-year-old committed after serving two prison terms for molesting young boys. Instead, the court returned the case to the trial court with instructions that if the man proposed specific conditions approved by experts, the judge should take them into account in deciding whether the man would still be ''highly likely'' to commit another offense, the standard required by law for continued commitment.
The conditions, lawyers say, could include regular psychotherapy, electronic monitoring and supervision by family members or social service agencies.
None of the more than 300 men who have been deemed dangerous and involuntarily committed since the law took effect in 1999 has ever been recommended for release by the state, said a spokesman for the Department of Human Services. A few have been released by judges who found that the commitment law did not apply to them.
The law is one of several enacted to crack down on sex offenders after a 7-year-old girl, Megan Kanka, was raped and murdered in 1994 by a neighbor previously convicted of child molestation. New Jersey's sex offender commitment law is generally considered one of the most strict of the 16 in the nation.
The decision, by the Appellate Division of Superior Court, came a month after a state Supreme Court ruling that was applauded by defense lawyers. In that case, the court ruled that before entering a plea bargain, a sex offender must be told that the deal could lead to his indefinite detention. ''A more onerous impairment of a liberty interest is difficult to imagine,'' the court said.
John S. Furlong, a defense lawyer and co-editor of ''A Megan's Law Sourcebook,'' said the two decisions ''signal that the appellate courts of New Jersey are beginning to scrutinize these cases in a way that is going to fundamentally change, at long last, the way the attorney general does business.''
Officials at the attorney general's office, which identifies prison inmates who are subject to commitment and then handles their commitment hearings, said they had not decided whether to appeal the Appellate Division ruling in the case, which is titled In the Matter of the Commitment of J.J.F.
Defense lawyers said that while they were encouraged by the decision, they did not expect many releases soon. A patient seeking release would have to make realistic plans for supervision as well as living arrangements, employment and, in most cases, therapy tailored for sex offenders. And the trial court judge would have to evaluate the plan's chances of effectively reducing the risk to the public.
The two trial court judges who hear sex offender commitment cases have often said the higher courts had not given them the authority to order a conditional discharge.
But the appellate division said that ''conditional release should always be a consideration'' for a hearing judge ''in view of the potential alternative of permanent confinement.''
The sex offenders committed by the state are housed in two former prisons, in Kearny and Avenel, which are run by the Department of Corrections, while the state's division of mental health provides therapy.
Mr. Furlong said Judge Michael P. King, who wrote the appellate division's unpublished opinion, ''is thinking through these global issues as they apply not only to the New Jersey and federal judiciary but as they apply to these human beings -- people who appear to be older, aware, insightful and willing to conform their behavior to societal norms.''
Mr. Furlong said that while the worst sex offenders would remain in prison for years, most of those now civilly committed had served in the state's prison for sex offenders, which houses many less violent inmates.
''Let's acknowledge that it costs $100,000 a year to house each of these guys,'' he said, ''and then possibly save the state of New Jersey millions a year by coming up with some solutions that house them someplace else without an appreciable increase in risk that they'll reoffend.''
The Supreme Court ruling last month came in a case brought by Jerry L. Bellamy, 52, who was civilly committed after serving an 18-month prison sentence for criminal sexual contact.
The charges stemmed from a 1999 incident in which Mr. Bellamy went with an 18-year-old woman to an Atlantic City motel room. The woman later accused him of forcing her to have sexual intercourse, but Mr. Bellamy maintained that the woman had agreed to have sex for money. Charged with sexual assault, he pleaded guilty to fourth-degree criminal sexual contact, the least serious charge of its nature.
After he finished his sentence and was committed, Mr. Bellamy sought to withdraw the plea, arguing that neither the trial judge nor his lawyer had warned him that by pleading guilty to a sex offense, his second, he risked civil commitment after completing his prison sentence.
