The leader of Hezbollah, Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, made a rare public appearance here on Sunday to trumpet as a victory a prisoner-exchange deal with Israel, in which some 430 Palestinians, Lebanese and other Arab prisoners will be swapped this week for a kidnapped Israeli businessman and three Israeli soldiers, presumed dead.
''This is a gift to all the Arabs, at the forefront of whom are the Palestinian people,'' Sheik Nasrallah said at a heavily guarded news conference in a mosque in a southern suburb of Beirut.
Sheik Nasrallah -- general secretary of the Shiite Muslim militant group that the United States considers one of the most potent terrorist organizations -- also held out the possibility that not all of the three Israeli soldiers kidnapped along the Lebanese border in October 2000 were dead, as the Israelis assume.
''On the day of the exchange, you will see who is alive and who is dead,'' he said in response to a question about the men's fates, which Hezbollah has refused to discuss in the past. ''Leave it until then.''
The complicated deal, sealed after months of painstaking negotiations with a German mediator, was announced Saturday, amid some criticism in Israel that it was lopsided and could encourage more kidnappings. Prime Minister Ariel Sharon, speaking after a cabinet meeting on Sunday, defended the deal as an unavoidable way to bring its soldiers home. But he said it was ''not an easy decision.''
''Rare are the times when the government deals with a torturous back and forth on a issue of principles and morals,'' he said. ''In my opinion, the cabinet took the correct, moral and responsible decision.''
He emphasized the importance of a second phase of the deal: in the coming months, Hezbollah is required to give what Mr. Sharon said was ''significant, proven and clear information'' about the fate of Capt. Ron Arad, an Israeli Air Force navigator shot down in Lebanon in 1986 and captured by Lebanese guerrillas.
In exchange for that information, Israel will be required to hand over a Lebanese prisoner not included in the release this week: Samir Qantar, a Lebanese sentenced to life in prison for an attack in 1979 that killed an Israeli man and his 4-year-old daughter in their home.
Hezbollah had been strongly demanding Mr. Qantar's release, an issue that reportedly helped scuttle an earlier and exhaustive round of negotiations on the deal last fall. Israeli officials have said that Captain Arad, who has not been heard from for more than a decade, was taken to Iran. Israeli commentators have speculated that this next phase in the deal may involve Iran, which along with Syria is the main financial backer of Hezbollah.
Sheik Nasrallah, whose group has claimed no knowledge about Captain Arad's fate, said he hoped ''to come to some results'' in providing new information.
The deal is one of the few signs of movement in the deadlocked struggle between Israel and the Palestinians and its Arab neighbors, Lebanon and Syria. The American-sponsored plan to revive peace negotiations between the Israelis and Palestinians has halted, and recent hopes of renewing the dialogue between Israel and Syria seemed also to end after Hezbollah fired a missile at an Israeli bulldozer clearing a bomb last week on the Lebanese border, killing one Israeli soldier. Israel blamed Syria, as one of Hezbollah's sponsors, for the attack.
The exchange of prisoners, or their remains, is scheduled to begin Thursday, Sheik Nasrallah and Israeli officials said. Then, the Israeli businessman, Elhanan Tannenbaum, kidnapped in the United Arab Emirates in 2000, and the three soldiers, Adi Avitan, Benny Avraham and Omar Sawayed, will be handed over to German mediators in Beirut, to be flown to Israel via Germany.
Sheik Nasrallah said 23 Lebanese and some of the roughly dozen Arab prisoners would be flown to Beirut. The Palestinians are to be released in the West Bank and in Gaza, he said.
Most prominent among the Lebanese are two guerrilla leaders, Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid, who was seized in 1989, and Mustafa Dirani, who was captured in 1994 and was involved in Captain Arad's capture in Lebanon. Also to be released is a German, Stefan Smyrek, who had been accused in 1997 of spying for Hezbollah.
On Friday, the Israelis will bring to the Lebanese border the remains of 59 Lebanese and Palestinians killed during the Israeli occupation of southern Lebanon, which ended in 2000, Sheik Nasrallah said.
At the news conference here, Sajed Obeid, 21, Sheik Obeid's son, said his family was busy preparing for his return. ''We've been waiting 14 years for this moment,'' he said.
Like Sheik Nasrallah, Mr. Obeid cast the deal as a triumph for Hezbollah, whose visibility in Lebanon as the main resistance force to Israel has declined since Israel withdrew in 2000.
''This is an achievement, a victory, for Lebanon and the resistance,'' he said. ''This not less of a victory as the one in 2000.''
Some Israeli commentators and right-wing politicians worried that the deal rewards terrorism and could lead to other kidnappings.
''The price is heavy,'' wrote Ben Caspit in the newspaper Maariv. ''The achievement is dubious.''
Asked if Hezbollah would seek other hostages if these deals fell through, Sheik Nasrallah said at the news conference: ''Yes. Of course.''
