As bankers for Hollinger International pushed ahead with plans to sell its most valuable newspaper assets in Britain, the Barclay brothers prepared to take control of the company, making a showdown inevitable.
Early this week, David and Frederick Barclay, through their newspaper company, Press Holdings International, will tender an offer for all of Hollinger Inc., the company that holds Conrad Black's controlling stake in Hollinger International, an executive who has been briefed on their plans said on Sunday.
A week ago, Press Holdings International had agreed with Lord Black to buy his 78 percent stake in Hollinger Inc.
Over the weekend, meanwhile, bankers from Lazard lined up potential bidders for two Hollinger International newspapers, The Daily Telegraph of London and The Sunday Telegraph, as well as The Spectator magazine. Among the potential bidders were the brokerage house Collins Stewart Tullett, the private equity firm Candover Investments and other British newspapers.
The negotiations came after Hollinger Inc. notified Hollinger International late last week that it had revised Hollinger International's bylaws so that no assets could be sold without unanimous approval from the board. Although Lord Black is no longer chairman or chief executive, he remains on the board.
Both sides seem convinced that they have the legal right to the newspapers Hollinger International owns. Hollinger International is incorporated in Delaware.
''The understanding from Lazard is this is a full-blown sale process,'' said Nick Miles, a spokesman for Collins Stewart in London. ''For whatever reason, be it Delaware laws or something else, these assets can be sold.''
A Lazard spokesman declined to comment.
Collins Stewart hopes to buy the newspaper group and immediately take it public, Mr. Miles said. The brokerage firm has done similar deals for Northumbrian Water and Centerparcs, an amusement park chain. It is too early to estimate a price Collins Stewart would pay, Mr. Miles said.
A spokeswoman for Candover in London would not comment on the timing or size of any deal for the Telegraph newspapers, but confirmed the group's participation. ''It is widely known they would be very interested,'' she said.
The private equity firm 3i Group in London has also been named in British newspapers as a potential bidder, but a spokeswoman said on Sunday that the group was not interested.
Richard Desmond, the owner of The Express newspaper chain, indicated through a spokesman in November that he was interested in the Telegraph newspapers. His spokesman could not be reached on Sunday. Daily Mail and General Trust, owner of The Daily Mail, has also expressed interest in the Telegraph papers, executives close to the situation said.
But the Barclay brothers seem to consider these would-be buyers irrelevant.
An executive briefed on Press Holdings International's plans said it was clear that Hollinger International ''cannot make any major asset disposals without Hollinger Inc. shareholder approval.''
Press Holdings International has to wait 35 days after tendering its 100 percent offer for Hollinger Inc. before taking control of the company.
