This year's Sundance Film Festival featured some new perspectives on familiar territory.
''Maria Full of Grace,'' a melodrama produced by HBO and written and directed by Joshua Marston, is the tale of Maria (Catalina Sandino Moreno), a young Colombian who becomes a drug ''mule'' -- she swallows small wrapped bundles of drugs and smuggles them into the United States -- to escape from her circumscribed life.
Even the old-school cop drama ''Miami Vice'' went where others had gone before with this kind of material. But Mr. Marston, directing his first feature, shows his wiliness by changing the look of the landscape. He invokes the dramatic purview of the British social realist director Ken Loach, whose films like ''Poor Cow'' (1967) and ''Sweet Sixteen'' (2002) depict a world where young characters trying to claw a way out of poverty consistently end up with broken, soiled dreams. Mr. Marston also adds the journalistic bravura of ''Pixote,'' the Brazilian director Hector Babenco's tense, spare film that dramatized the lives of the South American underclass. (Mr. Babenco's latest movie, ''Carandiru,'' was also shown here this year.)
''Maria,'' which was a dramatic audience award winner here, fits into the genre of ordinary lives shattered that has become an HBO staple in the last year, with films like ''American Splendor'' and ''Elephant.'' But it has a plaintiveness that could have been lifted from a 1930's Warner Brothers muckraking melodrama. Because of its urgency the movie could have been shot in black and white, yet the director inflects the material with an astringent naturalism that keeps the sentimentality at bay. (At times he seems to be responding to the stylization of Steven Soderbergh's ''Traffic,'' and Maria's consumption of the drug-filled pellets brings to mind a scene from ''Traffik,'' the 1989 British mini-series that inspired Mr. Soderbergh's movie.)
Ms. Moreno, in her first film, has a droll, nascent star power and a wariness that contradicts her character's impetuousness. She's all emotional contrasts; she shows sensitivity only when she's alone and can comprehend how her actions ruin the lives of those around her. Mr. Marston shows a trust in unproven performers that seems almost foolhardy until his gambles continue to pay off.
In terms of overfamiliarity, Vondie Curtis-Hall's story of a behind-bars journey from thug-life viciousness to open-mindedness has a title that sounds as if it were picked up at a secondhand store: ''Redemption.''
Based on the true story of Stanley Williams, a founder of the California street gang the Crips, the picture is relentless and quick; it has the swiftness of a coldhearted criminal. Mr. Hall's star, Jamie Foxx, provides a deft power. He'll rub his big, hardened hands over his shaved head as he sizes up a moment; he knows how to conduct himself as a threat, and he never softens, even after his transformation begins. The temblors of humor that ripple through Mr. Foxx's portrayal come so fast they seem illusory. It's an epic and transfixing performance. Originally made for the FX network, the film is slightly hobbled by its television roots.
So much material at this year's festival was financed by television entities looking to break into features that young, untested directors may wonder if there's a place for them in the ''independent'' filmmaking world of Sundance. FX was testing the waters to see if ''Redemption'' was worthy of theatrical release; Showtime had several movies, too. (''Maria'' is likely to get theatrical exposure, and is deserving of it.)
Amusingly, HBO was initially resistant to putting its products in theaters, contending that if the films failed, the luster of a cable premiere would be damaged. Apparently the successes of ''Real Women Have Curves,'' ''American Splendor'' and ''Elephant'' have led to a policy of selective reconsideration. And several of the documentaries here were made by Viewers Like You: a portion of the financing was provided by PBS.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
