Almost all of the dozen or so polls in the papers and on television here this weekend have Senator John Kerry with a lead of 15 to 20 percentage points going into Tuesday's Democratic primary.
But based on the track record of four years ago, they could be way off the mark.
Then, most of the polls published just before the voting picked the winners in the primaries, but they missed the margin of victory by a mile.
Most had John McCain with a narrow lead over George W. Bush in the Republican primary. One, the American Research Group, forecast a tie. In fact, Mr. McCain won by 48 percent to 30 percent.
On the Democratic side in 2000, prominent final polls broadcast by CBS News and CNN had Al Gore with a double-digit lead over Bill Bradley. Mr. Gore ended up winning by 50 percent to 46 percent.
The New Hampshire primaries are hard to predict for two main reasons, said Linda L. Fowler, director of the Rockefeller Center for Social Science at Dartmouth. First, the rules make it uncommonly difficult for pollsters to determine who is going to vote. Second, New Hampshire voters tend to change their minds at the last moment.
Under the rules, voters can register at the polls on the day of the primary, and about 10 percent of those who voted in the 2000 primaries did so.
In addition, 38 percent of the registered voters are independents. They can vote in whichever party primary they choose. Presumably, since the Democratic contest is the only one this week, a larger proportion of the undeclared voters will vote Democratic than did so four years ago when both parties had primaries. But the pollsters have no way of knowing what that proportion will be.
As for voters deciding late how to vote, 10 percent of Republicans and 15 percent of Democrats said as they left polling places in 2000 that they had not made up their minds until that day, and 36 percent of Republicans and 47 percent of Democrats said they had decided in the last week.
Put another way, researchers at Dartmouth who interviewed the same voters in 2000 a day or two before the election and a day or two afterward found that only 70 percent of those who said they planned to vote for Mr. McCain actually did so. For the other candidates, the figure was even lower: 50 percent for Mr. Bush, 50 percent for Mr. Bradley and 60 percent for Mr. Gore.
The polls published on Sunday counted 5 to 15 percent of likely voters as undecided.
''I have no way of knowing whether the people who say now they are going to vote for Kerry will really do it,'' Ms. Fowler said.
Other factors can also throw off the polls. One is that an increasing number of people now rely solely on cellphones. These potential voters cannot be reached by the pollsters, who survey a random sample based on all residential telephone numbers in a geographic area.
Another factor is that New Hampshire is one of the fastest growing states outside the Sun Belt. Pollsters cannot be sure how the demographics, and therefore the politics, have changed since the last election.
The findings of the polls here have changed drastically since the Iowa caucuses last Monday. Until then, all showed Howard Dean with a solid lead. But since Mr. Kerry's victory in the caucuses and Dr. Dean's raucous speech afterward, Mr. Kerry's support here has boomed and Dr. Dean's has fallen sharply.
All this uncertainty has not discouraged the pollsters from plying their trade. Counting all the published polls and the private polls conducted by the candidates, Mr. Smith at the University of New Hampshire calculated that in the month before the 2000 primary, 325,000 New Hampshire households were called by pollsters.
That was more than one-third of the state's voting-age population. Mr. Smith called it ''the polling equivalent of saturation bombing.''
But when the polls turn out to be off base as they were here in 2000, it is embarrassing to the pollsters, Mr. Smith said. Elections, he observed, are the only time when pollsters' reliability is measured.
When a pollster finds that, for example, 50 percent of Americans view President Bush's job performance as favorable or that 34 percent say the economy is getting better, there is no way to know whether these are accurate findings.
But pollsters' careers can be made or broken by how close they come to predicting election results.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE POLLS
