One should not confuse the improbable with the impossible. That dictum, sometimes credited to a P. G. Wodehouse character, frequently applies in a bridge context.
It did on the diagramed deal, from a game on the OKBridge network admiringly reported by Chris Willenken. He held the North cards, and his partner was Fern Lindsay of Greenwich, Conn.
The auction began normally, with a one-diamond bid, a one-spade overcall, a diamond raise and a two-heart bid. West's leap to five diamonds was clever: he did not expect to make this game but was anticipating having to save against four hearts. This advance save challenged North, who could have doubled and collected a penalty of 300. But he guessed wrong by bidding five hearts, reaching a contract that appears to have no play. East expressed his opinion with a double.
Double-dummy defense, starting with a low-diamond lead and a club shift from East, beats the contract by two tricks. Normal defense beats it by one trick. West led the diamond ace, denying the king in his methods, and could have continued with a low diamond, guided by his partner's encouraging signal. Cashing the club ace would also have made sure of three tricks for the defense.
But West shifted to a low spade, judging it improbable that South would play low from dummy, even if she held the jack in her hand. But it was not impossible. Lindsay thought carefully about the West hand. It surely included exactly five diamonds, in view of East's raise, and therefore a heart void was virtually certain. West's distribution was likely to be 3-0-5-5, or perhaps 4-0-5-4. Given West's active bidding, he was likely to have the spade queen, and South took into account that East, holding that card, might have bid one no-trump.
So Lindsay played low from the dummy and was vindicated when she was able to win with the jack. She then crossed to the heart ace, finding the expected 3-0 trump split. She threw two clubs on dummy's spade winners, and the position was this:
A spade winner was led from dummy, threatening to discard the club king, and East was helpless. The best he could do was to ruff with the heart jack. Then the declarer could overruff, trump a diamond and throw the club king on a spade. East could make his heart king whenever he pleased.
The doubled contract was made, and East could remind his partner, Do not confuse the improbable with the impossible.
BRIDGE
