In the photograph, taken on a street corner in 1989, Ana Martinez holds the hand of her daughter, Jasmin Andino, then 3. Both of them are smiling.
''After that she stopped walking,'' Ms. Martinez said, gazing at the picture, frayed around the edges, in her bedroom in their Bronx apartment. ''She started to lose her balance. When she was 5 years old, they put her in a wheelchair.''
As Ms. Martinez spoke, Jasmin, 17, blurted out something from the next room, where she sat in an elaborate wheelchair that embraces her twisted torso and crippled limbs so thoroughly that it is barely stirred by their violent spasms.
Jasmin utters only single words, which are often unintelligible, from a drooling mouth. She laughs sometimes, the laughter coming in piercing shrieks, though her mother does not always know what she is laughing about.
Jasmin's feet curl inward at the ankles, and her gnarled fingers flutter uncontrollably.
Ms. Martinez looked at the photograph again.
''At that age she was able to talk. She was able to put words together, like, 'I'm hungry, let's go.'''
Jasmin, her long black hair pulled into a ponytail, bowed her head; it tires her to hold it up all day.
''I ask myself: why my daughter?'' said Ms. Martinez, 44.
The medical reason is ataxia, the name for a group of degenerative diseases of the nervous system that can be inherited or sometimes acquired. There is no cure.
The deeper answer to Ms. Martinez's question is more difficult to come by.
She already has had her share of grief, losing her other daughter, Karla, at 17, to a form of ataxia known as Friedreich's in 1996.
Jasmin can no longer hold a glass or feed herself, and doctors have said that her condition will only grow worse.
Ms. Martinez and a home health aide, Marie Lamerique, bathe, change and spoon-feed Jasmin. The work is especially difficult for Ms. Martinez because she has many health problems of her own. She is in remission from leukemia and is weakened by anemia, and a breast cancer operation left her unable to use her left arm fully.
For years, Ms. Martinez, who came to the United States from Honduras in 1984 and is separated from Jasmin's father, had great difficulty getting her daughter out of the apartment. It has a three-step stairway to street level, an obstacle able-bodied people would barely notice but a mountain to her and Jasmin. The heavy wheelchair was also hard for Ms. Martinez to handle.
When she did take Jasmin out, buses often did not stop for them, Ms. Martinez said.
Life grew a little easier this month with the help of New Alternatives for Children, a member of the Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
After two years of trying with New Alternatives' help, Ms. Martinez got a ramp for the stairs and a bath chair from Medicaid, said Vanessa Acevedo, a social worker with the agency.
The Neediest Cases fund contributed an additional $2,217.60 to pay for a collapsible stroller, which makes it easier for Ms. Martinez to take Jasmin out.
The stroller was delivered to Ms. Martinez and Jasmin on Jan. 6, the Day of the Three Kings, a holiday many Latino Catholics celebrate with the giving of gifts.
A few days later, Ms. Martinez talked about how pleased she was to get the ramp and the stroller. ''Now maybe we can go out more often,'' she said, and mentioned restaurants, shopping and movies.
She then knelt down by the wheelchair and tickled her daughter's stomach. Jasmin looked into her eyes, and her mother smiled.
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,496,076.03  Recorded Thursday: 6,800.00
Total: $7,502,876.03  Last year to date: $7,682,882.89
