APPRENTICE TO THE FLOWER POET Z. -- A Novel  By Debra Weinstein  242 pages. Random House. $23.95.
''Apprentice to the Flower Poet Z.'' is a novel narrated by Annabelle Goldsmith, a young woman who dreams of making her mark as a poet. Glancing around a library one day, she tells herself: ''I will end up here too someday, unread, dust-coated; another lost document. And that's only if I'm successful.''
The world of poetry may be rarefied, but Debra Weinstein now gives it something usually associated with magazines and movies: a tell-all novel in the roman à clef, ingrate-assistant genre. Perhaps she is writing pure fiction. Perhaps she knows a great-lady poet or two. But it's a credit to this author and her amusing debut novel that the poetic proclivities described here have an authentic ring.
Annabelle likes to point out that in the Long Island town where she grew up, Walt Whitman was a shopping mall. Now, as the book begins, she is looking to enter a very different realm. She finds herself entering the orbit of the famous Professor Z., a commanding personage whose work is legendary. ''She could transform a garden into a flower bed, a flower bed into a wedding bed,'' Annabelle notes. ''Flowers violated other flowers, and you actually believed it.''
In an account that is witty and generous (without the cruel streak to which it might lend itself), Annabelle describes the golden moment when she first lands herself a position in Z.'s household. ''I need an assistant who will be -- and I don't mean to insult you, but I'll be blunt -- wallpaper,'' she is told. And: ''Someone who will dedicate herself to me the way that Véra Nabokov devoted her life to her husband's literary career.''
Annabelle is undaunted: '' 'Professor Z.,' I said, 'I am that person.' ''
The handmaiden's responsibilities turn out to be somewhat different from what Annabelle expected. For instance she is asked to provide ''prescription cat food'' to a woman ''reputed to be the meanest literary critic alive,'' because this woman has been helpful to Z.'s career. She is asked to dry rose petals that can be included in Z.'s favored correspondence. And then there are the errands. ''I like deep, rich colors for my hand towels -- blues, burgundies and purples,'' says Z., who is perpetually descriptive. ''I like the paper to be thick and textured.''
Fine. The payoff for such service will be the opportunity to bask in the aura of Z. and her esteemed fellow poets. Won't it? When Z. convenes her putative salon, isn't the talk supposed to turn eloquent? ''Instead,'' Annabelle reports, ''they spoke about margaritas and dental work, and shared strategies for getting out of jury duty.''
Feet of clay notwithstanding, Z. takes her work seriously. It is so serious that she farms some of it out: Annabelle is offered $2 a pop to write descriptions of flowers. Figuring that 250 of these (''Wisteria: like hysteria only it clings to a building'') will at least get her a leather jacket, Annabelle cooperates. But this is early in the book, while she is still awestruck enough to appreciate the early poems from Z.'s ''household rhymes'' period. Like:
In the garden, a swarm of red ants
Remember to buy diapers and training pants.
Clearly Ms. Weinstein (herself the author of a book of poems called ''Rodent Angel'') has fun with her material. But her book also takes its heroine and her ambitions seriously. Real reverence for (and allusions to) Emily Dickinson figures in this novel, as does Annabelle's early admiration for Sylvia Plath. It turns out that a Long Island teenager can find herself packed off to a psychiatrist's office if she goes around quoting Plath lines like ''Daddy, you bastard, I'm through.''
While she draws Z. memorably and gives her narrator a strong, sympathetic voice, Ms. Weinstein does not entirely avoid an occupational hazard: having her alter ego overshadowed by the novel's central figure, so that the book is slacker when Annabelle's own life assumes center stage.
In her romance with a fellow poetry peon named Harry, whose main kink is the sexual fantasy that he and Annabelle are James and Nora Joyce, a little bit goes a long way. It's worth noting that Harry has his own great writer to attend to, and that even though this one happens to be dead, literary archivists are still sifting through the scrawled-upon Juicy Fruit wrappers that were found in his pockets.
Ms. Weinstein is sly enough to leave no doubt about her own abilities, stymied or otherwise. By the time phrases like ''describe more fully'' and ''couch in flower metaphor'' begin turning up in the midst of Z.'s creations, this apprentice -- so-called because Z. values her so much more than she would a mere assistant -- has learned to deliver a flourish or two. ''The only wandering plant I could find was the wandering jew,'' she writes with deadpan earnestness to Z. about one research assignment, ''but I didn't think you wanted to bring religion into your poem.''
The least interesting aspect of this agile book is its string of revelations about Z.'s romances and family. Whiffs of scandal are easy to come by. The exaltations of poetry, as both Ms. Weinstein and her heroine recognize, are more precious and rare.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
