Israel's high court on Sunday suspended for 30 days the state's efforts to expel the Palestinian father of an Israeli soldier, pending a hearing on granting him the right to remain in Israel.
The Palestinian, Adel Hussein, 52, has been living illegally in Israel for years, passing as an Israeli Arab while seeking permission to remain legally, as a citizen or resident.
His ex-wife and son, Israeli Jews, have been lobbying on his behalf. The family's circumstances were first reported in The New York Times on Nov. 9, and are now being widely covered in Israel.
Mr. Hussein said he fled his home in a refugee camp beside the West Bank city of Tulkarm a few years ago after militants shot at his door, accusing him of being a Jew. He says he will be killed if he returns.
On Friday, border policemen making random checks stopped Mr. Hussein near the seaside Israeli town of Netanya as he rode in a taxi to an engagement party. Unable to produce valid identification, he was driven through an Israeli checkpoint and expelled to the West Bank within four hours, dropped by the side of the road near the town of Qalqilya.
Later that night, his son, Sgt. Muhammad Hussein, 21, smuggled his father back through the checkpoint in the car of an Israeli photographer.
Didi Rothschild, the family's lawyer, said a lawyer from Israel's Interior Ministry called him on Sunday morning to ask to postpone a hearing on Adel Hussein's status planned for Sunday before the high court. After an agreement between the lawyers, the court suspended any action against Mr. Hussein until the hearing. No date has been set.
Mr. Rothschild said public pressure was helping. ''It seems to me that if there will be strong opposition to the Interior office in Israel and outside Israel -- and it seems now that's what going on -- then probably the Interior office will give him citizenship,'' he said.
On Sunday, Israeli newspapers featured Mr. Hussein, and radio and television showed him describing his situation in fluent Hebrew.
As Mr. Hussein went for an espresso with his son in Tel Aviv on Sunday -- a walk that would have been highly risky for both before the court's action -- strangers called from passing cars or stopped him to shake his hand. ''You're staying with us, right?'' one man asked.
On his lapel, Mr. Hussein wore a silver pin of a flying bird to represent his new sense of liberty. ''I haven't felt such freedom since 1999,'' he said. ''I can walk with my son anywhere.''
As for Sergeant Hussein, before Sunday, he was breaking the law by merely meeting with his father, let alone smuggling him in from the West Bank. But military officials say they are aware of his special situation and are trying to help him.
Last year, Israel tightened its restriction on ''family reunification,'' saying Palestinians were using fake marriages to move into Israel and threaten its security.
