Vodafone is in a bind.
The company, the world's largest cellular telephone carrier, has long sought control of a major player in the United States to provide a strategic missing link for its far-reaching empire. So, when AT&amp;T Wireless announced last week that it was putting itself on the block, Wall Street speculation was rampant that Vodafone would swoop in with a takeover offer.
That, the speculation went, would start a bidding war with Cingular, the second-largest wireless company in the United States and the current favorite to buy AT&amp;T Wireless, the No.3.
Vodafone has the financial wherewithal to make a serious run at AT&amp;T Wireless, which has 21.9 million subscribers and is expected to sell for more than $30 billion.
And certainly Vodafone has strong strategic incentives. Verizon's C.D.M.A.-based network format is not compatible with the G.S.M.-based standard that Vodafone uses elsewhere in the world, while the AT&amp;T Wireless network is built upon a variant of G.S.M. Vodafone would prefer that its customers worldwide all be G.S.M. users, to make it easier for them to use the same phones everywhere.
But Vodafone, built by an acquisition spree in the 1990's, has a big problem: If it wants to buy AT&amp;T Wireless it must unravel its complicated and sometimes contentious investment in Verizon Wireless. Although Verizon is the largest mobile phone company in the United States, with 36 million subscribers, Vodafone is the minority partner, with a stake of about 45 percent.
Also, it would probably not be practical for Vodafone to buy AT&amp;T Wireless, and simultaneously fulfill another of its long-held ambitions: to take over SFR, the French mobile phone company owned by Vivendi.
Vodafone, which has some 130 million subscribers worldwide, wants SFR because it would fill a gap for the company in Europe. In November, in fact, Vodafone's chief executive, Arun Sarin, bluntly told investors during a presentation to shareholders, ''Our aspiration is to buy it, and you can quote me on that.''
Vodafone officials declined to comment for this article. But people close to the company say the prospect of bidding for AT&amp;T Wireless and gaining full control of a large slice of the United States market has put executives at Vodafone's headquarters in Newbury, England, on full alert.
The time would appear ripe for Vodafone to seek to shed its stake in Verizon and make AT&amp;T Wireless its American surrogate. In the summer, Vodafone will have its annual opportunity to demand that Verizon buy out Vodafone's 45 percent share, and this year might finally be the time to insist on it.
If it does not bid for AT&amp;T Wireless, Vodafone would face the possibility of never having a big, stand-alone presence in the United States. Vodafone is not likely ever to achieve that status by buying out its partner, Verizon.
Even in the unlikely event that Verizon would consider such a deal, Vodafone might find it untenable because of the network incompatibility issue -- which became especially divisive after Verizon chose to upgrade its networks in 2001 using a next-generation C.D.M.A. format, C.D.M.A. 2000, shunning Vodafone's version of G.S.M.
Similar technical barriers also make it unlikely that Vodafone would seek acquisitions of Sprint or Nextel in the United States. That would leave Cingular and T-Mobile as the only other possible targets in the United States. But neither appears willing to sell.
Vodafone and Mr. Sarin have remained silent about what they plan to do. Cornered at the World Economic Forum in Davos, Switzerland, last Thursday by a reporter for Reuters, Mr. Sarin would say only this: ''We have a partnership with Verizon Wireless. Do we watch what's going on in the United States, or how it can affect us? Yes.''
Executives close to the auction for AT&amp;T Wireless say that while Vodafone has indicated that it may have interest in bidding, it has yet to make even an informal offer.
''We believe investors currently do not expect Vodafone to react at this stage, and that may still be the most likely outcome,'' the London brokerage firm Cazenove wrote in a note to clients last week. ''The key question is whether circumstances have now changed sufficiently to act as a catalyst for an aggressive Vodafone move.''
Mr. Sarin, who took over at Vodafone after the company's architect, Sir Christopher Gent, retired last summer, has been insistent publicly that he is not nearly as interested in making big deals as his predecessor did. ''Don't expect acquisition and retention to grow faster than margins,'' he recently said.
When Vodafone meets with shareholders on Wednesday to report its third-quarter results, investors are expected to seek assurance from Mr. Sarin that Vodafone will not make a bid for AT&amp;T Wireless.
But if Mr. Sarin does not get on the buyout bandwagon quickly, it is uncertain whether Vodafone will be able to keep growing at the rapid clip it has in recent years, analysts said.
''While we expect Vodafone can grow its share of total profits in saturated mobile markets, we believe this will take years to play out,'' John Karidis and Ken Wotton, analysts at Commerzbank, wrote in a note to investors in which they downgraded the stock of Vodafone to equal weight from overweight. The note went on to criticize the company's recent share-buyback plan as ''too modest to stress management's view that the stock is very cheap.''
In New York, Vodafone's American depository receipts, each representing 10 shares, closed on Friday at $26.71, down 49 cents.
If Mr. Sarin does decide to pursue a deal with AT&amp;T Wireless, he will have to do some fancy footwork with his partners at Verizon Wireless.
Unraveling the Verizon partnership could become messy. For Vodafone, selling its stake would entail enormous taxes and other payments. Vodafone currently has a complex ''put'' arrangement that would allow it to sell its stake back to Verizon during a brief window this summer.
But executives close to Vodafone suggest that Mr. Sarin might try to negotiate a new deal with Verizon instead of exercising the put agreement with Verizon. One possibility might be to swap Verizon's stake in Vodafone's Omnitel in Italy, to make the taxes on such a transaction less burdensome. A new deal may be attractive to Verizon, if it means finally getting full control of the company.
