The budget proposed last week by Gov. George E. Pataki would raise taxes on New York City residents by $356 million, City Council Speaker Gifford Miller said yesterday.
Mr. Miller said in an interview that he planned to go to Albany today to testify before the Legislature that the governor's proposal is long on taxes, short on aid, and insufficient to comply with a court order requiring more spending on education.
''Of the $400 million that the city asked for in help, $356 million is in the form of new taxes to city residents,'' Mr. Miller said. ''It doesn't feel much like aid to me.''
The governor proposed extending the state and local sales tax on purchases of clothing and shoes under $110, but the city wanted the tax to phase out in June. Extending that tax would cost people who buy goods in the city an estimated $160 million next year in local sales tax and an equal amount in state sales tax, or a total cost of about $320 million.
''The clothing tax is enormously burdensome on working families and destructive to our economy,'' Mr. Miller said
In addition, a City Council analysis identified $36 million in taxes and fees in the governor's proposal that would fall on city taxpayers, including a surcharge on auto insurance and a tax on some security services.
It is something of a switch from last year, when the Council was asking for tax increases to help the city balance its budget and Mr. Pataki was complaining about what he called ''job-killing taxes.''
Aides to Mr. Pataki said that his budget proposal would net the city $418 million -- more than the $400 million in state assistance that Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg called for in his own budget proposal earlier this month.
Council officials, however, questioned the governor's statement that his budget would increase education aid to the city by $56 million this year over last year.
Part of that aid, they noted, is a $100 million matching grant that requires the city to spend its own money to qualify for the state money. ''If the city doesn't have the money, or doesn't like the program it is for, it won't get the grant and that will leave us $44 million in the hole,'' a council official said.
Mayor Bloomberg, who has been quiet so far on the governor's proposal, also plans to testify in Albany today. In his State of the City address earlier this month, he called for phasing out the sales tax on clothing on time.
Mr. Bloomberg, who has been criticized for not being feisty enough when he argues for the city's needs, used that speech to indicate a new willingness to fight. ''As long as I am mayor,'' he said, ''I will never back away from fighting any opponent -- or confronting any obstacle -- that would prevent our people from achieving all of their dreams in our New York.''
Mr. Miller, a Democrat who rarely misses an opportunity to attack Mr. Pataki, a Republican, said that he planned to tell the Legislature that in regard to the lawsuit that produced the court decision that New York City's schools do not receive enough money, the governor's response had been one of ''denial, duplicity and delay.''
