It can be difficult to know with certainty when a tennis match turns, but on Sunday at the Australian Open, there was very little mystery.
Those interested in the defending champion Andre Agassi's match with Paradorn Srichaphan of Thailand need only refer to the first set, when Agassi faced three set points on his serve at 4-5 and two more at 5-6. He saved them all, taking just enough conviction and energy out of Srichaphan's big game to assume command and become the first man into the quarterfinals with a 7-6 (3), 6-3, 6-4 victory.
Those interested in the Frenchman Sébastien Grosjean's up-and-down duel with the rugged Robby Ginepri of the United States need to know about the third game of the third set, when Grosjean was trailing by 0-2 and was down by 30-40 on his serve. He rushed to the net, coming up with a credulity-stretching low forehand volley to avoid going down a second break of serve. Ginepri was never quite the same confident player after that, and Grosjean advanced to become Agassi's next opponent, 6-4, 3-6, 6-4, 6-1.
Grosjean's lunging volley, spectacular as it looked, was routine compared with the shot that changed Marat Safin's fourth-round match with James Blake.
The score was 3-4, advantage Safin, with Blake serving in the fourth set. Blake had saved three break points in the game and looked prepared to save another as he moved forward to crush a short forehand down the line with Safin at the net. Safin lunged to his left without much hope, extending and releasing his racket. Just after it left his hand, the strings hit the ball, which popped in the air over the stunned Blake's head and landed on the baseline.
''Pure luck, 100 percent,'' Safin said.
It was the shot of the tournament, and what was more maddening for Blake was that it was probably against the rules, which state that a player loses the point if ''he throws his racket at and hits the ball.''
Blake said: ''That's really too tough of a call to make for an umpire, I think. Because I've done that before, where I felt the racket might have been out of my hand. I've never, never seen it called.''
When they met at the net after Safin held serve to win, 7-6 (3), 6-3, 6-7 (8), 6-3, there were two handshakes: one before they began discussing ''the shot'' and the other after they finished.
Perhaps Safin was overdue for a bit of good fortune. A wrist injury ruined his 2003 season, and he is ranked 86th.
''I don't think, if you asked the players, it was ever in doubt he would get back or get back fast,'' said top-seeded Andy Roddick, Safin's next opponent.
Roddick, who won the United States Open last year on his way to the No. 1 ranking, is certainly making the game look simple. The turning point in his match Sunday was the warm-up, after which he overwhelmed his fourth straight opponent, 16th-seeded Sjeng Schalken, 6-1, 6-2, 6-3. ''Same like U.S. Open,'' Schalken said of Roddick's level of play. ''He can go all the way.''
The 30-year-old Lisa Raymond has never come close to going that far at a Grand Slam event, but after surprising Venus Williams in the third round, there was no hint of a letdown in her poised and polished performance against the French teenager Tatiana Golovin on Monday. Raymond's varied shot selection and crisply sliced backhands played tricks with the 16-year-old Golovin's rhythm and confidence. Raymond's 6-2, 6-0 victory put her in the quarterfinals here for the first time. And considering that her next opponent will be No. 22 Patty Schnyder, a semifinal slot is hardly out of the question. Schnyder, a left-hander from Switzerland who also has plenty of variety in her game, beat Nathalie Dechy of France, 6-2, 6-4. Schnyder is 4-0 against Raymond, but they have not played since 1999.
The other women's quarterfinals will match top-seeded Justine Henin-Hardenne of Belgium against No. 5 Lindsay Davenport; No. 2 Kim Clijsters of Belgium against No. 6 Anastasia Myskina of Russia; and No. 4 Amélie Mauresmo of France against No. 32 Fabiola Zuluaga of Colombia.
Clijsters advanced Monday with a 6-3, 6-3 victory over Silvia Farina Elia of Italy. Myskina defeated No. 9 Chanda Rubin in a match full of weak serving and missed opportunities, 6-7 (3), 6-2, 6-2. Myskina spent much of the first set berating herself along with her coach and former boyfriend, Jens Gerlach.
Myskina said, when asked what it was like to be her coach: ''It's not easy, for sure. I'm a really tough girl on the court; really nice girl off the court.''
MATCH POINTS
Third-seeded JUAN CARLOS FERRERO of Spain and eighth-seeded DAVID NALBANDIAN of Argentina advanced to the quarterfinals on Monday. Ferrero defeated ANDREI PAVEL of Romania, 6-4, 3-6, 6-3, 6-2. Nalbandian was more convincing, beating GUILLERMO CAÑAS of Argentina, 6-4, 6-2, 6-1. Cañas was not his typical self after a five-set victory over TIM HENMAN on Saturday. Nalbandian has yet to lose a set and has not even been pushed to a tie breaker.
TENNIS
