The Devils scored two first-period power-play goals against a tired opponent Sunday. A rare, leisurely cruise seemed all but booked.
But the Devils never do anything the easy way. Atlanta tied the score early in the third period, and the Devils needed Jeff Friesen's goal to beat the relentless Thrashers, 3-2.
Friesen scored his 11th goal of the season, and his third in four games, with 13 minutes 24 seconds remaining -- just 2:17 after Atlanta left wing Ilya Kovalchuk tied the score.
''It's sometimes a frustrating rut,'' Friesen said. ''But I'm out of the rut now.''
After a rebound shot hit the post to the left of Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur on a three-on-one rush, the Devils moved up ice.
The Devils forced a turnover by Kovalchuk, and Friesen found an open spot at the top of the slot and whipped a shot past the glove of Atlanta goaltender Byron Dafoe.
Atlanta Coach Bob Hartley said of Kovalchuk: ''He put us back in the game, and he cost us the game. I guess that's part of being a 20-year-old kid.''
Kovalchuk tied the score at 4:19 of the third period with his 26th goal of the season. It was only the third short-handed goal allowed by the Devils this season.
''He waited and waited,'' Brodeur said. ''I said: 'I'm not going to move. If you score, you're going to have to pick your corner.' Went right through my legs.''
Patrik Elias and Grant Marshall scored first-period power-play goals for the Devils, who had not scored more than one power-play goal in their previous 11 games.
Brodeur (24 saves) made a tumbling save on a shot by Atlanta defenseman Frantisek Kaberle in the second period to keep the Thrashers from tying the score earlier.
Brodeur flopped on his belly to push away a shot by Atlanta center Patrik Stefan. Kaberle got the puck and fired it toward Brodeur.
Brodeur leaned forward to stop the shot and was nudged into a somersault by Devils defenseman Paul Martin. Brodeur then stopped Ronald Petrovicky's rebound attempt.
''That was desperation,'' Brodeur said. ''I just needed to do something to get in the way of the puck.''
The Devils (25-12-10-1), who had lost three of four in a stretch ending with a 4-0 loss to Ottawa on Jan. 13, are 4-1-1-0 in their last six games. They stayed 4 points behind Philadelphia in the Atlantic Division and have three games in hand. They open a three-game trip Tuesday against Columbus.
''We were all right enough to get by,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said. ''Sometimes, that's what it takes.''
On the Devils' first power play, after some patient passing, Marshall scored his fifth goal and his second power-play goal in two games.
Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski let a big slap shot fly from the point, and Marshall, planted in front of Dafoe, tipped it in at 3:37.
The Devils soon had another power-play chance. Elias was doubled over after drawing a slashing penalty on Petrovicky, but he recovered quickly. He scored his 16th goal at 12:15 by scrambling to a loose puck in a cluster of players in front of Dafoe, then flipping a backhand into the far side of the goal.
''We didn't rush it tonight,'' Elias said. ''If we had to take the whole two minutes before we score, that's what we did.''
The Devils held the two-goal lead for less than two minutes because Rafalski could not swat a loose puck away from Brodeur.
Petrovicky, a former Ranger, took a shot from the left face-off circle, and the puck caromed off Brodeur.
Atlanta center Brian Swanson tied up Rafalski, and Jeff Cowan slapped the loose puck past Brodeur at 14:14 for his seventh goal.
The Devils are 17-1-4-0 in games they lead after two periods. But Friesen had to come to the rescue to make that statistic relevant Sunday.
''He's a big, strong guy who can skate as well as anybody,'' Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer said of Friesen. ''And that's great for us.''
HOCKEY
