Gov. George E. Pataki came to New Hampshire on Sunday to campaign for President Bush as part of a concerted counterattack aimed at taking some of the spotlight off the seven Democrats vying for their party's nomination.
Mr. Pataki, a moderate Republican who has gone out of his way to support the president since the 2000 race, delivered a rousing defense of the administration's decisions to invade Afghanistan and Iraq.
Speaking to a group of businessmen at the Politics and Eggs breakfast in Bedford on Sunday, he suggested that the Clinton administration had erred in not launching a stronger military response in 1993, when terrorists first tried to blow up the World Trade Center, and in 1998, when Al Qaeda operatives blew up United States Embassies in Kenya and Tanzania. ''America failed to respond as it should have,'' he said.
By contrast, he said that the Bush administration doctrine of pre-emptive strikes against what it considers rogue states -- responding to the 2001 terrorist attacks with conventional war against the government in Afghanistan and deciding to invade Iraq -- had made the world safer.
''Thank God on Sept. 11 of 2001 we didn't have a president who stood there and wrung his hands and wondered what America had done wrong to provoke those attacks,'' Governor Pataki said on Sunday morning, in what has become a stump speech for him when he speaks about Mr. Bush. ''We had President Bush, who understands it wasn't what we had done wrong, it's what we had done right, that led to those attacks. We had a president who had the moral and political courage to say he was going to go after those who had launched those attacks.''
The governor also took the Democratic candidates to task for personal attacks on the president, noting that one candidate had suggested Mr. Bush was ''the enemy.''
''I wanted to be here in New Hampshire because when you think about what virtually all the Democratic candidates have been saying, it's been unrelenting, just nothing but negative personal and critical attacks on the president's great leadership,'' Mr. Pataki told a crowd of about 100 cheering Republicans at a Mexican restaurant in this gritty town on Sunday afternoon.
Mr. Pataki, who is in his third term, has been coy about his own ambitions, and he neatly dodged questions about whether he was testing the waters in New Hampshire in anticipation of running for president in 2008. His aides say he is keeping his options open. He has hinted strongly in recent days that he will stand for re-election in 2006.
The governor's whirlwind visit to New Hampshire is part of a larger effort by the Bush campaign to counteract the negative publicity about the president being generated here by the Democratic presidential candidates scurrying about the state, attacking him on every side, Bush campaign officials said.
Rudolph W. Giuliani, the former New York City mayor, made similar appearances here on Saturday, and other top Republicans will visit the state to carry the Bush message in the hours before the Tuesday primary. Senator John McCain of Arizona, who trounced President Bush here in 2000, will stump for him on Monday night, while Ed Gillespie, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, and Gov. Mitt Romney of Massachusetts will tour the state on Tuesday as voters go to the polls.
The state was also crawling with New York Democrats helping their favorite candidates.
Former Mayor David N. Dinkins and Representative Charles B. Rangel were in the state to attend a rally in Nashua in support of Gen. Wesley K. Clark, both men having previously endorsed his bid for the Democratic nomination.
Mr. Dinkins said he supported General Clark because ''I truly believe that this is a crisis in our town -- on our planet, as a matter of fact.'' He said when people understand that the president's insistence on $87 billion for rebuilding Iraq would mean less money for housing and other social services ''they will understand that the plight we are in is his fault.''
''That day will come, and we will all do better,'' Mr. Dinkins said. For his part, Mr. Pataki said his own political ambitions had nothing to do with his decision to campaign for Mr. Bush. ''This is me,'' the governor said. ''It's what I believe.''
