To police officers, the roofs of the city's housing projects are netherworlds of crime and threats, of drug deals, dark stairwells and pit bulls on the loose. But to residents, they are places of everyday convenience, shortcuts, a pebbled illusion of space and open skies, even a picnic ground.
Early Saturday at the Louis Armstrong Houses in Bedford-Stuyvesant, Brooklyn, the two views proved fatally incompatible. Timothy Stansbury Jr., 19, was using the roof to get to a party when he was killed by Officer Richard S. Neri Jr. in a shooting that Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly later called unjustified. Yesterday, Mr. Kelly said he would convene a department panel of borough and field commanders to review the tactics that officers use while patrolling the stairs and roofs of apartment buildings -- tours known as vertical patrols.
Currently, officers may choose to conduct such patrols with their guns drawn, a policy that contributed to Mr. Stansbury's death and that critics of the department said yesterday was unacceptable in a residential building where children are often present. ''If you cannot police a building without your gun being out, this is not the profession you should be in,'' Lt. Eric Adams, the head of 100 Blacks in Law Enforcement Who Care, said at a news conference in front of the Armstrong Houses.
Commissioner Kelly, however, did not condemn the practice, despite his call for a review. ''To a certain extent, you have to rely on the judgment of officers, and training that they receive, as to when they have their weapons out and at their side,'' he said in an interview on WRKS-FM.
Officers are trained to draw their weapons when they think they are in danger, said James O'Keefe, who was director of training at the New York Police Department's academy until 2002. ''There are no exact guidelines as to when it's O.K. to unholster your weapon or not,'' Dr. O'Keefe said. ''It comes down to an officer's fear.''
Officer Neri's weapon was drawn when he and his partner, Officer Jason Hallik, began to open the door to the stairwell, just as Mr. Stansbury was emerging, officials have said. Shortly after the shooting, Officer Neri made statements suggesting he had been startled by the door's opening and involuntarily fired a shot, according to a person who had been briefed on his statements.
Commissioner Kelly denied news reports that the officer had thought that Mr. Stansbury, who was unarmed, was carrying a gun. ''That was not information that we gathered in our investigation,'' he said. ''So I don't know where that came from, but that never surfaced.''
A spokesman for the Brooklyn district attorney, Charles J. Hynes, said the case could be presented to a grand jury as early as this week. The shooting will also be reviewed by the Police Department's Firearms Discharge Review Board, said the department's chief spokesman, Paul J. Browne.
Police recruits are taught that in general, a drawn weapon should be pointed at the ground, except when a threat is imminent, Dr. O'Keefe said. A reflexive response can make it easy to pull a trigger accidentally, he said.
Officers Neri and Hallik ''weren't going into a playground,'' he added.
''They were going into a place where pit bulls attack people, including police officers,'' Dr. O'Keefe said. ''That's what they're thinking about.''
When officers emerge from a rooftop door, they are vulnerable from virtually all sides. When they enter such a door from the roof, they never know who might be on the other side. Officer Neri most likely raised his gun because he believed he saw something threatening, Dr. O'Keefe said.
City Councilman Charles Barron of Brooklyn took a stronger view, saying, ''People should be indicted, convicted and sent to jail.'' Mr. Barron, who announced last week that he is running for mayor, raised the specter of Amadou Diallo, killed in the vestibule of his apartment building when officers mistook his wallet for a gun in February 1999.
After the Diallo shooting, the Police Department began ''simunitions training'' on the use of weapons under real-life conditions like poor lighting. Yesterday, though, Sgt. Noel Leader, a co-founder of 100 Blacks in Law Enforcement Who Care, criticized the Bloomberg administration's policing policies, saying, ''You have a lot of unnecessary negative contact between the Police Department and members of our community, primarily young black and Latino males, where the objective is simply to generate summonses.''
Under Housing Authority regulations, the single roof covering housing projects' adjoining buildings is off limits, but under the city's fire code, doors to the roof must remain unlocked. Residents of the four-story Armstrong Houses said that because front-door intercoms were often broken, to visit a neighbor it was easiest simply to walk up a few flights of stairs and cross the gravel-covered roof to a different building. Children play tag and have water balloon fights on the roof, they said, because a backyard playground is locked.
At the Armstrong complex, Angel Yulfo, 15, said that one night last October, he had muzzled and leashed the family dog, a pit bull named Brandon, and ascended the stairs for a walk. The dog bounded onto the roof, only to be shot seconds later by a police officer, Angel said. Angel, who has photographs of Brandon's wound, said he was thrown to the ground, handcuffed and taken to a nearby station.
It was the same doorway where Mr. Stansbury was shot on Saturday, but the dog survived, Angel said.
According to residents, the police intermittently tolerate the roof's status as public parkland. Sometimes, said Angel's father, also named Angel, 36, police officers greet him and warn him to clean up after the dog; other times they send him back inside. Officers can give citations to people for being on the roof. But several residents said that until Saturday, they were unaware the police patrolled there.
Vertical patrols have proved fatal before. In 1994, a 13-year-old with a toy gun was shot and killed by a police officer in a stairwell in the Gowanus Houses in Brooklyn. Residents there said that cops and robbers was a common game on rainy days, but that they had warned children of the dangers of playing with toy guns.
At night, the roof of the Louis Armstrong Houses can be forbidding even to residents. It is a blanket of black and shadow, with pipes belching steam and traffic noise drifting up from the street. It is easy to stumble on its uneven surface.
''I used it once,'' said Cheryl Brown, a resident. ''I didn't have the downstairs key, so I crossed over. It was scary, but you don't want to stay outside and freeze.''
