Nintendo has evidently decided to stop playing around.
Bolstered by strong holiday sales, the company, once synonymous with video games, was able to squeeze back into second place last year in the United States market for game consoles, according to industry data to be released today.
Deep price cuts on its GameCube -- down to $99 from about $149-- helped Nintendo edge out the Microsoft Xbox, moving into second place behind the Sony PlayStation2. In a report on annual sales data in the game industry, Nintendo was the only maker of video consoles to sell more game players last year than the year before.
Over all, sales in the video game industry, including consoles and software, fell 2.9 percent, to $10 billion in 2003, compared with $10.3 billion in 2002, said the NPD Group, the market researcher.
Nintendo sold 3.3 million GameCubes in this country last year, up 44 percent from 2.3 million in 2002. Microsoft, long a strong second place, sold 3.2 million Xboxes, roughly the same as the year before.
But while Nintendo may have overtaken Microsoft slightly in unit sales last year, Robbie Bach, Microsoft's chief Xbox officer, said that Microsoft still maintained a million-unit lead over Nintendo in ''life to date'' sales, and that the company hit all its targets for the holiday season.
Xbox, Microsoft says, was the only console in the market to maintain its price -- $179 -- while also increasing market share during November and December. Xbox's year-over-year share for the two months was up 4 percent, the company said.
Sony appears to have taken the biggest hit from Nintendo's price-cutting. It sold 6.3 million PlayStation2 units in 2003, down 26 percent from 8.5 million the year before, an analyst said. The Sony PlayStation2 continues to be priced at $179.
''Nintendo was impressive across the board,'' said Michael Pachter, a games analyst at Wedbush Morgan Securities. ''Sony just didn't do enough marketing.''
Richard Ow, senior games analyst at the NPD Group, said that despite the industry's downturn in total revenue last year, the games industry actually grew in unit volume and ended the year on a strong note. Nintendo's aggressive pricing helped expand the market and create more demand for video game software, Mr. Ow said.
''The GameCube made the first entry into the mass-market price range,'' he said. ''That was an aggressive move. It did a good thing for the industry because it induced a higher velocity of purchasing.''
He predicted that the PlayStation2 would maintain its lead in the market and that both Microsoft and Sony would cut the prices of their systems sometime this year.
''There's still room for more reshuffling,'' Mr. Ow said. ''The PlayStation2 and the Xbox have yet to show their hand and enter the mass market.''
Having expanded the console market with its price cut last year, Nintendo is now turning new attention to the hand-held game market, where its Game Boy Advance remains king. Last week, Nintendo executives released initial details of a new hand-held game player the company plans to release later this year -- presumably at a higher price than the current Game Boy Advance, which is priced at $100.
The new system will feature two 3-inch screens instead of one, so players can have different views, like a close-up and a long view, simultaneously. Perrin Kaplan, Nintendo's vice president for marketing and corporate affairs, said the new game unit would be distinct from the current Game Boy Advance, not simply an evolution.
The release appears timed to match Sony's planned rollout of its first hand-held player, code-named the PSP, which is expected to combine game capabilities with the ability to play movies and music. Both companies are expected to show the new units in May during the game industry's annual convention.
Nintendo has long dominated the market for hand-held game devices, where overall hardware sales were up 53 percent in 2003 to $750 million, from $490 million in 2002, the NPD Group said. During the year, Nokia entered the market with its N-Gage device, which combines game play with the ability to make cellphone calls. But it has generated little attention among consumers in the United States.
NPD also said that the growth in sales of video game software slowed sharply for the entire year, to only 5 percent. That was a sharp decline from a year earlier, when sales grew 21 percent. But strong holiday sales, analysts said, were a pick-me-up for the industry. And compared with previous holiday seasons -- which often had a single top-selling video title, like ''Grand Theft Auto'' in 2002 -- the 2003 season was more diversified.
The top-selling game during the holidays was ''Madden NFL 2004,'' which is made by Electronic Arts. Other strong sellers included two Pokémon titles from Nintendo and ''Need for Speed'' from Electronic Arts.
''The sales results are still quite impressive when you look at the overall industry performance during 2003,'' Mr. Ow said. ''The market has seen price cuts from console manufacturers as well as declines in retail software prices. With manufacturers and software publishers dropping prices to vie for consumer dollars, $10 billion in sales for the year is far from disappointing.''
