Petur Oskarsson knows all about cold. He is from Iceland, where reindeer wander the tundra and icebergs drift on the horizon.
But yesterday, as he walked among the swaddled and whimpering pedestrians of Midtown Manhattan, he seemed thoroughly impressed by the local weather.
''I've never in my life been as cold as I am here in New York,'' he said, raising his eyebrows and pulling his fleece headgear a little tighter.
It is not that it doesn't sometimes get much colder in parts of Iceland, said Mr. Oskarsson, who has spent four years working in New York as the trade commissioner at the Icelandic Consulate General. Even by New York standards, the recent temperatures in the city have not, for the most part, been record-breakers.
What is unusual is for the cold to last this long.
''We just don't get this kind of cold for three weeks at a time in Reykjavik,'' Mr. Oskarsson said of the Icelandic capital, his home.
New York's temperatures have been below the usual January lows of 22 or 23 degrees Fahrenheit every day since Jan. 6, said Paul Knight, a meteorologist at Penn State University. That is a longer cold snap than New York has had since 1994, and before that, one has to go back to 1977 and 1978 for a similar stretch of harsh weather, Mr. Knight said.
Thanks to the ice in the streets, alternate-side parking rules have been suspended for a week and are expected to be suspended again today, said Tom Cocola, a spokesman for the New York City Department of Transportation.
The temperature is expected to rise into the 30's this week, with some snowfall today and Tuesday, Mr. Knight said.
In practical terms, the extended cold has meant that New Yorkers cannot simply stay inside, cursing and waiting out the weather for a day or two. The fact that it was 14 degrees in Central Park at noon yesterday might once have seemed a freakish aberration. Now it has become the norm.
To give an Icelandic view of the cold, Mr. Oskarsson agreed to tour the streets of Midtown yesterday with a reporter. He was dressed in his standard winter gear: fleece hat, black Icelandic shell over two layers of fleece, ski gloves and long johns under his blue jeans.
''People talk constantly about the weather in Iceland,'' Mr. Oskarsson, a blond, rosy-cheeked man of 35, said as he passed a digital sign on Sixth Avenue about 2:30 p.m. that said the temperature was 16 degrees. ''As a fishing community, it was always a huge part of people's lives.''
In that sense, New York has begun to follow suit. It is hard to walk a block without hearing a few soliloquies about the cold.
Despite its name, Iceland is not all that cold, at least not in Reykjavik, where most of its roughly 300,000 people live. The Gulf Stream keeps temperatures in the 30's most of the winter, Mr. Oskarsson said.
New York, by contrast, does not have an icy reputation. To some tourists who ventured outdoors yesterday, that has become a sore point.
''I've been here three days, and I've never been so cold,'' Lee Chapman, a visitor from London, said as he stood shivering near the skating rink at Rockefeller Center, with only a thin wool hat and no gloves. ''We would've gone walking in Central Park, but instead we've mostly been sitting in bars and coffee shops.''
His companion and fellow Londoner, Emma Robertson, agreed. ''Now, if people ask me what is the coldest place I've ever been, I'll have to say New York City,'' she said.
The weather is hardest on those who work outdoors. Ibrahim Ahmed, who mans a kebab cart on 50th Street and Sixth Avenue, hovered yesterday near his grill, his back protected from the wind by a white canvas sheet. He had been out since 6:30 a.m. and was not going home until 5 p.m.
''The worst thing in this business is your feet,'' he said, glancing down at his heavy black boots. ''Your hands, your chest, you can warm, but my feet are very cold.''
He has one secret weapon, he added: his wife, an Eskimo who was born in Alaska and who advises him about layers of clothing and socks.
It also helps to maintain some perspective. It may not have been so cold in Iceland, but it was 18 below zero yesterday in Deadhorse, on Alaska's northern coast, and on Saturday night it got down to 40 below. The sun rose just above the horizon around 11 a.m. Alaska time and set around noon.
That kind of cold can keep people indoors and drive them into depression, said Monica Millard, who works at the reception desk at the Prudhoe Bay Hotel in Deadhorse. But Ms. Millard, reached by phone yesterday, had a few words of advice for New Yorkers, in the event that the cold snap lasted any longer.
''Don't let yourself become a recluse,'' she said. ''Bundle up and go outside and enjoy it.''
