Democratic presidential candidates campaigned in packed halls across New Hampshire on this last Sunday before the Democratic primary, winding up the contest in a frenzy of attacks on President Bush and raising expectations of a record turnout on Tuesday.
Howard Dean, struggling to avoid a defeat that his own aides said could be devastating to his presidential hopes, told voters in Manchester that he believed he was in ''striking distance'' of a victory that only two weeks ago he had taken as assured.
Dr. Dean's aides called about 100 of the campaign's top donors to a five-hour meeting in Concord, in part to discuss what they said would be the severe fund-raising challenges he would face if he lost here, a matter of particular concern given what the aides said had been a huge expenditure of money on the losing effort in Iowa.
''We need to regain the momentum that clearly we lost as a result of the disappointment in Iowa,'' said Steven Grossman, Dr. Dean's national campaign chairman.
Throughout the day, the candidates denounced Mr. Bush's economic and foreign policy: in one typical remark, Mr. Kerry described the foreign policy as ''arrogant and inept.'' But mainly, it was a day for the candidates to avoid conflict with one another and set out the themes that have defined this campaign since the beginning. From here in southern New Hampshire to Hanover, in the western part of the state, and from the seacoast to the hills of Keene in the southwest, the candidates called for a sharp expansion of health care coverage and an end to tax cuts that benefit the wealthy. More than anything else, each presented himself as the Democrat who could beat Mr. Bush.
New Hampshire voters responded to that appeal by turning out by the thousands across the state despite single-digit temperatures. At gyms and auditoriums, fire marshals were turning away voters who showed up to hear Dr. Dean, Senator John Edwards, Senator John Kerry, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman and Gen. Wesley K. Clark. Many were left to watch the events on television screens in overflow rooms.
''I think Edwards is a populist who has a valid message for this time of economic schisms,'' said John Wills, 44, who came here from his home in Arlington, Va., to see the candidates. ''I'd like to hear what he has to say. But I can't get in.''
The New Hampshire secretary of state, William M. Gardner, estimated that the turnout on Tuesday would be 184,000, exceeding the record set in the 1992 Democratic primary here when Bill Clinton struggled to second place after being battered by accusations of womanizing and draft dodging.
Polls continued to show Mr. Kerry with a lead, though a number of Democrats said they saw signs that Dr. Dean had stopped the erosion in his support after placing third in Iowa a week ago. At the same time, several Democrats noted that Mr. Edwards was, in these closing days, running a spirited campaign and drawing huge, enthusiastic crowds, as he did at the end of his campaign in Iowa, where he came in second.
In this volatile environment, candidates were grasping even the smallest sliver of good news. ''Lieberman leaps into third place'' read an enthusiastic e-mail message from Mr. Lieberman's campaign. The message announced a CNN/USA Today/Gallup poll showing that 12 percent of voters supported Mr. Lieberman. In the poll, Mr. Kerry was in the lead with 35 percent, and Dr. Dean had 25 percent.
Mr. Lieberman, from Connecticut, went on television to proclaim he had ''Joe-mentum.''
Meanwhile, Mr. Kerry's aides said that Dr. Dean's advisers were trying to play down expectations so that they could try to portray a second-place showing as a victory, much the way Mr. Clinton did in 1992.
Dr. Dean campaigned Sunday with his wife, Judith Steinberg Dean, appearing at a forum to discuss women's issues. Dr. Dean, who is usually disdainful of polls, spoke enthusiastically of some tracking polls -- overnight surveys that provide a rough measure of changing public opinions -- that suggested he was gaining on Mr. Kerry.
''We are going to work really hard and we are now in striking distance of winning,'' he said. ''This is going to be a close race, this is going to be a tough race.''
Dr. Dean turned down invitations to appear on the major morning network interview shows, a prominent platform that his opponents leaped at. The NBC program ''Meet the Press'' offered Dr. Dean a full hour on national television. George Stephanopoulos, the host of ''This Week'' on ABC, said he had gone so far as to trail Dr. Dean on Saturday and to rent a hotel room near one event so that Dr. Dean would have time for the interview.
''I spent the afternoon with him, and offered to do it any time, anywhere,'' Mr. Stephanopoulos said. ''But the campaign said they couldn't make it work.''
Dr. Dean, who has granted several softer-edged interviews with his wife, did agree to appear with the comedian Jon Stewart for a Sunday taping of his Comedy Central program, ''The Daily Show.''
After a brief appearance on the trail in Iowa last week and a nationally televised interview on Thursday night, Mrs. Dean decided not only to spend Sunday in New Hampshire but also to cancel appointments with her Monday patients to stay by her husband's side.
''I wanted to be here because I want to be with Howard, and he asked me to be here,'' Mrs. Dean told a reporter from the local ABC affiliate, WMUR, in one of four television interviews the couple gave Sunday afternoon.
Mr. Kerry, from Massachusetts, appeared at a rally in a sweltering high school gym here that was packed with supporters. The parking lots, filled with vehicles with Massachusetts license plates, suggested that this audience would not be of much help to him on Tuesday.
He moved from there to a crowded rally in Hampton on Sunday night, when he bantered -- speaking in what appeared to be fairly fluent French -- with a questioner who stopped him as walked off the stage.
Mr. Kerry did take a few shots at Dr. Dean. During a noontime visit to a quiet middle-class street in Merrimack, he met Diana Frothingham.
''We're trying to decide between you and Dean,'' Ms. Frothingham said.
When Mr. Kerry responded by emphasizing his ''consistency,'' she asked, ''Are you suggesting Dean is changing his position?''
''Yes,'' Mr. Kerry said.
On Fox News on Sunday, Mr. Kerry was critical of Dr. Dean for being critical recently, in particular attacking Mr. Kerry's support of the war in Iraq.
''Governor Dean, in the last few days -- after saying, two days ago, he was going to stop running a negative campaign -- has attacked Alan Greenspan, attacked all of his opponents and attacked me,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Well, I wonder when he's going to stop running the negative campaign he said he was going to stop running.''
Mr. Edwards, from North Carolina, has rebuked candidates for running critical campaigns, leading to a decidedly more mellow competition here. He said on Sunday that he believed that appeal was helping him here.
''It got through in Iowa and now it's happening here in New Hampshire,'' Mr. Edwards said.
Still, inevitably in the final days of the race, the campaigns traded accusations of dirty tricks by way of phone calls to voters.
Dr. Dean's New Hampshire state director, Karen Hicks, sent an e-mail statement on Sunday criticizing what she said were various forms of harassing or misleading phone calls aimed at hurting his campaign. For instance, she said, some voters complained that they had been awakened by late-night calls from people falsely claiming to be with Dr. Dean's campaign, apparently a bid to alienate voters. She did not say which campaign she believed was responsible.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
