FOR Bob McNair, a Texas energy zillionaire, his deal with Commissioner Paul Tagliabue in 1999 was as basic as Texas barbecue: if he paid $700 million to get all that beef, the expansion Houston Texans franchise, he deserved a case of barbecue sauce.
Now all that sauce, Super Bowl XXXVIII, is all over Houston -- for the first Super Bowl in a stadium with a translucent retractable roof. When the New England Patriots go against the Carolina Panthers on Sunday in Reliant Stadium, the roof will remain open unless nasty weather forces it to be closed. But rain or shine, this will be the wildest week in Houston's sports history.
It begins tonight with an ''opening ceremony'' in Reliant Arena featuring notable Houston names, including the former Oilers running back Earl Campbell, the former Oilers coach Bum Phillips, the former Olympic gymnast Mary Lou Retton and the Astros' two new pitchers, Roger Clemens and Andy Pettitte. Sorry about that, George.
The coin toss Sunday will be surrounded by six Pro Football Hall of Famers who are native Texans: Y. A. Tittle, Ollie Matson, Don Maynard, Gene Upshaw, Mike Singletary and Campbell. But the most venerable Texan, 89-year-old Sammy Baugh, politely declined the invitation to go to Houston from his ranch in Rotan, Tex., on a private jet or a private bus.
''I'm sorry,'' the former Redskins quarterback known as Slingin' Sammy told the Super Bowl office, ''but I don't spend any nights away from home.''
Houston had to look elsewhere for names because its teams have not created much lore. The original Oilers (who have played in Tennessee since 1997 and later became the Titans) won the first two American Football League titles, in 1960 and 1961, but few noticed. Since the N.F.L.-A.F.L. merger in 1970, the Oilers never came any closer to the Super Bowl than Pittsburgh, where they lost the 1978 and 1979 conference championship games.
Houston enjoyed the Rockets' 1994 and 1995 N.B.A. titles and an Astrodome basketball spectacle, Elvin Hayes and the University of Houston's 71-69 upset of Lew Alcindor and U.C.L.A. in 1968. Billie Jean King embarrassed Bobby Riggs in tennis there in 1973, but the Astros couldn't advance past the National League Championship Series, losing to the Philadelphia Phillies in 1980 and the Mets in 1986.
When Houston had its only previous Super Bowl three decades ago in Rice Stadium, the Oilers, with a 1-13 record that season (the worst in the league), were hoping nobody would notice that they weren't in it. The Miami Dolphins and the Minnesota Vikings were, with the Dolphins dominating, 24-7, but the week of that game is remembered mostly for sparrows and mothers.
After the Vikings' first practice at a high school facility, Coach Bud Grant fumed that not only were no lockers available for the players, but also some sparrows had been sighted in the showers.
''Go look for yourself,'' Grant told reporters. ''We don't have any lockers. Our seven coaches get to share one table for spreading out our clothes. And we have to go back to the hotel for our meetings instead of having them right here before practice. The facilities definitely give the Dolphins an advantage.''
Grant was fined by Commissioner Pete Rozelle for his outburst, but the Vikings continued to practice there while the Dolphins worked out at the Oilers' more modern complex. But some Dolphins were griping.
When the Dolphins' bachelors learned that Joe Robbie, the team owner, had invited the married players' wives to go to Houston on a chartered jet and to stay at a hotel as the club's guests, some said, ''How about my mother?'' and others wondered, ''How about my girlfriend?'' But the rule stood and at least one married Dolphin, defensive tackle Manny Fernandez, didn't sympathize with his bachelor teammates.
''Let 'em get married,'' he said.
Not that the dispute deterred the Dolphins' husbands or bachelors. In winning Super Bowl VII the year before, 14-7, over the Washington Redskins, the Dolphins completed a record 17-0 season. With their victory over the Vikings, they were 15-2, a remarkable 32-2 as back-to-back Super Bowl champions. It remains the best two-season record in N.F.L. history.
When the Dolphins scored on their first two possessions against the Vikings for a quick 14-0 lead, the game was over. Larry Csonka scored two touchdowns, Jim Kiick scored the other one. Up front, the Dolphins' offensive line, notably guard Bob Kuechenberg's blocking of defensive tackle Alan Page, opened holes against the Vikings' famous Purple People Eaters' defensive line.
But a week or so after the game, the effects of the Houston trip left a New York sportswriter not feeling well. After a checkup, his doctor asked, ''Have you been around cattle?''
Cattle? Why would a New York guy have been around any cattle? Then he realized that at the Friday night Super Bowl party at the Astrodome, he had stopped on the sawdust floor to gaze over a red curtain at a dozen prize beef cattle whose side-by-side rumps resembled those of an offensive line waiting for the snap.
''Yeah,'' he told the doctor, ''I was around some cattle recently -- at the Super Bowl party.''
The doctor said: ''That's it. That's why you've got a touch of hoof-and-mouth disease.''
With medication, the sportswriter recovered. But at this Friday's Super Bowl party at the Astrodome, cattle are not scheduled to be on display. Just the beef barbecue.
Sports of The Times
