The New Hampshire primary has lacked its usual moments of random nuttiness. This is, after all, the state that four years ago gave us Gary Bauer falling off the stage during a pancake flipping contest and Alan Keyes throwing himself into a mosh pit. The current campaign has delivered nothing more than a few strained stabs at regular-guyness. Wesley Clark has bagged groceries, gone bowling and served coffee at Dunkin' Donuts. (''Each represents a different part of the mosaic of the American workplace,'' said Mr. Clark's consultant, Chris Lehane.) John Kerry played in a hockey game, but his deportment was extremely staid. The other players -- students, firefighters and several ex-Boston Bruins who all seemed to be named Ken Hodge -- wore a motley combination of well-worn uniforms and T-shirts, while the immaculate senator appeared to have been run through a mangle on the way out to the ice.
Given the narrowness of the policy differences among the Democrats, you could argue that the fact that Mr. Kerry can skate, or that Mr. Clark was deemed a better-than-average beginning bagger at the supermarket, gives the electorate as much useful information as the specifics of their various health care proposals. The people here are well aware that if a Democrat is elected president this fall and by some miracle gets a new health initiative through the probably-Republican Congress, it would be so diced and sliced and puréed along the way that no one would remember whether it started out looking like the Dean plan or the Kerry plan or the Edwards plan.
Many voters have already thrown in the towel on issues and say they only care which candidate is most likely to beat George Bush. But for the people in New Hampshire, figuring out what the rest of the country would like in a presidential candidate is like trying to shop for a present for a relative you have never met, armed only with the information that she is very different from you and extremely picky. Thanks to New Hampshire's insistence on going first, these poor New Englanders are stuck trying to figure out whether the average swing voter in Ohio would prefer a headstrong former governor who balanced the Vermont budget or a rather twitchy general or a permanent-pressed war hero.
Mr. Kerry's hockey game might have been meant to show that the candidate is in good shape, although given the state of American politics, the fact that a candidate is physically fit is about as surprising as the fact that he has a well-functioning pancreas. The real point may simply have been to prove to the people of New Hampshire that Mr. Kerry could be attractive to the people of Pennsylvania -- or at least to the handful of male duck hunters who seem to make up the whole swing vote in that state.
Howard Dean's most passionate supporters aren't worried about electability -- in fact some believe Dr. Dean's power as a candidate is so great that terrified Republicans engineered his defeat in Iowa. ''They were afraid of the grass-roots movement he'd lead,'' said Heather Strassberger, who was at a Women for Dean rally yesterday. She was watching the event on C-Span in a backup room for overflow crowds -- not even the good overflow-crowd room where Dr. Dean himself dropped in to console his disappointed supporters.
Can we take a moment, gentle readers, to tip our hats to the audiences? Contemplate, for one minute, the fact that there are still American citizens -- overflow numbers of American citizens -- who are willing to drive considerable distances in ridiculously cold weather to watch a politician give a speech. ''My wife wanted to sleep in and I didn't want to miss this,'' said Brett Pingree, who drove up from Massachusetts with two children under the age of 3 to spend his Sunday morning in Dr. Dean's overflow-overflow room. He gave an excellent argument for the Dean candidacy (''He has a proven record on health care and balancing budgets'') while attempting to resolve a dispute between two toddlers over a Baggie full of trail mix. The campaign actually missed a great bet by not having Mr. Pingree on stage for the women's rally, and getting him to tell the part about letting his wife stay in bed. The New Hampshire women would have known immediately that the soccer moms in Ohio would love it.
Editorial Observer
