George Bruno was wincing like a man in pain. He had volunteered to play host at the final New Hampshire house party for Gen. Wesley K. Clark, to offer undecided friends and neighbors one last Sunday morning look at his candidate in his home state's most famous form of intimate electoral encounter. But there was nothing intimate about the stream of people coming up the front walk of Mr. Bruno's white clapboard Dutch colonial house here, bearing cookies, cameras and questions.
''My house will hold 75 people, and I'm expecting 150,'' said Mr. Bruno, a longtime New Hampshire Democratic operative who held the final house party of the 1992 primary for Bill Clinton, then served as Mr. Clinton's ambassador to Belize. On Sunday he was welcoming the actors Ted Danson and Mary Steenburgen, as well as a Ford Expedition with a sign proclaiming it full of ''New Hampshire Primary Diplomatic Observers,'' from Germany, France and Tajikistan. ''It's insane,'' he said.
Once upon a time, a few months, years or political lifetimes ago, the New Hampshire primary may have been the place to watch candidates test their messages, sharpen their skills and face small batches of voters as candid, cranky and well informed as a convention of civics teachers. But on this final, frantic weekend of the race, for all but the fortunate few New Hampshire was the place to see candidates from a distance, on C-Span, in holding rooms or from behind a frosted pane of glass.
''We just thought it'd be a bunch of women here,'' said Bob Lord, a history teacher at Manchester Central High School, who went with his wife, Karen, to see his candidate, Howard Dean, and Dr. Dean's wife, Judith Steinberg Dean, at a 10 a.m. forum at Southern New Hampshire University on Sunday that spilled into three extra rooms. ''We got here at 9:15 and barely got into the overflow room.''
Bob Mulholland, a longtime adviser to the California State Democratic Party, came to Manchester on a candidate-shopping trip this weekend, and with a friend from the British Labor Party, he managed to sneak into the Dean event through a back door. He, too, expressed surprise. ''I think the Internet has changed crowd-building completely,'' Mr. Mulholland said.
In fact, residents said, this final primary weekend seemed much more intense than past ones, perhaps because of Dr. Dean's online organizing efforts, perhaps because polls continue to indicate a volatile contest or perhaps because Senator John Kerry's surprising win in the Iowa caucuses last week shook up the race and left New Hampshire voters in a position to dictate the next turn in the campaign story line.
That is a role they have relished for years.
''Although the media's persistent desire to engage in incestuous amplification seems to increase with every presidential election, there is always the hope that they will somehow comprehend the fact that Iowa merely sets up the table,'' wrote Charles Brereton, a longtime primary watcher up the road in Concord, in his book, ''Primary Politics'' (Peter E. Randall, 2003). ''It is up to New Hampshire to determine the seating arrangements so that the dinner party is not proclaimed over just as the appetizer has been served.''
New Hampshire has been the scene of great political drama before. Senator Eugene McCarthy's strong second-place showing behind President Lyndon B. Johnson in 1968 upended that campaign year, inspiring Senator Robert F. Kennedy to enter the race days later and Johnson to withdraw within weeks. Bill Clinton's second place finish behind Paul E. Tsongas 12 years ago, in the face of questions about Gennifer Flowers and the draft, set him on the road to the nomination.
And New Hampshire voters are famously independent. Vice President Al Gore, who won the Iowa caucuses in 2000, staved off former Senator Bill Bradley here four years ago, but before that, the last candidate of either party to come in first in both Iowa and New Hampshire was Jimmy Carter in 1980.
So everywhere on Sunday, the crowds were big and the air was cold and crackling with expectation. New Hampshire voters mingled with out-of-state supporters and others along for the ride. At the Fairgrounds Junior High School in Nashua, John Wills pressed through an overflow crowd to try to get into the gymnasium where Senator John Edwards of North Carolina was speaking. Mr. Wills, who works in book publishing, had come from his home in Arlington, Va., inspired by Mr. Edwards's views on the economy, but he could not see his man. Three campaign volunteers blocked the door.
''Can't you prop the doors open,'' Mr. Wills asked, ''or set up a speaker here in the hallway so people can hear?'' But Mark Perriello, an Edwards volunteer, said he had to keep people out for their own safety. ''If I open the doors, everyone will push through me,'' Mr. Perriello told him. ''I'm a small guy.''
Even celebrity did not guarantee a seat. The actress Glenn Close, who recently endorsed Mr. Edwards, squatted in blue jeans on the dusty floor of the school's cafeteria, where Mr. Edwards and his wife, Elizabeth, eventually spoke to about 400 people who could not get into the main event.
At a Kerry rally at Nashua High School South, Bob Pelletier, an oil company salesman, said he too was ''astonished'' at the turnout. ''I was at a chili feed at a firehouse in Nashua a few weeks ago and there was no one there,'' Mr. Pelletier said. ''Now I'm parking blocks away and I can barely get through the door.''
At Mr. Bruno's house, stern greeters at first blocked even some of General Clark's senior aides from crossing the threshold.
''If I can't get in, you can't get in,'' his communications director, Matt Bennett, said with a shrug. Eventually, Clark aides did spirit themselves, the candidate's wife, Gertrude, and a handful of journalists into the Brunos' cozy house, where it was just possible to breathe and hear General Clark promise to ''bring a higher standard of leadership to this country.''
Others who wanted to hear Dr. Dean's speech were not so lucky. As campaign aides escorted reporters traveling with the candidate into the building, a security guard declared flatly: ''You can't bring one more person in here. I don't care if Bush is out there. There's no more room.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE SCENE
