HIGHLIGHTS
A TENNESSEE WILLIAMS RARITY -- In 1937 a shy young student in Prof. William Carson's playwriting course at Washington University in St. Louis was the odds-on favorite to win the university's annual playwriting competition. He was favored even though his classmates included Shepherd Mead, who would go on to write the book that inspired the musical ''How to Succeed in Business Without Really Trying,'' and A. E. Hotchner, who would write ''Papa Hemingway.'' After all, the shy young student, Tennessee Williams, had spent much of the year writing highly praised sketches of his mother and sister that foreshadowed ''The Glass Menagerie'' and were often read aloud by the professor. But when it was time to submit a work for the competition, Williams astonished everyone by instead submitting ''Me Vasha,'' an antiwar farce about a corrupt arms dealer and his mad, Blanche DuBois-like wife. Only the top three plays would be produced. Williams's play finished fourth. Furious, Williams, who later described himself as shocked and humiliated, screamed at Professor Carson and stormed out of St. Louis. He expunged ''Me Vasha'' from his list of works. Now, 67 years later, ''Me Vasha'' is to have what is described as its world premiere, in a production by the Washington University Performing Arts Department. The event, on campus on Feb. 6, will be part of an international symposium focusing on the early career of Williams.
THE TWO VINCENT VAN GOGHS -- A recently discovered letter from Vincent van Gogh, newly on display at the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, appears to contradict theories that he suffered from alienation as a so-called replacement child, The Associated Press reported. A year before van Gogh was born on March 30, 1853, his mother had given birth to a stillborn boy, also named Vincent. A paper written with two colleagues by Leo Jansen, a researcher at the museum, for publication by the museum next month says the letter's passionless tone led them to conclude, ''There is nothing to indicate that van Gogh dwelled excessively on the event; on the contrary, he attaches to it no personal emotion or recollection.'' The letter, written in 1877, three years before van Gogh began his career as an artist, conveyed his condolences to the manager of an art gallery in The Hague, where he had worked, on the death of the man's 3-year-old daughter.
JAZZ GREATS -- In a gathering reminiscent of the scene captured by Art Kane in his renowned 1958 photograph of jazz artists, ''A Great Day in Harlem,'' four of this year's winners of the national Jazz Master Awards -- Jim Hall, Chico Hamilton, Nat Hentoff and Nancy Wilson -- posed on Friday with previous winners and Dana Gioia, chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, which confers the honor. The gathering at the New York Hilton Hotel and Towers took place in conjunction with the International Association for Jazz Education Conference.
THEATER: YOUNG PLAYWRIGHTS -- The Young Playwrights Festival, founded in 1981 by Stephen Sondheim to support and nurture new American dramatists, begins its 22nd season tomorrow. After winnowing submissions by more than a thousand writers from some 50,000 public and private elementary, middle and high schools around the country, the festival is presenting a program of three plays at the Cherry Lane Studio Theater in Greenwich Village. Previews start tomorrow; opening night is Feb. 4, and the run, open to the public with tickets priced at $35, continues through Feb. 21. Chosen this year are ''Thick,'' by Travis Baker, 18, of Livingston, N.J.; ''Easter Candy,'' by Halley Feiffer, 18, of New York, a daughter of Jules Feiffer; and ''The View From Tall,'' by Caitlin Montanye Parrish, 18, of Atlantic Beach, Fla. Information: (212) 279-4200.
COPENHAGEN: ACCOLADE -- Mona Hatoum, a Palestinian artist who lives in London, is the winner of the 2004 Sonning Prize awarded by the University of Copenhagen for advancing and exploring European culture, The Associated Press reported. Among previous winners of the $167,000 prize are the film directors Krzysztof Kieslowski and Ingmar Bergman and the Nobel laureates Dario Fo and Günther Grass. Ms. Hatoum, whose sculpture and photography have been exhibited worldwide, was cited for ''being one of those who has found the most concise artistic expression for the new Europeans' existential experience on unstable grounds between several cultures.''
FOOTNOTES
Andrew LLoyd Webber and Cameron Mackintosh are discussing a revival of ''Evita,'' the BBC reported. But Lord Lloyd Webber's spokeswoman said the musical, which is about Eva Peron, was unlikely to open in the West End of London before 2005. . . . Jane Fonda, 66, above, plans to end a 14-year retirement by acting in a film opposite Jennifer Lopez, The Associated Press reported. Ms. Fonda's press representative, Pat Kingsley, said she was to appear in ''Monster-in-Law'' as the difficult mother of Ms. Lopez's fiancé.
