THREE recent introductions by American automakers of open-top two-seaters might have you thinking that news of popular models like the Mazda Miata and BMW Z4 only recently reached Detroit.
The flurry of activity includes the impending arrival of the Chrysler Crossfire roadster this spring and the promise of Pontiac's Solstice for the fall of 2005. Ford, meanwhile, is ringing Pavlov's bell for enthusiasts with a nostalgia-drenched recreation of the Shelby Cobra, though it is only a design study for now.
American automakers have only occasionally been successful at cooking up new models based on the classic roadster recipe. Only the Corvette has persevered, and even it has been transformed from its original Euro-style formula (remember the mesh headlight protectors of 1953?) to a muscular road burner. Ford's Thunderbird strayed from the path early on, achieving greater sales success after abandoning the two-person body design for 1958. It stumbled back into obscurity with an attempted revival of the original seating plan in 2002.
The latest crop of two-seaters will not meet the purist's definition of a roadster: an elemental machine with a lively, responsive driving character that offers only a single row of seats and side windows consisting of plastic curtains instead of glass that could be rolled down. The first Corvettes met the test, as did many early postwar models from independent makers, but over time the definition has been stretched to accommodate modern conveniences.
Still, two-seat Thunderbirds of 1955-57 deserve to be considered in this group, as do fringe entries like the utilitarian Jeepster and Nash's small Metropolitan. More recent two-seaters from Detroit are of less-certain classification: the Cadillac Allanté of 1987-93 had more to do with luxury than sport, and Dodge's Viper favors muscle over finesse.
Soldiers returning from Europe after World War II were offered a variety of alternatives to the lithe sports cars they had seen overseas. As assembly lines started to roll again, innovative creations were introduced, like the Playboy, complete with a folding metal roof. Dodge produced the Wayfarer three-passenger roadster in 1949, but this sedan-based giant aroused little passion in the sports car ranks, disappearing after 1952.
Wartime material shortages spurred an interest in replacements for steel body panels, and fiberglass became a viable alternative. The Woodill Wildfire of 1952-56 is considered by many vintage-car authorities to be the first production car with a fiberglass body (built by Glasspar, the boat maker). Power came from a flathead Ford V-8.
The first Corvette was almost the last, its 150-horsepower Blue Flame six and automatic transmission failing to arouse passions. Just when it seemed doomed, an engineer named Zora Arkus-Duntov convinced Chevrolet that what the car needed was a V-8 and good handling. The sales success of the 1955 model proved him right and set a lasting precedent.
Some aspiring automakers did grasp the kernel of the roadster's appeal, among them Powel Crosley, a radio and appliance magnate, who built a complete but pint-size lineup of sedans, wagons and pickups around a lightweight utility engine he made for the United States military during the war. Crosley's Hot Shot roadster, and slightly more civilized Super Sports, offered advanced design -- they used disc brakes and overhead cam engines -- but Crosley sputtered to a stop as an automaker in 1952.
Nash-Kelvinator, a maker of cars and kitchen appliances, took the most direct approach to capturing European roadster qualities, teaming with Donald Healey, a British sports car pioneer, to make the Nash-Healey. The body came from Pinin Farina in Italy, the engine was a Nash Dual Jetfire 6 and the car was assembled in England. But the international pedigree was not enough and production ended in 1954. Nash later imported the Metropolitan, built in England by Austin, which proved far more successful.
Stanley Arnolt, an auto distributor in the Midwest, took a similar path. Installing a body by the Italian coachbuilder Bertone on a chassis from Bristol, a British carmaker, resulted in the Arnolt-Bristol roadster, sold in the United States in 1955-63. Other roadster makers were race-car builders with a sideline. Frank Kurtis, who built Indianapolis 500 winners in the 1950's, produced a limited run of sports cars, as did Briggs Cunningham, a blue-blood sportsman who built racers in West Palm Beach, Fla.
Howard Darrin, well known for his custom-body luxury cars, parlayed the power of his name into an unusual roadster. Darrin, known as Dutch, worked with Kaiser in 1954 to make the Kaiser Darrin, a fiberglass roadster with sliding doors. Based on the Henry J, a compact model from Kaiser-Frazer, it used a Willys engine.
Before the era of limited production vehicles withered in the face of safety and pollution legislation, there were some notable last stands. Race-car driver Carroll Shelby installed Ford's new 260-cubic-inch V-8 in the British A.C. Ace sports car to create the Cobra. Cobras quickly distinguished themselves in competition and later achieved icon status using Ford's 427 V-8.
The Excalibur, built in 1965-75, was based on a Mercedes-Benz design from the 1920's, but it blended that classic style with a modern Corvette engine under its long hood.
The prosperous times of the 1980's inspired more attempts by America's Big Three to crack the elusive roadster market. General Motors reprised earlier trans-Atlantic assembly schemes with the Cadillac Allanté (the bodies were flown in from Italy on 747's) as well as a roadster version of the entirely homegrown Buick Reatta. The renewed interest in roadsters inspired Ford to market the Australian-built Mercury Capri of 1991, but in all three instances Americans stayed away in droves.
