The invitations for Arturo Gatti's postfight party had already been printed. And he had already chosen another opponent. But Gatti could not have calculated the rugged resistance from Gianluca Branco, a relative unknown from Italy, before capturing the vacant World Boxing Council junior welterweight title by unanimous decision on Saturday night.
With his left eye swollen almost shut and his right hand possibly fractured from an uppercut that hit Branco's hip, Gatti was modest at a news conference after the fight.
''I thought he won maybe two or three more rounds,'' Gatti, 31, said of Branco, 33, a former European titleholder who was making his American debut.
Many had shrugged off the unbeaten Branco, the W.B.C.'s No. 1-ranked contender, as an unworthy opponent for Gatti (37-6) and simply more proof of suspect rating systems within boxing's maze of sanctioning bodies.
Branco's record -- he was 32-0-1 -- showed that he had been past the sixth round only eight times and against opponents with lopsided records. He had left Italy to fight only once, and that was to France.
But from the first bell, it was Branco, who boxes in the semi-stiff, upright European style, who seemed to control the tempo. He chased Gatti with steady, no-frills jabs -- often two, three, four at a time -- and began to counter effectively with right-hand punches, overhand blows and leads, which frustrated Gatti as his left eye began to swell.
The punches lacked power, however, and Gatti fought through them, slicing away with body shots.
In the fifth round, boxing exposition turned to brawl, as Gatti's fights customarily do, and Gatti launched an uppercut that landed flush on Branco's hipbone. Gatti winced in pain -- he broke the same right hand the same way in his last fight with Micky Ward seven months ago -- and was hesitant to throw the right the rest of the fight.
With about 30 seconds to go in the 10th round, Gatti, who lives in Jersey City, rocked Branco with a left hook on the chin. It knocked him down and re-energized the partisan crowd, which began to chant Gatti's name. While Branco was able to make it to his feet, he was unable to win back points.
''He just didn't do enough to win,'' Gatti said.
The judges Tom Kaczmarek, of Brick, N.J., and Anek Hongtongkan, of Thailand, had it 116-111 for Gatti, while Guido Cavallieri, of Italy, had it 115-112 for Gatti.
Branco did not go to the news conference. He does not speak English and did not travel with a professional translator. His dressing room was silent and cloudy with cigarette smoke. Branco had brought about 30 family members from Italy to watch the fight, and afterward he was enveloped by the small chatter of encouragement from his relatives and corner men.
''I feel like a boxer who lost,'' Branco said through a cousin. ''Not a fighter who lost the fight, but a fighter who missed one punch.''
Branco wants a rematch, but Gatti has other plans. He wants to carry out the two remaining fights under his contract with HBO and stage a potentially lucrative and relatively safe showdown with the unbeaten lightweight Leonard Dorin in Montreal, where both have strong ties.
Should he win that fight, Gatti would most likely look to unify the junior welterweight title in a fight with Kostya Tszyu, the Australian-based World Boxing Association and International Boxing Federation titleholder. Then Gatti might retire.
But all that seems far away.
''He's got a title now,'' said Ward, who led Gatti into the ring on Saturday night. ''It doesn't matter how he won -- he won. That's all that matters.''
BOXING
