Almost four years ago this week, George W. Bush suffered the worst moment of his political life when he was buried under an avalanche of votes for Senator John McCain in New Hampshire. The Bush juggernaut seemed to have everything -- a vast treasury, big endorsements and even the candidate's parents, who turned up the weekend before the primary to vouch for their eldest child.
''This boy, this son of ours, is not going to let you down,'' the first President Bush told a roaring crowd of 1,600 at a rally in Windham, N.H., just four days before the vote.
But Mr. McCain won by 18 points, a debacle that still haunts the president and serves as a reminder to his 2004 campaign, as if any were needed, of the wild unpredictability of politics.
A week ago, the sleek headquarters of Bush-Cheney '04 in Arlington, Va., was humming with preparations for a race against Howard Dean. Today, Mr. Bush's advisers are scavenging for damaging nuggets in the long legislative record of Senator John Kerry, who was 3 points ahead of Mr. Bush, 49 percent to 46 percent, in a hypothetical election matchup in a Newsweek poll of registered voters on Friday and Saturday.
That may be why Mr. Bush chose to swipe at Mr. Kerry in some off-the-record jokes in a speech on Saturday night at the Alfalfa Club dinner, an annual banquet for Washington's political upper class. The official position of Mr. Bush's advisers is that he is too busy running the country to pay attention to the campaign, but someone must have forgotten to tell the president.
''I think Kerry's position on the war in Iraq is politically brilliant,'' Mr. Bush told the Alfalfa Club guests at the Capitol Hilton, according to a guest who heard the remarks. ''In New Hampshire yesterday, he stated he had voted for the war, adding that he was strongly opposed to it.''
The line got a big laugh, the guest said, as did this one about Howard Dean's ''I Have a Scream'' postcaucus speech in Iowa: ''Boy, that speech in Iowa was something else,'' the guest reported Mr. Bush as saying. ''Talk about shock and awe. Saddam Hussein felt so bad for Governor Dean that he offered him his hole.''
No doubt Mr. Bush, the original political animal, would be in New Hampshire punching back at Mr. Kerry and Mr. Dean if it weren't considered so unpresidential. There is no word on his frustration level, but at this point, the plan is that the president won't jump in until spring, when the Democrats could have a nominee and his campaign may have close to $200 million, a record, in contributions.
For now, Mr. Bush has made do by calling Karl Rove, his chief political adviser, for daily campaign news fixes, and by dispatching a clutch of high-profile surrogates to New Hampshire.
Sunday's surrogate was Governor George E. Pataki of New York, who said in an interview that he had talked to Mr. Bush ''a number of times'' about the campaign, and who, like Mr. Bush, Mr. Kerry and Dr. Dean, is a graduate of Yale -- a subject for another day.
Monday's surrogate will be, of all people, Mr. McCain, who is scheduled to appear at an afternoon rally for Mr. Bush in Nashua. Bush campaign officials said Sunday that they had asked Mr. McCain to help out in New Hampshire, and given his showing four years ago, his support can only help. Mr. McCain, who came out of New Hampshire in 2000 to lose in a brutal primary campaign waged by Mr. Bush's forces in South Carolina, did not return phone calls.
Tuesday's surrogate will be the Republican governor of Massachusetts, Mitt Romney. The day-after-day surrogate will be Ed Gillespie, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, who in a speech in Washington on Friday was busy painting Mr. Kerry as a Northeastern elitist and noting that the liberal Americans for Democratic Action had given Mr. Kerry a rating of 93 percent out of 100 percent. Mr. Gillespie then noted that Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Mr. Kerry's fellow Democrat from Massachusetts, had a rating from the group of 88 percent.
''Who would have guessed it?'' Mr. Gillespie said. ''Ted Kennedy is the conservative senator from Massachusetts.''
For now, Bush campaign officials are playing down the Newsweek poll, and asserting that they had predicted it all along. ''We've said for months that we expected this to be a close race and that at a certain point, polls would show us down by a few points,'' said Terry Holt, the campaign press secretary.
In fact, Bush officials said in November that they expected the race to be neck and neck in the spring, when the Democrats were likely to settle on a nominee. No one predicted it would happen this early.
White House Letter
