A human rights advocate identified by Jack Kelley, the USA Today correspondent who resigned under pressure this month, as a source for a 1999 article about ethnic cleansing in a Kosovo village disputes many of the details in the article.
The rights advocate, Natasa Kandic, the executive director of the Humanitarian Law Center in Belgrade, made these assertions in a telephone interview from Belgrade late last week, raising further questions about the veracity of the article, which the newspaper published on its front page in July 1999.
In the article, Mr. Kelley wrote about a Yugoslav Army notebook that had a typed order to ''cleanse'' a Kosovo village, although he did not identify the person who showed him the notebook. He added that United Nations investigators considered this ''the strongest and most direct evidence linking the government of Yugoslav President Slobodan Milosevic to 'ethnic cleansing' in Kosovo.''
Last year, while being questioned during an internal investigation of his work, Mr. Kelley told senior editors that he was interviewing Ms. Kandic when he was shown the notebook by a United Nations investigator, USA Today said.
During the interview last week, Ms. Kandic disputed the size and kind of notebook Mr. Kelley said he had examined and whether the reference to ''cleansing'' was an order typed on official military stationery, as he had described.
Ms. Kandic, who does not specifically remember being interviewed by Mr. Kelley, told USA Today about her disagreements with the article in a meeting last October. In last week's interview, she also said that she did not believe that Mr. Kelley could have seen the notebook, as he suggested in the article. The journal, she said, was not in her possession in July 1999 but was instead being held at the headquarters of the Kosovo Liberation Army.
Mr. Kelley's editors began questioning the article, and several others he had written over the years, after receiving an anonymous complaint about his work from a USA Today staff member last May. Mr. Kelley, a foreign correspondent who reported from various war zones for more than a decade, was a finalist for the Pulitzer Prize in 2002.
In an article on Jan. 13 announcing his resignation, USA Today said it had concluded a seven-month investigation of a sampling of his articles, including the article about the notebook, without having resolved ''whether Kelley might have embellished or fabricated stories.'' It has since said an independent panel will assess all his work for the paper.
In his July 1999 article, Mr. Kelley referred to a three-ring notebook with a black vinyl cover that contained a direct order ''typed on army stationery and stamped by the Supreme Defense Council of the Yugoslav Army Headquarters in Belgrade, which is headed by Milosevic.'' The order, which Mr. Kelley said was typed in Cyrillic letters and intended for a lieutenant, read: ''The aim of the military activity should be to cleanse Cusk and the surrounding villages and terrain.''
Mr. Kelley wrote in the article that 44 ethnic Albanian men were killed in the village of Cusk, near the western Kosovo city of Pec, in May 1999 -- a massacre that Human Rights Watch, among other organizations, has documented.
Ms. Kandic said it was possible that she once met Mr. Kelley, adding that she spoke to many foreign correspondents as part of her job. But she said an officer's notebook she examined at the time in Kosovo -- and which she later described in a report published by her organization -- bore little resemblance to the description of the notebook in Mr. Kelley's article. She said the notebook she saw was bound and that its cover was red. And while she recalled a reference to the word ''cleansing,'' she said the word was written, not typed, and was not contained in a military order.
A red notebook fitting the rough description provided by Ms. Kandic was later turned over to lawyers in The Hague who are prosecuting Mr. Milosevic, according to a court official, who insisted on anonymity.
Mr. Kelley said in his article that the materials contained in the notebook he examined ''will be used by the U.N. war crimes tribunal investigating Milosevic and four other associates.'' But the court official said that no document fitting the description provided by Mr. Kelley had been received.
Karen Jurgensen, the newspaper's editor, said in a statement posted on the USA Today Web site on Jan. 13 that Mr. Kelley identified Ms. Kandic to his editors as the unnamed person who had shown him the Yugoslav Army journal. Ms. Jurgensen said Ms. Kandic told the newspaper's editors last fall that she had done no such thing.
When confronted last fall by his editors, Mr. Kelley directed his editors to another woman, who, he said, had acted as his translator on the article. The newspaper later discovered that the translator was uninvolved in the reporting, Ms. Jurgensen said in the statement. It was after being informed of that finding, Mr. Kelley resigned, Ms. Jurgensen said.
(Another woman, whom neither the newspaper nor Mr. Kelley has identified publicly, told the newspaper that she saw Mr. Kelley interview Ms. Kandic, but did not see Ms. Kandic show him a notebook during that conversation, Ms. Jurgensen said.)
Mr. Kelley has admitted, in an interview with The Washington Post, that he ''panicked'' during the investigation and ultimately misled his editors during parts of their inquiry but he maintains that the original article was accurate. ''In my 21-year career, I have never fabricated or plagiarized a story,'' he said in a statement.
A lawyer representing Mr. Kelley, Lisa Banks, said on Friday that Mr. Kelley still insists that the notebook he saw had a black cover, although, she said, he now believed that what he saw might have been a photocopy.
''There's got to be a reason why Kandic is afraid to say or isn't willing to say she had the document in Belgrade,'' Ms. Banks said. ''We just don't know what it is yet.''
Ms. Banks also said she noted inconsistencies between Ms. Kandic's comments to The New York Times, as conveyed by a reporter, and another interview with her that was reported this month. On Jan. 15, Reuters, citing an interview Ms. Kandic gave to Danas, a Belgrade newspaper, quoted her as saying she ''got the diary, but did not keep it,'' before passing it on to an investigator working with the war crimes tribunal. Ms. Banks pointed to the quotation as suggesting that Ms. Kandic might well have had a notebook to show Mr. Kelley.
Asked on Saturday to comment on Ms. Banks's assertion, Ms. Kandic said the quotation in Danas, when translated from Serbian to English, did not convey the nuance she intended. ''It means I held the diary with my hands,'' she said, referring to her examination of it in Kosovo. She said she then handed it to the investigator, who had accompanied her, and that it was he who ultimately arranged its transfer to The Hague. It was never in her office in Belgrade, she said.
Asked if it was possible that she had made a photocopy of the notebook in Kosovo and showed Mr. Kelley a copy in her office, Ms. Kandic said no. ''It was immediately after the war,'' she said. ''The city was without electricity. It was impossible to find photocopy machines.''
The newspaper and Mr. Kelley have different interpretations of an October meeting held in Washington with Brian Gallagher, the newspaper's executive editor, Ms. Kandic and Mr. Kelley. (The meeting was first disclosed in an article in The Washington Post.) Mr. Gallagher said he had permitted Mr. Kelley to sit in on the session with the hope that ''seeing Jack would jog her memory.'' Instead, Mr. Gallagher said, Ms. Kandic said she could not recall having met Mr. Kelley before, and she then outlined differences between the notebook Mr. Kelley had described and the one she saw.
Mr. Kelley recalled the meeting differently, said his lawyer, Ms. Banks. Ms. Kandic, the lawyer said, ''agreed that the document had an order to cleanse and indicated that Jack had gotten it right.''
Asked on Friday if USA Today intended to publish a correction of the article, Mr. Gallagher said that no correction was planned. ''Because of differing recollections, we still can't be certain what occurred,'' Mr. Gallagher said.
