'People are responding to the positive message.'
Senator John Edwards stood surrounded by a throbbing mob of journalists and jubilant supporters begging for his autograph, posing for pictures, reaching out to touch.
''People are responding to the positive message of hope,'' Mr. Edwards said into a television camera at a Y.M.C.A. in Davenport on Sunday where a few hundred people heard him speak.
But off to the side, Craig Thorburn and Karen Caldwell, friends and undecided voters, stood hashing out the practical reality of the caucuses and whom they would support Monday night.
Mr. Thorburn said he would not pick until he arrived at his caucus site and determined the level of support for Mr. Edwards, his first choice.
The question for Mr. Edwards, as he dashed across the state on a five-city tour by plane, was how many voters he could swing to his side in the final hours of campaigning.
Only a few weeks ago he was considered a blip in the polls, a one-term senator from North Carolina whom few gave much of a chance. But on Sunday, he soaked up the adoration of crowds in the hundreds and seemed energized by his rising standing in the polls, including one by The Des Moines Register on Sunday that put him in an unpredictable four-way battle for the state.
''Can you believe what is going on?'' said Bill De Blasio, his New York campaign chairman, who flew in for a boisterous rally in Cedar Rapids.
''What have you done to the world?'' Mr. De Blasio shouted back over the cheers. At a rally with several hundred supporters in an auditorium at Drake University in Des Moines, an aide fretted over violating the fire code, something unimaginable weeks ago.
Mr. Edwards was already looking to the next contests, stressing his Southern roots and seeking to distinguish himself from Gen. Wesley K. Clark, of Arkansas, who also hopes to make a mark in the South.
On ''Face the Nation'' on CBS, Mr. Edwards spoke of his familiarity with the issues facing Southern states. ''I've been a senator dealing with the problems that exist every single day,'' he said, ''That's not where General Clark has been.''
As the campaign for Iowa went into its final hours, Mr. Edwards's rallies were intended as much to excite the faithful as to persuade the uncertain.
Over and over he shouted, ''You and I can change America!''
Some of those who turned out already planned to support Mr. Edwards. ''With a little more time, I bet he could even win this thing,'' Carl Rogers, 43, said as he stood outside the Drake auditorium. ''He is from the South,'' Mr. Rogers said, ''he has the passion and positive vision, and he would destroy Bush in a debate.''
And it was clear that Mr. Edwards would relish such a matchup.
''I love that sign,'' he called out to a woman at the rally in Davenport holding a placard that read, ''John Edwards v. Bush.''
''I dream about it every night,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''That's the truth.''
RANDAL C. ARCHIBOLD
Correction:  January 20, 2004, Tuesday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about last-minute campaigning before the Iowa caucuses misattributed an observation about the exuberance of Senator John Edwards's backers at a rally in Cedar Rapids. It was Senator Edwards, not his New York campaign chairman, Bill De Blasio, who said, ''Can you believe what is going on?''
