'Nominee has to be someone who says ''Bring home the troops.'' '
Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio sprinted across Iowa on Sunday visiting his pockets of support. He started in Cedar Rapids, passed through three college towns and ended in Des Moines, where he had dinner at his favorite Vietnamese restaurant and appeared onstage with the singer Ani DiFranco.
He is lagging behind in the polls. But at each stop he attracted standing-room-only crowds of 200 to 400 people and revved them up with his antiwar talk. He said the country's domestic prosperity was threatened by the problems in Iraq, calling attention to the fact that the United States had just suffered its 500th casualty there.
Mr. Kucinich, one of the most outspoken of the 126 Democrats in the House to vote in 2002 against war in Iraq, insisted that the American-led invasion should be the primary issue in the election, and he urged members of his party to take a stand against President Bush on the occupation of Iraq. ''If the Democrats don't challenge him on this,'' Mr. Kucinich said, ''then we'll have no credibility in the general election. The Democratic nominee has to be someone who says 'Bring home the troops.' ''
His campaign, which has raised $5 million, bought a four-page insert in The Des Moines Register to publicize his platform.
Mr. Kucinich also poked fun at his own 5-foot-7 stature. ''I am standing up,'' he said before kicking off his shoes and climbing onto a chair in his socks at a Cedar Rapids coffeehouse.
Even as other candidates are in a tight, four-way race, Kucinich supporters, along with his campaign, insist that he will do better than the polls indicate. That is in part because a number of polls have omitted his name from the list of candidates, they said. In addition, they say, Mr. Kucinich will draw first-time caucusgoers. Steve Fugate, a 37-year-old native Iowan, has never been to a caucus before, but this year he will be a precinct captain in Iowa City.
''I was one of those people that no one really appealed to,'' Mr. Fugate said. ''Dennis is the one that's really different. He's a genuine article.''
JENNIFER 8. LEE
