Democratic presidential candidates closed their caucus campaigns Sunday with broad denunciations of President Bush and snipes at one another after flooding Iowa homes with a last-minute monsoon of mailings and phone calls undercutting their opponents.
In the final hours before Monday's vote, the candidates struggled to keep a civil tone, taking a lesson from what many Democrats said was growing support for Senator John Edwards of North Carolina because of his attempt to present himself as running an upbeat campaign.
But yielding perhaps to the pressure to break out in an extraordinarily tight race -- at least as measured by a Des Moines Register poll published on Sunday -- some candidates went after their rivals even in a state with a reputation for disdaining negative campaigns.
Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, after asserting that he had been ''very careful not to do too many comparisons against other candidates,'' proceeded to tell voters in Newton on Sunday evening that Mr. Edwards, the youthful one-term senator from North Carolina, could not survive a campaign based on national security issues this fall, should he win the nomination.
''In the Senate four years -- and that is the full extent of public life -- no international experience, no military experience, you can imagine what the advertising is going to be next year,'' Mr. Kerry said. With a grin, he added: ''When I came back from Vietnam in 1969 I don't know if John Edwards was out of diapers then. Well, I'm sure he was out of diapers.''
Mr. Edwards, who is 50, was two months short of his 16th birthday when Mr. Kerry returned from his tour of duty in Vietnam.
Later Sunday evening, Mr. Edwards responded: ''I honor his service in Vietnam. In 1969, I was sitting around a kitchen table with my parents trying to figure out how we would pay for college like so many Iowans do every single day. And that is a difference between me and Senator Kerry.''
Late Sunday night, Mr. Kerry called Mr. Edwards to apologize for the remark, Mr. Edwards's advisers said.
In a departure from the intense campaigning in Iowa, Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, traveled 1,100 miles to Plains, Ga., to attend church services with former President Jimmy Carter. Mr. Carter, whose own national career took off at the Iowa caucuses in 1976, offered kind words for his ''fellow Christian,'' and praised him for opposing the war in Iraq but did not explicitly endorse his candidacy.
Dr. Dean returned Sunday afternoon to Davenport, Iowa, to appear alongside what his campaign billed as a real surprise guest campaigner: his wife, Judith Steinberg Dean. It was her first campaign appearance with Dr. Dean this year and her first ever in Iowa, and it came at a time when polls and interviews with voters signaled that support for Dr. Dean was declining.
In his final hours on an exhausting if colorful day of traveling across Iowa, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri asserted that he was ''the positive Democrat,'' even as his own campaign joined others this weekend in the under-the-radar barrage of mailings and phone calls that had many Iowans refusing to pick up their telephones and others throwing out mail unopened.
Across Iowa, the candidates returned to the themes that they believed would bring them to victory.
Before Mr. Kerry raised questions about Mr. Edwards's gravitas, Dr. Dean criticized fellow Democrats for supporting the war in Iraq, while Mr. Gephardt told a labor audience that he had battled the free trade treaties his opponents had backed.
Again and again, the candidates pleaded with supporters to vote on Monday. The intensity of their appeals reflected calculations by all the campaigns that in a race this tight, turnout would be crucial.
''We're past the preliminaries; we're a day from your caucuses,'' Mr. Edwards said at one of a series of overcrowded rallies during the day.
''You must give me a shot at George Bush,'' Mr. Edwards added. ''You give me a shot at George Bush, I will give you the White House.''
Dr. Dean, before walking hand-in-hand with his wife into a room packed with voters and cameras, stopped to offer a personal plea to Iowans. ''Would you guys please promise me that you will go to caucus at 6:30 on Monday?'' he asked.
And Mr. Gephardt, looking weary, urged supporters to ignore a poll in The Des Moines Register showing him in fourth place, saying his support from labor unions and people who remember him from his 1988 campaign would carry him to victory on Monday.
''My name is Dick Gephardt: I'm going to win the Democratic nomination and I'm going to beat George Bush,'' Mr. Gephardt said to union supporters here on Sunday.
On television, the negative advertisements that had battered Iowans for days were gone, replaced by sunny advertisements in which the Democrats built up their credentials.
But the atmosphere was rougher behind the scenes, where the candidates dispatched a wave of last-minute mailings, e-mail messages and phone calls, using every tool of modern campaigning at their disposal.
Attacks had previously come mostly from Mr. Gephardt and Dr. Dean, who focused the brunt of it on each other. But Mr. Kerry's campaign, in the last days, joined in the rush.
The one exception was Mr. Edwards, who aides said had not sent out any negative mailings or countenanced any attack telephone calls.
One flyer from Mr. Kerry's campaign singles out Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt for their calls to revoke all of the White House's tax cuts. It includes pictures of their faces, superimposed over a tax form, with the blaring headline ''These Two Candidates Want Hard-Working Middle Class Iowa Families to Pay Higher Taxes.'' It concludes, ''John Kerry is the only leading candidate who will fight against increases in middle class taxes.''
A handout from Mr. Kerry's campaign hails him as ''the real progressive'' and includes what Dr. Dean's campaign said were elliptical and out-of-context quotes critical of welfare recipients (they ''don't have any self-esteem. If they did they'd be working'') and the Iraq war (''If Saddam keeps thumbing his nose at the inspectors, then we're clearly going to have to do something about it'').
A new mailing from Dr. Dean, in turn, features photographs of Mr. Gephardt and Mr. Kerry and the headline ''Why Didn't They Ask the Tough Questions?''
Inside, the mail piece says, ''Kerry and Gephardt voted 'yes' and gave George Bush unchecked power to invade Iraq and failed to ask tough questions.''
Mr. Gephardt, meanwhile, has a new mailing that warns, ''John Kerry is No Friend to Family Farmers,'' and cites his vote for an amendment that would have eliminated a federal provision boosting the use of alternative fuel sources like corn-based ethanol.
During ''This Week'' on ABC on Sunday Mr. Stephanopoulos confronted Mr. Kerry about his mailings and asked him how they squared with his own vows to avoid attacks on fellow Democrats.
''I put no television ads on at all that are negative, George,'' he said. ''We have put out some mailings that show the comparison of the candidates. Now, I think that that was in response, incidentally, to some other mailings that came at us. We never began that process, never.''
Democratic leaders took note of the intense exchanges among the candidates, and what they described as a fierce but not unusual deluge of mail, and argued that it was good for their party.
''Candidates need to be tested if they are going to be the nominee,'' said Steve Lynch, the Chicasaw Democratic chair, who said he was supporting Dr. Dean but had been increasingly impressed by Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry.
The maneuvering came as Democrats prepared for the final crunch of mobilizing supporters in a contest whose outcome was expected by Democrats here to pare down this crowded field.
At a bar in downtown Des Moines early Sunday morning, Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager, drinking his usual Diet Coke, and Steve Elmendorf, a senior Gephardt adviser, looked wearily at the front page of The Des Moines Register, which illustrated the results of the poll by showing photographs of both their candidates over red downward pointing arrows.
Dr. Dean spent his morning with Mr. Carter, posing proudly next to the former president who has become a symbol of the caucuses. The moment provided at least a hint that he was being supported by Mr. Carter, though the former president was careful to say that was not the case.
The moment also offered Mr. Carter a bit of validation as well.
''It's kind of nice for a has-been politician to have these live candidates call on you, to be remembered,'' President Carter said, noting that General Wesley K. Clark has also said he would like to attend church with the Carters. ''I hope we'll have them all come.''
In Plains, Dr. Dean spent a quiet morning largely out of public view, first in the Carters' home, then at the Maranatha Baptist Church, where national reporters were not allowed to observe him. After services, on the picturesque Main Street of the tiny town, Dr. Dean noted that the raucous reception seemed out of place, and said, ''I'm going to resist the temptation to give a big long political speech here.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
