Thousands of low-income households with a disabled family member stand to lose part of their public assistance benefits because of a proposed change in state regulations intended to save New York State $9 million, according to Pataki administration officials.
In his budget address on Tuesday, Gov. George E. Pataki plans to include those savings along with other cuts to help deal with the state's estimated $5.1 billion budget deficit for the fiscal year that starts April 1, an administration budget official said.
''There will be cuts in the budget,'' said the official, who would speak only on the condition of anonymity. ''The economy is starting to come back, but make no mistake, the state faces a $5.1 billion deficit. You have to cut spending to close that gap.''
The change does not require legislative approval, but because Governor Pataki plans to include the $9 million savings in his budget, legislators will have a chance to address the issue and perhaps to restore the money.
The proposal came as a surprise to many legislators, as well as advocates for the disabled and independent experts, who said that only a handful of states had tried a similar change.
In addition to the $9 million in state savings, local governments across the state would also save a total of $9 million, the administration said in its proposal, a copy of which was provided to The New York Times by an opponent of the change.
In a state budget of more than $90 billion, the total savings would be minimal but at least 26,700 families, many in New York City, could be affected, according to an ''impact statement'' included with the proposal that was confirmed with an administration official.
''For many families, a cut like this can be devastating,'' said Mark Greenberg, the director of policy for the Center for Law and Social Policy, a nonpartisan research and policy organization based in Washington. ''It's only a small number of states where this has come up, and it has been very controversial when it was proposed.''
Under the Pataki administration's plan, those households affected by this change would lose $90 per month on average, according to an estimate provided in the proposal. For a family with a fixed monthly income of only several hundred dollars, that loss could have a significant impact, advocates for the poor said.
''One of the many reasons we think it is illegal is that the state has always recognized that households with disabled families have higher needs and this would undercut them,'' said Susan Antos, a staff lawyer for the Greater Upstate Law Project, a statewide support center and advocacy group for the disadvantaged.
The new rules would change what has been New York's policy since the federal government made sweeping changes to the welfare program in 1996, eliminating the guarantee of federal aid and giving states lump sums of money and vast discretion over how to spend it.
The change would affect elderly, blind or otherwise disabled people in roughly 40,000 households in the state that get Supplemental Security Income, or S.S.I., as well as Temporary Assistance to Needy Families, or TANF, according to the impact statement written by the administration and attached to the proposed regulatory change.
The change, actually a complicated series of accounting shifts, would reduce TANF benefits by varying amounts, depending on the size of a disabled person's household.
As an example, advocates pointed to a hypothetical case of a poor single mother with a disabled child. In the past, the family would have been considered a household of one, and the mother would have received a monthly TANF payment of $414, while the child would have gotten an S.S.I. payment.
Under the new proposal, the family would be considered a household of two. If no one were receiving an S.S.I. payment, the TANF payment would rise to $501. But because the child received an S.S.I. payment, the state would now pro-rate the TANF payment. For the hypothetical household, it would cut the payment in half, to $250, so that the mother and child would lose $164 a month.
''It clearly doesn't make any sense to give assistance to a recipient twice for the same needs,'' said Jack Madden, a spokesman for the Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance, which oversees how aid is distributed.
''New York has always provided generous assistance, but this kind of double counting is not only inappropriate, it also adds as a disincentive for people to seek employment and enter the work force.''
Assembly Democrats said the Pataki administration was trying to effect the rule change with little public scrutiny.
Assemblywoman Deborah J. Glick, a Manhattan Democrat who is chairwoman of the Assembly's Social Services Committee, said she was notified of the change in a Jan. 6 letter from John E. Robitzek, an official in the state's Office of Temporary and Disability Assistance. For such a change to take effect, she said, it needs only to be entered in the State Register after a period of public comment.
''Within the context of trying to deal with budgetary shortfalls and the impact of rising costs around education, the governor and the office of the budget are looking very carefully for every opportunity to ratchet down state expenses,'' Ms. Glick said.
A fiscal analyst for the Assembly said that since the savings from the change would be included in the governor's budget, ''we could try to get the amount of state appropriations bumped up or we could try and address it through budget negotiations.''
Along with other Democratic Assembly members, Ms. Glick was sharply critical of the administration's move.
''I think that they have never quite understood the direct impact to families,'' she said, ''nor have they demonstrated a particular concern for struggling families.''
