'I want to thank my incredibly wonderful wife.'
Howard Dean stood in the doorway of his Gulfstream jet, waving for the phalanx of cameras as if he already were president of the United States, his smile so broad it seemed to stretch beyond his face. Glancing back at him from two steps below was his wife of 23 years, Judith Steinberg Dean.
That's right. His wife. Mrs. Dean stepped onto Iowa soil for the first time on Sunday afternoon, making her debut on the campaign trail her husband has been treading ceaselessly for two years.
One of the first things she did was make it known that she preferred to be called Mrs. Dean, the name she uses everywhere but in her medical office or the hospital.
It was a carefully orchestrated moment, a strategic Sunday surprise for a candidate who had surged steadily for the past six months only to find himself slipping in polls on the eve of the most important election of his life.
At the suggestion of Ruth Harkin, the wife of Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, Dr. Dean called his wife on Saturday and asked her to fly out.
Arriving here from her home in Burlington, Vt., on a private Lear 35 jet, Mrs. Dean was shepherded onto the Gulfstream that had just ferried her husband from Plains, Ga., where he attended church with former President Jimmy Carter, who praised Dr. Dean's courage, but also the rest of the Democratic field.
Corralled inside the private airport lounge, reporters and photographers were blocked from documenting Mrs. Dean's arrival, then led out to the tarmac, where they stood in the 7-degree cold behind a rope. About 20 minutes after her plane landed, the couple emerged from his, as though they had traveled together.
Once on the ground, Dr. Dean grabbed his wife's hand and held his up to wave at the cameras a second time. Leading him the 20 feet to the bus, she looked back as if unsure what to do next. She ducked aboard the luxury bus emblazoned ''People-Powered Howard Express,'' and he waved a third time before climbing aboard.
''For those of you who might not know, my name is Judy Dean,'' Mrs. Dean said, struggling to find the microphone, an hour later at West High School, where a raucous rally of 1,000 people welcomed her with chants of ''We want Judy.''
''I haven't been here with Howard as much as I would like,'' Mrs. Dean said, her eyes darting back and forth from her speech to the adoring, applauding crowd. ''We have a son in high school, a daughter in college and I have a medical practice in Vermont with patients that depend on me daily. I wanted to come here today, and I wanted to say thank you to Iowa and to support my husband for president, Howard Dean.''
Then they hugged.
Dr. Dean, looking happier than he has in days, pre-empted his normal list of thank-yous to local supporters to say: ''I want to thank my incredibly wonderful wife for spending her Sunday in Iowa.''
Then, just as they had practiced backstage, the Deans and Mr. Harkin grabbed hands and raised them above their heads.
As the candidate's caravan rolled away to Cedar Rapids, the couple joined the journalists covering the campaign but refused to be photographed and stipulated that the entire conversation be off the record.
After attending a second rally, Mrs. Dean planned to fly home on Sunday night to Vermont, where she had a full schedule of patients on caucus day.
JODI WILGOREN
