'Educated Guess'  Ani DiFranco
All of Ani DiFranco's quirks, both endearing and annoying, are magnified on ''Educated Guess'' (Righteous Babe), an album she performed, produced and engineered all by herself.
''Educated Guess'' is one logical extrapolation of the career Ms. DiFranco has built on independence. It's the 16th full-length album she has released on her own label since 1990. Ms. DiFranco has become a college-circuit heroine, and her concerts are filled with young women singing along. She speaks everything on her mind in fearlessly articulate songs and poems about love, politics and the continuing process of finding her identity. ''I've got a lot of love and a lot of nerve/Watch me while I take this curve,'' she sings in the title song of ''Educated Guess.''
From the beginning Ms. DiFranco radiated skill and self-confidence, quick-strumming her guitar and pouring out words in a voice that can be bright or tart, affectionate or testy. Unlike typical coffeehouse folkies, she embraced rhythm, adding funk beats and jazzy horns to a band that kept expanding until she dissolved it in 2002.
For ''Educated Guess'' Ms. DiFranco deliberately limited her options. She restricted herself to an old eight-track reel-to-reel tape recorder and the sounds she could make herself, essentially guitars and voice. The album flaunts its homemade origins. The multitracked guitars aren't always in tune with one another, and background noises trickle in. Yet it's not an album of acoustic vérité. Ms. DiFranco still exercises her ingenuity as she stacks up various guitars into syncopated patterns and surrounds herself with her own vocal harmonies.
While minimal production can make an album intimate, Ms. DiFranco has been busily confessional throughout her career. ''Educated Guess'' sounds only a shade more unguarded than past albums. Ms. DiFranco is still navigating the shifting balance between love and autonomy: ''My heart is just a muscle, and simply put, it's sore,'' she declares. Although Ms. DiFranco is an optimist by both temperament and determination, on ''Educated Guess'' she doesn't force happy endings.
The album has some flirtations in ''Bliss Like This'' and ''Company,'' but its most emotionally exposed songs -- ''Bubble,'' ''Bodily,'' ''Origami,'' ''Swim'' -- are about breakups, each seizing a metaphor. ''I hated to pop the bubble of me and you,'' she sings, strumming her guitar hard as wah-wah distortion wells up around her, ''but it only held enough oxygen for a trip or two to the moon and back again.'' In ''Bodily,'' one of her bleakest songs, she plucks stark minor chords as she finds herself with ''My head just barely above/the darkest water I've ever known.''
Yet perhaps because the album was made in solitude, it also spotlights a certain narcissism. Every song is in the first person, and every one revolves around what the singer needs, wants and thinks; she never leaves herself behind. ''Since when did this me me me/Become the be all and end all of me,'' she sings in ''Origami,'' and she's not talking about herself, but complaining about a man who's too dependent on her. A few tracks are spoken poems, which aren't saved from their hectoring tone by studio tinkering or by Ms. DiFranco's friendliest voice: ''Why can't all decent men and women call themselves feminists?'' she insists, preaching to the converted.
Still, that assurance is inseparable from Ms. DiFranco's determination to reveal all she can: every fluctuation of uncertainty, pleasure, anger and tenderness. And it's worth putting up with a few overbearing moments to hear someone so willing to take chances.
'Underneath the Stars'  Kate Rusby
Kate Rusby's songs of thwarted love have a long pedigree. Most of them draw their lyrics from traditional songs, and she sets them to melodies that hold on to the stately symmetries of Celtic tradition. Her voice embraces both the taut, dignified delivery of British traditional singers and a tremulous immediacy that makes the songs sound anything but archival.
''Underneath the Stars'' (Compass), Ms. Rusby's fifth solo album, offers an oblique reflection on times of war. It's full of songs about sailors and soldiers who have gone off to sea or battle, and the women who wait for them as hope drifts away.
Nearly every song is lovelorn, though she finds some twists; in ''Let Me Be,'' she dismisses four eager suitors only to pine for a soldier who won't pay attention to her. And tucked in between the old ballads are a few of her own songs: ''Falling,'' a waltz about abject devotion, and ''Underneath the Stars,'' a song of parting that compares her man's departure to the impersonal movements of the stars.
Her backup is pristinely understated, using traditionalist fiddle, whistle and accordion along with gleaming guitars and a hushed brass chorale; like Ms. Rusby's voice, it sounds folky but not imitative. Poised and delicate, with a steely serenity, ''Underneath the Stars'' is a quiet gem.
New CD's
