LEAVE it to Steven P. Jobs to sell the razors and give away the blades.
Common Silicon Valley wisdom has hewed for decades to the business adage that to establish a successful business in consumer products, you must be willing to lose money on the razors and look for profits from selling the blades. A notable example has been Microsoft's money-losing Xbox video game business. By hemorrhaging money on each video game console (razor) sold and hoping someday to make it up on game software (razor blades), Microsoft's home and entertainment division reported losses of almost $1 billion last year.
Now, along comes Mr. Jobs, the chief executive of Apple Computer, who once again is standing the common wisdom on its head. For its fiscal first quarter of 2004, Apple sold nearly 750,000 of its palm-sized iPod digital music players (razors) for an average price of $400, while selling 30 million songs (blades) for about 99 cents each. While Mr. Jobs has repeatedly said that Apple makes little or no profit from each song downloaded, the company said last week that its iPod sales were crucial to Apple's financial resurgence.
Mr. Jobs has already received widespread credit for breaking the digital impasse between the recording industry and music consumers with Apple's iTunes store of downloadable songs. But the sales success of the iPod player indicates he may be onto something even bigger for Apple.
Mr. Jobs's next big thing is buttressed by mounting evidence of a post-PC era in which silicon, not software, will be king. That is likely to bring wrenching changes in the technology world, largely dominated by Microsoft for the last decade. Under Microsoft's hegemony, hardware became a low-cost commodity. Now it may be software's turn.
Richard Wallace, a columnist for Electronic Engineering Times, a trade publication, captured the shift in an article he wrote from the recent Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas. ''The irony is that while software gets the glory,'' Mr. Wallace wrote, ''it's silicon that's at the heart of the industry's next darling: pervasive media.''
That the iPod is more than just another hand-held gizmo was evident in Apple's recently announced surprise alliance with Hewlett-Packard, which plans to offer a version of the iPod, giving the device even broader distribution and marketing support. Hewlett, which in the fourth quarter was the world leader in unit sales of personal computers, also plans to place Apple's iTunes software, and some other Apple technology, on every consumer PC it sells.
The deal was a strategic coup for Mr. Jobs, as was evident in the reaction from Dave Fester, general manager of the Windows digital media division at Microsoft, who accused Hewlett of limiting consumer choice by including Apple music software instead of Microsoft software on its PC's. Many in the industry found irony in the remark: Microsoft is typically the one accused of limiting the public's choice with its industry-dominant Windows operating system.
For Microsoft, the issue transcends online music. The foundation of Microsoft's power and leverage in the computing industry is based almost entirely on a set of software sockets known as application programmers' interfaces, or A.P.I.'s. It is those A.P.I.'s that other software publishers must adapt to in writing programs for use on Windows machines. By controlling the shape of the sockets, and what can fit into them, Microsoft has a powerful advantage against its competitors.
The Justice Department's antitrust lawsuit in the 1990's was about Silicon Valley's quarrel with Microsoft over control of the A.P.I.'s. During the trial in 1998, Apple's lead software designer, Avi Tevanian, described his company's efforts to persuade PC makers to bundle Apple's QuickTime media software with their machines and how Microsoft demanded that Apple ''knife the baby'' -- in other words, drop the QuickTime bundling effort.
Now, with the new Apple-Hewlett alliance, Mr. Jobs finally has a QuickTime bundling arrangement. The program, which allows for the playing of video clips on a PC, will be a standard feature of every Hewlett-Packard computer. So will another Apple software technology, Rendezvous, which is an A.P.I. designed to let the computer identify and create links to any printer, camera, music player or other digital device without complicated configuration procedures on the user's part.
Simply put, Mr. Jobs has managed to inject Apple's DNA into the PC world, meaning that it will be increasingly easy for his company to offer PC users any kind of iPod-style device -- whether for music or other media -- the company may create in the future.
Don't be surprised, in other words, if Mr. Jobs and Apple have many razors in the works.
New Economy
