A man fell through the ice in Prospect Park Lake in Brooklyn yesterday morning, triggering an unsuccessful two-hour search for his body in the frigid water by three police teams and Fire Department scuba divers, the authorities said.
The man, whose identity remains unknown, was walking alone on the western part of the lake about 9 a.m. when several witnesses saw him fall through, said Joseph Woznica, deputy chief of the Fire Department, at a lakeside news conference.
The witnesses heard a shout for help from the man, who was wearing brown clothes and appeared to be in his 20's, Chief Woznica said. The man pulled himself out of the water and stood for a moment before falling through the ice again, said one police officer. He bobbed up, yelling for help a second time, and then disappeared under the ice, the officer said.
One of the witnesses went on the ice to try to rescue the man, but fell through himself, said Liam Kavanagh, a deputy commissioner of the Parks Department. The would-be rescuer pulled himself free and returned to shore.
Shortly afterward, a helicopter arrived carrying divers with the Police Department's Air-Sea Rescue unit. An emergency operation was set up at the lake's southern end, near the Grecian Shelter, Chief Woznica said. They were soon joined by other diving teams from the Police and Fire Departments.
''Conditions were extremely difficult due to the large ice pack and the cold temperatures,'' Chief Woznica said. The ice was a foot thick in spots, but open water with ducks and geese on it was visible in the middle.
In such cold water, a man trapped under the ice could survive for an hour and a half at the most, Chief Woznica said.
The two-man diving teams, wearing insulated dry suits, took turns searching the lake from a site just beyond three small islands about 40 yards from the lake's southern shore. In less than an hour, dozens of officials from the Police, Fire and Parks Departments arrived to help.
The lake is about six feet deep in the area where the man disappeared, and visibility in the water was close to zero, said Capt. Thomas Dougherty of the Police Department's Emergency Service Unit. The divers relied mostly on their hands to conduct the search, dividing the lake's southern side into grids using ropes and buoys, Captain Dougherty said. The divers themselves were connected to ropes, he said, and if they had tugged to signal trouble, officers on shore could have pulled them to safety.
After searching for almost two hours with no success, the divers walked back to shore, and fire and police officials ended the rescue effort. An effort to recover the man's body is expected to begin this morning, Chief Woznica said.
Despite the recent cold weather, almost all the city's 32 ponds and lakes remain dangerous, said Parks Commissioner Adrian Benepe. There are 86 signs on Prospect Park Lake warning passers-by not to go onto the ice, and red wooden ice rescue ladders can be found at 20 locations around the lake, Mr. Benepe added.
A man fell through the ice last winter in Prospect Park Lake but was rescued by a Parks Department official who happened to be nearby, Mr. Benepe said.
