The Walt Disney Company has been quietly testing a video-on-demand service in three cities since October. The company's executives talk about the service, called MovieBeam, as a modest business that is an attractive alternative for consumers who want to avoid paying high late fees to video rental stores.
But in fact, MovieBeam, now available in Jacksonville, Fla., Salt Lake City and Spokane, Wash., and to be introduced in other cities later this year, is more than just a way to help movie fans save money. It is also an early salvo by Disney in the battle over who controls content: entertainment creators or those who distribute it, like cable and satellite services.
With MovieBeam, consumers can watch any of 100 new movies that have been transmitted to and stored on a 160-gigabyte hard drive enclosed in a box on a television set.
''We're providing consumers with the back wall of the video store,'' said Peter E. Murphy, senior executive vice president and chief strategic officer of Disney. The collection of latest hits that lines the perimeter of a typical Blockbuster or Hollywood Video, he said, ''is where a rental chain earns 80 percent of its revenue.''
Mr. Murphy says he thought that MovieBeam had a strong shot at success. The company points to research showing that residents surveyed in the three test markets report spending from $7.50 to $18.50 a month on video late fees alone.
''People hate the video rental process and the late charges,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''We are after the heavy movie renter.''
Consumers using MovieBeam download the movies into set-top boxes made by Samsung, using proprietary technology licensed from Dotcast, a company based in Kent, Wash. Disney charges subscribers a $7 monthly rental fee, plus $2.49 or $3.99 for each movie purchased.
Customers navigate through a guide on the screen to pick a movie. The DVD-quality transmission -- which is sent as digital data over the airwaves alongside a standard PBS program -- can be viewed for 24 hours before the film stops working. While it is available, customers can stop, start and fast-forward the movie. Every two weeks, the customer's set-top box sends purchase information via phone line to MovieBeam's billing computers.
MovieBeam rotates the available movies, replacing 10 each month. The company said it thought that the number was sufficient to satisfy customers who wanted to be able to watch a movie at the spur of the moment.
The service gives customers more choice than the DVD rental service offered by Netflix, the Internet-based company, Mr. Murphy said. While Netflix offers thousands of movies, he noted, it restricts the number of movies a subscriber can check out at any one time (depending on the service plan, the limit is two to eight movies).
Disney executives said that the start-up and operating costs for MovieBeam were low. It costs about $250,000 to set up the service in a city. Corporate staffing is small, and if MovieBeam becomes a success, Disney can outsource customer service work. The company says it needs only two million subscribers to reach a break-even point.
Still, MovieBeam's success is far from certain. Films become available to subscribers only after they are released to video rental stores and online DVD merchants. And while customers purchase the service at retail outlets like Circuit City, Best Buy and Sears, they do not leave the store with a box under their arm. The equipment is shipped later by MovieBeam, preloaded with the latest films.
Then there is the question of clutter. The box, which has an external antenna, must sit on top of the television, and it adds one more piece of gear to a collection that probably already includes a VCR, a DVD player, a cable box and a video game machine.
''This service's success will ultimately depend on marketing,'' said Adi Kishore, an analyst with the Yankee Group. ''And that is a positive sign for Disney, because they are so good at it.''
Even if the MovieBeam service does not survive as a business, it illustrates the company's continuing efforts to alter an entertainment distribution chain in which content providers must share revenues with distributors. By distributing programming directly, Disney hopes to earn a bigger share of consumers' entertainment dollars.
MovieBeam uses the airwaves to transmit programming to its customers, but the set-top box can easily be modified to receive data via a high-speed Internet connection, company executives said. And to compete with digital video recorder technology from services like TiVo, content can be expanded to include pay-per-view television and sports programming that can be watched at any time.
''We can use other systems besides datacasting to deliver movies, TV or sports on demand,'' Mr. Murphy said. ''We're a branded content delivery company. We're not making a bet on any one delivery structure.''
Regardless of which system wins, Disney's aim is to call its own shots.
''Disney is constantly trying to service the consumer directly and relegate cable to the status of a dumb pipe,'' Tom Wolzien, an analyst with Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company, said.
Once digitized, any type of entertainment could easily be sent to subscribers' homes without paying a third-party distributor. ''The power of the gatekeeper,'' Mr. Wolzien said, ''is starting to diminish.''
TECHNOLOGY  Correction:  January 22, 2004, Thursday  An article in Business Day on Monday about MovieBeam, a video-on-demand service offered by the Walt Disney Company, misstated the schedule for adding movies to the rotation of those available. Ten movies are replaced each week, not each month.
