THE BEST AWFUL  By Carrie Fisher  269 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $24.
MAGGIE DARLING  A Novel  By James Howard Kunstler  324 pages. Atlantic Monthly Press. $23.
The meltdowns of recognizable public figures are fodder for two fizzy comic novels, each with a high-profile heroine. James Howard Kunstler's ''Maggie Darling'' conjures a certain well-known, tirelessly perfect domestic goddess, someone whose fans say things like: ''Love your balsamic duck. It's become my main company dish.'' She is the kind of woman who serves homemade bûche de Noël to the state troopers she has summoned to kick her husband out of their oft-photographed Connecticut home.
But if Mr. Kunstler has to make leaps of imagination to describe this dynamo and the 23 varieties of basil that she grows (''I can handle the pressure,'' says her hunky new gardener), Carrie Fisher has a home-court advantage.
The breakdown she describes appears to be her own.
''The Best Awful,'' Ms. Fisher's most amusingly snarky book since ''Postcards From the Edge,'' makes every conceivable effort to signal its skewed perspective. Even the logo of its publisher, Simon &amp; Schuster, appears upside down on the spine of the book's dust jacket, while this tale is said to be ''based on a truant's story.'' Ms. Fisher's fondness for criminal wordplay is allowed to run rampant, the better to signal the recklessness of its heroine. Thus, ''Off with their studio heads!''And, ''Je ne sais Kuala Lumpur.'' And, ''I must continue to make ends meet, since I can't seem to make them poultry.''
''The Best Awful'' picks up the story of Suzanne Vale, Ms. Fisher's previous and once far more glamorous alter ego, as she hurtles toward a brick wall. She has lost Leland, the father of her daughter, Honey, to another man.
''I turn people gay,'' Suzanne says at a dinner party, professing to have a superpower.
The gay man sitting beside her replies, ''You know, I believe I might've seen some of your work.''
Suzanne has long been out of circulation, and she has begun to feel bored with ''her noble lump-of-dough-dull life.''
Well, there is one good way to grapple with all these problems. And suddenly Suzanne sees it. Why doesn't she just stop taking the drugs that keep her bipolar mental illness at bay?
''Race you to the end of my personality!'' Suzanne is soon exclaiming. ''You won!'' And with that, this tartly funny book is off to the races, inviting readers to tag along on a wild manic ride. ''Send for the Sherpas!'' Suzanne cries while at her giddiest. ''I'm high on Everest, with the wind in my hair!''
Having already been through rehab in Ms. Fisher's earlier quasi fiction, Suzanne now zooms off in the opposite direction. She gets fired up enough to have her hair chopped off, visit a tattoo parlor and get picked up at a producer's memorial service by a star billed as Hollywood's easy-riding bad boy, who ''grinned his naughty grin and raised those famous eyebrows'' and also ''smelled like high salaries and first-dollar gross laced with fairly strong marijuana.'' All of this is frantic, but none of it is escapade enough.
So she heads off on a disastrous trip to Tijuana. There a drug misadventure tips her into a downswing, which Ms. Fisher describes with lacerating clarity. ''Inextricably trapped in an airless unfriendly skull once her own,'' Suzanne winds up institutionalized during the book's second half. With a mixture of desperation and fierce comic flair, she is able to weather this well-evoked ordeal by the story's end. But the bad thing about being a survivor, Suzanne points out, is that ''you keep having to get into difficult situations in order to show off your gift.''
The difficulties that befall Mr. Kunstler's Maggie Darling are more conventional. And there are a few more of them than this meringue of a story can handle, but never mind. Mr. Kunstler writes with ingratiating affection about a woman who might be endlessly happy in ''the kitchen, her refuge against all the gales of life,'' if it weren't for life's habit of ruining her soufflés, figuratively speaking. Incidentally Mr. Kunstler whips up culinary details as readily as Maggie does. And even these touches combine authentic allure with screwball humor.
Fond as he is of Maggie, Mr. Kunstler makes her a hot number and spares her the actual legal difficulties that plague her real-life counterpart. Though he draws on enough recognizable detail to qualify ''Maggie Darling'' as a roman à clef, much of it is fancifully scrambled: for instance an affair between Maggie and a Sting-like British heartthrob who uses the word 'tis in conversation. Their romance disintegrates after he starts calling her Mum.
Maggie is available for such adventures because she has caught her husband cheating on her in the midst of the famously decorous Darling Christmas party. While musicians play traditional numbers (according to Mr. Kunstler) like ''Rufty Tufty'' and ''Dick's Maggot,'' the picture-perfect Darling marriage shatters into something other than a holiday treat.
The book sends Maggie careering past far too many supporting characters, amusing as some of them are. (The old friend who takes up residence in Maggie's guest room winds up having ''transformed 264 square feet of perfect Shaker austerity into something that resembled a South Florida convenience store after a hurricane.'') By the time Mr. Kunstler works a helicopter and a Hartford crack house into the book's finale, he has functionally spiraled into outer space. His book, like its heroine, fares best when staying close to home.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
