PEYTON MANNING failed his final exam yesterday; Tom Brady passed his with flying colors in a classic case of hype meeting reality.
Last week at this time, we were gasping in awe over Manning's brilliance. We proclaimed that he had fulfilled his destiny -- actually, a destiny invented for him. He was the hope, the counterargument for all the running and scrambling coming out of the quarterback position. In relatively balmy Kansas City against a porous Chiefs defense, Manning was nearly perfect.
Who would have guessed that a week later Manning and his Indianapolis Colts would be run out of New England? Manning was no match for a defense that knew that he couldn't run, that knew he didn't like to run and that made him run.
After the Colts' 24-14 loss, a crestfallen Manning repeatedly and nobly took the blame. ''I felt I've done my part well to get us to this point and I needed to do my part well for us to win and didn't do it,'' he said.
But this really wasn't all Manning's fault. Most of it was the Patriots' fault, and some of it was ours. We build up to tear down, overrate and overhype. Manning has flaws in a fast-moving game like this, against a defense like New England's. He's not mobile.
Brady said he knew Manning was in trouble early last week when he saw the Patriots' defense practicing. After watching what they had prepared for Manning, he said he thought: ' ''Oh, God. I'm glad I'm not playing quarterback.' ''
Manning threw 47 passes and completed 23 for 237 yards, with 4 interceptions; Brady threw 37 passes and completed 22 for 237 yards, with one interception.
Brady is a bit more problematic to judge. He was tremendously hyped during his first season as a starter, a quarterback who went from seemingly nowhere to stardom. Two seasons ago in an A.F.C. divisional playoff game, he flew into the spotlight at Foxboro Stadium. In swirling snow against the Oakland Raiders, Brady was hit on a perfect cornerback blitz. He fumbled, and the game seemed over. The call was reversed, however, and the Patriots went on to win the game, went on to reach the Super Bowl and went on to beat the high-octane St. Louis Rams and Kurt Warner -- another quarterback we had all but put in the Hall of Fame before his time.
Brady was the toast of the town, but when the Patriots failed to make the playoffs last season, critics -- and I was one of them -- said Brady was a football Cinderella. That year Brady learned the reality of the pros: that championships are hard to come by. Some players spend their entire careers in the league and never reach the championship game.
That's a prospect that flashed before Manning's eyes yesterday when someone asked him if a championship was the only thing that affirmed a quarterback.
''I certainly would like to win a Super Bowl -- more than one,'' Manning said. ''I've played six years and haven't done that yet. I'm going to keep sawing wood and keep trying to get there.''
Brady-Manning is the story of the tortoise and the hare: Brady, a sixth-round pick, the 199th player chosen in the 2000 draft, and Manning, the all-American, the first pick in the 1998 draft.
Brady is not the pure passer Manning is, but he's going to his second Super Bowl. Brady does not have Manning's ability, but he has a Super Bowl ring and is in great position to get a second.
Brady is also just one piece of an incredible team. The Patriots are not the Philadelphia Eagles with Donovan McNabb or the Colts with Manning or the Tennessee Titans with Steve McNair. The Patriots are like the Carolina Panthers, a genuine team with no star players to speak off, a team with hard-hitting, hard-running role players.
The Patriots, with Brady as their leader, are going to the Super Bowl for the second time in three seasons. No fluke, no asterisk.
''Tom Brady is the greatest winner in football right now,'' said Ty Law, who intercepted Manning three times yesterday. ''I don't care what anybody says -- maybe his numbers are not eye-popping, but the rest of them are sitting at home. I'll play with him any day.''
Brady has been virtually flawless this season. He has consistently made the hard-to-defend outside throws, made clutch throws when he has had to, and hasn't tried to be Mr. Hero. Manning tried to be Mr. Hero yesterday.
You can reach a point in life where you no longer have to prove anything to anyone. Some reach it earlier, some later, some not at all. Brady learned that lesson after three years as a starter.
''There are only two people I care about proving myself to: myself and my coach,'' Brady said. ''Everybody else really doesn't matter. Regardless of what anybody else thinks, I'm proud to be the quarterback of the team that's going to the Super Bowl two out of the last three years.''
There will be no historic moment for the National Football League. Tony Dungy will not be the first African-American head coach in a Super Bowl this year.
Meanwhile, Manning will not deliver his franchise to the N.F.L.'s promised land in Houston. The Patriots saw to that with a suffocating defense that obliterated our view of a player we had anointed as the golden child come to New England to claim his place in history.
Yesterday, there was no place to be had.
Sports of The Times
