Conrad M. Black, the press baron accused of directing millions of dollars in unauthorized payments to himself and others, has found a new way to infuriate his opponents.
On Sunday, Lord Black, 59, made a deal to sell the controlling interest in his newspaper empire, Hollinger International, to a company owned by David and Frederick Barclay, British brothers with their own growing media empire, for about $178 million. [Page C1.]
The sale amounted to an end run around Hollinger's board orchestrated by Lord Black. The deal with the Barclays was negotiated in secret from the board, further enraging members of the company's special committee, which sued Lord Black on Friday, and of the executive committee, which removed him as nonexecutive chairman on Saturday, according to executives close to the company. Those same executives said that Hollinger's lawyers, who had suspected such a deal might be made, were exploring ways to block it on Sunday evening.
The deal for control of Hollinger, the publisher of The Daily Telegraph of London, The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post, will probably complicate the ability of the board to recover the money it is seeking from Lord Black and its investigation, which is being led by Richard C. Breeden, a former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission.
''This is a showdown between Black and Breeden about who is going to walk away with the money,'' said Laura Jereski, an analyst at the Tweedy, Browne Company, which is a large Hollinger shareholder.
Lord Black, who was born in Canada and received his British title in 2001, owns a 73 percent voting interest in Hollinger International and a 30 percent economic interest, through a publicly traded Canadian company he controls called Hollinger Inc. Mr. Breeden was hired by Hollinger International in November to investigate payments made to company executives and he has made stinging comments about Lord Black's assertion that the payments were authorized by the board.
On Sunday, in a further escalation of hostilities, Lord Black criticized Hollinger's board in a letter, saying that the company's suit against him ''can only be seen as a desperate attempt to prevent me from completing a transaction for Hollinger Inc. and divert attention from misrepresentations they had made about the noncompete payments in November.''
The sale, the lawsuit and Lord Black's removal as nonexecutive chairman by Hollinger effectively end his involvement in the newspaper company that he began with the purchase of two Quebec newspapers in the late 1960's and that catapulted him into the ranks of influential, largely conservative politicians and thinkers. Despite the end of his tenure, he defiantly proclaimed that ''I do not accept the validity of the executive committee's purported removal of me as chairman of the board, nor most of its other recent initiatives.''
In the lawsuit, the company accused Lord Black of misusing ''the company coffers'' by directing more than $224 million in payments to himself and others that were far greater than the value of any services they performed, among other accusations.
The lawsuit goes into extensive detail, including internal e-mail messages that demonstrate Lord Black's often imperial manner and his fondness for grandiose language.
For example, the suit quotes a 2002 e-mail message by Lord Black to a colleague as saying: ''There has not been an occasion for many months when I got on our plane without wondering whether it was really affordable. But I'm not prepared to re-enact the French Revolutionary renunciation of the rights of nobility.''
In another e-mail message that the lawsuit says reflects ''a contempt for public shareholders,'' Lord Black wrote, referring to Hollinger International by its ticker symbol, HLR, ''We have said for some time HLR served no purpose as a listed company other than relatively cheap use of other people's capital.'' The e-mail message added, ''Some others think we are running a gravy train and a gerrymandered share structure and we think they are a bunch of self-righteous hypocrites and ingrates.''
The surprise deal with the Barclay brothers, who operate from a small island that they own off the northwest coast of France, is a complex transaction in which they would take control of a privately held company controlled by Lord Black called Ravelston, which in turn owns a 78 percent stake in Hollinger Inc. In addition, the Barclay brothers, through their company, Press Holdings International, are seeking to buy the outstanding shares of Hollinger Inc., valuing the entire company at $423.8 million Canadian dollars or $325.9 million. The brothers would also take on Hollinger Inc.'s debt of $181.7 million Canadian dollars.
In a separate statement on Sunday, Lord Black said: ''It will be distressing to part from the Telegraph newspapers, The Spectator, the Chicago newspapers and The Jerusalem Post, in particular. But these fine titles must not be hobbled any longer by the current controversies and financial uncertainty. They will be in good and caring hands, and we will be able to focus exclusively on resolving current legal and public relations concerns.''
Still, any deal by Lord Black to sell his stake could run afoul of a court order issued Friday in Chicago at the behest of the S.E.C. barring any interference with Hollinger International's internal investigation. The S.E.C. said in its lawsuit that corporate insiders had tried ''to thwart and obstruct the efforts'' of the review. And the agreement between Lord Black and the Barclay brothers includes certain conditions that could permit the brothers to back out if revelations of financial impropriety were discovered at Hollinger Inc.
It is unclear if or how Hollinger International's board or the S.E.C. could block the transaction because the deal between Lord Black and the Barclay brothers is for Hollinger Inc. and Ravelston, which are both based in Toronto and under the jurisdiction of Canadian regulators.
Hollinger International said that ''The company and the board intend to review the offer for Hollinger Inc. and its implications for Hollinger International.''
Hollinger International's board has hired Lazard, the investment bank, to help restructure the company or possibly sell it.
Lord Black was under pressure to raise money quickly because Hollinger Inc. has an interest payment of $7.4 million due in March, and most analysts suggested that Lord Black did not have enough cash to make the payment. In November, when Hollinger International insisted that Lord Black repay $7.2 million in noncompete fees, he declined, saying he would pay interest until June, and then repay the principal.
An interest payment of $850,000 was supposed to be due on Sunday. If Hollinger Inc. failed to pay its interest within a month of the due date, it would have defaulted on its bonds.
Because Lord Black's shares served as collateral for the bonds, he could have lost control of the newspaper company. In Sunday's letter, Lord Black expressed a change of heart over his scheduled repayments, insisting that some of the noncompete agreements he had been accused of misusing had in fact been approved by the board. Therefore, he said, he would not repay them.
''My legal counsel has determined that documents not available to us in November clearly show that certain disputed noncompete payments were in fact known to and approved,'' he wrote. ''As a result of these discoveries, I am not obligated to and do not feel it is appropriate to return these noncompete payments.''
Hoping to persuade the board of Hollinger International of his good intentions, David Barclay wrote: ''We believe that our acquisition of Hollinger Inc. is the only viable alternative that brings to a positive conclusion the existing relationships among Lord Black and his associates and affiliated companies, on the one hand, and Hollinger Inc. and Hollinger International and their respective subsidiaries, on the other hand.''
Sir David also said, ''Our intentions are well meaning and constructive and we have no wish to interfere with the review that Lazard L.L.C. has been instructed to undertake.''
Two weeks ago, Lord Black made an agreement with Hollinger International that he would not sell his shares in Hollinger Inc., but that deal expired on Sunday. Lord Black said he offered to Hollinger's special committee last Tuesday ''the right to match any bona fide offer for control of Hollinger Inc.,'' but he said, ''they effectively declined that offer on Jan. 15, and canceled the scheduled meeting for further substantive discussions on Jan. 16.''
Herbert Denton, an informal adviser to several institutional investors of Hollinger International, said Lord Black's offer was a red herring. ''The purpose of the special committee is not to buy out Lord Black but to investigate him,'' he said.
News Analysis  Correction:  January 20, 2004, Tuesday  An author identification note was omitted yesterday from a front-page news analysis article, datelined London, about plans by Conrad M. Black to sell the controlling interest in his newspaper empire, Hollinger International. Andrew Ross Sorkin reported from London and Geraldine Fabrikant from Palm Beach, Fla.
