It took Anne LeClair a split second to realize there was opportunity in the murder trial of Scott Peterson, who is accused of killing his wife, Laci, and their unborn son.
No sooner had her county been identified as one of a handful of possible trial sites than Ms. LeClair, a tourism official, was collecting business cards and pulling together promotional materials.
''I FedExed the package the next day to the presiding judge,'' said Ms. LeClair, president and chief executive of the San Mateo County Convention and Visitors Bureau. ''It said that we understand that we are one of the spots; if you select us, here is some stuff to pass along to the media.''
To some it may sound crass, but some San Francisco Bay Area officials are hoping to lure Mr. Peterson's trial to a courtroom in their communities, and evidently no disrespect is intended.
The judge in the case, Al Girolami of Stanislaus County Superior Court, is to decide on Tuesday where to hold the trial. State officials say San Mateo, Santa Clara and Alameda Counties in the Bay Area are in contention, as is Orange County in Southern California.
The Bay Area communities are no slouches when it comes to promotional pitches -- two years ago the Bay Area Sports Organizing Committee was in a feverish competition with New York City to vie for the 2012 Olympic Games.
This time, however, no one dares call them pitches. Interest in the trial is more aptly characterized as yearning, and idle chatter about Mr. Peterson's guilt or innocence is considered unseemly.
''I am going to let the jury decide that one,'' Ms. LeClair said.
That said, tourism officials are seeing nothing but dollar signs in the media frenzy expected to follow Mr. Peterson from Stanislaus County, in what has already been among the most publicized murder cases in the country since O. J. Simpson was acquitted more than eight years ago.
''I am not saying it is the same as us getting the Olympics or something, but some of these trials go on three or four months,'' said Daniel N. Fenton, president and chief executive of the San Jose Convention and Visitors Bureau, a major promoter of Santa Clara County.
In Oakland, the biggest city in Alameda County, Manette Belliveau, executive director of the Convention and Visitors Bureau, said she could envision no downside to landing such a mega-event. Ms. Belliveau dismissed a suggestion that the winning county's association with the murders might taint it.
''If anything, having the media here is always to our advantage,'' she said. ''Sometimes they have impressions, never having visited the city. After spending three or four days with us, they go away with a completely different impression.''
Ms. LeClair, whose organization represents 140 hotels in a county still struggling from the dot-com collapse, said she had been ''careful not to lobby'' the judge in her package, sent a little more than a week ago. But in a telephone interview, her enthusiasm for the trial was unfettered.
She even ticked off a list of subjects in San Mateo County for journalists to pursue during court recesses, from surfers at Maverick's to Larry Ellison's Oracle Corporation.
''It presents all kinds of opportunity for us to showcase San Mateo County to a national audience and put it on the map,'' Ms. LeClair said. ''If it happens, we are going to make the most of it.''
The tale of Ms. Peterson's death and that of her unborn son has been a grim one ever since Mr. Peterson reported her missing from the couple's home in Modesto on Dec. 24, 2002.
Four months later, her body was found washed up on the shores of San Francisco Bay, as was the fetus of their son. Mr. Peterson, who the police said was carrying $10,000 and had dyed his hair, was arrested in Southern California and charged with two counts of murder. He has pleaded not guilty.
Even before the new jostling for a trial site, the case has been seen through a prism of financial opportunity by cable television, which has made it a mainstay of some newscasts and talk shows.
Ted Rowlands, a television reporter for KTVU in Oakland, said the station's Web site ''goes crazy'' with hits whenever there is a new development in the Peterson case posted. Mr. Rowlands, who also appears frequently on the cable talk shows to discuss the case, said that there had been periods of journalistic fatigue, even among the story's biggest cable promoters, but that there was no getting around its great ratings.
''When you reflect, you think this is crazy for these cable companies and other media outlets,'' Mr. Rowlands said. ''But if you take it to the nth degree, there is a financial gain here for the companies. That is the business they are in.''
The new opportunities surrounding a changed venue for the trial stem from Judge Girolami's determination that too many people in the Petersons' hometown, an agricultural center across the Diablo Mountains from here, have made up their minds about Mr. Peterson's guilt.
''Laci Peterson has become a posthumous celebrity, loved and cherished by the community,'' Mr. Peterson's lawyer, Mark Geragos, wrote on Jan. 8 in a motion to move the trial, ''whereas Mr. Peterson has been demonized as an evil outsider.''
Some court insiders regard Santa Clara County as the front-runner, a fact some neighbors attribute to an active campaign by officials in the county. Santa Clara has offered a newly remodeled jury room and a high-tech courtroom that is wired for plasma television hookups and equipped with adjustable platforms and spectator seats.
''It means they are having private off-the-record conversations with the office of the courts saying we would appreciate the assignment if it were given to us and we would do X Y Z to accommodate the anticipated impact,'' said John L. Maltbie, the county manager in neighboring San Mateo County.
Kiri Torre, chief executive of the Santa Clara County Superior Court, said that while she had been in e-mail contact with court officials in Stanislaus County, Santa Clara was not campaigning for the trial.
''We don't do that,'' Ms. Torre said. ''We are just waiting for Tuesday.''
As they wait, Mr. Fenton, the San Jose convention official, said his staff was preparing to call prosecutors and defense lawyers to offer recommendations on hotel accommodations, restaurants, transcription services or whatever else they might need.
''We think this is a good thing,'' he said.
Business and tourism officials in Alameda County said they had lower expectations. Ms. Belliveau, the Oakland convention official, said a big news media contingent would fill only a fraction of the city's 4,500 hotel rooms. Even so, she said, Oakland was eager and willing to receive Mr. Peterson.
''During these down times we welcome any room nights or any media coverage the city might realize,'' Ms. Belliveau said.
But those same down times have some officials privately rooting against their own counties.
One preliminary estimate puts the trial's cost to the host county at $300,000. While under state law the county must be reimbursed, some officials fear the Peterson boom could go bust because of the state's chronic budget problems.
''Given the financial condition of the state,'' said Mr. Maltbie, the San Mateo County manager, ''I wouldn't bet the farm that they would fully reimburse any local government that is on the receiving end of this trial.''
