The dining room table was set up just so in Lesvia Lucas's small white house on Locust Street; Howard Dean bumper stickers to the left, pamphlets to the right, a platter of raw vegetables beside a plastic container of sour cream dip.
Thirty years after immigrating from El Salvador, and 21 years after moving to Des Moines in search of a quiet place to bring up her children, Ms. Lucas is taking part in her first Iowa caucus. Indeed, she was about to play host to a small gathering for Dr. Dean. And all because a Dean supporter had approached Ms. Lucas's 24-year-old niece, Leslie Ruiz, at a Mexican food store on Des Moines's east side a few weeks ago.
''Nobody had ever asked us to be involved before,'' said Ms. Lucas, 54, a postal worker who is worried that Republican interest in privatizing the post office will cost her her job. ''I didn't know what the caucuses were about. It was just something on the radio or on television. But when someone asks you to take part, you know, it makes you feel important.''
In a four-way caucus race that has squeezed so tight in its final hours that the gaps in polls among the candidates have essentially disappeared, the turnout of a few thousand caucus novices might well spell the difference in many of the 1,993 neighborhood gatherings on Monday night.
While Dr. Dean's campaign has been especially aggressive about rounding up newcomers, aiming specifically at young people, Hispanics and independents, others have joined the hunt. Senator John Kerry's campaign has been actively recruiting among veterans; Representative Richard A. Gephardt's campaign has sought union workers. Senator John Edwards is trying to capitalize on polls showing him making a last-minute surge in the race by reaching out to independents and others attracted by his campaign's upbeat tone.
Beyond the specific appeals of the candidates, some first-time participants say they are driven by a strong desire to topple President Bush, or simply by the excitement of such a close contest.
And Iowa aside, attracting new voters has become a central strategy of the Democratic Party, which is still smarting over its narrow loss in 2000, when a relative handful of additional votes in any one of several states would have resulted in a Gore administration. In 2004, the Democrats are facing an incumbent president whose party is in an even stronger electoral position. So increasing the size of the party has become a Democratic lodestar.
''It's crucial,'' said Sarah Leonard, Dr. Dean's press secretary in Iowa. ''A few million more voters in 2000 would have come in pretty handy.''
Dean campaign officials would not say how many people they were confident of turning out on Monday night. ''But I would say that most of them will be first-time caucusgoers,'' Ms. Leonard said. ''This has been very important to us. We are basing a lot of our campaign on this.''
Officials at rival campaigns said much the same thing. ''I think everyone realizes that there will be a higher turnout than ever before,'' said Kim Rubey, Mr. Edwards's press secretary in Iowa. ''And the participation of first-time caucusgoers will be a huge storyline when the history books are written about the 2004 caucuses.''
The key, for all of the candidates, will be whether the newcomers actually show up.
''Usually, we have a small percentage of newcomers,'' said David Redlawsk, an assistant professor of political science at the University of Iowa. ''But if we see a large number this year, it could be decisive.''
It is a bit unusual for campaigns in Iowa to make such a fuss about newcomers, because historically the greatest predictor of caucus attendance has been previous caucus attendance. So campaigns have generally focused their efforts on those who have come before.
But not always. In 2000, Bill Bradley tried to reach out to newcomers, only to lose badly to Mr. Gore's more traditionally run campaign. And in 1988, Pat Robertson brought hundreds of evangelical Christians into the Republican caucuses, helping lead him to a better-than-expected second place finish.
This year, in addition to young people, the Dean campaign has pinned a lot of its hopes on attracting new voters from Iowa's rapidly growing Hispanic community.
Andres Gonzalez, who is spearheading the effort, said that while virtually all of the population growth in Iowa since 1990 has been among Latinos, only 450 out of 60,000 caucus attendees in 2000 came from that community. This year, when 100,000 or more are expected to attend the caucuses, he said, the campaign has set a goal of bringing in 1,000 first-time Hispanic participants.
Kerry campaign officials, while declining to cite specific goals, said they intended to capitalize on the appeal that Mr. Kerry, a decorated Vietnam veteran, has with veterans who have never taken part in the caucuses.
''He's 100 percent veteran and 100 percent of what we need, which makes him 200 percent to me,'' said John Feller, 77, who served in the North Atlantic in World War II and the South Pacific in the Korean conflict. ''I'd vote in all the elections before this, but never took part in the caucuses. I guess nobody really impressed me so much.''
Mr. Feller was pushing hard for Mr. Kerry at Veterans of Foreign Wars Post 9127 in Urbandale, and finding a lot of support among the other veterans. ''I'm doing this so I can feel good on Tuesday morning,'' he said.
Nelson Armbrester, who has been disabled since the Vietnam War, said the caucus process had always been impenetrable to him.
''I never really understood how it worked,'' said Mr. Armbrester, 51, who lives in tiny Humeston near the Missouri border. ''But when John Kerry announced he was going to run, I decided it was time to learn.''
All the campaigns have been pursuing Mr. Armbrester and the handful of other registered Democrats in Wayne County, he said, adding: ''The Dean people are the most aggressive. But let me tell you something about southern Iowa: aggressiveness doesn't work here.''
Dennis Adams, 53, a professional watercolorist and part-time schoolteacher in Woodward, made the half-hour drive down to Des Moines for a morning rally at Mr. Edwards's headquarters on Saturday. He intended to work the phones, go door to door or whatever was needed.
''This is the first time I've walked into Edwards headquarters and it'll be my first caucus,'' Mr. Adams said. ''But I think I can really make a difference on Monday night.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE VOTERS
