If it had been possible to look ahead, just a few months after 9/11, to the memorial design that was unveiled last Wednesday morning at Federal Hall National Memorial, we would have been surprised not only by its beauty, but also by the fact that the footprints of the twin towers are preserved intact, as essential elements in the design. For a very long time it seemed as though sheer political and financial pressure would force those footprints to be freed for development. Protecting those footprints was a remarkable achievement, the result of true aesthetic vision and popular will. Now, Gov. George Pataki and the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation must continue their success in helping to create a worthy memorial. They must vigorously stop even well-meaning attempts to dilute or clutter this powerful space.
The memorial design presented by Michael Arad and Peter Walker is a vision of how all the elements that might come into play can be combined to greatest effect. What they created is not a version of the National Mall in Washington, not a space for the establishment of other, more specific and potentially more literal memorials. The real memorial is the single coherent work of art created by Mr. Arad and Mr. Walker, and it must be protected as such.
The purity of what they have created is a visual purity, embodied in the broad expanse of the space itself, in the congregation of all those trees, in each visitor's emotional discovery of the two voids. The ground level of this memorial takes its power from sight lines that must not be interrupted with artifacts or statues.
The artifacts from the destroyed towers are naturally held sacred by the victims' families and many other Americans. They should and will be preserved for future generations to see -- both in museums at ground zero and in the spaces underneath the memorial itself. The architects have already indicated that is their intention, although those plans are only now being contemplated in detail. While the ground level of the memorial presents a single, intense aesthetic experience, a visitor's understanding of what happened on Sept. 11 can then grow more specific and detailed with each step down to the bedrock below.
It is imperative that the public, the officials and the builders all agree from the beginning that the memorial space is to be regarded as something close to sacrosanct, not to be tampered with, even by those with the best of intentions. There will always be the temptation to re-emphasize the tragedy of the terrorist attack, the city's sense of loss, or the heroism of the victims by putting one particular relic here or there. But every addition would be a huge subtraction from the memorial's impact.
Many hands will be working on the development of Lower Manhattan over the coming years, and the overall plans will undoubtedly change with time. The buildings envisioned by Daniel Libeskind will inevitably adapt themselves to market forces and to the design visions of other architects. But the memorial is not really part of the master plan. It will be financed separately, and the money will flow from public emotion, not market forces. It will be owned and overseen, at least in the beginning, by a foundation.
This foundation is being created even now by John Whitehead, whose guidance as chairman of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation has helped bring us a public process that has successfully created a work of public art for ground zero. The choices for leaders of that foundation will be crucial, especially in its earlier years when the pressures to change the memorial will be most intense. Governor Pataki and Mr. Whitehead must select foundation board members who understand that their role is not simply to raise money, although that will certainly be necessary for building and maintaining this memorial. They must also be dedicated to keeping this powerful and simple memorial intact, minus statues or symbols that are not part of the design.
