In his book ''Bloomberg by Bloomberg,'' Michael R. Bloomberg, businessman, boasted that the company he founded had enjoyed ''phenomenally low turnover.'' Two years into his term, Mr. Bloomberg, mayor, can say much the same of his administration.
The announcement last week that Mr. Bloomberg's commissioner of Housing Preservation and Development, Jerilyn Perine, is resigning for personal reasons served as a reminder of just how rare high-level departures from the Bloomberg administration have been.
It has not always been so for New York City mayors at midterm.
Edward I. Koch was just 74 days into his mayoralty when he lost one deputy mayor, and he forced out three more during a shake-up in his second year in office. By midterm David N. Dinkins had lost a press secretary, a corporation counsel, a health commissioner, a labor relations commissioner and a sanitation commissioner. And a deputy mayor had announced her desire for another job within the administration.
And by the middle of his first term Rudolph W. Giuliani was already on his third budget director, had purged several agencies of midlevel managers, and had lost his buildings commissioner, correction commissioner, commissioner of youth services and the head of the Health and Hospitals Corporation.
Mr. Bloomberg, by contrast, still has all of his deputy mayors in place and most of his commissioners. All told he has lost four commissioners -- of housing, correction, emergency management and design and construction -- and a few advisers. But his team is still largely the one that he put together after his election in 2001.
''Far fewer top people are exiting this administration,'' said William B. Eimicke, a professor of public administration at Columbia. ''It is atypical.''
Asked why, people inside and outside the administration offered several theories.
Some said Mr. Bloomberg's lack of political debts had enabled him to pick the administration he wanted, rather than one dictated in part by political paybacks.
Others credited his ability to pick good people and, rather than micromanaging them, give them wide leeway to do their jobs. Others speculated that his nonconfrontational style and belief in continuity might have led him to work around people who are not working out, instead of getting rid of them. And some suggested that his great wealth -- and the way he rewarded his top campaign aides with six-figure bonuses after the election -- had not hurt in attracting loyal followers.
But many officials who work for Mr. Bloomberg say he has simply been a good, loyal boss. He is, after all, a mayor who recently assembled all of his agency heads at Gracie Mansion and told them, in a reversal of normal political protocol that made some of his staff members wince, ''You're there to take the credit and I'm here to take the blame.''
Government officials past and present said that the administration's high retention rate has enabled it to conduct the business of government without distracting upheavals.
But some questioned whether that was an unalloyed good.
''It is good and bad,'' Mr. Koch said. ''The good is, it shows great team spirit and it shows that he's pleased and that, in his judgment, people are doing what they should be doing. The bad is, it's never that way, at least in my experience. At some point, whether it's in two years, or later, or earlier, there has to be a shake-out, an attempt to evaluate, to promote, to remove.''
Mayor Bloomberg's chief of staff, Peter Madonia, said that continuity would be crucial if the administration were to accomplish its goals.
''You have a mayor who let them put forward an agenda, and have a vision for their agencies, and they haven't finished it yet,'' he said. ''It's a big behemoth, government, and if you have a vision, it takes a while to move it. And you have commissioners who are still in the middle of their own agendas. They're not finished, so they're not prepared to leave.''
Mr. Madonia said that the mayor's style had been vital to staff retention: pick good people, do not micromanage them and back them up.
''He allows you to do your job,'' he said. ''He'll support you, he'll be behind you. Even if you make a mistake -- obviously you can't make too many in any business -- but it allows you to take some risks in a business where people tend to be risk-averse.''
Mr. Bloomberg appears unthreatened by his commissioners, allowing them to speak in public and backing them up when they are the subject of criticism.
Consider his relationship with his police commissioner, Raymond W. Kelly. The mayor often allows Mr. Kelly to take center stage, and seems unfazed when, say, the commissioner out-bats him at a charity stickball game or receives considerably higher approval ratings than Mr. Bloomberg does in public opinion polls.
It is quite a departure from the relationship between past mayors and police commissioners. William J. Bratton, for one, said he had been forced out of the Giuliani administration in part because the mayor was jealous of the publicity he got.
Then there is the mayor's loyalty. His commissioner for homeless services, Linda Gibbs, came under fire from advocates for the homeless, who sought a contempt of court order against her personally. Mr. Bloomberg was ferocious in his defense of her and rarely missed an opportunity to publicly praise her while the controversy raged.
''It proved to me that he was good to his word,'' Ms. Gibbs said. ''When the commissioners started, the message he gave to us was: 'Figure out your agencies, find out what's working, find out what doesn't, and use this time we have to make it better, even if it includes fights.' He was really saying, 'I will back you up.' That fact that he was there 100 percent, it was proof that he was good to the challenge that he had given us.''
Most people who have left Mr. Bloomberg's administration had worked in the Giuliani administration as well. William J. Fraser, who was kept on as correction commissioner, resigned after 11 months when he and others within the department came under investigation. Mr. Bloomberg backed him publicly but accepted his resignation.
Other commissioners to leave included John T. Odermatt, the commissioner of the Office of Emergency Management, who had worked as deputy there in the Giuliani administration; Kenneth R. Holden, the commissioner of the Department of Design and Construction, who held the post during the Giuliani administration, and Ms. Perine, who was appointed commissioner of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development in 2000 by Mayor Giuliani and retained by Mayor Bloomberg.
Michael Carey, who was president of the city's Economic Development Corporation in the Giuliani administration, lasted eight months as a special assistant to Mr. Bloomberg before leaving. His stewardship at the corporation was later questioned in an audit by the city comptroller's office.
One of the closest members of the mayor's inner circle to leave was Vincent LaPadula, an aide to Mr. Giuliani who joined the Bloomberg campaign and became a senior adviser to Mayor Bloomberg. He recently left to work for J.P. Morgan Chase.
Mr. LaPadula was Mr. Bloomberg's point man in setting up the city's 311 hotline, and served as an unofficial liaison to the city's Republicans. His name surfaced in the investigation of Russell Harding, a former housing official in the Giuliani administration who was indicted on embezzlement charges, for taking a trip with Mr. Harding at the city's expense, but no charges were ever made against him.
Another top aide, Kevin Sheekey, left his post as a special adviser to Mr. Bloomberg to serve on the host committee for the Republican National Convention, which is scheduled to be held in New York City from Aug. 30 to Sept. 2. But he is widely expected to rejoin Mr. Bloomberg either in his administration or on his re-election campaign.
The relatively small amount of turnover has left Nathan Leventhal, who led Mr. Bloomberg's transition team and is now in charge of filling appointments, not as busy as he might have been. ''I do have to fill commissions and boards,'' he offered.
Mr. Eimicke, of Columbia, said that most administrations see an exodus at about the halfway point.
''We're sort of right now at the time that you would see some outflow of people,'' he said. ''From your own selfish career point of view, this is probably the best time to leave because your guy is still in.''
