A walkout at the Indian Point 3 nuclear power station was averted Sunday when union leaders and the plant's owner agreed on a four-year contract that would require all workers to pay some health care costs in exchange for other financial benefits.
The strike had been planned for midnight Saturday but was postponed when the two sides began making progress as the deadline approached. An announcement that the strike had been officially called off was made at 9:30 a.m. Sunday by Manny Hellen, the president of the union, Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers Union of America, at the Ramada Plaza Hotel, where negotiations had taken place all week.
''We feel this contract is an excellent package,'' Mr. Hellen said. ''Everybody should feel very good about one thing: you have another four years of Local 1-2 running the plant and keeping it safe and secure.''
The contract would cover not only the 276 workers from Indian Point 3 whose previous contract had expired, but also the 282 workers at Indian Point 2 whose contract was not due to expire until June.
''Reuniting the work force to form one Indian Point team was our goal from the beginning, but we knew it would only work if we made a very good offer,'' said Fred Dacimo, the lead negotiator for Entergy Nuclear Northeast, the plant's owner.
Talks broke down on Friday evening, and a federal mediator was called in because the starting contracts for workers at the two power stations were so different, said Jim Steets, a spokesman for Entergy. While Indian Point 3 workers received more benefits, Indian Point 2 workers had a higher pay scale.
Under the new contract, Indian Point 3 workers would have to contribute to the cost of health benefits, as Indian Point 2 workers have been doing.
Indian Point 3 workers would get a raise of 70 cents an hour, to bring them in line with their counterparts. Neither the company nor the union would disclose further details about the contract, which is expected to be ratified by the union membership within a month.
The Indian Point reactors, which have drawn community opposition intermittently since they began operating in the 1970's, became the focus of renewed safety concerns after the attack on the World Trade Center. The security force guarding the plant, which includes the National Guard and the State Police as well as a private security staff, would not have been affected by a strike. During the negotiations, however, union leaders, who in the past dismissed fears that the plant posed any danger to the community, said that the reactor would pose a threat without their workers.
''The public should not believe for a minute that Indian Point 3 will be run safely if there is a strike,'' said Steve Mangione, a spokesman for Local 1-2. ''Management has been shadowing union workers, taking a refresher course. You take a refresher course when you want to brush up on computer skills, not when you want to run a nuclear power plant.''
The union called for Indian Point 3 to be shut down for safety's sake during a strike, and the Westchester County executive, Andrew J. Spano, agreed. Entergy said it would not close the plant during a strike and that the plant would operate safely with replacement workers.
''I'm very pleased that the current employees will continue to operate the plant,'' Mr. Spano said. ''I was concerned that if there were a strike, the replacement workers would be spread too thin.''
Workers at Indian Point 2 went on strike for nine weeks in 1983, and the plant remained open. At that time, workers at Indian Point 3 were employees of the New York Power Authority and were prevented by state law from striking.
Indian Point is in Buchanan, N.Y., 35 miles north of Midtown Manhattan, on a strip of land along a bend in the Hudson River. Con Edison built three power plants there, the first of which, Indian Point 1, closed in the early 1970's. Indian Point 2 began operating in 1974, and Indian Point 3 followed in 1976. But by the mid-70's, Con Edison was suffering the effects of the oil crisis and had a cash-flow problem. The state stepped in and bought Indian Point 3, Mr. Steets said.
''That began the separation of the two plants, which then moved independently forward under separate companies and developed separate cultures,'' Mr. Steets said. ''They even erected a fence between the two plants.''
Entergy, a Louisiana-based company, bought Indian Point 3 in 2000 and Indian Point 2 in 2001 with the goal of restructuring the workplace around the theme ''one site, one team,'' Mr. Steets said. The first thing the company did was tear down the fence. Then, last year, it merged the security forces for the two plants. It is in the process of completing a four-story administration building on the site to house workers who have been scattered at different locations. The building includes a new cafeteria, which Entergy officials hope will create more of a sense of community among the 1,350 employees at the site.
The merger of the two union work forces under one contract was another major goal of the company.
''Now we have a group that is governed by the same work rules,'' Mr. Steets said. ''So accomplishing work and training schedules will be greatly simplified.''
Indian Point generates about 2,000 megawatts of power, enough to provide electricity to 2 million homes. Last week, it provided 30 percent of the electricity used by New York City, Westchester County and Long Island, Mr. Steets said.
