As investigators worked to find out what became of Parmalat's assets, a lawyer provided new details over the weekend about a Bank of America account in New York that he says holds billions of euros missing from the company.
After Parmalat, the Italian dairy giant, sought protection from creditors last month, investigators here, as well as in Milan and Bologna, have been trying to track billions of euros that are said to have disappeared from Parmalat's books over the last decade through a network of fraudulent offshore accounts.
Investigators have said the accounting fraud involved as much as 10 billion euros, while estimates by some analysts have put the amount at 13 billion euros.
There has been an air of intrigue surrounding the investigation since an assertion late last week by an Italian lawyer that he and a team of investigators had found 7 billion euros ($8.7 billion) in a Bank of America account. The lawyer, Carlo Zauli, said Italian banks had transferred the money to a Bank of America branch in New York for Calisto Tanzi, Parmalat's founder and former chairman, and some of his closest associates. Mr. Tanzi remains in jail in Milan.
Mr. Zauli, speaking with journalists here on Saturday, provided an account number as proof of his discovery. He said that the New York account had money that had been transferred from an account in Malta, where it had been held for a unit of Parmatour, a travel company owned by the Tanzi family that declared bankruptcy on Friday.
A statement released by Parmalat on Saturday described what it said Bank of America had found. ''The account number in question is not amongst those used by their New York branch, but that in any case the bank has initiated an internal investigation,'' the statement said.
Calls to Bank of America seeking comment were not returned on Sunday.
But a hedge fund manager expressed skepticism over Mr. Zauli's claim. ''In theory, the account could exist, but I find it hard to believe that you could have that much money in a single account in a U.S. bank and nobody would notice,'' said the hedge fund manager, Carlo Gentili, who works in Milan for Nextam Partners. ''It would be very hard to hide an amount of money that large even in a bank as big as Bank of America. If you had the money in Indonesia maybe it would be possible, but it would be very difficult to pull off in the U.S.''
Mr. Zauli said he had been hired by 400 individual Parmalat investors and several institutional investors. He spoke at a meeting of more than 300 investors who had gathered to hear from lawyers who were organizing a class-action suit aimed at recouping money.
One investor, Fausto Zanetti, 50, who bought 30,000 euros of Parmalat shares in November and attended the meeting, said: ''I'm furious. I'm feeling cheated and I don't know what to do.'' He bought the shares at 2.54 euros each after hearing a financial analyst in a television interview put a target price of 3.1 euros on the stock. The shares are now all but worthless. ''I don't want to pay more money to these lawyers, but this is my last recourse,'' Mr. Zanetti said. He said he had been asked to pay 2.5 percent of what he invested in Parmalat to take part in the lawsuit.
Giuseppe Lozupone, whose firm is organizing the suit, said that the fee asked of each client had not been decided. He said Italy did not permit lawyers to work without pay and be paid based on the size of a judgment.
''This is not about our law firm trying to make money, this is purely a personal thing because many of the lawyers on our team have money tied up in Parmalat,'' Mr. Lozupone said in an interview. ''One person by himself with his gun is never going to be able to take on the banks. But if several hundred investors come together, our individual guns become a tank and then we can take on the bank and their tank.''
Many investors at the meeting, though not Mr. Zanetti, said they had bought Parmalat bonds on the advice of their banks and only after they had been assured that the investments were low risk.
Mr. Zauli, who says he has found the Bank of America account, is one of the lawyers working with Mr. Lozupone's law firm.
About 80,000 investors have Parmalat bonds and about half as many own the shares, according to an estimate by the Italian financial daily Il Sole/24 Ore.
