HIGHLIGHTS
MARIAH CAREY: MENACE TO MALAYSIA? -- Mariah Carey's impending performance in Malaysia has upset some of that country's Muslims. ''Everyone knows Mariah Carey presents herself in a sexy, unacceptable and almost vulgar manner,'' Ahmad Sabki Yusof, the leader of the Pan-Malaysian Islamic Party's youth wing, wrote to the government, the BBC reported. Muslims account for 60 percent of Malaysia's 24.5 million population. Ms. Carey, below, has received permission to perform on Feb. 22 in a 50,000-seat stadium in the capital, Kuala Lumpur, but has been warned that her costumes should not be offensive. Mr. Ahmad Sabki, who called upon the Ministry of Culture, Arts and Tourism to rescind its authorization, argued that Ms. Carey was ''not an appropriate role model for young Malaysians.'' He said, ''Allowing such concerts promotes and condones values that are totally contrary to our way of life and our culture.'' Although Western entertainment is popular in Malaysia, officials have been concerned about its influence. Linkin Park was allowed onstage only after agreeing not to go bare-chested or to scream too loudly.
BRITISH AWARD CONTENDERS -- ''Cold Mountain,'' its stars and director appeared poised to dominate the nominees for the British Academy's film awards to be announced today in London, Reuters reports. On the longlist of candidates for the awards, the British equivalent of the Oscars, ''Cold Mountain'' was a contender for best picture, best director (Anthony Minghella), best actor (Jude Law), best actress (Nicole Kidman), best supporting actor (Philip Seymour Hoffman) and best supporting actress (Renée Zellweger). Scarlett Johansson's name appeared twice on the longlist for best actress, for her performances in ''Lost in Translation'' and ''Girl With a Pearl Earring.'' Among 15 contenders for best picture are ''Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King,'' ''Kill Bill,'' ''Mystic River'' and ''The Station Agent,'' as well as the British films ''Calendar Girls'' and ''Love Actually.'' Tom Cruise was nominated for best actor for ''The Last Samurai,'' but that film did not make the longlist of candidates for best picture.
RUSSIAN FILM-PRIZE DISPUTE -- The omission of one of last year's most popular films from the nominees for the Golden Eagles, Russia's version of the Oscars, has prompted young critics to attack the old guard of the National Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences. The dispute focuses on Pyotr Buslov's hit ''Bumer,'' a teenage crime adventure, the BBC reported. Besides their anger over the omission of ''Bumer,'' the critics asked why the academy had included television films in the feature category. The second annual Golden Eagle awards ceremony is scheduled for Jan. 31 in Moscow.
PARIS: FRANCE AND FILM -- What has happened to France's love affair with movies? Box office sales of 174.2 million tickets last year represented a decline of roughly 5.6 percent from the total for 2002, according to national film board figures reported by Agence France-Presse. In addition French television viewers are watching fewer movies on the small screen. Only one film made the list of the 20 most popular shows of 2003, the weekly Film Français reported on Friday. Last year four made the list. The national film board attributed the box office decline to the poor economy and international events rather than to competition from DVD's.
KING TRIBUTE IN BROOKLYN -- Wynton Marsalis (below), the artistic director of Jazz at Lincoln Center, is to deliver the keynote address today at the 18th annual ''Brooklyn Tribute to Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. -- Come Share the Dream'' at the Brooklyn Academy of Music. Participating in the event, beginning at 10:30 a.m. at the Howard Gilman Opera House, will be the Boys Choir of Harlem, the a cappella group the Persuasions and the Lafayette Inspirational Ensemble. After the tribute, whose hosts are the academy, the Brooklyn Borough President Marty Markowitz and Medgar Evers College of the City University of New York, the BAM Rose Cinemas, in association with the National Black Programming Consortium, will present screenings of the new documentary ''Citizen King.'' The tribute and the screenings are free with seating on a first-come, first-seated basis.
FOOTNOTES
If the Paul Taylor Dance Company ever needs a home away from home, it will be welcome in Britain, where it has been named best foreign dance company of 2003 in the National Dance Awards given by a critics circle of more than 50 writers who represent mainly national newspapers as well as arts publications. In addition the critically acclaimed ''Promethean Fire'' has earned the company a nomination for a 2004 Laurence Olivier Award. The awards are to be announced on Feb. 22. The company returns to City Center in Manhattan from March 2 through 14. . . . For the eighth time Billy Crystal will be the host of the Academy Awards broadcast because he felt the itch when he sat out the show in 2003, The Associated Press reported. ''Last year I felt the itch to do it,'' he said. ''The war had hit. I wanted to be in the limelight. I wanted to feel that extra pressure.'' This year's show will be on Feb. 29 on ABC. . . . Gerard Schwarz, music director of the Seattle Symphony, has been nominated by President Bush for the National Council on the Arts. Mr. Schwarz is a founder and former music director of the New York Chamber Symphony and was the music director of the Mostly Mozart Festival from 1982 to 2001. The nomination is subject to Senate confirmation.
