LINCOLN FINANCIAL FIELD's glitz rises above the other four stadiums and arenas in this city's sports complex: the skeleton of the Phillies' new ballpark, still under construction less than three months from opening day; tired old Veterans Stadium, which will soon be imploded; the dazzling Wachovia Center, where the 76ers and the Flyers frolic; and the smaller but still useful Spectrum.
But last night, the Linc, as the Eagles' new strictly football stadium is known, turned into another sports tomb for Philadelphia.
With a trip to Super Bowl XXXVIII against the New England Patriots at stake in last night's National Football Conference championship game, the Eagles lost to the Carolina Panthers, 14-3. It was the third straight year they have lost the N.F.C. title game, the last two in Philadelphia.
And with four of the Eagles' best players likely to depart as free agents -- running back Duce Staley, linebacker Carlos Emmons and cornerbacks Bobby Taylor and Troy Vincent -- the Super Bowl window also seemed to narrow, if not slam shut, for this group of Eagles, who dominated the N.F.C. East the last three seasons. The talent would be difficult to replace.
''I wanted this group to win a Super Bowl,'' Coach Andy Reid said in the hush of the Eagles' interview area. ''They overcame a lot of things.''
But the Eagles' offense couldn't overcome the confusion created by Panthers Coach John Fox who has emerged as pro football's latest defensive wizard, guiding Carolina, the N.F.C. South champion, to playoff upsets of the St. Louis Rams and the Eagles, both on the road.
Before Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb left the game for good with separated rib cartilage early in the fourth quarter, he completed only 10 of 22 passes for 100 yards with 3 interceptions, all by the rookie cornerback Ricky Manning Jr.
''Donovan was very sore,'' Reid said. ''He would've continued to play until he passed out, but I wasn't going there.''
The Panthers' rush also prevented McNabb from scrambling for yardage; he rushed twice for 10 yards.
''That was the whole thing going into this game; we saw him running last week,'' defensive end Mike Rucker said, referring to McNabb's 107 rushing yards, an N.F.L. postseason record for a quarterback, in the Eagles' 20-17 overtime victory over Green Bay. ''We put the pressure on him and closed those lanes down and didn't let him run.''
Over the last half-century, five other N.F.L. teams had lost three consecutive conference title games -- the Browns (1951-53) and the Giants (1961-63) in the N.F.L. championship game during the pre-Super Bowl era, and since then the Raiders (twice, 1968-70 and 1973-75), the Los Angeles Rams (1974-76) and the Cowboys (1980-82).
But the Eagles are the first team to lose three straight conference title games with two of those games at home. A year ago, at the Vet, they lost to Tampa Bay, 27-10. Two years ago, in St. Louis, they lost to the Rams, 29-24. And last night at the Linc they lost to Carolina, in only its ninth season.
The Linc is what Jeffrey Lurie, the Eagles' owner, had in mind in 2000 when he unveiled plans to build the $512 million palace in South Philly not far from the Walt Whitman Bridge.
''Winning the Super Bowl is the ultimate goal,'' Lurie, the franchise's chairman and chief executive since 1994, said at the time. ''As an organization, you want to assemble the best staff and players, but you also have to provide them with the best facilities and environment in which to achieve success.''
The Eagles have not qualified for the Super Bowl since their 1980 team, with quarterback Ron Jaworski and running back Wilbert Montgomery, defeated Dallas, 20-7, for the N.F.C. title at the Vet before losing to the Oakland Raiders, 27-10, at the Louisiana Superdome.
In their 71 seasons, the Eagles have won the N.F.L. championship only three times, each long ago in the pre-Super Bowl era -- in a 1948 snowstorm against the Chicago Cardinals at old Shibe Park, in 1949 against the Rams at the Los Angeles Coliseum, and in 1960 against Green Bay at Franklin Field on the University of Pennsylvania campus.
Of the cities with teams in the four major pro sports, Philadelphia is suffering the longest drought without the ultimate championship -- the 21 years since the 76ers with Julius Erving won the National Basketball Association title in 1983.
The Phillies' only World Series victory occurred in 1980 with Mike Schmidt at third base, Pete Rose at first and Steve Carlton as their ace pitcher. The Flyers, a rough-and-tumble hockey team known as the Broad Street Bullies, kissed the Stanley Cup twice, in 1974 and 1975.
But last night, the Linc's glassy glitz couldn't change the luck for the Eagles and for Philadelphia.
In the somber silence of the Eagles' green-carpeted locker room, most of the players remained either in the trainer's room or in the shower. But as a few spoke in whispers, a longtime Philadelphian shook his head.
''The Phillies ought to be good,'' he said.
''But will they be good enough to win it all?'' he was asked.
''In this town,'' he said, ''no team ever is.''
Sports of The Times
