Natalie Guzman was alive after the first car struck her yesterday morning in Queens. But she could not survive when the second one hit her.
About 5:30 a.m., Ms. Guzman, 18, was crossing Roosevelt Avenue near 111th Street to buy a bag of chips when a car hit her and sped off, the police said. As she lay crumpled in the street, friends ran from a pool hall to help her and cover her with a jacket, her family said.
Then, a second vehicle, its headlights off, came speeding down Roosevelt Avenue toward the spot where she lay, the police and family said. Her friends scattered, and the car ran over Ms. Guzman's head, killing her.
The second car, described as a dark-colored sport utility vehicle, did not stop either, the police and family said.
Ms. Guzman was taken to Elmhurst Hospital Center, where she was pronounced dead at 5:55 a.m.
Yesterday afternoon, relatives gathered in the small two-bedroom apartment of Ms. Guzman's mother, Miriam Toribio, in Corona and choked back tears to speak about the accident. Why, Ms. Toribio asked, did no one pull Ms. Guzman out of the street? Why did neither driver stop to help? Had someone been trying to hurt her daughter?
''This is a horrible tragedy,'' said Louisa Salsa, who is related by marriage. ''How could this happen to her?''
The police had no answers for them yesterday afternoon. A police spokesman would not say whether the death was being investigated as an accident or a homicide. No one witnessed the first accident, the police said. They had no detailed descriptions of the vehicles and could not say how much time had elapsed between the accidents.
Family members said they learned that a security camera was operating in a nearby laundry and could possibly provide information about the vehicles that hit Ms. Guzman.
The family gave details of the last hours of Ms. Guzman's life, as told to them by investigators and people who saw her die.
They said Ms. Guzman spent Saturday night with friends at the pool hall on Roosevelt Avenue. The family said that they did not particularly like or trust her friends, but that the pool hall was only two blocks from Ms. Guzman's house and that they felt she would be safe there.
Ms. Guzman had asked her mother for $1 to buy a bag of chips, made her bed and left home at 10 p.m.
About 9 a.m. yesterday, detectives came to Ms. Toribio's apartment to tell her what had happened to her daughter. Ms. Toribio sat on her bed yesterday afternoon, crying as she looked at snapshots of Ms. Guzman, her only daughter.
Born in the Dominican Republic, Ms. Guzman came to New York as a child and lived in the Corona apartment with her daughter, Laritza, 1, her mother and her grandmother. She dropped out of school when she became pregnant but recently started attending G.E.D. classes, her family said.
''She was very smart, but she thought nothing could happen to her,'' said Dulce Guzman, who is also related by marriage.
The family members vented their anger toward Ms. Guzman's friends, who were with her at the pool hall. Ms. Toribio wondered why they had left Ms. Guzman in the middle of the street, and she faulted them for not calling her after the first car struck.
''Maybe I could have helped her,'' Ms. Toribio said. ''Why did nobody call me to tell me my daughter was in the street?''
She said her family hoped to donate Ms. Guzman's organs.
Ms. Toribio, who sells Avon products, said she and other family members did not know how they would be able to pay for a burial.
