One way to get ahead in English departments is to read the complete works of Walter Scott. Few academics slog through Scott anymore, but English departments still need Scott scholars; you can jump the line of more modish tenure seekers, if you volunteer to play the frump.
In broadcasting there's a similarly dowdy part that few young performers are lining up to play: avuncular white-man master of ceremonies. This person must have no personal aspirations to comedy, song and dance or even self-expression; he must be content to applaud other people's stardom, however cheap. Casey Kasem and Dick Clark continue to pull this off, and they cry all the way to the bank when people call them hokey.
But who will take the place of these men, who are both in their 70's? What entertainer will forgo his chance to be Ashton Kutcher or Justin Timberlake, and instead play the vaguely asexual dude who doesn't get the girl or the Grammy but says to the stars and their fans, in short: ''You kids go and have a good time. I'll clean up''?
That would be Ryan Seacrest. At 28, Mr. Seacrest is the host of ''American Idol,'' whose third season will have its premiere tonight on Fox; the newly anointed successor to Mr. Kasem on ''American Top 40''; and now the star of his own syndicated television show, ''On-Air With Ryan Seacrest,'' which started last Monday and is on every weekday.
Mr. Seacrest has made no secret of his ambitions. He doesn't want to do stand-up or make an album. He wants more than anything to be the master cheerleader for the whole treacly scene, stoking squeals for anyone with a hit, including Sting, Missy Elliott, John Mayer and Clay Aiken.
Self-tanned, with bleached highlights and a torn, patchwork wardrobe, Mr. Seacrest on his own show manages to be just cool enough to share the stage with credibly cool people like Ben Stiller and Ms. Elliott. But he's also an all-purpose superfan, and he certainly doesn't alienate Dubuque. Presto: the new Kasem-Clark. A celebrity middleman is born.
''On-Air With Ryan Seacrest,'' which is made by Mr. Seacrest's own production company (like his M.C. predecessors, Mr. Seacrest is a businessman), is an hour of live showbiz at its most sincere. There are airhead interviews, movie clips, live music, plugs for everything, celebrity ''news,'' call-in segments and schlock giveaways. Innumerable pans of the audience -- both inside and outside Mr. Seacrest's Hollywood studio -- show a hooting, cheering, sign-flaunting throng that cannot get enough of this stuff.
As on ''American Idol'' and ''American Top 40,'' a fair amount of Mr. Seacrest's work of the host on ''On-Air'' is incantatory. Half a dozen times per episode, he reels off the show's Web site and its phone number, along with his show's mission (''We bring Hollywood to you'') and its studio address.
Reciting these facts is not Mr. Seacrest's only logistical obligation, however. Addressing the crowd, in the semi-round and on his feet, he alone has to watch the clock and pace the live show, D.J.-style.
In tight segments, live and in plain sight, Mr. Seacrest has to produce and star in his own show, in real time. He introduces graphics, bops to music, supervises the talent, covers mistakes, plays off technological difficulties, ad-libs, conducts interviews, fields audience reactions and throws to commercials, all the while looking composed in 360 degrees. He doesn't stutter.
Last Wednesday Mr. Mayer, the pop heartthrob, told the ''On-Air'' audience that Mr. Seacrest was ''a totally cool guy, just a good man.'' On all five shows last week Mr. Seacrest kept his cool, whipping up casual bonhomie with almost everyone, even Donald Trump, who appeared to promote ''The Apprentice,'' his reality show.
Against the odds then, the slightly retro formula of ''On-Air'' is not cloying. It's watchable. Only when the script is too loose, and shots of the screaming audience too many, does one notice that the show's short on laughs. At those times the hour drags.
But ''On-Air'' certainly does proud the tradition of variety scream shows, and the proof's in the crowd. One older woman apparently waited overnight for last Thursday's show, so eager was she for a chance to see Mr. Aiken, the runner-up in last season's ''American Idol'' competition.
Like a good grandson Mr. Seacrest expansively invited her into the studio to hug Mr. Aiken. She did, and while she swooned it was possible to imagine such a goofy fan, maybe the same woman, at Ed Sullivan's back door waiting for a glimpse of Johnny Mathis 30 years ago.
ON-AIR WITH RYAN SEACREST
Weekdays (check local listings)  Adam Freeman and David Armour, executive producers.
WITH: Ryan Seacrest and Rosanna Tavarez.
TELEVISION REVIEW
