When Ernie Els comes to Hawaii, he makes far more money than he spends.
Winning the Sony Open for the second consecutive year in a playoff, Els made a 30-footer for birdie on the third extra hole to outlast Harrison Frazar on Sunday at Waialae Country Club. Earning a first-place check worth $864,000, Els became the first back-to-back winner at Waialae since Corey Pavin won in 1986 and 1987.
But it was not easy against Frazar, a 32-year-old veteran looking for his first PGA Tour victory and competing in his first playoff. Els, who shot a final-round 65, and Frazar (66) finished at 18-under-par 262. The playoff ended at the par-3, 196-yard 11th hole, where Els rolled in the winning putt after Frazar missed a birdie attempt from 35 feet.
Last year at the Sony, Els defeated Aaron Baddeley with a 43-foot birdie putt on the second playoff hole. For Els, winning in a playoff at the Sony never gets old.
''It's good that you know you've made putts under pressure,'' said Els, who is ranked No. 3 in the world and won seven events worldwide last year. ''I knew Harrison would be tough. He's ready to win.''
It appeared that Els would win on the second playoff hole, the par-4, 353-yard No. 10, after Frazar hit a poor tee shot into the left rough and needed three shots to reach the green. But after Frazar made a 15-foot putt to save par, Els missed a 10-footer for a birdie, and the duel continued.
''I misread that putt and pushed it to the right,'' Els said.
Frazar began the day with a one-stroke lead over Els. But Els led by two strokes with four holes to play in regulation before he made a three-putt bogey at No. 15 that cut his lead to one. Then at the par-3, 189-yard 17th hole, Frazar rolled in a 20-foot putt that tied him with Els heading to No. 18.
Frazar got the quick advantage there, hitting his tee shot into the fairway. Els's tee shot drifted right into deep rough. Then Frazar hit a superb 2-iron second shot that was on line with the flag, stopping about 35 feet short of the cup. Els had no chance of reaching the green from deep rough, and his second shot landed in the fairway, still about 65 yards short of the flag.
The pressure was on Els, knowing that Frazar would probably make a birdie at worst. After Els hit an average pitch shot to 10 feet, Frazar had a 35-foot putt for an eagle to win. But Frazar left his putt 4 feet short and right, giving Els his chance. He capitalized, making the 10-foot putt for a birdie and forcing Frazar to make his 4-footer to force a playoff.
Frazar was philosophical in defeat.
''This was a step in the right direction no doubt,'' he said. ''I don't feel like I lost today. I got beat.''
Playing superb golf together in the last group, Els and Frazar pulled away from a tightly packed leader board and turned it into a two-man race. Els took a two-stroke lead over Frazar by making a 15-foot birdie putt at No. 8, followed by another birdie at the par-5, 510-yard No. 9 after reaching that green in two shots.
But Frazar showed grit. He made his own birdie at No. 9 with an 8-footer, staying within two shots. And on No. 10, Frazar made an 18-footer for a birdie, moving to 14 under par for the tournament, one stroke behind Els.
At No. 11, Frazar tied Els with another birdie, hitting a beautiful tee shot to 4 feet. Now Els and Frazar were feeding off each other, and it got better at the par-4, 446-yard 12th hole. After hitting his tee shot into the left fairway bunker, Els hit a beautiful approach shot from 118 yards that stopped 4 feet from the cup. But with Els in obvious birdie position, Frazar answered, chipping in from 30 feet for a birdie to keep pace with Els, who made the putt to finish off his birdie.
But Els continued to show why he is one of the world's best. At No. 13, he showed his superb short-game skills, chipping in for birdie from 28 feet to take a one-stroke lead. Then at the par-4, 433-yard 14th hole, Els hit a terrific approach shot to 2 feet and converted the easy putt for a two-stroke lead.
Els does not make a habit of losing two-stroke leads with four holes to play, but he gave Frazar more hope by three-putting for a birdie at No. 15. That cut Els's lead to one stroke with three holes to play, setting the stage for a tense finish.
The Sony Open will be remembered not only for Els's victory, but also for the play of 14-year-old Michelle Wie, who shot a second-round 68 and missed the cut by one stroke. Wie dominated the scene until she left, but Els continued to dominate the Sony.
CHIP SHOTS
DAVIS LOVE III made a late run with birdies at Nos. 16 and 17, and he could have reached 17 under with an eagle at the par-5, 551-yard 18th hole. But Love's second shot at No. 18 sailed to the right and over the grandstand, and after a free drop, he settled for a par and third place at 15-under 265. . . . VIJAY SINGH tied for 10th place at 270, his 10th consecutive top-10 finish.
GOLF
