For those whose image of Iowa is a red barn at the edge of a sprawling cornfield, welcome to the real heart of the Democratic Party in western Iowa.
In the 17th Precinct on the southwest side of Council Bluffs, with the towers of downtown Omaha just visible on the western horizon, is a struggling working-class community of factory workers, casino employees and railroad people. And for generations, it has been among the most active Democratic precincts in Iowa.
Party officials expect upward of 100 people to turn up Monday night at Rue Elementary School for the precinct caucus, more than a fifth of the neighborhood's registered Democrats.
''It's sounding to me like it could be really close,'' said Dick Tannahill, 70, a retired assistant principal who now works part time at a dog track. ''We've got 18 delegates to elect and, near as I can tell, it could go almost any which way.''
Mr. Tannahill will be the caucus's chairman. His wife, Arlene, will act as secretary. He is a supporter of Howard Dean, but says he has no idea whether his man will carry the caucus. The neighborhood has changed over the years. People do not talk to each other much about politics now, he said, so only when his neighbors split into candidate support groups at the caucus will he discover who is supporting whom.
Other people say much the same.
''I see my neighbors and I say hi, but no one even mentions the caucuses,'' said Ed Behm, a retired electrical worker who has lived in the precinct for 36 years. ''It isn't as friendly as it used to be. I used to know, 15 or 20 years ago, how everyone was voting. Now, I don't even know my next-door neighbor's vote.''
Mr. Behm said he had been intending to side with Senator John Kerry in the caucuses. In fact, he had promised the Kerry campaign he would.
''But then, a few months ago, this young kid came to the door talking about Howard Dean, who I'd never even heard of before,'' Mr. Behm said. ''I really liked what he was saying, especially about being against the war.''
He even agreed to call up neighbors on the campaign's behalf. ''Most folks were pretty nice about it, though one lady hung up on me,'' Mr. Behm said.
In a way, he is part of a problem that many 17th Precinct voters mentioned: the telephone just does not stop ringing. ''You just get so many more calls this election,'' said Mary Loehr, a stay-at-home mother who has lived in the precinct for 33 years and just recently switched her support from Representative Richard A. Gephardt to Mr. Kerry.
The small single-story homes in the 17th Precinct are a mix of 1950's bungalows and 60's ranch homes, with a smattering of split-levels, mobile homes and apartment blocks. They sit in a rather forlorn grid between the Union Pacific rail yards on the south and the commercial stretches of Broadway on the north, where signs for discount grocers compete for attention with auto repair shops, motels and a Salvation Army thrift shop.
''The Democrats in Iowa are generally found in the places where you find them everywhere else in the country,'' said Peverill Squire, a professor of political science at the University of Iowa. ''They're in the larger cities, in the suburbs and in the college towns. And they tend to be employed in the same types of occupations as they would be in other parts of the country, the service sector and the manufacturing sector.''
Essentially, that means that the biggest clusters of Democrats are in Davenport and the other eastern river cities, in the college towns Iowa City and Ames, in Des Moines and in the more working-class sections of Pottawattamie County, where Council Bluffs is. As a rule, the farther west one travels in Iowa, the less Democratic it becomes, which makes steadfast districts like the 17th Precinct a bit of an anomaly.
The precinct has not voted Republican in a presidential general election since 1984. Al Gore got 365 votes to George Bush's 281 in 2000.
''Dean started out in Council Bluffs first,'' said Emil Pavich, a former state legislator who is regarded as the local party's unofficial historian. ''He came to a local fund-raiser early last year. And then Kerry was soon after that, and Gephardt. Lately, of course, they've all been going full blast.''
Mr. Pavich lives in the 18th Precinct, not far from the 17th, and knows both well. A lot of retirees live in the 17th Precinct, but there has also been a steady influx of young working-class families. Racially, the neighborhood is nearly all white, Mr. Pavich said. And labor unions are a force here, though perhaps not as much as in eastern Iowa.
''I'd say that politically, the people here have not really changed all that much over the decades,'' he said. ''Precinct 17 has always been working class, concerned about health care, jobs. They're pocket conservatives. They vote their pocketbook and, beyond that, they're pretty conservative.''
Like every person interviewed in the precinct, Mr. Pavich said that he had no idea who would win it on Monday night. He is going for Mr. Gephardt. ''I supported him in '88 and I don't change loyalties,'' he said.
Jean Hartwell, the party's county chairwoman and a Dean supporter, said that a lot of people still had not made up their minds. ''I don't know what they're looking for,'' Ms. Hartwell said. ''What I hear the most is that they just want someone who can beat Bush.''
Mr. Pavich said the one thing for certain was that there would be a big turnout. He thinks Mr. Tannahill's estimate of 100 out of the 17th Precinct's 500 Democrats sounds about right.
''If you can get 20 percent of people to come out on a cold night and then get them to stand up in front of everybody and state their preference, I figure you've done pretty good,'' Mr. Pavich said. ''The founding fathers would be pretty proud.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRECINCT
