It was not until the holiday shopping rush was well under way that Alison L. May, chief executive of RedEnvelope, the luxury gift company based here, discovered just how badly things were going. December had promised to be the biggest revenue-generating month for the company, but it turned out to be its biggest nightmare.
RedEnvelope sells goods like monogrammed wool blankets, martini glasses and custom picture frames -- often over the Internet. But despite its high-tech pedigree, the company was forced into damage control by inventory shortages, management problems at its Ohio shipping center and an overload on its system for personalizing gifts.
''They're all very fixable issues at a quieter time,'' said Ms. May, who joined RedEnvelope in May 2002 after holding the positions of chief operating officer and chief financial officer for Gymboree, the children's apparel company also based in San Francisco. ''But it's hard to fix a problem while orders are at a peak.''
RedEnvelope's disastrous showing was especially bitter because the 2003 holiday season turned out to be particularly strong for Internet selling, with online companies ringing up $18.5 billion in sales, according to Nielsen/NetRatings. That is a 35 percent increase over 2002. ''It was a fantastic season,'' said Abha Bhagat, an analyst with Nielsen/NetRatings.
RedEnvelope revealed the full extent of its holiday fiasco when it announced this month that it would have to revise its forecast for the third quarter substantially downward. Its stock lost nearly a third of its value, dropping from a closing price of $15.50 on Jan. 8 to a close of at $11.09 the next day. On Friday, the stock closed at $10.16 a share.
Its experience could be a cautionary tale for other Internet retailers. But what made RedEnvelope's problems worse is that it designs many of its own products, while most online retailers turn to large suppliers for mass-produced products. RedEnvelope's approach gives it higher margins, analysts said, but it does not provide flexibility to meet a surprise increase in demand.
''Most online companies don't do proprietary products; they do commodity products,'' said Steve Weinstein, an analyst with Pacific Crest Securities. ''At Amazon, if they want more books they get more books.''
Selling exclusive products, particularly ones that require customization for individual customers, means that RedEnvelope must be even more precise than most Internet retailers in the way it manages inventory, Mr. Weinstein said.
The damage done in December was a blow to a company that in September had bucked conventional wisdom by becoming the first e-commerce business to go public in 2003. In 2000 and 2001, dozens of Internet retailers went out of business, including companies like Toys.com, which had once seemed financially solid.
RedEnvelope, which started in 1997 as 911Gifts.com, had been seeing steady growth for the last 12 quarters. Its strong management and loyal customer base gave investors confidence that an e-commerce operation with the right ingredients could actually succeed. The company wasn't showing an annual profit yet, though it was steadily heading in that direction.
RedEnvelope reported revenue of $8.3 million for the fiscal second quarter ended in September, compared with $5.4 million for the same period in 2002. Its net loss was $2.8 million in the second quarter, compared with $3.7 million in the year-earlier period.
RedEnvelope said on Jan. 9 that net income would be a paltry $900,000 to $1.2 million during the third quarter ended in December -- a huge decline from the $4.3 million to $4.7 million the company forecast in October. And instead of the roughly $39.5 million to $42.5 million in revenue the company had forecast, the company now expects revenue of about $35 million. It plans to announce its quarterly results on Jan. 27.
For the full fiscal year, which ends March 28, 2004, net revenue of $84 million to $88 million, is excepted. RedEnvelope executives predicted results for the year would fall between a net loss of $400,000 and a net profit of $200,000.
The public offering raised $29 million, meeting the company's target. Its filings with the Securities and Exchange Commission last fall said it planned to use the proceeds to build up inventory for the holiday season and to invest in new equipment.
But RedEnvelope gravely underestimated demand. It has always promoted itself as a purveyor of last-minute gifts and has won customers with its unusual items and its signature red boxes and white bows.
During the heart of the shopping season in early December, orders were coming in at 10 times RedEnvelope's normal daily volume. Orders swelled for several of the company's custom-designed items, like a jewelry armoire, for which there was no alternate supply source. ''We took an inventory risk,'' Ms. May said. ''What began as small problems had a ripple effect.''
Order fulfillment and delivery posed huge problems. Ms. May decided in the fall to take over control of the distribution center, which had been managed by an outside company. But she had not realized that the operation did not have the capacity to handle the overwhelming volume of orders. And, she said, the new management was too inexperienced to address the problems fully, even after additional temporary workers were hired.
''They're not alone with having misjudged inventory levels,'' said Patty Freeman Evans, an Internet retail analyst with Jupiter Media. Most Internet retailers, she said, have tended to keep inventory levels low.
RedEnvelope was not the only Web retailer to run out of popular items. Sharper Image, for instance, had that problem, but was generally able to bring in more inventory in a few days, company officials said.
Like many Internet and catalog retailers, Sharper Image ended the season on a high note. Jeff Forgan, Sharper Image's chief financial officer, said its sales across all channels were up 30 percent over last year, and Internet sales were up 35 percent to 45 percent.
Ms. May tried to move quickly to protect RedEnvelope's reputation by giving customers advance notice that the gifts might not arrive in time for Christmas. ''We called people right away,'' she said. ''Protecting our brand name was the most important thing.''
RedEnvelope has already made staffing changes throughout the company in response to the holiday problems. Ms. May said the departure this month of Pamela Knox, the senior vice president for marketing, however, was not related to those issues. Analysts are waiting to see whether the earnings results will prompt other changes, too.
Still, some are optimistic that RedEnvelope's interesting products and its reputation for reliable service -- both crucial for online retailing -- can help it survive. ''I think their core business is very loyal,'' Ms. Evans of Jupiter said. ''They're not going to get put out of business with one bad Christmas.''
Others point out that while RedEnvelope's stumble was not entirely surprising, it does not point to unsolvable issues. ''If you opened the doors and nobody shows up, that's different,'' said Mr. Weinstein of Pacific Crest Securities. ''It's not a business model problem, but that they failed to execute on distribution and having the right amount of product.''
Ms. May, for one, is looking ahead to Valentine's Day to prove that RedEnvelope has the goods and can deliver.
