'Don't believe the polls you're looking at. You are the polls!'
Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri bounded into one crowded union hall after another on Sunday, shaking his fist and roaring into the microphone as he urged his supporters to keep on fighting.
He was painfully aware that a poll by The Des Moines Register, published Sunday, had ranked him at the bottom of the crowded pack of presidential candidates for the first time in his campaign. Yet in stop after stop, Mr. Gephardt seemed more energized and more impassioned as he made his last dash across the state.
In Des Moines, as hundreds of steelworkers whistled and chanted, ''Gephardt! Gephardt!'' he scrapped much of his stump speech and said he was the only man who could carry the concerns of the working class to the White House. In Newton, as autoworkers and farmers cheered and waved signs, he held his hand over his heart and said he would never forget their stories and their struggles.
A plain-spoken politician known more for his Midwestern reserve than for sparks of spontaneity, Mr. Gephardt even startled his audience by plucking a little girl from the crowd and dancing with her on stage as the crowd cheered him on. And over and over again, he told his supporters to keep the faith.
''Don't believe the polls you're looking at,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''You are the polls! The key to winning is you!
''This is your country,'' he said. ''This is your future. It's about you. It's about your future. It's about what kind of country it's going to be. We're going to do this. We're going to win for America.''
Gone was the sharp criticism of Howard Dean, whom he once viewed as his primary rival for primacy in Iowa. His advisers described the race as a dead heat among Mr. Gephardt, Dr. Dean and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who ranked first in the Des Moines Register poll.
Mr. Gephardt said he was counting on his support from 21 labor unions to carry him across the finish line. And as the flags waved and banners flew, he stood side by side with James P. Hoffa, president of the Teamsters, and Joseph J. Hunt, president of the Ironworkers, and promised to provide universal health care, better trade deals and dignity to workers he said had been overlooked by the Bush administration.
''This election for me is a fight for the middle class,'' Mr. Gephardt roared. ''It's a fight for jobs. It's a fight for education.''
''I grew up in a household that struggled every day, every day,'' said Mr. Gephardt, who is the son of a milk truck driver and a secretary. But as he hopped from city to city, first in a black Excursion and then in a chartered plane, he seemed to alternate between fiery rhetoric and wistfulness.
Many of his friends, family members and supporters from his first campaign in 1988 have converged on this state to help push him to victory. His wife, Jane, stood by his side at several campaign stops and he hugged her tight. ''I'll never forget the towns across Iowa that I've been in over the last year or more,'' Mr. Gephardt told retirees here. ''I'll never forget the main streets where the stores have been shuttered and closed. I'll never forget the manufacturing jobs, 30,000 of them, that have been lost. I will never forget because I come from this place.''
And when a reporter asked him what he planned to do if he did not win the Iowa caucuses, a question he typically refuses to answer, Mr. Gephardt startled the journalists around him by responding. ''I'll have a good life,'' Mr. Gephardt said. ''I have a great family.''
RACHEL SWARNS
