The parking lot next to the headquarters of Frankfurt's largest newspaper could be mistaken for that of a Silicon Valley software firm in the late 1990's. Mercedes-Benzes, BMW's, and the odd Volkswagen sit in rows, although, unlike their California counterparts, they all bear license plates with the letters ''F-AZ.''
That is an abbreviation for the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, perhaps Germany's most august paper, and certainly one of its most generous employers. Until this year, a job at the paper came with a company car: entry-level reporters got a VW Golf, senior editors a top-of-the-line BMW.
Now, though, the cars are limited to senior editors, and they must pay a monthly fee for them. Like most German newspapers, including its Munich rival, Süddeutsche Zeitung, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung suffered mightily in the recent recession. Its lush perks, and nearly a quarter of its staff, have vanished with its ad revenue.
While Germany's economy rumbles back to life, Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung and the country's other newspapers have enjoyed little of the recovery. With ad revenue down nearly 40 percent since its peak in 2000, and once-lucrative help-wanted ads off by 75 percent, the leading publishers are being forced to confront fundamental questions about the viability of their business.
Nowhere has the pain been more acute than at Germany's two most celebrated dailies, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung and the Süddeutsche Zeitung. Both expanded pell-mell during the Internet boom. At the Süddeutsche, the reversal in ad sales was so severe that it brought the paper to the brink of bankruptcy in October 2002.
With national distribution, far-flung foreign bureaus, and well-honed political positions -- the Allgemeine tilts right, the Süddeutsche left -- these papers are the twin pillars of Germany's fourth estate.
''It would be the equivalent of The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times being in critical financial trouble at the same time,'' said Adam Bird, leader of the media practice at Booz Allen Hamilton in Munich.
More than respected editorial voices, the two papers are quintessentially German institutions, with complex ownership structures, consensus-driven management, and business philosophies -- particularly at the Allgemeine Zeitung -- that emphasize long-term values over short-term profits.
They exemplify what economists sometimes describe as Rhenish capitalism, a German style of business that is more socially conscious and less Darwinian than the Anglo-Saxon version. In Germany's brutal media marketplace, such a model may no longer be sustainable.
''These papers were isolated from normal market forces,'' said Josef Joffe, editor of the weekly paper Die Zeit and a former foreign editor at Süddeutsche Zeitung. ''They went on a spending spree while the guillotine was coming down. They need to cut back to where they were before.''
In the last three years, Hans Werner Kilz, editor in chief of Süddeutsche Zeitung, has presided over a reduction in his staff to 307, from 425, the closing of a regional edition in Düsseldorf, and the scrapping of a section devoted to news from Berlin. He has preserved the paper's 22 overseas news bureaus, but has slashed travel budgets.
Ask Mr. Kilz whether his paper can preserve its editorial quality, and he shrugs. ''I'm an optimist by nature, but ...'' he said, the words trailing off.
The Süddeutsche survived a scrape with insolvency in late 2002 through a 150 million euro investment by a new shareholder. The investor, a regional newspaper chain called Südwestdeutsche Medien, joined the five Bavarian families that started the paper in October 1945.
Although the new investor has only an 18.75 percent stake in the parent company, Süddeutscher Verlag, several insiders said it was determined to extract a higher return on investment, even if that meant deep cuts.
Süddeutsche Verlag, which also publishes professional books, lost 76.6 million euros in 2002. The company estimates that it broke even last year, though the final figures, which will not be published until summer, may show a small loss.
Hanswilli Jenke, one of two relatively new managing directors, said the paper was still in the midst of a two-year turnaround.
''The boulder was rolling down the mountain,'' said Mr. Jenke, a former television executive. ''We stopped it in the middle of the slope, and now we have to push it back up the mountain.''
Advertising is showing the first glimmerings of a recovery, he said. As in the United States, the rebound in Germany's media business has been led by broadcasting, with magazines and newspapers behind.
To grab its share, Mr. Jenke said, the company had strengthened its advertising sales staff. He hopes eventually to sell ancillary products, like books, CD's, and digital video discs, to Süddeutsche's 310,000 subscribers. Adding single-copy sales, the paper's total circulation is 437,000 copies.
Mr. Jenke said Süddeutsche had also streamlined its management, once known for its slow pace because all major decisions were subject to the approval of the five founding families. It now has a three-member operating committee that represents the owners.
Mr. Jenke denied that the company, or its new co-owner, would sacrifice quality in a rush for profits. ''The challenge is to maintain the quality,'' he said. ''Editorial quality is the basis of our economic model.''
The Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, which is majority-owned by a nonprofit foundation, does not face quite the same pressures. But its parent, F.A.Z. group, suffered a loss of 60.6 million euros in 2002 and is expected to report another loss for 2003 (the paper's circulation is 388,000).
At the peak of the Internet boom in 1999 and early 2000, when companies bought half-page ads to recruit executives, the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung turned away advertising. On Saturdays, when it carries help-wanted ads, it had 234 pages at its peak. On a recent Saturday, it ran 44 pages.
''My question was: did our whole business model work anymore?'' said Frank Schirrmacher, one of the five publishers, who oversees the culture and ideas section.
Like the Süddeutsche, the Frankfurter Allgemeine had expanded aggressively, with customized sections for Berlin and Munich, and a six-day-a-week English-language edition distributed as an insert in The International Herald Tribune, which is owned by The New York Times Company.
The customized sections were scrapped. The English edition shrank to a tabloid published once a week. The paper curtailed its benefits -- not just the company cars, but also its generous pensions.
The ownership structure of the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung insulates its publishers -- who function more like American top editors -- from pressure. Because of the structure of the business, it is difficult for the managers of the parent company to dismiss these five men. Still, Mr. Schirrmacher said he and his colleagues recognized that unless they stabilized the paper's finances, they risked losing their independence.
Despite his questions about the paper's viability, Mr. Schirrmacher said he believed there was a place for a high-quality, nationally distributed paper in Germany. The preliminary results for 2003 do not look as grim as in earlier years. And the paper, which had been losing readers since 2001, picked up a few in the most recent industry survey, while the Süddeutsche lost some.
In Munich, Hans Werner Kilz is also trying to look on the bright side. He noted that the Süddeutsche had widened its circulation lead over the Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung in recent years.
Both papers, and most of their competitors, are fighting a long downward trend in readers, as the population in Germany ages and newspapers fail to replace older readers with young ones.
A courtly 60-year-old, Mr. Kilz knows about the vagaries of journalism. He edited Germany's top news magazine, Der Spiegel, for eight years, leaving after a clash with its publisher, Rudolf Augstein.
Now, as he faces a new owner and an uncertain future, Mr. Kilz can only hope his paper's values will prevail.
''We publish this paper with a piece of our hearts,'' he said, as the last rays of the afternoon sun flickered outside his window. ''The people here love this paper. One must not do anything to take away this love.''
MEDIA
