An expert declarer will sometimes be aware that something odd has happened. It may be the result of a beginner doing something foolish, or an expert falling asleep, or an expert looking foolish but actually being diabolically clever.
One of these three was clearly true on the diagramed deal. Internal evidence makes it obvious that this is a vintage specimen. The one-spade opening makes this clear, in these days of five-card major openings. In addition the four-heart response is a giveaway. Most modern experts play that a response of four hearts to one spade is a splinter, showing heart shortage and spade support. In an unfamiliar partnership, South would avoid four hearts for fear that his partner would believe it was a splinter.
The deal was played in France about four decades ago. South was Pierre Jaïs, one of the eight stars to own the Triple Crown as winners of the Bermuda Bowl, the Team Olympiad and the World Pairs. Looking at all four hands, it is apparent that he was due to succeed. After the defense has taken three club tricks, he is forced to take a trump finesse and make his game. Dummy's spade winners take care of the potential diamond losers.
But an odd thing happened. After the lead of the club king, East did not make the normal play of overtaking with the ace in order to continue the suit. The clubs were therefore blocked when the club continuation was won by East's ace.
The return at the third trick was the heart deuce, and the declarer had to decide what was going on.
He was able to reject the idea that East was a beginner. He knew that on his right was Christiane Martin, one of France's best female players and a three-time European champion.
It now seemed to Jaïs that he could make his game without relying on the heart finesse. He put up his heart ace, crossed to the diamond ace, and played the top spades. He discarded his club loser and attempted to get rid of his diamond losers. But the third round of spades was ruffed by West with the heart seven.
South was uncommonly unlucky, because the spades divided 7-2, and the ruff came with the remaining low trump. East's heart king took the setting trick. Jaïs was left to wonder: Was East uncommonly sleepy or uncommonly devious? History does not say.
BRIDGE
