Four days after France appointed Aïssa Dermouche as its only foreign-born and Muslim prefect, his car was destroyed by a bomb near his home in Nantes early Sunday.
No one took responsibility for the explosion, which caused no injuries, officials said.
President Jacques Chirac immediately condemned the bombing, demanding in a statement ''that the perpetrators of this very serious act be prosecuted and punished with the greatest firmness.''
Interior Minister Nicolas Sarkozy and Prime Minister Jean-Pierre Raffarin telephoned Mr. Dermouche to offer their support, according to statements issued by their offices.
Mr. Sarokozy expressed ''his deepest outrage'' and offered assurances that ''all investigative means will be put in place to identify the perpetrators so that this criminal act can be punished,'' the statement from his office said.
The car, a Saab, was parked on a street in a residential neighborhood in the center of Nantes, near the street where Mr. Dermouche's home is situated. The bomb went off at about 4:40 a.m. Officials declined to rule it a racist act.
''We have no trails to follow because there were no threats,'' Jean-Marie Huet, state prosecutor in Nantes, was quoted as saying by Agence France-Presse. ''But it was a well-planned attack because the car was not in front of his house so they had to know it was his. We have to ask what was the message they wanted to leave? Was it the far right or Muslim fundamentalists or jealousies of a private nature?''
The appointment last Wednesday of Mr. Dermouche, a 57-year-old Algerian-born business school director, has attracted an extraordinary amount of attention because France is embroiled in a divisive debate on whether its large immigrant population, particularly its Muslims, could be better integrated into society through affirmative action.
Officially, affirmative action, or ''positive discrimination'' as it is widely called in France, does not exist because it goes against the strict Republican ideal that all citizens must have equal rights and opportunities.
But the debate was joined after Mr. Sarkozy said on national television last November that affirmative action was necessary to help raise poor Muslims out of suburban ghettos and give them opportunities in French society.
Mr. Chirac, by contrast, has said that it is unacceptable to appoint people ''based on their origins.'' Last week, he said Mr. Dermouche's appointment upheld ''a fundamental republican principle -- that top civil service appointments are based on the recognition of merit, whatever the origins of the persons involved.''
Mr. Dermouche, who came to France when he was 18 and has headed the elite Audencia school of management in Nantes since 1989, was appointed prefect or department governor of the Jura region, near the Swiss border, after an official announcement from Élysée Palace that someone of ''immigrant origin'' was to be selected for such a post. He is to assume the job next month.
As an immigrant from France's former North African colonies who has risen to the highest levels in public life, Mr. Dermouche is touted as a success story. He has been honored by the French government as a knight of the Legion of Honor and of the National Order of Merit.
After the bombing, Mr. Dermouche and his family have been given police protection, said Justice Minister Dominique Perben.
Although the government declined to characterize the attack, racial and religious tensions have been on the rise in France. Last November, a Jewish school building in Gagny, north of Paris, was destroyed in an arson attack. No individual or group took responsibility.
After the attack, Mr. Chirac called an emergency high-level meeting to approve measures to stop attacks on Jewish sites, including tougher policing and prosecution. In addition, $8 million in sweeping urban renewal investments in tough areas with large Muslim populations was approved.
No one has been arrested in connection with that attack.
As a prefect in France, Mr. Dermouche would be required to uphold the anticipated law banning religious symbols like the Islamic veil, the Jewish skullcap and large Christian crosses in public schools. On Saturday, demonstrators opposed to the ban marched in Paris and other French cities, including Nantes.
