One man was shot dead and another wounded on a Chinatown street on Saturday night, the police said yesterday.
The two victims were standing on the sidewalk near 49 Division Street about 10:45 p.m. when one or more people opened fire at them. A 30-year-old man was shot in the chest and taken to New York University Downtown Hospital, where he was pronounced dead an hour later, the police said. They did not release his name.
The other victim, 27, was shot twice -- once in the left shoulder and once in the stomach. He showed up at the Fifth Precinct station house, two blocks from the shooting scene, a few minutes later, the police said. That victim, who was also not named by the police, was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center, where he was in critical but stable condition, the police said.
Officers recovered a .38-caliber revolver and 45 casings at the scene of the shooting, which rattled the otherwise calm street, which is lined with dim sum restaurants and electronics shops. Shopkeepers said they worried that the shooting would drive away business.
Just steps from where the shooting occurred, a bullet had blown a hole the size of a grapefruit into the front window of the Golden Bowl Restaurant. A makeshift sign on pink paper covered the hole and announced, in Chinese, that the restaurant was hiring.
The restaurant had closed at 9 p.m. Saturday, but the window remained exposed because the shop's iron security gate was broken and could not be pulled down over it, employees said. They said they found the hole when they came to work yesterday morning, as well as a stray bullet on the floor, which the police took.
''We didn't know what happened until we saw the newspapers,'' said Paula Zou, 30, a waitress who spoke through a Chinese translator. ''We thought it was a thief.''
Throughout the day, people talked about the shooting, which Chinatown's three main newspapers, The Ming Pao Daily News, The World Journal and The Sing Tao Daily, reported on their front pages.
''It was a big thing for Chinatown,'' said Roxanne Lo, a reporter for The Ming Pao Daily News. ''People in Chinatown have concerns that gangs are coming back.''
A police spokesman said it was too early to tell whether the shooting was gang related.
