For two people on the verge of being Britain's newest press barons, very little seems to be known about the reclusive Barclay Brothers, David and Frederick, who agreed Sunday to buy Conrad Black's stake in the Hollinger newspaper empire.
They list their address as Monaco in Who's Who but have also acquired a rocky island redoubt in the Channel Islands tax haven to shield their seclusion. They own London's glittery Ritz Hotel but also make money from downmarket home-shopping catalogs and Scottish newspapers.
And, while they shun publicity, the Barclays want to buy newspapers. ''We have never really known why they are so keen,'' said Roy Greenslade, media columnist at The Guardian newspaper. ''The only thing they ever said was, 'We like newspapers.'''
Whatever their motives, if the brothers secure control of Hollinger International -- owner of The Chicago Sun-Times, The Jerusalem Post and The Telegraph group and other British titles -- it would cause an upheaval in the British newspaper landscape.
It would give the twins control of Britain's biggest-selling broadsheet, adding to their ownership of The Scotsman and other smaller newspapers. They would gain a potential political platform among the traditional conservative voters of Middle England -- the bedrock readers of The Daily Telegraph.
Yet recent developments could limit the Barclays' ability to complete the deal, including a lawsuit filed by a special committee of Hollinger International on Friday against Lord Black, seeking repayment and interest of more than $400 million. By taking control of Lord Black's Hollinger assets, the Barclay brothers could be liable for a large part of those damages. The Barclays have made no public comments on the suit.
If the deal goes through, ending a period of flamboyant ownership by Mr. Black, The Telegraph's readers could see changes. Mr. Black steered the paper's editorial policy on a conservative, pro-Israel course that distinguished it from many other British newspapers.
With the new owners, who were both knighted in 2000 for their philanthropy, that course could change, but not too much. The brothers are thought to be admirers of former Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher and would be unlikely to risk losing The Telegraph's conservative following.
''They have had a record of not interfering, of being benign proprietors,'' said a person who has worked for them.
By acquiring The Daily Telegraph and The Sunday Telegraph, the two brothers would leap into the main ranks of British newspaper ownership, but they would also confront considerable problems.
The Daily Telegraph faces stiff competition from The Times of London, owned by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, which has been waging a price war on its broadsheet rivals for years.
The war has been expensive for The Telegraph Group, which announced losses of £25.2 million ($45 million) in December 2002, and damaging to circulation. The Telegraph's 900,000 circulation is down from 1.2 million when Lord Black took over the paper in 1985.
Others, like Mr. Greenslade, noted that the brothers have relied on Andrew Neill, a former editor of The Sunday Times, to run their newspaper businesses, including The European, which folded in 1998, and their ailing weekly, The Business. Mr. Neill is regarded by media analysts as politically conservative but also as an active, even interventionist, editor, a style that would put him at odds with the established Telegraph journalists.
''I think the great drama depends on whether they put Andrew Neill in charge or not,'' Mr. Greenslade said.
The Barclay brothers, who have declined to comment on the planned acquisition, have announced their intention to work with other Hollinger shareholders, but made no mention of their plans for the company's other assets, like The Spectator magazine, The Jerusalem Post and The Sun-Times.
The brothers, now in their late 60's, began their careers in property development in London but showed a taste for more varied investments, including shipping and hotels. In 2002, they bought the Littlewoods chain of Main Street stores and home-shopping businesses for £750 million. A year later they bought the home-shopping division of GUS for £590 million.
But, since the early 1990's, they seem to have yearned for a newspaper empire. In 1992, they bought The European, an effort to create a newspaper with a Europe-wide sales base, and invested tens of millions of pounds before it folded in 1998. In 1995, they bought Scotsman Publications and in the late 1990's acquired The Business, a re-modeled effort to revive an ailing newspaper called Sunday Business. Three years ago, they were in the bidding for Express newspapers, continuing their quest for a newspaper with nationwide circulation.
The brothers' operations, though, are opaque, and they have long sought to avoid scrutiny and publicity. In the 1990's, the twins -- said by The Times of London in a 2002 report to be identical in appearance except for the way they part their hair -- bought Brecqhou, a rocky outcrop near Alderney in the Channel Islands, to build a baronial home far from prying eyes. A list published in 2003 by The Sunday Times of London placed them 34th among the country's richest people with a joint fortune of £650 million pounds.
So far, newspapers have not contributed much to the bottom line. Apart from Scotsman Publications, which posted a pretax profit of £8.2 million in July, the brothers' other newspaper ventures, particularly The European, turned into sinkholes. But, for their supporters, that merely underscored their long-range commitment.
''They are committed and they put in significant investment,'' said a person with knowledge of their deals. ''They have a record as long-term investors. They run a financially strong group.''
One reporter at The Daily Telegraph, which would be the jewel in the brothers' newspaper crown, offered another explanation, ''Newspaper buying, is something one does when one is terribly rich and doesn't know what to do with the money.''
