Philadelphia Eagles quarterback Donovan McNabb received a huge roar Sunday simply by pulling on his helmet and jogging onto the field in the second quarter.
McNabb means that much to the Eagles. He had been hit in the ribs, forcing him out of the game for one play, and Eagles fans were delighted to see him return.
Little did they know how much damage had been done. McNabb had separated cartilage in his left rib cage.
He threw interceptions on three of the Eagles' next four possessions, all to the rookie cornerback Ricky Manning Jr., and any invincibility that McNabb possessed had vanished.
Carolina earned its first trip to the Super Bowl with a 14-3 victory, and McNabb finished the game with a green cape pulled over his shoulders, unable to compete.
''Donovan would have continued to play until he passed out,'' Philadelphia Coach Andy Reid said. ''I wasn't going to go there.''
This game was supposed to belong to McNabb. The Eagles had lost to St. Louis and to Tampa Bay in the last two National Football Conference title games, and McNabb was eager and excited.
He finished with 10 completions in 22 attempts for 100 yards. After he was hurt, McNabb completed only 4 of 12 passes for 42 yards.
''It was rough,'' McNabb said. ''I continued to stay with it and fight through it.''
The problem was, he could barely throw the ball. Philadelphia running back Correll Buckhalter said McNabb had to be hoisted to his feet every time he went to the bench.
''Donovan's the leader of this team,'' Buckhalter said. ''But it's football. People get injured.''
When the Eagles got the ball with 9 minutes 31 seconds left, the backup quarterback Koy Detmer ran onto the field and stayed there.
''For me, being a competitor, it was tough to swallow,'' McNabb said.
Reid told him earlier that he was going to take him out of the game for a few plays. McNabb said no. Finally, Reid had seen enough, but the Eagles seemed to sag.
''I wanted to do my best to win it for him,'' Eagles wide receiver Freddie Mitchell said. ''It's sad.''
By controlling the ball with a powerful rushing attack early in the game, Carolina had kept McNabb in check by keeping him off the field.
At the time the Panthers took a 7-0 lead with 10:12 left in the first half, the Eagles had the ball for only 6:57; Carolina had it for 12:51.
McNabb was injured on the next drive. After completing a pass to Mitchell for 9 yards and a first down, McNabb dropped back to pass.
Carolina defensive end Mike Rucker put pressure on McNabb, who said he tripped over either Rucker or Philadelphia running back Duce Staley, who was trying to block Rucker.
''Duce got me a little on that one,'' Rucker said, ''but I was able to stay alive and was able to get his heels and get him down that way.''
McNabb lost his shoe and his balance. Panthers linebacker Greg Favors fell on McNabb while his legs were over his head.
Reid wanted a late-hit penalty, but one was not called, Reid said he was told, because McNabb appeared to be tripped by Staley, not by Rucker.
''I'm not saying I agree with it,'' Reid said.
McNabb stayed down, and 4:18 was left in the first half. Detmer entered the game and threw a pass for a 3-yard loss.
McNabb was back before the next play. He completed a 10-yard pass to Mitchell, and David Akers kicked a field goal after a replay showed that Mitchell had caught the ball.
But McNabb was intercepted by Manning on Philadelphia's first two drives of the second half.
After the Eagles drove to the Carolina 18, Manning stepped in front of receiver Todd Pinkston and made a leaping interception.
The Panthers had to punt, but McNabb threw his third interception when the Eagles got the ball back. This one was not McNabb's fault.
McNabb appeared to complete a pass to James Thrash, but safety Mike Minter got to Thrash at the same time the ball did.
Minter jarred the ball loose, and Manning caught the ball. The Panthers had a first down at the Philadelphia 37.
''He definitely timed it perfectly,'' Thrash said of Minter, ''but you've got to come up with those.''
Carolina's DeShaun Foster scored on a 1-yard run with 4:11 left in the third quarter, and the Panthers' 11-point lead looked insurmountable. McNabb completed one pass for 3 yards on the Eagles' next drive. After Chad Lewis dropped his third-down pass, McNabb left for good.
PRO FOOTBALL
