Exactly 28 years ago Monday, a little-known former governor of Georgia named Jimmy Carter polled just shy of 30 percent support in Iowa's precinct caucuses. He came in second, nine points behind ''uncommitted,'' but the national news media proclaimed him the clear winner of the year's first presidential nominating contest, if only because he had finished so far ahead of everyone else.
Mr. Carter spent that caucus night not in Iowa, but in New York City, so he could be available for all three network news programs the next morning: none of them had sent anchors to Des Moines. Because he went on to win not only the Democratic nomination but also the White House, nothing about this state's politics has ever been quite the same.
Now the networks' mobile newsrooms roll through the frigid streets, and Tom Brokaw takes a table at 801 Steak and Chop House, Des Moines's meatery of choice. And depending on your viewpoint, the Iowa caucuses have become either an established ornament of American democracy or an unrepresentative abomination, in which candidates can win by losing if they run a good race, or lose by winning if they perform below expectations. The contest does not produce a single convention delegate but only begins the county and state selection process. It is far from a reliable predictor of the eventual nominee.
But together with New Hampshire, which votes next week, the Iowa caucuses lead the pack. So a once-obscure former governor of Vermont, aided by Mr. Carter's old organizer, Tim Kraft, and a batch of high-profile members of Congress are all hoping that Iowa will be their own breakthrough.
The contest looms all the larger this year because the primary schedule is now so compressed: of the delegates needed for nomination, more than one-tenth will be allotted by Feb. 3, and nearly 60 percent by March 2.
''It just keeps going,'' said Hugh Winebrenner, a retired Drake University professor and the author of ''The Iowa Precinct Caucuses: The Making of a Media Event.'' ''There have been attempts by the parties, the candidates, by other states to derail it or at least put it in some kind of perspective, and none of that has succeeded. But the original meaning has been transformed strikingly. There's been no little-known candidate come out of Iowa and win the nomination since Carter. Now it's a winnowing of the field, which is very different.''
The race here is seen as so close that all the major candidates could conceivably survive to fight on. The front page of The Des Moines Register was plastered Sunday with big red up and down arrows detailing its latest poll, which showed some candidates rising and others falling, but all within reach of one another.
On Jan. 19, 1976, the notion of the caucuses as a big event was such a novelty that the Iowa Democratic Party had raised $4,000 to help defray the caucus costs: selling tickets, at $10 a head and $1 a drink, so the public could watch the national reporters at work on election night. Now, the party uses the caucuses as a vital fund-raising tool, and the candidates pay tribute, as Senator John Edwards of North Carolina did by donating computer equipment worth thousands of dollars for use during this election cycle.
''That's getting very close to, I don't know what the right word would be -- not corruption, but something,'' said former Senator Gary Hart of Colorado, who first saw the Iowa caucuses as a way to build early support when he was George S. McGovern's campaign manager in 1972. Mr. Hart's own candidacy caught fire after his surprising second-place finish here behind Walter F. Mondale in 1984 helped propel him to victory in New Hampshire.
''In a perfect world, caucuses would be a very good way of figuring out which of the candidates has been persuasive,'' Mr. Hart added. ''But what started out as a person-to-person, humanized event has gotten to be very organized and professionalized. The deliberative aspect of it -- getting together in a rural Iowa farmhouse to debate the candidates' merits -- is the ideal, and I think we've strayed very far from that.''
''Caucus'' is an Algonquin Indian word meaning elder, and Iowa's system dates to its statehood, in 1846. But for most of their history, the caucuses remained comparatively obscure. Only after the debacle of the 1968 Democratic Convention in Chicago and the subsequent revision of the party's rules to emphasize grass-roots power did Mr. Hart and others in the McGovern campaign seize on the caucuses as a way to make an early splash on a low budget.
It was all partly an accident: because the Iowa Democrats could not book a suitable meeting place for the state convention until May 20, 1972, and because new rules required 30 days between each party gathering (local, county, Congressional district and state convention) the latest possible date for the precinct-level caucuses was Jan. 24. For the first time, that put Iowa ahead of the New Hampshire primary, until then the initial test of candidates' strength.
Mr. McGovern, then a senator from neighboring South Dakota and a strong critic of the Vietnam War, headed a special Democratic commission that proposed changes in the national party rules. A young aide, Richard G. Stearns, sketched out a plan to win support in the 28 states where national delegates were chosen by caucuses or conventions, with easier potential for organizing, instead of primaries, with their higher turnouts and costs.
''Because caucus turnout was historically so low, on a fairly low budget you could organize the kind of attendance that could not only be competitive, but dominating,'' said Mr. Stearns, now a Federal District Court judge in Massachusetts.
In the summer of 1970, Mr. Stearns went to Iowa with Gene Pokorny, who had built a reputation as a wunderkind organizer. They carried the names of about 160 people who had written Mr. McGovern about the war, ''went and saw everyone'' and left with a skeletal organization in place, Mr. Stearns recalled.
Eighteen months later, the smart money favored Senator Edmund S. Muskie of Maine, but on caucus night -- in a blizzard with a wind-chill factor of 56 degrees below zero -- Mr. McGovern came in third with nearly 23 percent, and Mr. Muskie was virtually tied with ''uncommitted'' at almost 36 percent. R. W. Apple Jr. of The New York Times praised Mr. McGovern's ''surprisingly strong showing,'' and ABC News declared, ''The Muskie bandwagon slid off an icy road in Iowa last night.''
So began a three-decade obsession with the Iowa results, whose meaning has varied wildly. Ronald Reagan lost here to George Bush, but went on to win New Hampshire and the nomination in 1980. Mr. Bush finished third here in 1988, after Bob Dole and the Rev. Pat Robertson.
On the Democratic side that year, Michael S. Dukakis finished third behind Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri (whose political life now depends on winning outright) and Senator Paul Simon from Illinois.
Four years ago, Al Gore handily defeated Bill Bradley in Iowa, only to face a strong challenge from him in New Hampshire. And President Bush finished first here, where John McCain did not compete, only to lose to him in New Hampshire.
So why do candidates keep coming back?
Mr. Hart offers a clue. Asked if he has ever regretted begetting such a beast, he laughed long and hard, and replied: ''I did many times in the cold, cold winter of '83-'84, until I came in a very distant second. And then I thought they were manna from heaven.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CAUCUSES
