Carolina quarterback Jake Delhomme looked around Lincoln Financial Field on Sunday night and watched the reputedly vicious Eagles fans streaming quietly to the exits as the final seconds of the National Football Conference championship game ticked away. He turned to the Panthers' huddle for congratulations and hugs. He needed only to kneel a few more times to put the finishing touches on a stunning 14-3 victory over the Eagles. That is when Delhomme, the unlikeliest of Super Bowl quarterbacks, started to let his reality sink in.
Delhomme and his team had come in and done the almost unthinkable. They dominated the Eagles, sending them to their third straight defeat one step from the Super Bowl. The Panthers sapped all the magic that put Philadelphia here, played their stifling brand of defense and letting the weight of the pressure on the Eagles do the rest of the work.
''We liked our chances here,'' Delhomme said. ''We knew we had to play well. But they had all the pressure, no doubt. And we really didn't have any.''
The Panthers head into the Super Bowl, in Houston on Feb. 1., to play New England as the little franchise no one pays much mind, the team two seasons removed from a 1-15 record, the team that was supposed to be simply a steppingstone for the better teams to reach the championship.
But, as it turned out, Carolina was the better team. The Panthers knocked off the Dallas Cowboys at home, beat the Rams in St. Louis and did not just beat the Eagles here, but also pulled the life out of them.
Even the famously unruly Eagles fans were rendered mute at the end, not mustering a respectable round of boos for the disappointment of being left at the Super Bowl doorstep once again.
The game had the Panthers' fingerprints all over it. Their defense hounded Philadelphia quarterback Donovan McNabb into three interceptions, then knocked him out of the game and intercepted his backup, Koy Detmer, at their 8-yard line.
All three of the interceptions of McNabb were by a rookie cornerback, Ricky Manning Jr., who might be the prototypical Panther. He was passed over until the third round of last year's draft coming out of U.C.L.A. because critics said he was too short (5 feet 8) and too light (185 pounds). But he played his way into the Panthers' lineup late in the season and has not looked back.
Manning had three interceptions in the regular season -- returning one for a touchdown in the finale against the Giants -- and picked off Rams quarterback Marc Bulger once last week in the divisional playoff game.
His first interception against Philadelphia came in the final minute of the first half. He stepped in front of receiver James Thrash to kill an Eagles drive, preserving the Panthers' 7-3 lead.
The Eagles were driving again on their first possession of the third quarter when Manning stepped in front of receiver Todd Pinkston and McNabb unwisely threw the ball right to him at the Panthers' 18.
The third interception, it turned out, was a charm. Thrash caught a pass from McNabb but took a crushing hit from safety Mike Minter. The ball popped free and Manning was there to grab it, returning it 13 yards to the Eagles' 37. Four plays later, DeShaun Foster crashed through four tackles for a spectacular 1-yard touchdown run and the game was all but sealed as the Panthers took a 14-3 lead.
''I felt like I could attack them,'' Manning said. ''That's what I did no matter what coverage I was in. I was attacking, attacking. They didn't know if I was in zone, man, whatever. I was up there all day long disturbing their pass routes. It worked.''
Early in the fourth quarter, Eagles Coach Andy Reid pulled McNabb. He had sustained separated rib cartilage taking a hit earlier in the game and kept absorbing big hits. Detmer took over, but he did not fare much better against a fired-up Panthers defense.
That defense took its direction from Coach John Fox, who learned a lot about playing the Eagles before he took over the sad-sack Panthers two seasons ago. As the Giants' defensive coordinator, Fox went 9-2 against the Eagles, including a playoff victory.
''All of this starts with Coach Fox,'' Delhomme said. ''He has brought in the attitude.''
The attitude turned into a celebration on the Carolina sideline. It started in the smile of Delhomme, the most accidental tourist at his position. He was the Panthers' surprise starter this season, having spent much of his career knocking around the league, looking for a chance. When the Panthers offered one, neither they, nor he, expected he would be hoisting any kind of trophy this year.
''We don't have any superstars,'' Delhomme said. ''We have Stephen Davis and he doesn't want to be a superstar. We don't have a lot of egos. We're just a selfless bunch of guys. We don't care who gets the credit.
''It's not always the team with the best talent that wins. It's the team with the best chemistry.''
The Eagles were the team with the talent, the pedigree. They felt destined for the Super Bowl a year ago, when the N.F.C. championship game was the final game in old, dilapidated Veterans Stadium. But Tampa Bay came in and spoiled that party.
This Eagles team was less talented than that one and tended to win much closer, uglier games, but with another home game in their new, cushy stadium, losing was not thought to be an option.
''They're all disappointing,'' Reid said of the playoff losses. ''If you're asking me right now, it's the most disappointing.''
Reid and his players were at a loss for an explanation. Carolina ran all over them. The turnovers killed their offense. The game was never really close, even when the score was.
''We never really got any rhythm,'' Reid said. ''When we did every once in a while, we ended up with turnovers, so we ended up stalling.''
The result was a quiet stadium on a cold day, Eagles fans too shocked to muster any anger. They turned one last set of cold shoulders and walked away.
PRO FOOTBALL
