At 8:30 a.m. on a recent Thursday, Leo Valliot was in his usual wooden booth at Roland's diner here looking forward to his usual breakfast of eggs and bacon, which, as usual, he intended to eat in quiet and peace. But instead of his coffee, he ended up drinking a ''Cup of Joe,'' caught up in Senator Joseph I. Lieberman's political tempest.
At 8:45, the Lieberman entourage swept through the glass front door, unannounced, taking captive three dozen bewildered diners, most of them middle-aged. As aides worked their cellphones and cameras flashed, the candidate moved deftly from booth to booth, tousling kids' hair and soliciting questions.
''You get resigned to this happening in primary season,'' said Mr. Valliot, hunkering down over his eggs with great concentration and mumbling that he planned to vote for George W. Bush or John Kerry.
At the neighboring booth, Dennis Bastille, recently unemployed, said he was glad for the unexpected opportunity to ask Mr. Lieberman about jobs and health coverage. ''He made a good impression, but it was just a couple of minutes, and to make a judgment you need hours.''
Voters here are sometimes unwitting actors in a political sideshow whose raucous magnitude often seems to dwarf this tiny, quiet state, as the Democratic candidates come a-courting for the Jan. 27 primary.
Maeve Sheehan, 23, a volunteer for Senator John Edwards, said he was on the sidewalk holding an Edwards for President sign ''when Joe Lieberman pulled up in his town car, jumped out and shook my hand.''
''Now, that wouldn't happen in New Jersey,'' he said.
Residents agree that the campaigning this year is particularly intense, but are divided about whether the lavish attention constitutes an opportunity or a nuisance.
Nearly every morning, some diner in the state holds a Cup of Joe session, introducing Senator Lieberman as the breakfast special of the day. Lunch often includes a Conversation With Clark, a Town Hall Meeting with John Edwards or a Meet the Candidate session with Howard Dean. And dinner time provides a wide selection of house parties for the various candidates -- and probably a chili supper somewhere with John Kerry.
Campaign signs are scattered along snow-lined roads like red, white and blue bread crumbs, marking the candidates' frantic paths from Manchester to Portsmouth to Concord. At one of two house parties he attended on a recent Wednesday night, Senator Lieberman joked, ''I used to travel all over the world; now I travel all over New Hampshire.''
Geneva Bliss, a retiree with a long woolen coat and a cane, said she now received several phone calls a day from the campaigns. ''You do hate to be called so much, but it's part of our culture in New Hampshire to do this job and to give everyone a chance,'' she said. After screening the candidates, Mrs. Bliss and her husband, John, traveled to Peterborough to meet Gen. Wesley K. Clark. She is now a supporter, noting that he seemed charming in person and also ''much more well rounded'' than the last general she considered: Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Perhaps because this is such a quiet place most of the time, many residents regard the onslaught as an almost exciting quadrennial sport, something like the Olympics.
''For me, this is very personal and passionate: I mean where else in America do you get presidential candidates hanging out in your neighbor's living room?'' said Lisa Haswell, who says she will probably vote for Dr. Dean. Even so, she continues to attend parties for other candidates, because she is not certain.
''You get to ask one on one about issues you care about,'' Ms. Haswell said. ''You see body language, inflection, and get a sense of what they're like as a person. And through your vote you transmit that to the American people.''
At a stately Tudor house in Nashua last week, a last-minute reception for Dennis J. Kucinich was crowded with young Democrats performing due diligence on him -- firing questions on topics like drugs and Native American rights -- though few of the guests expressed interest in voting for him. Even the party's host, Steve Thurber, a teacher, admitted that he was not a Kucinich supporter.
''I didn't seek out Dennis; this is a favor to a friend,'' Mr. Thurber said. ''But it is important that he has the opportunity, and I'm extremely pleased that he's here.''
Colleen and Matt Meyers, wearing Clark buttons and carrying a yard sign, said they recently pulled their two children out of high school for the day so that they could hear General Clark. The previous week they had skipped school to hear Dr. Dean and Mr. Kucinich. Ms. Meyers, a retired foreign service officer-turned saddle fitter, says she is leaning toward General Clark, while her husband is inclined to vote for Dr. Dean.
As they discussed their commitments on the sidewalk in front of a clapboard realty office, Walt Sterling, 66, weighed in with his view, though nobody asked. ''I thought there was an arrogance about Dean, and that made Clark much more appealing.''
He added: ''We observe things from up here in the hills and then once every four years we come down to say what we think. We stand taller on election day; this is very important to us.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: NEW HAMPSHIRE
