THE buttoned-down academician came out ready to make a statement that was less about genius and more about guts. When conventional logic dictated retreat, Bill Belichick gave his team the chance to put a bold first foot forward, to search in the snow for a few Indianapolis mouths to smash.
Fourth-and-1 on his very first possession from his own 44, with the touchdown machine called Peyton Manning ready to roll, Belichick tempted those conservative football fates by risking the cardinal National Football League head-coaching sin. He opened himself to the super second guess by relinquishing play-calling control to a mere player.
''We put it in his hands,'' Belichick said of a quarterback from Michigan who plays like Montana. ''He made a good decision.''
The quarterback, Tom Brady, read the Colts' defense and lunged left for 2 short yards that would have very large repercussions in the New England Patriots' advancement to the Super Bowl. Those 2 yards for a first down put the Patriots on their way to the end zone, to the only touchdown they would score, in a 24-14 victory in the American Football Conference championship game.
Two simple yards, two resounding messages, which mocked the vaunted Colts offense before it even took the field.
Punt? Us? Here? Now?
Punting is for weaklings, the Patriots seemed to be saying. Here, in our house, you will punt before we do. And that is exactly what the Colts, previously known as the nonpunters of the playoffs, were eventually forced to do.
The other message, more implicit, was that the no-prisoners Patriots' defense, which allowed the fewest points in the league this season, was not about to play along with the pregame hyperbole that put Peyton in a place where few contemporaries could compete.
''We wanted to put a little silence on the situation,'' said Ty Law, whose three interceptions would get the Patriots' point across rather well. First came fourth-and-1 from the 44, speaking volumes about the Patriots' intentions.
''I was ready,'' Ken Walter, the New England punter, said after the Brady-orchestrated victory returned the Patriots to the Super Bowl, which they won on a walk-off field goal two years ago. ''I was over by the net, waiting. But these are the situations that come up, and in games like this, games of this magnitude, you have to take your chances.''
Besides Manning's apparent graduation from regular-season sensation to postseason sainthood, the other main discussion last week focused on the gulps soon condemned as the goofs leading to the elimination of St. Louis and Green Bay. The Rams' Mike Martz and the Packers' Mike Sherman lost their endgame nerve, which, granted, was altogether different from Belichick's first-quarter adventurousness yesterday at Gillette Stadium.
But look at it this way: Had Brady not gotten the first down, had the Colts' first possession begun in Patriots' territory, had Manning come in and picked up where he left off last week in Kansas City, how many Monday Morning Quarterbacks would today be advancing the hypothesis that Belichick, the Wesleyan man, had turned into the nutty professor?
''It comes down to what Tom sees up there,'' Belichick said.
He said there were options but wouldn't say what they were because however much Pete Rose there was in him on fourth-and-1 at the 44, N.F.L. coaches would rather spread their bank account information over the Internet than divulge game strategy.
Brady, a much freer spirit, was happy to spit out the state secrets, though. ''Take a timeout or take a penalty or try to go over and get the first down,'' he said.
Was a statement made?
Brady ducked under center, backed up to take a look, and stepped back to take the snap. The first down made, he proceeded to march the Patriots 65 yards in 13 plays.
''The coaches knew we could do some things,'' said Patriots receiver Deion Branch, football-talk for absolutely.
For the remainder of the first half, the Colts were in a stupor in snow-swirling conditions. Manning threw the first of his four interceptions to snuff out a drive that might have tied the score. Another pick led to the first of five Adam Vinatieri field goals. A botched snap on what would have been the first playoff punt by the Colts' Hunter Smith led to a safety. It was 15-0, New England.
The Colts couldn't stop Brady enough in the second half, couldn't sustain enough offense, to catch up.
Then the superficial ignominy: In the third quarter, Smith had to punt first, before Walter would get his chance in the fourth quarter.
''I don't know why people were making such a big deal about them not punting,'' Walter said. ''I've been in games where I punted once or not at all and my team lost. Sometimes you don't punt because you're turning the ball over.''
Believe this, though. Belichick's willingness to let Brady have a look on that first possession established New England as the team that would call the shots. It turned out this wasn't totally the matchup it was supposed to be, Manning's brilliance versus Belichick's brainpower. Belichick had a pretty fair coach on the field he could trust to make an early crossroads decision.
Punt? Not unless Tom Brady stepped back from the line of scrimmage and called for it himself.
Sports of The Times
