Facing a spending bill and energy legislation left over from last year, Congress returns to Washington on Tuesday to a truncated schedule that both Democrats and Republicans say will be dominated this year by politics, not policy.
For the Senate, the first order of business is an $820-billion catchall spending bill covering myriad federal agencies. The Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, is seeking to reopen debate on rules governing overtime pay, media ownership and country-of-origin food labeling and is urging a filibuster on the measure, which is seven bills wrapped into one.
A vote on whether to cut off debate is scheduled for Tuesday afternoon. Should Democrats block the measure, Republicans say, it would set the tone for another year of the bitter partisanship that tainted the last session.
''Generally speaking, my optimism is not very high for a terribly productive year,'' said Senator Mitch McConnell of Kentucky, the Republican whip. ''We have less time in session, it's a presidential election year, and that tends to be the most partisan of all years.''
While lawmakers in both parties predict Democrats will hold up the spending bill only briefly before allowing it to pass, the fate of the other leftover item, the energy bill, is unclear. The measure fell short by a handful of votes necessary to break a Democratic filibuster in the Senate last year. It was a major setback for President Bush, who has made updating energy policy a central goal of his domestic agenda.
Mr. McConnell said the Republicans do not intend to reintroduce the measure unless they are sure they have the votes to pass it. That appears unlikely because the parties are deeply divided over a provision offering legal protection to companies that make a gasoline additive blamed for water pollution.
Mr. Daschle asserted that he could produce the votes to pass the bill if that provision was removed. Some Democrats are suggesting that parts of the bill with bipartisan support, like a program expanding the use of corn-based ethanol, be introduced as separate legislation.
''This year, more than any other, the way to get things done is working in a bipartisan way,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York. ''I guess each party and the White House have to decide if they want to do that. In an election year, sometimes it doesn't happen.''
Election-year politics are casting a shadow over Congress even before members get back to work. With President Bush scheduled to deliver his State of the Union address on Tuesday, the White House has put forth far-reaching proposals to revamp immigration law and expand space exploration, initiatives that Republicans and Democrats say could easily falter on Capitol Hill.
Many Democrats scoff openly at the space proposal, suggesting that the president should spend the money on problems closer to home.
''With all the domestic priorities we've got locally here on earth, plus the war going on, plus the deficit, there's a lot of people saying, Well, let's hold on,'' said Senator John B. Breaux, Democrat of Louisiana.
Mr. Breaux said changes in immigration law, traditionally supported by Democrats, might stand a better chance. ''I think something like that could possibly pass,'' he said. ''What are we going to tell our people, that we're not going to do it because it's not enough?''
Yet the immigration plan, which would create a guest worker program giving temporary legal status to millions of illegal workers, is drawing opposition from some conservative Republicans, among them Senator Trent Lott of Mississippi, the former Republican leader.
''I have a problem with how he wants to deal with illegal aliens,'' Mr. Lott said. ''They say it's not amnesty, but it smells like amnesty. I want to know exactly how that's going to work.''
The sheer brevity of the Congressional calendar, which includes breaks for the Democratic and Republican conventions in the summer and an early recess so that lawmakers can go home to campaign in the fall, means there will be little time for legislation that requires extended debate. But some must-pass bills are on the agenda.
Chief among them is a measure that would reauthorize highway programs. As drafted in the House, the bill would increase federal investment in road, mass transit and other transportation infrastructure improvements by $375 billion over the next six years. Proponents say it would create 1.7 million jobs.
States are depending on getting the highway money by spring, when the construction season begins. While there are likely to be battles over how the money should be allocated among the states and whether the bill should include an increase in the gasoline tax, most lawmakers predict that the measure will pass in some form.
''The highway bill is going to be one of those bipartisan achievements that is a necessity,'' Mr. Daschle said. ''It isn't even an option. It has to be done, and it has to be done early, because of the construction cycle and the need to get contracts let and work started.''
Also high on the agenda is a tax bill that would do away with longstanding breaks for American companies that export, and instead institute incentives that conform to international trade laws. The European Union has threatened to impose retaliatory tariffs in March if Congress does not take action by then.
