It sounds like a Hollywood horror movie.
In January 1999 two unknown filmmakers went into the well-dressed wilds of Park City, Utah, to the Sundance Film Festival, in an effort to track down a mysterious but legendary god: the studio distribution deal. Sure enough, after a midnight screening of their grainy $30,000 movie, the two filmmakers, Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez, found their deal, a $1.1 million payday that eventually brought their little film rave reviews, international distribution and some $250 million in worldwide sales.
The movie was ''The Blair Witch Project,'' and it became the ultimate indie: cheap, hip and enormously profitable. It made Mr. Myrick and Mr. Sanchez rich and relatively famous.
Then, just like that, they disappeared.
Call it the curse of the Blair Witch or just a sophomore slump, but five years after Mr. Myrick and Mr. Sanchez burst onto the film world, they have yet to make another movie. Their last project, a comedy called ''Heart of Love,'' died in preproduction, a victim of financing problems, they say. And even as moguls prowl this year's Sundance festival, looking for the next big thing, one of the ''Blair Witch'' producers, Gregg Hale, found his newest movie, ''Say Yes Quickly,'' rejected by the festival.
But the curse isn't limited to the movie's creative personnel. Last month Artisan Entertainment, the company that bought and distributed ''Blair Witch,'' was purchased by its larger and more successful rival, Lions Gate Entertainment, for $160 million and some $45 million in debt that Artisan had accumulated. (The final deal may be worth more depending on sales on forthcoming Artisan films.) Even the actors from ''Blair Witch'' -- Heather Donahue (the girl with the flashlight), Joshua Leonard (the blond camera man) and Michael C. Williams (the sound man) -- have struggled thus far to turn their overnight star power into more significant movie careers.
Depending on who is talking, what befell that movie's creators and Artisan is either a commentary on the state of today's independent cinema or just a cautionary tale about the dangers of hitting it too big too soon. Or perhaps it is a judgment on the indifferent quality of ''Blair Witch,'' which hit a momentary cultural nerve. In any case it is not what anyone involved expected.
''It's frustrating, no doubt,'' said Mr. Sanchez, 35. ''Our experiences after 'Blair Witch' kind of turned us off a lot of things and taught us how things worked. But we're all just trying to get back into making movies again.''
That statement is particularly shocking considering the enormous hype that surrounded the debut of ''Blair Witch,'' a buzz that was built in large part through a clever, grass-roots Internet promotion, suggesting that the movie was actually found film made by three students who had apparently been gobbled up by a witch in the woods near Burkittsville, Md.
The promotional scheme by Artisan, which bought the film at Sundance, and the production company, Haxan Films, built up intense expectation for the movie, particularly among horror-loving moviegoers in their teens and 20's. By the time ''Blair Witch'' opened nationwide in July 1999, it had already impressed audiences at the Cannes Film Festival -- it won the youth prize there -- and the Web site was getting more than a million hits a day.
The film sold out theaters across the country, and its stars and creators made the covers of Time and Newsweek. The Internet strategy soon was being imitated by other movies and became a much-cited example of the effectiveness of so-called ''viral marketing,'' a catchall phrase for any number of Internet-based, youth-conscious advertising campaigns, including that of the Democratic presidential candidate Howard Dean.
While the reviews were not all positive, most critics were impressed by the filmmakers' ability to use a low-budget aesthetic -- shaky camera work, 16-millimeter black-and-white scenes and those spooky stick figures -- to their advantage. ''The imagination works overtime watching the acuity of these talented filmmakers,'' Janet Maslin wrote in The New York Times, ''and wondering what bright idea they'll have next.''
As it turns out, their next bright idea was to do something completely different. While Haxan and its investors earned an estimated $35 million to $40 million from ''Blair Witch,'' neither Mr. Myrick nor Mr. Sanchez said he had any interest in an immediate sequel.
''My philosophy has always been to prefer quality over quantity,'' said Mr. Myrick, 40, from his home in Pasadena, Calif. ''I was in no rush to make another movie just because it was easy to do.''
Mr. Sanchez was even more adamant. ''We just wanted to get the hell away from 'Blair Witch,' '' he said. ''We were trying to get out of the horror genre, so we tried to do a complete 180.''
The 180 in question was a screwball, Monty Pythonesque comedy called ''Heart of Love'' about a man who discovers he is God, written to include cheesy cameos by the likes of the comedians Gallagher and Don Knotts and actors like Erik Estrada and Jimmy (J. J.) Walker.
Artisan wasn't happy about Haxan's reluctance to do a sequel. ''Artisan was thirsty to capitalize on the movie and thirsty for revenue, but the Haxan guys didn't want to make a sequel at that time,'' said Amir Malin, Artisan's former president and chief executive, who had announced in January 2000 that the film would have not one but two follow-ups. ''So that caused tension.''
Haxan and Artisan also squabbled over the proceeds from the video release, which was rushed out at Halloween 1999, but the issue was settled with Artisan out of court.
A year later Artisan released ''Blair Witch 2: Book of Shadows,'' with a new director (Joe Berlinger), a new cast and -- most strikingly -- a studio-size budget ($15 million, not including marketing and promotion). Lightning, however, was not about to strike twice; the film grossed only $26 million. (Mr. Myrick and Mr. Sanchez were credited as executive producers, but had little creative imput.)
The underperforming sequel was just the first of several disappointments for Artisan. Founded in 1997 by Mr. Malin and Bill Block, Artisan was a little, well-respected company, known for its taste in small budget films like ''Pi.''
After ''Blair Witch,'' however, Mr. Malin, who took over as chief executive in late 2000, said that the company had become weighed down by a large staff and some questionable artistic decisionmaking.
''I think we thought we could do no wrong,'' he said. ''From a business point of view the company had started out with the strategy to operate efficiently, with no bloated overhead and smart decisions. Then all of a sudden with the success and all that money coming in, all the principles that had been engineered upfront were thrown out the window.''
Artisan started producing a string of commercial clinkers and badly reviewed art-house pretenders like ''Soul Survivors'' (2001), a $14 million production that grossed less than $4 million domestically.
By late 2000 the company's debt had ballooned to $260 million, Mr. Malin said, a figure he said he managed to lower to $45 million at the time of the company's sale by cutting staff and overhead and eliminating the company's production group.
Haxan, meanwhile, had its own problems, struggling to nail down the financing for ''Heart of Love.'' Haxan was a five-man production company formed by former film students and college friends from the University of Central Florida who produced ''Blair Witch'' on their credit cards.
Although the film was shot in only eight days in Maryland, the project had been more than three years in the making. So when success came, Mr. Sanchez said they wanted to catch up with life again: they bought houses, they married, they had children.
''The whole starving-artist thing gets kind of old when you're in your late 20's, and all your friends have houses and cars,'' said Mr. Sanchez, who now lives in Maryland with his wife, Stephanie, and two children. ''I mean, had 'Blair Witch' not happened, they would have turned my power off.''
Mr. Myrick agreed, adding: ''We'd been working in the business for years and struggling to get by, and suddenly we had some financial independence and stability. I was actually able to lock myself in a room and work on a project for three years.''
With offers coming in for everything from ''Exorcist 4'' to ''Halloween 7,'' Haxan set up a big office in Orlando and hired staff.
''It was a classic case of overextending,'' said Mr. Hale, who produced two unsuccessful television shows for Fox. ''But none of us were businesspeople -- we were independent filmmakers -- so we just didn't know better.''
By this year, however, the office was closed and the phone disconnected. Artisan opted out ''Heart of Love'' in 2001, and the film was officially canceled in 2002.
The independent film world was also changing, with indies like Miramax looking more and more like studios, and Sundance looking more like Cannes.
But both Haxan and Artisan officials, including Mr. Malin, still say they are proud of ''Blair Witch,'' and especially their marketing of it.
Rachel Cohen, Artisan's former vice president of production and acquisition, said that although Mr. Myrick and Mr. Sanchez were still untested, they deserved another shot. ''I think it remains to be seen if they're real filmmakers,'' she said. ''But I absolutely think they deserve the chance to make another film.''
The sale of Artisan may actually make for a second life for ''Blair Witch,'' or so its creators hope. Last week Mr. Sanchez and Mr. Hale met with executives from Lions Gate to pitch a number of ideas to rejuvenate the franchise, including a prequel set in the 1940's, a pre-prequel set in the 18th century, and a plain old sequel.
Mr. Hale is still trying to get ''Say Yes Quickly'' seen, and Mr. Sanchez is also shopping several new scripts. Mr. Myrick, while working with Mr. Sanchez, is also shooting a pilot for a television show called ''The Strand.''
''After taking the temperature of the studio system, I'm not in any rush to do business with those guys,'' Mr. Myrick said. ''I'd much prefer to raise a couple million dollars and do the thing myself.''
Mr. Sanchez seconded that. ''We're all underdogs again,'' he said. ''And that's how we were with 'Blair Witch' and that's probably why 'Blair Witch' was what it was. Now it's time to roll up my sleeves and get it done again.''
Correction:  February 9, 2004, Monday  An article in The Arts on Jan. 19 about the problems that have confronted two filmmakers, Daniel Myrick and Eduardo Sanchez, since their success with ''The Blair Witch Project'' five years ago misstated the title of a movie they were later asked to make but did not. It was ''Freddy vs. Jason.'' (There is no movie named ''Halloween 7.'' The seventh film in the series, ''Halloween H20: Twenty Years Later,'' was released before ''The Blair Witch'' project.)
