Whether the rest of the nation likes it or not, Iowa kicks off the Democratic presidential primary today with its caucuses. This is, as we have said before, no way to choose a potential president. But this year it turned out to be a great way to torture one. Intense media attention robbed the caucuses of their old homey aura of grass-roots citizenship and turned the event into an overpolled, overspun symphony of attack ads. But in the process, it created a kind of trial by fire that allowed the voters to see how well Howard Dean, who led the pack for most of the campaign, might fare under the kind of unimaginable pressure and scrutiny that come with a modern American presidential race.
Tonight, the tiny slice of Iowans who participate in the caucuses could all but anoint a presidential nominee, narrow the race down to just two or three credible candidates, or churn things up entirely, sending four men off to New Hampshire wrapped in a blanket of political possibility. We can't help hoping for the latter. Iowa should not be the place where the decision is made. Its thin population is only slightly closer to a cross-section of Americans than that of Auckland or Bruges, and the caucuses themselves are a sort of carpet-swapping process of preferential apportionment that falls ludicrously short of the one-person, one-vote ideal. But it will have served its purpose if the nation gets teased into paying greater attention to politics and to the more direct primary elections that begin next week in New Hampshire.
Whatever the ultimate fate of the former governor of Vermont, Dr. Dean has plied the hustings as a case study in the risks and lacerations of being the perceived front-runner. His words and record have been vetted by rivals and the news media far more intently than those of any other candidate. He has been the perpetual target of the television ads in a campaign where something like $90 per caucus-goer has been lavished on television advertising, much of it in negative broadsides that shunted Democrats' competitive juices into intramural back-stabbing. The nastiest brickbats will be savored by Republican strategists for their general election defense of President Bush.
For all the strangeness of the event, there's no way around the fact that Iowa presents the campaign's starting ribbon to be snipped, ducked under, or hacked through by the candidates. After tonight it's on to New Hampshire, another extremely unrepresentative state where the voters feel entitled to the candidates' undivided attention.
