Ty Law and Rodney Harrison were experimenting in practice early last week. They tried a role reversal. Law moved from his usual position of cornerback to safety. Harrison moved from his normal spot at safety to cornerback. They kept flip-flopping, playing frisky Patriot games.
Their coach, Bill Belichick, told them, ''That looks interesting.'' Law and Harrison said they wanted to try it in the American Football Conference championship game, particularly against Indianapolis receiver Marvin Harrison. Belichick said fine -- as long as it worked.
So, in the title game at Gillette Stadium on Sunday, Law and Harrison formed their own version of the Cover 2 defense, in which safeties play back in a zone, complementing the initial line of pass defense. Law took on Marvin Harrison at the line and ran with him underneath, with Rodney Harrison often offering support from behind. Then Rodney Harrison moved up to the line, knocking Marvin Harrison off his routes and running with him while Law offered backup. It was a new, two-man twist on a familiar defense. The Colts' Harrison might as well have been placed in a box with a sealed lid.
The result of Law and Rodney Harrison versus Marvin Harrison was staggering. Marvin Harrison made one catch for 6 yards in the first half and finished with only 3 catches for 19 yards. New England won, 24-14, and earned a trip to the Super Bowl in part because it took what might be the most critical element of the Colts' offense -- Marvin Harrison's stupefying, back-breaking catches -- and erased it from the game.
Only a flicker of the Colts' fiery offense was left.
''Let's get this straight -- I've got all the respect in the world for Peyton Manning and Marvin Harrison, and Marvin, along with Randy Moss and Torry Holt, is the best receiver in the game,'' Law said. ''But when you watch some of their film, Marvin is running so free in the secondary. I mean, he's got plays of 70 and 80 yards for touchdowns where nobody touches him. I could complete some of those passes.
''So, Rodney and I were talking about it, and I can run with and cover any guy, and Rodney likes to get up there and jam them and re-route them. We thought that mix-up on Marvin would help throw him off his game. And we knew one thing: He's the man they go to in crunch time and he's the guy that Peyton trusts.''
Law made three interceptions. Rodney Harrison had a game-high 10 tackles, an interception and forced a fumble on Marvin Harrison. Both Law and Rodney Harrison benefited from a consistent Patriots pass rush, one that accounted for four sacks and nasty pressure on Manning.
''I'd look up and see one All-Pro guy covering me,'' Marvin Harrison said. ''I'd look up and there would be a second All-Pro covering me.
''They were not going to let me get free downfield. I've seen a lot of defenses. This attack had some success partly because we got down, 7-0, in the first quarter and then 15-0 at halftime. That took away some of our running game and some of the effectiveness of our play-action passes. If we had stayed close early and we had the run going, Rodney Harrison would not have been able to play it like that. He might have even had to come up to the line to support the run. That could have changed things, but as it was, we got too one-dimensional.''
And far too predictable with their stellar receiver. The Colts nearly always line up Marvin Harrison wide right. Law and Rodney Harrison would simply line up to that side and wait for Marvin Harrison to come to them. He kept running into the teeth of a trap. There was not enough of Marvin Harrison in motion, Harrison in the slot, Harrison out of the backfield, to force the Patriots out of their plan.
Tom Moore, the Colts' offensive coordinator, offered few answers. ''I can't tell you what happened until I see the tape,'' he said. ''My hat is off to them. You want the opportunity to make big plays. They took them away from us.''
None of the other Colts receivers were able to offset the lack of big plays from Marvin Harrison. When the Colts began to find an answer -- tight end Marcus Pollard, who began catching balls over the middle and delivering as many blows as the Patriots' defensive backs were dispensing -- the offense began to rise, but not nearly enough. Not in the way that Marvin Harrison has lifted this offense.
''We didn't want to give their receivers too much freedom,'' Patriots linebacker Tedy Bruschi said. ''We got our hands on them and got their jerseys dirty.''
Rodney Harrison added: ''It was all about being physical, physical, physical with their receivers. We wanted to hit these guys in the mouth and let them know we are here.''
They got the message. The note to Marvin Harrison arrived special delivery.
''I'm not a guy who's going to hide,'' Marvin Harrison said. ''I'm easy to find.''
In this title game, too easy to find, and too easily controlled.
A.F.C. Analysis
