Lenny Wilkens is neither looking forward to seeing Vince Carter today nor looking back.
He sees this afternoon's game at Madison Square Garden against Toronto -- the team that fired him last season, a move Carter hailed -- as simply his third as coach of the Knicks.
But Allan Houston, the Knick with the longest current tenure, sees beyond one game. He guaranteed a future in the playoffs -- this season.
Houston made his bold prediction after the Knicks secured their third straight victory Saturday night in Chicago, echoing what James L. Dolan, the Garden chairman, has repeatedly forecast and what the team's president, Isiah Thomas, has said he envisions.
''We're going to make the playoffs,'' Houston said Saturday night. ''Whatever happens, I don't care, we want to make the playoffs.''
Houston sounded momentarily the way Thomas did when he tried to soften expectations last week. But then Houston re-emphasized his prophecy: ''We're going to make the playoffs.''
The Knicks are one game out of the eighth and final Eastern Conference spot. They have won four of their last five games, scoring more than 100 points in their last four under Stephon Marbury's lead-foot, sleight-of-hand direction.
Their record (18-24) is identical to last season's at this point. Little else is. ''It seems like we're in a much different place,'' Houston said. ''We've had a lot of changes up to this point. I would say I'm much more optimistic. And we've got a lot of depth.''
Wilkens came into a turbulent atmosphere when he replaced Don Chaney on Thursday. The Knicks have won their two games since then and had yesterday off.
''Right now, my mission is to get us playing defense and come together as a cohesive unit,'' Wilkens said. ''I know we have our work cut out.''
In New York, he has what he lacked in Toronto: a veteran team with three former All-Stars in Marbury, Houston and Dikembe Mutombo; a double-double threat in Kurt Thomas; and one of the hottest players in the conference in Keith Van Horn. Van Horn has scored 54 points in Wilkens's two games.
''This is probably as talented a team on paper as I had in New Jersey since we reached the finals,'' Van Horn said. He added that Wilkens ''brings a lot of respect, just in the way he handles himself.''
And yet that manner caused Carter to criticize Wilkens in April as being out of touch. ''We should look for a coach that understands the game today,'' Carter said then.
Wilkens has responded gently.
''Many players will say things to distract from themselves,'' he said last week, adding Saturday of Carter, ''He's a great player; I still think that and I hope he proves that.''
Carter's injuries last season forced him to miss 39 games. Injured again, with a strained right quadriceps, Carter missed the Raptors' 75-70 loss Saturday at Atlanta and is doubtful for today's game.
Carter did not practice with the Raptors at John Jay College yesterday, but he spoke to reporters about how Wilkens might work better with the Knicks than he did with the Raptors.
''It's all about finding your fit,'' he said. ''It's nothing to attack him as if he wasn't a great coach, he's proven that. It's time to move on.''
In Toronto, Alvin Williams, a shooting guard turned point guard, was the most appreciative recipient of Wilkens's teaching.
''I think of him way beyond a coach, I think of someone who helped me out tremendously,'' Williams said. ''He develops players. He gave me a chance. I think the only one before he got there that was really playing well and had a name for himself was Vince.
''With Lenny Wilkens, the rest of us flourished. We got signed to long-term contracts, we played, other teams wanted us. He gave us an opportunity, not just me.''
Williams called it upsetting that Wilkens and the Raptors parted. ''It was a situation where sometimes change is better, but it was unfair how things happened,'' he said.
With Carter reasonably healthy, the Raptors made the playoffs in Wilkens's first two seasons. Wilkens said he had moved on and wanted the Knicks to keep doing the same.
Today he will take but a few minutes for a reunion, just as he did with Antonio Davis and Jerome Williams in Chicago.
''I want to see Alvin, Morris Peterson; just like tonight, Antonio came over, Jerome Williams,'' Wilkens said. Then he added with a laugh, ''Everything wasn't all bad.''
PRO BASKETBALL
