It made for an odd couple, the decorated Vietnam veteran who voted for Richard M. Nixon in 1972 and the icon of the antiwar movement who lost that election in a landslide.
But when former Senator George S. McGovern endorsed Gen. Wesley K. Clark's bid for the Democratic nomination here on Sunday, what brought the two together was one thing: beating George W. Bush.
''I wanted to figure out which of these Democrats has the best chance of defeating Bush,'' Mr. McGovern said, addressing a crowd of about 400 who turned out for pancakes and politics at the Keene Middle School. ''This is the one,'' he said, pointing to General Clark.
The endorsement was made as two other Democratic hopefuls who have skipped the Iowa caucuses, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman and the Rev. Al Sharpton, campaigned in South Carolina, which holds its primary on Feb. 3.
In New Hampshire, Mr. McGovern noted that he thought highly of Senator John Kerry, Representative Richard A. Gephardt and Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor to whom he is often compared.
''I looked at all nine of the candidates, I think with an open mind,'' Mr. McGovern said. ''I just happen to think that General Clark is the logical candidate for me to endorse because I honestly believe he's the best qualified person, both in mind, which is a brilliant, brilliant mind, and in the quality of his character and his emotional makeup.''
In Columbia, S.C., Senator Lieberman began his day happily swaying, clapping, nodding and foot-tapping along with more than 1,000 black worshipers at the Brookland Baptist Church, and then unveiled an antipoverty proposal.
Addressing a small group at the Modjeska Monteith Simkins Center for Justice, Ethics and Human Rights, he called poverty a moral scandal ''that challenges us to take action, be truer to our values, to be more faithful to our faith.''
Appearing both relaxed and grave, Mr. Lieberman offered his plan to spend $6 billion a year to help working people out of poverty as part of a crusade.
Mr. Sharpton campaigned at four churches in South Carolina, in Florence, Columbia, Sumter and Hartsville.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: ON THE TRAIL
