A powerful truck bomb exploded at the main gate of the American occupation headquarters here on Sunday morning, killing at least 20 people and wounding at least 60 others, military officials said.
It was one of the worst suicide bombings in Iraq since a truck bomber struck the Baghdad headquarters of the United Nations in August, killing 23 people. The United Nations will review the issue of Iraq on Monday, when top American and Iraqi officials will visit officials in New York for an important meeting.
At least 18 of the dead were Iraqi civilians, and it was difficult initially to identify the nationalities of the other two, military officials said. Many of the wounded were Iraqis waiting to enter the compound to go to work. No Americans were killed, though several soldiers received minor wounds.
Though guerrilla fighters have occasionally lobbed mortar rounds into the heavily fortified American headquarters, a wide zone that contains the former Republican Palace and other buildings of Saddam Hussein's deposed government, this was the first car bomb attack in the area.
The attackers appeared to be sending a pointed message by striking at the heart of the American authority in Baghdad one day before senior American and Iraqi officials were to meet at the United Nations about resistance from a powerful Shiite cleric to plans for the scheduled transfer to sovereignty on June 30.
Mainly because of security concerns, the United Nations has not returned to Iraq since it suffered the devastating suicide bombing in August, and it is unclear how the attack will affect the New York talks.
The bomber drove a white Toyota pickup truck loaded with 1,000 pounds of Soviet-made plastic explosives into the line for vehicle inspections, then detonated it at about 8 a.m., just 50 feet from the gate, military officials said.
The blast destroyed six or seven nearby vehicles and set four ablaze. It shook buildings more than a mile away, and the wind carried the acrid smell of smoke across the Tigris River into downtown Baghdad.
Dozens of American soldiers surrounded the wreckage as firefighters struggled to put out the flames. At 8:40 a.m., at least three cars still lay smoldering, and a mangled white bus sat in the middle of the avenue.
Bodies lay on the ground surrounded by debris as ambulances raced in. Most of the dead were Iraqis who had been sitting in cars at the busy intersection outside the gate, said Col. Ralph Baker, commander of the Second Brigade of the First Armored Division. Concrete blast walls helped protect Iraqis standing at the checkpoint, who suffered wounds rather than death in many cases. He added that the fact that the explosion was outside the perimeter was considered a security success.
American officials have used the walled-off area, called the green zone, since the fall of Baghdad in April. Because the compound is so large and the gate is at its very northern perimeter, at the west end of a bridge spanning the Tigris, the attack was obviously aimed at Iraqis working for the Coalition Provisional Authority and its allies rather than at any distinct military target.
The attack ''was clearly timed to claim the maximum number of innocent victims,'' L. Paul Bremer III, the top American administrator here, said from the United States in a written statement. ''Once again, it is innocent Iraqis who have been murdered by these terrorists in a senseless act of violence.''
People with dazed expressions and blood on their faces and clothing staggered east across the Jumhuriya Bridge. Weesam Kadhum, 22, a civil engineer working in a building just 300 feet outside the main entrance, said he had seen shrapnel flying.
''Suddenly there was this bright light, and small pieces rained down from the sky,'' he said. ''I ran to my house across the street. I didn't want to stop running. I've only now realized that I don't have any blood or injuries on me.''
His 4-year-old son, Wadah, was wounded slightly by flying glass as the blast shattered the windows of Mr. Kadhum's two-story home and those of other nearby buildings.
In Al Karama hospital, Ahmed Ali, lying half-naked in a bed with a shrapnel wound to his torso, said he had been among 200 people standing at the gate to be let into the compound. ''I felt as if a storm had hit,'' said Mr. Ali, 23, who does maintenance for water pumps in the compound. ''There was a huge blast and smoke and fire everywhere. Then the Americans began shooting.''
Colonel Baker disputed his account, though, saying American soldiers did not open fire.
In the meeting on Monday in New York, American and Iraqi officials are expected to try to persuade the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, to send a delegation here to lend legitimacy to caucus-style elections for a transitional assembly. Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the most influential Shiite cleric in Iraq, renewed a call for direct elections on Jan. 11, hobbling the plans.
Many United Nations officials have complained, with regard to the coming meeting, that they were deliberately kept at a distance during the planning stage and are now being asked to validate a process from which they were excluded.
The United Nations withdrew from Iraq after the bombing in August, whose victims included Mr. Annan's senior envoy here, Sergio Vieira de Mello.
The bombing on Sunday was the deadliest single attack in Baghdad since the attack on the United Nations, which has said it is reluctant to return until security improves.
In Tikrit, a homemade bomb being transported in a white Mercedes-Benz late on Saturday night accidentally exploded and killed two men, one of them a relative of Mr. Hussein, The Associated Press reported, quoting an American commander. A third man was seriously wounded. The men were apparently rushing to attack an American patrol when the bomb went off.
Right after the explosion in Baghdad, soldiers parked a tank in the middle of the Jumhuriya Bridge to seal off one main road leading to the American headquarters.
Jasim Muhammad, a 32-year-old taxi driver with dried blood on his face, gazed vacantly at his shattered red Volkswagen Passat, which sat on the west end of the bridge several hundred feet from the blast site.
Mr. Kadhum, the civil engineer, stared at his home, voicing a sentiment that has become all too familiar among Iraqis. ''Of course we're scared living here,'' he said, ''but where can we go?''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE INSURGENCY
