In the week leading up to the American Football Conference championship game, Patriots cornerback Ty Law grew increasingly irritated. The questions about Colts quarterback Peyton Manning were ceaseless and, Law thought, a bit disrespectful. What about the Patriots, he thought. What about their defense, their physical play, the ability of Coach Bill Belichick to create a new defense for each challenge?
In practice, New England quarterback Tom Brady had watched the offensive scout team -- emulating the Colts -- face the Patriots' defense and knew what was in store for Manning.
''I was thinking: 'Oh, God. I'm glad I'm not playing quarterback,' '' Brady said. ''They make it tough.''
The Patriots' defense brutalized Manning and the Indianapolis Colts on Sunday with four interceptions, three by Law, tying the most Manning has yielded in a game. New England went on to a 24-14 victory that sent the Patriots to their second Super Bowl in three years. The Patriots have won 14 games in a row, and a 15th would give them their second Lombardi Trophy in three seasons, a veritable dynasty in the age of free agency and the salary cap.
In the 2001 season, the Patriots upset the St. Louis Rams in the Super Bowl, stifling their high-powered offense by pushing their receivers off their routes.
The game against the Colts was also akin to a backyard brawl. Manning and the Colts had entered the game on an incredible roll, scoring 10 touchdowns in 17 postseason possessions. But the Patriots had determined one thing: the Colts were a finesse team and could be manhandled. So the theme was set for the week, and the Patriots assumed the role of schoolyard bullies.
''This was probably the most simple game plan we had,'' Law said. ''Just beat them up. We're going to challenge them more than other teams. We felt we were a more physical team and we couldn't play a finesse game with them. The only thing you can beat speed with is power.''
So on some plays, Law pushed receiver Marvin Harrison all the way out of bounds. The Colts frequently implored the officials to call penalties. On other plays, Patriots defenders pummeled Colts receivers after they caught the ball. Marvin Harrison fumbled deep in Patriots territory on a hit by safety Rodney Harrison.
In their first two playoff games, the Colts had given up only one sack. On Sunday, the Patriots brought unrelenting pressure, frequently with just four rushers, sacking Manning four times and forcing him out of the pocket numerous times.
The Patriots had determined that one of the few flaws in Manning's game was in throwing on the run; Law's three interceptions all came when Manning was forced to move out of the pocket.
The defense had knocked the lights out of a cerebral offense, turning what was expected to be a chess match into a boxing match.
Manning, who had thrown only 14 incompletions in 56 attempts in the past two games, and who had a perfect quarterback rating of 158.3 in a first-round playoff victory over Denver, completed 23 of 47 passes for 237 yards. His rating was 35.5; only once in his career has it been lower.
''Chess is a finesse type of thing,'' Patriots linebacker Tedy Bruschi said. ''To us, it's more like rock-'em, sock-'em robots.''
The game remained close because, for the five turnovers they caused and their 349 yards of offense, the Patriots struggled to get into the end zone after scoring on their opening drive.
Brady vowed that the Patriots would work on their red-zone offense before heading to Houston next Sunday for the Super Bowl on Feb. 1.
They should merely look at that first drive, a clinic in efficiency in which the Patriots mixed what had been their shaky running game (they gained 112 yards against the Colts' undersized front, 100 by Antowain Smith), the spread offense and Brady's pinpoint accuracy.
On fourth-and-1 from their 44, the Patriots set the tone quickly, eschewing a punt and allowing Brady to make the decision to try the sneak. It worked, and the Patriots converted two third downs on the way to the touchdown. They scored on a 7-yard pass from Brady to receiver David Givens.
The Colts moved quickly down the field on their first drive, with Manning frequently using a no-huddle offense to limit the Patriots' substitutions. The Colts reached the 5-yard line, and on third down, tight end Marcus Pollard ran a crossing pattern, going from Manning's left to right. Manning watched him the whole way, but he did not see Rodney Harrison crossing the other way.
That was part of the Patriots' plan: set up crosses so even if an interception was not made, the receiver would be hit as soon as he caught the ball.
This time, Harrison intercepted the pass, thwarting the Colts' scoring attempt and giving Brady the ball again.
Brady again moved the Patriots into scoring position, but this time, they stalled. Adam Vinatieri kicked the first of his five field goals.
''It's kind of scary to keep kicking field goals with how explosive that offense is, they could make a few quick passes and tie the score up,'' said Brady, who completed 22 of 37 passes for 237 yards.
But he noted that ''it was 15-0 at halftime, and we really dominated.''
By halftime, Manning had been intercepted twice, and the Patriots could see the frustration growing. Marvin Harrison had fumbled, and the Colts' punting unit, which had not been on the field in the playoffs, yielded a safety when Justin Snow snapped the ball over punter Hunter Smith's head.
But when Colts running back Edgerrin James plunged in for a 2-yard touchdown run to open the third quarter, the Patriots led by only 8 points. Vinatieri kicked two more field goals in the third quarter, but the Colts trailed by just 14 points late in the quarter.
Manning unraveled as the Patriots' defense stiffened again. He was intercepted deep in his own territory. Brady returned the favor with his first interception at home this season, but the Colts could not capitalize because Manning was intercepted again, at the Patriots' 11, midway through the fourth quarter.
Even a touchdown pass to Pollard with 2 minutes 30 seconds remaining, pulling the Colts to 21-14, did not spark the offense. The Colts went three downs and out when they got the ball again. When Vinatieri kicked his final field goal, the Patriots' victory was assured.
''To win 14 in a row, that's unbelievable,'' Brady said. ''I mean, who does that? Nobody does that. Still, the goal really hasn't been achieved. Winning 14 in a row is great. But if there is not a 15th, then it's all for nothing.''
PRO FOOTBALL
