Given the state's financial problems, New York State's 212 legislators are probably going to be facing the voters this year without the comforting shield of new spending programs. The one thing the lawmakers can afford is reform. Fixing Albany would be giving New York the thing it most needs, and it would be far cheaper than distributing new ballparks hither and yon.
Unfortunately most of New York's robotic legislators prefer the current way of doing business, in which they go along, get along and maintain their $100,000-plus part-time public jobs by blaming one another when nothing changes. They have reason to be confident that voters won't hold them accountable: the two parties have carefully crafted voting districts to make sure the chances of an incumbent being defeated are only a little better than the odds that the Capitol will be carried away by a tornado. It's a frustrating trap, and the only way out is party primaries. We need reform candidates challenging the Assembly Democrats and Senate Republicans -- the members of the ruling majorities that somehow haven't managed to make things better.
Finding serious reform candidates may be hard. Coming up with a platform is easy. Here are a few ideas to kick-start any serious campaign:
Budget reform. If things proceed normally, the next six months of budget negotiations will be a mess, a secret mess. Gov. George Pataki, Joseph Bruno. the Senate majority leader, and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver will meet behind closed doors to carve up the public's $93 billion budget. The folks kept outside the door could use their free time to create a more rational budget deadline and an independent budget office to give out unbiased -- read believable -- data.
Lobbying reform. The curtain on a new legislative year went up and, as if on cue, Mr. Pataki and the Legislature face another embarrassing incident involving the state's big, fat, secretive authorities. Former Senator Alfonse D'Amato, who earned $500,000 from a phone call to lobby the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, worked his magic again  for a company about to lose a huge  contract with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. After Mr. D'Amato's intercession, the Port Authority's board, including Mr. Pataki's powerful appointees, started the bidding process over, giving Mr. D'Amato's client another chance.
Prying open this underground world of unregulated public-private hybrids should be way up there on every politician's list this year.
Reapportionment reform. It will be years before the Legislature is scheduled to redraw the outrageously gerrymandered election boundaries. The very remoteness of the event means this is the best time to create a more impartial system for doing that job. That wouldn't cost a penny, and it would buy the voters of the future a state legislature that actually felt some compunction to represent the state's real needs.
Fixing Albany: Editorials in this series remain online at nytimes.com/albany.
Fixing Albany
