After the deafening blast that killed 20 or more people on Sunday, quiet washed over the places where the survivors gathered.
At Al Karama Hospital, the wounded lay silent, or talking in softly throttled voices to friends and relatives. In the yard of the city morgue itself, one old man sat collapsed on the ground, his clothes muddied, and mourned the son-in-law whose body lay inside.
''Why, why did they take him?'' sobbed Qasim Salman, wiping wide circles in the dust with his palms.
Hundreds of families have asked that question since suicide bombers began shaking Iraq in August, and no doubt it will be whispered again and again this week, in places like the simple home where Mr. Salman's son-in-law, Hassan Jasem, lived in the poor district of Sadr City.
The Iraqi dead seem to mirror, in some ways, the American soldiers who die here: mostly men, many of them working class, just doing their jobs. But the landscape of grief in Iraq seems denser than in the United States, as the insurgents mount their most spectacular attacks against the Iraqis themselves.
Sunday is a work day here, and about 200 Iraqis had lined up by 8 a.m. to enter the American-led coalition headquarters when the attacker detonated his car bomb nearby. Working for the Americans makes an Iraqi a traitor in the eyes of insurgents, and a viable target. But in this ravaged economy, the Americans are among the few sources of steady pay, and those employed at the coalition headquarters thought they were safer than most because they worked inside the walled compound.
The dozens of wounded, most of them also men, poured into hospitals like Yarmouk and Al Karama, tattooed with blood. Those who could walk roamed about, crudely bandaged and dazed. Families raced in looking for a face they could still recognize. Police officers loaded the dead, bundled in plaid hospital blankets, into the beds of their white pickup trucks to take to the morgue, and raged against how routine such tasks had become over the last few months.
Often, several members of the same family find work at the coalition headquarters, sharing the little bit of prosperity found there. Jasem Salman was waiting in line with his 25-year-old son, Hassan, on Sunday as he did every day, and so was there to see his son die from a neck wound, and to take his body to Al Karama. A lean, craggy man whose blue coveralls were ripped and whose face was caked in blood and dirt, Mr. Salman paced between the room where Hassan lay under a blanket and the outer hall, waiting for the hospital to give him permission to take his son to the morgue.
Mr. Salman and his family are Kurds, and Hassan had been a Kurdish fighter -- a member of the pesh merga -- before the war, family friends said. But his father persuaded him to take a job as a welder a few weeks ago at the coalition headquarters, in order to support his new wife and the baby they expected soon. Around noon, Hassan's body was lifted into the back of a police pickup for transport to the city morgue.
At the morgue, men squatted on the ground with Hassan's father-in-law, who is also his uncle, while his father went to take care of the paperwork needed to take the body home.
Two police pickups arrived with more bodies, one of them an Iraqi policeman named Mahdi Abbas. His colleagues pulled the body onto a blood-swirled gurney that a rubber-booted attendant had brought outside.
Sgt. Hesham Ibrahim, one of the police officers, brimmed with fury at having to bring friend after friend to this place. ''If I captured the person who did this under Saddam, you know they would have tortured such people in an expert way,'' Sergeant Ibrahim said. ''If I had him alive, I would keep him alive and slice off a piece of his body every day.''
The men unloaded a second body onto a gurney, and one of the blankets fell away, revealing the barrel chest of a big man. Just then, Hassan's older brother, Habib Jasem, arrived. He, too, worked at the headquarters, driving Iraqis into the sprawling compound. Habib had seen the blast from his car. He had raced toward the line where his father and brother had been waiting. But American soldiers stopped and detained him, fearing he was another suicide bomber. Only at the hospital did Habib learn that his brother had died.
Hassan's younger brother, Haider, squatted against a wall, and slapped his own head. The three brothers were best friends, and Hassan had been the lively jokester in the middle, a neighbor who had come to the morgue said.
''I just talked to him this morning,'' Haider shouted. ''I was with him all the time. If an hour went by without my seeing him, I would miss him.''
Habib sat crumpled in a corner by the morgue's doors, sobbing and shaking. Then he wailed, and wailed again and again, like a wounded animal. ''Hassan is gone,'' he wept. ''Oh my God, oh God.
''When will I find you?'' he asked a brother who could no longer answer. ''I can't find you any more.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: CASUALTIES
