Most of the time ''Live From Lincoln Center'' is in the business of taking big events -- symphony concerts and opera, mostly -- and compressing them to fit the television screen. But in recent years Lincoln Center has developed an alternative approach. By staging concerts for small, invited audiences in the Stanley H. Kaplan Penthouse, it can offer television viewers performances that were meant to be intimate.
There is a tradeoff. If the more conventional programs can seem shoehorned onto the small screen, they retain a sense of being the daily business of the concert hall, captured and transmitted. The Kaplan Penthouse concerts, by contrast, have a made-for-television quality. That isn't necessarily a bad thing, although it was difficult not to have mixed feelings about the Wednesday evening installment, when the violinist Joshua Bell offered a 90-minute program of encores and bonbons.
There was, for one thing, the distinct sense that the show was driven by commercial concerns, that Lincoln Center and PBS considered this an easier sell than a more substantial recital of the kind this supremely gifted violinist more typically plays. And Mr. Bell for his part had a CD to promote: much of the music on the program also appears on his latest disc, ''Romance of the Violin'' (Sony Classical).
But for all that, Mr. Bell's naturalness and informality, to say nothing of the sweetly focused sound he produces, were so disarming that one accepted the program on its own terms, as an old-fashioned salon evening. He acknowledged early that this wasn't the kind of concert he normally played, and although he dutifully mentioned the CD, he mostly presented the recital as a tribute to his teacher, Josef Gingold, who died in January 1995, and to various of his violinistic heroes, including Fritz Kreisler, Jascha Heifetz and Nathan Milstein, all of whom drew their encores from similar candy boxes.
Mr. Bell has assimilated the Romantic violin style, preserved on recordings by Kreisler, Elman and other players of the early 20th century, and his performances were beyond reproach. This was a program in which melody was paramount, so in Kreisler's ''Liebesfreud'' and ''Schön Rosemarin,'' as well as in arrangements of Schumann's ''Träumerei,'' Debussy's ''Girl With the Flaxen Hair'' and a Puccini aria, ''O mio babbino caro,'' he couched the violin lines in a sumptuous, flexible tone and manipulated them thoughtfully.
For variety he offered a few sizzlers as well, including Ravel's ''Tzigane,'' which he played with a more acidic sound, and the brisk finales from Bach's Concerto in A minor and Vivaldi's ''Summer'' Concerto. Simon Mulligan, the pianist who normally accompanies him in recitals, provided support for several of the works, with the Orpheus Chamber Orchestra backing him in the rest and playing short Dvorak and Gershwin works on their own.
MUSIC REVIEW
