John Fox has left his footprints all over these streets. He knows the neighborhood. He doesn't scare easily.
For five seasons, he ventured down Interstate 95 as the Giants' defensive coordinator, and four times he skipped town with a victory over the Philadelphia Eagles.
The games left scars but also revealed information. They showed tendencies that Fox, now the head coach of the Carolina Panthers, rode all the way to a Super Bowl.
''He told us what to look for and what to expect, and that paid off,'' Panthers defensive tackle Brentson Buckner said Sunday night, minutes after Carolina defeated the Eagles, 14-3, to advance to Super Bowl XXXVIII against the New England Patriots. ''Guys saw the success he had with the Giants coming down here, and we were like, 'If they can do it, we can do it.' ''
Panthers defensive end Mike Rucker said of Fox's knowledge of the Eagles: ''He knew the personalities, he knew what kind of team this was, what they do. What their strengths were, what their weaknesses were. We came in here with a great game plan in all three phases and were able to execute.''
If every team is a reflection of its coach, the Panthers are tough, resilient and quick learners, as their victory over the Eagles in the National Football Conference championship game at Lincoln Financial Field showed.
The Panthers do not just tackle opponents, they run through them. They play keep-away with the football, pounding opponents with a ferocious running game and limiting the other team's chances.
In all, it does not look pretty and the statistics do not jump off the page. Carolina quarterback Jake Delhomme was 9 of 14 passing for 101 yards and a touchdown. Stephen Davis rushed for 76 yards on 19 carries, and the Panthers ran for 155 yards.
Carolina's most forceful offensive play was for 1 yard, with DeShaun Foster breaking four tackles to score in the third quarter. ''Just determination, just get in the zone,'' Foster said of the play. ''It was blocked up fairly well. The rest was just fight.''
Carolina's domination of the Eagles was so complete that many Eagles fans left midway through the fourth quarter, like little green rivers flowing toward the exits.
The Panthers sacked Donovan McNabb four times and injured him on a tackle by Greg Favors in the second quarter, a hit that separated McNabb's rib cartilage; it affected him for the rest of the game.
After halftime, McNabb was the last of the Eagles to return from the locker room, jogging onto the field with the team trainer. By the fourth quarter, the backup Koy Detmer was left to try to save the Eagles.
Panthers cornerback Ricky Manning Jr., a rookie, intercepted McNabb three times, and linebacker Dan Morgan intercepted Detmer once.
The Panthers never let up.
''He looked to be a little tender,'' Fox said of McNabb. ''They ended up pulling him. I've seen Detmer for a lot of years. It wasn't like we were going to go to sleep.''
Two seasons ago, Carolina was a mess, finishing 1-15 in a part of the country that would just as soon tune in to college basketball or auto racing as pro football.
But under Fox the Panthers have been reborn. He had to scrap the mentality that haunts losing teams. He surrounded himself with talent, on the coaching staff and on the field -- with savvy draft picks like Manning, who was taken in the third round out of U.C.L.A., and smart free-agent signings like Davis, a mountain of a running back whom Steve Spurrier had no use for in Washington.
''You kind of have a formula, a plan, and you just try to find the best human talent and try to mold it into a team,'' said Fox, who led the Panthers to a 7-9 mark last season, his first in Carolina. ''You have to change the mind-set, the attitudes. I think the cornerstones of that are enthusiasm and hard work. We have laid that groundwork and moved forward since then.''
For the players who experienced it, the 1-15 season is fading into memory.
''That season felt like it took two years,'' Buckner said. ''Now we practice like champions. These guys have the eye on the prize. When we show up in Houston, people will know where the Carolina Panthers are from.''
For those still curious, the Panthers play in Charlotte, N.C., where they began as an expansion team in 1995.
Through every step of their playoff run, the Panthers have seemed unloved, if not an underdog. In a wild-card playoff game, they knocked out the Dallas Cowboys and Coach Bill Parcells.
Next, they traveled to the fast track of St. Louis and upended the entertaining Rams.
On Sunday night, in prime time, with silver helmets and teal socks, they walked out beneath the lights, lacking history but not intent.
''First and foremost, it starts with Coach Fox,'' Delhomme said. ''He wants high-character players first, good football players second. I think that defines our team.''
N.F.C. Analysis
