Ever since CBS hyped Peyton Manning's passer rating when he was nearly unstoppable, I have had trouble getting the peculiar measurement out of my head. As Manning's Indianapolis Colts were thumped yesterday by New England, I was madly computing, only slightly faster than CBS was.
Armed with instantaneous calculations by the Web site primecomputing.com, I watched Manning's nearly perfect playoff passer rating of 156.9 slip into ignominy. To 48.6. To 33.1. And, finally, to 35.5.
Manning's fall from grace was achieved with a healthy body, but after Philadelphia's Donovan McNabb's rib injury late in the second quarter of the Eagles' loss to Carolina, his rating was 4.9.
His replacement? Koy Detmer: 40.2. I didn't see that on TV!
Had I completed my formula for TV Analyst Rating, which should be ready for the Super Bowl, yesterday's senior analysts, Fox's Cris Collinsworth and CBS's Phil Simms, would have done quite well. Troy Aikman, whose analysis remains too conventional, would have had a lesser rating.
Collinsworth further cemented his position as the bluntest pro football analyst. When running back DeShaun Foster scored a touchdown to put the Panthers ahead, 13-3, Aikman praised his effort: ''Look at the power and explosion that he shows, carrying two, three, four guys with him.'' But Collinsworth saw incompetence, not skill: ''That's a pathetic effort by the Eagles. That's four guys, with their arms and shoulder pads and helmets all over him, and they can't get him on the ground.''
Aikman described how Carolina's Ricky Manning Jr. grabbed the second of his third interceptions; he praised Manning's knack for being around the ball and, in jargon, said he was playing ''inside technique leverage.'' But Collinsworth leveled the Eagles' Todd Pinkston, labeling his failure to stick to his route ''the unpardonable sin'' and ''simply awful for a professional wide receiver.''
Collinsworth frequently punctuates what Aikman has just said. When Foster was stopped at the line on a run, Aikman said, ''He just got stoned.'' Collinsworth said, ''Like George Foreman hitting on the job.'' Joe Buck, the play-by-play announcer, added: ''Like George Foreman and his grill.''
And when Pinkston dropped a pass, Aikman focused on the hit on McNabb. But Collinsworth, a former receiver, piled on, saying, ''Todd Pinkston should have been pounded for dropping that ball, for letting down your quarterback.''
O.K, it's tough, candid language. Pause here, at halftime, to savor the erudition of the late Heywood Hale Broun, shown last week on an ESPN Classic compilation of reports in 1968 about Vince Lombardi and Super Bowl II between Green Bay and Oakland. Broun, on ''Woodie's World,'' said: ''Long ago, Canute, king, coach and general manager of the Britons, commanded the waters to stop. But they broke through his line. Vinnie Lombardi hasn't tried stopping the tides, but it's safe to say if he ordered his Packers to do it, they'd drown in the attempt.''
Simms doesn't have Broun's verbal arsenal, or his plaid blazers. His style is subtler than Collinsworth's. He rarely wields an anvil. He noted how Tom Brady told him that the Colts' defense ''is the simplest in the N.F.L.'' and how their defensive ends left gaps that made the Patriots' draw play more effective. Simms noted how a new passing formation for Manning was installed for the game, and how the Colts could not cope with the Patriots' five-receiver formation, especially when Brady looked off and pumped downfield to create a bigger hole for his receiver, Troy Brown.
On a Colts fourth-down play when the on-screen clock expired before the ball was snapped, Simms said: ''There can be a one-second difference between what the official sees. He has to look up, see the zero and look down. If the ball is snapped before he looks down, then the offense gets away with it.''
Minutes later, after a pass to the Colts' Troy Walters, Simms said, without a moment to think: ''That was a play they took from the Tennessee Titans. The receiver fakes like he's going inside, stops, breaks it outside and he's wide open''
The best analyst makes you say, ''I didn't know that.'' After a short pass to Colts receiver Marvin Harrison, Simms said Harrison ''doesn't read signals'' -- perhaps wise considering Manning's wild cryptology -- but receives the play ''from whoever lines up next to him.''
Simms also keeps a close watch on time. With two minutes left in the game, he insisted that three seconds should be added. The referee added one.  TV SPORTS
