One of the aims of the New York City Ballet's Balanchine 100 festival is to suggest what influenced George Balanchine in his epochal work. Two programs presented by the company on Tuesday and Wednesday nights at the New York State Theater offered a glimpse of how August Bournonville's style affected at least one Balanchine ballet.
Balanchine served as ballet master in the 1930's at the Royal Danish Ballet, where Bournonville created some of the 19th century's most distinctive dances. The Danish choreographer was represented on Wednesday by the pas de deux from ''Flower Festival in Genzano'' in a superb performance by Ashley Bouder and Antonio Carmena.
These young dancers performed with a vitality that made the duet something more than politely negotiated dance history. Ms. Bouder's musical phrasing was a special joy, particularly in the slight, teasing ritards of her flying legwork. Mr. Carmena kept the precise shape of the jumps and footwork though he soared and traveled through the air with unusual vigor, using the floor as springboard.
Oddly enough, the distinctive Bournonville épaulement or upper body shaping was more in evidence in Balanchine's ''Donizetti Variations,'' performed on Tuesday, especially in the performances by Jenifer Ringer and Philip Neal, the leads, and the demisoloist Carrie Lee Riggins. One could argue that the ballet's bounce, humor and soft-edged virtuoso dancing has as much to do with the quality of Donizetti's music as with Bournonville. But its sunny charm is certainly very Bournonville. Mr. Carmena, Adam Hendrickson and Aaron Severini also stood out in the first-rate cast.
The performances were nearly as exhilarating in Balanchine's ''Apollo,'' presented with role debuts on both nights. (Dancegoers open to their own exploration of the Balanchine canon might have been intrigued by the vivid echoes of the 1928 ballet to be found in another signature work on the program, his 1941 ''Concerto Barocco.'' Seen together on Wednesday night, the two offered their revelations about the choreographer as a modernist.)
On Tuesday night Alexandra Ansanelli blended spacious arabesques and a voluptuous stillness with a touch of inwardness in an affecting role debut as Terpsichore, making a good match for the introspection and playfulness of Peter Boal, her Apollo. Ms. Ansanelli tends to say a great deal emotionally through the pure medium of movement. Ms. Bouder was a stylish new Polyhymnia, in a cast completed by an ungainly Pascale van Kipnis as Calliope.
Sofiane Sylve and Miranda Weese were new on Wednesday night as Polyhymnia and Calliope, respectively. Both brought flesh and blood to the characters, with Ms. Sylve notable for the flyaway impulsive look of her dancing. Nikolaj Hubbe and Darci Kistler were luxuriously physical as Apollo and Terpsichore.
Balanchine's exuberantly silly ''Slaughter on 10th Avenue'' completed both programs, in strong casts headed by Damian Woetzel and a juicy Maria Kowroski (Tuesday) and by Ms. Sylve and an intriguingly louche Mr. Neal. Standouts included Jason Flower and Andrew Veyette as the weary bartenders on both nights and Mr. Hendrickson as an enjoyably insufferable Morrosine on Wednesday.
CITY BALLET REVIEW
