This year's Sundance Film Festival has started with a gurgle instead of a pop. The crowds are thick as ever, the cellphones ubiquitous as always, and sure, the audience went into a neck-craning wave when Demi Moore showed up with her boyfriend, Ashton Kutcher, for his new film -- out in theaters imminently -- ''The Butterfly Effect.'' But the festival has chosen not to highlight its 20th anniversary, and the prime mover behind the whole endeavor, Robert Redford, has elected not to give interviews.
Perhaps it's an ill wind brought on by a book just out about Sundance and Miramax, the festival's most colorful customer, telling unflattering tales about Mr. Redford and accusing the festival of betraying independent film. In his book ''Down and Dirty Pictures: Miramax, Sundance and the Rise of Independent Film,'' Peter Biskind says Sundance has been co-opted by corporate sponsors and Hollywood indie posers.
Geoffrey Gilmore, the festival's director, said that Sundance had changed over the years, but he rejected the notion that it had betrayed the spirit that inspired it. ''I admit we put more films with major actors in competition,'' he said. ''I used to worry that that would make it not a level playing field. But it doesn't. Juries look at the quality of the work.''
Of the 137 films in the festival this year, he said, only 15 had distribution deals before they came. (Mr. Kutcher's film was one of them.)
As for the corporate involvement, Mr. Gilmore, who said he had not read the Biskind book, lamented that it was on the rise at many film festivals because of the huge media attention. ''Festivals used to be platforms for film,'' he said. ''Now they're platforms for everything: cars, clothes, personalities.''
The Traumatic 20's
Whatever the criticisms, Sundance still offers some of the best movies to be seen all year; new talent can be and is discovered here. With rare exceptions, the movies are no longer made for $15,000 on someone's credit cards, but more often than not they manage to shame Hollywood with their innovation and substance.
One of the first feature films to generate real enthusiasm is ''Garden State,'' a comedy in the vein of ''The Graduate'' written and directed by and starring Zach Braff, who in his day job appears on the NBC comedy ''Scrubs.''
Mr. Braff, 28, plays a 20-something slacker-actor from New Jersey nicknamed Large who comes home for his mother's funeral. The movie slowly reveals the reasons for Large's detached demeanor: he has been on lithium and a host of other drugs since he was 16.
But Large's high school friends are entirely as unaccomplished as he is, including the comically menacing Peter Sarsgaard, who plays a gravedigger and a robber (the friends run into each other at the funeral), and another character who is the former high school drug pusher, now a cop. Natalie Portman plays a quirky and vivacious young woman who helps Large reconnect to his life.
''I wanted to take the pulse of being a 20-something in 2004, when you're trying to figure out who the hell you are,'' Mr. Braff said in an interview. ''It's about a guy who's searching.''
He said that he had been accumulating ideas and anecdotes for the script since attending film school at Northwestern University, but that he had aspired to be a filmmaker since he was 10.
The $4 million film was made and financed independently, but Mr. Braff did not get the project going until he won the interest of the influential agent Kevin Huvane, whose Creative Artists Agency took on Mr. Braff after he landed ''Scrubs.'' Mr. Huvane got Jersey Film, the powerful production company, involved in the project, and Mr. Braff succeeded in getting the cast of his choosing. Fox Searchlight and Miramax jointly paid $4 million to buy the film for domestic and international release.
Meanwhile a kind of ''Memento'' creep seems to be plaguing some films. Shades of that critically lauded Christopher Nolan film about memory, shown here three years ago, are visible in movies like ''November,'' in which Courtney Cox plays a photographer tortured by the memory of a shooting death. The film, directed by Greg Harrison, shares much stylistically with ''Memento'': blurry and dim images, fast cuts accompanied by dissonant noise, and differing versions of the same event. But ''November'' seemed to confuse moviegoers here as much as it intrigued them.
Rosenbergs Revisited
In the documentary ''Heir to an Execution,'' Ivy Meeropol, the granddaughter of Julius and Ethel Rosenberg, who were convicted of conspiracy to commit espionage and executed in 1953, traces the wrenching history of her family in an attempt to come to terms with their deaths and with her own identity.
Ms. Meeropol was brought up in a home where belief in the Rosenbergs' innocence was family gospel. She bears the name of the family who adopted her father, Michael, and his brother, Robby. She tracks down and interviews many of her grandparents' fellow travelers and reaches out to find members of the extended family who cut off contact after the executions.
Central to Ms. Meeropol's search is a desire to understand why both of her grandparents maintained their innocence to the end, which -- even if true -- made orphans of her father and her uncle, who were 10 and 6 at the time.
''I got confused about how I felt about them,'' said Ms. Meeropol, 35, in a conversation after a screening with her father. ''I'd feel angry. How could they leave my father and my uncle?''
During her research, Ms. Meeropol had to confronts the facts of recently decrypted Soviet documents that showed that her grandfather was probably a willing spy for the Soviet Union, even if he was not guilty of the crime of which he was convicted, which involved atomic secrets. Her grandmother's name did not appear in any of the documents, leading her and others to conclude that Ethel Rosenberg was innocent.
Ms. Meeropol's interviews with the Rosenbergs' former comrades reveal how the couple's decision not to cooperate with the government, not to name names, to stand by each other until death, was a testament to their character and their mutual love and a conscious gift to their sons and grandchildren.
In one emotional scene, a 103-year-old friend of the Rosenbergs says that in the days before their death the F.B.I. offered to spare their lives if they signed a list of names identifying other people as spies. They declined. The friend's name, Harry Steingart, was on the list.
''Now I understand why I'm proud of them, and I didn't really before,'' Ms. Meeropol said. ''The reason they wouldn't name names or submit to the government's characterization of them had to do with who they were, and who they wanted to be for my father and uncle.''
The film will be shown on HBO in June.
Surfers, No Stereotypes
For the first time at Sundance, the opening night film was a documentary: ''Riding Giants,'' which received a standing ovation, is a journey through the history of big-wave surfing that projects the culture in an entirely new light.
Rejecting the stereotypical images of beach bums, the filmmaker, Stacy Peralta (''Dogtown and Z-Boys''), portrays the early surfers as pioneers and heroes who continually pushed the limits of human experience in their quest to surf the biggest waves possible.
Supported by astounding surfing clips, the film traces the devotion of a handful of surfers in Hawaii in the 1950's through to Laird Hamilton, widely recognized as the greatest surfer in history, who surfs 40- and 50-foot waves. Most of the surfers featured in the film came to the festival.
Greg Noll, one of the early symbols of big-wave surfing in Hawaii, confessed to being overwhelmed. ''Hollywood has gotten it wrong so many times,'' he said. ''This is the first time it hit the nail on the head, showing the dedication it took. Each generation builds on the next, and these guys now are full-on astronauts, going into another realm.''
Big-wave surfing, which Mr. Noll gave up in 1969 after conquering the biggest wave seen up to that time, is ''an adrenaline disease,'' he said. ''You become an adrenaline junkie.''
Reporter's Notebook
