Facing a choice of Japanese sanctions or Japanese aid, North Korea is quietly taking steps to unblock its longstanding political logjam with the government in Tokyo.
After 15 months of unremitting hostility, North Korea last week sent a series of signals that suggest a desire for warmer relations with Japan.
First, six adult children of Japanese hijackers from the Red Army faction, an extinct left-wing terror group, unexpectedly arrived here on Tuesday from Pyongyang, the North Korean capital.
Then, North Korea floated a March 20 deadline for sending to Japan the children of five Japanese who had been kidnapped by North Korea years ago. The parents came here from North Korea in October 2002.
On Saturday, four Japanese diplomats completed a visit to Pyongyang, the first by Japanese officials since relations between the countries soured in the fall of 2002. That was when North Korea first admitted that it had kidnapped Japanese citizens in the 1970's and 80's, who were forced to teach Japanese to North Korean intelligence agents.
By clarifying the fates of as many as 100 kidnapped Japanese, North Korea could win Japan's full participation in a second round of six-country talks, tentatively set for next month, that are intended to defuse North Korea's nuclear threat.
Normalization of relations could also mean the beginning of the payments, to total $10 billion, that Japan agreed to make in reparations for its colonial occupation of northern Korea in the first half of 20th century.
''The North Koreans have come to an understanding that the Japanese can't become a participant in nuclear talks with the abductee issue outstanding,'' Frank Jannuzi, a Senate Foreign Relations Committee aide, said here on Thursday, after a week of meetings in Pyongyang.
If the issue of the kidnappings is not resolved to Japanese satisfaction, it is likely to strengthen support here for economic sanctions. On Friday, leaders of Japan's governing coalition and the main opposition party agreed that soon after the Parliament reconvenes on Monday, they would submit legislation to empower Japan's government to restrict trade and financial remittances to North Korea.
''They now realize that without having the settlement of the abduction cases, Japan will not give anything to them, and this is why they are approaching us,'' Hatsuhisa Takashima, a Japanese Foreign Ministry spokesman, said in an interview on Friday. ''If they really want sincere direct talks with us, that is a good sign.''
An American diplomat agreed in a separate interview, saying: ''You have to have Japan squeezing the money. That's how you get motion out of them.''
A similar view came last week from Senator Sam Brownback, Republican of Kansas, who is sponsoring the North Korea Freedom Act, a bill that would tie all American aid to North Korea to improvement of its human rights record.
''Japan has a strong hand to play on the issue of financial support of North Korea,'' Senator Brownback said in a speech here on Jan. 7, referring to annual remittances of tens of millions of dollars by ethnic Koreans in Japan to North Korea. ''It needs to play its hand.''
Japanese concern also extends to the plight of people who flee North Korea. Last week, Japanese human rights groups and editorial writers protested after China disclosed that it had arrested a Japanese human rights advocate and two North Korean refugees a month ago. The activist, Takayuki Noguchi, worked with Life Funds for North Korean Refugees, the largest group here that aims to help North Koreans who escape their country.
