There are no ''Rove for President'' signs, Rove house parties or bumper stickers screaming ''Karl!''
No matter. To the Democratic presidential candidates, the powerful White House political strategist they consider President Bush's evil genius might as well be on the ballot. Certainly they have mentioned him so often on the campaign trail in recent weeks that he sometimes sounds like Mr. Bush's running mate.
Wesley K. Clark in Nashua, N.H.: ''So if Karl Rove is watching today, Karl, I want you to hear me loud and clear. I am going to provide tax cuts to ease the burdens for 31 million American families.''
John Kerry on the CBS program ''Face the Nation,'' describing what he called Howard Dean's inability to tackle the president on national security: ''If he can't answer those questions adequately now, he's not going to be able to answer them when George Bush and Karl Rove go at him.''
Dr. Dean in Columbia, S.C.: ''If Karl Rove tries to divide us by gender, we're going to talk about better schools for all of our children.''
Joseph I. Lieberman in a conference call to reporters: ''I've got news for Howard Dean. The primaries are a warm-up compared to what George Bush and Karl Rove have waiting for the Democratic nominee.''
Even Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, who supports Dr. Dean (and who invoked Mr. Rove's name in his endorsement speech), is in on the act. Dr. Dean, he said on Friday in Iowa, ''is George Bush and Karl Rove's worst nightmare.''
Mr. Rove, as is his custom, did not return calls to his West Wing office seeking comment about the bruising from his boss's competitors. Officials at Bush campaign headquarters did not want to comment, either.
But never mind. At the heart of the matter are only two questions: Why do the Democrats so lustily attack Mr. Rove, and does it work?
The first question is easy to answer: Mr. Rove has become the ultimate symbol of politics over policy, with a persona that Democrats love to hate. Elusive to reporters, infamous for browbeating Republican operatives (and members of Congress) who displease him, Mr. Rove is the man who told Republicans they should use the war on terrorism for partisan advantage. He has a hand in all policy set by the president, from immigration to Medicare to the Middle East.
''He's the personification of the most politicized White House in modern history,'' said Jay Carson, a spokesman for Dr. Dean. ''These guys promised to change the tone in Washington, and they were successful. They made it worse.''
Mr. Rove, who has known the president for 30 years, managed his 2000 campaign, piled up Republican gains in the 2002 midterm elections and is running the 2004 re-election operation straight from the White House. But like Mark Hanna, the strategist and fund-raiser behind William McKinley's 1896 drive to the presidency, he has longer-term goals. Not incidentally, Mr. Rove is an avid student of Hanna's role in history.
''Democrats are incensed about Rove, because Rove has big ambitions,'' said Michael Kazin, a professor of history at Georgetown University who is writing a biography of William Jennings Bryan, the Democrat demolished in the 1896 campaign. Like Mr. Hanna, Mr. Kazin said, Mr. Rove ''clearly wants to establish a Republican majority for decades to come.''
At the same time, invoking Mr. Rove, at least among the Democratic loyalists who vote in primaries, is a kind of code describing a president who Democrats say is manipulated by the political strategist behind the curtain.
''What it implicitly does is make the point that this is not a president who is making his own decisions,'' said Chris Lehane, a senior adviser to General Clark.
Hanna's name was used in a similar way with McKinley, and cartoonists of the time often drew the president as a small boy with his strategist telling him what to do. But historians note that McKinley was re-elected in 1900, ushering in a period of Republican dominance. Mr. Rove, not incidentally, believes that Hanna's role was overstated, and that McKinley was far more politically engaged than people knew.
Which brings up the second, more difficult, question: Does attacking Mr. Rove work? Many Democrats say absolutely, and that his name is red meat for the party faithful. But some Democrats question the wisdom of the tactic, saying that it portrays Mr. Bush, an intensely political president who works hand-in-hand with Mr. Rove, as above politics.
''Why attack the monkey when you can attack the organ grinder?'' said Paul Begala, a former White House adviser to Bill Clinton who said he likes Mr. Rove. ''It's a conceit among liberals that actually works to Bush's great advantage. It suggests that Bush is not political and that he simply does what he thinks is right, or what Karl tells him to do.''
Nonetheless, Mr. Begala said, Democrats are right not to underestimate Mr. Rove. ''Karl is the most influential unelected person in America,'' he said.
White House Letter
