''Harlequinade,'' George Balanchine's affectionate version of a Frenchified commedia dell'arte ballet that Marius Petipa choreographed in 1900, returned to New York City Ballet on Saturday afternoon, a spectacular delight as always.
Granted, the plot or even the fact that there is a plot, does not make it a typical Balanchine pure-dance signature piece. Here as always, Harlequin loves Colombine. Cassandre, her father, wants her to marry Léandre, a rich fop, and sets his thugs on Harlequin, who breaks into pieces. But lo, a good fairy renders him whole and showers him with gold coins, so he can wed his sweetheart amid rejoicing by the house servants, Pierrot and Pierrette, and scores of children and revelers.
As usual, when Balanchine reconsidered the Petipa ballets he had seen in his youth in Russia and then rechoreographed in what he called ''the spirit of Petipa,'' these seemed in contradiction to his overall modernist aesthetic.
How could one reconcile his avant-garde works, danced in leotards to contemporary music, with a sweet and sunny confection like the two-act ''Harlequinade'' that he choreographed in 1965 and revised in 1973, adding squads of kiddies and stage-filling dances by funny people dressed as buffoons? And what about the hilarious passage when a drunken police patrol crosses the stage, doing battle with its insteps?
The answer, as every Balanchine devotee knows, is in the vocabulary, stupid. At both extremes Balanchine remained loyal to the steps of ballet's classical idiom, the same language used differently.
''Harlequinade'' has nonetheless never remained consistently in the repertory and its return after nine years on Saturday featured a virtually all-new cast at the New York State Theater.
Alexandra Ansanelli was a supremely elegant Colombine, less concerned with the usual sparkle than with a refined clarity that stretched her dancing into languorous beauty.
Benjamin Millepied gave Harlequin a superb impetuosity in his sharply articulated performance, which lacked only a consistent power. He saved it up for his final big solo. To see him serenade Colombine, his expressive back to the audience, was a study in ardent infatuation.
Joaquin De Luz's innate bravura gave Pierrot a revealing and rich vigor, a Pierrot with a mind of his own who went beyond a stock figure's melancholy.
Megan Fairchild as his wife, Pierrette, was delectable but needed more projection in that delectability.
As for La Bonne Fée, the good fairy, she was danced with breathtaking placement in every arabesque by Sofiane Sylve, a French dancer of great allure who joined City Ballet this season after appearing as a guest last year.
There are two major mime roles. The cast's only veteran, Andre Kramarevsky, ranged explicitly and persuasively as Colombine's father. Léandre, the fat suitor who has to enter a door sideways, was nicely etched by Adrian Danchig-Waring.
Balanchine, however, took the ballet seriously and filled it with dancing, especially in the second act. Jennifer Tinsley's debut as the bird leader of the Alouettes, had a showgirl pizazz that fit with Balachine's contemporary view of classical dancing.
Although he followed the scenario of Riccardo Drigo's tuneful score, conducted by Richard Moredock, Balanchine moved across several performing traditions.
The Italian commedia dell'arte is transformed by the French sensibility found in Molière. There are typical shifts of mood and also tragicomic farce (Harlequin in pieces is actually a dummy) coated with refinement.
As in his 1948 ''Orpheus,'' Balanchine remembered a link to the avant-garde productions of Vsevelod Meyerhold in Russia. In 1910 Meyerhold's staging of Molière's ''Don Juan'' featured a proscenium within a proscenium. Rouben Ter-Arutunian's toy theater décor did the same for ''Harlequinade.''
CITY BALLET REVIEW  Correction:  January 23, 2004, Friday  A picture caption on Monday with the continuation of a review about New York City Ballet's performance of Balanchine's ''Harlequinade'' misstated the position of Sofiane Sylve, who was the Good Fairy, in the company. While new to City Ballet, she is a principal dancer, not a member of the corps de ballet.
