The short white woman with the shaggy blond hair and the sparkling eyes of a pixie stood before the audience holding aloft the book from which she was about to recite.
''Secrets of a Sparrow.'' Pause. ''By Diana Ross.''
The speaker, Marylouise Burke, a hair taller than the music stand in front of her, then proceeded to transform herself into the statuesque Ms. Ross, recreating this singer's unsuccessful attempt at crowd control at her soggy Central Park concert in 1983.
''My tears mixed with rain and fell to earth,'' Ms. Burke whispered. The crowd roared.
Sensitive stars would be wise to steer clear of Cause Celeb!, a weekly series of readings on Mondays at a downtown performance space called Fez. There, before mostly young audiences, show business meets schadenfreude, as actors recite embarrassing, touching, salacious or jaw-droppingly clueless passages excerpted from celebrity autobiographies. From the A-list down, no one is safe.
''Many of these books are simply insane,'' said Nancy Balbirer, who created the show with a fellow actress, Charlotte Booker. ''They're like Greek myths, but these gods are really human.''
Tonight's show will be devoted to tales about Burt Reynolds as recounted by Loni Anderson, Tammy Wynette, Mamie Van Doren and others in their memoirs and autobiographies. (''As we undressed, there was a windstorm of clothing flying through the air, fluttering to the floor like tired birds,'' Ms. Van Doren writes in ''Playing the Field,'' the passage to be read by Melissa Hurst, an actress.)
On opening night, Jan. 5, the theme was ''Viva las Divas.'' The readings recounted the backstage hysterics, drug habits and sexual peccadilloes revealed in the sweaty prose of some of Hollywood's most high-profile prima donnas.
Sass seeped through Ms. Balbirer's reading of a sexually frank passage from Elizabeth Ashley's ''Actress: Postcards From the Road.'' A stage actor, Edward Burke, conveyed dry sophistication as his Tallulah Bankhead explained the medicinal uses of heroin in ''Tallulah: My Autobiography.''
Each week the excerpts are read by a rotating cast of eight actors as well as by guest readers, like the actor and playwright Charles Busch. In a rare performance out of drag, Mr. Busch barked orders at a wig mistress as he recited an anecdote from ''Ginger: My Story,'' by Ginger Rogers, on opening night.
The Village Voice columnist Michael Musto read a passage from ''The Million Dollar Mermaid: An Autobiography,'' by Esther Williams, in which she discovers her husband, the actor Jeff Chandler, wearing women's clothing. And reading from ''Past Imperfect,'' by Joan Collins, the playwright Doug Wright turned her trip to the unemployment office (''So I could afford to pay the maid,'' she writes) into a semi-comic indictment of celebrity hubris.
''There is a hilarious schism between what a celebrity thinks and how the real world acts,'' Mr. Wright said, speaking as himself.
Cause Celeb! was created by Ms. Balbirer, who is in her mid-30's, and Ms. Booker (who is slightly older) in Los Angeles seven years ago. The two were working in television at the time, Ms. Balbirer in a small part on ''Seinfeld'' and Ms. Booker in a sitcom called ''Hi, Honey, I'm Home.''
Moving East to further their acting careers in New York, the two women took ''Cause Celeb!'' with them, resurrecting it at two intimate spots, Bar and Books and the Marquee, before landing their current open-ended run at the much larger Fez, which is part of the Time Cafe, at Lafayette and Great Jones Streets in the East Village.
Future readings are to be devoted to the themes of gender identity and celebrity trials, as well as to the careers of Joan Crawford and, in a night called ''Marilyn/Manson,'' Marilyn Monroe and Charles Manson.
The readers are careful to refrain from impersonation. (''We're not Tovah Feldshuh,'' Mr. Musto said.) And no campy theatrics are necessary, Ms. Balbirer said; a straight reading from the texts -- written in all seriousness -- supplies all the humor that's needed, she said. As Mr. Busch said, ''There is humor in humorlessness.''
That's not to say that a particularly ridiculous passage, read with subtle inflections or deadpan delivery, can't be theatrical. Ms. Booker for example got one of the night's biggest laughs with a line from Hedy Lamarr's ''Ecstasy and Me: My Life as a Woman.''
''To be a big star,'' Lamarr wrote (and Ms. Booker recited with a flourish), ''is to own the world and all the people in it.''
Correction:  January 23, 2004, Friday  An article in The Arts on Monday about ''Cause Celeb!'' a weekly series in Manhattan in which performers read from celebrities' autobiographies, referred incorrectly to its origin. The series began a little more than a year ago in New York, not seven years ago in Los Angeles. (Its creators, Nancy Balbirer and Charlotte Booker, were then in a show there created by Eugene Pack called ''In Their Own Words: Celebrity Autobiographies.'')
The article also misstated the relationship between Esther Williams, whose autobiography was a subject this month, and Jeff Chandler, who was in the passage that was read. They were companions, not a married couple.
