To a growing number of network executives, shows like ''Kingdom Hospital,'' a 13-week-long series written by the horror master Stephen King and set to make its debut on ABC in March, are the vanguard of a new approach to building a network prime-time schedule.
They acknowledge, though, that they are stealing the model from HBO.
This heretical notion, as laid out in separate interviews by executives from ABC, Fox and WB, calls for networks to introduce television series intended to run in relatively short bursts of 8 to 13 episodes over consecutive weeks, not the 22 or more episodes spread out over an officially designated September-to-May season.
HBO has enjoyed much success following this path with ''The Sopranos'' and ''Sex and the City,'' and other networks have begun to copy the strategy. The new programs -- like ''Kingdom Hospital,'' ABC's ancient Rome epic ''Empire'' and ''Casino'' on Fox -- are part of a broad reconsideration by network executives of the conventions of prime-time programming and scheduling as they deal with competition from cable and with declining ratings.
Already, executives of NBC and Fox have declared their intention to reject the nine-month television season. NBC announced last week that it would begin its fall season before Labor Day rather than in the third week of September, and Fox has committed to starting more shows in the summer -- as early as June this year -- as it did successfully last year with ''The O.C.''
Several networks are ready to embrace the short-run series as staples of their schedules. Jordan Levin, chief executive of the WB Television Network, said he had detected ''a tipping point of sorts,'' where viewers had been influenced by the short-run style of cable programming to expect the same from the broadcast networks.
''They're watching shows in much smaller arcs,'' Mr. Levin said, citing the example of so-called reality programs, which have been dropped into network schedules for 6 or 10 or 13 weeks. A recent example: Fox began ''The Simple Life,'' a 10-week reality series following the escapades of the socialites Paris Hilton and Nicole Richie on an Arkansas farm, in December, and it has been the most successful new show on the network.
Numerous short-run shows, mainly dramas and reality programs, are in development across most networks, with ''Kingdom Hospital'' the first drama of its kind to reach prime time. ABC's ''Empire,'' in production in Europe and scheduled for 2005, will play for only eight episodes in its initial run, ABC executives said.
''It's clearly a model that has worked very well for HBO,'' said Susan Lyne, the president of ABC Entertainment. She called it ''time-period sharing,'' citing the way ''The Sopranos'' occupies Sunday night at 9 for part of a year, followed by ''Six Feet Under'' or other dramas.
Gail Berman, the president of Fox Entertainment, said: ''I absolutely think this is part of the future of the business. It's especially flexible when you're trying to roll out new shows all season long. It helps with the puzzle a lot.''
The reasons for the new approach, the executives said, begin with a growing conviction among the networks that they must move toward a full 52 weeks of original programming. Plans to make such a move have been held back by economic realities. Networks relied on repeats in the summer months to turn a profit. The studios that produced the shows for the networks relied on syndication sales of repeats to cover the deficits incurred in producing shows.
Now, several network executives said, the growing market in DVD sales of network series is providing a financial alternative to reliance on rebroadcasts. More and more series are being packaged and sold to viewers as complete seasons on DVD -- from the expected, like ''Friends,'' to the surprising, like ''The Simple Life,'' which Fox Home Entertainment is releasing on DVD days after the series finale appeared on the Fox Network.
But counting on DVD sales to replace summer reruns or syndication sales contains significant risk, several executives said. ''I think DVD sales works on a Stephen King model,'' Mr. Levin of WB said. ''But it won't work for every show.''
In addition, both actors and writers do not have contracts in place that allow them to share significantly in the revenue from DVD's, which goes to the show's owners. (Though the owner is generally a production studio, because networks now tend to own or have an stake in most of the shows on their schedules, they get a hefty share of the DVD sales.) Negotiations to work out those terms with production studios could prove contentious, and eventually costly.
''The battle over DVD sales is going to get nasty in a hurry,'' one senior Hollywood production studio executive said.
It has already caused some of the supporting cast members of the 90's NBC hit series ''Seinfeld'' to decline to participate in interviews for the DVD because they do not share in the profits. At the moment, studios can simply make DVD deals without the actors' and writers' cooperation, although that will presumably end as soon as actors and writers work out new contracts.
Another problem could arise in the casting of short-run shows if actors resist tying themselves to a series that runs only 8 to 13 episodes a year. Actors are usually paid on a per-episode basis. One longtime star of a network drama said he would be loath to tie up several years of his career in a series that ran only 8 to 13 times a year.
But network executives say they have to find a way to eliminate reliance on reruns, especially of serialized programs, because they perform poorly in the ratings and are, in effect, an invitation for viewers to sample what the cable networks are offering.
The executives are also increasingly desperate to find ways to deal with the ever-shortening attention span of young viewers.
Lloyd Braun, the chairman of ABC Entertainment, said ABC, which has had particular trouble establishing new dramatic series, believes it can improve by turning shows like ''''Kingdom Hospital'' and ''Empire'' into short-term ''events'' that viewers will be willing to commit several weeks to.
''You can't take a new drama and put it on the fall schedule and have people commit their lives to them anymore,'' Mr. Braun said. ''We live in a different universe now.''
CBS and NBC might not be ready to move into that new universe yet. While those networks have steadied their schedules by introducing short-run reality programs in recent years, both also have dramas -- the ''C.S.I.'' shows for CBS and the ''Law and Order'' shows for NBC -- that comfortably play all season long, and repeat well. With dramas that have no trouble with a full season of 22 to 24 episodes, those networks have less incentive to look for new ones that may run only 8 times a year. (CBS said this weekend that it would add a third ''C.S.I.,'' set in New York, to its schedule in the fall, and NBC is close to announcing a fourth ''Law &amp; Order.'')
''We're doing just fine playing by the same old rules,'' said Leslie Moonves, the chairman of CBS Television. He said other networks might be talking about new programming models as an excuse for their failure with traditionally constructed series.
But Mr. Braun commented, ''We're not saying we're going to stop doing 22 episodes of a drama, but I am saying we're going to have to position them differently,'' and pay for them differently.
''Empire'' for example, will be the most expensive drama ABC has ever produced, Mr. Braun said. At about $3 million an episode, the cost is about twice as much as ABC pays for a typical new series ''But there's less risk,'' he went on. ''We've been able to craft it. We've sold the foreign rights. We have a partner in Hallmark. The worse-case scenario there is we break even.''
That compares favorably, he said, with a traditional dramatic show that ABC would order for a fall season. In that case, the network would commit itself to paying for at least 13 episodes. If the show failed early, as virtually all ABC dramas have in recent years, like ''M.D.'s'' and ''Push, Nevada,'' the network would have a sizable loss on its hands, he said.
At WB, the problems with reruns have been acute because almost all its shows are serialized dramas like ''Gilmore Girls'' and ''Everwood.'' Mr. Levin said the network was considering turning a season-long run of some of its top shows into one long, concentrated burst.
For a show like ''Smallville,'' WB may, instead of beginning the new season in September, hold it back until next January. That way, Mr. Levin said, it would be able to broadcast all 22 episodes of the series in a row, without ever throwing a repeat program into the run.
To help amortize the costs of such a plan, WB would go even further into the HBO model by using a second run of each episode somewhere else on its schedule -- in the same week.
''You get hooked on it,'' said Garth Ancier, co-chairman of WB. ''You watch it, more or less, 22 straight weeks. I think it would be a much better way to watch television.''
