Last year ended a bit brighter for Terry and Beverly Hicks, a working-class couple here. Ten days before Christmas, they were allowed to speak to their 28-year-old son, David, for the first time in more than two years.
''It was pretty exciting, pretty emotional,'' Mrs. Hicks said, sitting at the kitchen table of her simple home. Most of the conversation was about family; besides, the censors would not let him talk about other things, like how he was being treated, his parents said.
The Hicks's son, a high school dropout and roustabout adventurer, has been confined in a 6-feet-by-7-feet wire cage at the American military base at Guant치namo Bay since he was seized in Afghanistan in December 2001. He gets two brief exercise periods a week.
In December, Mr. Hicks was also finally allowed a visit by a lawyer, Stephen Kenny of Adelaide, who has often taken difficult and unpopular cases. It was the first time a civilian lawyer had been allowed access to a Guant치namo detainee, Mr. Kenny said, adding that he won access by agreeing not to discuss the conditions of Mr. Hicks's confinement.
Mr. and Mrs. Hicks do not believe that those belated gestures are a coincidence. A few weeks earlier, in November, the United States Supreme Court agreed to hear arguments in a lawsuit brought by Mr. Hicks and 15 other foreigners detained at Guant치namo Bay, challenging their lack of access to civilian courts.
The Bush administration argued that the court should not take the appeal. If it is to avoid a potentially adverse ruling, the administration needs to dispose of the detainees' cases before the scheduled argument in March.
In December, a Marine Corps lawyer, Maj. Michael Mori, was appointed to represent Mr. Hicks. He assured the Hickses that he would not ''lie down for anyone,'' the senior Mr. Hicks said.
David Hicks's case may be the stickiest of those involved. The administration is now negotiating for the release of some of the detainees to their home countries, principally Britain, where they would be tried. But Australia says that if Mr. Hicks fought for the Taliban in Afghanistan, he did not violate any Australian laws at the time.
The Bush administration is holding some negotiations to urge Mr. Hicks to plead guilty to a crime, but it is unclear what crime he might have committed.
His case is often compared to that of John Walker Lindh, the Californian who was seized fighting for the Taliban. Mr. Lindh pleaded guilty to violating an American antiterrorism law and was sentenced to 20 years in prison.
But Mr. Hicks is not an American citizen. There is no evidence that he killed or wounded any civilians or any American soldiers, said Mr. Kenny, his lawyer, who has enlisted the help of the Center for Constitutional Rights, a liberal public interest group in New York.
Nor does Mr. Hicks have any history of anti-Americanism, his parents said. In 1998, he fought with the Kosovo Liberation Army against the Serbian government of Slobodan Milosevic. A year later, a convert to Islam, he went to Pakistan. There, he joined Lashkar-e-Taiba, a guerrilla group used by Pakistan's intelligence service to fight in Kashmir.
Lashkar-e-Taiba was closely linked with Al Qaeda, and Mr. Hicks was sent to Afghanistan, where he was when the United States went to war after the Sept. 11 attacks.
Contrary to most reports, he was not captured by the Americans on the battlefield, his father contended. The elder Mr. Hicks, a printer, went to Afghanistan last August, for a documentary being made about his son's life by a Sydney filmmaker, Curtis Levy. Mr. Hicks said he had met the commander of the Northern Alliance, the anti-Taliban group allied with the United States, which did capture his son.
The commander told Mr. Hicks that his son had been arrested while traveling in a van with several Afghan men, none of them armed, the father said.
Ten days later, the Afghan commander turned David Hicks over to the Americans, his father said.
His family has received fewer than a dozen letters from him in the last two years, and there is often a long delay before they are delivered.
''I have nothing to say because today is the same as six months ago and six months before that,'' David wrote to his parents last March; they received the letter in July. He wrote that he knew his father was ''doing a lot to help me, but do not do it to a point so that it affects your health.''
The next five lines of the letter were blacked out by the censors. ''That's Cuba,'' were the next readable words. His parents assume that David had just described something about life at Guant치namo Bay.
In September, David Hicks received a letter his parents had written in May, with news that an aunt, Pat, had died of cancer.
''The news about Pat is extremely sad; in fact, unbelievable,'' David wrote back. ''Why these things happen to good people.''
He told his parents that he had been moved away from the rest of the detainees -- the reason is not clear -- and that as a result he saw only military police officers.
A lot has changed in the last year, said Mrs. Hicks, who is David's stepmother, and the developments in December suggest that some resolution appears to be ahead.
''But we've still got another harrowing year ahead,'' she said.
