Ben Munisteri certainly must have fun putting dance steps together. A sense of boundless joy in the sheer process of choreographic invention was apparent in the program that his company, Ben Munisteri Dance Projects, presented on Wednesday night as part of the Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater.
Peppy bounces made the excerpt from ''Muse of Fire'' that opened the evening pure jollity. Many of the hops were in unison, and there was much unison choreography in the company's other dances. Mr. Munisteri may be fascinated by the sight of the same things being done with equal skill by different bodies.
He was both serious and inventive in two pieces. He set his new dance, ''Turbine Mines'' to selections from Vangelis, as well as snippets of enigmatic dialogue from the film ''Blade Runner.'' The choreography conveyed a sense of mounting urgency.
The dancers -- Lisa Wheeler, Christine McMillan, Eric Sean Fogel, Danica Holoviak, Kyle Lang and Devon Fitchett -- often seemed caught up in an adventure in which they were propelled by a mysterious and inescapable kinetic force.
Mr. Munisteri created ''Earthly Perch'' last year to recorded movements from Britten's Cello Suites (Op. 72 and 80). The introspective music inspired sober choreography that made the dancers appear determined and occasionally careworn, as if their movements reflected solemn thoughts.
Fun prevailed in two older works. David Leventhal and Larry Keigwin, guest dancers for this engagement, leaped fearlessly in ''Smash Through to Sunlight.'' And there were assorted turns, as well as some unison twistings on the floor and bends for standing dancers in a sequence from ''Late-Night Sugar Flight.''
Over the years Mr. Munisteri has presented pieces in several intimate and often nonproscenium spaces. In such settings the deliberately abrupt phrases in his older dances could take on an informal air, even though his choreography is meticulously organized. On the stage at the Joyce, a conventional proscenium theater, some of these phrases seemed unduly disjointed. Nevertheless, every fragment was vibrant.
DANCE REVIEW
