'If you will stand with me I promise that we will beat George Bush.'
Senator John Kerry was the embodiment of upbeat most of Sunday, praying and swaying to the gospel music at a black church in the morning and surrounding himself with 1,800 of his biggest supporters at a boisterous rally Sunday night: Vietnam War comrades; firefighters; and his fellow Massachusetts senator, Edward M. Kennedy.
But late in the day, the hoarse candidate, separated from his entourage for a single campaign stop, leveled a pungent attack at another surging contender, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina.
''I like John Edwards a lot,'' Mr. Kerry said in response to a question in Newton, Iowa. ''He's a capable, talented person. But I believe the nominee of our party has to be somebody who has the experience necessary to stand up to the onslaught that will come from the Republicans. If they run this race on national security and you have a nominee who has been in the Senate four years, and that is the full extent of public life -- no international experience, no military experience -- you can imagine what the advertising is going to be next year.''
He added, with a grin, ''When I came back from Vietnam in 1969, I don't know if John Edwards was out of diapers then.'' As Mr. Kerry's audience of 250 began to laugh, he corrected himself, ''No, I'm sure he was out of diapers.''
And in the very next moment, Mr. Kerry hinted that he might consider Mr. Edwards as his running mate. When he was asked about his choice for vice president, Mr. Kerry pointed to the woman who had asked him about Mr. Edwards. ''We were just talking about that,'' he said, as if to atone for his assault. ''No, no, no -- not going near that question of vice president. I don't have the right to do that.''
Sunday morning at Antioch Baptist Church in Waterloo, Mr. Kerry and his daughters prayed and hugged other worshipers but sat motionless when a preacher spoke alike of homosexuality, lesbianism, alcoholism, pride and lying as sins.
Mr. Kerry then went to a nearby elementary school to find the auditorium packed with more than 800 people and a press contingent more than double the usual number following his campaign.
''I ask you to stand with me at those caucuses,'' Mr. Kerry urged the crowd. ''If you will stand with me, if you will stand with me so that we can stand up against the special interests in this country, if you will stand with me, I promise that we will beat George Bush. If you will stand with me we will restore to the average American their rightful voice in this country again, and we will represent the real interests of America and of our future.
''If you will stand with me,'' he wound up, ''on Nov. 2, we will send George Bush back to Texas, and we will say, 'Mission accomplished.' ''
With Mr. Kerry was Jim Rassmann, with whom he was reunited Saturday for the first time since Mr. Kerry, then the skipper of a Navy swift boat, rescued Mr. Rassmann from a river in Vietnam while both men were under fire in 1969.
In what appeared to be an unplanned sortie, Mr. Rassmann, who said he was new to politics, praised Mr. Kerry by saying how much his men from Vietnam still admired him, and then went on to attack Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who has overtaken Mr. Kerry in most New Hampshire polls.
''John's probably going to slap me silly for this,'' Mr. Rassmann said, before noting that Mr. Kerry was not the only veteran in the race. Without naming General Clark, he then referred to reports that some generals have said ''they would not vote for that man, because there was a crisis of character there, and he did not have their support.''
DAVID M. HALBFINGER
