At first it seems too strange to be believed: The once-acclaimed, now-closed Grand Royal, the boutique record label started by the hip-hop stars the Beastie Boys in 1993, is for sale via online auction, cast off as if it were a chipped dinette set.
But peruse the ''due diligence'' section on the Bid4Assets.com Web site, and the reality of a shuttered record label emerges. Up for sale, along with some master recordings, are oddities like 267 cassette copies of the eponymous debut from the rap-metal duo Moistboyz, a recording contract with the rock band Pavement, and 51 lime-green tank tops emblazoned with the logo of bygone alternative-rockers Luscious Jackson.
As of Sunday afternoon the latest bid for the label's remnants (they are being auctioned as one lot) was $15,000, and the sale ends at 3 p.m. on Thursday. If the reserve of $100,000 is not met, Jeffrey Golden, the court-appointed trustee, will try to sell the label some other way. ''Right now, we just want to dispose of the assets,'' said Ben Seigel, a lawyer for Mr. Golden. ''It's costing us a fortune. We've been paying storage fees on T-shirts and CD's for almost two years.''
It is an inglorious end to Grand Royal, which was once a proud and prosperous independent label. Not only are the particulars of the Grand Royal estate itemized on the Bid4Assets site, but Mr. Seigel said anywhere from $200,000 to $600,000 may be missing from Grand Royal's liquidation assets. In documents filed last week with the United States Bankruptcy Court in Los Angeles, lawyers for Mr. Golden sought to question four individuals with connections to Grand Royal, including Michael Diamond, better known as Mike D of the Beastie Boys. Gary Gersh and John Silva, the label managers for Grand Royal when it closed, are also listed, as is William Harper, the label's accountant and business manager.
Grand Royal enjoyed instant credibility because of its association with the Beastie Boys, one of hip-hop's most popular and critically acclaimed groups. In the early days, the label rode the wave of the Beastie Boys' success and the popularity of alternative rock. In addition to music from bands that won the Beastie Boys' favor, like the singer-songwriter Ben Lee and the band Buffalo Daughter, the label also produced an irreverent magazine called Grand Royal, which focused on artists and issues near and dear to the Beastie Boys and their friends.
One of the label's first albums, from Luscious Jackson, a funk-driven New York foursome signed by Mr. Diamond, became the label's first gold record. The label also enjoyed success from a deal Mr. Diamond made with the German label Digital Hardcore, which brought in the band Atari Teenage Riot, among others.
One top-seller Mr. Diamond did not sign was the band At the Drive-In, a hard-rock group from El Paso. The band signed with Mr. Gersh and Mr. Silva when they were executives at Digital Entertainment Network; that company went bankrupt in early 2001, and the two men moved to Grand Royal and brought the band with them.
Initially, it looked like At the Drive-In might buoy the label. When Grand Royal released ''Relationship of Command'' in 2000, the album sold well and landed on many critics' lists as one of the year's best. But the band unexpectedly broke up in March 2001. With Luscious Jackson having disbanded in 2000, no prospective hits on the horizon and substantial operating expenses, the label announced it would close; it filed for bankruptcy in July 2002, with plans to liquidate.
Mr. Golden hired Wolinsky, Becker &amp; Hurewitz, an accounting firm familiar with the music industry, to examine the bankruptcy case records. According to court documents filed by Mr. Golden, the review revealed that, before the bankruptcy filing, ''the debtor made a number of transfers that were not accompanied by a corresponding benefit to the debtor.'' These transfers could be recovered as estate property.
Mr. Silva, Mr. Gersh and Mr. Harper did not respond to phone calls and e-mail messages seeking comment. According to Steve Martin, a publicist for the Beastie Boys, Mr. Diamond is in the studio working on the next Beastie Boys album, due out this summer.
Joseph Eisenberg, Grand Royal's bankruptcy lawyer, said Mr. Golden's request to question the four men was routine. ''Nobody has intimated or is even thinking there is any misappropriation of funds or any inappropriate diversion,'' he said.
As for the auction, it is unclear what the value of the label might be, aside from its worth as a collectible. The most lucrative Grand Royal act by far was the Beastie Boys, and their masters and rights are owned by Capitol Records; none of the masters to Grand Royal's biggest hits are included in the auction. Most of what is listed on Bid4Assets.com are fulfilled contracts and detritus from bands whose heydays have long passed. Or, as Mr. Martin put it after surveying the site, ''It looks like a bunch of junk.''
