The winner of the Iowa caucuses on Monday night will have an unexpected competitor waiting right around the corner, and he is not one of the Democrats running for president.
The opponent is President Bush and his State of the Union address, which White House officials scheduled for Tuesday night, only 24 hours after Iowa, to draw attention from the Democratic victor, a Republican close to the Bush campaign said.
''Was it planned?'' the Republican said. ''Yes. The fact that the Iowa caucus was going to be held on a certain date was not unknown to people in the White House.''
The underlying strategy, the Republican said, was not to steal all the thunder from the Democrats, which even another ''axis of evil'' State of the Union address was unlikely to do, but rather to change the subject.
''What you achieve by doing it quickly is to get people to focus on the president's positive agenda after two weeks of people beating his brains in and criticizing every aspect of his policies,'' the Republican said. He did not want to be named for fear of angering White House officials who insist that there is no political element to Mr. Bush's address -- even as Bush campaign officials say the speech will outline the broad themes of the his 2004 campaign.
Democrats scoffed at the White House strategy on Sunday, saying that the State of the Union address would hardly drown out what become an electrifying, unpredictable race in Iowa. Democrats also said that recent official White House leaks previewing some of the policy announcements in the speech -- like Mr. Bush's proposals on immigration and sending humans to the Moon and Mars -- had stolen drama from the annual address.
''I think the attention will go right back to Iowa,'' Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, said in a telephone interview. ''There's more excitement now in the Democratic primaries than there is in the State of the Union. I don't think it's going to have the political impact they expect, and if anything, I think it will backfire on them.''
After Iowa, Mr. Schumer said, the nation's political klieg lights will immediately shift to New Hampshire, where the Democratic candidates -- and an army of reporters -- will race before dawn on Tuesday to take up the campaign there first thing in the morning. The New Hampshire primary is Jan. 27, one week after the State of the Union address.
Others said recent presidential announcements had not cut into the political narrative unfolding in Iowa. ''Granted, the State of the Union is a unique event, but he has been making big pronouncements and having big events for weeks now and still this primary has dominated the coverage,'' said Debra DeShong, the communications director for the Democratic National Committee. ''It has really captured people's attention with its excitement.''
Democrats also said Mr. Bush's address would give them an opportunity to remind voters that it was in the State of the Union speech a year ago that Mr. Bush made a case for military action against Iraq because of what he called ''a serious and mounting threat to our country'' posed by Saddam Hussein's illicit weapons. But American inspectors have not found any evidence of unconventional weapons, and in a speech in Los Angeles last Friday the top Democrat on the House Intelligence Committee, Representative Jane Harman of California, said that Mr. Bush should use his State of the Union address ''to acknowledge the problems and outline specific steps to fix them.''
White House officials indicated that Mr. Bush would almost certainly not do that and that he would instead tell Americans on Tuesday that the decision to go to war was the right one. ''It will be clear in the American people's mind that the president is very comfortable with the decision we made, and that, as a country, we ought to be proud of the actions we've taken,'' a senior administration official said in a briefing for reporters on Friday.
Mr. Bush's speech, like his re-election campaign, will focus on his role as commander in chief in the fight against terrorism, which polls indicate is his greatest strength against the Democrats. Notably, Mr. Bush will lead off his speech, which will be seen by an estimated 60 million people and is expected to run a little less than an hour, with a long overview of what he considers his administration's accomplishments in fighting terrorism. Last year Mr. Bush opened with domestic policy, where polls show the Democrats now have many advantages.
White House officials are seeking to depict Mr. Bush as a visionary leader above the fray, and as usual have left little to chance. Staff preparations for the speech began last October; the first meeting with the president was in mid-November. Mr. Bush took a detailed outline of the speech to his Texas ranch over Christmas, worked on a final draft with his high command at Camp David this past weekend and was to begin practicing with a teleprompter at the White House on Sunday.
White House officials said that preparations for the speech this year had been slightly more pressured than last, when Mr. Bush gave his address a week later, on Jan. 28. ''So the speechwriters were even more stressed than usual,'' the senior administration official told reporters.
Although the Constitution requires that the president give Congress ''information'' about the state of the union, there is no law that says when the message must be delivered or in what form. By tradition, however, the president usually picks a night in the last two weeks of January. The senior official said the White House had worked out the date with Congress, which returns from recess on Tuesday, then repeated the official White House position that Mr. Bush was not thinking about politics.
''He is president for the course of this year,'' the official said, ''regardless of what happens in November.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: STATE OF THE UNION
