Being seeded at a Grand Slam tournament isn't the honor it used to be. Thirty-two players are seeded instead of 16, but it's still a first-time thrill and a clear sign of progress, and Taylor Dent and Robby Ginepri have progressed plenty in the last few months.
They are an increasingly important part of the next generation of United States players, a generation that for now deserves to be called the Andy Roddick generation but may have a few more names on the label before it finishes.
Roddick's United States Open victory and rise to No. 1 in the yearend ranking only makes success seem closer for his peer group. Ginepri has known him since before they were teenagers, beaten him on occasion, and has no difficulty separating the ''Saturday Night Live'' host and the news media darling from the on-again, off-again practice partner.
''We've been pretty good friends throughout our junior and even pro career,'' Ginepri said. ''So every time I see him on the cover of something, it's a little weird, but I know Andy is Andy. I think him winning the U.S. Open is definitely good for all the young Americans who are coming up, because we've been around him, beaten him a couple of times here and there, and we're seeing how well he can do. So it pushes you to do the same.''
For now, the 27th-seeded Dent and the 32nd-seeded Ginepri will have to settle for the second round of the Australian Open. On the first day of play in gusty, gorgeous conditions, Ginepri defeated Luis Horna of Peru, 7-5, 6-3, 6-3. Dent needed even less time to eliminate Fernando Verdasco of Spain, who retired because of illness in the third set after Dent dominated the first two with his booming serve and deft net play.
The burly, baby-faced 22-year-old Dent remains an anomaly: one of the last men at the elite level to serve and volley and chip and charge, and though the style was once common, it is now something to savor: the all-or-nothing push forward, the sliced returns, the stiff half-volleys.
Dent receives a lot of positive feedback, particularly from fans who crave variety. ''People come up to me all the time, and say: 'God, it's so refreshing to watch you play. We see everybody playing the same,' '' Dent said. ''And it's nice to hear because sometimes I feel like these people must be getting bored watching me just hitting serves and a volley and chipping and charging, and the points aren't very long.''
With his family background, Dent has been marked for success since he was a teenager. His father, Phil, an Australian, reached the Australian Open final in 1974. His mother, the former Betty Ann Grubb, was once ranked in the top 10 in the United States. But Dent's progress has been steady instead of spectacular: an improved ranking every year despite some significant injuries to his back and wrist. Last year was a breakthrough; he won three titles and made a run to the fourth round of the United States Open.
Though he worked with the veteran coach Brad Stine through much of the year, he made a coaching change after their contract expired in September -- and resumed working with his father. For Stine, who had been hired and fired by another rising American, Mardy Fish, it was apparently difficult to accept.
''I was a little disappointed with the way it turned out afterward,'' Dent said. ''I don't know if I should get into it; if it's right for me to get into it. I just felt like he took it more personally than I meant it to be.''
Stine coached Jim Courier when he was No. 1. ''I just felt like it wasn't the best thing for my tennis,'' Dent said of Stine. ''He had a lot of experience with Courier, and you couldn't have two more totally opposite games than Courier and myself. I felt like I wasn't improving like I should have been.''
There was no arguing with his results last fall, as he rode his power game to back-to-back titles in Bangkok and Moscow. ''It was so clear, and it was just clicking,'' Dent said. ''Everything I wanted to do, I was doing. It was fun to play. I'm trying to get back to that now. I feel I've dropped off a little bit.''
He is still in the tournament, which is more than last year's finalist Rainer Schuettler of Germany could manage on Monday. Schuettler, seeded sixth, surrendered a two-set lead to lose in five sets to the 19-year-old Swede Robin Soderling in the opening match on Rod Laver Arena.
Justine Henin-Hardenne of Belgium, the top-seeded woman, had no such difficulties, predictably overwhelming the 15-year-old Australian wild card Olivia Lukaszewicz 6-0, 6-0.
Seventh-seeded Carlos Moya of Spain, a former finalist here, withdrew on Monday because of an ankle injury he sustained in Saturday's final in Sydney. He was scheduled to face the American James Blake later in the day. Moya was replaced in the draw by Ivan Miranda of Peru.
Swedes have a great tradition of success in Australia -- from Mats Wilander to Stefan Edberg to the surprise 2002 champion Thomas Johansson -- along with an ever-vocal cheering section made up of high-spirited Swedish sun worshipers, delighted to escape the Scandinavian winter.
Soderling gave them much more to cheer about than the weather, in the process eliminating one of the biggest threats in Ginepri's section of the draw, but hardly the only one. Ginepri, a 21-year-old who lives in Georgia, will next face the big-serving Australian teenager Chris Guccione.
Ginepri's tabloid-fodder relationship with the actress Minnie Driver is over, and he is now dating someone else in Georgia. He is also paying the full wages of his coach, Steve DeVries, once on the United States Tennis Association coaching staff.
Money, at least in the short term, should not be a problem, considering that he earned $250,000 in the off-season by winning an exhibition that featured Andre Agassi.
''That definitely helped put a down payment on the house,'' Ginepri said. ''It's a little different with Steve now, because I had things paid for with the U.S.T.A. with him. I didn't have too much pressure on paying the bill that week or the hotel or whatever, but I'm not too worried about that. I think if I just concentrate on my tennis, good things will happen.''
TENNIS
