After a negotiation that played out over two news conferences, several asides to reporters, and, finally, an encounter at the top of a staircase in a Los Angeles hotel, CBS announced Saturday afternoon that it had a deal with Mark Burnett to produce two more editions of the hit reality series ''Survivor.''
Although the news surprised no one, it was preceded by a reality show of its own starring Mr. Burnett and the CBS chairman, Leslie Moonves, which appeared to cast doubt on the seemingly inevitable return of one of CBS's most popular shows.
First in the spotlight, Mr. Burnett: He came to a Los Angeles hotel ballroom to meet with television reporters to publicize the ''Survivor All-Stars'' edition, which begins on Feb. 1 after the Super Bowl. But he used the occasion to drop a few hints that perhaps there would be no more ''Survivor'' shows after this one, because CBS, a unit of Viacom, had not sent him any notice that it would want more from him.
''Who knows? Maybe CBS's strategy is to go out on top with the all-star show,'' Mr. Burnett told reporters, none of whom believed him. With the pressure of finding a location to stage a new ''Survivor'' bearing down on him, Mr. Burnett speculated that if nothing happened within a week, he would not be able to produce a new ''Survivor'' for the fall television season.
Did any of the posturing have to do with the fact that Mr. Burnett had delivered his latest hit reality series, ''The Apprentice,'' to NBC instead of CBS? Or that that show's star, Donald Trump, has been gleefully criticizing Mr. Moonves in public? Or that Mr. Moonves had played a little gamesmanship with ''The Apprentice'' by placing his biggest show, ''C.S.I.,'' opposite it? ''I don't know,'' Mr. Burnett said.
Mr. Moonves, standing at the back of the same ballroom, professed amazement at Mr. Burnett's statements, and questioned whether CBS had ever ordered new editions of ''Survivor'' as early as January. Mr. Moonves said he simply could not fathom why Mr. Burnett would think he was being snubbed. ''Maybe he's been hanging around with Donald Trump too much,'' he said. Mr. Moonves then promised he would get a mullet haircut if ''Survivor'' were not on CBS next fall.
As for ''The Apprentice,'' Mr. Moonves said, Mr. Burnett had pitched the series to him ''as a courtesy,'' though a deal was already all but set at NBC. Would CBS have bid on the show? ''Possibly,'' Mr. Moonves said.
A few moments later, the two men ran into each other at the staircase outside the ballroom. After a brief exchange, Mr. Burnett had his official order for two more editions of ''Survivor.''
The CBS corporate spokesman, Chris Ender, noted that the network owned the rights to the series ''in perpetuity'' and could have gone forward without Mr. Burnett. But it would never be the same, Mr. Ender said, and Mr. Moonves knows it. ''Mark does a great job,'' Mr. Moonves said. ''We love him.''
