AERON, the ergonomic chair that was a standard-issue luxury item for dot-com entrepreneurs at the height of the economic bubble of the 1990's, was the subject of numerous complaints lodged last year by a small but vocal group of customers. Herman Miller, the Michigan-based manufacturer, acknowledges that 625 Aeron chairs were delivered with padded armrests that retained a persistent and distinctly unpleasant smell.
The problem, for which the company is blaming a new supplier, may be related to the curing process for foam in the armrests. Alternately, said Mark Schurman, a Herman Miller spokesman, it could have been the byproduct of a chemical agent used to coat armrest molds, something that acts like a nonstick cooking spray. He said, however, that there was no danger to health as a result of the odor and that the process had been corrected.
The chairs, which have the posture of a praying mantis and can be bought at Design Within Reach for $829, are assembled in Michigan. The workers who attached the armrests may not have noticed the odor because of the speed of the production line. ''Sitting in the chair for a few hours, perhaps you notice it more,'' Mr. Schurman said. The bulk of the complaints surfaced not long after the chairs were assembled last August. Reports were also filed with the company in September. A recall was not issued because some armrests from the supplier were not affected, Mr. Schurman said. As he put it, ''There was no bad batch.''
Technicians made house and office calls for requested replacements. ''We have the best seating warranty in the industry,'' Mr. Schurman said, ''12 years, bumper to bumper. We are committed to customers' satisfaction.''
Herman Miller maintains a strong financial interest in the reputation of the Aeron chair. In the eight years since it was introduced, it has become a moneymaker and a high-end design icon, reflected by its inclusion in the collection of the Museum of Modern Art in New York. But the company has seen its dominance challenged in what Mr. Schurman calls the ''high-performance, high-design seating'' category, a category the Aeron chair essentially created.
Last spring, Herman Miller itself introduced Mirra, a slightly less expensive task chair. The company maintains that Mirra has not affected Aeron sales.
In an attempt to hold its own against the No. 19 from Allsteel ($680), the Life chair with adjustable arms and seat pad from Knoll ($708) and the Leap chair from Steelcase ($450), Herman Miller was taking steps to bolster the Aeron brand with updated upholstery colors and by marketing to more affluent buyers.
''When the chair was originally introduced, we said it was not an executive chair,'' Mr. Schurman said.
But last year, Herman Miller began offering an even more expensive polished aluminum frame meant to signify the management class. The gussied-up chair costs $285 more.
