JUST over four years ago, buyers began looking at 195 Hudson Street in TriBeCa, a 1929 brick warehouse being converted into luxury condominiums. In marketing materials, the developer promised wood-burning fireplaces, video intercoms to the lobby and garage, and triple-glazed windows that would keep in the heat and shut out noise from the nearby Holland Tunnel.
The pitch worked. Bankers, artists and advertising executives flocked to the 27-unit building, where sale prices for raw cement-floored lofts ranged from $600,000 to over $3 million.
Today, many of those buyers are fuming. They say in court papers that they can't use their fireplaces, that no apartments have video intercoms, and that the windows -- double-glazed, not triple -- are cracking and leaking and, in some cases, cannot be opened because the brackets that would hold them open have broken off.
Developers put about 1,300 new apartments on the market last year in Manhattan, mostly without incident. But the TriBeCa condominium provides a sobering tale for any prospective homeowner.
Three years ago, the state attorney general's office brokered a deal under which the developer of 195 Hudson would pay the condo board $1.5 million for some repairs. But negotiations stalled when one homeowner refused the settlement, and then, according to the condo board, the developer failed to come up with the money. So now, tired of waiting and haggling, the condo owners have filed suit in State Supreme Court in Manhattan against the developer -- as well as the architect, the building engineers and the construction manager -- on claims including breach of contract and fraud. The board is seeking $5 million in damages to cover repairs.
About 35 co-op and condominium boards in New York State, most of them in New York City, are currently seeking damages for problems in their buildings, according to Oliver Rosengart, assistant state attorney general in the investment protection bureau. They complain of defects like faulty heating systems and insufficiently chilled wine cellars.
Such complaints are not surprising, given the pace of new construction in the city, said Stuart Saft, chairman of the Council of New York Cooperatives and Condominiums. From 1999 to 2003, developers built 3,720 new condominium and cooperative units in Manhattan, compared with just 1,152 in the five previous years, according to the Real Estate Board of New York, a trade group. Developers gutted and renovated 445 more condos between 2001 and 2003. (No figures are available for renovations in earlier years.)
''We've seen this in every building boom,'' Mr. Saft said. What is new, he said, is the number of high-end buildings with complaints from owners. ''It is amazing that people are buying three- and four-million-dollar apartments and are still being faced with these kinds of construction defects.''
At the Empire Condominium on East 78th Street, for example, buyers who spent $3 million or more on apartments complained of buckling floors and leaks, among other problems. In September, the attorney general's office arranged a settlement under which the developer, RFD Third I Associates, agreed to some $2.5 million in repairs.
And at 19 Beach Street in TriBeCa, owners of the six multimillion-dollar lofts say the roof and showers are leaking and that the building is poorly ventilated. Adam Leitman Bailey, their lawyer, said the board is negotiating with the developer for repairs.
Mr. Bailey said that because land and real estate are so expensive in Manhattan, developers are spending more to buy land or old buildings to convert, and less on ''quality materials and labor.''
But seasoned developers say new buildings always have problems. What is important, they say, is whether the developers repair defects promptly and at no cost to buyers. ''With any product that you buy, like a car or some clothing, if there's something wrong with it, what you're looking for is someone to say, 'You're right -- the headlight doesn't work, and I'm going to fix it,' '' said Daniel Brodsky, president of the Brodsky Organization and head of the real estate board's housing committee. Mr. Brodsky said that his company often has to send contractors back to repair floors or fix leaks, but that he has never been involved in construction-defect litigation.
At 195 Hudson, problems emerged in 2000, as residents began moving in. Their own architects and contractors had fitted out the apartments with hardwood floors, granite countertops and limestone bathroom tiles.
But the residents say they had no heat. Their first winter, a particularly bitter one in New York, the average temperature in most apartments was 59 degrees, said Lynn Fisher Hill, the condo board president, who owns a 3,600-square-foot loft with her husband, Frederick.
The condo board's lawsuit alleges that an engineering report it commissioned found ''an inadequate heating system'' with the building ''missing approximately one-third of the radiators necessary to heat the loft apartments.'' The report said the windows did not meet the state energy code or provide enough insulation.
When residents sought relief by firing up their hearths, smoke filled the building. Fire trucks arrived at least twice. The condo board told owners to stop using their fireplaces altogether. The lawsuit cites a ''failure to install wood-burning fireplaces that draft safely and properly.''
In the Hills' apartment, the fireplace is the centerpiece of the living room, lovingly framed in rare anegre wood from Africa. But in the 2,100-square-foot apartment where Ethan Signer, a retired professor, and his wife, Laura Karp, a painter, live with their 13-year-old son, Jasper, the fireplace is covered with a bamboo screen, a reminder of its uselessness.
Problems kept cropping up, the condo owners say. In court papers, they assert that the developer, the architect, the engineer or the contractors failed to install ''kitchen exhaust ductwork sufficient to meet the needs of the proposed owner kitchens -- ductwork is sized for a small bathroom fan, not a kitchen exhaust system.'' As a result, residents quickly had their culinary aspirations thwarted.
The first time Bill Wolf and his wife, Kiele, who are investment bankers, fired up their Thermador grill to make hamburgers, ''our neighbors called and said, 'Smells good, but we're not hungry,' '' Mr. Wolf recalled this week, as he wistfully showed visitors the fake pink coals resting under the grill. ''You would have thought we were running a Texas barbecue judging by how many complaining calls we got.''
Bonnie Taffer and her husband, Lewis, installed a Viking stove and an exhaust hood when they moved into their 2,300-square-foot loft. But Ms. Taffer said she cannot grill fish, broil steak or sauté anything that creates smoke. ''If we cook, someone three floors above us can call us and tell us what we are cooking,'' she said.
The complaint also alleges a ''failure to install a domestic hot water system that provides hot water to all of the lofts within several minutes.'' Mr. Wolf said that when he draws a bath for his 2-year-old daughter, Ashley, he frequently has to wait 20 minutes for hot water.
In July 2000, the residents wrote to the attorney general's office, which regulates the sale of condominiums and cooperatives. The condo board asked for an investigation of, among other things, ''shoddy workmanship'' and the installation of building systems that it said did not match what was promised in the original prospectus.
The board's lawsuit says that the FSI Consulting Group, an engineering firm hired by the board, produced a September 2000 report citing 391 deficient items that would cost more than $4 million to repair. Meanwhile, Mr. Rosengart, the assistant attorney general, had begun negotiations involving the developer and the board.
In early 2001, Mr. Rosengart said, he brokered a deal under which the developer, Steven Blumenthal, would pay $1.5 million in cash to the condo owners to cover many of the repairs. At that point, Ms. Hill said, the board was prepared to accept the settlement, but one condo owner refused.
Over the next two years, the board, Mr. Blumenthal and Mr. Rosengart went back and forth as emotions ran high at 195 Hudson. An affidavit supplied by Ms. Hill says that several dates for the payment of the $1.5 million came and went. Each time, Mr. Blumenthal ''was unable to come up with the settlement money,'' according to the board's court papers.
Mr. Blumenthal did not return calls seeking comment, but one of his lawyers, Andrea Roschelle, a partner at Starr Associates in Manhattan, said: ''He wants people to know that he has substantial defenses against the claims made by the condo board. He has been in negotiations with the attorney general's office in an attempt to resolve these things amicably, and it is our understanding that the attorney general is still attempting to resolve the dispute.''
The condo owners continued to find problems, Ms. Hill said, and in September, the attorney general's office commissioned a study by an independent architect. That report, now an exhibit in the lawsuit, found further problems with the fireplaces and the building's facade, as well as cracked windows and corroded frames. It said the defects would cost more than $1.6 million to repair.
The following month, Mr. Rosengart persuaded Mr. Blumenthal to pay $1.6 million in cash and to fix the fireplaces at his own expense. But by then, the condo owners were fed up, so they sued.
''At the beginning, it's a wise thing to cut your losses, take the money and move on,'' Ms. Hill said. But after three years and the discovery of problems that the board now says would cost $5 million to repair, ''we are way down the line from there, and no money has ever appeared,'' she said.
Perfido &amp; Weiskopf Architects, also named as a defendant in the suit, declined to comment. Gabriel Oancea, a partner at Kallen &amp; Lemelson Consulting Engineers, another defendant, said he believed no lawsuit should have been filed, but declined to say any more. A spokesman for two other defendants, Jeffrey M. Brown Associates Inc. and its affiliated construction management firm, K&amp;J Construction, said, ''all the construction work managed by K&amp;J was performed in accordance with the design documents prepared by the owner's architect and engineer.''
Lawsuits can be lengthy, costly and risky. Still, ''the discrepancy between the offer and the cost to repair is so great that it's really inappropriate to take a gross offer of $1.6 million,'' said Ed Braverman, the lawyer for the condo owners in the litigation. ''If the offer to settle was a reasonable percentage of the amount of damage in the building,'' he said, ''then I think it should be accepted, because a settlement is always a compromise.''
Other lawyers who have handled construction-defect cases say that such compromises stack the deck against condo owners. ''They're not going to get what they're entitled to get to begin with,'' said Doug Danzig, a partner at Fulbright &amp; Jaworski who represented condominium owners at the Empire, where the board recently accepted a settlement worked out by the attorney general's office.
At 195 Hudson, residents seem almost as angry at the attorney general as they are at the developer. ''We gave the developer millions of dollars to do things he did not do,'' Ms. Hill said. ''So why does the attorney general's office think it's O.K. for us to pay for 75 percent of what needs to be done to the building?''
For his part, Mr. Rosengart said, ''I'm doing my best to make people close to whole in order to avoid litigation, and in my perception it's not that far off.'' He added that he was still trying to negotiate a settlement.
In the meantime, the condo board at 195 Hudson has raised maintenance fees nearly 80 percent, in part, it says, because the developer's original estimates were too low and to help pay legal and engineering fees, which are also being partly covered by a special monthly assessment. The building plans to borrow about $1.5 million to begin work on the facade, the boiler room and improvements to the hot-water system.
''This building is being perceived as this is where the rich people live,'' said Ms. Karp, the painter. ''But quite a lot of people in this building are so tapped out over these assessments that they are in trouble.'' She and Mr. Signer now pay $1,486.88 a month in maintenance, up from $838.32 three years ago, plus a $770 assessment.
For many homeowners, the trouble is much more than the daily irritations of idle fireplaces or rusting windows. It is the thought that their most vital investments have been compromised. The continuing legal troubles, as well as the publicity about problems in the building, are likely to make the apartments harder to sell. ''You might think we are a bunch of whiners with luxury apartments,'' said Mr. Taffer, who is vice president of the condo board. ''But this is the biggest financial purchase I have made in my life. I worked for 22 years, and I put my nest egg in this place. I put my life and soul into this.''
Turf
