A Brooklyn jury should ''send a message'' to a tobacco company and punish it for decades of hooking people on deadly cigarettes by granting a large damage award to the widow of a longtime smoker, the woman's lawyer argued yesterday.
The request from the lawyer, Gary J. Douglas, came as the first jury in New York State to hold a tobacco company liable for an individual smoker's death began considering whether to add an award of punitive damages. Last month, the same jury awarded $175,000 to the Brooklyn widow, Gladys Frankson, as compensation for the death of her husband, Harry W. Frankson, in 1999.
But a lawyer for the company, Brown &amp; Williamson, told the jurors in Supreme Court in Brooklyn that their first verdict had already sent a sobering message. ''Brown &amp; Williamson has heard that,'' said the lawyer, Thomas E. Riley.
Mr. Douglas, Mrs. Frankson's lawyer, catalogued actions that he said the jury found had occurred, like enticing children to smoke. The jury found the company responsible for concealing the risks of smoking.
He said corporate willingness to sacrifice people's health for profit should be severely punished. ''We're going to ask you to send a message to the defendant,'' Mr. Douglas said, ''and not just the defendant, but the tobacco industry and to corporate America as well.''
He said that only a big award would get the attention of the company, which has annual revenue of $3.6 billion. ''One or two million will have no effect,'' he said. ''They'll write it off: 'petty cash.' ''
But Mr. Riley repeated themes from the first part of the trial, when the company focused on the fact that Mr. Frankson, like most Americans, had been told for decades about the hazards of smoking. ''Mr. Frankson was warned,'' Mr. Riley said. ''He was warned for a long time.'' Mr. Frankson, an airline operations executive at New York airports, was 57 when he died of lung cancer in 1999. He had smoked Lucky Strikes for more than 40 years.
Lucky Strikes were made by the American Tobacco Company, which in 1994 was merged into Brown &amp; Williamson -- now the country's third-largest cigarette company -- a subsidiary of the British American Tobacco Company.
As the battle shifted yesterday to punitive damages -- which under the law are to punish a defendant for outrageous conduct -- the two sets of lawyers described Brown &amp; Williamson in starkly different terms.
An economist, Robert W. Johnson, called by Mrs. Frankson's lawyers, testified that Brown &amp; Williamson's annual profits exceeded $500 million. But to the company's lawyers, it is a company facing challenges, with revenue declining to $3.6 billion in 2002 from $5.4 billion in 1999.
Such calculations are far from academic, because the jurors are likely to look for a way to measure their award. Still, very large awards rarely survive. The United States Supreme Court said in a decision in April that the awards should be ''proportionate'' to the wrong committed.
Since 2001, several juries in Oregon and California have set stratospheric damage awards of as much as $28 billion against tobacco companies, according to the Tobacco Products Liability Project at Northeastern University, which works to foster lawsuits against the industry. The $28 billion award has already been reduced to $28 million by a trial judge, and that sum is now being challenged in an appeal.
