George Balanchine's enchanting two-act ''Midsummer Night's Dream'' is usually performed in June and July, and it seemed an unexpected choice to take New York City Ballet's repertory into full swing on Tuesday night at the New York State Theater.
But since ''Balanchine 100: The Centennial Celebration'' is the title of the company's winter and spring seasons this year, the surprises along the way ostensibly have a thematic explanation.
There is plenty of method and, so far, no madness in the way Peter Martins, City Ballet's artistic director, has organized the troupe's tribute to the 100th anniversary of Balanchine's birth.
The winter season, subtitled ''Heritage,'' focuses on Balanchine's early extant works and alludes to influences on him, especially before he and Lincoln Kirstein founded City Ballet in 1948. ''Vision,'' the spring season, focuses on Balanchine's legacy, including City Ballet as a company that promoted new works.
So after an all-Balanchine gala program in November and five weeks of Balanchine's ''Nutcracker,'' City Ballet has given a nod to chronological sequence. It is not that ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' is an early Balanchine work. But when he choreographed it in 1962, he recalled that he had appeared as a child in Shakespeare's play (not a ballet version). He was, he said, an elf in a production at the Mikhailovsky Theater in St. Petersburg, Russia.
It was a play he knew in depth, and he often noted the parallel between the vision of the divine in a New Testament passage and Bottom's mangled gloss on that text. This vision of a new dimension that went beyond the literal may suggest why he followed the storytelling of his first act with a vision of his own in Act II: a pure-dance abstraction without words.
Yet even this plotless divertissement distills the play's overall theme of love and reconciliation. At its most elevated, this theme is rendered through classical dancing. On Tuesday, Darci Kistler, as Titania, was in full flower as the fairy queen. It is a role that gives her freedom to dance both expansively and sweetly. For Peter Boal, Oberon is a natural character. He does not aim for flamboyant bravura, but his masculine power and swiftness, expressed in his huge leaps and sharp leg beats, are emblematic of a monarch who rules his realm.
Balanchine's genius is to tell his story of quarreling lovers with cinematic rapidity. Alexandra Ansanelli (Helena) and Rachel Rutherford (Hermia) had fine attack as the distraught women with mixed-up sweethearts. These were Stephen Hanna (Lysander) and Sébastien Marcovici (Demetrius). When Jennie Somogyi, as the Amazon queen, decided to marry Henry Seth as the Duke of Athens, following her double and triple fouettés, there was indeed cause for celebration.
Because this ''Dream'' is usually performed in the summer, it is easy to forget that its premiere was on Jan. 17, 1962. It is an entertainment for all seasons, gratifying on all levels.
In contrast to other choreographers, Balanchine gave his version more of a musical than a literary sensibility. He used not only Mendelssohn's music for the play, but other Mendelssohn scores as well -- embodied vividly in Act II by the six-couple ensemble and, in the final duet, by Jock Soto and Miranda Weese. The entire performance was a spirited affair, thanks in part to the vibrancy of Paul Mann, a guest conductor from England. Charles Askegard as Titania's Cavalier, James Fayette as Bottom and Albert Evans, outstanding as a mercurial Puck, were part of a lively canvas inhabited by scores of children as bugs and fireflies. There is no sweeter moment in Balanchine's entire work than when they yawn and lie down to sleep.
CITY BALLET REVIEW
