ROSEMARY M. BAKKER'S career as an interior designer took an abrupt turn when her mother fell 13 years ago and broke her hip. The house where her mother lived in Bay Ridge, Brooklyn, was transformed by the injury into an obstacle course.
''When I saw the house through my mother's eyes, I began to see interior design differently,'' Ms. Bakker said. ''I understood that older people had to leave their homes because they were not designed for them. We design only for the healthy and the young. There are ways to design homes so people can live in them from the cradle to the grave.''
Ms. Bakker, 50, who had spent most of her career thinking about fabric and color schemes, let her subscriptions to glossy interior design magazines lapse. She began to promote research and to design products friendly to those who find themselves impaired.
''I worked as an interior designer with a lot of clients who had a lot of money,'' she said. ''They had a little too much time on their hands. They were too focused on perfection, and there is no perfection in life. I always wanted to help people. I wondered sometimes about what I was doing. When I was a girl I dreamed of being an interior designer or a social worker. Now I am both. I have found my place.''
Her place is as a research associate in gerontologic design at the Weill Medical College of Cornell University. Her research, financed entirely by grants, involves testing bath chairs, grab-bars or hand-held shower heads at New York Weil Cornell Center and in her own home. One grab-bar, she said, came loose as she hoisted herself out of the tub.
Ms. Bakker plans to have 100 first-year medical students explore the hospital in wheelchairs. ''I want to sensitize them to the obstacles their patients may face,'' she said. ''They will go through entrance doors, use bathrooms, go in and out of elevators, go to the cafeteria and up and down ramps. I want them to experience these environmental obstacles so they can know how difficult it is to traverse through a hospital.''
Ms. Bakker is the founder and director of the Task Force on Hoarding in New York City, a multiagency effort by those in the housing, legal and social service fields to coordinate the response to hoarding.
Hers is a professional odyssey that has been intimately linked to her mother's decline. The broken hip was a start. Her mother, Arlene, later developed Alzheimer's disease. She, like many with the disease, began to hoard items, which spilled from countertops onto the floor and made walking around her house difficult.
Ms. Bakker, who frantically tried to keep her mother's home free from clutter, was no longer concerned simply with design for the elderly, but with the way of life of those battling a disease that was slowly robbing them of independence.
''My mother hoarded papers, junk mail, magazines and newspapers,'' she said. ''She could not decide what was important and what was not important. She would open a letter, read the bill, but then could not go from there. She could not write the check, put it in the envelope, put the stamp on it and mail it. She got to Step 1 and no further. Things piled up.''
MS. BAKKER is working on ways to intervene in households where hoarding is a problem. When she speaks about hoarding, the conversation soon turns back to her mother, as it does when she speaks about design for the elderly.
''I went in and cleaned out my mother's house without realizing how upsetting this was to her,'' she said. ''I piled all the stuff in the basement, and that night my mother went down the steps to drag it all back up. It taught me that when you clean out an apartment or a house, you have to remove the stuff immediately. Then you have to intervene constantly to make sure the hoarding does not resume.''
She spun back and forth in her office chair and reached across her desk toward a pile of pictures. The prints showed the interiors of New York City apartments that were piled high with clutter.
She had, within easy reach, pieces of carpet that were water resistant, brightly colored grab-bars for bathrooms, reachers with triggerlike handles for retrieving items from a shelf, and plastic tea kettles with automatic shut-off switches. She displayed each item as if she were doing show and tell.
Her mother is now in an assisted living center. It has been a long journey for both women. It began when Ms. Bakker's father, who was in the Air Force, was killed in a plane accident when she was an infant.
''It was, at times, a difficult relationship,'' she said, ''but now she is my best friend. I see her three times a week. We walk around the block. We have lunch. There is wisdom and intelligence there, even with the disease. You have to know how to bring it out.''
She looked out the window, up the street toward where her mother now lives. ''She still recognizes me,'' she said, clasping her hands. ''Thank God. She still knows my name.''
PUBLIC LIVES
