HIGHLIGHTS
ST. PAUL: CHANGING LEADERS -- The St. Paul Chamber Orchestra won't have a music director anymore. What it will have, beginning in the 2004-5 season, is leadership transferred to its musicians and five artistic partners. An announcement in St. Paul yesterday said Andreas Delfs, above, the ensemble's music director since 2001, had played a leading role in creating the new collaboration, based on a European model. He will serve as artistic consultant to the orchestra for the next two seasons and will lead it in an annual set of subscription concerts while continuing as music director of the Milwaukee Symphony Orchestra. Starting with the next season, Nicholas McGegan, who directs the orchestra's Baroque Series, will become an artistic partner. Three others will also join the lineup: the violinist and conductor Joshua Bell, the oboist Douglas Boyd and the pianist Stephen Prutsman. In the 2005-6 season, they will be joined by the Italian conductor Roberto Abbado. Under the new setup, the artistic partners will work with two committees in whom decision-making power is vested. Each committee will comprise three musicians and two managers, who are the orchestra's president and managing director, Bruce Coppock, and its vice president and general manager, Barry Kempton. The artistic vision committee will be responsible for all aspects of programming, selection of guest artists and conductors, and recording activities. The artistic personnel committee will oversee all orchestra personnel matters, including auditions and tenure review. Now in its 45th season, the 35-member St. Paul Chamber Orchestra lays claim to the title of the country's only full-time professional chamber orchestra.
DIVAS: NOW HEAR THIS -- The soaring aria sounds beautiful. But even if the soprano is singing in English, her words may be unintelligible without titles. ''It's not our ears,'' says Joe Wolfe, an Australian physicist. ''In some cases, the information simply is not there.'' In a brief paper published yesterday in the journal Nature, the physicist and his colleagues at the University of South Wales described what they called the ''soprano's effect.'' In creating it, the singers sacrifice intelligibility to make music by pushing air from their lungs through the larynx, making the vocal cords vibrate twice as fast as a man's 220 times a second and creating a higher pitch, The Associated Press reported. Classically trained sopranos, led up the scale by researchers, eventually muddied the vowel sounds so that ''hard,'' ''hoard'' ''who'd'' and ''heard'' could not be distinguished.
NASHVILLE: EARL SCRUGGS AT 80 -- There were greetings from President Bush and Dolly Parton and Dwight Yoakum and plenty of prime picking at a surprise 80th-birthday party for the banjo great Earl Scruggs at the Country Music Hall of Fame and Museum in Nashville on Tuesday. Mr. Scruggs, who teamed with Lester Flatt (who died in 1979) in the Foggy Mountain Boys and Flatt &amp; Scruggs, brought a three-fingered approach to banjo playing that gave bluegass music a distinctive sound. At his party, he accepted a banjo-shaped cake and watched an all-star cast perform ''Foggy Mountain Breakdown,'' The Associated Press reported. Among those attending were Vince Gill, Ricky Skaggs, Bela Fleck, Alison Krauss, Brenda Lee and members of the Nitty Gritty Dirt Band.
LOCAL 802: NEW PRESIDENT -- David Lennon, a graduate of the Juilliard School and former principal violist of the Kansas City Symphony and the New York City Opera National Company who has played professionally in concert and theater productions, was installed on Tuesday as the successor to Bill Moriarity as president of Local 802 of the American Federation of Musicians. Calling itself the world's largest local union of professional musicians, 802 represents the musicians at Lincoln Center, in Broadway pits and those who perform in and around New York in jazz clubs, cabarets, hotels and clubs as well as in recording sessions. Mr. Moriarity retired.
MUSEUM: CURATOR NAMED -- Caron Smith has been appointed chief curator and deputy director at the Rubin Museum of Art. Housing Tibetan and Himlayan Art from the collection of Donald and Shelley Rubin, the museum is to open on May 22 at 150 West 17th Street in Chelsea. Ms. Smith has worked previously in the department of Asian art at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, at the Asia Society, with the Mr. and Mrs. John D. Rockefeller III Collection and for the last six years as a senior curator at the San Diego Museum of Art.
MISS AMERICA: NEW FACE -- Grappling with declining television ratings and dwindling assets, the Miss America Organization, which posted a $1.4 million loss in 2002, has appointed a new leader for the fourth time in five years, The Associated Press reported. Art McMaster, 50, previously the vice president for finance, has been named acting president and chief executive. He succeeds George F. Bauer, the chief executive who left after two years when his contract expired on Dec. 31.
FOOTNOTES
Beyoncé, left, will sing the national anthem when Super Bowl XXXVIII is played in Reliant Stadium in her native Houston on Feb. 1, The Associated Press reported. . . . Hobbits are headed for the Mardi Gras in New Orleans. Elijah Wood, who played Frodo in the ''Lord of the Rings'' film trilogy, and Dominic Monaghan, his hobbit pal, Merry, will be celebrity monarchs in carnival parades. On Feb. 22 Mr. Wood will ride with the Krewe of Bacchus, and Feb. 23, Mr. Monaghan will ride with the Krewe of Orpheus, founded by the singer Harry Connick Jr., according to The Associated Press.
