If Schone Malliet had his way, in dozens of American cities every Friday afternoon there would be a long line of buses waiting to take city dwellers to the snow-covered mountains.
''Skiing is the one sport that hasn't figured out how to make itself accessible,'' Malliet, the executive vice president of the National Brotherhood of Skiers, said. ''It is either too expensive or it doesn't reach beyond its mountain borders. We have to do something about that.''
For a ski industry desperate to expand its traditional customer base, Malliet's organization represents a growing assembly of willing, and symbolically important, new consumers. The group, an umbrella association of 84 African-American ski clubs in 46 cities, is generally considered the largest ski club in the nation, with more than 14,000 members.
Later this month, the N.B.S. will take about 3,500 of its members to the Copper Mountain Resort in Colorado for its 31st annual summit, a weeklong festival of skiing and socializing that the brotherhood says is the largest continuously running ski convention in the nation.
''People of color represent the greatest opportunity for growth in skiing,'' Malliet said. ''That our group exists, that it has been around for 31 years, proves that skiing doesn't have to be an elitist, expensive sport for white people.
''There is room for diversity. We represent that.''
Most surveys estimate that black skiers make up 3 percent of all snow-sports enthusiasts. Skiing and snowboarding are, and always have been, overwhelmingly white sports, a fact that spawned the first black ski clubs in the 1970's. A trip to the mountain by one of these locally based clubs of African-Americans lessened the sense of isolation on the slopes.
''The N.B.S. started out as an ethnic thing,'' Malliet said. ''But I really think it is more of an urban thing now, because there are all kinds of people in urban areas who want to live an outdoor lifestyle, too.
''The N.B.S. can be the platform for the inclusion of many groups into the skiing community, be it Hispanics or Asian-Americans.''
Significantly, another principal ambition of the group is to identify and develop people of color who can someday compete and win medals for the United States Winter Olympic team -- in any of the winter disciplines. To this end, the brotherhood gives financial support and pays for the training of dozens of younger athletes, including some in national and international competitions who attend special holiday camps or summer training sessions in Europe or South America.
''Because we recruit so few kids out of urban areas into our winter sports, all of our best athletes nationwide don't get access to these sports,'' Malliet, a certified United States Ski and Snowboard Association Alpine racing coach, said. ''It's a lot like golf, which has recently made strides in establishing grass-roots organizations in urban areas. They used to say golf was an expensive sport just for white people, too.
''Frankly, we can do better at the highest levels in both sports.''
The N.B.S. has sponsored Andre and Suki Horton, brother and sister Olympic Alpine skiing hopefuls from Anchorage. They have also financially backed Ralph Green of Brooklyn, a member of the United States Disabled team who lost his leg nearly 10 years ago after a gunshot wound.
Meanwhile, industry giants like Vail and Intrawest have partnered with the brotherhood, providing discounts for certified members in lodging, lift tickets and rental equipment. These resorts have been swayed, in part, by the group's statistics, which reveal a retention rate of beginning skiers in brotherhood clubs of roughly 70 percent; the national average is about 33 percent.
''The goal is to introduce more people, in all areas, to a great sport,'' Malliet said. ''Our conventions are for skiing, for social events and for all other forms of winter outdoor exercise. We get some people coming just to be around other professionals from their field of business. It is, in some ways, like every skiing gathering.
''It is a unifying event. Skiing shouldn't just be for people who live near mountain areas or for people whose families could afford it. That's what our group can accomplish. When we're celebrating our 50th anniversary summit, that might be our greatest gift to the skiing industry.''
THE SKI REPORT
