FACING a two-day car trip solo from Cleburne, Tex., to Los Angeles, Rex McGee decided he needed a soundtrack other than music. Before he embarked on the 1,500-mile drive in September, he used his computer to download four audiobooks and burn them to CD's -- his aural driving companions.
''It's a perfect way to pass the time,'' said Mr. McGee, a screenwriter. ''I need to get involved in a story.''
Through the long stretches of desert in New Mexico and Arizona, Mr. McGee listened to an eclectic mix: ''Underboss: Sammy The Bull Gravano's Story of Life in the Mafia'' by Peter Maas; ''My Anecdotal Life'' by the actor-writer-producer Carl Reiner; ''The DaVinci Code'' by Dan Brown; and ''Winesburg, Ohio,'' the 1919 Sherwood Anderson classic, which in book form had been on his shelf unread for years.
The desire to multitask during a road trip or a daily commute is one reason for the growing popularity of audiobooks. Another factor is technology. With a digital audio player, a user can now download titles -- and often for less than it would be to buy a book, audiocassette or CD.
An aural rendition of ''Anna Karenina'' ordered from www.blackstoneaudio.com, for instance, would cost $162.90 and require juggling 24 tapes.
For $23.95 you can download the tale, unabridged and clutterless, in about 30 minutes if you have a high-speed Internet connection.
As digital audio players drop in price and become capable of holding more data, downloadable spoken-word programming is becoming easier to manage and more widely available.
There is a catch, of course. Publishers have yet to settle on how authors should be compensated for audio versions of their works, and the need to protect against copyright violations means that secure technology must be used to download audiobooks. As a result, there are only a few places on the Web where they can be found. (There are many outlets, however, from which to purchase or rent audiobooks on CD's or cassettes.) The closest thing to a well-stocked, easy-to-navigate chain bookstore is Audible.com, which carries 18,000 works.
''They have the best selection, the most titles, the most current things,'' said Robin Whitten, editor and founder of AudioFile magazine, a bimonthly publication that reviews audiobooks. ''They often get a new program the day the book goes on sale.''
At Audible, a user can not only acquire classics but the latest best sellers, too, from the various John Grisham and Danielle Steele offerings to Madonna's foray into children's books (read by the star herself), plus enough self-help, meditation and business titles to make an autodidact both rich and satisfied.
And more than just books are available. Public radio programs like ''Car Talk,'' ''This American Life'' and ''All Things Considered'' are available, as are magazines and newspapers like Scientific American, The Wall Street Journal and The New York Times, delivered in digest form.
Beyond abundance of offerings, another difference between Audible and its competitors is ease of use. Gaining access to a file you have purchased requires only a one-time download of a software program called Audible Manager, and then a simple click on your computer screen to transfer the file to your computer's hard drive. Then you may (with some exceptions) do with it what you will: listen to it on your desktop, burn it onto a CD or transfer it to a portable device.
The one limitation in this case may be the size of your portable player's hard drive. If it is not large enough, you might have to add chapters as you are ready for them.
Audible throws in a player called the Otis with a subscription to its service ($14.95 a month for one audiobook and one periodical or radio program; $19.95 a month for two audiobook titles); the player holds 17 hours of programming. The unabridged ''Anna Karenina'' is 34.5 hours. (Most titles, of course, are far shorter, even when unabridged.)
With an iPod, the process is even simpler, because Audible.com recently struck a deal under which the Apple iTunes store has begun to feature Audible titles prominently amid the music for sale. An iPod is ideal for memory-heavy audiobooks. A 40-gigabyte iPod can hold more than 4,800 hours of spoken-word titles, and an audiobook purchased from Audible steers itself directly to the iTunes file on your computer.
It is also possible to use a wide range of hand-held organizers for audiobook playback. And there are several gadgets that allow you to easily play your digital audiobooks in the car; information about these and other compatible MP3 players is available on the Audible.com site.
The simplicity and abundance of Audible offerings are more apparent when you take a look at www.payperlisten.com, the digital download arm of Audiobooks.com, which sells new and used titles in taped form. At PayPerListen, the emphasis is on the classics, said Jimmy Belson, managing director, adding that there are more than 300 titles available at the site.
The site has the feel of a smaller operation. After placing an order, you must wait several hours to have your credit card processed and to receive an e-mail confirmation; only then are you able to download your purchase. Titles are downloaded chapter by chapter, making for clumsier file management.
The same is true at www.audiobooksforfree.com, which, in addition to requiring a piecemeal download, offers what the site's proprietors call ''bearable'' quality audio. For a $6 fee, you can upgrade the audio quality, and for an annual membership, you can get access to more than 326 titles, which run mainly toward classics and thrillers.
Books are not the only spoken-word material that is available for downloading from the Web. At www.radioclassics.com, thousands of hours of old-time radio shows are available, including favorites like ''Fibber McGee and Molly,'' ''Our Miss Brooks'' and ''Dragnet.'' In addition to free streams of shows offered each week in conjunction with RadioClassics' syndicated show, ''When Radio Was,'' the site offers a monthly subscription for $19.95 that allows you to download 20 hours of content. Subscribers are permitted to listen to the shows on two different computers and have the right to burn them onto CD's for portable listening.
RadioClassics recently introduced a $4.95-a-month program that allows you to stream the shows on your PC; about 4,000 of the 50,000 hours the site has to offer are available for streaming, said Barry O'Hagan, the site's streaming and downloadable content manager. Mac users may find this service difficult to use, and Mr. O'Hagan hedged about plans to make it more Mac friendly.
Once you are set up to download listening material, you may be overwhelmed by the sheer volume that can be had at the flick of a cursor. A worthy guide is AudioFile (www.audiofilemagazine.com), which reviews audiobooks produced for any medium, with an ear for production values. In keeping with the digital spirit, Ms. Whitten recently introduced a plan that allows users to subscribe to an online version of the magazine, complete with recommended titles and discounts, one issue at a time for $2.95 a month.
Ms. Whitten, who has been following the industry for more than 10 years, said she found the growing number of audiobooks in digital format encouraging, but that it would be some time before the selection was as broad as that on CD's and cassettes. ''There are still a lot of audiobooks that are not available, and it will take a while,'' she said. ''The publishers are trying to figure out what users want and how it will work best for them.''
For Mr. McGee, hearing Carl Reiner read his autobiography gave the book a different dimension -- and lent color to a long and tedious drive. When he reached Los Angeles, he wrote Mr. Reiner a letter. ''I told him, 'You kept me laughing through New Mexico and Arizona,''' he said. The actor surprised him by calling to thank him for the note.
BASICS  Correction:  January 13, 2004, Tuesday  An article in Circuits on Thursday about downloading audiobooks over the Internet misspelled the surname of an author whose works are available in that format. She is Danielle Steel, not Steele.
