Both sides in the David Gest v. Liza Minnelli divorce case said in a Manhattan court yesterday that they would abide by a prenuptial agreement they signed eight days before their wedding spectacular in March 2002.
But they still have plenty to fight about, given the words that were exchanged yesterday by their lawyers during a conference in State Supreme Court that lasted almost three hours.
Ms. Minnelli arrived at the small courtroom with little fanfare, and quietly took a seat in the back row until her case was called. Mr. Gest could not attend, said his lawyer, Raoul Felder, because he was not feeling well enough to travel from Hawaii, where he has been living since filing suit against Ms. Minnelli for assault in October. He claimed she beat him. Ms. Minnelli filed for divorce shortly thereafter, and Mr. Gest then filed his own counterclaim for divorce.
Ms. Minnelli was excused not long after she arrived. Court artists asked for her autograph, and an aide tried to fend off a few reporters outside the courtroom. ''I'm sorry, we won't be making any comments,'' the woman said, her arms around Ms. Minnelli's shoulders, guiding her away. But Ms. Minnelli broke free, turning to the reporters who were asking how she felt. She smiled a big smile, waved a pink-gloved hand, and said, ''I'm feeling very well, thank you.''
Things had been less pleasant in the courtroom. Justice John E. H. Stackhouse had to remind Mr. Felder and lawyers for Ms. Minnelli that he would not tolerate personal attacks in court or in legal paperwork. Ms. Minnelli's side tried to cast doubt on the nature of Mr. Gest's illness and on the credibility of his doctor. Mr. Felder said Mr. Gest was ailing largely because Ms. Minnelli had beat him about the head. ''Yesterday he had 20 injections in his head,'' Mr. Felder told the court.
But a lawyer for Ms. Minnelli, Frederic J. Siegel, said he had a videotape of Mr. Gest at a New Year's Eve party that indicates he is not as sick as he claims. Mr. Siegel wants Mr. Gest in New York for deposition. But Mr. Felder claims that migraine headaches prevent him from flying.
At one point, Mr. Felder began to talk about wanting Ms. Minnelli to submit to a blood test to prove that she criminally withheld information about a medical condition from Mr. Gest before the wedding. That matter was settled in the judge's chambers. When he reappeared, Justice Stackhouse made it clear that Ms. Minnelli had done nothing criminal and gently chided Mr. Felder for suggesting that she had.
The case was adjourned until Feb. 20.
