However carefully you search your dictionary, you will not find the word POTY. But tournament players in New York know that it is an acronym for Player of the Year. The Greater New York Bridge Association awards points for placing well in major competitions and adds them up to determine the champion.
POTY for 2003 is Michael Polowan, whose many titles include the Vanderbilt Knockout Team Championship in 1995. He had a remarkable POTY batting average, perhaps the best in history: He played in five of the significant events, winning three and finishing third in two. One of the wins was in the most prestigious event at the Winter Regional Tournament in Manhattan just after Christmas: the two-day Board-a-Match Teams. Second in the POTY and winning the Team Player of the Year title was Brian Glubok.
On the diagramed deal from the board-a-match teams, Polowan was South and had to interpret a very rare bid made by his partner, Michael Rosenberg. The partnership started slowly, with a one no-trump response to a fourth-seat one-spade opening. But the auction accelerated after the club fit was established. Three diamonds showed some diamond length and implied heart shortage.
But what did four hearts mean? In most contexts it would be a splinter, showing slam interest with a singleton or void in hearts. That was virtually impossible here. Heart shortage in both hands would be duplication, a contraindication for slam purposes. The expert meaning is therefore length and weakness in hearts, so that there is no duplication in the suit and a slam is worth considering. Polowan, happy to accept the invitation, leaped to six clubs.
With the cards lying favorably, six clubs was not difficult to make. Polowan concentrated on collecting an overtrick, often important in board-a-match scoring. He won the opening heart lead with his ace and led the club jack for a winning finesse. When East discarded, declarer continued by finessing the club queen. A heart ruff, the spade ace, and a spade ruff were followed by a second heart ruff.
When both defenders followed to another spade ruff, South could claim all the tricks. After removing the missing trump, dummy's diamond losers could be discarded on his spade winners. As it happened the overtrick was overkill. In the replay, the slam was not reached by North-South.
BRIDGE
