Apple's Macintosh may have only 5 percent of the computer market, but its music players are flying high.
At his opening address at the Macworld Expo here on Tuesday, Apple's chief executive, Steven P. Jobs, cited impressive market-share figures for the iPod music player (31 percent) and for the iTunes Music Store, Apple's dollar-a-song download service (70 percent).
''Ah, feels good to get past that 5 percent,'' Mr. Jobs said with a mock early-morning stretch.
Evidently, one good iPod deserves another. Mr. Jobs went on to unveil the inevitable sequel: the iPod Mini, which will be available in February. It's a smaller, sleeker iPod that holds less music, costs fewer dollars and comes in five brushed-aluminum colors: gold, silver, blue, pink or green.
The iPod Mini is indeed skinny and mini: at 3.6 by 2.0 by 0.5 inches, it nearly hides behind a business card. In shape, the iPod Mini suggests that its mother was a lipstick tube and its father was a box of Tic-Tacs.
In many ways, the iPod Mini mimics its big brother. The new device gets 8 to 10 hours of battery life per charge, synchronizes its music collection automatically with Apple's free iTunes jukebox software when plugged into a Mac or a PC (by FireWire or U.S.B. 2.0), and features a crystal-clear, satisfyingly simple menu system for navigating your songs and playlists.
Like iPod senior, this iPod also does far more than just play music. It can also display your calendar or address book, serve as a book reader and treat you to a handful of games, including a clever multiple-choice version of what might be called Name That Tune (From Your Own Collection).
Like the original iPod, the Mini version doubles as a pocketable external hard drive for everyday computer files -- a function that has little to do with music but has become an essential feature for computer fans who routinely shuttle big files between home and work.
There are differences, however. As its name suggests, the player has a smaller capacity than the famous white-and-chrome iPods. Its minuscule built-in hard drive holds 4 gigabytes (compared with 15, 20, or 40 in current models of the full-size iPod). That's enough for 1,000 songs, which is probably adequate for the typical morning jogger.
You can now push inward to ''click'' the iPod's famous touch-sensitive scroll dial at the 12, 3, 6, and 9 o'clock positions, because the tiny case offered nowhere else to put the four iPod buttons (Play, Menu, and so on).
In the days preceding the iPod Mini's announcement, the Web swirled with rumors about its price. Gossip had it that the player would cost $100, wiping all rivals off the map and instantly turning Apple into the Microsoft of the music world.
The actual price is $250. That's only $50 less than the 15-megabyte, full-size iPod, which holds nearly four times as many songs.
Apple argues that that's the wrong comparison. It points out that the Mini is only $50 more than a 256-megabyte, flash-memory-based player like the Rio Cali. Such players hold only about 60 songs (and, of course, lack the elegance of Apple's hardware and software).
In any case, early adopters and gadget fetishists may well snap up all the iPod Minis that Apple can make, even at this price; Apple can always lower the price later.
Such buyers would argue that especially when paired with the included belt clip or the optional armband, the iPod Mini's diminutive, caress-worthy shape is a $50 feature in itself.
DAVID POGUE
Correction:  January 13, 2004, Tuesday  An article in Circuits on Thursday about a new Apple music player, the iPod Mini, misstated the memory capacity of full-size iPod models. They start at 15 gigabytes, not 15 megabytes.
