Throughout its 90-year history, the Hill Auditorium at the University of Michigan has served as a kind of Midwestern Carnegie Hall. Boasting superb acoustics, its stage has accommodated performers from Arthur Rubinstein to Emmylou Harris, the Berlin Philharmonic to Garrison Keillor.
Built by the architect Albert Kahn in 1913, the auditorium underwent one restoration in 1949 and another to its notable pipe organ in 1990. But by the late 1990's, patrons were complaining that it had too few restrooms, narrow aisles and cramped seats, some with dismal views.
Further, the auditorium lacked air-conditioning, rendering it unusable in summer, and hallway and street noise penetrated the auditorium.
On Thursday after an 18-month renovation project at a cost of $38.4 million, Hill Auditorium will be rededicated. The first concert in the restored hall, with the violinist Midori, the countertenor David Daniels and the Tony Award-winning soprano Audra McDonald, will be presented on Jan. 17.
A combination of university funds and private donations was spent on the Hill's infrastructure, said Michael Quinn, of Quinn Evans/Architects in Ann Arbor.
Mr. Quinn's firm, whose past work includes renovations of the concert hall and opera house of the John F. Kennedy Center for the Performing Arts in Washington, worked on the Hill Auditorium project with Albert Kahn Associates, still in business in Detroit.
''It is a restored hall, but technologically it is a 21st-century performing arts center,'' Mr. Quinn said during a tour, pointing out a vast new air-conditioning system, a new lower lobby with concession stand, 29 new restroom stalls and improvements designed to enhance the acoustics.
Mr. Kahn, an industrial architect, whose work included the Ford Motor Company's sprawling River Rouge complex in nearby Dearborn, brought in an acoustician, Hugh Tallant, from New York to help achieve the sound he sought. To test the result, as Hill Auditorium was near completion, he had his son climb to the top row of the balcony.
Standing on stage, Mr. Kahn dropped a pin, asking his son if he could hear it clearly up above. Mr. Quinn recalled that his son replied that he could.
But what many visitors will notice first is the new color scheme in the concert hall. The walls, painted an anonymous cream during the 1949 renovation, again have the original shades of soft blue, gray, orange and gold.
The organ, which was dismantled for the restoration, now has had its original bronze pipes restored. In 1990 the organ was painted a robin's egg blue, matching the way it looked when it was displayed at the 1932 Chicago World's Fair. That gave it a jaunty appearance but made it somewhat distracting. Now, Mr. Quinn said, the pipe organ will still be noticeable, but more subtly.
The main floor was reconfigured, and now has fewer seats, with more knee room and better sight lines for those remaining. Rather than the 4,100 seats before the renovation began in May 2002, there will now be about 3,600.
