IT is axiomatic that if you find a beautiful spot and build on it, you risk making the site less beautiful. That is especially true in the Sonoran Desert of Arizona, where views are long, water is scarce and buildings can be seen for miles.
A long list of federal and local building covenants protecting the cactus and the wildlife makes the challenge greater. ''The desert is one of the most fragile ecologies that we know,'' said Bartholomew Voorsanger, founding partner of the New York architectural firm of Voorsanger &amp; Associates.
Mr. Voorsanger recently designed a large, carefully sited house near Tucson. ''It was a daunting task to build in such an environment,'' said the architect, whose firm was awarded the commission for a $150 million addition to the National D-Day Museum in New Orleans in December. ''If you are a philistine, it's easy,'' he explained. ''You scrape it clean and 50 years later the land reclaims itself.''
Only 13 percent of Pima County, which encompasses Tucson, is open for development, according to John Strobeck, owner of the Bright Future Consulting Company, which analyzes the home building market in Tucson. The rest is government land: Indian reservations, parks and national forests.
Development is further restricted by Federal Emergency Management Agency regulations demanding proof that any new home have adequate water for the next 100 years. Building sites must also be surveyed for plants like pineapple cactus and saguaro, and during construction, those plants must be either maintained or replanted. And then there is drought and risk of fire. Nevertheless, 7,000 homes are built each year in Pima County.
Mr. Voorsanger, 66, who is known for his renovation of the Asia Society in New York, has often built on sensitive and spectacular sites; among his current projects is a 23,000-square-foot house on a ridge overlooking the Snowmass ski area near Aspen. Although his architectural office is in New York, his heart remains in the West. He was brought up in California, and climbed the High Sierras with Ansel Adams. Even his architectural inspiration came from the West. As a 12-year-old, he remembers seeing a church in Berkeley built by Bernard Maybeck, an architect whose houses, set into steep hillsides, continue to inspire him.
Susan Daniels had seen photographs of a stone and mahogany house Mr. Voorsanger designed in Montana and wanted him to look at the three virgin acres on the edge of the Coronado National Forest she had purchased with Dr. Eugene Falk. ''We are very good friends who are in love,'' explained Ms. Daniels, who was previously married to Dr. Falk's college roommate. Their property, bought in 1997, was in a luxury development known as the Canyons.
''I knew I had to have a house with views of the mountains,'' she said.
The land was ready for a house. Diamond Ventures, owners of the Canyons, had completed plant and water surveys, along with two consecutive years of pygmy owl surveys. (And they had not ignored the federally protected long-nosed bats either.)
''The Sonoran Desert is unique in terms of wildlife and plant life,'' said Mary Darling, a lawyer and biologist who runs Darling Environmental and Surveying in Tucson. ''That's why we have more controversy with the Endangered Species Act and more surveys that are required.''
Mr. Voorsanger said it was challenging to build in such an environment, not just because of the ecology but also because two-thirds of the site was a steep, rocky slope. ''We made a kind of surgical incision into the site, for the footprint of the house,'' he said. During construction, heavy machinery was restricted to a corner of the land to preserve the landscape.
''It is very difficult to go back and replant and replace,'' Mr. Voorsanger said. ''Much of this growth has shallow roots. It's been there for decades, and so you don't want to disturb it.''
Then there were restrictions by the Canyons -- 30 pages' worth -- on size, shape, color and materials. To avoid boxy-looking houses, continuous roofs were banned; they also could not be shiny (so forget copper, which Mr. Voorsanger had used in the Montana house). Colors had to be earth tones. ''It was a very complex zoning envelope,'' he said.
Happily, the couple was not interested in a whitewashed adobe house with small windows. ''The reason for that style of architecture, with tiny windows that are merely punctured openings, is the sun and heat,'' Mr. Voorsanger said. ''But why? It's a disconnect with the landscape.''
The house Mr. Voorsanger designed for Dr. Falk and Ms. Daniels is 31 percent glass; the Canyons has no rules about glass. The other materials are French limestone and stucco.
They consulted a half-dozen local architects before they approached Mr. Voorsanger. ''All of the architects here said, 'Tell us what you want and we'll build it,' '' Dr. Falk said. ''What Mr. Voorsanger asked was 'What type of lifestyle do you have; how do you want to live in this house?' '' The couple told him that their priority was views of the Catalina Mountains (for Ms. Daniels) and of downtown Tucson three miles away (for Dr. Falk). They also told him that they wanted a modernist house.
''Bart was so open, and I felt he didn't have a huge ego,'' she said. ''He wasn't going to build a house for himself. He was going to build a house for us.''
As is his practice, Mr. Voorsanger presented the couple with three concepts: one simple, one intermediate and one radical. ''The clients always pick the one that is most radical,'' he said. Sure enough, the couple opted for a two-story, 7,300-square-foot house with a soaring roofline and an expanse of glass in the living room framing the view of the canyons to the north and the rising sun to the east. Tucson is to the south, visible from the kitchen and dining room windows. (Both the clients and the architect declined to reveal the house's cost.)
Women, Mr. Voorsanger said, tend to be the decision makers. ''The women usually defer to the men, but they don't really mean it,'' he said. ''They outmaneuver them.'' In this case, the couple made decisions together about the house, but Ms. Daniels was in charge of the interiors.
The house is four connected pavilions whose roofs echo the curve of the landscape. The strong shadows cast by the sweeping roofs and cantilevers make the house look less massive. Almost no direct sunlight enters the house in summer: the living room's ''low E'' windows discourage both ultraviolet rays and heat. But in the winter, when the sun traces a low course, carefully angled soffits made of four-inch planks of mahogany bounce light into the house.
The glass reaches 19 feet in the living room and 15 feet in the master bedroom, and is pitched 5 degrees off vertical. With the glass angled outward, Mr. Voorsanger said, ''the eye follows it to the top and out to the vistas.''
He used mahogany for floors and ceilings to create a more intimate scale. ''Everything can't be dramatic,'' he said, ''or the whole thing becomes exhausting.''
He reserved the big drama for the entrance. An open-tread exterior staircase rises 12 feet to a 5-foot-wide pivoting door of bronze and translucent glass. When it opens, you can see straight through to the canyons beyond.
Such a building demanded a level of precision that challenged local workers. For the pivoting doors to swivel perfectly, the door frame had to fit precisely into the stone wall. Thus the clients were not surprised that it took more than three years to build the house instead of the 18 months they had planned. The complexity of the drawings at first overwhelmed the contractor, Mr. Voorsanger said.
''They normally get four drawings, a floor plan, a roof plan and some elevations,'' he said. ''We gave them 90 drawings. It took time for everyone out here to absorb this and understand what we were trying to do.''
Ms. Daniels, who once had her own antiques showroom in the D&amp;D Building in Manhattan, went to New York dealers like Barry Friedman and DeLorenzo, and made several trips to Paris. She decorated the house with French Art Deco furniture, some of it by Jacques-Émile Ruhlmann. ''I knew that the clean lines of French Art Deco would work here,'' she said.
Ms. Daniels also worked with a New York decorator, Eve Robinson, who helped with fabrics and materials.
Finally, a Phoenix landscape architect, Steve Martino, found a way to build an outdoor fireplace into a courtyard wall to give Ms. Daniels and Dr. Falk a cozy place to sit on winter evenings. Mr. Voorsanger gave Mr. Martino's work high praise.
''He understood the topography, and the flora of the Southwest,'' Mr. Voorsanger said. ''It worked because he thought about the landscape architecturally.''
Correction:  February 5, 2004, Thursday  An article on Jan. 8 about a house near Tucson belonging to Susan Daniels and Dr. Eugene Falk misstated the role of Eve Robinson in its decoration. She was Ms. Daniels's interior designer; her work went beyond helping with fabrics and materials.
