For three years, President Vicente Fox has been pushing President Bush to recognize Mexicans working illegally in the United States and living in the shadows.
So a small measure of elation resounded Wednesday in Mexico, flowing from the hope that millions of illegal immigrants might someday win some legal status from Washington.
The hope was abridged, though. Officials from Mr. Fox down, while applauding the spirit of Mr. Bush's proposal, said they would wait to see the letter of the law as enacted by Congress, which decides how many people will have the right to live and work legally in the United States.
The future of millions is in the balance. As many as 10 million Mexicans work in the United States, and perhaps three million to five million are illegal residents, although no one knows the true number. Each year, hundreds die crossing the border in search of better work and a new life. Wednesday's proposal holds the possibility for some of the immigrants to live and work within the law.
''It is a very interesting program,'' Mr. Fox said. ''We are going to wait for details.''
The proposal was a personal triumph for Mr. Fox, who will meet with Mr. Bush in Monterrey, Mexico, on Monday. He has ceaselessly tried to persuade Mr. Bush to make the case for immigrants and the value of their labor in the United States.
The two presidents spoke by telephone for about 15 minutes on Wednesday morning, Mr. Fox said. It was, by several accounts, their warmest conversation in more than two years.
Mr. Fox said the American president voiced ''clear recognition for the value of these Mexicans working in the United States.''
Those workers, Mr. Fox said, should have ''the rights that any worker in that country has, even though they are not American citizens,'' including ''labor rights, and all their human rights,'' and the right ''to come and go to Mexico.''
This may prove a sticking point. Mr. Bush's proposal, if enacted, would not let labor flow as freely as money does across the border between Mexico and the United States.
Mexico's foreign minister, Luis Ernesto Derbéz, said the proposal was not all Mexico sought, but a welcome beginning. Mr. Derbéz said his nation would ''continue working for, searching for, a complete program, a whole one, which covers all those who seek temporary work, and those already in the United States.''
The proposal left many details unresolved, and ''the devil is in the details,'' said Jorge Castañeda, foreign minister from December 2000 to January 2003.
''How many people are involved?'' Mr. Castañeda said. ''How many people does this really affect, of the three to four million undocumented Mexicans in the U.S.?''
When the temporary work permits proposed by Mr. Bush expire after three years, he asked, must the workers leave the United States?
''If they have to come home, they won't enroll in the program,'' Mr. Castañeda said. ''It won't work if you insist on that.''
Wednesday's proposal grew from a back-of-a-napkin idea sketched by Mr. Castañeda, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and the national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice, at a dinner during Mr. Fox's state visit to Washington in September 2001, Mr. Castañeda said.
A week after that dinner came the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks. The immigration discussion froze in the cold light of security fears. Now, in an election year, with millions of Hispanic votes at stake in states like California, Texas and Florida, a thaw has come.
''This is the best news we have received since 9/11: the impasse in the migration agenda might come to an end,'' said Rafael Fernández de Castro, chairman of the international relations department at the Autonomous Technological Institute of Mexico, a leading university here.
''This is Bush's effort to please the Latino electorate in the U.S., but also to please Mexico,'' Mr. Fernández de Castro said. ''There have been more controls at the border. That has made it hard to cross, and has led to many Mexican deaths. And now they are going across to stay, and not coming back.''
''For the five million undocumented Mexicans living in the U.S., it is hell,'' he said. ''They could be subject to deportation at any time, and they are living in a lot of uncertainty.''
BUSH ON IMMIGRATION: MEXICO
