Since Col. Muammar el-Qaddafi proclaimed last month that Libya would rid itself of outlawed weapons, praise has been pouring in from world capitals, the Libyan press reports every day.
Telegrams and phone calls from heads of state congratulate the ''great leader'' of Libya's revolution for his visionary decision, a potentially transforming step for a state that made itself a pariah in the 1980's, blazing a path of terrorism across Europe.
In 1986 its actions prompted a bombing by the Reagan administration. Two years later a Libyan attack brought down Pan Am Flight 103 over the village of Lockerbie, Scotland, killing 270 people, most of them Americans.
In the space of the last few months, something seems to have come over one of the world's best known boogeymen, an alteration that some American officials attribute to Western resolve in toppling Saddam Hussein, but that many experts say has been percolating in Colonel Qaddafi's mind for a decade.
These experts agree that the main factors underlying his decision are more likely to be his disastrous economic policies at home, the squandering of Libya's bountiful oil resources and a deepening isolation that threatens any hopes for the country's future.
The question that still seizes many Libyans and Western officials is: will it last?
In a private conversation last month with foreign diplomats and intelligence officers, Colonel Qaddafi confided that he would begin a campaign to persuade other nations, starting with Iran, to give up any ambition to acquire nuclear weapons. According to one person who was present, the colonel said such arms ''do nothing to enhance security'' and retard development.
An amazing shift in strategy, if he does pursue it, Western diplomats here say.
As for the timing of the colonel's proclamation, it may have been motivated primarily by a desire to use Libya's final payout of the $2.7 billion in Lockerbie compensation as leverage to win eased American sanctions, say Western officials who have been involved in the negotiations.
''He realized that Libya was on a path of international isolation and internal stagnation after 30 years of concentrated economic wrecking,'' said one European diplomat. ''But there is no question that the Lockerbie settlement has set the time frame for his actions. He had to make the announcement on weapons if he was to test how George Bush would respond.''
That time frame dictates that if the United States does not lift sanctions and remove Libya from the list of terrorist states by May, $6 million of the $10 million promised to victims' families will be returned to Libya. The Bush administration has refused to acknowledge any such time constraints, and President Bush reiterated this week that he was looking for ''concrete steps'' from Libya before improving relations.
But some experts say there may be a limit to the effectiveness of such demands. Western governments now need to ''lock in'' the Libyan commitment, said one Western diplomat, because ''I would say that we have still not reached the point of no return for the colonel'' in moving the country in a new direction.
Still, what he has promised to do is nothing short of astounding. And there are still powerful countercurrents. ''It seems the Americans are not in a hurry, so we are not in a hurry,'' Prime Minister Shukri Ghanim said in an interview.
Echoing that view, Jiumaa Belkhair, a soft-spoken official in the Ministry of Information, said: ''Myself, I am not in favor of running after the Americans. Libya doesn't need anything from America, and America needs oil.''
British and American officials this month are scrambling to assemble a large team of weapons experts and intelligence officials to create an inventory of Libya's illicit weapons programs and map the steps to dismantle them. As an inducement for Colonel Qaddafi, Britain has signed an aviation agreement allowing British Airways to fly to Tripoli. And Libyan students may soon return to British universities.
Libyan and Western officials, including some who worked closely with Colonel Qaddafi in bringing about his declaration last month, say it is still impossible to fathom him.
''Qaddafi has always had a messianic complex,'' one Western expert said of the unpredictable army officer, who seized power in 1969. ''He feels that God has been unfair to him by making him the leader of a small country of five million people, and he always imagined himself walking on a larger stage, like president of the United States.''
Having failed to exert power as an Arab leader in a region that has largely shunned his erratic policies, Colonel Qaddafi has sought in the last decade to reinvent himself as an African leader, lavishing financial aid and oil supplies on a destitute continent, including some on pariahs like President Robert Mugabe of Zimbabwe.
But none of those attempts to find legitimacy have delivered what Libya needs most: an infusion of Western investment, especially in its oil industry, whose production has declined steadily from a peak of 3.3 million barrels a day in the late 1970's to about 1.4 million barrels a day now, industry experts say.
As a result, much of Libya looks like its poor neighbors. Its schools, hospitals and airports have deteriorated, and its national airline is dangerous to fly, Western pilots say. ''They would like to have Boeing aircraft and rebuild their fleet,'' one Westerner said.
Libya is making a bid with Tunisia to host the World Cup of soccer in 2010, but without access to Western technology, its shabby infrastructure is likely to undermine any chance for success.
Though open political opposition is forbidden here, popular discontent with Colonel Qaddafi's rule simmers just below the surface. At Al Fateh University, an underground movement that calls itself Elle wages a graffiti campaign to protest the dilapidated conditions of cold and windowless classrooms and outdated equipment, one Libyan said.
The arrival of satellite television and the Internet since the late 1990's -- much later than they appeared in most Arab countries -- has given rise to what professors call an ''electronic perestroika,'' an opening to the outside world that has shocked many Libyans into a realization of the backward conditions they live in.
Shops have opened in a private sector long persecuted for supporting ''wage slaves,'' as the colonel has called them, and on the occasion of the annual People's Congress last June he appointed Mr. Ghanim, the first reformist prime minister, an American-trained economist.
Prominent ideologues at the congress quickly branded Mr. Ghanim a ''traitor to the revolution'' for promoting a privatization campaign. Colonel Qaddafi personally intervened to defend him.
Seven months later, Mr. Ghanim's claim to have privatized 360 state companies is more fiction than reality, foreign diplomats say, but he is trying to rebuild the institutions of public administration that Colonel Qaddafi spent years tearing down to prevent any competitor for power from emerging.
''This is a micromanaged country,'' said one diplomat. ''If a light bulb burns out, no one dares to change it until he gets permission from the leader.''
Some Westerners here say the war in Iraq did little to affect the pressures that were building on the government. ''I think it has been a long process and Libya was well on its way in this process by the time the Iraq war took place, but at the same time, it didn't do any harm,'' a Western diplomat said.
Still, in an interview with the conservative French daily Le Figaro on the eve of the Iraq war, Colonel Qaddafi betrayed what some readers thought was a new realism about American power.
''When Bush has finished with Iraq, we'll quickly have a clear idea of where he's going,'' he said. ''It won't take long to find out if Iran, Saudi Arabia or Libya will be targets as well,'' and ''at that moment, things will be clear and the rest of us will be able to face them openly.''
These days a significant source of influence on Colonel Qaddafi appears to be his family. One son, Saif el-Islam el-Qaddafi, is a student at the London School of Economics. Like Mr. Ghanim, he has brought home a realistic view of revolutionary economics and Libya's image abroad. Moreover, at 61, the colonel may be having serious thoughts of his own mortality, Western officials say.
''He is the chief of his tribe, and he wants most of all for his family to be at the helm of the ship,'' a European diplomat observed.
These currents were well known among Western governments when Colonel Qaddafi's intelligence chief, Musa Kussa, approached British officials last March seeking to trade Libya's secret weapons programs for a new era of relations.
For months of secret negotiations, little happened as the colonel weighed his options, officials said. In October, after American and British intelligence intercepted a ship carrying nuclear centrifuge technology reportedly provided by Pakistani nuclear scientists and their middlemen, Libya continued to hold back. (The Pakistan government has denied any involvement in the supply of nuclear technlogy.)
One party in the talks said, ''Until December we were still in the dark about whether the whole thing was designed to keep us in play while he was trying to complete a nuclear weapon.''
One family confidant said of the weapons: ''The son has been ready for a long time to convince him to give them up. But the question has been, in giving them up, what could they get.''
