The Turkish-German filmmaker Zuli Aladag sat in a cafe the other day, his curly black hair just visible under a baseball cap, and recalled his youth, when he was the only foreigner in a children's orchestra in southern Germany.
''I was accepted as the exception,'' said Mr. Aladag, who played the clarinet and trumpet. ''The reaction was, 'You're not as dirty or as ugly or as stupid as the other ones.' I had the experience of racism here -- that of people telling you the others are asses, but not you.
''But this all changed when I went to university,'' said Mr. Aladag, a 35-year-old of Kurdish-Turkish origin who is an emerging director in German film. ''Things have changed in Germany. There's a lot more acceptance here.''
Mr. Aladag and his peers belong to a wellspring of mostly third-generation Turks exploding onto the German arts scene. It includes the more established filmmaker Fatih Akin (''Short Sharp Shock,'' ''In July,'' ''Solino''); the novelist and actress Emine Sevgi Ozdamar (''Life Is a Caravansary''); a television comedian, Kaya Yanar; and hip-hop artists like Kool Savas, among others.
Mr. Akin, Mr. Aladag and Mr. Yanar were the middle-class children of ''guest'' workers who came to Germany to make money. Most planned to return to Turkey in a few years but ended up striving for a better life for their children, who, in some ways, became German. As adults, they are pioneers who have developed artistically, as Mr. Akin said, ''in a vacuum,'' grappling with two cultures to create their own.
When Mr. Aladag created a stir with his ''Elephant Heart,'' a critically acclaimed coming-of-age drama in which a young alienated boxer gets drawn into the criminal underground, critics seemed surprised that he had not made a film about Turkish migration or split identity.
''A lot of time Turkish artists are expected only to make stories that reflect their Turkish passports or parents,'' said Susan Vahabzadeh, film critic for the Munich newspaper Süddeutsche Zeitung.
The artists, who are among the first Turkish-Germans to reach the top of a profession, reflect a diverse subculture. There are nearly three million Turkish-Germans in Germany, by far the largest minority in a country of more than 82 million. Some Turks still live cloistered in poor neighborhoods, speaking only Turkish. Others are fluent German speakers integrating into society. Germany is struggling with its role as an immigrant culture, and strains have developed between the mostly Muslim Turks and Germans, manifested in quarrels over the building of mosques and proposed bans on the wearing of head scarves in public schools.
One Turkish-German writer, Ms. Ozdamar, does not fit into any of the molds. ''I had to come to Germany to get to know Turks,'' she said in a recent interview. When she first arrived in Berlin in 1965, an ambitious, dreamy young woman, she worked in a factory for two years to earn money for drama school in Istanbul. But after completing her studies in Turkey she felt compelled to return to Berlin, where she became an actress and a prominent author, one of the first Turkish-Germans to garner a sizable, devoted audience here.
''I got to know Turks better leaving them,'' Ms. Ozdamar, 57, said. Raised middle class in Turkey, she said her stay in a women's hostel in Berlin had opened her eyes to different ways of Turkish living in Germany, from the deeply religious to the openly rebellious.
''Berlin was a semi-destroyed stage -- with old people walking around, visibly unhappy,'' she said. ''I was completely free from the burden of history, and it was a place for me to find my own story.''
She has published a semiautobiographical trilogy, which begins with ''Life Is a Caravansary,'' about a girl growing up in the politically turbulent Turkey of the 1950's. At the end of the novel, she is a young woman setting off to find her destiny in Germany, as Ms. Ozdamar did.
How Turks are treated once they arrive in Germany is a recurring theme for the artists. Mr. Aladag recalled apartment owners shutting their doors in his face. Mr. Akin remembered a climate of fear when Turkish-Germans reached a critical mass in the 1980's, but he did not feel personally affected, he said. The harshest realities have found raw expression in the rap lyrics of young musicians like Killer Hakan and Kool Savas. Mr. Hakan has known a life of Turkish ghettos, clashes with neo-Nazis, gang violence and prison, all of which he channels into his music.
Ms. Ozdamar said she had experienced very little, if any, prejudice in Germany. But most agree that an atmosphere of distrust toward Muslims coexists with an increasing interest in what it means to be Turkish.
''I don't have a problem,'' Ms. Ozdamar said. ''I don't know what kind of looks I would get on the street and in the stores if I was heavily pregnant and wearing a headscarf. But the fact is that the third and fourth generations of Turks have brought forth a middle class who can afford to be artists.''
Mr. Akin, the filmmaker, said: ''I never had the feeling I was a foreigner in this world. He was born in Hamburg in 1973, and his parents were guest workers with a vision for the future. His mother, he noted, was one of the first Turkish women hired as a teacher in the German educational system. His ''In July'' is a romantic road movie played out in a drive from Germany to Turkey.
''A whimsical romantic comedy from Germany -- yes, you read that right -- 'In July' is also a love letter to a benign and beguiling vision of Europe,'' A. O. Scott wrote in The New York Times.
Kaya Yanar is one of the first Turkish Germans to have his own television show. In one episode he wore a headscarf for a satire of a Madonna video and danced in front of a Turkish rather than an American flag. He knew Turkish-Germans were watching him by the number of complaints he received about desecration of the headscarf.
On television and in the clubs he has a freedom no German comic has; he can make fun of immigrants, as he regularly does. With an astringent affection, he impersonates figures from his Frankfurt childhood like the Indian Ranjid, the Turkish doorman Hakan and the Italian Francesco.
He is a man who likes security, order and control. In essence, he says, he's German. Yet at some point he realized his success is a political breakthrough.
''At first I thought everyone liked me because I was funny,'' he said. ''But it's more than that. It's because I'm Turkish.'' Mr. Yanar acknowledged that the distinction can work two ways. A quotation he once gave the German press and is often repeated still reflects the way he sometimes feels, he said.
''I'm always afraid someone will come along and say: 'O.K., little Turk, you've had your fun. Now here's the door.' ''
Correction:  January 9, 2004, Friday  A picture caption yesterday with an article about Turkish-German artists misstated the given name of a film director. He is Zuli Aladag, as shown in the article, not Alan.
