Nine months after the American-led invasion toppled Saddam Hussein, frequent breakdowns in supplies of fuel and electricity, especially in Baghdad, are defying attempts by both Iraqis and foreign occupiers to stitch together something resembling normalcy here.
Increased fuel smuggling -- a phenomenon that stretches back at least a quarter century -- has now added to the already familiar litany of problems including sabotage by insurgents and an infrastructure weakened by decades of war and sanctions. Three influential Shiite ayatollahs recently went so far as to issue fatwas, or religious decrees, prohibiting followers from smuggling and oil profiteering.
In addition, the American bureaucracy for awarding contracts and releasing funds, pilloried by Congress for giving away money too easily, nevertheless moves too slowly to satisfy Iraqis, whose impatience is fertile ground for more acts of rebellion.
''There's a large set of people who are neutral and their patience is wearing thin, and they can join those against us,'' said Col. Kurt Fuller, commander of the Second Brigade of the 82nd Airborne Division, which has responsibility for much of south Baghdad. Back in August, the colonel saw a direct link between the lack of electricity and increased attacks on his soldiers, he said, when power went out in an area called Abu Desheer.
''We went to the neighborhood council and said, 'You were totally peaceful. What happened?' '' he recalled. ''They said, 'No power.' Saddam used to cut off power to punish them. So they thought the coalition was punishing them.'' Anxious to prove that untrue, soldiers went to the Electricity Ministry and got replacements for a burned-out transformer at the local power station installed within a month. Attacks dropped off, the colonel said.
Like the gasoline supply, power to Baghdad improved through the autumn. But a blackout engulfed the city for two days in mid-November and the lights darken for long stretches now.
For weeks, Adel Makhmoud, 25, has folded his blocky, 5-foot 10-inch frame into the back seat of his Volkswagen Beetle and slept there. ''We're an oil rich country, we have the second highest oil reserves in the world,'' he said one recent night near the front of a mile-long line of cars outside a gas station. ''Who can improve this?''
Mr. Makhmoud slept in line in the summer, too. Now he and other Baghdadis have grown convinced that things will not get better. At home the power usually vanishes for four hours a day. Mr. Makhmoud lives in the affluent Zayouna neighborhood, where generators power homes for about an hour most nights when power fails. The rest of the time, Mr. Makhmoud and his brother and sister study by kerosene lamp. Baghdadis also heat homes with kerosene, which has contributed to long lines and shortages of that fuel.
While security remains the overriding concern, these burdens take their toll. At the gas line the other evening, Mr. Makhmoud concluded that ''despite all this tragedy, it's okay as long as Saddam is gone.''
Uday Jihad Kazem, a 30-year-old businessman also waiting for gasoline, demurred. ''I think it was better under Saddam. I know he was a dictator. He executed people. But he didn't kill my father, or brothers, or do anything to me.''
In general, Iraqis find it hard to believe that the superpower which occupied their country in weeks cannot fix the energy problem in months.
''Expectations have been tragically hyped by political events in Iraq and at home, our normal American short term view and the real needs of the Iraqis who find themselves in a desperate situation after 30 really bad years,'' said Cliff Mumm, director of a program to rebuild infrastructure for Bechtel Corporation.
''Maybe if the planning had been more comprehensive, the situation would now be a little better, but I don't think prewar planning would have stood up confronted with the reality of how deteriorated the infrastructure of Iraq actually was,'' Mr. Mumm said.
Only a few Iraqis appreciate the sheer size of the reconstruction problem, or recognize that a relatively cautious occupation can hardly undo the effects of long economic neglect.
''You had Sept. 11 in your country, and did people do things the normal way after that?'' said Falah al-Khawaja, an adviser to the chief executive of the Oil Ministry. ''No, they did things completely differently, from firemen to the president. And here, we had our whole country destroyed.''
Baghdad, for all its troubles, has a verve missing just months ago. More people are out on the streets, including women, who feared abduction and rape during the lawless summer. Stores bustle with customers. Police officers have cars, flak jackets and guns. Along the road north from Basra to Baghdad, new high-voltage power towers have replaced those damaged by sabotage and are protected by armed guards.
But sabotage continues to throttle a steady flow of oil. The pipelines of north and central Iraq that feed oil from the Kirkuk fields to the country's largest refineries have been attacked at least 85 times since the end of the war, according to the Oil Ministry. Although the ministry maintains that sabotage has decreased, just two weeks ago a rocket propelled grenade attack destroyed a fuel depot south of Baghdad.
Iraq imports gasoline and cooking gas from nearly all its neighbors. But for a month now, gasoline lines in Baghdad have grown and ebbed. Dan Senor, spokesman for L. Paul Bremer III, the top American official in Iraq, attributed the gasoline shortages to an enormous influx of cars. ''There are now something like a quarter of a million cars since the end of major combat operations have come into Iraq,'' he said last month during a Baghdad news conference. He also blamed hoarding for some of the shortages.
But others say the shortages stem in great part from the resurrection of the widespread smuggling of fuel out of the country that was prevalent under the rule of Mr. Hussein.
''It's very profitable,'' Mr. Khawaja said. ''The price of petrol at government stations in Iraq is about one cent per liter versus 21 cents in Kuwait, and that is the cheapest in the region.''
Imported gasoline, Mr. Khawaja said, is often smuggled back out of Iraq. ''What you need is monitoring from the border to the filling station,'' he said.
American soldiers and Iraqi police recently arrested smugglers who were trying to bribe officials at a fuel depot with $1,500 to stamp documents that would have let them take gasoline from Iraq to Jordan, said Asim Jihad, a spokesman for the oil ministry.
Money from smuggling, in turn, feeds the attacks on the occupation forces, Oil Ministry and American military officials contend.
On Dec. 20, Colonel Fuller's soldiers found 28 trucks unloading gasoline and kerosene into tanks in a field.
His soldiers have taken to escorting fuel trucks from the nearby Doura refinery to local gas stations, just as they did in August, he said.
Because of the war, Iraqi power plants did not undergo routine annual maintenance in the spring. Maintenance was scheduled to restart in October, Mr. Hassan said. Through the summer and fall, Mr. Hassan and others at the Electricity Ministry said, the power plants gave Bechtel a list of needed spare parts. So far, ''we've gotten absolutely nothing,'' he added, and engineers are jury-rigging equipment just as they did under Mr. Hussein.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: ENERGY
