John Kelly opened the Altogether Different festival on Tuesday night at the Joyce Theater with an evening of work that for once lived up to the title of this annual series. ''The Skin I'm In,'' a beautifully staged sampler program of excerpts from old works and several complete new small pieces, offered easy passage into the wild imagination of an exceptional, unclassifiable artist.
There were two decipherably new episodes in the flowing journey through Mr. Kelly's world and 20 years' worth of his award-winning Off Broadway theater pieces and performance-art solos.
One of the new ones, ''Paradise,'' seems to have developed from two earlier Kelly pieces and from the lifelong inspiration of Marcel Carné's film classic ''Les Enfants du Paradis,'' which Mr. Kelly acknowledges here.
Set to music by Radiohead, ''Paradise'' is a little visual poem about a performer whose obsessive identification with a character, Pierrot, has driven him mad. The ingredients include a processional of characters drawn from the Carné film who cross and recross the stage like the corps in the ''Kingdom of the Shades'' segment in the ballet ''La Bayadère.'' In the end, Mr. Kelly's fragile artist finds something like peace in the gentle embrace of a Pierrot (Christopher Williams).
The other new bit, ''The Discovery of Sound,'' is a slightly limp program opener that does eventually introduce the viewer to Mr. Kelly's intensely evocative way of inhabiting each character, musical passage, cultural era and gesture. No one else could make so complete and instantaneous a world as Mr. Kelly does by slowly drawing a length of dull-red silken fabric across the stage in ''Discovery''; or crooking a dangling arm in an excerpt from ''Pass the Blutwurst, Bitte,'' his 1995 exploration of his identification with the painter Egon Schiele; or pulling off Eurydice's long white gloves in an excerpt from his 1998 ''Find My Way Home.''
''The Skin I'm In'' offers a near-full exposure to Mr. Kelly's magician mind, with considerable help from brilliant film by Anthony Lane, vivid costumes (particularly those of Gary Lisz), Agnieszka Kunska's sensitive lighting, and a company of performers -- characters in themselves -- who also included Nina Goldman, Rebecca Jung, Daryl Owens and David Zurak.
The program will be repeated tonight, Saturday afternoon and Sunday night at the Joyce, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street.
DANCE REVIEW  Correction:  January 13, 2004, Tuesday  A dance review on Thursday about the Altogether Different festival at the Joyce Theater misstated the surname of the filmmaker whose work accompanied ''The Skin I'm In'' by John Kelly. He is Anthony Chase, not Lane.
