An angry crowd of Iranian protesters is an image seared into the memories of most Americans over 35. The students who are the subject of ''Forbidden Iran,'' a ''Frontline'' documentary on PBS tonight, are not demanding the death of American hostages. They are pro-Western dissidents defying their country's Muslim theocracy.
''These are the children of the Islamic revolution,'' the Canadian journalist Jane Kokan says. ''But now they want religion out of their lives.''
At a moment when the world is gripped by images of the devastating earthquake that struck Iran late last month and the American government is preoccupied with more menacing forms of Islamic fundamentalism, focusing on the oppression of Iran's pro-democracy movement seems almost an indulgence. And that makes this ''Frontline'' segment all the more inconveniently timely.
The documentary is Ms. Kokan's video diary of her trip last fall to Iran, which she visited by pretending to be an archaeologist on a group tour. Her goal was to interview pro-democracy Iranian students and expose the torture and killings of dissidents in jail. Her inspiration was the death of Zahra Kazemi, an Iranian-born Canadian journalist who died in an Iranian prison last July after being arrested while reporting on the underground pro-democracy movement.
The interviews Ms. Kokan manages to obtain, at considerable risk, are fascinating mostly because they are so hard to get. At one point a dissident with the nom de guerre of Arzhang arranges for Ms. Kokan to have a telephone interview with a prominent student leader, Amir Fahravar, in jail. As Arzhang drives her around Tehran, Ms. Kokan tries to conduct her interview over her cellphone. The language barrier obliges her to hand it to the driver, who acts as interpreter. ''Will you, the students, win?'' she asks.
The piece is personal, quixotic and odd -- both affecting and affected. Ms. Kokan, while unquestionably brave, spends a lot of time on her own perils: we see her walking around and donning Muslim dress and sneaking out of her hotel to send coded e-mail messages from an Internet cafe. In her first-person narrative, she never says ''we'' or explains that a colleague came along, disguised as a teacher, to film her every step and to record interviews.
Still, perhaps because it is so jagged, the piece is a sharp reminder of the injustice that goes on, almost unnoticed, in Iran. According to the documentary, Shirin Ebadi, an Iranian human rights lawyer who in 2003 became the first Muslim woman ever to win the Nobel Peace Prize, has agreed to investigate the death of Ms. Kazemi. The documentary works best as a tribute to Ms. Kazemi and to the story she never had a chance to finish reporting.
FRONTLINE  Forbidden Iran
On most PBS stations tonight (check local listings)
Produced by KQED San Francisco and WGBH Boston. Jane Kokan, reporter.
TELEVISION REVIEW
