It sometimes seems as though Donald Trump is to business what the Venetian Resort in Las Vegas is to Venice -- a fun, cheesy caricature of the real thing.
One would not necessarily want the real estate developer known as the Donald to represent American capitalism, but he is perfectly cast as the hammy boss on NBC's rat-race reality show, ''The Apprentice.''
The premise, for anyone who has missed the blaring promos on television and in movie theaters, is urban ''Survivor'' -- 16 young would-be entrepreneurs compete at an array of business tasks (the first assignment is to sell lemonade on the street). The last one standing will become president of one of Mr. Trump's companies for a year. Each week, one aspirant is eliminated -- not voted off by his rivals, as is the case on other shows, but by Mr. Trump, who presses the losers to turn on their weakest link before delivering judgment (''You're fired!'').
January is crammed with fresh contortions on the reality genre, from Fox's ''My Big Fat Obnoxious Fiancé'' (a woman has to pass off a horrible boor as the love of her life to family and friends) to ''Can You Be a Pornstar?'' a self-explanatory reality show on adult pay-per-view cable channels. But ''The Apprentice'' stands out as one that takes a modest twist on the ''Survivor'' formula -- from jungle to urban jungle -- and improves on it.
There is more to ''The Apprentice'' than just the spectacle of Type A contestants making fools of themselves or the irresistible braggadocio and banality of Mr. Trump. (''New York,'' he says in a typical voice-over narration. ''It can chew you up and spit you out.'').
There are some intriguing glimpses of reality behind the television reality.
As on any of these shows, clichés and stereotypes are tweaked and teased for the camera: Jessie, 21, the chiropractor/real estate agent from Wisconsin, delivers her biography posed next to bales of hay. Ereka, 27, the marketing manager who grew up in New York, shows off her big-city smarts by showing up the first day at work at the Trump headquarters in a strapless top.
The women are teamed against the men, who run a gamut from Kwame, 29, an African-American Wall Street investment manager with an M.B.A. from Harvard, to Troy, 32, who never went to college and is a mortgage lender/real estate developer in Idaho. As was the case when men were pitted against women in ''Survivor: The Amazon'' (Mark Burnett, the creator of ''Survivor,'' is the executive producer of ''The Apprentice''), the men start out like Eagle Scouts, calmly setting goals and divvying up chores, while the women debate, bicker and even cry -- at times, they fall back on feminine wiles to get ahead.
Yet in between those stock tableaus are smaller, truer life lessons: early in the first episode, each team has to select a name. The women, hardwired to listen and to please, come up with the Protégé Corporation. The men, missing even Mr. Trump's most glaring cues for flattery, call themselves the Versa Corporation.
''That's a pretty interesting choice,'' Mr. Trump mutters with complete uninterest.
When the teams are summoned to the New York Stock Exchange, it is the men who fret over what to wear. ''It would not be inappropriate to wear a tie,'' David, 31, a doctor/venture capitalist, suggests gravely.
A personality clash between Ereka and Omarosa, 29, a political consultant/pageant coach and the only African-American woman competing on the show, festers into a racial standoff in the second episode. Those are the ragged, unpleasant frictions that made reality shows like MTV's ''Real World'' and CBS's ''Survivor'' so popular in the first place; they have been airbrushed out of the more contrived dating shows like ''The Bachelor.''
In the through-the-looking-glass morality of reality shows, the quest for money is more honorable than the pursuit of love, which as almost every variation on ''The Bachelor'' has shown, is actually a grab for fame and fortune dressed up as romance. Viewers may doubt the sincerity of Larissa on ''Average Joe Hawaii,'' but it is hard to question Omorosa's determination to finish first.
And for once, the players' personalities are not revealed by how well they balance a tiki torch or pitch woo in a hot-air balloon. Each week, the teams are thrown into into real work places -- next week, they compete to come up with the best advertising campaign for a company marketing corporate jet service. (Viewers may be surprised to learn that even top New York advertising executives still say things like ''Think outside the box.'' )
Mostly, ''The Apprentice,'' is about career voyeurism -- the kind of fantasy fulfillment that George Plimpton used to indulge in by playing quarterback with the Detroit Lions or filling in for the percussionist of the New York Philharmonic.
And then of course, there is Mr. Trump, sweeping in and out in his black Trump helicopter like Glinda the Rich Witch. Perhaps not surprisingly from a man whose biography on the show's Web site is longer than those of Frankin D. Roosevelt and Bill Gates combined, a top reward for a job well done was a peek at his private penthouse apartment.
The best that one can say for that opulent sprawl of pink marble, gold and crystal is that it does indeed reflect its owner's taste. And there was something wonderfully ambivalent in the stunned reaction of one contestant. ''You have to want those things, you have to aspire to those things,'' the would-be apprentice said pensively, ''if you want to be like Trump.''
THE APPRENTICE
NBC, tonight at 8:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 7:30, Central time. Subsequent episodes on Wednesday nights at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time.
Mark Burnett and Donald Trump, executive producers; Conrad Riggs, producer. Produced by Mark Burnett Productions in association with Trump Productions LLC.
TELEVISION REVIEW
Correction:  March 25, 2006, Saturday  An article in The Arts on March 13 about Tony DiSanto, executive vice president for series development and animation at MTV Networks, misstated the role of Mark Burnett, one of the ''reality auteurs'' to whom a media professor compared him. (Similar errors occurred in more than a dozen earlier articles, dating to July 2001.) Mr. Burnett is an executive producer of ''Survivor,'' not the creator. Charlie Parsons, another executive producer of ''Survivor,'' created the format, initially for a Swedish show, on which it is based.
