The incremental progress St. John's had made under the interim coach Kevin Clark was there again Wednesday night. The Red Storm was not embarrassed by Syracuse, the defending national champion and the 17th-ranked team in the country. That means something, but the reality remains that St. John's is not nearly talented enough to beat a team like Syracuse.
The Red Storm got its first taste of Big East basketball this season, dropping its conference opener to Syracuse, 65-59. It was the 10th consecutive victory for the Orangemen.
Whatever chance St. John's may have had was diminished greatly by the shooting woes of its leading scorer, Elijah Ingram. After hitting only 2 of 20 3-point attempts here last season, Ingram had shooting troubles again Wednesday night. He hit only 1 of 9 3-point attempts and 1 of 12 total shots, scoring 3 points.
While Grady Reynolds (13 points), Daryll Hill (12) and Kyle Cuffe (12) tried to pick up the slack, there was not enough firepower in the St. John's lineup to make up for Ingram.
''When the game was over, I told everybody that it was my fault we lost,'' said Ingram, playing for the first time in four games without a protective mask covering a broken nose. ''But my teammates picked me up and said it wasn't my fault, that we play well as a team and we lose as a team. But I feel personally that if I played a little bit better, we could have won.''
Ingram, who was averaging 13.9 points a game while hitting 40.3 percent of his 3-point attempts, could not come up with a reason for his shooting problems at the Carrier Dome, but he admitted that last season's performance started to weigh on him. ''After I missed my first three shots, I started to think about what happened last year,'' he said.
Despite Ingram's problems, the Red Storm (4-7) hung in against the Orangemen (10-1) for most of the game. St. John's led, 21-16, after a foul-line jumper from Lamont Hamilton with 11 minutes 25 seconds remaining in the first half. But Syracuse Coach Jim Boeheim switched to a zone defense shortly thereafter, and the Red Storm could not figure out how to deal with it. St. John's did not score over the final 6:43 of the half and trailed, 32-26.
The second-half scoring began with a Reynolds dunk, but St. John's could not get any closer than 4 points. The main problem was Syracuse guard Gerry McNamara, who had 16 second-half points to finish with 23. In the second half he hit 3-pointers, fed Hakim Warrick for a thunderous dunk and connected on 8 of 8 free-throw attempts.
''He's tough,'' St. John's guard Andre Stanley said of McNamara. ''We tried everything we could on him. We switched guys on him, put different bodies on him. But it's hard when a shooter like that gets hot.''
St. John's trailed by 58-53 after Stanley hit two free throws with 3:01 left, but Syracuse made few mistakes down the stretch to close out the victory.
Warrick also had a productive night for Syracuse, scoring 18 points and grabbing 11 rebounds while playing the entire 40 minutes. The Orangemen's starters played the entire second half.
The 65 points represented the lowest offensive production for Syracuse this season.
Clark found a lot to like about the Red Storm's efforts. The team is 2-3 since he took over after the Dec. 19 firing of Mike Jarvis, and considering who the opponent was, St. John's performance Wednesday night may have been the team's best under its new coach.
''I'm extremely proud of our team today,'' Clark said. ''They came into a somewhat difficult environment to play in. A lot of people struggle here. They played against a very good basketball team with, probably, three all-league players, and a coach like Coach Boeheim. I thought there were times in the game where we had lulls, but they also made big plays at key junctures.''
At the very least, St. John's showed signs it will not be a complete pushover in the Big East.
''We felt even before we came in that we can play with anybody,'' Stanley said. ''It's just that edge down the stretch. We lost by 6 points. We just got to bust through that door.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
