As the City Council started its new term yesterday, Speaker Gifford Miller turned a welcoming message to his members into a political attack on the man that he is likely to challenge in 2005, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg.
Mr. Miller praised the 51-member Council for scaling back the mayor's proposed sales and property tax increases and budget cuts. He vowed that they would override the mayor's veto of their legislation that would govern the removal of lead-paint hazards in older apartments where young children are living.
''I'm proud to say that our approach prevailed,'' said Mr. Miller, who repeated that phrase at least five times in his 16-minute speech.
Mr. Miller also criticized the mayor's plan to eliminate party primaries in citywide races, which was overwhelmingly defeated by voters in the November election. And he sought to take credit for calling attention to school safety and quality-of-life concerns, like potholes and trash pickups, which have been championed by the mayor.
The speaker's remarks signaled that the conflict between the Council and the mayor would only escalate in coming months, flourishing in the politically charged atmosphere surrounding City Hall. Mr. Miller, a Democrat who represents the Upper East Side, and Councilman Charles Barron, a Democrat from Brooklyn, are widely considered to be potential rivals to Mr. Bloomberg, who is seeking a second term.
An aide to the mayor dismissed Mr. Miller's attack as politically motivated, saying that ''he sounds more like a candidate for mayor than the speaker of the Council.''
Meanwhile, the Council was not so eager to address another conflict -- the accusations of sexual harassment against Councilman Allan W. Jennings. Mr. Miller did not mention the matter, and as reporters watched intently, Mr. Jennings, a Queens Democrat, took his customary seat.
The Daily News reported yesterday that five more women say they have complained about Mr. Jennings's conduct in the past, though only two have come forward so far to file, in December, a formal complaint with the federal Equal Employment Opportunity Commission.
Fred Baldassaro, a spokesman for Mr. Miller, said yesterday that the Council had not received any complaints from the other women, adding that they would ''vigorously investigate'' any that came in. ''The speaker and the City Council have zero tolerance for cases of harassment and discrimination,'' he said.
On Tuesday, Mr. Miller announced that he had hired a private firm, ADR Associates/JAMS, to investigate the accusations against Mr. Jennings. Council officials have said that the speaker was told of rumors of a sexual harassment complaint in June, but did not learn that it concerned Mr. Jennings until his aides filed their formal complaint. The Council's Standards and Ethics Committee has also referred the complaints to the city's Department of Investigation.
Mr. Jennings has denied the accusations. When approached by reporters after yesterday's meeting, he responded with ''no comment,'' before disappearing into a lounge reserved for council members.
Several council members said that they were concerned about the accusations against Mr. Jennings, who is described as something of a maverick and not particularly well liked by his colleagues. ''The charges are extraordinarily serious, and I think it's important that they are addressed expeditiously and appropriately by the Council,'' said Councilman Eric N. Gioia, a Queens Democrat.
During the two-and-a-half-hour Council meeting, Mr. Miller was unanimously re-elected as the speaker and James S. Oddo, of Staten Island, one of only three Republicans on the Council, was returned as the minority leader. The council members then took turns speaking about committee work and thanking their staffs. So many of them exceeded their allotted two minutes on the floor that Betsy Gotbaum, the public advocate, who presides over the meetings, urged them to offer their thanks in private.
