In his crackdown on school violence, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg declared that the worst offenders would be suspended and transferred to off-site alternative programs. ''The days of tolerating the few who hurt the many are over, starting now!'' the mayor recently intoned.
But sociologists, veteran school administrators and other experts warn that similar efforts have failed in the past, and that the mayor's goal of creating a safe atmosphere in the schools is likely to prove elusive unless he can do more than isolate troublemakers.
''If you are simply intent on creating a safer climate back at the home school, that's admirable,'' said Richard Organisciak, a former superintendent of the city's alternative schools. ''Why wouldn't you want to do that? But now account for the children that you have pulled out. What is your expectation of an outcome for them?''
Efforts to segregate disruptive students from the general school population have been tried repeatedly in the city, with mixed results. Through the mid-1970's, the city had so-called ''600 schools,'' which were disbanded by court order after charges that they were warehouses for mostly black and Hispanic boys deemed socially maladjusted.
Since then, chancellor after chancellor has offered his own model: Joseph A. Fernandez called them Borough Academies, four schools for violent students that he created in 1992. Ramon C. Cortines called them Crossroads Academies, for students caught with weapons, a program created in 1995. Rudy Crew called them Second Opportunity Schools, intended for the 300 most violent students, a program created in 1997.
And Chancellor Joel I. Klein called them New Beginnings centers, off-site programs for repeat offenders of the discipline code, centers that he and Mr. Bloomberg created last year. (Originally, they were called Twilight schools, until officials recognized the unfortunate connotation of troubled students being sent into oblivion.)
All of these initiatives, except for Crossroads, still exist in some form or another, a jumble of programs and services, some more effective than others. City officials say the issue of race is no longer much of a factor because 73 percent of the city's student population is now black or Hispanic.
But Jill Chaifetz, the executive director of Advocates for Children, a group that monitors the school system, said her group still had serious concerns.
She said statistics showed that 97 percent of children assigned to Second Opportunity Schools for the most violent students were black or Hispanic, with whites and Asian virtually unrepresented.
Experts say that for the isolation centers to work, they must blend counseling, support services and basic instruction to get at the root causes of misbehavior. And they say the programs should keep students on track to completing their diplomas.
Into the 1970's, that was hardly the case. The 600 schools focused heavily on changing outward behavior, like instructions on manners, in many cases to the exclusion of regular academic instruction. ''The history of these programs has been generally been that there is no curriculum, so the kids can't get any credits and either stay there or drop out,'' Ms. Chaifetz said.
In partnership with community-based organizations, the New Beginnings centers now serve about 900 younger high school students who have been removed from their schools for mostly nonviolent disciplinary problems. City officials say the centers are working, and they plan to open four more.
Deputy Mayor Dennis M. Walcott said mayoral control of the schools would give Mr. Bloomberg's efforts a better chance to succeed. ''There's immediate accountability,'' he said.
But many of the city's alternative programs suffer from a lack of clear purpose, experts said. And with so much change and redirection by so many recent chancellors, what is left in the system is a scattershot array of programs that has left even veteran principals unclear about what types of students they are supposed to serve.
In the early 1980's, for example, Chancellor Frank J. Macchiarola created Outreach Centers intended to entice dropouts to get their diplomas. Over time, however, they came to serve as temporary placements for suspended students and permanent assignments for some.
Mr. Organisciak said the city's more successful alternative programs were aimed at specific types of students. ''We learned the hard way that by thinking you can put a 15-year-old in with an 18-year-old and make it work, you'd be sadly mistaken,'' he said.
And he said the goals must be clear. ''Children still want to feel that they are learning,'' he said, ''and moving toward something tangible.'' He added, ''It can't be a very amorphous, you-are-going-to-be-a-good-citizen kind of thing.''
Richard Arum, a professor at the Steinhardt School of Education at New York University, said isolating troubled students was a last-ditch effort that masked earlier failures in the school system or at home.
''When it gets to the point that the kids are so bad you have to pull them out,'' he said, ''it seems to be a fundamental failure of the system. And then the question is why is the system fundamentally failed? It's failed because the schools haven't been more proactive on a day-to-day basis.''
Mr. Arum said courts had added to the problem by overemphasizing students' due process rights. And he said isolating troublemakers could backfire. ''If done well, it might make the kids that are there feel a little safer,'' he said. ''If done poorly, it will further delegitimize the system and make discipline even less effective.''
News Analysis
