A Return Trip To 'The Cooler'
MARIA BELLO, a once and future New Yorker, read the script for ''The Cooler,'' where she plays a Las Vegas cocktail waitress looking for luck, when she was in New York two years ago.
Later this month, Ms. Bello faces HOLLY HUNTER, PATRICIA CLARKSON, HOPE DAVIS and RENÉE ZELLWEGER for the Golden Globe award for best supporting actress in a motion picture.
Ms. Bello said she had to fight for the role with a videotape audition and urgent importuning.
''I heard first I was too pretty,'' she said by telephone yesterday. ''Then I heard they were looking for some gorgeous, you know, actress, who was, you know, kind of a bigger name than I am.''
Luckily the film's director, WAYNE KRAMER, was familiar with Ms. Bello from ''E.R.'' on which she played Dr. Anna Del Amico, put-upon physician.
Ms. Bello and the director agreed on how to approach her role in ''The Cooler.'' Unlike some reviewers' summaries of her character, Ms. Bello said, ''It's so far removed from that idea of the hooker with the heart of gold. I think she wears her heart on her sleeve.''
In addition to her affecting performance, the film's most talked-about scenes are the nude ones between Ms. Bello and WILLIAM H. MACY. In their naturalism, the scenes recall the nude scene with JULIE CHRISTIE and DONALD SUTHERLAND in ''Don't Look Now,'' NICOLAS ROEG's film from the mid-70's.
''What really makes them different from most mainstream Hollywood movies that you see,'' Ms. Bello said about her nude scenes, ''is that they're real people with real bodies and they're not in perfect lighting.'' She added, ''We really worked on it not being very graceful.''
Still, as good-natured revenge for having a whole crew of camera operators, electricians and grips see them nude for a week, she and Mr. Macy organized what we will call a show-us-your-hindquarters party.
At a Reno restaurant, members of the crew were required to take Polaroids of themselves before they could get drinks.
The photographs were publicly displayed, a variety of gluteus muscles scrutinized, and then glasses raised in acclamation or derision. ''The funny thing is, we don't know where those pictures are,'' said Ms. Bello, who plans to move back to New York in a few months. ''Someone's going to blackmail everyone!''
Making Sure His Head Doesn't Swell
After a miserable 4-12 record this season, none of the New York Giants could resort to the Babe Ruth answer for why he was paid more than the president of the United States. ''I,'' said the Babe, ''had a better year.''
Despite his nonchampionship season, DHANI JONES, 25, a Giants linebacker, is nonetheless ever vigilant against the swelling of his own head.
To guard against creeping egotism, he said on Tuesday night at a Muscular Dystrophy Association benefit at Chelsea Piers, he retreats to the subway and plays a makeshift musical instrument for spare change.
''A lot of times when you play in New York, people put you on a pedestal, you hear the cheers,'' said Mr. Jones, dressed in a gray pinstriped suit and a purple-and-black bow tie. ''You start to think that you are important.''
Down in the subway, usually somewhere along the D line, Mr. Jones said, he dresses in blue jeans with paint stains and plays a washboard bass.
The most he made was $4.85.
''It's a dose of reality for me,'' he said. ''It helps my ego.''
And She Can Act, Too!
Alone among the celebrities at the ERIC LINDROS Celebrity Mini-Golf Classic at Madison Square Garden on Tuesday night, CHLOË SEVIGNY actually attempted some mini-golf.
And her Connecticut friends, who accompanied the actress to the charity event, said she was a big hockey fan and played goalie in street hockey all the time.
Ms. Sevigny demurred. ''I really don't know anything,'' she said.
Still, she did notice that there was a difference between basketball players and hockey players.
''I thought they would be bigger,'' she said of the few New York Rangers present. ''It's not like when you go to a Knicks function.''
with Joe Brescia and Melena Z. Ryzik
Boldface Names
