The French police said on Wednesday that they were hunting for a passenger who failed to show up for an Air France flight that was canceled on Dec. 24, the first of more than two dozen such cancellations that disrupted holiday travel to the United States over the past two weeks.
''We are carrying out an investigation into this passenger who didn't show up,'' a national police official under the Ministry of Interior said, ''and that's all we can confirm.''
A French intelligence official identified the no-show passenger as Abdul Hay, and said American intelligence officials were alarmed by the name because it was similar to that of a man who was among roughly 40 Taliban prisoners who escaped from an Afghan prison in October.
But the French official denied an earlier ABC News report that the man was carrying a French passport, might have been trained in Afghanistan and might possess a compact bomb capable of eluding detection by airport security equipment.
''All we have is a name,'' he said, adding that without even the passenger's sex or age, it was impossible to conclude more at this stage.
American intelligence officials were interested in about 10 names on the list of passengers holding tickets for Air France Flight 68 from Paris to Los Angeles on Dec. 24.
Seven of those people checked in for the flight and were cleared by security officials at the airport after the flight was canceled.
Two other passengers on the list failed to show up for the flight. One of those passengers was named Abdul Hay.
Finding the man, if he exists, could prove extremely difficult because of the open border policy among 15 countries in Europe.
People can travel freely across the continent without having to show identification.
The French intelligence official said the search for the missing passenger was not related to two raids on suspected Islamists by French antiterrorism police on Tuesday, one near Lyon and a second in a small town north of Paris.
''It's too early to give any information,'' France's interior minister, Nicolas Sarkozy, told reporters on Wednesday, according to Agence France-Presse.
