President Bush has now waded into one of the most turbulent and emotional issues of our day: immigration reform. He had barely thrown out the first hints of a new guest worker program yesterday when it came under a noisy assault from both conservatives and advocates for immigrants. For simply reopening what has always been a torturous debate in this country, the president deserves applause. He has recognized that the nation's immigration system is, as he put it, ''broken.''
At first glance, it is not clear exactly how the Bush plan would clear up a border policy that has become steadily less rational, humane and secure, as the number of illegal immigrants here grows by 350,000 each year. But the president started at the right place by addressing one of the basic conflicts in America's immigration policy, that persistent tug of war between keeping the borders secure and enticing needed low-paid workers to sneak past the immigration agents. Essentially, the White House wants to create a guest worker program, this one mostly for lower-skilled jobs. Yet for this proposal to be anything more than a bow to Hispanic voters or a convenient prelude to meetings with the Mexican government, Mr. Bush and his party have a lot of work to do.
The president says he wants to set up a job registry to list positions that no American will take. Employers could hire immigrant workers for these posts -- either from abroad or from among those already working illegally in this country. The workers accepting these new visas would have them for only a few years. How many workers would be allowed into the program and what would happen to them when the visas expired loom as large unanswered questions in this proposal.
Despite the lack of details, the president's guidelines clearly do not constitute a sweeping amnesty, as some anti-immigrant groups are labeling it. It is a long way from that. In fact, there is reason to worry that if participants in this guest program have no hope of eventually qualifying for permanent legal residence, they may well slip back into the shadows when the visas come to an end.
The president's outline seems to mirror a bill offered by three Arizona Republicans: Senator John McCain and Representatives Jeff Flake and Jim Kolbe. But that bill has the advantage of offering a real, if slower, path to a green card for those among the nation's 8 million to 10 million illegal immigrants who come forward to join the new visa system.
The president spoke emotionally and well about the nation's long dependency on immigration, and he recalled the many hard-working immigrants he knew in Texas. But he made it clear that his top priority was not ensuring the welfare of illegal immigrants, but securing the nation's borders and meeting the economic needs of this country. Even with that conservative pitch, any real improvement in the immigration quagmire will still be a hard sell on Capitol Hill. Still, Mr. Bush has begun the selling.
