If President George W. Bush expects to win a bloc of immigrant support for his new immigration overhaul proposal, some surprises may await him inside the pizza parlor, the beauty shop and Chinese-Spanish restaurant on Fifth Avenue in the polyglot Sunset Park section of Brooklyn.
''It sounds good, and I say sounds good because it doesn't mean it's good,'' said Elmer Rodriguez, an El Salvadoran baking slices at Gina's Pizzeria, where the decor suggested Sicily, but the kitchen help was from Latin America. ''For someone coming here for the first time and wants to try it out, O.K., but for someone who is already here and wants a future here, it doesn't make sense.''
Like Mr. Rodriguez, many immigrants were torn between possible benefits and dangers of the three-year temporary work permit proposed by the president. Many wondered whether applicants might open themselves to deportation when the three years expired.
Others welcomed the plan as a step in the right direction. Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger of California, himself an immigrant, embraced the proposal as a way to ensure that the hundreds of thousands of foreigners in the state illegally now could fully participate in the economy. But Mr. Schwarzenegger expressed concern that Washington would not provide enough money to pay for the social services for the new migrants that the president's plan is expected to encourage.
In Brooklyn, Mr. Rodriguez pointed out other potholes that could trip the unwary. Mr. Rodriguez said he has a temporary work permit, one extended year-to-year to victims of Hurricane Mitch, which devastated parts of Central America in 1998. But for many here illegally, he said, it would not be worthwhile to apply only to risk deportation.
''It's also illogical,'' he said, ''because if they send them back, they're going to come back here again.''
The owner of the pizzeria, Tom Cavallino, saw advantages for low-wage employers like himself and tax benefits for the government. But, he also shook his head over what he saw as encouragement for more people to come to the country illegally.
''A lot of times you can't get American people to work -- they're too young or irresponsible,'' Mr. Cavallino said, adding that when he immigrated legally from Sicily in 1966, he took the first job he was offered, delivering bananas, and opened his pizza place two years later. Now, even immigrants who apply to work at his restaurant try to bargain up their wages, he said.
''If I offer them $5 an hour, they think it's too cheap, they try to make their own price,'' he said, adding of the proposal: ''It's good because they get paid, and they pay taxes, too. It's bad, because it gives them more ideas to come with illegal papers.''
Down the block where Michael Chan manages the China Wok, a modest takeout place that advertises Spanish, American and Chinese cooking, the view was more positive.
''This is a good idea because this country is built by immigrants, all the different cultures is what makes this country great,'' said Mr. Chan, who arrived from China at age 11 to join his father, an illegal immigrant who toiled in a ''high class restaurant in New Jersey for very little money.''
''If we're talking about the lower-level jobs, it's all done by the illegal immigrants, that's how they contribute,'' he said. He dismissed the three-year time frame as unimportant when people can earn only two or three dollars a day at home.
From the perspective of Luis Guaman, an Ecuadoran who has been working illegally in Brooklyn kitchens for 20 years, the plan held a strong lure: the possibility of visiting his homeland again for the first time.
But he was skeptical of the president's intentions, echoing many who saw the proposal as an election ploy.
''He offers a lot of things but he doesn't do anything,'' Mr. Guaman said of the president. ''After he wins, forget it. They only give permanent status to top dogs, they don't give it to dishwashers.''
Still, Katherine Culliton, a legislative staff lawyer for the Mexican American Legal Defense Fund said she was pleased that Mr. Bush acknowledged that the current system was broken. But, she said: ''A guest worker bill isn't enough. It doesn't provide equal worker rights, family unity or a path to citizenship. Unless this plan is changed, it will produce a permanent underclass.''
Leaders of the United Farm Workers, the union founded by Cesar Chavez, also expressed misgivings.
''It's not amnesty, that's for sure,'' said Arturo Rodriguez, president of the union. ''I don't really feel, based on what I've heard and read, that President Bush has focused on the real issues confronting us and immigrants in the United States. It doesn't provide a pathway for legalization for those here now, nor for guest workers to be brought in.''
Some saw flaws in the plan on a practical level. The plan's reporting requirement would force workers and employers to register each new worker. But these workers are more transient than the rest of the labor force, creating a huge paperwork burden for employers and the government, said Josh Bernstein, director of federal policy for the National Immigrant Law Center, who went on to praise the president's tone.
''He said people shouldn't have to break the law in order to work in jobs that are available to them,'' Mr. Bernstein said. ''He said we shouldn't turn our backs on people working in our economy and taking the hardest jobs. The principles are not bad. It's more the details that are flawed.''
In Tucson, Manuel Castillo Flores, 57, and Luciano Salazar Gonzalez, 30, who work illegally as landscapers, said they could live with the proposal despite the shortcomings.
Mr. Gonzalez, who lives here with his wife, who is pregnant, and his young son, said if the proposal were to become law, he would not hesitate to pay whatever fee and sign up. ''If it's true, I'm going to sign up no matter what,'' he said. ''What is there to lose? If it's a trap and they send me back after three years -- hey, Mexico is only an hour and a half away. I can come right back.''
But back in New York, Ivanhoe Ewen, a Jamaican immigrant who became a citizen last year, said the plan seemed too generous.
''It's a threat to the people who are here legally employed,'' he said.
BUSH ON IMMIGRATION: WORKERS  Correction:  January 9, 2004, Friday  A front-page article on Wednesday about a proposal by President Bush to overhaul immigration laws misstated the number of green cards issued per year. It is 675,000 (140,000 is the number of employment-based visas). An article yesterday about the proposal also included an incorrect total from the Immigration Service. The article on Wednesday also referred imprecisely in some copies to the amount of time Mr. Bush proposes that undocumented workers could participate in a guest worker program. While the White House indeed did not specify the time, it did offer workers the option of three years, plus a chance to renew for three years.
