For Ruth Guerra, of Ozone Park, Queens, retirement was supposed to be the easy part.
Instead, at age 70, she is struggling. Struggling to support herself. Struggling to provide for her oldest sister.
In the late 1970's, Ms. Guerra fled her native Colombia as drug-related terrorism overran her hometown, El Banco, where she had owned a small clothing business. New York offered stability and security. For 20 years, she held several jobs at once -- cleaning, baby-sitting and home care. She took on many kinds of work, and she prospered.
Each month she sent $300 to her oldest sister, Ana Villafane, whose own retirement savings from her job as a teacher had disappeared during Colombia's political upheavals.
Then, in 1991, Ms. Villafane, now 92, came to New York to be with Ms. Guerra. And on $2,000 a month, Ms. Guerra supported them both. She paid for her sister's medical appointments, and for prescriptions to treat her heart and stomach ailments.
But one year ago today, Ms. Guerra worked her last shift as a home attendant. Through she knew her retirement benefits would fall short of her earnings, she was upbeat, expecting that a part-time job would help her make up any difference.
Unfortunately, she said, there were things she had not factored into that equation. Things like her knees, racked with arthritis. Like her older sister's growing medical needs. Ms. Guerra soon realized that being out of the house for even a part-time job wasn't really an option.
And when her first pension check from the home care company arrived, she was shocked, and thought that a mistake had been made.
''My pension was very small,'' Ms. Guerra said in Spanish, through a translator, as she leafed through her pension and Social Security paperwork. ''I didn't have any money and I had many problems.''
Ms. Guerra's benefits amounted to $649 each month. She qualified for $138 in food stamps.
Yet, at the time, her rent was $830, and her sister's medications and medical appointments cost at least $100 per month.
That's when Ms. Guerra began to sell her dining room furniture, china set, television and VCR -- anything to make some extra money.
''I needed money for her,'' Ms. Guerra said as she pointed to a shoe box full of her sister's medications. Finally, Ms. Guerra said, her landlord agreed to reduce her monthly rent, but Ms. Guerra had to get a roommate, and move into a smaller part of the house where she had been renting space.
Ms. Guerra draws a line across her hand to show how her home was divided last year. Her living room became her bedroom. Ms. Villafane shares a room with the new tenant, a young woman, on the other side of a new wall.
Even with the new arrangement, Ms. Guerra owed her landlord four months' rent. To avoid eviction she had to pay.
But in May, she found some much-needed help after a friend referred her to Catholic Charities, Diocese of Brooklyn and Queens, one of the seven charities supported by the New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. With $900 from Catholic Charities, Ms. Guerra was able to pay a portion of the rent she owed. Rosa Orihuela, a Catholic Charities caseworker, also helped Ms. Guerra with food and has kept in contact with her.
''As part of the senior program she comes to our food pantry,'' said Ms. Orihuela. ''Her situation is ongoing so we try to help her out with her monthly bills as much as we can.''
On a recent afternoon, Ms. Guerra looked over her past-due bills with Ms. Orihuela. The stack of bills next to her sister's box of medications add up to $1,659. And her sister's medications are running out.
Contemplating what she could do to make good on her bills, she said that maybe she could find work doing alterations. Or cleaning someone's house. ''I have the will to work,'' Ms. Guerra said as she wrung her hands. ''My hands can still be used for something.''
For now, her priority is caring for her sister, who piped up at Ms. Guerra's mention of Colombia. Ms. Villafane remembers the cobblestone streets. And the Easter processions she watched from the roadside. But mostly she remembers the peace.
''Colombia is not what it used to be,'' Ms. Villafane said. And for Ms. Guerra, retirement has not been what she thought it would be.
But as she looks back, she remains hopeful about what is yet to come.
''This has been the longest year of my life,'' she said about 2003. ''It seems like a century has gone by. My wish for the new year is that something will be different.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,111,045.30  Recorded Tuesday: 311,879.65
Total: $6,422,924.95  Last year to date: $6,952,886.63
