Andrew S. Fastow, the former chief financial officer of Enron, has tentatively agreed to plead guilty to fraud charges and has provided evidence against another former high-ranking executive who is expected to face criminal charges as soon as this week, people involved in the case said yesterday.
A plea by Mr. Fastow and, if it happens, the charging and arraignment of Richard A. Causey, the former chief accounting officer, would be the most significant turning point in the two-year criminal investigation into the collapse of Enron, the energy-trading company.
Still, the situation remains fluid. The deal with Mr. Fastow -- which would result in a prison sentence of at least 10 years, according to people involved in the case -- hinged in part on a resolution of a related criminal case against his wife, Lea. A federal judge in Houston, however, rejected the deal with Lea Fastow late yesterday because it left him with no ability to increase the sentence above an agreed-upon term of five months.
Mr. Fastow had been scheduled to enter his plea today in Federal District Court in Houston, and Mr. Causey had been expected to be arraigned tomorrow. However, the judge's rejection of Lea Fastow's agreement has put all of those plans in question. Still, people involved in the case expressed confidence that Lea Fastow's deal would be resolved and that her husband would ultimately enter his plea.
The Fastows, who are the parents of two young sons, were concerned about agreeing to any deals that could require them to serve their sentences at the same time, leaving neither available to care for their children, people close to them and involved in the case said. The plea negotiations were reported yesterday in The Houston Chronicle.
Mr. Fastow -- who was charged with using off-the-books partnerships to enrich himself and disguise Enron's financial troubles -- has been a central figure in virtually every criminal case brought in the investigation, even those in which he was not a defendant.
If Mr. Fastow pleads guilty as expected, those other cases are sure to feature him as a primary government witness, including one against executives from Merrill Lynch &amp; Company who were charged with aiding Enron in illegally puffing up its reported profits through a bogus sale of an electrical barge.
The expected plea by Mr. Fastow and the expected charges against Mr. Causey take prosecutors to the upper reaches of Enron's management, involving executives who were in frequent contact with the company's two former chief executives, Jeffrey K. Skilling and Kenneth L. Lay.
Former Enron executives and others involved in the investigation said that prosecutors had pressed defendants and potential defendants -- including Mr. Fastow and Mr. Causey -- to provide information implicating either Mr. Skilling or Mr. Lay in criminal activity. As part of his cooperation with the government, Mr. Fastow was said to have already provided information about Mr. Skilling, whom he worked with for almost a decade, but there was no indication yesterday whether those details would merit or sustain criminal charges.
Indeed, by being willing to cut a deal with Mr. Fastow, the prosecutors are continuing a strategy that began with putting pressure on low-level executives to implicate higher-ups. Now, with the deal with Mr. Fastow and subsequent pressure on Mr. Causey, they have reached high enough in the Enron organization to determine whether knowledge of wrongdoing reached the very top.
Gordon Andrew, spokesman for the Fastows, had no comment on the plea negotiations. A phone call to John W. Keker, Mr. Fastow's primary lawyer, was not returned.
The plea negotiations were driven by Mr. Fastow, who was indicted more than a year ago on 98 counts of fraud and conspiracy, a person close to the case said. The deal entails certain perils for Mr. Fastow, including the possibility of serving additional time if the government concluded he failed to cooperate fully in its investigation, people involved in the case said. Indeed, these people said that Mr. Keker, Mr. Fastow's lawyer, was ''heartsick'' about the stringent terms of the deal.
In the end, however, the length of any prison term was less significant than the personal issues created by the dual indictments of the Fastows. Indeed, people close to the family and lawyers said, a driving force behind the negotiations was the fear by the Fastows that they could both end up serving time in prison, leaving their children to be raised by others.
Timing also required the Fastows to decide whether to cut a deal in the next few weeks. Mrs. Fastow is scheduled to go on trial on Feb. 10 on six charges of conspiracy and filing false tax returns, and her ability to negotiate the terms of her punishment would vanish if she were convicted.
The inquiry into possible wrongdoing at Enron has been enormously complex, often because the issues involved came down to questions of whether investigators were examining bad business decisions or a knowing effort to commit crime. The case against Mr. Fastow has always been the most significant in that regard because the accusations involved much more clear-cut criminal activity.
As a result, Mr. Fastow -- who was implicated in wrongdoing by a onetime friend and subordinate, Michael Kopper -- has long been viewed as an avenue for prosecutors into the final stages of the Enron investigation. Given the strength of the case against Mr. Fastow and his wife, prosecutors had more leverage over him than over any other senior Enron executive. In the end, he was viewed as the man most likely to succumb to pressure to reveal everything he saw in the company's executive suites.
The criminal charges against Mr. Fastow, which included fraud, money laundering and conspiracy, portray Enron as a company where fraud and deceit were the workaday mechanisms used to hide the fact that the corporation was secretly spinning out of control. Ultimately, Mr. Fastow is depicted in the charges as a facilitator who manipulated accounting and financial techniques to allow Enron to disguise its many business failings while enriching himself at the company's expense.
As portrayed in his indictment, Mr. Fastow entered into two kinds of illegal conspiracies: schemes in which he defrauded the marketplace by disguising Enron's true financial performance and schemes in which he defrauded Enron itself by siphoning money into his own pockets. The crimes were vast and complex, with the proceeds from one illegal transaction at times being used to help finance the next.
The government charged that he backdated documents to manipulate the company's financial statements and drained millions of dollars that rightfully belonged to Enron and a bank that invested with it. To obtain illicit kickbacks, the charges said, Mr. Fastow instructed a colleague to write $10,000 checks to his wife and children, an amount deliberately chosen to avoid incurring federal gift taxes. Some of those transactions played the central role in the indictment against Lea Fastow.
The original criminal complaint specifically cited the company's chief accounting officer -- who, while not identified, was Mr. Causey -- as entering into an illegal agreement with Mr. Fastow. Under that agreement, the company agreed to shield a partnership controlled by Mr. Fastow from losses in its dealings with Enron, the complaint said. Such a deal would allow Enron to sell poorly performing assets to Mr. Fastow's partnership and report earnings from that transaction, even though the company continued to bear the risk of any losses.
Reid Weingarten, a lawyer for Mr. Causey, has in the past said that his client always acted in good faith and fully believed that his actions were in Enron's best interest and in compliance with accounting rules.
Since the charges were brought against Mr. Fastow, however, the criminal investigation headed in a new direction. The workings of Mr. Fastow's partnerships were ultimately viewed by prosecutors as just one element of a broad mosaic of deceit at Enron, involving not just complex high finance but basic accounting issues like asset valuation and the use of reserves to offset losses.
The government has secured cooperation from other executives on the broader accounting cases. They include David W. Delainey, a former chief executive of an Enron division, who has pleaded guilty to insider trading, and Wesley Colwell, who settled civil charges with the Securities and Exchange Commission that he manipulated company earnings through fraudulent accounting maneuvers. Lawyers involved in the case have said that such accounting decisions were made with the involvement of Mr. Causey, and they fully expected him to be charged with similar counts.
Correction:  January 9, 2004, Friday  A caption in Business Day yesterday about plea negotiations between the government on one hand and Andrew S. Fastow, Enron's former chief financial officer, and his wife, Lea, on the other, misstated the date of the picture of Lea Fastow. It was made on May 1, not this Wednesday.
Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  A chart in Business Day on Friday listing the former executives of Enron who have been indicted or pleaded guilty to various financial crimes referred incorrectly to charges against two former executives of Enron's broadband division, Kevin A. Howard and Michael W. Krautz. (The error also appeared in a similar chart on Jan. 8.) While the two men have been charged with fraud and conspiracy, they have not been charged with insider trading.
