Charles Cullen, the nurse who has claimed that he killed 30 to 40 patients in New Jersey and Pennsylvania during the past decade, has made a tantalizing offer to the teams of investigators trying to retrace his sprawling trail of victims.
Mr. Cullen, his lawyer says, is willing to help the authorities determine which patients he deliberately injected with fatal amounts of medication, in exchange for their agreement not to seek the death penalty.
But as police officers and prosecutors from seven counties have begun the formidable task of sifting through the records of thousands of patients Mr. Cullen treated during his 16-year medical career, it now appears unlikely that they will be willing to strike a deal with him any time soon -- if ever.
For their part, law enforcement officials in New Jersey, which has 15 people on death row but has not carried out an execution since it reinstated the death penalty in 1982, say they have few qualms about making such an agreement.
Some privately argue that such a move could save time and taxpayer money in an investigation likely to drag on for years and cost millions. They also point out that even if Mr. Cullen were sentenced to death, his history of treatment for mental illness makes it doubtful that New Jersey's Supreme Court, given its makeup and track record, would ever allow him to be executed.
But prosecutors in Pennsylvania have been far more aggressive in seeking and carrying out death sentences in recent years -- the state has more than 200 prisoners on death row and has carried out three executions since 1995. And as it happens, one of the Pennsylvania prosecutors involved in the Cullen case, District Attorney John Morganelli of Northampton County, is such a steadfast advocate of capital punishment that he once won a federal court case that forced the governor of Pennsylvania at the time, Robert P. Casey, to sign death warrants.
At this early stage of the inquiry, all the investigators say they are too busy piecing together the evidence to decide whether to seek capital punishment.
So far Mr. Cullen has been charged only in Somerset County, N.J., which has accused him in two deaths, and on Wednesday prosecutors from the two states met for the first time at the office of County Prosecutor Wayne J. Forrest to exchange information on the case.
Nonetheless, John Hagerty, a spokesman for New Jersey's attorney general, said that one of the topics raised was the possibility of seeking the death penalty. Neither Mr. Hagerty nor the participants at the meeting would characterize those discussions, but as the case moves forward, and as Mr. Cullen perhaps faces additional murder charges in other jurisdictions, the issue is likely to become the subject of intense negotiations among the teams of prosecutors.
Mr. Morganelli, who has characterized Mr. Cullen as a suspect in the death of at least two patients in Easton Hospital, said it was premature to comment on the possibility of seeking a death sentence. But Mr. Morganelli, who is an all-but-formally-declared candidate for Pennsylvania attorney general, was not hesitant to proclaim his philosophical support for capital punishment.
''I think that it's necessary to have the death penalty, and I think we should enforce it,'' he said on Wednesday. ''I'm frustrated that we have 200 people on Pennsylvania's death row today, many of whom have admitted killing people, and they're still around.''
The New Jersey attorney general, Peter C. Harvey, whose office is overseeing the extensive investigation, has directed New Jersey prosecutors to focus on first gathering the facts before deciding whether to accept Mr. Cullen's offer of cooperation.
''We've got to see what we can prove without his cooperation first,'' Mr. Harvey said. ''Once we know that, and can evaluate the truthfulness of the statements he's made so far and know his state of mind both then and now, then we can talk.''
Mr. Harvey and other prosecutors involved in the investigation say the sheer volume of cases means that it will take months to slog through the paper trail of Mr. Cullen's career.
Once they complete their independent assessment, the authorities also have to weigh legal and political factors involved in a death sentence. If the evidence corroborates his claims to have intentionally killed dozens of patients, law enforcement officials could face a surge of public pressure to seek the death penalty -- especially in a year when one of the prosecutors involved is running for attorney general.
In the weeks since Mr. Cullen first made his startling admissions, investigators have unearthed evidence that raises questions about his candor.
Mr. Cullen denied killing any patients when he worked at Easton Hospital, but the authorities say they suspect him in at least two patient deaths there. If prosecutors determine that Mr. Cullen was untruthful in his statements, it could undermine the value of his cooperation.
Mr. Cullen's lawyer, Johnnie Mask, has not returned repeated calls requesting comment on the matter.
But death penalty opponents say that Mr. Cullen's cooperation can be valuable beyond simply saving investigators time and money. Richard Dieter, executive director of the Death Penalty Information Center, said that by helping the authorities determine precisely how, and how many, he killed, Mr. Cullen could provide the victims' families with a sense of closure and help medical authorities prevent similar incidents in the future.
''I think the medical system let this go on so long, that we need to do everything we can to make sure this never happens again,'' Mr. Dieter said.
''If Charles Cullen can help the medical system learn from this, then I think the public does recognize that there are some values that trump the death penalty.''
