Twelve days before the Iowa caucuses, the battle for the Democratic nomination has become an increasingly furious debate over how to reverse President Bush's tax cuts, yet avoid the politically deadly charge that the Democrats are the party of tax increases.
Nowhere is this more striking than in the sudden scrambling of Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor, who has advocated repealing all of Mr. Bush's tax cuts, including those for the middle class. Now, under heavy fire from his rivals, Dr. Dean is preparing a new tax plan that is widely expected to offer tax relief for the middle class.
Dr. Dean insisted on Wednesday that he had long intended to propose ''additional tax reforms that will make the tax code fairer for working families and that will ensure that corporations and the wealthy pay their fair share.'' But the political pressures to do so are intense -- both from his opponents for the nomination and from the increasing imperative to reposition himself to the center for what he hopes will be a general election campaign.
Most immediately, Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senators John Kerry, John Edwards and Joseph I. Lieberman, seeking to present themselves as the more centrist, electable alternatives to Dr. Dean, are hitting the issue hard in Iowa and New Hampshire.
''I don't want to go back to being the old Democratic Party that doesn't get it,'' Mr. Kerry said in an interview on Wednesday. ''I've been fighting all year to protect middle-class taxpayers.'' Mr. Kerry has advocated eliminating the tax cuts that benefit the wealthiest Americans, but preserving those for the middle class. His campaign is planning a new television spot in Iowa faulting others for not doing the same.
Adding to the pressure within the Democratic Party are the first maneuverings of the general election campaign. The Bush camp and its allies clearly look forward to campaigning against their eventual opponent as a throwback to the old tax-and-spend days of the party. Conservatives are already running advertisements and directing barbs along those lines at Dr. Dean. A new television advertisement in Iowa produced by the Club for Growth, a conservative group, shows a man and his wife denouncing Dr. Dean's ''tax-hiking, government-expanding, latte-drinking'' policies.
Grover Norquist, an influential conservative strategist, said of Dr. Dean: ''In order to be the baddest Democrat in the primary, he had to stake out the most radical pro-tax position. I don't intend to let him walk away from that in the general.''
At the same time, the Bush administration is warning that rolling back the tax cuts would be a ''huge mistake'' that would jeopardize the economic recovery, as Treasury Secretary John W. Snow put it Wednesday.
Dr. Dean's move toward a middle-class tax relief at the urging of his advisers was first reported on Wednesday in The Boston Globe. In interviews on Wednesday, aides insisted that no decision had been made on the type of tax relief.
Gina Glantz, a senior Dean adviser, said an announcement would come after President Bush unveiled his budget, next month.
The debate over taxes is painful terrain for the Democratic Party, which is still haunted by the memory of the 1980's, when Republicans ran successfully against the Democrats as ''taxers and spenders.'' Bill Clinton built his primary campaign in 1992 around the idea of the ''forgotten middle class,'' including a middle-class tax cut and a new emphasis on fiscal responsibility. He argued that Democrats would not be returned to power until they regained the trust and loyalty of those voters.
But once Mr. Clinton was elected, he abandoned the middle-class tax cut and focused on cutting the deficit. The tax increases in his 1993 budget agreement took a heavy toll on Congressional Democrats, who lost their majorities in 1994. Still, by his second term, which saw the balanced budget act of 1997, some middle-class tax relief and a roaring economy, Mr. Clinton was widely credited with changing the Democratic Party's image as economic stewards.
''This is one of the big choices the party had to make to get out of the wilderness in 1992, and we have to make again to find our way back in 2004,'' said Bruce Reed, a former Clinton domestic policy adviser who is now the head of the Democratic Leadership Council, a centrist group that has been critical of Dr. Dean. ''Republicans have spent 30 years trying to convince America that all we want to do is raise people's taxes, and we'd be crazy to hand them that chance again.''
General Clark tried this week to tie himself to part of that Clinton legacy when he unveiled a broad tax overhaul, which campaign officials said would essentially eliminate federal income taxes for a family of four with income of less than $50,000. His plan would cut taxes for other families with incomes up to $100,000 and raise taxes on Americans who make $1 million or more a year.
Representative Rahm Emanuel, an Illinois Democrat and former Clinton aide who supports General Clark, argued that only by moving to such broad new ideas for tax ''reform'' can the Democrats ''get out of the straitjacket that Bush put you in.''
In fact, the Bush tax cuts have been tricky for Democrats. Many in the party believe the cuts were fiscally unsound, responsible for big new deficits, skewed toward the rich and a painful check on federal spending for years to come. Yet many Democrats also know that calling for the rollback of tax cuts will be treated as a tax increase by their opponents.
Moreover, the Bush tax cuts do provide some relief to middle-income Americans -- in some cases only a few hundred dollars, but in other cases as much as $2,000 or more.
Of the major candidates, only Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt have advocated rolling back the entire tax cut. Mr. Gephardt, at the head of the pack with Dr. Dean in Iowa, argued that he would provide Americans with a more valuable form of relief -- guaranteed health insurance.
Dr. Dean has argued that whatever tax cut the average middle-class family received from the Bush administration is far outweighed by the additional costs of higher state and local taxes, reduced government services, higher health costs and the general drag of growing deficits. Much of the money from rolling back the tax cut would go to a new health care plan, he says, and the rest to balancing the budget.
Still his advisers have advocated providing some relief -- including the possibility of an income tax cut -- to the middle class to offset what they lose from the Bush rollback.
Dr. Dean's rival campaigns were already scoffing at what Bill Buck, of the Clark campaign, called ''the secret plan to provide tax relief.''
Mr. Buck added, ''They say they won't release it until this pesky nomination fight is out of the way.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
