The return of Joe Gibbs as coach of the Redskins after an 11-year absence has created more excitement here than any other sports celebrity, including Michael Jordan and Jaromir Jagr, has in recent years. Gibbs guided Washington to three Super Bowl championships in the 1980's and early 1990's, and many believe he is the one to revive the franchise.
''If you're a Redskins fan, it doesn't get any bigger than this,'' Joe Theismann, the quarterback for Gibbs's first Super Bowl-winning team, said Wednesday in a telephone interview. ''And unlike when he first came to town in 1981, he doesn't have to rebuild this team. There's a lot of talent already in place, which is why I think it's a great time for him to return.''
The five coaches who followed Gibbs were a combined 74-101-1. Since Daniel Snyder bought the team in 1999, the Redskins have gone through four head coaches: Norv Turner, Terry Robiskie, Marty Schottenheimer and Steve Spurrier, who resigned Dec. 30 after a 5-11 season with three years left on his five-year, $25 million contract.
''The desire to coach has always been with me, even after being away from the game for 11 years,'' Gibbs said Wednesday on the Web site of Joe Gibbs Racing, his Nascar team. ''After speaking with my wife, Pat, we both agreed it would be a thrill to go back.''
Gibbs, who will also hold the title of team president, said he had agreed to a five-year contract, reportedly for $5 million a year. A news conference is scheduled for Thursday afternoon at Redskins Park in Ashburn, Va., to introduce Gibbs.
''Who better to set our strategy and lead the Redskins back to championship glory?'' Snyder told The Associated Press.
Redskins officials had previously contacted Gibbs when there was a coaching opening, but he was pursuing a successful second career as a Nascar team owner and told them he was not interested. When the Redskins called this time, however, Gibbs said he would consider returning.
The team also interviewed the former Giants coach Jim Fassel, the former Minnesota coach Dennis Green and Ray Rhodes, the Seattle defensive coordinator, while waiting for Gibbs's answer.
Theismann said Gibbs was adept at hiring assistant coaches. Gibbs is expected to bring in the former Buffalo coach Gregg Williams as his defensive coordinator and his former Redskins assistant Joe Bugel as offensive line coach. Tom Coughlin, the Giants' new coach, and Jets Coach Herman Edwards had expressed interest in Williams.
The Associated Press reported that Gibbs approached the Atlanta Falcons several weeks ago about their coaching vacancy. Gibbs owns a minority share in the Falcons that he will sell.
Gibbs, 63, coached the Redskins to Super Bowl victories in the 1982, 1987 and 1991 seasons during his 12-year tenure in Washington. After the 1992 season, he retired from the N.F.L., and he was inducted into the Pro Football Hall of Fame in 1996.
His racing team has flourished, winning Winston Cup championships in 2000 and 2002. But in recent years, Gibbs has handed much of the day-to-day responsibilities to his oldest son, J. D., who is president of Joe Gibbs Racing. His other son, Coy, runs the team's Busch Series program.
Gibbs's record in Washington was 124-60 in the regular season and 16-5 in the playoffs. He was part of a group that tried to purchase the Redskins in the late 1990's after the death of Jack Kent Cooke, then the owner.
The current Redskins are aware of Gibbs's legend.
''I can't believe it,'' defensive tackle Jermaine Haley said. ''I can't wait to meet him.''
A year ago, Theismann said, he renewed his friendship with Gibbs, who told him that during his time away from football, nobody wanted to pick his brain about the game, especially his offensive schemes.
''He couldn't understand it, and I was shocked myself,'' Theismann said. ''Here was a coach as well versed about the offensive side of the ball as Bill Walsh.
''Today I was surprised as anybody to hear he was returning to the Redskins. But don't let anybody tell you that the game has passed him by. I know from our recent conversations that he can still coach.''
Dan Henning, who was an assistant under Gibbs and is now offensive coordinator and quarterbacks coach with the Carolina Panthers, was once out of football for a year and found that returning was not easy.
But, Henning added: ''Joe is a great football coach. If anybody can do it, he can do it. The biggest difference for Joe is going to be the free agency. Free agency has changed the whole business. But, hey, he's reacted to every situation that he was ever faced with. He'll react to this one, too.''
Carolina Coach John Fox said that earlier this week, some of his assistants had seen Snyder and Vinny Cerrato, the Redskins' director of player personnel, in the Charlotte, N.C., area, where Joe Gibbs Racing is based.
''Nobody could figure out what they were doing here,'' Fox said.
Some may question how long the honeymoon will last between Gibbs and Snyder. But Theismann predicted that the relationship would work because Snyder grew up in the Washington area and idolized the Redskins when Gibbs was coach.
''Daniel Snyder will give Joe Gibbs everything he needs,'' Theismann said, ''from power to players.''
PRO FOOTBALL
