Dr. Gilbert Lederman, the Staten Island oncologist who was pummeled by bitter allegations in a suit by the estate of the former Beatle George Harrison on Tuesday, made a peace offering yesterday.
He offered to donate to charity the guitar that the suit said he coerced the dying Mr. Harrison to autograph for the doctor's son in 2001.
The offer came on a day of intense news coverage of the battle between the Harrison family and the doctor, most widely known until this week for advertisements promoting his stereotactic radiosurgery at Staten Island University Hospital. The suit, alleging a breach of privacy, seeks millions of dollars in damages and the return of autographed items.
On Tuesday, Dr. Lederman had referred reporters to his lawyer, who said he could provide little information. But yesterday a statement came from the office of Howard J. Rubenstein, a public relations man who speaks for many of the city's notables, including George Steinbrenner.
Released on behalf of the lawyer, Wayne Roth, the statement said the Lederman family was extremely distressed about the ''meritless allegations,'' adding that the doctor and the ex-Beatle had developed a close relationship. It said Mr. Harrison ''freely autographed his son's guitar.''
The statement said that the guitar had been appraised at less than $10,000 and that the Ledermans had no intention of selling it. It also presented the doctor's version of public comments he made around the time of Mr. Harrison's death that the suit said had breached Mr. Harrison's privacy. The comments, the statement said, ''had nothing to do with Mr. Harrison's care, but everything to do with the great admiration and respect Dr. Lederman had for Mr. Harrison.''
The overture did not immediately succeed. Paul V. LiCalsi, the lawyer for the Harrison estate, said the Harrison family did not want the guitar sold, traded or displayed by anyone.
''If this were a sincere offer,'' Mr. LiCalsi said, ''Dr. Lederman would return the guitar to the Harrison family and write a check to the charity of his choice.''
