Late on Tuesday afternoon, the 13-member jury appointed to select a 9/11 memorial design announced that it had chosen the plan called Reflecting Absence, by Michael Arad and Peter Walker. To many New Yorkers, including us, that choice came as something of a surprise, even though Reflecting Absence had been among three plans -- out of eight finalists -- that the jury was re-examining most seriously. Our initial reaction to Reflecting Absence was discomfort with its starkness. But initial reactions do not matter at this point. The design has evolved significantly, with guidance from the jury, since it was first presented. The details of the reworked plan are not scheduled to be released until next week, and even those will be subject to change as time passes.
We suspect -- even though this design was not our first choice -- that we will see in the final results the intelligence and conscientiousness this jury has shown all along. And it is possible to draw a few tentative conclusions even at this point. The first is that in choosing Reflecting Absence, the jury has put the task of memorializing 9/11 front and center. The core of that design is two striking voids, which, in their simplicity, movingly recall the work of the sculptor Michael Heizer. Though the memorial will name the dead, the real evocative power of this plan will come not from the individual names but from the emotional focus those two voids will provide.
It's encouraging to note that Mr. Walker, a landscape architect, has joined Mr. Arad, who is an architect with the New York City Housing Authority, on this project.
Mr. Arad's original plan envisioned towering white pines dotted around the site. We hope that Mr. Walker has revised that aspect of the plan considerably, increasing the presence of nature and softening the starkness of what felt, in the original presentation, like an open plaza. We look forward to seeing the new details of Reflecting Absence next week, and we congratulate Mr. Arad, Mr. Walker and the members of the jury.
