President Bush's sweeping proposal on Wednesday to give legal status to millions of illegal workers was a political document as well as an immigration policy and sought to re-establish his credentials as a compassionate conservative at the starting gate of an election year.
White House political advisers have long talked of the critical importance of Hispanics to Mr. Bush's re-election. But political analysts said that his latest proposal was also designed to appeal to a much larger political prize, suburban swing voters, who might see the plan as evidence of a gentler Republican Party.
''For a party that's trying to look more inclusive and welcoming, the proposal has broader thematics that show an openness to America's new immigrants,'' said Bill McInturff, a leading Republican pollster.
Mr. Bush's speech carefully hit the emotional notes about opening the United States' borders at a time when the administration has spent more energy securing them. ''Many of you here today are Americans by choice, and you have followed in the paths of millions,'' the president told the crowd. Every generation of immigrants, he added, ''has reaffirmed the wisdom of remaining open to the talents and dreams of the world.''
Behind the poetic language, analysts said, lay a prosaic White House calculation: That it was more important to reach toward the political middle than to worry about placating Mr. Bush's conservative base. Many conservative Republicans called Mr. Bush's plan nothing more than amnesty for lawbreakers but moderate Republicans said the White House had enough political capital with the conservatives to make it worth risking their ire. [Page A28.]
Certainly Mr. Bush's speech announcing the proposal, in the East Room of the White House, came with the kind of political noise not normally heard in the formal splendor of the executive mansion's state floor.
Hispanic leaders invited by the White House jammed the room, cheering and chanting. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell, whose parents immigrated to the United States from Jamaica, had a front-row seat.
The real political risk to the White House, moderate Republicans said, was whether the proposals would be as welcomed by Hispanics as Mr. Bush and his political advisers expected. Many Hispanic leaders quickly heaped criticism on an immigration plan that they said did not go far enough, and asserted that the White House was cynically chasing their votes with an empty plan that would do them no good in the end.
''The notion that there is a green card at the end of this process is an illusion, and that's the crux of the matter,'' said Cecilia Muñoz, a vice president of the National Council of La Raza, a Hispanic advocacy organization. ''The headlines today suggest that he's providing legal status. But the bottom line is when people learn the details of this proposal and what it does and doesn't do, it's likely to seem less appealing.''
The White House left many details of the proposal vague, including a critical one at the heart of the plan. Under Mr. Bush's proposal, an illegal worker with a job in the United States could apply to be a three-year guest worker, a status that would provide full employee benefits, the ability to move freely in and out of the United States and the right to apply for a green card. In his speech, Mr. Bush said that an immigrant could renew participation in the guest worker program -- but he did not say for how long, leaving it up for Congress to decide.
The tactic is one Mr. Bush has used before, most recently on the Medicare bill, which allows him, Democrats say, to take credit for proposing reforms while leaving Congress to work out the details.
For now, analysts of Hispanic voting trends said it was too early to tell how much the proposal would help Mr. Bush. His advisers have said the president needs 40 percent of the Hispanic vote to win. Mr. Bush won 35 percent of the Hispanic vote in 2000, a significant showing for a Republican. For the past three years, the White House has been aggressively trying to encroach on a traditionally Democratic and rapidly growing voting group.
''The plan is still too vague to say how it will fare among Latino organizations and the Latino community,'' said John A. Garcia, a political professor at the University of Arizona and the author of the book ''Latino Politics in America.'' But at the least, Mr. Garcia said that it ''puts the spotlight back on Bush and the Latinos'' and gets Latinos re-engaged in a national conversation with the president and his policies.
But pollsters and political strategists said that Mr. Bush did not have to persuade every Hispanic voter of the value of his plan, and that just improving his standing on the margins could make a difference in the 2004 election.
Andrew Kohut, the director of the nonpartisan Pew Research Center, noted that Republicans have been gaining significant ground with Hispanic voters in the last decade, and that Mr. Bush's immigration proposals could exploit those gains. Pew surveys in Florida in the late 1990's, Mr. Kohut said, showed that 36 percent of Hispanic voters were Democrats while 24 percent were Republicans. But surveys in more recent years showed that 30 percent of Hispanic voters were Democrats while 32 percent were Republicans.
''So think about the advantage that could be for Bush in a close election, and it gives you some indication of the potential for this proposal to help him politically,'' Mr. Kohut said.
John McLaughlin, a Republican pollster and a partner in Opiniones Latinas, a firm in Alexandria, Va., that conducts national surveys among Spanish-speaking adults, said that many legal Hispanics were interested in overhauling immigration laws for national security reasons, and also to make it easier for them to travel to and from the United States.
''Their family and friends, even in the legal immigration system, are running into increased barriers,'' Mr. McLaughlin said.
BUSH ON IMMIGRATION: NEWS ANALYSIS
