Following in the footsteps of former 1980's colleagues -- and grandfathers-in-arms -- Dick Vermeil and Bill Parcells, 63-year-old Joe Gibbs came out of retirement Wednesday to coach the Washington Redskins, a team he last led in 1992. It was the same day the Giants snatched Tom Coughlin, 57, out of retirement to be their new coach.
Although the National Football League has publicly encouraged its teams to bring fresh blood to the coaching ranks, it might now seem that the average coach is older than a Rolling Stones band member. With his new Levitra television ad running during this season's playoffs, can Mike Ditka be far behind?
Some blame the era of the salary cap, parity among teams, the old-boy network or old coaches who simply take care of themselves better, but some of the N.F.L.'s greatest former coaches are now renewing old rivalries using players who were barely alive when the rivalries were born.
At the Giants' news conference, the Gibbs announcement almost upstaged the arrival of Coughlin. But not everyone was shocked. Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi, an executive in the N.F.L. for more than 30 years, said: ''I am never surprised when a coach comes back anymore. I'm only surprised when they don't come back.''
Gibbs will now go head-to-head in the National Football Conference East against Parcells, 62, the Dallas Cowboys' coach, who was the Giants' coach two decades ago when he faced Gibbs in what was then the league's powerhouse division. Among Parcells's trusted assistants in that era was Coughlin, who coached the Giants' wide receivers.
''One of the attractions when I came into the N.F.L. was that Coach Landry was at Dallas, Joe Gibbs was at Washington and Bill Parcells was in New York,'' Coughlin said. ''Now you are talking about a division that is again right back on top of the National Football League, in my opinion.''
Coughlin's introduction at Giants Stadium was far from a stunner. A former Giants assistant and once a winning coach for the Jacksonville Jaguars, Coughlin had been the leading candidate all along in the Giants' search for a replacement for Jim Fassel, who was dismissed last month.
But Coughlin's appointment helps illustrate why it now seems so hard for younger assistant coaches without head coaching experience to be hired as head coaches. In addition to Coughlin, the Giants had interviewed three N.F.L. assistants: Romeo Crennel and Charlie Weis from the New England Patriots and Lovie Smith from the St. Louis Rams. Crennel and Smith are African-American, and the N.F.L. has made a push to encourage its teams to interview and hire African-American coaches when vacancies arise.
But the Giants chose Coughlin, although they said they would have been happy with any of candidates they interviewed. The Giants did concede that one significant advantage Coughlin had, perhaps even the determining factor, was his experience as a head coach in the pros.
The Giants co-owner Wellington Mara, active with the team in nine decades, said there was a time when more N.F.L. teams might have chosen an untested candidate. ''You like to think you can uncover something very valuable,'' Mara said. ''But because of the salary cap, the level of ability on each team is so close, and it is more important than ever to get the right coach. If you make a mistake, it exacts more of a penalty.
''Years ago, you might build a vastly superior team, and if you had a mediocre coach, you could maybe get by.''
John Mara, Wellington Mara's son and the team's executive vice president, said that if there was a trend toward hiring the most experienced coach available, it might be because the alternative -- hiring top assistant coaches who are offensive or defensive coordinators -- has not been as effective in recent years.
''Too many teams have been burned by coordinators who couldn't make the leap,'' John Mara said. ''Teams these days have to go with people who have proved that they can win.''
After two losing seasons in three years, the Kansas City Chiefs lured Vermeil from a one-year retirement in 2001. Vermeil, now the oldest coach in the league at 67, has led the Chiefs to a 13-3 record this season and a spot in the playoffs.
The Pittsburgh Steelers' owner, Dan Rooney, is head of the N.F.L.'s workplace diversity committee, which sets guidelines for owners on filling coaching vacancies, standards that include a rule that a team must interview, in person, at least one minority candidate. In a telephone interview Wednesday, Rooney said the Gibbs hiring was a surprise but he did not characterize it as a setback for the league's diversity initiative.
''Maybe the Redskins, because of what had happened with them in the their last couple of hires, wanted to get somebody they knew who had a winning track record,'' Rooney said. ''Joe was very successful there.''
Gibbs is replacing Steve Spurrier, a college football coaching icon who resigned last week after two ignominious seasons in the pros.
''But there will be young people hired this year and not just older coaches,'' Rooney said. ''Atlanta is looking for a young person, for example. Our diversity committee wants minorities and young people to get an opportunity to show what they can do. But we are not in a position to say: 'This is who you must hire.'
''The process is working. There was a minority coach hired last year and we might have one or two more minority coaches hired this year.''
On Wednesday, Dennis Green, a former head coach of the Minnesota Vikings, reached agreement with the Arizona Cardinals, the team announced. Although Green is African-American, he is also 54 years old with 10 years as a head coach in the N.F.L.
John Fox, the coach of the Carolina Panthers, waited several years in his post as the defensive coordinator of the Giants before he was offered the Panthers' job in 2002. Asked if the hiring of Gibbs, Coughlin or Parcells signaled an inclination to favor older, more experienced coaches, Fox answered: ''I think it has always been a little bit that way. That was my experience, all my time as an assistant coach: you see a lot of guys recirculated through the league. It's hard to earn your stripes until you get that opportunity.''
The Rams' coach, Mike Martz, a coordinator who got his head coaching post when Vermeil left St. Louis after the 1999 season, praised the league's approach to hiring. Martz is also Lovie Smith's immediate boss.
''First of all, I think the league has done a terrific job,'' Martz said Wednesday. ''It's really important for assistant coaches to have these opportunities.''
If there is a discernible anti-youth movement in the N.F.L. coaching ranks, it was Accorsi, the Giants' general manager, who offered a theory for what is driving it.
''It's not because people feel sentimental about old coaches,'' he said. ''It's because these experienced guys are coming in and winning. Recycled? Who cares; they're winning. If they weren't, people would say, 'That's not fair.' But they aren't and they can't, because these coaches are winning football games.''
PRO FOOTBALL
