Gov. George Pataki's 10th State of the State speech yesterday was more a panegyric to freedom and security than a rousing promise to fix what's clearly wrong with New York's government. Freedom and security are excellent, of course, no argument there. But we wish that the governor had spent more time and passion promising to deal with some of the real embarrassments that Albany and Mr. Pataki have gotten us into in these past few years.
Toward the end of a long speech that was full of promises for more jobs, better environmental protection, school finance reform and other tantalizing goodies, the governor did offer some acknowledgment that all is not well in New York's State Capitol. He expressed a sweeping, but extremely vague, desire for ''comprehensive reforms'' that would ''fundamentally change the way business is done in Albany.''
The real question is whether there is meat to go with all these lofty words. We've had promises before. Mr. Pataki has vowed to pursue campaign finance reform ever since he became governor, for example. So far, we have no substance to go with his promissory fluff. Moreover, the real state of the state is not so cheery as Mr. Pataki lets on.
The budget is patched together with borrowing and one-time fixes and is so predictably late each year that a headline reading ''Budget Is Approved on Time'' would be big New York news. The state's almost 100 authorities act like secret societies. Governor Pataki sits on this closed empire, stashing his cronies in handsome jobs while lobbyists, unseen and unregulated, troll for lucrative contracts.
The real state of the state's judiciary is unhealthy. In every election season, Republicans upstate and Democrats in the city are busy elevating their friends to judicial jobs. Lawyers give campaign contributions. Then some of those judges throw lucrative legal work back to those who backed them in their campaigns. Being a judge should be a source of pride, not patronage.
Any hint of such reforms was hard to find yesterday, swamped by the flag-waving and wish-listing that easily distracts from the systemic problems of the state. That may have been the idea all along.
