A RESTAURANT chain known for its irreverent advertising, Chipotle Mexican Grill, has hired the new New York office of an irreverent British agency, Mother, to create its campaigns.
Chipotle, majority owned by McDonald's, will formally announce the hiring of Mother today. Chipotle, with about 300 stores that compete in the rapidly growing segment of the restaurant business known as fast-casual Mexican, has previously produced its print, outdoor and radio ads internally.
The chain's sensibility is typified by a billboard that shows an oversized Chipotle (pronounced chi-POAT-lay) foil-wrapped burrito and asks: ''Burrito? Or body pillow?'' and by an animated image on its Web site (www.chipotle.com) that shows an employee being buried under a barrage of burritos.
Chipotle, which spends an estimated $8 million to $10 million a year on all marketing communications aimed at consumers, becomes the first advertiser to hire the Mother New York office as its creative agency of record. Before New Year's, the National Basketball Association named the office to work on a creative project, centered on promoting viewership of and attendance at the league's playoff games.
Madison Avenue has been closely monitoring the progress -- or perceived lack thereof -- at the Mother New York office, the first outpost for the agency outside London. The office has had what is known in retailing as a soft opening; that is, a low-key, informal start-up during the last few weeks rather than a big, splashy one with ribbon-cuttings and speeches. The announcement of the Chipotle account is intended as a signal that the office is open for business.
Mother is one of the hottest agencies in the competitive British advertising market. Since it was founded seven years ago, it has landed assignments from blue-chip advertisers like the Boots drugstore chain, Coca-Cola, Diageo, Orange telecommunications and Unilever.
But whether the charmingly cheeky tone of its output will gain favor in the United States -- among consumers as well as potential clients -- is a question that is difficult to answer, particularly in an uncertain economy for the advertising industry when established agencies are struggling.
''It's a tough challenge,'' said John Staffen, who started yesterday as the executive creative director at the New York office of Arnold Worldwide, part of the Arnold Worldwide Partners division of Havas. Agencies based in other American cities that have opened offices in New York have found it hard to flourish, Mr. Staffen said, much less agencies with headquarters overseas.
Executives at the new clients of Mother New York offered a different perspective.
''We look at ourselves as a company that breaks some rules,'' said Jim Adams, marketing director at Chipotle, which is based in Denver, ''so that wasn't a concern.''
Chipotle was especially interested in Mother's New York office, he added, because of the chance to work with the two partners who are the creative executives there, Linus Karlsson and Paul Malmstrom.
They are a longtime team who most recently worked together at Fallon Worldwide, part of the Publicis Groupe, and are known in the industry by their nickname, the Swedes.
''We make burritos; we try not to take it too seriously,'' Mr. Adams said. ''Mother and the Swedes understand that attitude.''
''We've kept an eye on the Swedes,'' he added, ''so when we heard they were involved in opening this arm of Mother, we said, 'Let's go talk with them.' And we've found our creative soul mates.''
Tim Andree, senior vice president at the basketball league in New York, said the N.B.A. gave the office the creative assignment because ''Mother is obviously one of the hot shops'' in advertising. Also, he added, league executives had worked with another partner at the office, Rob DeFlorio, who before joining Mother had been global advertising director at Nike in Beaverton, Ore.
Mr. DeFlorio said that he, the Swedes and the fourth partner at the office --Andrew Deitchman, formerly a global director at the Red Cell agency in London, owned by the WPP Group -- were optimistic about their prospects, despite the widespread belief that transplants find it difficult to put down roots in New York.
''That's because we don't see our office as a transplant,'' Mr. DeFlorio said, ''because the literal definition is taking organs from one entity and putting them into another.''
''We're all new to the agency,'' he added -- none of the four has worked for Mother before. ''What's being carried forth is the Mother philosophy, the Mother spirit, not transplanted or exported by Mother people from London.''
In hiring the office, neither Chipotle nor the basketball league is dismissing another agency. Chipotle has produced ''pretty much everything in-house since we started in 1993,'' Mr. Adams said. The N.B.A.'s policy is to bring in agencies to handle assignments from time to time as it continues to work with Berlin Cameron/Red Cell in New York, part of WPP.
''At some point, we're going to have to slug it out'' with other agencies, Mr. DeFlorio acknowledged. Asked if he was confident the office would prevail in such reviews as frequently as the flagship London agency does, he replied, ''Absolutely.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
