Auditing and corporate governance rules throughout the European Union will be tightened in the wake of the accounting scandal at Parmalat, the European Commission said on Wednesday.
The commissioner for internal markets, Frits Bolkestein, told senior colleagues within the commission that although it was too early to come to any definitive conclusions about Parmalat, his department was examining its implications for the union's financial services laws.
Existing auditing rules, which date to the 1980's, were set for revision last May, but the recent events at Parmalat will result in more stringent changes, a commission spokesman, Jonathan Todd, said.
Next month, for example, the commission will propose a law requiring one audit firm to take overall responsibility for the accounts of large companies when there is more than one auditor to handle different divisions.
Parmalat had two auditors, a fact that investigators suspect might have allowed its management to conceal financial irregularities.
Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu audited the company's consolidated accounts and the Italian office of Grant Thornton International audited several of the group's divisions.
Under current rules there is a danger that some accounts at a firm could ''fall between two stools, as we may have seen in the Parmalat affair,'' Mr. Todd said.
The proposal will also try to prevent auditors from making management decisions for their clients; to strengthen oversight of auditing firms with a system of national regulators in the 15 member countries cooperating fully; and to reinforce coordination with regulators in countries outside the union.
Mr. Todd said there was no plan for a single unionwide equivalent of the Public Company Accounting Oversight Board, which was established by United States lawmakers after the Enron and WorldCom scandals.
''We are looking to create national P.C.A.O.B.'s that would coordinate their work with their equivalents in the different countries,'' he said.
The commission plans to strengthen corporate governance regulations by reinforcing the importance and independence of nonexecutive directors and audit committees of publicly listed companies.
In addition, the commission plans to insist on improvements in the transparency and disclosure at all corporate levels, doing away with complex and opaque company structures.
A new law focusing on financial market abuse is set to take effect in October. A separate law laying out the legal requirements for corporate prospectuses is due in June 2005.
The commission is also pushing for the swift adoption of another law requiring tougher transparency requirements.
''We already saw the need to update the rules,'' Mr. Todd said. ''The current situation is not entirely satisfactory. In light of recent events we are beefing up our efforts.''
