Moving to bolster its dwindling enforcement staff, the Internal Revenue Service said yesterday that it would eliminate 6,700 mostly clerical jobs over the next two years and close its Memphis tax return processing center and use the savings to hire about 2,200 more auditors, criminal investigators and tax collectors.
Mark W. Everson, the agency's commissioner, said that an increasing number of people were filing their tax returns electronically, reducing the need for clerks to open paper returns and enter the data into computers.
''One of the things I have done that is very distinct from the way things were done here is that the first thing we are trying to protect is the enforcement,'' so that it grows in size, Mr. Everson said.
The I.R.S. has about 12,000 auditors, down a third from 1997, to examine returns filed by 130 million individuals and couples, as well as millions of complex returns filed by corporations, partnerships, pension plans and charities.
The I.R.S. has fewer than 3,000 criminal investigators, and many of them have been assigned to pursuing the financial dealings of Al Qaeda and drug traffickers.
A severe drop in audits and a shortage of tax collectors have emboldened many tax cheats, officials at the agency have said.
In addition, new rules imposed by Congress in 1998 to protect taxpayers from zealous I.R.S. employees have added to the duties of auditors, investigators and collectors.
The I.R.S. budget last year was $9.8 billion, with about a third of that going to enforcement. That spending works out to be about half a cent for each dollar of tax collected.
''We did not get as much money for 2004 as we expected,'' Mr. Everson said. ''We will be cut by a couple hundred million bucks by Congress and we have a 'higher than the administration asked for' pay raise for staff, and all that hurts us to about $400 million, the difference between what the president requested and Congress'' approved, taking inflation and other increased costs into account.
''Altogether that puts pressure on us, so we have moved things around to the greatest degree possible to protect the enforcement'' budget so that it continues to expand, he said.
How many auditors, investigators and collectors will be hired is uncertain because of pressure to hold down spending in the face of $500 billion annual budget deficits.
Colleen M. Kelley, president of the National Treasury Employees Union, said that she wished that the I.R.S. would negotiate with the union to phase out jobs through attrition, in part to maintain morale.
''Over all, half of the jobs are veteran longtime employees,'' but are still too young to be eligible for early buyouts or retirement, she said. ''The majority of the employees affected are women and minorities in clerical positions who are not mobile and will just be out of work.''
Ms. Kelley also said that closing the Memphis office was premature because a recent General Accounting Office report found that the shift to electronic filing of tax returns was going slower than expected.
Mr. Everson said that the I.R.S. planned to close its Philadelphia center in 2007 and its Andover, Mass., center, sometime after that. The centers in Atlanta; Austin, Tex.; Fresno, Calif.; and Kansas City, Mo., are not scheduled to be closed. The centers in Covington, Ky., and Ogden, Utah, have been switched to handling returns, like those from businesses, not filed by individuals.
