When the fog descends on this part of the San Joaquin Valley in winter, the limitless horizon of summer disappears. The lush cotton and bean fields whose harvests clothe and feed America become no more than a memory, and a hope.
Legend has it that the fog is a curse visited by the spirits of the Yokut Indians who made their home around Tulare Lake until white men stole their land and drained the lake to plant the bottom in cotton. Tulare Lake was once the largest body of fresh water west of the Mississippi, home to thousands of migratory birds that nested among the tall tule reeds that encircled its shores.
Today the dry lake bed forms the core of the vast land holdings of the J. G. Boswell Company, whose 150,000 acres make it the largest private landowner in California. The company and its agricultural empire are the legacy of Col. J. G. Boswell, a Georgia cotton planter who fled the boll weevil blight of the 1920's to make his fortune in the West. Colonel Boswell and his descendants, who control the company to this day, amassed their empire through clever dealings, astute lobbying in Sacramento and Washington and, most important, control of the flow of water through California's arid Central Valley. The federal government generously aided them in the monumental task of harnessing the water of four rivers that carry the snowmelt of the Sierra Nevada in the spring. Those rivers once nourished Tulare Lake; now they irrigate the lands of Boswell and the other giant agribusinesses that dominate the valley.
Every company requires a company town, and for decades, Corcoran was Boswell's fief. In its heyday, Corcoran boasted a thriving main street with movie theaters, restaurants, a J. C. Penney outlet, even, it is said, a number of houses of illicit pleasure. In those days, celebrated and mourned in Steinbeck's ''Grapes of Wrath,'' the Boswell company and other large cotton enterprises employed thousands of hand pickers.
But by the 1960's, mechanization had replaced many of them, and Corcoran began to fade into its present rather sad state. The privately held company is run by only 300 salaried employees in its offices in Corcoran and headquarters in Pasadena.
The theaters are dark, most shops are shuttered and the biggest employer is the high-security California State Prison-Corcoran on the outskirts of town. The city's most prominent residents -- Sirhan Sirhan, Charles Manson, Juan Corona -- live within its Protective Housing Unit.
The whole Gothic tale of the famously reclusive Boswell family is told in a new book, ''The King of California: J. G. Boswell and the Making of a Secret American Empire,'' by Mark Arax and Rick Wartzman, two journalists at The Los Angeles Times.
The book is selling well in the towns and cities of the Central Valley, from Bakersfield to Fresno, bookshops report. But in Corcoran, which has no bookstore, it is hard to find a copy, or even anyone who admits to having read it. The local paper, The Corcoran Journal, part owned by Boswell, has barely mentioned it. The only appearance in town by the authors was in a darkened high school gymnasium late last fall. A bare handful of the town's 10,000 residents showed up.
''We gave a reading to about a dozen enthusiastic folks, brave folks, I guess,'' Mr. Arax said. ''They bought up quite a few books, maybe 50. That was our big Corcoran event.''
Jeanette Todd, managing editor of The Corcoran Journal, said she had read the book but not given it a full review in the paper because it came out in October, just as her husband, a retired Boswell construction foreman, was dying of cancer. She said she had received no instructions from the paper's owners to ignore the book.
''They would never do that,'' she said. ''They leave us pretty autonomous down here.''
But she said she had problems with the book. ''I live here and know a lot of people who were interviewed for the book and in some instances what they said was incorrectly quoted or taken out of context,'' she said. ''Things I was aware of myself I saw in the book and thought, 'That's not quite the way it was.' That led me to make the comment that if it wasn't sensational enough, maybe it didn't appear in the book.''
''My overwhelming sense,'' she added, ''was disappointment that six years of avid research had not resulted in maybe a little more depth.''
Jon Rachford, a retired Boswell engineer who is on the board of supervisors here in Kings County, was blunter in his assessment. He said that the book's assertion that Colonel Boswell drained Tulare Lake was inaccurate. ''That's just blatantly false,'' Mr. Rachford said. ''I was a water engineer. That lake had been dry many times prior to Boswell showing up on the land in the 1920's.''
But he also said that the authors got a lot right. ''The problem is, some people don't know what was right and what was wrong.''
Boswell family members and executives of the company did not return phone calls seeking comment.
The Boswell family's paternalistic generosity is evident to this day throughout Corcoran. There's the J. G. Boswell Park, the municipal swimming pool, a picnic pavilion, the Kate H. Boswell senior center at the Y.M.C.A. and the Boswell science wing at the high school. The company provides full college scholarships each year for two top graduates of Corcoran High.
The company's relationship with the town accounts for much of the reticence among its citizens to talk about the book, or about the Boswells, at least with strangers.
Ernie Corral, who runs one of two lonely barbershops on Whitley Avenue in Corcoran, at first declined to discuss the subject. Then he confessed that he was aware of the book and the stir it had caused in town.
''Me and some other fellows were talking about writing a book ourselves about Corcoran,'' Mr. Corral said. ''But if we did we'd be run out of town or hung.''
