During his first six months in office, President Néstor Kirchner's relations with Argentina's business community were about as frosty as the icebergs of his native Patagonia.
Mr. Kirchner, a left-leaning populist, had openly snubbed business while campaigning before elections in April, saying that Argentina's economic collapse and ensuing default and painful devaluation last year were the result of what he saw as a decade of corrupt, free-market excesses under his opponent, former President Carlos Saúl Menem, who opened up the economy in the 1990's.
Then, upon taking office at the end of the crisis, Mr. Kirchner, 53, refused to compensate banks and utilities, most of which are foreign-owned, for heavy losses they suffered from the peso devaluation in 2002. He faced down the International Monetary Fund, which was demanding stricter fiscal discipline and pro-market policies, though he still managed to secure I.M.F. aid. Finally, he angered foreign holders of Argentine bonds with a take-it-or-leave-it offer to pay them back just a quarter of their bonds' face value.
But in a sudden change, Mr. Kirchner in the last two months has held a flurry of meetings with top executives at the Casa Rosada, the presidential palace, and has struck a more conciliatory tone, publicly and privately, even praising some of the utilities he once demonized.
''There has been a shift,'' said Miguel A. Kiguel, who was chief of cabinet and under secretary of finance in the Menem administration and now runs NuVerse, a financial consulting firm in Buenos Aires. ''We're seeing him start meeting with bankers and top executives.''
Mr. Kirchner's tough stance against big business, the markets and the I.M.F. -- many Argentines blame those three for at least some of their economic woes -- have won him approval ratings of over 70 percent.
Yet, in recent weeks he has moved to woo the middle classes by toughening his line against left-wing protesters, whose demonstrations have disrupted downtown Buenos Aires almost daily. Although the economy is recovering from a bitter four-year recession and some jobs are being created, Argentina's poor have taken to the streets to protest high unemployment, which although down from a record 21.5 percent in May 2002, is still stuck at over 17 percent.
According to Oscar Vicente, director of Petrobras Energía, a unit of the Brazilian state energy company Petrobras, who has known Mr. Kirchner for 15 years and was one of the first executives he invited to the Casa Rosada, the coolness was all about political expediency, not ideology.
''He needed to put some distance between himself and the business community to be able to get his priorities sorted,'' Mr. Vicente said, ''because at the beginning, everybody wanted their problems solved first -- the banks, the utilities, industry.''
The recent overtures, Mr. Vicente predicted, were signs the president was moving toward creating ''a stable environment in terms of taxes, pricing, norms and regulations.''
''He is not antibusiness, not anti-entrepreneur,'' the executive said. ''The president knows we need all sectors on board to get the country going again.''
Though the economy has begun to crawl back from the recession, Mr. Kirchner needs investment desperately if he is to steer a steady course for growth.
For now, government coffers are full enough to finance the social spending needed to support about 20 million Argentines -- more than half the population -- said to be living on less than $30 a month as a result of the economic crisis. But that is largely because Argentina has not been making payments on $88 billion in debt since its finances collapsed and it defaulted early last year.
While the economy is expected to have grown 7 percent to 8 percent in 2003, that growth is still dwarfed by the economy's 20 percent contraction during the 1998-2002 crisis.
Because of the dispute with the utilities, Argentina's infrastructure, the backbone for any sustained economic recovery, has been starved of investment for the last two years. Without fresh financing, it could start crumbling soon.
Businessmen, both foreign and Argentine, used to Mr. Menem's pragmatic wheeling and dealing, were initially put off by Mr. Kirchner's ideological antagonism to free-market economics. They also complained about his lack of international experience and strategic vision, and said that, as governor of Santa Cruz, he tended to run the sparsely populated but oil-rich Patagonian Province as a personal fiefdom.
The Buenos Aires business elite was also offended by Mr. Kirchner's reliance on a clique of trusted ministers: his cabinet chief, Alberto Fernández; and two Santa Cruz allies, the powerful planning minister, Julio de Vido; and Oscar Parrilli, secretary general of the president's office.
While acknowledging the lingering doubts among business leaders, Mr. Vicente said that negotiations with Mr. Kirchner while he was governor had been ''always tough but transparent'' and that his provincial administration had ''the laudable habit of sticking to an agreement and respecting the rules.''
And Luis Pagani, head of the Argentine Business Association, which initially reciprocated Mr. Kirchner's coolness, recently praised the president as ''the right man'' to solve the country's problems.
Meanwhile, according to several executives here, Mr. Kirchner is beginning to feel more at home with Argentine business leaders, though he still mistrusts Wall Street and most foreign multinationals. Aloof relations with some overseas executives remain a roadblock.
''As president of Argentina at the moment, he should be letting C.E.O.'s who leave meetings with him feel confident about doing business here -- that they can expect transparency, the rule of law,'' said Federico Thomsen, a Buenos Aires consultant for several foreign companies here. ''People don't seem to be leaving with that feeling.''
That, said Mariano Grondona, a leading political commentator, could be because of what he calls the ''estilo K,'' or ''K-style,'' the president's tendency to use the stick on anyone he sees as a potential opponent before offering any carrots.
Comparing Mr. Kirchner's negotiating style to that of a cowboy taming a bucking bronco, Mr. Grondona said in a column: ''Only when he senses that the beast's will has been broken will he saddle up, take it out for a trot, and maybe even give it a sugar cube at the end of the day.''
On a summer tour of Europe that was supposed to drum up financial support and investment for Argentina, Mr. Kirchner snubbed French business leaders in Paris, and in Madrid he told executives that Argentina did not need corporate help to recover. Both actions prompted astonishment among foreign executives here.
Jacques Chambert-Loir, who heads the Argentine operations of the French oil giant Total, said in an interview in July with the daily La Nación that he found it ''hard to believe the president really means everything he said.''
''Saying Argentina will emerge from the crisis with or without companies seems inadequate,'' Mr. Chambert-Loir said. ''Who is going to invest in Argentina, if not companies?''
Even though relations with business have warmed on the ground, the perception of Mr. Kirchner remains unchanged. Roger Noriega, the United States assistant secretary of state for Latin America, said earlier this week that Argentina should address its debt problems ''in a serious and responsible way,'' and warned it against drawing close to Cuba's president, Fidel Castro.
In Argentina, however, the handful of corporations that have stepped up to invest have felt themselves basking in the warmth of Mr. Kirchner's approval.
When César Alierta, head of the Spanish telecommunications company Telefónica, came to Buenos Aires recently to announce that the company would invest some $700 million in its Argentine network over the next four years, Mr. Kirchner gushed.
''These are the sort of businessmen we need,'' he said. ''Businessmen who invest in Argentina, who generate industrial growth and are betting on our country as much as we are.''
Few analysts are willing to bet yet on just how business-friendly the government will be if the economy hits another bad patch soon, but for now, more and more local business leaders appear willing to give Mr. Kirchner at least the benefit of the doubt.
''I think he's adapting to his new role as president,'' Mr. Kiguel said. ''We're not talking pragmatism yet, but it looks like we're moving in that direction.''
