Pro football teams do not hire new coaches just before the playoffs. Baseball teams do not change managers on the eve of the World Series. But figure skating is different.
The United States championships are being held this week at Philips Arena, the home of the N.B.A. Hawks and the N.H.L. Thrashers. The main attraction is the women's singles, which begin Thursday night with the short program and end Saturday night with the free skate.
The favorites are 23-year-old Michelle Kwan, who has won this title the last six years, and 19-year-old Sasha Cohen, who skated sensationally early this season.
Through the years, Kwan and Cohen have had the best of coaches. But needs and circumstances change. Coaches, too. Kwan, who had gone through a period of essentially self-coaching, hired a new coach seven weeks ago. Cohen hired a new coach two weeks ago.
Kwan's coach of record was Scott Williams, who was more of a friend and adviser. Cohen's coach was Tatyana Tarasova, a celebrated Russian whose departure was prompted by health problems (Cohen and Tarasova's explanation) or possibly Cohen's erratic season (a popular belief in the sport).
Kwan's new coach is Rafael Arutunian, a former Soviet skater and coach. Cohen's new coach is Robin Wagner of Glen Cove, N.Y., who coached Sarah Hughes to a surprise gold medal at the 2002 Salt Lake Olympics. Hughes, a freshman at Yale, has not competed this season.
Kwan, who is skating in her 12th consecutive nationals, said she thought she needed a change. ''A few months ago, I ran into a few problems with skating,'' she said in a news conference this week. ''I needed help. And I had problems with boots and blades. I knew Rafael.''
Cohen said in an interview that Tarasova was having health difficulties, including a blood-sugar problem, in mid-December.
''She fell down stairs at the Grand Prix final and hurt a leg,'' Cohen said. ''She really needed a break, and she wanted to go back to Russia for medical treatment. The parting was mutual. We had no problem with each other. She just couldn't coach me the way she wanted.''
Then she hired Wagner. ''I see a talented athlete and artist,'' Wagner said of Cohen. ''She's doing beautifully, and I'm pleased with her on every level. And there's room for growth.''
Cohen started the season by winning three Grand Prix competitions. In her last two outings, she fell six times in nine days. Critics said she was competing too often. She agrees.
''Now I know,'' she said. ''I thought I could handle that many competitions. Tatyana thought it was too many. I know now I have to plan my season better. I got sick for two weeks, kind of like the flu, and I took two more weeks to come back to where I was.''
She added: ''I have to look at everything as a learning experience. I love the way things are going.''
Kwan seems happy with everything, including her decision not to skate in any major competitions this season until now.
''I never say I'm 100 percent ready,'' she said, ''but I feel I'm stronger than a few months ago. I didn't know if I would be at the nationals. You have to be perfect at the nationals.''
Kwan is a five-time world champion and a two-time Olympic medalist (silver in 1998, bronze in 1992). She says her chances of continuing through the 2006 Olympics in Turin, Italy, are ''pretty high.''
What keeps her coming back?
''I really don't know,'' she said. ''I feel I've made full circle over the last 12 years. I've been everything, to over the hill and back up. As long as it keeps my interest, as long as I enjoy myself, I'll have a passion for skating.''
--------------------
Defending Champs Lead Pairs
ATLANTA, Jan. 7 (AP) -- The names may change in United States pairs skating, but the sloppy programs do not.
Tiffany Scott and Philip Dulebohn, the defending champions, were in first place after the short program at the United States Figure Skating Championships on Wednesday night. There were only two clean programs the entire night.
Rena Inoue and John Baldwin Jr. were second and Katie Orscher and Garrett Lucash were third. The free skate, worth two-thirds of the final score, is Friday night.
FIGURE SKATING  Correction:  January 10, 2004, Saturday  A sports article on Thursday previewing the United States Figure Skating Championships misstated the year in which Michelle Kwan won a bronze medal in the Olympics. It was 2002, not 1992.
