FOR a company whose name begins with the word micro, practically nothing about Microsoft is small. It has huge profits, enormous power and vast ambition.
It might come as a surprise, therefore, to discover that the company's latest target for conquest is minuscule indeed: the face of your wristwatch.
Starting next week, two watchmakers, Fossil and Suunto, will offer what Microsoft calls Smart Watches with MSN Direct, which Bill Gates has been describing in trade-show speeches for two years now. The twist is that these watches can download and display tiny bits of text information from the Web: stock prices, news clips, weather data.
Now, wireless watches have been introduced and flopped several times, in incarnations ranging from Timex pager watches to Seiko's 1990 MessageWatch. So what makes Microsoft think that its version will be the next small thing?
Because Microsoft is behind it, for one thing, not some rinky-dink operation like Seiko or Timex.
These watches are more versatile, too. In addition to the generic Web snippets, Microsoft's watches can also display your appointments as you've recorded them in Microsoft Outlook for Windows. Your fans and loved ones can even send messages to your watch, using the MSN Messenger chat software (and a profound gift for self-expression in 15 words or less).
Incidentally, these watches also tell time. In fact, they synchronize themselves wirelessly with an atomic clock on the Internet. They also adjust automatically when you encounter a new time zone, daylight time, or a leap year -- quite a neat feat.
Furthermore, because you're actually looking at a tiny computer screen, you can choose from several different watch face designs. Suunto's N3 watch ($300; www.suunto.com) offers five variations on a digital display, but Fossil's WristNet line ($180 to $200, www.fossil.com) offers both digital and analog watch faces. You can switch among these watch-face designs as your current fashion emergency demands. In fact, you can sign up to have Microsoft send your watch a fresh face each month, although, alas, each new design wipes out the previous one.
For Microsoft's designers, making all of this simple to use could not have been easy. Consider the crudeness of the canvas: a black-and-white screen, composed of only 120 pixels by 96 pixels. No color, not even shades of gray; no room for menus, buttons or borders; no mouse or keyboard.
Yet history shows that when its back is against the wall, Microsoft can rise above its fondness for cluttered bloatware. Sure enough, the Smart Watch exhibits some of Microsoft's finest, cleanest, simplest work in years. The fonts are crisp, dark, stylish and extremely readable -- yes, even on a watch. The limited graphics (primarily in the Weather module) are evocative and pure. And navigation involves only four buttons: Previous, Next, Select and Channel. (That button moves from module to module: Time, Messages, Weather, News, Stocks, and Calendar. Microsoft intends to add a few other modules, including restaurant reviews, movie listings and what it calls daily diversions.)
And at least for the moment, the Smart Watch operating system is 100 percent free of spam, viruses and pop-up ads (but give it time).
Not all of the modules are equally indispensable. A day trader might appreciate wireless access to stock prices, but that's not the kind of person who'd be satisfied with Microsoft's 15-stock limit and 15-minute delay. Odder yet, certain companies' stock listings aren't available, at least at the moment. Likewise, the local weather module is very cool -- the Previous and Next buttons provide readouts for humidity, ultraviolet radiation, three-day forecast, wind speed, barometric pressure, and sunrise and sunset times -- but really, do you need this on your wrist?
The calendar-downloading function (which requires installation of a free Outlook add-on module) is much more useful. The value of having your current schedule with you at all times is pretty obvious, but now you don't have to hook up some pocket organizer to your PC every time you want an up-to-date copy. Wireless is wonderful.
Before you start rushing off to eBay to buy the rest of your Dick Tracy ensemble, however, consider these watches' heritage. The truth is, they have more in common with cellphones than with watches.
For example, you have to pay Microsoft a monthly fee for the wireless service, either $10 a month or $60 a year up front, plus a $60 activation fee. Yes, you read that right: you've lived to see the day when people pay a monthly fee for their watches.
(If you don't pay the fee, or if you stop paying it, the time functions -- watch, stopwatch, countdown timer, alarm clock, wireless self-setting -- will still work, at least as long as Microsoft maintains its broadcasting system.)
And like cellphones, these watches gulp down juice like marathoners at the finish line. Every two days you have to take the watch off to recharge the built-in battery (presumably at the same time you remove and plug in your cellphone, palmtop and digital camera). This watch-charging ritual may be fine if you're Inspector Gadget, but represents a bit of a psychological hump for everyday Americans.
Finally, there's the little matter of coverage. The wireless broadcasts arrive on a thin slice of the FM radio band that Microsoft calls DirectBand (but should, of course, have called WatchBand). It's brought to you by local FM radio stations paid by Microsoft.
At the moment, the wireless service works only in the 100 most populous cities in the United States and southern Canada. (You can check coverage at direct.msn.com.) Even then, coverage can be baffling and flaky; at one point, the Suunto watch claimed to find no signal, while the signal-strength indicator on the Fossil right next to it cheerfully displayed all bars. Similarly, New York City is covered, but its airports are not.
When you travel outside the coverage area, your watch still tells the time, but all the wireless functions are dormant.
Note, too, that when you travel -- even to another covered city -- you don't get your calendar and message data unless you first visit a Microsoft Web site and tell it where you'll be going, which is a very silly nuisance.
There are a few other glitches, too. For one thing, the watch could really use some kind of list view, a summary screen for your messages, headlines, and so on. Cycling all the way through the full-screen displays gets old fast.
For another thing, there's not a lot of room for those news items. Microsoft assumes that its news suppliers always obey the old journalism-school rule of putting the most important facts in the opening sentence, which is all you get on the watch. Sometimes the news clips are so inappropriately truncated that the results are almost comical. The headline ''Tech Visions Turned Into Reality,'' for example, led to the item reproduced here in full: ''Computer technology really is affecting every part of our lives. And it's only the beginning.'' The end. (You can just hear the signoff: ''Vermont Farmer, Taciturn News, reporting live.'')
Microsoft says that it is working on that problem. Microsoft has a thoughtfully designed, intriguing technology on its hands -- if you can get past the monthly fee, the coverage concerns and the requirement to recharge the thing every other night.
The question is, who, exactly, can get past all that?
Microsoft says that it interviewed over 12,000 people in Smart Watch focus groups. Unfortunately, none of them were women, from the looks of things.
These watches are not what you'd call petite; the size falls somewhere between a men's sport watch and a hockey puck. They're available only with plastic bands (on the Fossil watch, the antenna is concealed inside). Few women in my much less scientific focus groups indicated that they'd be caught dead wearing any of Fossil's six models or Suunto's one, except perhaps to attend a happy hour at the World Wrestling Federation.
So who, then, is left to appreciate the clean design and up-to-the-minute wireless brains of the Smart Watch? Certainly not the average person whose tolerance for technology was long ago exceeded by spam, viruses and the arsenal of remote controls on the coffee table.
No, the Microsoft Smart Watch is, to put it bluntly, for gadget freaks. It's for early adopters, guys who love ''because it's there'' technology, people whose pupils dilate at the mention of the word ''wireless.'' Others are likely to give these watches the backs of their hands -- and not in the way Microsoft is hoping.
STATE OF THE ART E-mail: Pogue@nytimes.com
Correction:  January 14, 2004, Wednesday  The State of the Art column in Circuits on Thursday, about watches that download text information from the Web, misstated the fee structure for the data service, MSN Direct from Microsoft. It has an annual or monthly charge only; there is no activation fee.
