Riding scooters through the Latin Quarter or playing baseball in Luxembourg Gardens, Edward Zalaznick, a New York native, Isabelle Fouchard, his French-born wife, and their three boys cut a noticeable swath around their home on Monsieur le Prince in Paris. The family of five, remembered by friends and relatives as adventuresome, cosmopolitan, eclectic and humorous, died along with 143 other people when their Egyptian charter plane plunged into the Red Sea on Saturday.
The plane, a Flash Airlines Boeing 737, went down just after takeoff from Sharm el Sheik, a popular Egyptian resort on the southern tip of the Sinai Desert. It had been due to stop in Cairo before continuing to Paris, where the family, whose children were 12, 9 and 6, had made its home for the past decade.
Egyptian authorities quickly ruled out terrorism, calling the cause of the crash mechanical, but Dominique Perben, the French justice minister, has asked for a preliminary criminal investigation.
Though an underwater search for the victims is continuing, no bodies have been recovered.
Ms. Fouchard, 43, and Mr. Zalaznick, 42, met when both were attending the New York University School of Law in the mid 1980's. Mr. Zalaznick's younger brother, Brian, was his roommate at the time, in an apartment on Perry Street in Greenwich Village. Though Brian, 40, had also attended Tufts University with his brother, he said that he had never seen him so instantly smitten by a woman, and that it was a feeling that appeared mutual.
''She thought he was this cool New Yorker and he thought she was this fabulous sexy French babe,'' said Brian Zalaznick.
Their wedding came in Dijon in 1989 and featured an unlikely tableau of Dixieland jazz, a sumptuous French dinner and an impromptu soccer game pitting the French against Americans.
''It was knock-down, drag-out soccer,'' said Dana Grossman, Mr. Zalaznick's sister, ''and the French won, I have to admit.''
Edward Zalaznick loved soccer growing up, playing on the varsity team at Scarsdale High School, where he graduated in 1979, but even then his interests were broader than just sports, said Brian, who was the varsity football quarterback.
The couple's first child was born two years later, while they were living in New York City. He was David, a quiet, intellectual boy with an early, abiding interest in history and the Yankees. Paul followed in 1994, a boy who most recently said he wanted to make perfumes when he grew up, which Ms. Grossman took to mean he might also follow a portion of his mother's family into the winemaking business. Thomas, nicknamed T. T., was born in 1997, and was by all accounts a charmer.
By 1994, the family had moved to Paris, where Mr. Zalaznick most recently worked as the chief of mergers and acquisitions in the legal division of Total, a French oil company. Ms. Fouchard, who had six other relatives on the flight, including her father, Philippe Fouchard, a law professor at the University of Paris, was a corporate lawyer.
Ramona Naddaff and her husband, Peter Sahlins, both University of California at Berkeley professors, lived across the hall from the Zalaznicks while teaching or on sabbatical in Paris, for about two years with their son, the two families sharing an open-door policy. She said that as deft as she was at work, Ms. Fouchard's favorite days were Wednesdays, which she would take off and spend with the boys.
The family spent Augusts in the United States, staying with Mr. Zalaznick's mother, Gilda Gellin Zalaznick, who put a soccer goal and then a baseball pitching net in the backyard of her Greenwich, Conn. home for her three grandchildren. This past summer, David attended summer camp in Pennsylvania.
The side of the Zalaznick family that was in the United States would frequently visit Paris.
''Edward would take me to galleries and museums in Paris and in Italy, too,'' Gilda Zalaznick said of her son. ''To me, one Madonna would look like another, but Edward would make it all make sense to me.'' She added: ''If he could have made a career out of art, he would have, but he always kept up his collages and pastels and his portraits. From the time he was a little boy, he kept a journal and just drew and drew.''
When they were not visiting each other, the family members would send e-mail messages and make phone calls back and forth, the last ones coming from Edward on New Year's Day to let everyone know what an incredible time the family was having climbing up Mount Sinai.
