In a blur of orange, white and blue, Stephon Marbury sped up the court, 0 to 60 with one step. His teammates seemed seconds behind him on the break, or inches away from where his passes landed in the halfcourt.
The Knicks' reaction time to Marbury's explosive game lagged during Tuesday's loss in Cleveland, and it was still out of sync in practice Wednesday.
As Marbury and his new teammates ran through a crash course of plays in preparation for Marbury's first game at Madison Square Garden on Thursday night against Yao Ming and the Houston Rockets, it became clear that time -- and not talent -- was a pressing issue.
How fast can the 14-22 Knicks reach .500? ''This is definitely the most talented team I've played on,'' Marbury said Wednesday.
But these Isiah Thomas-reinvented Knicks know they have quite a deficit to overcome. And Marbury cannot make it up alone, no matter how ''unbelievably up-tempo'' he makes the game, according to Knicks Coach Don Chaney.
''The one thing that Stephon does when he's on the floor is he makes you run because the ball is up the floor quickly,'' Chaney said. ''Our guys have to get used to that, the instant reaction time from defense to offense up the floor, and I think that's going to take awhile for us.''
The chemistry already began brewing in the back of the bus Tuesday night during the ride to the Cleveland airport. Allan Houston, who missed 12 of 18 shots, started talking with Marbury about where the Knicks like the ball.
''He was telling me he wasn't used to getting shots that wide open,'' Marbury said.
Keith Van Horn said he was not ready for a Marbury midair pass, fumbling it because he thought Marbury was going to shoot instead. Marbury had eight assists Tuesday. The Knicks missed 50 shots, and Marbury missed six of his nine shots, finishing with 8 points, far below his 20.5 average. Penny Hardaway also shot 3 of 9 in his debut for 6 points.
Marbury attributed his struggles to his playing time; he played 29 minutes, including the final 4 when the game was virtually over. ''I really couldn't get into the game like I wanted to,'' he said. ''I'm used to playing 40 minutes.
''I want to play; I don't want to be on the bench. The more I'm on the court, the better it is going to be for everyone because I think everyone will be able to adjust to the way I play.''
Chaney said that Marbury's minutes ''would climb as he gets used to what we're doing.''
Marbury estimated that he learned 35 percent of the offense in Wednesday's practice. ''Coach put in new stuff today,'' he said. ''By him putting in new things, I have three or four calls I know I can go to.'' A habitual tape-watcher, Marbury vowed to study the other 65 percent.
''The main thing to get down is the defense,'' he said.
Against Houston on Thursday, the Knicks will be going against the top field-goal defense in the league. The Rockets have held teams to 38.8 percent shooting this season. They have also allowed teams 83.8 points a game, second stingiest in the league.
Marbury comes into the Garden as a Knick after dreaming about it for a lifetime. When he was 9, he sneaked into the building and ducked down to the court to see Dominique Wilkins and the Atlanta Hawks. He said he wanted to feel what the N.B.A. life was like.
As a high school senior, Marbury recorded his greatest Garden moment when he led Lincoln High School to the Public Schools Athletic League championship. As an N.B.A. player at the Garden, Marbury has averaged 23.9 points and 8.9 assists in seven appearances.
In 1999, Marbury was able to force a trade to New Jersey, even if he had wished it to be to New York. ''This is really home,'' he said.
And that could be the downside of his Garden debut. ''I'm going to try to block it out, but I know I'm going to see about 30 people that I know where I lived at, 30 people from where I go to eat, 50 people a place I might get my hair cut at -- there's no hiding,'' he said.
But that is exactly what he and the Knicks have craved for so long. ''It's a great situation to be someplace where you're wanted and everybody wants you there,'' Marbury said.
REBOUNDS
In a 10-day span, FRANK WILLIAMS went from starting point guard to straining his groin to being on the trading block. The Knicks had offered him and OTHELLA HARRINGTON for Cleveland's DARIUS MILES. Williams said that the groin muscle was 90 percent and that he could be ready by Saturday. ''It couldn't have come at a worse time,'' he said. ''I just have to make room for myself.'' . . . DIKEMBE MUTOMBO had a limited practice Wednesday but is expected to play Thursday night. He crashed to the court Tuesday guarding Cleveland center ZYDRUNAS ILGAUSKAS, who scored a game-high 24 points. ''I was wondering why he wasn't getting out there on him,'' said Coach DON CHANEY, who added that Mutombo came to him Wednesday and said his hip was bothering him. . . . Since taking over for JEFF VAN GUNDY in December 2001, Chaney is 71-110.
PRO BASKETBALL
