As a technology becomes commonplace, the number of competitors fighting to provide it often shrinks. But not so, it seems, with the new generation of televisions. At the Consumer Electronics Show here this week, even a number of companies with unfamiliar names, like BenQ and Mintek, are introducing sets.
Another new entrant is better known: Epson, the maker of photographic printers and commercial video projectors. The company has introduced a line of televisions called Livingstation with a special feature: not only can these HDTV-ready models display still photos, but they can also produce high-quality prints of each shot, directly from inside the unit.
The TV's also come with a feature more common to laptop computers: an external CD-R/RW drive that connects to the set through a U.S.B. port, allowing consumers to create an archive of their displayed photographs.
The idea of adding a photo-quality printer to a television may seem as unlikely as combining a word processor with a food processor, but Epson contends that it makes sense. In a world of look-alike plasma and liquid crystal display TV's, the company thinks it has found a way to trade on its commercial strength in printers while creating a marketing niche.
Epson will initially release two wide-screen L.C.D.-based rear-projection sets with its ''photo on demand'' feature. For automatic viewing of photographs, users insert a digital camera's memory card (CompactFlash, Secure Digital, SmartMedia or Memory Stick) into the TV's front-panel slot. The pictures appear in a grid and can then be rotated or cropped. One click on the TV's remote sends the file to the printer, which produces a 4-by-6-inch glossy print at a 300-dot-per-inch resolution.
Prints will cost 30 cents each, comparable to the price at the digital printing stations that are beginning to pop up in retail and convenience stores. The company will sell a package of 50 sheets of paper and a sufficient quantity of replacement ink for $14.99.
To guard against the uneven product cycles of TV sets versus printers, the printer itself has been designed to be removed easily and replaced with a more advanced model whenever one comes to market.
The TV's can only display and print pictures; they do not provide editing tools like those in basic digital-camera software to enhance color or reduce red-eye.
That was intentional, according to an Epson executive. ''We wanted something easy to use, a product that would allow consumers to print photographs with just one or two clicks of a button,'' said Jodi Maugham, a home-entertainment product manager.
The two new TV's, a 47-inch and a 57-inch model priced at $3,499 and $3,999, come equipped with dual analog tuners but require a third-party digital tuner, priced at $350 and up, to show HDTV images. In compliance with a federal mandate intended to speed the transition to digital broadcasting, both sets will come with a built-in digital HDTV television tuner beginning in July. Pricing for these step-up models has not been determined.
Epson will sell the televisions in specialty electronics stores, rather than high-volume chains like Circuit City and Best Buy where its products could get lost among the competition.
The sets represent Epson's first effort to build a name for itself in consumer video. For its next generation of displays, the company is considering adding a high-speed Internet connection port, allowing users to e-mail photos and use the TV for personal teleconferences.
Epson has high hopes for its new products, believing that it can leverage its commercial display expertise and its knowledge of home-based entertainment. ''This is not Epson the printer company putting its toe into the TV business,'' said Rajeev Mishra, director of the company's home entertainment division. ''In five years, we expect this to be a $300 million business for us.''
