It is a favorite line of Pete Rose's, and like so many things from his past, it is haunting him now. In his latest autobiography, Rose again asserts that he thought his gambling was benign and that if he had been an alcoholic or a drug addict, baseball would have treated him compassionately instead of barring him for life.
Rose has begun an aggressive campaign to be allowed to return to baseball and to gain entry to the Hall of Fame, finally admitting that he bet on games while managing the Cincinnati Reds. Meanwhile, two players who never let their drug and alcohol problems define them slipped into Hall of Fame jerseys at the Waldorf-Astoria yesterday.
Paul Molitor and Dennis Eckersley smiled at a news conference there, a day after their first-ballot election to the Hall of Fame. Like Rose, they also endured personal crises in the 1980's, Molitor with cocaine use, Eckersley with alcoholism.
''Everyone's got their own things that they battle at some point along the line,'' Molitor said. ''Some are bigger than others, some are more public than others. But we all have a choice in how we deal with those things. I've learned a lot of lessons.''
Neither Molitor nor Eckersley offered an opinion on whether Rose should be reinstated. But both players seemed annoyed at the timing of Rose's publicity blitz, and both dismissed Rose's comparison of his problem to those they faced.
''I think he's a Hall of Famer; it's a no-brainer,'' Eckersley said. ''I don't want to get into judging people. All you can say is it's a little late to admit it. It takes away from the forgiveness. But we've all got to forgive sometime. It's just bad timing, man. It's not right, but it doesn't take away from this.''
Molitor questioned Rose's suggestion that gambling on baseball was equivalent to substance abuse.
''Baseball's concern is integrity,'' Molitor said. ''There's some differences there in terms of those things. It's very clear what the penalties are for gambling on baseball. The penalties for the other things aren't as clear.''
Rose wrote that ''baseball had no fancy rehab for gamblers like they do for drug addicts,'' another assertion he often makes. Eckersley took exception to Rose's statement.
''Why didn't he get help?'' Eckersley said. ''There's help for that stuff, isn't there?''
Eckersley's career renaissance can be traced almost directly to his admission of alcoholism. He said his problems began well before he entered alcohol rehabilitation for 30 days after the 1986 season.
In 1987, a sober Eckersley joined the Oakland Athletics and accepted a move to the bullpen,. He became the most dominant closer of his generation.
''That off-season of '86, it was like, 'Thank God,' '' Eckersley said. ''You've got to be desperate before you do anything about it anyway. I can't get around that. I hate to talk about it, but guess what? That's part of my story. It's who I am.''
Molitor joined the Milwaukee Brewers in 1978, at age 21, and within a few years he had begun to experiment with marijuana and cocaine. He said he stopped using drugs before the problems spiraled out of control.
By 1982, Molitor had established himself as a premier hitter with speed, putting himself on a path that led to 3,319 hits over 21 seasons. He said that beating a serious problem had helped shaped his life since.
''A lot about who you end up becoming and the character you develop is how you handle some of the things that maybe you're not so proud of, or poor decisions and failures and mistakes,'' Molitor said.
''And for me, getting involved in that area at that time in my life, and dabbling into the drug and party scene as a youngster at the major league level, it's hard for me to imagine sometimes. It's almost 25 years ago.
''But it was real and it was problematic and it was something that could have easily cut short my career if I didn't get a grip on it quickly. But you learn from it and find the positive in it and try to use your experiences to help other people. And it makes you appreciate things that are good.''
Molitor said he and Eckersley had talked about their similar experiences. Now they will be linked in history in a happier way, at a ceremony in Cooperstown, N.Y., on July 25 that both will savor because of where they have been.
''All it does is just reinforce how grateful I am,'' Eckersley said. ''To be sober, you have to be grateful for everything. It's the ultimate motivation.''
BASEBALL
