Following are excerpts from Gov. John G. Rowland's speech yesterday, as recorded by The Associated Press:
These have been the most difficult times of my life. Over the course of the last month, I have lived my own personal nightmare -- unfortunately, a nightmare that has affected more than just me and my family. It has affected my friends, it has affected my fellow public servants and it has affected you and your family.
When we make mistakes in life, we tend to think of those mistakes in very personal terms. But when you live a public life, the ramifications of your actions are far greater.
They affect the people that you work with. They affect the people that have supported you. But most importantly, they affect the people of the state: you and your families, you who have put your trust in me.
That's what's most tragic. I have hurt and angered people that I have spent my entire adult life trying to serve.
Though I am proud of the accomplishments of my administration, I am well aware that my failings have cast a long shadow.
I was wrong when I accepted gifts given to me by state employees and from friends who do business with the state. For this I accept full responsibility.
But worse, I was wrong in failing to truthfully address these issues. I lied, and there are no excuses. My mistakes are my own, and I offer my sincerest apologies to the people of Connecticut, to my own family, to the people I work with and to our legislators and other public officials with whom I share an important public duty.
The lessons are very profound.
I fully recognize that my problems are not caused by the media or by my political opponents. They are a result of my own doing. They are self-inflicted, and unfortunately I have compounded them. . . .
One of the first lessons you teach your children as parents is to never tell a lie. In all of this, nothing weighs heavier on my heart than my failure to speak truthfully about these issues.
I should know better, and I do know better.
But I want you all to know that I have never -- not once -- provided any favors or taken any actions in exchange for the gifts I have received.
Still, as I face my problems, I ask no one to defend my actions. I ask no one for sympathy.
What I do ask for is the chance to allow a fair and full federal investigation to progress and to reach a conclusion. . . .
Tonight, I ask for your forgiveness, perhaps your understanding, and even your patience.
Those of you who know me, you know my true character.
Tonight, I humbly ask for a renewed opportunity to earn back your trust, to redeem myself in your eyes and to continue to lead this state. . . .
I love this state very much, and I have dedicated most of my adult life to serving the public.
For as long as I carry the responsibilities of this office, I intend to meet them -- each and every day that I serve. And as long as you have expectations of me, I will give my best to you in return.
