For most of the 1990's, Tassilo Schlicht, an unemployed German handyman, watched as Polish men and women crossed the Neisse River to work in and around his hometown, Forst, for wages typically three times the rate in Poland.
Last August, Mr. Schlicht, 46, ended his 12-year search for work in the former East Germany and began driving three miles a day across the same river to Zasieki, Poland, to a job. He now earns 900 euros a month ($1,150) as a cashier at a gas station serving cross-border consumers.
''Guten Tag,'' Mr. Schlicht greeted German shoppers in December at the yellow 10-pump Apexim station, where a liter of super unleaded costs 0.85 euro, 25 percent less than in Forst. ''Soon we're going to be living together, and as a German, going to Poland for a job, any job, just made sense.''
As Poland prepares to join the European Union in May, persistent unemployment in eastern Germany is beginning to lead some German job seekers east, creating a trickle of cross-border labor that is raising eyebrows in Germany.
''This is an interesting development,'' says Elmar Hönekopp, a researcher at the Institute for Employment Research in Nuremberg, part of the German Labor Ministry. ''One shouldn't overplay this, but this is something to watch.''
For years, the trend has been in the opposite direction. According to the German Federal Statistical Office, 317,600 Polish citizens worked in Germany in 2003. Mr. Hönekopp says 15,000 Germans work in Poland, most as senior officials for German companies.
But with unemployment rising in depressed border towns like Forst, which is 68 miles southeast of Berlin and has a population of 24,000, blue-collar Germans are shifting their sights to the east.
In November, the last month with government figures available, unemployment in the former East Germany averaged 17.4 percent, more than double the 8.1 percent rate in the former West Germany. In the town of Forst, however, unemployment rose to 22.5 percent, up from 20.9 percent a year earlier.
The town of Forst typifies many former East German border crossings, which continue to struggle more than 13 years after reunification. The town's center is dominated by a newly refurbished town hall, but along the main road leading to Poland, many storefronts are empty or occupied by bargain-basement ''one-euro stores,'' where no item costs more than a euro. ''My town is dying,'' Mr. Schlicht said. ''It's really sad.''
The movement to seek work in Poland highlights the mired local economies of eastern Germany. ''This says more about the continued weak state of the eastern German economy than it does really about the Polish economy,'' Mr. Hönekopp said.
Mr. Schlicht is one of 15 Germans working for Apexim, a chain based in Poznán, Poland, that employs 150 people at 14 gas stations along Poland's border with Germany. Since 1998, Apexim has built eight new stations to serve the growing numbers of German shoppers crossing the border for cheaper gas, cigarettes and food.
Apexim opened its station in Zasieki in August, a mile from the German border on a two-lane road next to five dilapidated houses. On a recent Sunday, German shoppers lined up 10 deep at Mr. Schlicht's register to fill their gas tanks and buy cartons of cigarettes for 16 euros, about half the price in Germany.
''We've been driving 65 kilometers to Poland to gas up and buy food for five years now,'' said Heinz Kunze, a 63-year-old German retiree from Grossräschen near Dresden. He also bought about two pounds of Polish butter for 3.60 euros - 44 percent less than he would have paid at home, just 40 miles away.
Wieslaw Lukszewski, 45, Apexim's personnel director, says that about 98 percent of its customers are German ''and we want to offer them the best quality and service.''
''That includes speaking the language of our customers, so hiring people like Tassilo made a lot of sense,'' he said.
As one of the first blue-collar Germans commuting to Poland, Mr. Schlicht has drawn attention at home, not all favorable. Most of his neighbors, Mr. Schlicht said, have congratulated him on his initiative to find work in Poland.
But in October, Bild Zeitung, a conservative German newspaper, portrayed Mr. Schlicht as a symbol of eastern Germany's growing desperation. The newspaper printed a photo of Mr. Schlicht peering under the hood of a car as a Polish co-worker stood by, and wrote: ''While Tassilo Schlicht gets his hands dirty, his Polish boss relaxes in the sun.''
Mr. Schlicht, 5 feet 9 inches tall with a wiry build and close-cut blond hair, shrugs off the negative publicity. He said a Polish customer once complained that he did not speak Polish well enough to work in Poland. Mr. Schlicht is learning the language at a college in Germany. ''Most customers don't care,'' he said. ''I like my Polish friends. This is the future, as far as I'm concerned.''
Some experts say that true mixing of the labor markets is years away. Wages in Poland are still a third of those in Germany, which will discourage most Germans from going east, said Burkard Steppacher, head of European research at the Konrad-Adenauer-Stiftung, a research institute in Sankt Augustin, Germany.
''This is a very specific situation involving cross-border consumers,'' Mr. Steppacher said. ''While it's not a big trend, it is a sign of normalization in the work force.''
Under terms of the European Union's expansion, restrictions will remain in place on Polish-German cross-border labor for up to seven years after Poland joins the union, said Heinrich Machowski, a Berlin economist who is a board member of the German-Polish Business League, a cross-border business group. ''What is happening, I think, is that a psychological change is taking place,'' he said. ''Poles are getting a sense of belonging to Western Europe, and Germans are more open to exploring jobs in the east.''
For Mr. Schlicht, the move to Poland ended a fruitless search for work in the former East Germany. In 1990, less than a year after German reunification, Mr. Schlicht lost his job at the former East German state-run Kombinat, giant Soviet-era factories that produced an array of goods, where he used to repair bicycles and washing machines and make shoes.
In the mid-1990's, he worked for a few months at an Esso gas station near Forst for no pay to get experience, but lost a chance for a job when German management cut staff, he said. He went through retraining programs at his local government unemployment office, but said he was never able to land a job.
In August, he saw Apexim's advertisement for German-speaking cashiers in his local newspaper, and went to the job interview in Zasieki, where 50 other Germans had shown up.
Mr. Schlicht says his cashier job pays him double what he had been receiving in monthly unemployment benefits and has allowed him to support his 20-year-old son, Oliver, a student at the Technical University of Dresden.
Apexim also pays for Mr. Schlicht's medical insurance, and if he loses his job, he will get Polish unemployment benefits. While working 10-hour shifts at the gas station is not his dream job, Mr. Schlicht is grateful. ''These days, a job is a job, wherever it is.''
