Gov. John G. Rowland's speech on Wednesday night left Democrats unmoved and Republicans split over the likelihood it could stem the political hemorrhaging.
Prominent Democrats interviewed after the speech said the damage was done, and there was little Mr. Rowland could say following recent revelations that would repair it.
''The governor's made-for-television speech was just another feeble attempt at damage control, and it is too late for apologies and spin,'' said James A. Amann, a Democrat and the House majority leader. ''The governor has lost the people's trust, and now even some members of the Republican caucus want him to resign. It's up to him to listen to them.''
George C. Jepsen, chairman of Democratic State Central Committee, said the governor's speech should have been delivered 10 months ago when Mr. Rowland faced questions of ethics violations.
''We're left with a governor whose credibility is so shredded, it's beyond repair,'' Mr. Jepsen said. ''And state government is paralyzed. All the meetings at the mansion have had nothing to do with the business of the Legislature; they've been about the business of restoring John Rowland's political future.''
Republicans were divided, with some calling for him to resign and others praising his speech as an act of contrition. But their defenses tended to be muted ones.
Louis C. DeLuca, a Republican who is Senate minority leader, called the speech ''an unusual portrait of the governor'' and showed Mr. Rowland taking full responsibility for his actions. But he said it was too soon to tell whether the public would be forgiving.
Asked if the speech would help Mr. Rowland regain public trust, Mr. DeLuca said: ''For those who didn't like him to begin with, it won't. For those who supported him, they'll continue to support him. It's the ones in the middle he was reaching out to.''
Mr. Rowland might see a rise in public support in the next few days, said Prof. Ken Dautrich, director of the Center for Survey Research at the University of Connecticut.
''The public is more prone than legislators to be swayed by emotional appeals,'' he said. ''But that will fade away as Democratic leaders begin talks on impeachment or that process, and as the federal investigation progresses, and every day it's in the headlines.''
William A. Aniskovich, a Republican and the Senate minority leader pro tempore, described the speech as ''an act of contrition that wasn't meant to reflect politics.''
''We are in the midst of a very fluid series of events and the speech is just one of those,'' he said. ''It was a sincere act of contrition. What the impact of it is a different question.''
At Connecticut restaurants, the reaction to the speech was skeptical, at best. Several people said they believed the apology was sincere but doubted whether it could override their concerns about Mr. Rowland's honesty.
''He got caught,'' said Jeff Swenson, 43, at Grant's Restaurant and Bar in West Hartford. ''There's probably more stuff we don't know about.''
Jim Sherman, 37, a salesman from South Windsor who was at Max's Oyster Bar, said that as a Republican, he wished the apology changed his mind, but it didn't.
''I feel bad for the guy,'' he said. ''I got choked up when he was talking, but after he said how he sincerely regretted everything, I kept waiting for him to say, 'and therefore I should resign.' ''
