In January 1988, Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri hunkered down in Iowa, devoting nearly all of his time and nearly all of his cash to the state he thought would propel him to the Oval Office in his first bid for the presidency.
Iowa is still critical to his presidential campaign this time around; his aides say he must win it to gain the Democratic nomination. Yet with less than two weeks to go before the Iowa caucuses, Mr. Gephardt has been hopscotching across the country, courting sugar-beet farmers in North Dakota on Sunday, wooing voters over biscuits and gravy in Oklahoma on Monday and rallying cheering steelworkers here in South Carolina on Wednesday.
At the steelworkers rally, Mr. Gephardt lashed out for the first time at Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who is not campaigning in Iowa but who has been leading in several polls in South Carolina, a state that Mr. Gephardt hopes to win.
Mr. Gephardt is hoping to persuade fund-raisers and wavering voters that he has learned from his past and will be viable in the primaries that follow the Iowa caucuses on Jan. 19. This campaign, he says, is broader than the one he ran in 1988, when he ran out of money and victories shortly after winning in Iowa.
''You learn from your experience,'' Mr. Gephardt said as he reflected on his two presidential campaigns in an interview this week. ''You learn from your mistakes.''
In 1988, Mr. Gephardt ran television advertisements exclusively in Iowa in the weeks before the Iowa caucuses. Mr. Gephardt is currently running television advertisements in Iowa, Oklahoma and Michigan, with spots set to resume in New Hampshire and South Carolina this month. Next week, he plans to campaign in Michigan and Washington State.
''We're going to these other places to pay attention to those voters so that when we finally get there after we get the results we're looking for in Iowa and New Hampshire, we've got a base of support to build on and we're not starting from scratch,'' he said. ''We're trying to run a better campaign that is more likely to succeed.''
Mr. Gephardt is still haunted by his failed presidential campaign. He is no longer the boyish upstart who stumped through all 99 counties in Iowa, hoping to fix his name in the hearts of voters. His strawberry blond hair is tinged with silver now, and he has become one of the most powerful Democrats in Congress and a household name.
But aides to Howard Dean, his primary rival in Iowa, have accused him of running the same ''one-state strategy'' that failed in 1988. Doubts about Mr. Gephardt's finances and his ability to run a national campaign have dampened the support of fund-raisers and even of some of the voters who lean toward him.
Last month, the Wisconsin Advertising Project reported that Mr. Gephardt had dedicated 80 percent of his advertising dollars in Iowa from last January to December. Dr. Dean, by contrast, spent about 40 percent of his budget in Iowa. Mr. Gephardt is battling Dr. Dean for primacy in Iowa, but he lags rivals in most polls in other states.
Still, Mr. Gephardt's advisers emphasize that there are important differences between 1988 and today. In his first campaign, Mr. Gephardt spent 144 days in Iowa, installing his mother in an apartment in Des Moines and moving his wife and children there, too, in the summer of 1987. By the end of 2003, by contrast, he had spent more than 50 days in Iowa, 24 days in New Hampshire, 11 days in South Carolina, 10 days in Michigan and 6 days in Oklahoma, as well a day in North Dakota and some time in other states.
He has hired state directors in 14 states and has no plans to uproot them for the Iowa campaign as he did in 1988. His advisers say he is now spending half of his advertising budget outside of Iowa.
He has taken pains to court prominent politicians in other states, snagging the critical endorsement of Representative James E. Clyburn of South Carolina, who campaigned with him here on Wednesday.
And in recent weeks, he has been rallying steelworkers in Michigan, dining on barbecue ribs with voters in South Carolina, praying in black churches in Oklahoma and telling everyone who will listen that he is the candidate committed to working families, unions and universal health care.
Lisa Blanco, 40, a social worker, said she was astonished to stumble across Mr. Gephardt, a politician so closely associated with Iowa, in her tiny town of McAlester, Okla., this week.
''I was surprised,'' she said. ''As of today, I'm with Gephardt.''
But some warn that his forays outside Iowa may cost him. Mr. Gephardt is even with Dr. Dean in Iowa, but even supporters in other states say they are counting on an Iowa victory to carry the day.
''A lot here depends on what happens there,'' Mr. Clyburn said on Wednesday as he stood among the cheering steelworkers. ''From what I hear from people, they're still looking and hoping for some signal from Iowa that this is a viable candidate.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MISSOURI CONGRESSMAN
