Saying, ''I have lived my own personal nightmare,'' Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut admitted on Wednesday night that he had lied to the residents of the state, apologized and pleaded to keep his job in the face of mounting ethical scandals.
''I was wrong when I accepted gifts given to me by state employees and from friends who do business with the state,'' Mr. Rowland said in a six-minute speech televised live from his office in the Capitol. ''But worse, I was wrong in failing to truthfully address these issues. I lied and there are no excuses.''
The speech, the most important in a political career that has spanned more than two decades, came one day after Mr. Rowland became the first sitting governor in Connecticut to be served with a subpoena for personal records, as part of a vast federal corruption investigation.
During his speech, Mr. Rowland never mentioned the specifics of the investigation. Instead, he used his most formal and high-profile appearance since the start of the controversy to offer an abject apology.
''Tonight, I ask for your forgiveness, perhaps your understanding and even your patience,'' he said.
Mr. Rowland, a Republican in his third term, was not his usual assured self. He choked up several times.
At the heart of the controversy surrounding Mr. Rowland are gifts and free work done on his private cottage in Litchfield. At a Dec. 2 news conference, Mr. Rowland denied he took anything free of charge. But 10 days later, he admitted that his earlier statements were untrue.
The governor made public documents that showed that he received thousands of dollars of free work from people at the center of a federal investigation into corruption in the awarding of state contracts.
One of the people who helped outfit his cottage is his former deputy chief of staff, who pleaded guilty to accepting bribes paid in cash and gold.
Mr. Rowland did not explain why he took the gifts, except to say that he has made ''mistakes.'' However, he added, ''I want to tell you that I have never -- not once -- provided any favors or taken any actions in exchange for the gifts that I have received.''
Mr. Rowland's mission last night was twofold. He was seeking both to win back public support and to keep legislators from moving to begin an impeachment inquiry.
Immediately after his speech, Moira K. Lyons, a Democrat and the speaker of the House, said that nothing she heard changed her opinion.
''If my word is not good, I do not think people are ever going to support me or listen to me again,'' she said. Ms. Lyons planned to meet with all Democrats in the House on Thursday, and the only item on the agenda was to be deciding whether to proceed with an impeachment inquiry.
Robert M. Ward, a Republican and the minority leader in the House, said it was too early to know how the public would react to the speech. But politically, he said, the governor still had significant work to do.
''I think it would be appropriate for the governor to answer detailed questions,'' he said.
Mr. Ward did not voice any opposition to an impeachment inquiry.
Even before Mr. Rowland spoke, Kevin B. Sullivan, a Democrat and the president pro tempore of the Senate, called for the governor's resignation. Mr. Sullivan was the first member of the legislative leadership to go that far.
A clear majority of the public also believes it is time for Mr. Rowland to step down, according to a poll released Tuesday morning by Quinnipiac University.
According to the poll, 56 percent of Connecticut residents said they believed Mr. Rowland should resign. Only 13 percent of voters say he is honest and trustworthy. The poll was conducted Jan. 4 to 6, before Mr. Rowland received the subpoena for his documents. The poll of 1,006 registered voters has a margin of error of plus or minus 3.1 percentage points.
In his address, Mr. Rowland said he would work hard to regain the trust his actions have damaged.
Aides to the governor said he made a conscious decision to limit his remarks and not go into details, fearing attention would be taken away from the apology.
But it is the subpoena's request for specific information on Mr. Rowland's gifts that gets to the core of his ethical troubles. The subpoena reflects a broadening of the investigation to include a review of the governor's personal finances since he took office in 1995.
The issue of gratuities -- in the form of discounted or free vacation rentals from people doing business with the state, personal charges to a Republican Party credit card and a vintage Mustang given him for a birthday present -- has long plagued the governor. The circumstances of some of them, and the governor's explanations for them, have similarities to the cottage controversy and involve some of the same people.
The Mustang, for instance, was procured by a close aide to the governor, Vincent J. DeRosa, who was also among those who Mr. Rowland said helped outfit his cottage. The car was presented to Mr. Rowland by his wife, Patricia, at a party in 1999 held at Tunxis Plantation, a country club owned by the Tomasso family, whose construction companies are at the center of the federal investigation.
When asked last year by reporters about the Mustang, Mr. Rowland insisted that it was not a gift, and that he had paid $22,000 for it before selling it for the same amount. But copies of checks he made public were dated months after the car was given to him, as were checks he has made public showing belated payments for cottage improvements that are now under investigation.
Mr. Rowland acknowledged his troubled history with finding the dividing line between the public and the personal.
''As you might imagine, I've had many sleepless nights over the past few weeks,'' Mr. Rowland said. ''I've wrestled with John Rowland the governor and the mess I've created. But I've also wrestled with John Rowland the person.''
Despite the increasing pressure on the governor to resign, Mr. Rowland again vowed not to leave office.
''I humbly ask for a renewed opportunity to earn back your trust, to redeem myself in your eyes and to continue to lead this state,'' he said.
