Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur reached quickly behind him and scooped up the puck, as if no one else had noticed. But the replay camera, like a closed-circuit monitor at a department store, had caught everything.
As if falling behind the worst team in the National Hockey League was not quite humiliating enough, the Devils had shot a puck into their own net Wednesday night and went on to lose, 4-2, to the Pittsburgh Penguins.
''It put the icing on the cake in saying we weren't ready for the game,'' Brodeur said of allowing a goal on a clearing attempt by defenseman Scott Niedermayer.
On a night when 2 points seemed all but certain, the Devils (20-9-9-1) lost a point in the standing to the Philadelphia Flyers, who tied Buffalo, 1-1. The Devils, who have played two fewer games, trail Philadelphia by 4 points in the Atlantic Division.
Of larger concern to Devils Coach Pat Burns is the way his team, 2-3-2-1 in its last eight games, is playing in general. Not only did the Devils start poorly, but they also gave Pittsburgh five power plays. The Penguins scored on one of them.
''I'm going to have to check their hearts and check their heads to see where this is going,'' Burns said. ''What is the problem? I think that's what it is. I think definitely it is gut-check time.''
Pittsburgh (10-23-5-3), which lost Monday by five goals and lost its owner and captain, Mario Lemieux, for the season Tuesday to planned hip surgery, became the last N.H.L. team of the season to get its first victory against a division opponent. The Penguins are 1-8-3-1 in the Atlantic Division.
''It was definitely our team's fault,'' Burns said. ''We were unmotivated, undisciplined, uninspired. All those good words.''
The Devils fell behind by three goals. The second one came with 18 seconds left in the first period, when Niedermayer shot the puck past Brodeur as he attempted to clear the puck from his zone.
''I didn't expect it at all for Nieder to shoot the puck at me,'' Brodeur said.
Dogged by Pittsburgh right wing Matt Bradley into the corner to Brodeur's left, Niedermayer tried to clear the puck by flipping it along the goal line, toward Brodeur. The puck hit Brodeur's stick, then bounced over the goal line before Brodeur picked it up.
Bradley was credited with his second goal, and the Devils were booed off the ice at the end of the period. Burns waved his hand in disgust toward the ice, even though the officials had skated off.
Asked when he had done that last, Niedermayer said: ''Not for a long time. I had three in one season one time. Unfortunately, I was overdue.''
Niedermayer later scored a power-play goal, and Patrik Elias scored his 13th goal of the season at 2 minutes 39 seconds of the third period after taking a pass from Scott Gomez.
Devils center Erik Rasmussen nearly scored the tying goal in the final minute, but Pittsburgh goaltender Jean-Sébastien Aubin dived to make a glove save.
''I made solid contact with the puck, Rasmussen said. ''I knew it had a chance.''
The end was only a tease. Penguins center Mike Eastwood, who had scored one goal in 40 games before Wednesday, gave Pittsburgh a 1-0 lead at 10:38 of the first period because the Devils appeared to be afraid to touch him before he shot.
Devils right wing Turner Stevenson received a high-sticking penalty, and Pittsburgh left wing Ryan Malone swept a rebound past Brodeur at 7:58 of the second period to make it 3-0. The chase began.
''It seems to be a little bit of a pattern, not being prepared to play,'' Devils center John Madden said.
And no one seems to know why.
''We emphasized having a good start,'' Scott Stevens, the captain, said. ''We said we can't get behind the eight ball. And it happened again.''
HOCKEY
