The Giants' kick in the pants showed up for his first day of work Wednesday, wearing a crisp suit and a warm smile but carrying plenty of warning about what lies ahead.
In Tom Coughlin's opening speech as the new Giants coach, he promised to restore pride and professionalism, to clean up turnovers and special teams. He called the extensive injury list ''a cancer'' and said coaching could help that, too. ''It's a mental thing, I believe, as much as it is anything else,'' he said.
The Giants say they did not set out to find a whip-cracking disciplinarian to turn their 4-12 team upside down, but they clearly consider it a bonus. Asked if he thought the players would be nervous about Coughlin, the Giants' patriarch, Wellington Mara, said, ''I hope they are.''
What the Giants were seeking was a coach who would make it, in Mara's words, ''uncomfortable to lose.'' They found him in a man they have admired since he worked as an assistant under Bill Parcells for three seasons in the glory years, 1988 to '90. They tried to hire him before, in 1993, and when they had a second chance, they grabbed it.
Mara greeted Coughlin on Wednesday morning by saying, ''Welcome home.''
Coughlin, 57, called his hiring a dream come true. His re-entry into the game after a year off came courtesy of a franchise he feels deeply about. He grew up in Waterloo, N.Y., when television was black and white and he could watch only two N.F.L. teams, the Browns and the Giants. He said he watched the Giants' collapse this season -- in color, on DirecTV -- with sadness but also with an eye on the opportunity. He has spent the year since the Jacksonville Jaguars fired him preparing for a chance to coach again.
He attended the N.F.L. scouting combine last year, stood on the field with his own stopwatch and timed players in the 40-yard dash the way he always had. He fully expected another crack at being a head coach. He did not want to be left behind. His year away from the game -- after eight seasons coaching the expansion Jaguars ended in three losing years and his firing -- was an unnatural one.
He had been coaching since he graduated from Syracuse in 1968. ''It was a unique experience,'' Coughlin said. ''I've done it all my life. You become a creature of habit, and as the calendar unfolds, you think and act the same way as you did when you were coaching. When the season rolled around, I was looking for a training camp.''
Four of Coughlin's colleagues invited him to work as a consultant in their training camps, including Parcells in Dallas, but once the season started, Coughlin was left in front of his television to contemplate the future. His future finally arrived this week.
He was the Giants' first thought when Jim Fassel urged the team to announce his firing with two games left in the season. The Giants interviewed three other candidates: the New England defensive coordinator, Romeo Crennel; the Patriots' offensive coordinator, Charlie Weis; and the St. Louis defensive coordinator, Lovie Smith. They also inquired about Louisiana State Coach Nick Saban's interest in the job. The Giants' executive vice president, John Mara, said that Crennel, Weis and Smith were all impressive in their interviews and that the decision was harder than he expected. The Giants contacted Saban's agent on Monday but decided that pursuing him would mean a long, unsettling courtship.
What swung the Giants toward Coughlin and away from the three coordinators was his N.F.L. head-coaching experience, Mara said. John Mara and General Manager Ernie Accorsi conducted the interviews. After Coughlin came to New York on Monday for a second interview, Mara and Accorsi recommended Coughlin to the Giants' co-owners, Wellington Mara and Robert Tisch, who made the final decision.
''I was always rooting for Tom,'' Wellington Mara said. ''But if the owner's been around long enough, he knows enough not to express his own feelings and use his judgment.''
The Giants decided their veteran-laden team, which started the season with Super Bowl aspirations, needed a jolt from a coach with N.F.L. experience.
Coughlin said he would not comment on the players until he had a chance to study the films further. But asked about tight end Jeremy Shockey, one of the team's controversial players, he said: ''The kid has a heart and a spirit, and you want to capture that. But he's got to recognize he's a professional, and be aware of how people perceive him.''
Coughlin said he believed most of the team's major problems, like turnovers, could be addressed through coaching. The Giants finished the season minus-16 in turnover ratio, tied for worst in the N.F.L.
''I think you drill it right away,'' Coughlin said. ''A lot of it has to do with the fundamentals of how you secure the ball. A lot of it has to do with engaging your defensive players from Day 1, telling them to strip the ball. The idea is, you drill the defense to strip the ball and you drill the offense to protect the ball.''
His assertion that the Giants' extensive injury problems were rooted in a lack of discipline raised a few eyebrows, but Coughlin is clearly not done ruffling feathers. Under N.F.L. rules, he will get two extra minicamps to evaluate his new team, beginning in late March. The changes will start much sooner.
Coughlin said his first job was to assemble what he hopes will be the best staff in football. He will meet with current players and evaluate them on film. He will begin to establish the routine that will govern the Giants.
That routine is what comes with Coughlin, who believes his rules are the basis for discipline. He forbids players to have facial hair or wear hats in meetings. They must sit up straight with their feet flat on the floor. A ringing cellphone draws a fine.
''I've spent a lifetime trying to improve concentration and focus,'' he said. ''I don't know how a guy who's slouching can pay attention to what is going on.''
Coughlin also said that his stern reputation was a bit overblown, that he had grown and adapted over the years. He changed his often-criticized ban on coaches wearing sunglasses at practice while he was in Jacksonville, but no one gave him credit for it.
''There was a stamp put on me in '95, and nobody seems to be able to write any current articles,'' Coughlin said. ''Those same impressions carried all the way through. You don't stay the same. Nobody stays the same. You adjust and you move on.''
The Giants are also clearly moving on, leaving the Fassel era and its player-friendly atmosphere behind. They also hope they are shedding the reasons for a 12-loss season and a collapse of the high hopes that surrounded the team.
Coughlin, they decided, had two of the qualities they wanted most: he has something to prove after being fired in Jacksonville, and he has a high energy level.
''He has an all-consuming commitment to winning,'' Accorsi said. ''He is just all about winning.''
That is the change the Giants want most of all.
PRO FOOTBALL
