WHIPLASH  Developed by Crystal Dynamics and published by Eidos for the Xbox and PlayStation 2; $49.95; for ages 13 and older.
SPHINX AND THE CURSED MUMMY  Developed by Eurocom and published by THQ for the Xbox, PlayStation 2 and the GameCube; $49.99; for ages 13 and older.
MARIO AND LUIGI: SUPERSTAR SAGA  Developed by Alpha Dream and published by Nintendo for the Game Boy Advance; $34.99; for all ages.
I BLAME Warner Brothers for my cavalier attitude toward violence. I have been inured by decades' worth of the misadventures of Daffy Duck and Wile E. Coyote. Now when I see a cartoon bunny plugged into an electrical socket, I just laugh. I can't help myself.
Heartless gamers like me will find a lot to laugh at in Crystal Dynamics' action-adventure game Whiplash, which uses animal product testing as a backdrop. This game revolves around the adventures of Spanx and Redmond, a weasel and a rabbit who are trying to escape from the mega-corporation Genron while handcuffed together. Genron's motto is: ''We hurt animals so you don't have to.''
Years of testing have made Redmond tough, and Spanx uses him as a ''Swiss Army bunny,'' jamming machinery with his body, turning him into a helium-filled balloon, or just using him as a mace against the researchers who cry out ''Stop in the name of science!'' as they attack. ''Hey,'' he remarks as Spanx drags him across the floor, ''this is just like water-skiing, except it's on concrete.''
As they search for a way out of Genron, Spanx and Redmond must jump across ledges, crawl through pipes and air vents, and try to bankrupt Genron by damaging equipment and freeing animals who will in turn attack guards and scientists. About half the game is a lot of fun. The other half involves corridors.
Genron is riddled with long hallways guarded by electronic sensors and robot weasels, and one is constantly running down a seemingly endless series of corridors hoping to arrive someplace. One room exits into five long, identical corridors with the same hazards and guards. Whiplash can be finished by an experienced gamer in less than 10 hours, and the hallways seem to exist to prevent the player from finishing in five. It's unfortunate, because Whiplash would make a great five-hour game, perfect for a one-day rental.
Because of the repetitive game play, even if you don't finish the game, you'll feel like returning it the next day.
Sphinx and the Cursed Mummy, an action-adventure game developed by Eurocom, takes longer to finish yet has far less repetition. The game is long only in the way a game is supposed to be: by increasing the difficulty and complexity as it gives the player new skills to deal with ever more challenging obstacles.
Set in a gorgeously rendered ancient Egypt populated by people with animal heads, the game follows the adventures of Sphinx, a young warrior with a tail, and Prince Tutankhamen, a young man who has the misfortune to be turned into a mummy early in the game.
Sphinx is a fairly typical hero who uses athleticism, wits and a sword to battle monsters. The monsters are varied, including flaming armadillos that curl into balls and roll into you. Some monsters can be captured: the armadillo, for example, can be used to set something on fire. Occasionally the game forces you into a match in which you fight monsters in a locked room.
But these battles seem poorly integrated into the story. And because the game sets major battles some distance from the nearest save point, you often wind up dying and then having to travel some distance and repeat some lesser challenges just to get back to a place where, unless you are very lucky, you will again die and have to repeat the process.
While Sphinx also has to solve various puzzles, it is Tutankhamen who faces the most elaborate mind-benders. Since he's a mummy, he's already dead, so he can't be killed. He can set himself on fire to burn down a wooden gate or slide through narrow gaps after being squashed by a boulder.
Sphinx is reminiscent of the Legend of Zelda video-game series; grand edifices and vast landscapes help give the game its epic feel. Yet Alpha Dream's role-playing game Mario &amp; Luigi: Superstar Saga manages to create a sense of grand adventure on the tiny Game Boy Advance screen.
Superstar follows the same basic formula as Sphinx, in which one travels the depth and breadth of the land gathering items and attaining powers with which to battle increasingly durable monsters and solve increasingly complex puzzles.
The game's turn-based battle system is quite ingenious. Like other role-playing games, Superstar gives characters a certain number of points that indicate how powerful their attacks are.
But instead of a strict mathematical system for determining the damage inflicted, attacks can be strengthened and enemy actions parried by pushing the right button at the right time. The result is a game that melds the best aspects of role-playing battle with the best aspects of arcade action.
Superstar is also quite funny, with a goofy story involving the theft of a princess's voice, simple but clever slapstick comedy. The best character is the villain Fawful, who makes threats like: ''Princess Peach's sweet voice will soon be the bread that makes the sandwich of Cackletta's desires! And this battle shall be the delicious mustard on that bread! The mustard of your doom!''
It's the only Game Boy game I've played that made me laugh out loud.
Superstar and Sphinx are brilliant games with similar structures, but they also share a major flaw: the inability to bypass scenes and dialogue you have already watched. And unlike games that use recorded dialogue, permitting you to at least spend the wasted time petting your cat or cleaning your fingernails, these games rely on text dialogue that requires you to keep tapping a controller button to move from sentence to sentence.
Critics and players often disparage games that prevent you from skipping dramatic scenes, yet a startling number of developers pay no heed. Maybe they are aware of the high tolerance of experienced, hard-core gamers, who have gone through so many aggravations so many times in so many games. Games are developed and tested by such gamers, and even though the industry acknowledges the importance of appealing to the inexperienced casual gamer who buys something at Kmart, some developers seem unable to recognize unacceptably irritating game features.
Developers should really test their games on inexperienced gamers, though it might be cruel to put them through the annoyance. Perhaps instead game testing could be farmed out to Genron, which would force bunnies and chimpanzees to play video games. The sight of a chimp screaming in frustration as it listened to the same conversation for the 15th time might finally make developers realize that some of these games are just too cruel.
GAME THEORY E-mail: Herold@nytimes.com
