From the opening joke, Gov. George E. Pataki used his annual address to the Legislature to signal that he was in no way a lame duck, despite being in a third term and having suffered through a humbling budget battle with lawmakers last year.
Making light of how long his speeches usually run, he asked several people who are considered possible future candidates for governor if they were comfortable in their seats. Then he paused and said, ''Because I may be here a long time.''
The lawmakers, judges and other dignitaries who were crammed into the Assembly chamber on Wednesday broke into laughter.
As usual, the governor's so-called state of the state address revealed more about the state of the governor than about anything else. Throughout the hour-and-fifteen-minute address, the governor struggled to lay out not only an agenda for what he will do with his next three years in office but also a rationale for why he might be needed for a fourth term.
He vowed to work with lawmakers to make New York the safest state in America in five years, to create a million new jobs within a decade and to make all of the Hudson River safe to swim in by the year 2009. He challenged the same lawmakers, who overrode his veto of the budget last year, to pass 45 pieces of legislation, from antiterrorism laws to changing the budget-making process. These were not the goals of a short-timer.
''It is true the governor is keeping his options open and those options include running for re-election,'' one of Mr. Pataki's senior aides said Monday night, as the governor was going through his last rehearsals of the address. ''In order to do that you have to really set long-range visionary goals.''
But if the speech was meant to remind lawmakers that the governor is still important in New York, it also seemed intended to portray Mr. Pataki as a man wrestling with weighty security matters that the public usually thinks of as federal issues. He spent the first part of his address talking about the importance of the war on terrorism and the sacrifice of the American military.
Mr. Pataki, who has not ruled out running for the United States Senate in 2006 or president in 2008, consciously echoed Franklin Delano Roosevelt's famous Four Freedoms speech, asserting that the agenda he was laying out would give New Yorkers freedom from crime, poverty, ignorance and an unhealthy environment. He ended with a quote from Abraham Lincoln about freedom.
To a large degree, the governor returned in the speech to a tried-and-true theme that has worked for him since he was first elected in 1994. He declared that security was government's top priority and called on the Legislature to pass more than a dozen tough-on-crime measures.
He went so far as to say that the most important legislation the lawmakers would take up this year was a bill that would, among other things, make it easier to eavesdrop on suspected terrorists and allow prosecutors greater leeway to charge them in state courts.
Some Democrats in the audience found the notion that an antiterrorism law was the biggest issue they faced laughable. They pointed to a looming $6 billion budget deficit, a crisis in Medicaid costs that has driven property taxes sky-high and a court order to improve inner-city schools that could cost billions of dollars.
Democrats said the speech was notable for what it did not say. Mr. Pataki said nothing about raising the minimum wage, one of organized labor's priorities this year. He made a vague pledge to reduce the cost of Medicaid and lessen its burden on local governments, but did not say how he would do so. And he made only a passing allusion to the budget crisis, saying that he agreed with legislative leaders that this was not a year to raise taxes.
''I don't know how you can discuss the state of the state without discussing the state's finances,'' Comptroller Alan G. Hevesi, a Democrat, said.
Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Westchester County Democrat who is a frequent critic of the administration, said: ''The central issues that New Yorkers care about were not in the speech. There is an ostrich-like quality to it.''
On education, always one of the most contentious issues in Albany, the governor offered no details about how he would overhaul financing for New York City schools, which the state's highest court has ordered. But he said the guiding principle should be to scrap the old school aid formulas and make sure more resources get spent in the classroom.
Not surprisingly, the Republicans who control the Senate praised the governor for laying out what they said was an ambitious agenda.
''What he was saying is he's here, he's the governor, he's accomplished many things and has a great deal more work to complete,'' said Senator Nicholas A. Spano, a Westchester County Republican who is a strong supporter of Mr. Pataki.
The tenor of this year's speech stood in sharp contrast to last year's, when the governor drew a line in the sand, declaring he would not stand for any increase in ''job-killing taxes.''
This year, the governor took pains to sound conciliatory. For instance, he praised the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, a Manhattan Democrat, and the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, a Republican, for their work in attracting high-technology industries to New York, something for which he usually claims sole credit.
Some Democrats took the governor's gentler tone as a sign of political weakness. But Senator Bruno and other Republicans said Mr. Pataki was sending a strong signal that he was willing to compromise.
''I think it's an indication he's less confrontational and I applaud that,'' Senator Bruno said. ''We were in different places last year. I think this is a year of togetherness. I think the governor feels it. I don't think you are going to see confrontation.''
News Analysis
