BACK when Washington had a major league baseball team, the usually woebegone Senators, the sports joke there was that the nation's capital was ''first in war, first in peace and last in the American League.'' It was a bad joke, so bad that the Senators deserted Washington not once but twice, first for Minnesota, then for Texas.
In pro football recently, it wasn't much better.
With the Redskins having qualified for the playoffs only once in the 11 seasons since Joe Gibbs took his three Super Bowl rings to Nascar, the pro football version of that joke permeated the nation's capital. But all those people who remembered when ''Hail to the Redskins'' was more important there than ''Hail to the Chief'' didn't think it was funny.
They didn't think Daniel Snyder, the Redskins' owner, was funny, either.
Just about everything Snyder has done since he purchased the franchise has had little impact. When he signed Bruce Smith and Deion Sanders as free agents in 2000, then fired Coach Norv Turner near the end of the season, the Redskins ended up 8-8. When he brought in Marty Schottenheimer as coach in 2001, they were 8-8 again.
When Snyder hijacked Steve Spurrier from the University of Florida for $25 million over five years in 2002, the Redskins would surely become better. Instead they got worse -- 7-9 that season, 5-11 the next, prompting Spurrier's resignation. For all his success as a college coach, he knew he had been a bust as a pro coach.
But the reality of the Redskins' problems is that Daniel Snyder has been a bust as an owner.
As a businessman who had made zillions in the communications industry, he wouldn't let anybody tell him how to operate a pro football franchise; he would tell you. But after four sad seasons, he persuaded Joe Gibbs to return as coach and presumably make the Redskins relevant again.
And suddenly, Gibbs is not only the Redskins' coach again, he is also the club president with a reported five-year, $25 million contract.
But for Gibbs to be a success, Snyder can't be peering over his shoulder every minute. Or worse, Snyder can't be signing or cutting players without Gibbs's approval. After four sad seasons, Snyder should have realized that being a communications genius doesn't make him a pro football genius.
In the 63-year-old Gibbs, Snyder suddenly has a Pro Football Hall of Fame coach with the unique distinction of having won three Super Bowls with three quarterbacks, none of whom will ever be enshrined in Canton, Ohio -- Joe Theismann, Doug Williams and Mark Rypien.
If Snyder is as smart as he thinks he is, he'll just sign the checks and let Gibbs coach.
When Gibbs departed with a 124-60 record (16-5 in the postseason), Jack Kent Cooke, then the Redskins' owner, correctly called him the best coach in the history of the franchise. Gibbs certainly did more than two other Redskins coaches in the Hall of Fame -- George Allen and his Over the Hill Gang of three decades ago, and Ray Flaherty, who won the 1937 and the 1942 titles with the renowned passer Sammy Baugh.
Vince Lombardi also coached the Redskins, but for only one season, so it's unfair to rate his Hall of Fame résumé against Gibbs's record. After guiding the Green Bay Packers to five championships, including the first two Super Bowls, and remaining the general manager in Green Bay in 1968, Lombardi joined the Redskins in 1969 and produced a 7-5-2 record. But he died of cancer before the 1970 season.
Gibbs's return surprised some, but not all, pro football people. ''Sooner or later,'' Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi said, ''they all come back.''
All the great coaches anyway. Just as Lombardi did after a year away from the sideline, as Bill Parcells did twice (once after two years, the other after three), as Paul Brown did after five years away, as George Halas did off and on when he owned the Bears.
Gibbs has been away 11 years, a long time for anybody in any sport. But Dick Vermeil, now with the Kansas City Chiefs, was away from coaching for 14 years before returning to the Rams and winning a Super Bowl in January 2000.
Wisely, Gibbs has reportedly already hired two assistant coaches familiar with the league personnel -- Joe Bugel and Gregg Williams. As a Gibbs assistant, Bugel was the longtime coach of the Redskins' offensive line, the celebrated Hogs. Williams, recently discharged as the Buffalo Bills' head coach, had been a respected defensive coordinator for the Tennessee Titans.
Gibbs knows he has a capable quarterback in Patrick Ramsey, and Bugel will develop an offensive line to protect him, unlike Spurrier, who threw Ramsey to the wolves of every opposing team's blitz.
And competitively, with Parcells in Dallas, Tom Coughlin on the Giants' sideline and Gibbs all working to dethrone Andy Reid's Philadelphia Eagles, the National Football Conference East could be the N.F.C. Beast it was when Gibbs, Parcells, Tom Landry and Buddy Ryan were together there some 15 years ago.
As long as Daniel Snyder just signs the checks.
Sports of The Times
