The Sumitomo Trust and Banking Company will repay the last of the public money that it borrowed in 1999, the latest sign that Japan's financial industry is slowly returning to health.
Sumitomo Trust, which is based in Osaka, is considered one of the strongest of Japan's big commercial banks, with far fewer nonperforming loans than its competitors. It becomes the second major lender, after the Mitsubishi Tokyo Financial Group, to return all the taxpayer money borrowed at the height of Japan's banking crisis, when the government spent about 8 trillion yen ($75 billion) to prop up teetering lenders.
On Jan. 13, Sumitomo Trust will buy back the 100 billion yen ($941 million) in preferred shares the government bought in 1999. The bank will then sell the shares to 29 companies close to Sumitomo Trust for 138 billion yen ($1.3 billion).
The next day, Jan. 14, Sumitomo Trust will use cash on hand to repurchase the 100 billion yen in subordinated bonds it issued to the government, and repay 2.4 billion yen ($22.5 million) in interest.
Last year, Sumitomo Trust and several other banks repaid the billions in yen they borrowed from the government in 1998.
Although most large banks returned to the black in the six months from April to September, few are expected to follow Sumitomo Trust and repay all the money they borrowed from the government, analysts said. The Mizuho Financial Group, UFJ Holdings and other bank groups must first write off more of their nonperforming loans before they can afford to repay the government.
Even Sumitomo Trust will see little immediate benefit. The bank will be free of direct government control and will reduce its interest payments. But its capital adequacy ratio, a crucial barometer of its health, will remain low compared to its international peers. More worrisome, its core business serving pension funds and other big institutions is still under heavy competition from rivals.
''In general, the buyback is positive news,'' said Yukiko Ohara, a bank analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston. ''But trust banks are under a lot of pressure to cut fees, yet they still have a lot of operating costs.''
Sumitomo Trust must also battle other banks, foreign and local, for the right to manage pension funds and other large accounts. Pension funds have tried to offset the long slide in the stock market by cutting the fees they pay managers.
For example, the Government Pension Investment Fund, the world's largest pension fund, cut the fees it paid managers by 57 percent in 2001 and 2002.
The fees Sumitomo Trust earned from its trust business fell 21.5 percent in its fiscal first-half ended in September, compared with the same period the year before.
Japanese banks, Sumitomo Trust included, are also having difficulty raising the amount they charge borrowers. Interest rates are near zero and demand for new loans is weak, so banks continue to generate only thin profits from their loan books.
Moody's Investors Service, in a report issued on Wednesday, said government support for the banks remains strong, but that ''there are only 'dim prospects' for a rapid improvement in core earnings.'' Ms. Ohara said the large number of trust banks and the need to cut fees would ultimately lead lenders to merge or be bought out.
''There isn't a need for all of them,'' Ms. Ohara said.
