Italian prosecutors are widening their investigation of Parmalat to include Italian and foreign banks, which they suspect helped Parmalat's senior executives spread false information about the company to sell its bonds and lift its shares.
On Wednesday, authorities here and in Parma, where the food and dairy company is based, met for the first time with foreign banks, questioning four executives from Deutsche Bank and meeting with a lawyer for Citigroup.
A prosecutor in Milan, Eugenio Fusco, said that the investigation had spread beyond the actions of Parmalat's executives to a web of outside bankers and advisers, who he said may have helped the company paint a misleading picture of itself to Italian and foreign investors.
Mr. Fusco did not name the banks or describe the kind of information that was disseminated. It is not clear whether any bank knew the full extent of Parmalat's actions, which became apparent last month after a statement that purported to show a $4.1 billion account at Bank of America was found to be a fake.
Mr. Fusco described what prosecutors believed was a pattern of false statements made by Parmalat over several years, which were picked up and amplified by banks as they marketed its shares and bonds.
''A banker knows that Parmalat says something which is false, and the banker helps Parmalat with operations or transactions, so that the financial community believes Parmalat is a good company,'' Mr. Fusco said. ''Instead, Parmalat is not a good company.''
The scrutiny of Parmalat's foreign banks propels the investigation to a new level, legal experts said, because it has so far centered on the roles of the company's founder, Calisto Tanzi, and a handful of other senior executives, including a former chief financial officer, Fausto Tonna.
''There have been many trials that have involved many different banks, but they were all Italian banks,'' said Alberto Alessandri, a professor of business and criminal law at Bocconi University in Milan. ''This is the first time that international banks and consultants have been involved in an Italian criminal investigation.''
Under Italian law, outside advisers who knowingly allow a company to spread false information in the market can face criminal charges and a five-year prison sentence, Professor Alessandri said. If outsiders are found to have acquiesced to other types of fraud, a court here can judge them as harshly as officers of the company itself. Proving such complicity is difficult, however, he said.
In the United States, banks and Wall Street firms were harshly criticized for their role in advising scandal-ridden companies like Enron and WorldCom, but they have largely eluded criminal prosecution.
So far, Italian prosecutors have arrested eight people, including Mr. Tanzi and Mr. Tonna, in connection with the Parmalat affair. A ninth person, Giovanni Bonici, the former head of Parmalat's Venezuelan operations, also faces an arrest warrant and is negotiating his return to Italy.
Parmalat and its auditors are the focus of several lawsuits in the United States on behalf of shareholders and bondholders. The Securities and Exchange Commission has also sued the company, contending that Parmalat induced investors in the United States to buy more than $1.5 billion in bonds and other securities while engaging in ''one of the largest and most brazen corporate financial frauds in history.''
Investors bitterly criticized the underwriters of Parmalat's bonds for relying on audited financial reports, which overlooked the fact that the company's executives had siphoned off more than $10 billion.
''I expect a lot more than that,'' said Gary E. Wendlandt, the chairman and chief executive of New York Life Investment Management, which has more than $175 billion in assets under management, including Parmalat bonds.
''We've done issues ourselves,'' Mr. Wendlandt said. ''The bankers come in and go through chapter and verse, every line item. They don't rely on an auditor's opinion.''
Executives from Deutsche Bank's offices in Milan and London met with prosecutors in Parma to discuss a 350 million euro ($390 million) bond issue that the bank placed for Parmalat in late September.
Deutsche Bank has also come under scrutiny after it reduced its 5.1 percent stake in Parmalat to 1.57 percent on the day last month that the company's Bank of America account was found to be a fake.
The bank said in a statement that its stake was not strategic, and included some stock that it borrowed to support client transactions.
The German financial regulator, BaFin, has requested information from Deutsche Bank on who purchased the Parmalat bonds.
A spokeswoman for the bank declined to discuss the bond offering or the timing of the stock sale. She said Deutsche Bank was cooperating with the authorities.
In Milan, a lawyer for Citigroup, Nerio Dioda, met with the lead prosecutor, Francesco Greco. Neither discussed the conversation afterward. A spokeswoman for Citigroup in New York declined to comment, saying only that ''Citigroup remains committed to assisting the authorities with any inquiries they may have regarding Parmalat.''
Citigroup helped Parmalat set up an offshore investment vehicle to shift loans between units of the company. It carried the name Buconero, or Black Hole, which has become something of a mordant joke.
In the company's hometown, the board of Parma A.C., the soccer team owned by Parmalat, held a marathon meeting on Wednesday to consider its future. Stefano Tanzi, the son of Calisto Tanzi and the club's president, was resisting pressure to step down, according to an official close to Parmalat.
The mayor of Parma, Elvio Ubaldi, said, however, that the board of the Parma team would resign this week and that a new administration would be named.
''The club faces a real risk of closing unless we find someone else to support the club,'' Mr. Ubaldi said. Parma, which for most of its history played in Italy's lower divisions, has been a leading team in the top league, Serie A, since Parmalat took control in 1990. It is currently in sixth place.
On the day of the board's meeting, investigators in Parma were also stepping up their part of the investigations. Mr. Tonna, the company's former chief financial officer, left the Parma courthouse in a police van on Wednesday without comment after investigators completed another day of interrogating him.
While the task of unraveling Parmalat's finances is vast, prosecutors appear to be making progress. Mr. Greco confirmed that in addition to Mr. Tonna, the investigators are being helped by another person with knowledge of Parmalat's accounts.
Mr. Greco said prosecutors were also studying documents from Parmalat's auditors, Deloitte &amp; Touche and Grant Thornton. As expected, Parmalat's bankruptcy administrator, Enrico Bondi, dismissed Grant Thornton as the auditor of its main operating unit.
Mr. Bondi is staying in touch with the inquiry through his lawyer, Marco de Luca, who lined up in a hallway at Milan's Palace of Justice for his appointment with prosecutors.
''It's sad for the country, but also for everyone,'' Mr. de Luca said. ''This affects not just Italy, but the entire world.''
