The board of the New York Stock Exchange plans to recommend that state and federal regulators pursue legal action against its previous board and Richard A. Grasso, its former chairman, over the size of his pay package, a person briefed on the situation said yesterday.
The move heralds what could be a new front in the still-simmering debate over whether Mr. Grasso and the former directors violated a fiduciary duty to the exchange by agreeing to the compensation arrangement that awarded him $188 million in pay.
The Securities and Exchange Commission, and Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, will assume responsibility for the investigation, regulators said yesterday, to determine whether a civil suit should be brought against Mr. Grasso and his former directors, many of whom are the former or current chief executives of Wall Street's largest investment banks.
If Mr. Grasso agrees to return a substantial portion of his pay, such a suit would not be filed, this person said.
John S. Reed, the interim chairman of the stock exchange, has said that he expects Mr. Grasso to return as much as $150 million of his compensation and that he would be starting talks with Mr. Grasso in the coming days to discuss the matter.
Mr. Grasso resigned from the exchange under pressure in September. According to people who have been briefed on the investigation, Mr. Reed has made a series of strong arguments to Mr. Spitzer that he pursue the case.
Indeed, by putting pressure on Mr. Grasso and the former directors, Mr. Reed and the board may well have an ultimate goal of forcing Mr. Grasso to settle.
''There is a possibility that a civil claim could survive a motion to dismiss,'' said John C. Coffee Jr., a professor of securities law at Columbia University. ''Bringing in Mr. Spitzer is an attempt to get further leverage over Mr. Grasso.''
While Mr. Grasso has received the $139.5 million, he is owed another $48 million by the exchange, according to a second contract he signed, but he agreed to give up that additional compensation while still chief executive.
Since taking over, Mr. Reed has overhauled the exchange's board and completed a report into the origins of Mr. Grasso's pay.
One conclusion of the report, made by Dan K. Webb, a former federal prosecutor, is that Mr. Grasso, in asking for $139.5 million in deferred compensation and pension payments early in 2003, was fearful that a new board would not grant him such a payout.
Lawyers close to the exchange have said that such a conclusion would bolster the legal case against Mr. Grasso, in that it shows he was putting his interests ahead of the institution that he headed as chairman and chief executive.
In doing so, New York prosecutors could claim Mr. Grasso violated his duty of loyalty to the exchange and could thus be sued to return the money to the Big Board.
Such a suit would be unprecedented, given the unique status of the New York Stock Exchange.
Mr. Spitzer's office intends to take the lead in pursuing legal action, citing a statute under New York's nonprofit corporation law, regulators who have been briefed on the investigation said. The law states that these corporations must award reasonable compensation to officers that is in line with the services that the executives provide. Neither Mr. Spitzer's office nor the S.E.C. would comment for the record.
If an investigation into Mr. Grasso's pay determines that an appropriate pay scale for him was much lower than his final reward, Mr. Spitzer's lawyers could claim that the $188 million that he was awarded was far in excess of the services that he provided as chairman and chief executive.
Mr. Spitzer's office will receive a copy of the Webb report today. While lawyers there will use the report as a guidepost, they, in conjunction with S.E.C. lawyers, will conduct their own investigations, lawyers involved in the investigation said yesterday.
Among those likely to be questioned, they say, will be some of Wall Street and corporate America's most well-known chief executives who sat on the stock exchange's compensation committees from 1999 to 2003.
Mr. Webb, as part of his investigation, has already questioned many of these executives.
They include Henry M. Paulson Jr., the chief executive of Goldman Sachs; Richard S. Fuld Jr., the chief executive of Lehman Brothers; James E. Cayne, the chief executive of Bear Stearns; and Gerald M. Levin, the former chief executive of AOL Time Warner.
Kenneth G. Langone, a personal friend of Mr. Grasso and a director of Home Depot, led these committees through June 2003. At one time he and Mr. Grasso served together on the Home Depot board.
If the suit is successful, these directors could be fined or banned from board service at any New York State nonprofit institution. Any case will have to prove that directors violated their fiduciary duty to the exchange's board in awarding the package to Mr. Grasso. It will also have to establish that directors, especially those on the compensation committee of the exchange from 1999 to 2003, violated a duty of care by failing to do the appropriate work in signing off on such payments.
The legal role of the S.E.C. in the investigation is less clear.
While the board of the exchange has not technically violated any federal securities law or internal rules in awarding such a sum, there is a securities law statute that states that the commission could file an action if it could be proved that directors or officers of a self-regulatory organization abused their authority in any way.
Violating New York State law could be seen as such an abuse, an official close to the investigation said yesterday.
The S.E.C. could file its suit together with Mr. Spitzer and as a potential sanction against former directors could ban them from sitting on public company boards.
While Mr. Grasso has not spoken publicly since his resignation, people who have talked with him in recent weeks say he feels he has done nothing wrong in that he was never in the room when compensation committee members met to decide how much to pay him.
A telephone call to Mr. Grasso's lawyer, Kenneth Edgar, was not returned yesterday.
By bringing in Mr. Spitzer, backed by the S.E.C., the stock exchange is raising the stakes in its battle with Mr. Grasso.
The suit against the exchange differs from suits brought by New York prosecutors against nonprofit institutions over excessive pay.
While the stock exchange is a nonprofit institution, it belongs to its 1,366 members who own seats on the exchange, where they buy and sell stocks.
As shareholders of a public company would in theory be harmed by an exorbitant payout to that company's chief executive, these members are the ones who could be said to have suffered from Mr. Grasso's pay. Thus, they would be the ones most likely to file a suit.
While the stock exchange members played a leading role in forcing Mr. Grasso's ouster, they have yet to file any collective legal claim against him.
Market Place
