Geologists examining the latest pictures from the Spirit rover on Mars said on Wednesday that they were finding tempting targets for close-up exploration in each new view of the russet landscape and were becoming increasingly puzzled over how to read the rocks as an archive of the planet's more dynamic and warmer history.
The spacecraft was sent to Gusev crater to test the hypothesis that the cold and arid planet was once a more temperate world, with water flowing on its surface and some forms of simple life. Photography by orbiting vehicles showed that the broad Gusev basin appeared to be a dried lake bed.
Looking at the rock-strewn scene southeast of the Spirit's base, Ray Arvidson of Washington University in St. Louis, deputy principal science investigator of the mission, said, ''This is not your typical lake bed, if it is a lake bed.''
Although the 100-mile-wide crater may have held lakes at several periods in the past, Dr. Arvidson explained, it has probably undergone repeated convulsions of change. The originally smooth floor of an ancient lake could have been covered by lava from a volcano, like the extinct one north of Gusev. Then the volcanic layer could have been chewed up by subsequent asteroid impacts. Over time, the terrain could have been further modified by deposits of soil brought in by rivers and dust blown in by winds.
In the three-dimensional picture made public on Wednesday, the landscape appeared to be even rockier than in previously photographed sections. Some of the angular rocks seemed to have been sandblasted from the winds, clearing away the pervasive red dust down to the gray rock surface. But other rocks were coated in dust.
Toward the near horizon, about a mile away, a hill rose about 300 feet above the surrounding landscape -- an invitation to exploration.
Dr. Jim Bell of Cornell, who directs the panoramic camera operations, said at a news conference here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory that the hill should be a relatively easy drive for the 400-pound, six-wheel Spirit. A more imposing hill seen in previous photographs of another part of the landing site was estimated to be up to 20 miles away -- too far from the rover.
''We're seeing some pretty interesting scientific targets,'' he said.
But no decisions will be made on where to direct the Spirit on its first excursions until its cameras have completed and transmitted a full 360-degree picture of the landing site, officials of the mission said. Flight controllers now estimate that it could be at least next Wednesday before the rover is ready to roll off its landing base for its first excursion.
Art Thompson, a flight engineer on the mission, said the delay of at least three days was caused by minor but troublesome problems checking out and preparing the rover for its three-month exploration tasks.
''If everything went perfectly, we thought we could be ready in nine days,'' Mr. Thompson said. ''We're being very cautious, and I wouldn't be surprised if the delay is a day or two more.''
Officials of the mission said the Spirit rover was in ''excellent health.'' Engineers were able to reduce the vehicle's slight overheating by shutting down the electronics for one of its communications links for an hour during the work day. New tests of the main antenna showed no signs of the anomalous electrical behavior as its motor was driving a change in the instrument's position.
