As the Nets lost forward Kenyon Martin to a two-game suspension on Wednesday, they continued their efforts to outrace 11 other teams -- including the Knicks -- to sign guard Charlie Ward.
Ward would fill one of the roster spots the Nets opened Wednesday when they waived Mikki Moore and Robert Pack. The other spot will go to forward Eddie Griffin, who agreed to terms last week and will arrive for Thursday's practice.
Ward, who was waived by Phoenix on Tuesday, a day after being traded by the Knicks, is being pursued by almost every team with a shot at the championship, including the Lakers, the Pacers, the Mavericks, the Rockets and the Spurs.
The Nets, who next play on Friday night in Philadelphia, could use help after losing Martin for his part in a fight with Corey Maggette of the Los Angeles Clippers during the Nets' victory Tuesday night at Continental Arena. Maggette also received a two-game suspension, as the two exchanged punches and were ejected from the game. Neither player was fined, but each will lose his salary for the games; in Martin's case, that is about $110,000.
The Nets are seeking Ward to provide a steady hand behind Jason Kidd at point guard. Ward's agent, Craig McKenzie, said that he had been contacted by 12 teams and that Ward would most likely make his decision before the 48-hour waiver period expires. He is eligible to sign with a new team on Thursday night.
The Nets, like most of the interested teams, will offer him the veteran minimum, $1.07 million, prorated for the remainder of the season. One person familiar with Ward's situation said that Dallas is the only team with cap room to pay more; the Mavericks' $4.5 million midlevel exception is available.
''To me, we have a good team and he would fit in with us,'' Rod Thorn, the Nets' president, said. ''We have a good group of guys. I can see him getting minutes, even with Jason, because he's a good shooter, a solid defender and a tough, competitive guy. Plus, he wouldn't have to move. It's tough to move during the season with kids. We have a chance to do something. Those are our selling points.''
McKenzie said: ''New Jersey is one of the teams that has a leg up for what they've done, what they've built, and to have it 45 minutes away from his home, that's great. I don't want to say it's the deciding factor, but being close to home is a factor.''
Nets Coach Byron Scott said: ''I think he's a good player. I like Charlie. I think he's-- mentally and physically -- he's a tough kid. He plays hard. He can make shots, too. That's one thing about him, he can knock down 3's and make long shots. Plus he's a competitor and he's been in big games. His experience would help us as well.
''He has a little edge to him. He doesn't give you an inch. He is another guy who doesn't back down. I don't care how big you are. He is a feisty little guy. I like that about him.''
Before Martin's suspension was announced, the Nets were hoping that he would be assessed only the mandatory one-game suspension for throwing a punch. But Stu Jackson, the N.B.A.'s vice president for basketball operations, said the ugliness of the incident merited the longer term.
''Certainly in many of these situations where punches are thrown, if it's something that doesn't escalate to a higher level, we'd consider penalizing the players with one game,'' Jackson said. ''In looking at this more and more, I felt strongly that, one, the incident could have been prohibited had cooler heads prevailed, and secondly, it got to a level that was ugly.''
Two seasons ago, Martin was suspended for a total of seven games and fined $347,057.55. Jackson said that history had no bearing his decision. ''Kenyon Martin has been very good in terms of his behavior on the floor and his focus on playing excellence, which he has done pretty well,'' he said. ''His behavior of two years ago was not a factor at all, evidenced by the fact that I felt both players were equally responsible for the incident.''
Martin has been involved in only one other fight in his four seasons in the N.B.A. Almost two years ago to the day, Martin delivered a hard foul to Orlando's Tracy McGrady. When McGrady shoved him, Martin threw a punch and received a two-game suspension and a $15,000 fine.
PRO BASKETBALL
