The setting was picturesque and the weather balmy, but Tiger Woods was focused on business Wednesday as he discussed the 2004 PGA Tour.
The season-opening Mercedes Championships begins Thursday at the Plantation Course, with sunny skies and midday temperatures reaching 80 degrees expected all week. But Woods did not need the Hawaiian heat to fire up his competitive juices. Though he won five tournaments in 2003 and captured the player of the year award for the fifth straight time, Woods did not win a major championship, and Vijay Singh finished ahead of him to win the money title. That led many people, including many of Woods's competitors, to believe that the gap between Woods and everyone else had closed.
Woods is not buying that idea. And his quest to re-establish dominance on the Tour is just one of the compelling things to watch this season.
''Have they closed the gap?'' Woods said, repeating the question. ''I don't know. I feel as if when I'm playing well, I'm tough to beat. I look at it this way: If I'm playing well, I like to take my chances against anybody.''
This week, Woods will take his chances among a field of 30 players. Only players who won on the Tour last year are eligible to play the Mercedes. The field also includes Singh, Ernie Els, Davis Love III, Mike Weir, Justin Leonard, Fred Couples, Jim Furyk and Retief Goosen. Last year's two surprises -- Ben Curtis, who won the British Open, and Shaun Micheel, who won the P.G.A. Championship -- are also in the field.
Els played brilliantly while winning the Mercedes last year, finishing 31 under par, the Tour's 72-hole record for strokes under par. That performance jump-started Els's season, as he won seven times worldwide and played the most consistent golf of his career.
Although Els still views Woods as the player to beat, he says he believes that more talented players, coupled with improved technology that gives players more distance on their shots, has lessened Woods's advantage.
''I think the Tiger effect is not as strong as it used to be,'' Els said. ''It's not as huge as it was maybe three or four years ago. I think guys go into a week and feel, you know, if they play their games, it might be good enough.
''Tiger is still Tiger. But I think the standard of play on tour have definitely increased. Tiger hits a lot of shots that we can't hit. He's a great putter. But a lot of guys are driving it as long, or longer, than him.''
In some ways, Woods is still measured against his year in 2000, when he won nine times on the Tour, with three major championships. Many players say Woods will never have another year that dominant.
''You don't realize how good his record is, period, until you sit back a little and think about it,'' said Love, who won four times last year. ''His scoring average over the last five, six years is just incredible. When you sit back and look at 2000, you say, 'That's the fantasy, the ultimate goal.' But the standard he's held to is the gold standard of 2000. I don't think anybody can keep that kind of pace up.''
But Woods does not rule out having another year like 2000. ''Hopefully this year,'' he said, smiling.
Woods, Singh and Els will be in the spotlight this week, but the golf year will take an interesting twist next week, when Michelle Wie, a 14-year-old from Honolulu, plays in the Sony Open in Honolulu on a sponsor's exemption. Last year at 13, Wie became the youngest golfer to win an adult United States Golf Association title, capturing the Women's Amateur Public Links championship. Woods wished Wie well next week, but he said he did not think Wie should make a habit of playing on the PGA Tour too early in her career.
''I think it's pretty neat she's playing,'' Woods said. ''I hope she goes out there and plays her game. I think it's good experience to move up and play against people who are better than you. But I also look at the philosophy, too: you need to play to win, learn the art of winning.''
How difficult has it become to win on the PGA Tour? Players who did not win last year, and are not in this week's field, include Sergio García, Phil Mickelson, Nick Price and Charles Howell III. Making the Mercedes is a reward for winning in 2003 and an opportunity to start 2004 on the right track. And Singh, like Woods, hoped to take advantage.
''You can't ask for a better opportunity to win a golf tournament, only 30 players out there,'' Singh said. ''Half of them are very rusty. You got great accommodations. They look after you great here. I'm happy to be here, ready to go.''
CHIP SHOTS
This is the first week the PGA Tour's voluntary testing apparatus for drivers will be at a tournament site. Drivers can be tested to make sure they conform to United States Golf Association regulations.
GOLF
