Tony Stewart had been testing his new stock car at Daytona International Speedway on Tuesday night when he was summoned to the airport adjacent to the racetrack for a meeting with his boss, Joe Gibbs.
Stewart spotted an airplane with a Washington Redskins logo and got excited. Maybe Gibbs had bought a new airplane for his formidable racing team. Maybe Stewart would get to ride in it.
Gibbs then told Stewart and his other driver, Bobby Labonte, that he had decided not to buy the Redskins airplane, but to return to coach the Redskins after 11 years away. Stewart said he was not that surprised. Once a football coach, always a football coach.
''He's always been involved in it, even when he hasn't been coaching,'' Stewart said yesterday in a news conference at the racetrack. ''He's kept a close eye on what's been going on in football.''
But Gibbs, 63, had become a successful stock-car owner in the interim by keeping a close eye on what had been going on in racing. Gibbs had won two Winston Cup championships in four years: Labonte in 2000, Stewart in 2002.
Since Dale Jarrett buckled into Gibbs's first racecar in 1992, Joe Gibbs Racing had won 40 races and more than $62 million. His calming influence helped the tempestuous Stewart win a championship.
It is a significant loss for Nascar as it heads into its first season with Nextel as its biggest sponsor. Along with Richard Childress, Rick Hendrick, Jack Roush and Dale Earnhardt's widow, Teresa, Gibbs had become one of Nascar's top owners.
Gibbs quickly established a presence in stock-car racing. But his racing employees insisted that his operation would not crumble with his departure.
''The race team will be fine, and all of us on the No. 18 team,'' Labonte said, referring to his car number, ''will work just as hard to win another championship in 2004.''
J. D. Gibbs, 34, the older of his two sons, will become the president of Joe Gibbs Racing. Coy Gibbs, 31, has driven a car owned by his father in the Busch Series, which is to the Nextel Cup what Class AAA baseball is to the major leagues.
Stewart and Jimmy Makar, the senior vice president of Gibbs's team, said Joe Gibbs had apparently become less involved in the team's daily operations anyway.
''I don't think Joe has ever given up 100 percent on coaching,'' Makar said. ''The racing thing has fulfilled a little bit of those competitive juices flowing within him, but it's sort of running itself now.''
So, when Gibbs got another chance to coach the Redskins, Makar saw a man who had an opportunity to sink his teeth into something. His racing team sees an opportunity, too. Gibbs's move might give the team a chance to slap more advertising on their cars.
''This move gives our sponsors added value in terms of gaining national exposure,'' J. D. Gibbs said.
Childress said: ''He's got his son set up to carry the team, and he'll keep giving a lot of support to the sport. He's not leaving us. If anything it can help us with the notoriety of him going back and being a football coach and still being associated with the sport.''
Joe Gibbs emphasized that he was not running away from racing. He will remain as the chief executive of the company, which is based in Huntersville, N.C. He said in a statement that he would maintain his relationship with the team's sponsors.
Stewart said: ''It's not going to affect anything. J. D. Gibbs has done a great job of following in his father's footsteps all these years. He's learned everything from Joe. I think everybody with the team is excited for Joe.''
Those who competed against Gibbs and his team are not sorry to see him go -- but not for the obvious reasons. Dale Earnhardt Jr. is a Redskins fan, for example. He went to the team's 27-0 loss to the Cowboys on Dec. 14 and swore he would never go back.
''Everywhere he goes, he knows what he needs and he gets what he wants and he puts the right people in the right places,'' Earnhardt said during a news conference yesterday at Daytona. ''I think he can make things happen over there.''
PRO FOOTBALL
