The digital sign outside the Hess Station in Hell's Kitchen read 24 degrees at 1 p.m. yesterday -- the coldest daytime temperature since winter began last month. To be sure, it was not a record low for the date. But for New Yorkers who had grown accustomed to an unusually warm winter, it came as a shock.
Allan Peter Georges, 50, a cabdriver who was outside talking to friends after filling up, was thrilled. Low temperatures, he said, are good for business. ''When it's cold,'' he said, ''people don't want to walk.''
If that is the case, Mr. Georges may be picking up more business, as temperatures are expected to remain below freezing -- and perhaps dip into the teens -- over the next week or so.
The cold snap that came Tuesday night seemed even colder in a region that had enjoyed unseasonal temperatures as high as 58 degrees over the weekend. ''I thought we were going to breeze through the week, because it was so warm,'' said Brandi Coleman, 26, who has been visiting the city from Fairhope, Ala., with her mother and two daughters for the last two weeks. But when she woke up yesterday morning, she said, ''I thought, oh my God.''
Jimmy Blount, 51, and Nati Mejia, 44, meatpackers waiting for a delivery on 14th Street, said they preferred being inside the meat locker, a balmy 38 degrees. At least it was not windy in there, Mr. Blount said. Outside, winds gusted to 32 miles an hour.
For some New Yorkers, standing in the cold was unavoidable. Andy Gutierrez, 62, a postal worker who has been delivering mail for 33 years, was bundled up in several layers (and a pair of rubber gloves provided by the Post Office since the anthrax attacks) as he delivered mail in Hell's Kitchen. Freezing mornings are just like any others, he said.
''There's nothing you can do,'' he said. ''You have to finish no matter what.''
''You gotta keep moving,'' he said, and moved on, his cart in tote.
Mohammad Abdul, 26, was stuck behind a newsstand opposite the Port Authority Bus Terminal all day. When his shift began at 7 a.m., he said, ''it was really, really cold,'' so he turned on three small electric heaters above and below the counter.
Lopez Wilfredo, 28, a courier in Greenwich Village, whose face was barely visible behind a thick black scarf that reached to just below his eyes, said that he went out earlier with just a turtleneck under his jacket. ''I had to go home and reassess, '' he said. He also added a hat to his ensemble.
Before temperatures dipped into the 20's on Tuesday night, the lowest temperature recorded at Central Park since the winter solstice on Dec. 21 was 31 degrees, two degrees above normal for this time of year, said Jeff Warner, a meteorologist at Penn State University.
The city is preparing for an increase in homeless people looking for shelter, said Jim Anderson, a spokesman for the Department of Homeless Services. The increase, he said, is typical for this time of year. ''We have a bed for everyone who needs one,'' he added.
Yesterday was also one of the coldest days since New York City's smoking ban went into effect last March. Some bar and restaurant owners feared that the freezing temperatures would keep customers away. ''Some smokers are hard core and will brave the weather,'' said Vinny Mongru, a bartender at the Henry Street Bar in Brooklyn Heights. ''Some won't.''
But many smokers have proved resilient -- whether it is outside a bar or an office building. Scott Arshan, 40, a sales representative in Midtown, stood outside in only a sweater and pants, shivering with a cigarette in hand. The cold, he said, ''definitely cuts down on the smoking.'' It was his eighth smoking break of the day.
About 2:30 p.m., with temperatures still hovering in the mid-20's, Bernadette Gibbons, 16, of Maspeth, Queens, stood on the corner of 45th Street and Broadway, waiting to get into the ''Total Request Live'' studio.
''I'm absolutely freezing,'' she said, ''I think I'm getting hypothermia.'' She had been there for more than an hour -- clad in a short skirt and a coat -- and expected to be there at least one more. She said she did not mind. ''When you get upstairs, you get to be on TV,'' she said, ''It's cool.''
