With the trials of iconic corporate executives soon to begin -- Martha Stewart and WorldCom's Scott D. Sullivan, among others -- many investors are wondering if 2004 will be the beginning of the end of the corporate scandal season. Or will the new year simply be the end of the white-collar crime wave's beginning?
That we may be nearing a culmination is no doubt what most investors would prefer. A guilty plea expected soon from Andrew S. Fastow, Enron's former chief financial officer, may hearten those who think the worst is over.
In addition, with the stock market rising and the economy ebullient, many investors already seem less concerned about whether the executives running their companies are back on the straight and narrow. Rising stock prices, after all, hide a multitude of sins.
''It is still a bull market for prosecutors because there are enough improprieties from years past that are bubbling up from the surface to keep us busy,'' said Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, who has led the regulatory charge against dubious practices in the financial industry in the last two years. ''Having said that, I do sense a genuine shift in behavior in boardrooms, which would suggest that the number of gross abuses occurring right now may be on the decline.''
Almost no one would deny that Mr. Spitzer has good instincts on corporate fraud. But some investors and experts on white-collar fraud remain convinced that misdeeds at American businesses are not subsiding, and they expect them to continue this year at or above their recent pace.
Carl W. Pergola, national director for litigation and fraud investigation services at BDO Seidman, the accounting firm, is one who forecasts no decline in fraud cases this year. ''There is a greater awareness that fraud is out there now,'' he said. ''We're finding that more employees are recognizing fraud. They're more willing to put their hand up and say we don't like the way this works.''
One reason some investors expect corporate malfeasance to continue is that while legislation has curbed some of the more egregious anti-investor practices that sprang up in the 1990's, a powerful motivation remains for many executives to make results appear better than they actually are. That motivation: executive pay packages that are still largely tied to companies' financial results.
''The temptation to burnish earnings or finesse them is there because expectations for stocks are so high, and once again there is a lot of money riding on this,'' said Bill Fleckenstein, head of Fleckenstein Capital in Seattle. ''There is still a tremendous amount of pressure to 'make the number.' And regrettably, I think managements are still going to contemplate moving heaven and earth to do it.''
Scandal-weary investors in the United States are understandably relieved at the recent lull in revelations of new misdeeds by domestic companies. Indeed, the latest large-scale corporate imbroglio, involving Parmalat, occurred at a comfortable distance from American borders. The company, whose executives stand accused of a huge accounting fraud, is based in Parma, Italy.
But United States investors cannot afford to be too smug about shenanigans continuing to occur overseas. Because the nation's financial concerns are now global powerhouses, even foreign scandals are likely to involve American companies.
Citigroup, for example, figures prominently in the Parmalat scandal. The bank apparently structured a loan for Parmalat in such a way that the interest paid on the debt did not show up as an expense for the company but as a return paid to an investor. That loan vehicle made Parmalat's borrowing costs seem lower than they actually were.
Earlier this week, Citigroup was named in a lawsuit filed by Parmalat investors. Citigroup has said that the deal was approved by Parmalat's auditors.
And investigators continue to uncover fresh mutual fund malfeasance, with additional state regulators joining the hunt. Regulators have recently announced their pursuit of mutual fund cases in California, Texas and Colorado as well as New Hampshire and Florida.
Investors may be weary of the damaging revelations about funds, but those who are investigating the industry say they have a great deal of work left to do. ''We are acutely focused on every aspect of the sale and operation of mutual funds, not just late trading and market timing,'' said Stephen M. Cutler, director for enforcement at the Securities and Exchange Commission. ''Whether it be undisclosed revenue sharing, stale prices, failure to give breakpoint discounts, improper 12b-1 fees or other abuses, we're pursuing it. I expect that the year ahead will be one of the commission's busiest ever in the mutual fund area.''
Mr. Pergola, the fraud investigator at BDO Seidman, has been an accountant and a certified fraud examiner for more than a decade. He said he had seen a significant change recently in companies' reaction to fraud accusations made by employees or outside auditors.
''It used to be that we would be trying to persuade companies to delve deeper, that where there's smoke there's fire,'' Mr. Pergola said. ''But their view would be why would we incur the cost? What I'm finding now is, even the smallest misappropriation gets a response that is much more dramatic than it has ever been.''
Mr. Pergola said that while the spotlight remained hot on public companies, people committing frauds might shift to private companies or to investment scams. ''The guys who commit fraud are going to move to whatever game they can make money at,'' he said.
With executive pay packages still munificent at many companies, even those that have been poor performers, the temptation among managers to burnish results remains strong. Indeed, some investors argue that the lure may be greater this year than it has been, for several reasons.
One, according to accounting experts, is that some of the tried-and-true tricks for gussying up financial results are no longer easy to put over on investors. So managers who are determined to make their earnings numbers have to resort to new methods.
Stock options, for example, are not the one-stop earnings enhancer they once were. Although some technology companies still refuse to deduct the cost of options from their operations as an expense, investors have gotten wise to how this practice overstates a company's earnings. And a year from now, companies will be required by the Financial Accounting Standards Board to account for options as an employee cost, so many companies are already doing so.
In addition, investors are much more aware about how companies use their pension accounts to bolster earnings, especially when stocks are rising. So using pension gains to burnish earnings is not as effective as it was during the late 1990's.
''There is a never-ending supply of new games and tricks to be trotted out as the old ones are revealed,'' said Gregory P. Taxin, chief executive of Glass, Lewis &amp; Company, an institutional advisory firm in San Francisco. Mr. Taxin said he did not expect a decline in wrongdoing in 2004. Because corporate earnings rebounded nicely last year, managers whose pay is tied to further increases will be under some pressure to keep the profits' momentum up. And executives interested in keeping their stock prices at the high levels reached during last year's surging market -- and what executive is not? -- may also feel inclined to maintain earnings growth any way they can.
After all, if profits disappoint in the coming months, companies' shares will fall, depressing the value of stock options recently granted. In the wake of the bear market, executives are perhaps more keenly interested than ever in keeping share prices high.
A powerful deterrent to future corporate misdeeds, some investors say, could come in the form of jail terms for some of the executives scheduled to come to trial shortly. If cases against former executives at Adelphia Communications, WorldCom, Tyco International and Credit Suisse First Boston lead to at least a few prison sentences, managers may be more likely to fight off any temptations to cut corners to make their earnings look better.
Conversely, if the accused go free, executives may feel emboldened to act aggressively. More important, investors may lose faith in the American system of justice.
Byron R. Wien, senior investment strategist at Morgan Stanley, said it was important that executives be punished if they are guilty of wrongdoing. ''You don't want to feel that some smart lawyers get them off on technicalities,'' he said. ''Investors want to believe the system will protect them, that maybe they'll lose money but people won't get away with it.''
News Analysis
