After eight years of leading Greece's ruling party, Prime Minister Costas Simitis said Wednesday that he would call a parliamentary election on March 7, a month early, then resign the next day.
The move, which surprised many political analysts, appeared aimed at reviving the flagging fortunes of the Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement, better known as Pasok. It also makes room for Foreign Minister George Papandreou to succeed Mr. Simitis and command the party that his father, Andreas, founded.
''A leader must always be daring and grant new impetus,'' the 69-year-old Mr. Simitis, a mild-mannered former professor of law and economics, said in a nationally televised address. ''A younger generation must now take charge,'' Mr. Simitis added, explaining that he would stay on as prime minister until the March 7 parliamentary election, a month earlier than the scheduled date.
It was unclear whether Mr. Simitis had made his decision after quietly clinching a senior European Union post. Socialist officials have frequently acknowledged but often played down Mr. Simitis's ambition to replace Romano Prodi, president of the European Union Commission, whose term expires in October.
Pasok has been troubled by a string of scandals, corruption charges and opinion surveys showing rival conservatives commanding a lead of as much as eight points.
Earlier this week, however, an opinion poll published in the Athens daily Eleftherotypia showed the 52-year-old Mr. Papandreou, an American-trained sociologist, receiving an approval rating of 72 percent among voters, compared with 51 percent for Mr. Simitis.
Despite his success in pulling Greece into the euro zone, Mr. Simitis has come under fire in recent months from senior Pasok members for losing touch with the party's traditional voters.
On Wednesday, however, those same critics claimed that if anyone could revive the party's fortunes, Mr. Papandreou could.
''Our hopes of a victory have been rekindled,'' said Yiannis Kapsis, a former Pasok foreign minister and a stiff critic of the government's policies. ''Disgruntled voters and supporters who had given up on Pasok are already returning back.''
Conservative opponents dismissed the leadership change as a gambit designed to dress up old policies in fresh wrapping.
The eldest son of the late Andreas Papandreou -- who ruled for most of the 15 years following his rise to power in 1981 -- George junior (his grandfather of the same name was prime minister in the 1950's) has emerged from his father's shadow.
For years, pundits and the press patronized him as ''Georgaki,'' the diminutive form of George. Socialists shunned him as the sober-sided antithesis of his father, a dominating figure best known for his anti-American rhetoric in the 1980's, when he soared to power vowing to shut down all American bases in the country and to end Greece's membership in NATO.
Today, the American-born younger Papandreou is credited with building stronger bridges with Washington and ending Greece's age-old hostility with Turkey since taking on the high-profile post of foreign minister in 1999.
Government officials said a Pasok congress was being planned next month to endorse Mr. Papandreou's candidacy as party chief.
It was not clear who would succeed him as foreign minister.
Correction:  January 12, 2004, Monday  An article on Thursday about plans by Prime Minister Costas Simitis of Greece to call early parliamentary elections and resign, a step expected to make room for Foreign Minister George Papandreou to succeed him as leader of the governing Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement, misstated the period in which Mr. Papandreou's grandfather, also named George, was prime minister. It was 1963-1965, not the 1950's.
