Jurors found a Texas businessman who has not withheld taxes from his workers' paychecks since 2000 guilty on Wednesday on 29 federal charges.
The charges stemmed from the refusal of the defendant, Richard M. Simkanin, to withhold taxes from the paychecks of the 49 employees of his company, Arrow Custom Plastics of Bedford, Tex. He was also charged with filing fraudulent tax refund claims and refusing to file personal returns.
Mr. Simkanin, 59, a mechanical engineer who has been in jail since last June, faces a maximum of 139 years in prison, according to federal sentencing guidelines. Judge John H. McBryde of Federal District Court set a sentencing date of April 30.
Jurors deadlocked on two additional counts, and Judge McBryde declared a mistrial on those.
''Justice was served,'' said David Jarvis, the assistant United States attorney who prosecuted the case. ''I'm pleased that the jury understood that no one is above the law.''
Arch D. McColl III of Dallas, a lawyer for Mr. Simkanin, disagreed. ''I'm terribly disappointed,'' he said. ''This was a courageous man who acted in good faith, yet they labeled him a criminal. It was not a fair trial.''
Mr. Simkanin's legal battles have traveled a serpentine and highly publicized course. After his arrest last year, he agreed to accept a plea bargain that was ultimately thrown out because of a technicality involving the number of years he would serve in prison. With the deal off the table, he was tried last November, but Judge McBryde declared a mistrial after eight hours of jury deliberation with no verdict.
Later, Mr. Simkanin was denied bail after an informant reportedly told authorities that they had heard him talking about ''killing federal judges.'' In an order outlining his reasons for keeping Mr. Simkanin in jail pending his new trial, Judge McBryde referred to the defendant and others who share his views on tax laws as ''cult-like.''
By the time of his arrest, Mr. Simkanin, who no longer considered himself a citizen of the United States and instead loyal only to the Republic of Texas, was, according to his indictment, liable for $175,000 in uncollected taxes. Still, he believed that nowhere did the Constitution or any other specific law state that the vast majority of workers were legally obligated to pay taxes.
