THE bosu and I have a complicated relationship.
If you saw the two of us together at the gym, you might not notice this immediately. You might in fact be so captivated by the strange sight of me, red-faced and hopping awkwardly on a squishy dome-shaped disk, that you would overlook the emotional undercurrents.
I can understand how a casual observer would mistake the bosu for an inanimate object, just another newfangled piece of exercise equipment whose only purpose is to improve physical fitness.
That's what the bosu wants you to think.
The truth is, it's out to get me. It should be easy to stand on the bosu. But I wobble like an inelegant stork when I try. The bosu weighs only 16 pounds. But it makes me grunt unhappily when I lift it over my head. It's just a few inches high, but I get dizzy as I jump on and off it as fast as I can.
The bosu would deny it does this on purpose. Billed as a balance trainer, the dome (which looks like a ball sliced in half and then mounted on a platform) claims to be nothing more than an efficient and safe way to make nearly any kind of exercise, from squats to push-ups, more challenging. If vinyl could speak, the bosu would say this explains its growing popularity since its invention in 1999 as an alternative to the so-called stability ball (which is more commonly known in gym parlance as ''that big ball you lean against, drape yourself over or roll up the wall until you feel like dying'').
In some ways, the bosu (whose name is an acronym for ''both sides up'' because it can be flipped over for even more ingeniously painful maneuvers) is a textbook example of a product best bought online. It's new enough to be hard to find in local stores, and it's relatively compact and therefore less expensive to ship than say, a set of barbells.
Also, as the trainers at my gym point out, it is good for you. This is probably why my list of New Year's resolutions included, as Pledge No. 48,000, ''getting into shape.'' I found myself comparison-shopping online one day last week. The bosu was available at many, many fitness equipment Web sites, like www.bosu.com (the official company site, which packages the device with a pump to inflate it and an instructional video) and nefitco.com (which sells a wide range of fitness equipment, from wobble boards to foam rollers). I found the lowest prices at www.the.sportsauthority.com and www.fogdog.com, both of which were selling the bosu for $99.99, including pump and video.
To diversify a bosu workout, you can also use hand weights (available for $29.95 at www.home-gym-exercise-equipment.com), a medicine ball ($29.99 at www.sears.com) or resistance tubing (available in light, medium or heavy resistance levels for $11.79 at bodybuilding.com).
The thought of this made me queasy.
Yet, as I examined the ''enhanced view'' of the blue, rubbery bosu at Fogdog Sports, conflicting emotions welled up. I wished I could tell the bosu how I felt about it: that while I was grateful to it for strengthening the muscles around my knee, I felt it could be generally nicer.
But I suspected the bosu would not respond in a way that would give me closure. So instead, I phoned its inventor.
''I hate the bosu,'' I confided to David Weck, a personal trainer who invented the dome while he was looking for a way to alleviate his own back pain during workouts.
Mr. Weck seemed unperturbed.
''I love to hear that,'' he said. ''The trainer's greatest compliment is if you can develop a love-hate relationship. It shows that the device is challenging you.''
''Why did you invent it?'' I asked accusingly. ''Wasn't rolling around on that nauseating stability ball enough for you?''
''The ball was great,'' Mr. Weck said enthusiastically, as if ''great'' was some kind of secret synonym for ''nauseating.''
(For aficionados, by the way, different models and sizes of the ball are available at bodytrends.com, where the popular heavy-duty Sissel Swiss Balls range in price from $31.99 to $42.49.)
Mr. Weck continued: ''But you can't stand on the ball safely, and human beings are bipedal animals. So I decided O.K., I'll cut this ball in half to create an unstable but stable product that gives me a perpetual challenge against gravity.''
''It's hard on me,'' I whined.
Mr. Weck seemed unmoved.
''What's real cool is when you surprise yourself,'' he said. ''There you are doing some exercise that you're not good at and you're going out of balance and you're about to fall off but then somehow you save yourself and it's like a light bulb goes off. Ding, your body has found a way to solve that.''
Grudgingly, I admitted that the bosu had improved my balance. Since I began using it a few months ago, I am less likely to trip over tree roots or small rocks when I run on mountain trails.
''Me too,'' Mr. Weck said. ''When I play basketball, I don't twist my ankles anymore. The balance training on the bosu rehearses you for those kinds of situations and when they occur, your body knows how to react.''
This unleashed a long description of how my reaction times have improved since I started using the bosu, a mind-numbingly detailed litany I will spare you.
Mr. Weck listened as attentively as if I were describing the plot twists of the movie ''Chinatown.'' Then he suggested more exercises, involving things like ''forming a box position with the body'' and ''a modification of the old-school squat-thrust.''
Talking about fitness was making me feel fit. It was such a good feeling, in fact, that I briefly wondered if we could wrap up the discussion a little faster so I could get to the gym to hop around.
I managed just as quickly to quell that thought. But I wondered: if mere conversation had such salutary effects, what greater benefits might be conferred by the physical presence of a bosu in my own home? Maybe my rubbery little friend would act as a talisman, warding off bad health and the impulse to eat cookies.
But then I realized this was the main reason I wanted to own one. And not a good reason. In truth, I couldn't conjure a mental image of myself doing much more than walking past the bosu in my bedroom, a lair more typically reserved for lying indolently against pillows while reading.
Sure, the bosu might make a nice companion for my husband's clothing rack (the stationary bike). But would it be fair to deny a bosu an opportunity to torture a wider variety of red-faced people? In the end, I couldn't justify it. I love the bosu too much to live with it.
ONLINE SHOPPER E-mail: Slatalla@nytimes.com
