Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg plans to give homeowners a one-time rebate of the 18.5 percent property tax increase instituted by the city more than a year ago.
The rebate would cost the city $250 million, and would mean an average of $400 returned to taxpayers who own their own homes, and owners of condominiums or cooperative apartments. It would not be available to owners of large apartment buildings, commercial property or utilities, which account for the bulk of property taxes in the city.
Mr. Bloomberg's aides said he will make the announcement today in his annual speech to City Council members and others. The aides said he will say that tax revenues to the city have increased enough that he can essentially give the group known as Class 1 and Class 2 property owners the amount of their increased tax payments from last year.
Those property owners have become among the Republican mayor's most vociferous critics.
The rebate would be proposed as part of the budget for the 2005 fiscal year, which begins July 1, and would be mailed out after that, officials said.
The mayor, who saw his popularity plunge in polls taken after the tax increase, would be able to claim the rebate as a center piece of his fiscal policy just as he rolls toward a reelection campaign in 2005.
The rebate is being proposed despite projections of a budget deficit next year. However, the deficit is rapidly shrinking as the city economy improves, and the exact amount is very much in dispute between Mr. Bloomberg, who has been conservative about revenues, and the City Council, which contends that revenues are a billion dollars ahead of estimates.
Mr. Bloomberg opted for the rebate formula rather than a repeal of the tax so that the tax would be in place in future years if needed, his aides said. However, he would not rule out even larger rebates during flush times, nor smaller rebates, or none at all, should the city face a fiscal crisis as dire as that of recent years.
Because it is unusual to offer a tax rebate and it is only being offered to some taxpayers, the rebate would require the approval of both the state Legislature and the City Council, though the property tax increase had only required City Council approval. It would amount to roughly the 18.5 percent increase faced by typical homeowners last year, with a somewhat smaller amount for co-op and condo owners.
Mr. Bloomberg hinted this summer that he would like to reduce the tax, just months after it and a number of other tax increases were enacted. ''The mayor believes that those who got us out of the fiscal crisis should be the first to benefit from the improving economy and city budget,'' said an administration official. ''The mayor said he would reduce the property tax as soon as the economy allowed, and he is keeping his promise.''
The aide said the mayor did not expect either the Council or Legislature would resist a giveback to taxpayers, though the landlords who are not affected might put up a fuss.
Such tax relief for the city, however, might put Mr. Bloomberg in a weak bargaining position with state lawmakers if he goes begging for new cash from them, and might raise the ire of municipal labor unions whose contracts have expired.
The tax increase approved in November 2002 is estimated to be worth $1.8 billion in the fiscal year that starts in July. About half of the revenues came from owners of commercial and utility properties, while about 35 percent of the increase was placed on owners of large residential properties, or buildings with more than three units.
Owners of one-, two-, and three-family homes, which would be the target of the rebate, paid the rest, a fraction of the revenues, which is why the rebate proposal would only cost the city $250 million.
Nonetheless, it was the small and private homeowners who have come to be among Mr. Bloomberg's most vocal and persistent critics, though of course businesses were not thrilled with the increase, as well.
Mr. Bloomberg will almost certainly receive cheers from the homeowners he so vexed, though he is also likely to face some criticism from City Council members, who risked their own political hides by approving the tax during their own election years, though none of them suffered at the polls as a result.
The tax rebate, should it go as planned, puts Mr. Bloomberg in an interesting negotiating position as he goes to Albany this year with his wish list for the year. Among those wishes is a desire for more school aid, and the creation of a fifth pension tier that would ostensibly lower the city's ballooning pension costs. There is also his perennial request for relief on Medicaid spending.
Mr. Pataki, who was chilly on the issue of giving more school money to cities in his own annual address yesterday, may feel some financial obligation toward Mr. Bloomberg, who is emulating Mr. Pataki's fiscal agenda of lowering taxes at a time when Republicans are preparing to descend on New York City for their national convention.
Mr. Bloomberg turned to tax increases after it became clear he was unlikely to get his commuter tax proposal past the Legislature. Polls showed that a series of city taxes, coupled with tax increases on the state level, infuriated many New Yorkers who did not agree with Mr. Bloomberg's contention that tax increases were better than a reduction in city services.
