The New York City Department of Education has settled a federal lawsuit charging that it illegally forced hundreds of struggling students out of Franklin K. Lane High School in recent years.
Under the settlement, which does not include any admission of liability, the department agrees to take back students discharged from the school, in Brooklyn, since Jan. 1, 2000, whether they choose to attend Lane or another school. Such students will also have priority in enrolling in night or summer school.
Within 30 school days, the department is also to start a Young Adult Success Center, at a neighborhood social service center, offering at least 12 hours a week of academic and other support services for Lane students, current and past.
While young people have the legal right to remain in school until they are 21, the lawsuit charged that Lane students were often pushed out if they were not on track to graduate in four years. Hundreds every year were sent to alternative schools, with no follow-up to see whether they actually attended those schools.
Peter Kerr, the department's communications director, said the settlement reflected Chancellor Joel R. Klein's ''commitment to ensuring that all children have the opportunity to progress in their education and to provide additional supportive academic services to students who may have been improperly discharged.''
Last year, Mr. Klein promised to end the practice of forcing out students, sometimes referred to as ''pushouts.''
The Education Department intends to create programs to identify struggling students in need of specialized attention and early intervention, Mr. Kerr said, while working to ensure that they do not leave school.
Elisa Hyman, a lawyer at Advocates for Children who filed the suit on behalf of the former Lane students, said the agreement would ensure that Lane followed the law.
''It's critical that students who want to stay in or return to school are aware of their rights, and that schools stop forcing students out of their doors,'' she said.
Under the settlement, former Lane students who are already attending other schools will receive notice of their right to remain in school until they are 21.
The settlement also clarifies that students may not be transferred against their will into G.E.D. programs or other non-diploma-granting programs, and may not be recorded as having been sent to another program until Lane has confirmed that they are actually attending that program.
In addition, for the next three years, the department is to conduct yearly training sessions for all Region 5 administrators, including Lane's guidance counselors and attendance officers, on the procedures and policies for transferring or discharging students. Region 5 covers parts of Brooklyn and Queens.
The Education Department has yet to resolve two other lawsuits charging that students were illegally excluded from two other high schools, Bushwick High School in Brooklyn and Martin Luther King Jr. High School for Law, Advocacy and Social Justice in Manhattan.
