The confiscation and slaughter of civets continued in Guangdong Province, where officials trying to prevent a new outbreak of SARS also unveiled plans for a ''patriotic campaign'' to eradicate rats. Meanwhile, health officials announced that a new ''suspected'' case of SARS had been confirmed in Guangdong.
The new case is a 20-year-old waitress who works at a restaurant that apparently serves civet. State media said the waitress, a migrant worker from Henan Province, came down with a fever on Dec. 26 and went to a hospital on Dec. 31. She has since been transferred to another hospital.
Health officials initially denied reports in Chinese newspapers that a second suspected SARS case existed in Guangdong. But on Thursday morning, official state media reported that 48 people who came in close contact with the waitress had been quarantined. None reported any SARS symptoms, and the waitress was said to have had a normal temperature for seven consecutive days.
This morning in Guangdong, the 32-year-old man who became mainland China's first SARS case of the winter was released from the hospital. Earlier, he had told the Chinese media that he had never eaten civet, and that his only contact with wild game was with a mouse. He apparently threw a mouse out a window at some point before he became ill. One Guangdong newspaper quoted him as saying he had handled the mouse with chopsticks.
Meanwhile, health officials in the Philippines announced that a woman quarantined as a suspected SARS case does not have the disease. She had recently visited Hong Kong and developed some SARS-like symptoms upon her return home, but officials there said tests determined that she instead has pneumonia.
The activity this week comes as Chinese officials are moving aggressively to avoid another SARS outbreak and drawing some criticism for the campaign against civets. The confiscation of civets began in earnest on Tuesday, and state media reported that workers were drowning the animals in disinfectant. The World Health Organization has cautioned that such a slaughter must be carried out carefully to avoid the risk of causing more infections or contamination.
Guangdong officials have estimated that they plan to confiscate and kill about 10,000 animals by Saturday. The exact number put to death so far is not known, but the official New China News Agency reported that on Tuesday more than 1,500 government workers in Guangdong had inspected 67 animal markets, 797 restaurants and 137 wildlife markets. They reportedly seized 171 civets.
In addition, 2,030 civets from 41 breeding farms were quarantined in Guangdong. In Beijing, officials held surprise inspections on Wednesday in of search civets, state media said. None were found in restaurants or markets but 289 civets at a breeding farm were quarantined, as were 10 at the city zoo.
The disclosure that the first SARS patient in Guangdong had come into contact with a rodent apparently prompted officials in the provincial capital of Guangzhou to turn their attention to rats. The Guangzhou Daily reported that residents would be encouraged to put out rat poison from Jan. 10 to Jan. 13 as part of a ''patriotic campaign'' to exterminate vermin.
