With criticism mounting over the timing and the tone of Pete Rose's admission that he had bet on baseball, Rose issued a statement yesterday in which he apologized more intently for his past behavior than he did in the 322 pages of his new book, ''My Prison Without Bars.''
In the 13-sentence statement, Rose said, ''I am terribly sorry for my actions and for my bad judgment in ever wagering on baseball,'' adding, ''I deeply regret waiting so many years to come clean.'' The career major league leader in hits, Rose also apologized to baseball fans for ''abusing their trust'' and thanked them for ''their continuing faith in me.''
Rose, who privately admitted to Commissioner Bud Selig in November 2002 that he had bet on baseball games while managing the Cincinnati Reds, also said in the statement that he never planned for his public confession, which is contained in the new book, to interfere with this week's Hall of Fame news.
Paul Molitor and Dennis Eckersley became the newest members of the Hall on Tuesday, one day after the relevant information about Rose's book seeped out. Both players have expressed annoyance that the book, which will be available in bookstores today, had overshadowed their election to the Hall. And that same sentiment has been expressed by any number of baseball writers who vote each year on Hall of Fame candidates and who will vote on Rose's candidacy -- if he is restored to baseball within the next two years.
''I never intended to diminish the exciting news for these deserving players,'' Rose said.
With a series of interviews with journalists today and a broadcast of a taped interview on ABC tonight, Rose and his representatives apparently felt it was time for some damage control. Although the book contains numerous apologies from Rose for betting on baseball, there is often a feistiness in his words that was not present in yesterday's statement.
In the statement, Rose blamed a news report last weekend for persuading ABC, which had taped its interview with him on Dec. 12, and Sports Illustrated, which had arranged to publish excerpts from the book, to move up their timetable and to begin disclosing Monday what it was that Rose was actually saying in the book.
Yesterday, spokesmen for ABC News and Sports Illustrated essentially backed Rose's assertion. They said each news organization had originally agreed with Rodale Press, the book's publisher, to wait until yesterday to publicize the book's contents. But they said that two newspaper articles -- one in The New York Times on Dec. 31 that disclosed that Rose had admitted betting on baseball to Selig and one in The Philadelphia Inquirer on Saturday that said Rose would make the same admission in his book -- made it clear that the overall story was beginning to leak out and that the timetable would have to be accelerated.
''The decision was made on Sunday that the story was starting to break, and as it was an exclusive, we decided to go with it on Monday morning,'' said Jeffrey Schneider, a spokesman for ABC News. ''We talked to Rodale, and everybody agreed to move it up two days. We didn't want to get beaten.''
But the result was to turn Rose into a huge story on Monday, thus obscuring the Hall of Fame results that were released the next day.
Rose also said in yesterday's statement that he had expected to be reinstated into baseball shortly after his November 2002 meeting with Selig and that a public admission that he had bet on baseball would have been coordinated with the reinstatement. He said it ''was always my intent'' for the public admission to come first, followed by the book. The book, which Rose worked on for several years with his collaborator, Rick Hill, was originally supposed to be published in March, but Rodale moved up the date.
While Rose may have left that meeting with Selig feeling he was close to being reinstated, Selig evidently did not feel the same way. Selig was said to have been distressed by subsequent news articles that cited Rose's failure to pay back taxes and that reported on his gambling activities in Las Vegas casinos. One baseball official theorized yesterday that Rose's behavior had slowed down the always cautious Selig and that negative reactions in recent days to Rose's book might keep the possibility for reinstatement moving at a tepid pace.
''I don't know if he can let him back on the field after all of this,'' the official said.
The same official said that he had read the book and that while he thought Rose was trying to be humble in it, ''I don't see a lot of contrition.''
Meanwhile, Rose's softer statement yesterday also included condolences to the family of Tug McGraw, who was a teammate of Rose's in Philadelphia and who died of brain cancer this week.
BASEBALL
