David Hartstein wanted to make his KaBloom chain of florists the Starbucks of flowers. But how? KaBloom, based in Woburn, Mass., owned 30 shops, mainly in New England, but building more seemed too risky. It had always been difficult for him to motivate store managers to put in long hours, and in a vivid display of the perils of expansion, a competitor with the same national aspirations as his, Gerald Stevens in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., went bankrupt by acquiring too many flower stores too fast.
So, 18 months ago, Mr. Hartstein turned to a growth path that would bring in cash instead of burning through it and that would attract managers with a vested interest in success -- franchising.
At first, Mr. Hartstein, KaBloom's 47-year-old co-founder and chief executive, said his board was apprehensive about the idea, fearing franchisee-owned stores would be less profitable than company-owned ones. But it went along, and to oversee the transition it hired Steven Siegel, a former chairman of the International Franchise Association, who at the time operated 35 Dunkin' Donuts franchises in the Northeast.
The changes can be tough for the owners to adapt to at first, said Mr. Siegel, KaBloom's chief operating officer and chief financial officer. ''If you want to expand rapidly without a lot of capital this is the way to do it, but you're absolutely giving up some control,'' he said. ''If you're not prepared, you can be blown away.''
Indeed, while many business owners see franchising as a ticket to riches, ''history is littered with franchise flops,'' said Kevin Hein, a franchise lawyer with Snell &amp; Wilmer in Phoenix. Few franchise operators in the United States pass the 100-unit market, ''a big deal'' in the industry, he said.
At this point, KaBloom appears to be on its way to that threshold. Since the first franchisee -- the person who buys the franchise and agrees to run it -- opened a KaBloom shop on May 3, 2002, in Andover, Mass., a total of 55 franchised stores have opened in 13 states including Connecticut, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Florida and Texas, in addition to the company-owned locations. His ambition for this year is to open an additional 100 franchised stores and to increase his company's revenue to $50 million from $12.7 million in 2002. The expansion has created some financial strains, with a surge in spending on infrastructure, from legal fees to computer systems. In the last year alone, KaBloom has more than doubled its corporate staff, to 50 from 20.
But for KaBloom as for any franchiser, success depends less on setting up an efficient system than on finding the right people. Only about a quarter of new franchise systems survive 10 years, says Scott Shane, a professor of economics and an expert on franchising at the Weatherhead School of Management at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland, largely because of the incompetence of the franchisees. A common mistake is to enlist people who view the purchase as an investment, not a job, and hire managers to do the day-to-day work, Mr. Shane says.
''The reason that a franchise owner does better than a manager is that they work harder and longer, and keep a closer eye on costs,'' he said.
That is particularly critical for the flower business, experts say, because the product is so perishable and the hours are so long (with holidays the busiest times) and so unpredictable (with funerals and other unanticipated events being a big source of revenue).
KaBloom charges franchisees a $30,000 fee for each new store and requires them to spend an additional $110,000 to $182,000 to make the shop adhere to specifications of the chain's master plan. Inevitably, some do not cut it, Mr. Siegel says, using as an example a former marketing executive who kept uneven hours and inadequate inventory. In that case, somebody else bought her store and made a go of it.
To head off such problems, Mr. Siegel warns candidates about the drudgery that lies ahead. ''I ask every perspective franchisee, 'Are you ready to be a retailer? You'll be open seven days a week. Saturday is the biggest day of the week,''' he said. ''These executives who come out of high tech, human resources, marketing, software, think they're ready for retail, but they're not. It's more important for them to go to their kid's football game or go out on Friday nights.''
No matter how rigorous the process, he added, a few inappropriate franchisees will make it through the screening. He is considering doing psychological testing of franchisees, a not uncommon practice in the industry, but not before KaBloom has grown to 500 franchisees.
Another challenge for entrepreneurs going into franchising is maintaining the integrity of the brand. In the last few months, a few KaBloom franchisees made their own tweaks to the company's store concept that did not go over well with corporate headquarters.
One franchisee's store sign had the wrong lettering style, another's van was closer to blue than the purple that KaBloom insists on, another's counter was the incorrect size and yet another's automated glass doors strayed from the company's signature design of opening up to a large refrigerated room where customers can browse at an array of tulips and other flora.
''We want customers to have that ''Wow!'' effect, like a garden, all the colors,'' Mr. Siegel said. ''That's the way stores look in Europe.'' But maintaining the look, he added, can sometimes be a struggle because ''franchisees are always testing you to see what they can get away with.''
While KaBloom struggles to keep them in line and to protect its brand, the true test of its longevity will be the strength of its concept and the ease with which its model can be copied and maintained, says Andrew J. Sherman, a franchise lawyer and author of ''Franchising and Licensing: Two Ways to Build Your Business'' (Amacom, 1991).
Mr. Sherman once advised the owner of a thriving waterfront restaurant with mediocre food and overpriced drinks against trying to franchise it. ''I said, 'You're successful because of your view,''' he recalled. ''That concept cannot be replicated. I'm more impressed to see a successful business in a mediocre location with a good management team.''
Likewise, fads like the yogurt craze of the 1980's are poor franchise bets because they end eventually, according to Mr. Hein, the franchise lawyer.
But flowers are no fad. Sales grew briskly in 2003 after stagnating for several years, according to Eric Beder, retailing analyst for Northeast Securities in New York. And Mr. Hartstein and his co-founder, Thomas G. Stemberg, the chairman of Staples, say they believe that KaBloom can persuade Americans to change their habits and buy a bunch every day, like stopping at Starbucks for a latte. ''The idea,'' Mr. Hartstein said, ''was to sell flowers the way they're sold in Europe: affordable, convenient.''
SMALL BUSINESS
