''History has been made,'' Gen. Pervez Musharraf, the president of Pakistan, declared this week after signing an agreement to hold peace talks with top officials of India, its neighbor and adversary. The invocation of history may be premature, because the agreement to talk only returns these populous nuclear powers to where they were in 1999. But both the Indian and Pakistani leadership deserve credit for moving their countries a bit further back from the edge of war.
A number of issues separate predominantly Muslim Pakistan from mostly Hindu India. The one that has caused two of their three wars in the past 56 years is Kashmir, a province that is mostly in Indian hands but claimed by Pakistan. A majority of Kashmiris are Muslim, and Pakistan has supported an Islamic separatist insurgency against India in the province. Pakistan has long demanded that Kashmir's future be negotiated. For its part, India has insisted that there is nothing to negotiate -- Kashmir is Indian.
Now both sides have yielded somewhat. The Indians have agreed to put Kashmir on the table, and General Musharraf has promised not to allow anti-Indian insurgents to operate from Pakistan. He has given such assurances before. This time there may be reason to hope that his efforts will be more serious because the guarantees are part of a lengthy process that also includes the restoration of diplomatic and transportation links and a cease-fire along the front line that divides Kashmir.
General Musharraf has survived two recent assassination attempts. Pakistani officials say those attacks have strengthened his resolve to fight the radical Islamists who are behind such attempts and who are linked to the Kashmiri militants. Another interpretation is also possible: that his opponents stepped up their attempts to get General Musharraf out of the way because of his growing seriousness about reducing their influence and reconciling with India. On the Indian side, Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee seems eager to run a national election campaign this year on a peace platform.
Although there is every reason for caution, given the history of this dispute, this accord is good news in a region that desperately needs more of it.
