Today It Would Be 'Get Me the Benecol'
BERNARDO BERTOLUCCI's new film, ''The Dreamers,'' is set in the cinéaste heaven of 1968 Paris, and from what we could see, MICHAEL PITT, as an American film student who becomes entangled in an incestuous relationship, has the period cigarette thing down.
At the New York premiere at the Beekman Theater on Tuesday night his look was more the tragically shabby 90's evocative of RIVER PHOENIX and KURT COBAIN: worn brown corduroy jacket, lank shoulder-length hair, wispy goatee. But his cigarette work would have been worthy of JEAN-PAUL BELMONDO in ''Breathless.''
Standing in front of the paparazzi, Mr. Pitt was fidgety and rebellious. Before he let them cross-examine him, he drew a cigarette from a torn pocket. He played with the unlit cigarette, rolling it around in his fingers before lighting it. His plush pink lips sucked in the tobacco, his eyes looked like pools, he blew smoke at the lenses like a baby dragon.
The film, which has an NC-17 rating, has frontal nudity and masturbation. As the film builds, there are scenes of Mr. Pitt, LOUIS GARREL and EVA GREEN lying nude and entwined.
Mr. Pitt was not familiar with Mr. Bertolucci's work, including ''Last Tango in Paris,'' which made so many couples forgo buying butter in 1972. Mr. Pitt said he wanted to do the movie because it was beautiful. What makes something beautiful?
''It was a pure thing.'' All of it?
''This?'' Mr. Pitt says. ''Talking to you right now, having all these people take pictures of me? Not at all. That's not pure.''
Ah, c'est vrai, it's a dirty business shilling the flick; that is the tragedy of the cinematic artist. And while Mr. Pitt and his girlfriend, the actress ALEXIS DZIENA, step into the theater we shall take a GEORGE BURNS moment and address the readers directly: You know what makes us older people at Boldface really nostalgic about ''Last Tango''? The cholesterol. Does anybody even have butter in the house anymore? If MARLON BRANDO made his famous request of MARIA SCHNEIDER today, she would say: ''Right. And I suppose you think I also eat steak. It's over, big boy. I cannot be with a man who is so careless of his health.'' Then, again, the movie was set in France.
But to those attending the opening: JONATHAN DEMME, wearing a black beret with a small pin with the word peace written in English, Hebrew and Arabic; the French-born painter ANH DUONG, a staple on the social scene; LIV TYLER, who starred in Mr. Bertolucci's 1996 film, ''Stealing Beauty,'' and her husband, ROYSTON LANGDON. The publicists wore T-shirts reading ''NC-17, After all, an orgasm is better than a bomb.''
At the after-party at Guastavino's, Mr. Bertolucci, who is 63 and has a round friendly face, sat on a dark sofa. There are going to be inevitable comparisons between this film and ''Last Tango,'' we told him. ''Yeah, but you know the difference is that 'Last Tango' was about a 50-year-old, very violent and destructive man,'' Mr. Bertolucci said slowly, in his rich, heavily accented English. ''I have these three wonderful ''
Here a middle-aged man interrupted the conversation and reached over to shake Mr. Bertolucci's hand. ''Congratulations! I loved it!'' he said. ''It was like when'' -- hey, watch your language, fella! -- ''was shaking hands. It made me feel nostalgic for another time in my life.''
Who was that?
''My best friend, but I can't remember his name,'' Mr. Bertolucci said, laughing. ''I don't know.''
This Also Troubled Spinoza
So often, as we amble down the avenue, we find ourselves wondering, as people of a certain age are wont to do, ''Who put the bomp in the bomp de bomp de bomp?'' This is inevitably followed by the troubling, ''Who put the ram in the rama lama ding dong?''
The answer? The songwriters BARRY MANN and GERRY GOFFIN.
But as this is about the Off Broadway show starring Mr. Mann and the lyricist CYNTHIA WEIL, his wife and partner, let's concentrate on them. ''They Wrote That?'' opens this evening at the McGinn/Cazale Theater at Broadway and 76th Street. Their songs include ''You've Lost That Lovin' Feeling'' and, with JERRY LEIBER and MIKE STOLLER, ''On Broadway'' and ''Uptown.''
Mr. Mann and Ms. Weil have been married so long they'll argue in front of anybody. Like when they were explaining how Mr. Leiber told them that if they didn't change the lyrics to ''Only in America,'' it would not get played.
''Only in America,'' Mr. Mann sang, ''Where they breach the golden rule, do they start to march when my kids want to go to school.'' He went on: ''I would have loved to write it that way -- ''
''-- But Jerry Leiber said, and maybe Mike, 'You'll never get it played,' '' Ms. Weil put in.
''You interrupted me, I was talking honey,'' Mr. Mann said.
Curtain at 8.
with Lily Koppel and Paula Schwartz
Boldface Names
