The Dana Corporation, the auto parts supplier, said on Wednesday that it had named a top General Motors executive to lead the company as it struggles to get back on its feet after fending off a hostile takeover and enduring the death of its chairman and chief executive last year.
Michael J. Burns, who was president of G.M.'s European division, will take over March 1 as president and chief executive of Dana, which is based in Toledo, Ohio, and has more than $9.5 billion in annual sales. He has also been named to the board.
He succeeds Joseph Magliochetti, who died in September of complications from gall bladder surgery. At the time, Dana was defending itself against repeated takeover bids by its rival ArvinMeritor. That company, based in Troy, Mich., dropped its bid in November.
Glen Hiner, who became acting chairman after Mr. Magliochetti's death, will stay in that post. William Carroll, who had been acting president and chief operating officer, will retire.
Mr. Burns, 51, has overseen G.M.'s struggling European operations for the last five years. Under his leadership, G.M. Europe was able to rebuild after a $1 billion operating loss in 2000. But the unit continues to struggle and posted a $286 million loss last year.
Mr. Burns said his reasons for leaving G.M. after 34 years had nothing to do with G.M. Europe's performance. ''We made a lot of progress and I think are at the point of breaking through,'' he said in a phone interview on Wednesday.
Mr. Burns said Dana offered him a chance to run a company while putting into practice the lessons he learned at G.M., especially those he picked up in Europe. ''For me there aren't that many jobs that come around like this one,'' he said. ''That was a draw, and being able to make Dana into a success. I don't plan on changing jobs again.''
Mr. Burns is taking on a tough challenge at Dana. The company recently completed a restructuring plan that resulted in the loss of more than 10,000 jobs over the last two years. It recently announced that it planned to sell its $2 billion replacement parts business and use the proceeds to pay down its debt.
Such cost-cutting measures are critical in an industry where the customers--the world's biggest automakers--demand and usually receive yearly price reductions from suppliers.
But Mr. Hiner said the board expected Mr. Burns to push for ways that the company can expand its business instead of just cutting costs. ''The restructuring is behind us and we've got a good cost base,'' Mr. Hiner said. ''So we've asked Mike to look at revenues.''
To do that, Mr. Burns will have to polish Dana's once prominent profile as a leading supplier of large technologically advanced parts that sell at a premium.
In the late 1990's, the company was known for its ''rolling chassis,'' a full undercarriage for a vehicle that needed only an engine mounted on top to run. At the time, Dana was the industry's largest independent parts supplier, with a stock price of more than $60. Shares of Dana, which has slipped to being the No.6 supplier in North America, fell 5 cents on Wednesday, to $21.52.
