With little rest and a raspy voice but a bounce in his step from his primary successes, Senator John Edwards on Wednesday rushed on to Tennessee and Virginia, which will hold the next primaries crucial to his candidacy.
At the same time, behind the scenes, his aides wrestled with how to convince voters beyond the South that Mr. Edwards, who is from North Carolina, could compete and stand as the sole challenger to Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the leading candidate in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination. The campaign has all but ruled out the Michigan caucus on Saturday and had no plans to compete in Washington State, which also has a caucus on Saturday.
Instead, Mr. Edwards, turning his eye to the Wisconsin primary on Feb. 17, began broadcasting a commercial there Wednesday, while sending staff members there to lay the groundwork for what his strategist believe will be a pivotal showdown. The campaign announced that Mr. Edwards would visit Milwaukee on Saturday.
But the need to keep pace with fund-raising intruded on Mr. Edwards's schedule. He attended fund-raisers in New York City and New Jersey on Wednesday night but sought to make the most of his time with an appearance on CBS-TV on ''The Late Show With David Letterman'' to read the Top 10 list. (The No. 1 answer to things never before said by a presidential candidate: ''Read my lips, no new wardrobe malfunctions.'')
Wednesday was also a day to play up the results from Tuesday night, when Mr. Edwards won the South Carolina primary and came close to winning in Oklahoma. He sought to portray the race as already down to two or three candidates.
''This is a very fluid race,'' Mr. Edwards said at a news conference after speaking in Memphis. ''It looks like it's narrowed down to two, or maybe three, candidates. And I think if it's two, it's myself and Senator Kerry. I'll let General Clark argue for whether he should be No. 3.''
Mr. Edwards is counting on a boost in momentum from anticipated triumphs in here and in Tennessee, and he plans to campaign in both states every day leading up to the primary. He began broadcasting two commercials in the two states Wednesday, including one that focused on the theme of ''two Americas'' divided by class, which his campaign says helped with his recent successes.
Mindful of Tennessee's early voting option, he issued a plea at a rally in Memphis: ''I came here today to ask any of you who have not yet voted to go from this place and go vote and vote for John Edwards. I need you. I need your family, your friends, every person you can touch.''
At a rally at Norfolk State University, Mr. Edwards broke from his standard remarks and warned that the country's ''economic security'' was imperiled by the transfer of jobs overseas. With polls showing voters concerned about the economy, Mr. Edwards plans to highlight proposals every day to reverse job loss.
''Protecting America also means protecting America's economic security,'' Mr. Edwards said, his voice cracking from lingering bronchitis.
He attacked what he called the exorbitant growth of corporate executive pay and the practice of some American companies moving operations overseas, suggesting that President Bush has not done enough about either.
''This president is putting our economic security at risk every single day,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''The very idea that we have a million plus jobs leaving America and going overseas endangers our economic security.''
He added: ''Twenty years ago, we all listened, when we were worried about what was happening to some of our automobile manufacturers, we listened to the refrain, buy American. Why don't we hire American?''
It was also clear Mr. Edwards would aim for the votes of African-Americans. Norfolk State, where he spoke on Wednesday, is a historically black college, and he planned a visit to another one, Tennessee State University in Nashville, on Thursday.
And it was apparent that more than anything, Mr. Edwards plans to play up his natural appeal to Southerners. He may have a slight edge in that regard in Tennessee and Virginia.
He lived in Nashville from 1978 to 1981, working at a law firm not long after graduating from law school at the University of North Carolina. He and his wife, Elizabeth, had their first child, Wade, there before moving to Raleigh, N.C. Mrs. Edwards, also a lawyer, lived in Virginia from 1977 to 1978 while a law clerk to a federal judge.
Still, Mr. Edwards's campaign struggled to overcome Mr. Kerry's solidifying position as the front-runner, a powerful magnet for undecided voters. Exit polls in South Carolina showed that voters who chose Mr. Kerry did so in large part because they found him more likely to beat Mr. Bush.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
