THE scene could not have been more incongruous or telling. There, in a room off the lobby of a hotel in Kohler, Wis., Jackie Autry, who was running the Anaheim Angels for her husband, Gene, walked into the caucus of small-market clubs during the owners' first discussion of revenue sharing in 1993.
Think of that: the Angels of Anaheim, Calif., a small-market club; Jackie Autry at the table along with the owners of the Pittsburgh Pirates, the Kansas City Royals, the Minnesota Twins and others of legitimately small-market size. Who was going to walk in next, George Steinbrenner?
What had Major League Baseball come to in Southern California that the Angels would share a table with teams from cities far smaller than the geographic and demographic area just south of Los Angeles?
The answer was not in the status but in the terminology. Rather than small-market clubs, they were low-revenue clubs, and the Angels had done such a poor job of operating themselves that they had played themselves into a low-revenue club.
To the north, meanwhile, the Los Angeles Dodgers had maintained their status as a high-revenue team. They continued to draw more than three million fans a season, and they continued to spend lavishly on their player payroll. But while the Angels had ground themselves into a low-revenue team, the Dodgers had squandered themselves into a losing team.
Later this month, both teams will enter spring training with new owners. Arturo Moreno, a businessman of Mexican descent, bought the Angels from the Walt Disney Company last May for $182.5 million. Frank McCourt, a Boston real estate developer, bought the Dodgers for $430 million last week from the Fox Entertainment Group, a subsidiary of Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation.
They are not starting out even. Seven months before Moreno acquired the Angels, they won the World Series. The Dodgers, on the other hand, have not reached the postseason since 1996 and have not won a postseason game since they won the World Series in 1988.
Moreno starts ahead in another way. Because he already owned the Angels, he was able to function the way he wanted this winter. He shored up his mediocre lineup by signing right fielder Vladimir Guerrero, and he bolstered the pitching staff by signing Bartolo Colón and Kelvim Escobar, guaranteeing an overall expenditure of $140 million.
McCourt, whose acquisition of the Dodgers was delayed for three months while he got his financing in order, was unable to authorize expenditures that would have improved the National League's weakest offense. The Dodgers, however, did have the league's most effective pitching staff last season.
Both new owners declined the opportunity to discuss their plans, whatever they may be. A spokesman for the Angels said Moreno does not do telephone interviews, and a Dodgers spokesman did not respond to a request to interview McCourt.
The most salient question an inquiring person might ask McCourt is what he can do to revive the vibrant organization the Dodgers were before Murdoch. Peter O'Malley, who sold the team to Fox, was never his father's son in his involvement in Major League Baseball, but few men were able to match Walter O'Malley's brilliance.
At least Peter O'Malley understood what it took to maintain a competitive team; that much he learned from his father. The Dodgers' philosophy was basically to finish in first place every few years and remain competitive in between.
Fox bought the team in 1998 for $311 million and tore up the fabric of the organization, making one mistake by firing the general manager, Fred Claire, who understood the organization, then compounding it by replacing him with Kevin Malone, who promptly pronounced himself ''the new sheriff in town'' and sent the Dodgers spiraling downward.
The speculation is that McCourt will replace the current general manager, Dan Evans, but it will take some deft moves by Evans or his replacement to turn the Dodgers into a contender this year.
Pat Gillick, who pitched for and graduated from the University of Southern California more years ago than he can remember, would be a natural as the new Dodgers general manager. But having retired three times as a general manager, he said the other day that he was happy living in Toronto and working as a consultant for the Seattle Mariners.
Billy Beane, the mastermind of the Oakland Aberrations, would be another ideal candidate, but word out of Oakland is that the Athletics' owners won't even let the Dodgers interview him.
But a decision on a general manager is just one of the moves McCourt has to make. His overall task is to rescue the Dodgers from the Fox plague of ownership, in which the Dodgers suffered the way the Yankees did under CBS ownership in the 1960's.
Baseball officials have portrayed the McCourt purchase as another leg in the return of teams to family ownership, reversing the trend of recent decades in which corporations assumed command of teams. Moreno's ownership of the Angels is cited as another example, even though his silence on the telephone is as enlightening as the baseball views of corporate executives who are clueless when they begin making baseball decisions.
The reality is that the vast majority of teams are currently owned by wealthy individuals -- businessmen, entrepreneurs -- and not corporations. Moreno, for example, had $182.5 million to spend for the Angels because in 1999 he sold his outdoor advertising company for more than $8 billion.
That is not the kind of bankroll previous family ownerships operated on, the Griffiths in Minnesota, for example, but it's the kind of money needed to operate a team in today's economic climate.
If he doesn't already know it, McCourt will quickly learn that fact of baseball economic life. Some people believe he is in over his head financially, but he has been trying to buy a team in recent years -- the Boston Red Sox a few years ago -- and now he has succeeded.
His ultimate success is another matter.
On Baseball
