For the last decade online bridge clubs have proliferated. They permit players to enjoy themselves for long or short periods far from their partners and opponents.
The grandfather of them is OKBridge. Others include ACBL online, Bridge Club LIVE, e-bridge, e-bridge 4 Prizes, MSN Gaming Zone, Swan Games and TopBridge. They charge a membership fee, usually with a free trial period. Four services are free: Bridge Base Online, Bridge Time, Floater and WinBridge. Information about these and others can be found on: www.greatbridgelinks .com.
Occasionally you can watch top players at work, sometimes with live commentary. On the diagramed deal, played on Swan Games, two Italian world champions were in opposition. Benito Garozzo, now an American citizen, was sitting East and playing with Lea Dupont. Dano De Falco was South, partnering Gabriella Olivieri.
The three no-trump by North looks odd. By partnership agreement, it was artificial, showing a maximum with four-card spade support. West led a diamond, and South won with dummy's ace. He cashed the two heart winners, throwing a club from his hand, and led a diamond. Garozzo won with the queen and had to make a crucial play. He led a trump, which was the right idea but the wrong time.
South won in dummy and led a club to his king with fatal results. West won with the ace and led a second trump, after which there was no escape for the declarer. Instead De Falco should have led a trump to his king and ruffed a diamond. Then he could continue a red-suit crossruff and reach this ending:
When South leads his established diamond jack, West is helpless. If she ruffs, she must concede a trick to the club king at the finish.
So East should have shifted to a club at the fifth trick. Whatever South does, the defense can then shift immediately to a trump with decisive effect. That is certainly not obvious, online or offline.
Garozzo and Dupont gained 2.09 imps, based on comparison with others who had played the same deal. But De Falco and Olivieri won the 22-deal match by 31 imps.
A tournament under the auspices of the Greater New York Bridge Association will be played this weekend at the New York Helmsley Hotel, 212 East 42nd Street in Manhattan. This is the schedule:
Tomorrow: Victor Mitchell Pro-Am, 7 p.m. Preregistration required at (212) 254 1009
Saturday: Betty Kaplan Teams (four-player teams, rotating), 1 p.m. and 7 p.m.
One-session pairs (0-200 points), 1 p.m. and 7 p.m.
Sunday: Grand National Teams (Open and Flight B), 11 a.m. and 4 p.m.
One-session pairs (0-200 points), 11 a.m. and 4 p.m.
Another tournament will be played this weekend at the Guardian Angel Church Auditorium, East Allendale Road, Allendale, N.J. This is the schedule:
Tomorrow: Stratified Open Pairs and 199'er Pairs, 1 p.m.
199'er Swiss Teams, 7:15 p.m.
Stratified Open Pairs, 7:30 p.m.
Saturday: Novice Game, 9:30 a.m.
Stratiflighted IMP Pairs and 199'er Pairs, 1 p.m.
Stratified Open Pairs, 7:30 p.m.
Sunday: Stratiflighted Swiss Team, noon
BRIDGE
