Sticking one of its eyes to the Martian ground, the NASA rover Opportunity has found a mix of particles, from fine soil to sand grains to almost perfectly round pebbles.
It is too early to say why some of the pebbles are round, what the mix of particles means or whether the new information fits with the theory that Mars was once warm and wet, Dr. Steven W. Squyres and other scientists said yesterday at a news conference at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. Dr. Squyres is a professor of astronomy at Cornell and the principal investigator for the two rovers on Mars.
Meanwhile, hoping finally to squash the programming bug that has troubled the other rover, the Spirit, for the last two weeks, mission controllers yesterday completely erased its flash memory, used for the long-term storage of data.
The four-hour procedure was the equivalent of erasing and reformatting a corrupted hard disk in a personal computer. The Spirit's computer started crashing on Jan. 21, and engineers traced the problem to the software that reads and writes information to and from flash memory. Today, the Spirit is to resume its analysis of minerals in a rock nicknamed Adirondack.
The Opportunity, which landed on the other side of Mars three weeks after the Spirit, has been analyzing the soil since it rolled off its lander on Saturday. Even the low-resolution images show that the soil contains at least two components, a fine-grained dirt and coarser material on top.
''When we first looked at them, it just sort of looked like gravel sitting on top,'' Dr. Squyres said. ''Then as we took a closer look, we began to notice some of these grains looked awfully darned round.''
Another camera, a microscopic imager on the rover's mechanical arm, provided a close-up of a patch of soil one inch by one inch that shows one round sphere an eighth of an inch thick. ''About the size of a sunflower seed,'' said Dr. Kenneth E. Herkenhoff of the United States Geological Survey, who is the main scientist for the microscopic imager.
Dr. Harry Y. McSween Jr., a professor of planetary geoscience at the University of Tennessee and a member of the science team, said the scientists were at first excited by the prospect that the spheres were grains known as oolites that become round as they roll around and accumulate sediment at the bottom of shallow water. Most of the pebbles examined by the microscopic imager are not round, Dr. McSween said, and some appear to contain air bubbles. More likely, he said, they are glass beads that cooled out of molten rock tossed up by a volcanic eruption or a meteor impact.
The Opportunity will now move about 10 feet to another patch of soil, spin its wheels to gouge a small trench, then back up to take a look at what it has dug up. After that, it will move another 10 feet to investigate an exposed bedrock outcrop.
