Bleary-eyed taxpayers are likely to find an unwelcome surprise tucked away in this year's New York State income tax form.
There, in line 56, is something known as a ''sales or use tax,'' which is basically an attempt by the state to raise millions of dollars in uncollected revenue by taxing out-of-state retail sales, including those made over the Internet. New York residents who buy something from an out-of-state retailer are expected to pay Albany the difference between that state's sales tax and New York's, which is one of the highest. For Internet and catalog purchases, many of which do not include any sales tax, residents are expected to pay the full New York sales tax, raising obvious concerns about how the new rule can be enforced.
State law has long required the payment of such sales taxes, but Michael Bucci, spokesman for the New York State Department of Taxation and Finance, acknowledged that many people may not have been aware that the state has begun a new effort to enforce the tax rule, and consequently may have thrown away their receipts. To help alleviate that problem, there is a provision on this year's form for taxpayers to estimate the amount they owe based on their income, Mr. Bucci said.
Mr. Bucci would not go into detail about how the department plans to enforce the rule, but he said it was unlikely that anyone would be audited this year solely for failure to accurately answer the question.
The change comes as a result of a bitter legislative fight last year, when lawmakers came up with a raft of tax increases and other revenue-generating proposals to restore billions of dollars in health and education cuts the governor proposed at a time when the state faced a budget deficit of nearly $12 billion.
Lawmakers estimated that the state lost $1 billion annually by not collecting online sales taxes, and a Senate report predicted that adding the new line to the tax form could generate about $25 million a year. Although the line was added in the hope of capturing taxes mostly from Internet sales, Mr. Bucci said that technically, it would apply to other retail sales as well.
Several states have been trying to persuade Congress to allow them to collect sales tax for each other on Internet and catalog purchases, and some states, including Connecticut, Vermont and North Carolina, have begun enforcement attempts similar to the one here. New York's participation with other states in an attempt to streamline the tax code will not be reflected in the current tax form, Mr. Bucci said.
Taxpayers are likely to be befuddled about how to respond to the new tax. Many people do not keep a detailed log of all the purchases they have made on the Internet.
''Realistically, the governor's budget division is probably correct in saying that this is not going to take in a lot of revenue,'' said Robert B. Ward, director of research at the Public Policy Institute/Business Council of New York State. ''This is part of a nationwide effort to bring in more revenue to government,'' he added, ''and it is not going to be an easy process for the states.''
