MARION JONES stood on a podium at the New York Athletic Club yesterday fielding questions from an audience of reporters and young runners. She talked about her comeback; her new baby, Tim; her excitement at competing in her first Millrose Games. Then the questions turned toward scandals that have engulfed the track world and have marginally involved her. What about her relationship with Charlie Francis? What about Balco and Victor Conte? What about the state of her sport?
Jones answered every question with the grace of royalty, the precision of a lawyer and the dexterity of a politician.
''I believe in a drug-free sport and drug-free competition,'' Jones said.
Finally, Skip Stolley, the meet organizer of the Millrose Games, stepped in and interrupted. Jones was finished answering drug questions. This was about the Millrose Games and her comeback after a yearlong maternity leave.
For the second time in two days, someone involved with Jones attempted to define the terms of an interview. During a conference call with a few reporters on Tuesday, a USA Track &amp; Field representative took a voice count of invited guests. She asked an uninvited reporter how he had gotten an invitation. The reporter was allowed to stay for a broad-ranging conversation that covered Jones's comeback, her baby and, once again, questions about performance-enhancing drugs, Balco and Francis.
Tomorrow, in a rare indoor appearance at Madison Square Garden, Jones will run the 60 meters in a race that will also feature Allyson Felix, the 18-year-old Californian who broke Jones's 200-meter high school record last June.
Jones's comeback is intriguing. There are emerging dynamics between three conflicting camps -- a public relations staff trying to fashion a new image for her, one segment of the news media enamored of Jones's charisma and talent, and another part that is following the scent of an emerging drug scandal. With the best of intentions, the people around Jones want to manufacture the news and her image much as they did leading to the 2000 Sydney Games, when Jones's quest for five gold medals became an obsession. (She won three.)
There is a new reality, however. Jones is 28 and a mother who has been touched -- however gently -- by the breeze of a scandal involving a sport that she rules.
The reality is the use of performance-enhancing drugs in a fragile sport fighting for credibility, with the Athens Games coming in August.
Track and field officials, from Craig Masback, the chief executive of USA Track &amp; Field, to promoters feel the news media focus too keenly on the negative. They do not understand why journalists who cover the sport become upset at disclosures of positive tests and suspicions of hundreds gone undetected.
For one, we feel like fools. We report on what we believe to be competition taking place on a level playing field, only to find that some athletes are running on synthetic fuel that is almost impossible to detect. It's disturbing to think that Marion Jones, one of the sport's most dominating and charming performers, is even on the periphery of such a scandal.
My blood doesn't boil at the idea of athletes using performance-enhancing drugs. Everybody wants an edge. What do you do? You root it out over time. If you're an athlete, you tell; if you're an official, you test; if you're a journalist, you investigate and expose. We're all in agreement with Jones: we want a drug-free sport.
Frankly, before Sydney the idea that Marion Jones would use performance-enhancing drugs never crossed my mind. Then came the disclosures that her husband at the time, C. J. Hunter, had tested positive for a banned substance. Then last year Jones and her partner, Tim Montgomery, began training with Charlie Francis. Francis is the former coach of Ben Johnson, who was stripped of his gold medal in the 100 meters at the 1988 Seoul Games after testing positive for steroids.
Then Jones was called on to testify before a grand jury about her relationship with Balco, a San Francisco Bay Area laboratory that has been the center of an investigation into the steroid THG, and her association with its founder, Conte.
''I acknowledged that a number of major scandals my name has been associated along with that, and it doesn't help that I'm one of the elite athletes in the sport,'' Jones said on Tuesday.
''Did I know of Balco and Victor Conte? Sure, everybody knew of him. Was I married to C. J. Hunter, who tested positive in Sydney? Sure, but I'm really set in the idea that I don't believe in guilt by association in the least.''
Neither do I. At the same time, you have to choose associates wisely.
I'm pulling for Marion Jones -- pulling for her to win medals in Athens and smash records. She is the Wilma Rudolph of her generation, quite capable of breaking molds and barriers, becoming not only a great female athlete, but one of the greatest runners of all time.
During Tuesday's conference call, Jones was asked about her legacy in the sport. She said it was far too soon to think about a legacy -- there were still too many races to win, dragons to slay.
Given the events of the last year and the reality of a new family, Jones should reconsider. It's never too early to think about your reputation and your legacy. You don't need a public relations firm to screen the news media and handlers to dictate questions.
All you have to do, as Jones likes to say, is run fast, jump high and stay clean.
That speaks volumes.
Sports of The Times
