Don't Cry for Dying Flowers
Q.  I have been given a beautiful houseplant called queen's tears. It has vase-shaped clumps of leaves and drooping green flowers with touches of red, purple and blue. Some of the flowers are starting to die, and there aren't many buds. What is the best way to keep the plant in bloom?
A.  Queen's tears (Billbergia nutans) is a bromeliad, which means each clump dies after it flowers. You keep it blooming by nurturing the baby plants -- called offsets by botanists and pups by everyone else -- at the base of each clump. It takes them about a year to mature and produce flowers of their own.
Queen's tears should have bright light in winter, bright indirect light in summer. If you put it outdoors for the summer, choose a partly shaded spot. It will enjoy the cool of fall, but bring it in when night temperatures fall to freezing.
Year-round, allow the soil to dry quite a bit between waterings, then water by filling the clumps and letting them spill over slightly. Add all-purpose fertilizer, diluted to half strength, to every third watering. Wait until the parts that have flowered start showing signs of decay, then carefully remove them, leaving the pups in place. There tend to be a lot of pups, so although a crowded pot is fine, you will eventually have to remove some. Plant them in shallow pots of any light quick-draining mix. Or give them away. Queen's tears is named for the drops of nectar that sometimes drip from the flowers, but its other name is friendship plant, because it is so easy to share.
Sources for queen's tears include Logee's Greenhouses, www.logees.com or (888) 330-8038, and Yucca Do Nursery, www.yuccado.com or (979) 826-4580.
In the Spotlight
Q.  I would like to display a bonsai, orchids and other plants that need moderate light to strong light, but not on window shelves or under industrial-looking fluorescent grow tubes. Can I use incandescent grow bulbs and table lamps?
A.
We could take an excursion through the jungle of lumens and foot-candles, light and heat, and the assortment of required wavelengths, but the short answer is no. And that is primarily because light dissipates with lightning speed as you move away from the source. Plants needing strong light in a south window should be no more than about 18 inches from the glass. If they are under grow lights, they must be even closer. And a single incandescent grow bulb would not be sufficient even if you put the plant close enough to turn it to toast.
Avoid the temptation of high-intensity bulbs like metal halide and high-pressure sodium. They give living areas a most unnatural glow and blind you when you look at the plant.
The best way to put light-loving plants center stage is to keep them under grow lights or on a sunny windowsill, then give them brief star turns in the living room when they are at their best.
Garden Q &amp; A
