JUST how profitable a business is running a chain of hospitals? Tenet Healthcare, the onetime darling of the industry, once promised earnings that would increase by 20 percent or more a year. Now a much smaller and humbler company, Tenet announced last week that it would sell more than a quarter of its hospitals and was predicting it would probably not do better than break even this year.
While Tenet's competitors have not had as bad a year, the for-profit hospitals are struggling. Hospitals are facing more unpaid bills from uninsured and underinsured patients and their profits are being squeezed.
''There is a very real crisis in the hospital industry,'' said Sheryl R. Skolnick, an analyst with Fulcrum Global Partners, a research firm for large investors in New York, who says the problem extends to not-for-profit hospitals, too. Only about 15 percent of the nation's hospitals are for-profit.
HCA, the nation's largest for-profit chain, told investors this week that its profit margins were under pressure, largely because of the company's growing levels of bad debt. Doubtful accounts are now about 11 percent of revenues, compared with 9 percent at the end of 2002. And despite the flu sweeping much of the country last fall, patient volume was essentially flat.
The industry's ''business model is under significant pressure now,'' said Ms. Skolnick, who said investors should not expect the strong profits and cash flows of the past. She recommends that investors sell their shares in Tenet, HCA and Health Management Associates, another for-profit hospital chain.
Ms. Skolnick also worries that Medicare, the federal health insurance program for the elderly, could significantly reduce hospital payments in 2005 -- if not before -- as it grapples with how to pay for the new drug benefit that President Bush signed into law in December. The administration now estimates that the benefit will cost $534 billion over 10 years.
While other analysts and investors are less pessimistic, they agree that Tenet's old strategy -- aggressively raising prices to qualify for special Medicare payments -- clearly backfired. Few, if any, investors expect the major hospital companies to have rapidly increasing profits over the next few years.
Tenet, based in Santa Barbara, Calif., is also the focus of numerous federal investigations into its charges to Medicare, its relationships with physicians and other practices. The company's earnings have deteriorated as a result of lower Medicare payments and the ability of health plans to demand lower prices in their contracts for the care provided by Tenet hospitals. The company is also facing significant sums of bad debt.
''I see Tenet as an outlier,'' said Jordan Schreiber, a portfolio manager specializing in health care at Merrill Lynch. ''They gamed the system.''
Mr. Schreiber praises HCA, particularly for raising its dividend from 8 cents a year to 52 cents. Analysts, however, are projecting earnings growth in the low double digits in the years ahead.
''The growth is modest but very steady,'' said Mr. Schreiber, whose fund owns the stock. ''That's all you can ask for.'' He also owns shares in Triad Hospitals, despite that company's own problems with bad debt.
One critical factor, analysts say, is where a company's hospitals are, and Tenet suffered from having a decidedly mixed portfolio.
The company announced last week that it would keep 69 hospitals and sell 27, including 19 in California that as a group were unprofitable. Analysts say that California is a difficult place to run a hospital because of high labor costs and burdensome regulations.
How much Tenet will get for these hospitals is unclear and many analysts say the company will not realize significant sums for the group. ''Most of them are going to go for next to nothing,'' predicted Kemp Dolliver, an analyst with SG Cowen. Some of the hospitals, like Queen of Angels/Hollywood Presbyterian Medical Center, operate in low-income areas.
But analysts say some of the other companies are operating in better locations with hospitals that have significant market share.
''HCA's assets are the best in the business,'' said Nancy L. Weaver, an analyst with Stephens Inc. She also likes Triad Hospitals, another chain, which she described as relying on partnerships with many not-for-profit hospitals.
While Triad never offered the high profit margins of a player like Tenet, it does offer a sustainable stream of earnings, she said. She is recommending both stocks.
Like Ms. Skolnick, however, Ms. Weaver is concerned that hospital companies are going to have difficulty handling the growing burden of people unable to pay their bills over the next two to three years.
The current environment may also favor hospital companies that concentrate on smaller markets and investors have pushed some of those stocks up much more than the companies that operate in cities.
Over the last three years, for example, the stock of Health Management Associates, a chain of 52 hospitals based in Naples, Fla., has risen 52 percent, compared with 20 percent for HCA.
''The market's judgment is the rural model, well executed, is a better model,'' said John W. Ransom, an analyst with Raymond James &amp; Associates, adding that hospitals in those markets face less competition and have lower labor costs.
More government financing should be available to rural hospitals as a result of the Medicare legislation, although Mr. Ransom warned that payments could be reduced sometime in the future. ''The signals are clearly there that is coming to an end,'' he said.
Mr. Schreiber of Merrill Lynch also argued that the proliferation of players in the rural markets would eventually lead to some sort of shakeout in the sector.
Also, Ms. Weaver said rurally focused companies risk paying too much for acquisitions. Companies can also stumble when they buy too many hospitals too quickly.
''There are always ebbs and flows in this business,'' she said.
Market Place
