Republicans and their allies have begun laying the groundwork for a familiar line of attack against Senator John Kerry: that he is ''out of sync'' with most voters, ''culturally out of step with the rest of America,'' a man who votes with ''the extreme elements of his party,'' as Ed Gillespie, the Republican chairman, has put it in recent days.
In short, that he is a Massachusetts liberal. It is a charge that ultimately proved devastating to Michael S. Dukakis, the Democrats' presidential nominee in 1988, who ended the campaign battered by the Republicans as ''a card-carrying member of the A.C.L.U.,'' a product of the ''Harvard boutique'' who coddled criminals and was too much of a legalistic liberal to require school children to say the pledge of allegiance.
Some of the so-called wedge issues that polarized voters and resonated back then, when President Bush's father was waging the attack, may not have the same power today, but others have risen in their place.
This year, the state's liberal image is being highlighted anew by its role in the growing debate over gay marriage.
The state's highest court on Wednesday ruled that people of the same sex must have the right to marry -- not just to enter into civil unions -- if the state is to comply with its previous rulings.
Conservative leaders said the court decision only underscored the need for a constitutional amendment limiting marriage to heterosexual couples. Mr. Bush appears increasingly likely to embrace such an amendment. Mr. Kerry says he supports civil unions, not same-sex marriages, but has opposed a constitutional amendment outlawing them.
''This could be a very defining difference between the candidates,'' said Tony Perkins, president of the Family Research Council, a conservative group.
In a statement on Wednesday night, Mr. Kerry clearly sought a middle ground. He said he believed in protecting the ''fundamental rights of gay and lesbian couples, from inheritance to health benefits,'' but added that he believed the answer was civil unions.
''I oppose gay marriage and disagree with the Massachusetts court's decision,'' he said.
The Kerry campaign, which includes several veterans of the Dukakis campaign, says it will not make the mistakes of 1988, when Mr. Dukakis was widely seen as too passive in the face of the attacks. ''We welcome a debate with the likes of Ed Gillespie, Karl Rove and this White House about who's out of sync with Main Street America,'' said David Wade, a Kerry spokesman.
''Their tired old G.O.P. attack dog just won't hunt,'' Mr. Wade said, adding that Republicans would be running against ''a Democrat who fought for his country in war, put criminals behind bars as a prosecutor, stood up for balanced budgets in the Senate,'' and ''kept faith with America's veterans.''
Another Kerry adviser was more blunt. ''This is not the Dukakis campaign,'' the adviser said. ''We're not going to take it. And if they're going to come at us with stuff, whatever that stuff may be, if it goes to a place where the '88 campaign did, then everything is on the table. Everything.''
Republicans assert Mr. Kerry's problem is his own voting record, and argue that it is very fair game. Mr. Gillespie, in a recent speech, asserted that Mr. Kerry's voting record was, by some measures, even more liberal than the senior senator from Massachusetts, Senator Edward M. Kennedy, another icon of liberalism.
Ralph Reed, chairman of the Bush-Cheney campaign in the Southeast, said on Wednesday, ''More important than labels is the fact that he has a voting record over 20 years in the U.S. Senate that is out of the mainstream, simply out of step with where the American people are, by consistently voting to weaken national defense, undercut our intelligence capability and massively raise taxes.''
Mr. Kerry and his allies dismiss that characterization of his record, noting, for example, that he was one of the first Democrats to sign onto the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit reduction act. Representative Barney Frank, Democrat of Massachusetts, argued that Mr. Kerry's background as a decorated veteran and a tough prosecutor also come into play.
''It is hard to demonize as an irresponsible leftist a man who has locked up criminals and shot communists,'' Mr. Frank said. ''That's John Kerry's record. Kerry's cast a couple specific votes that are unpopular, but so has Bush. In general, I like our ground better.''
Still, Republicans do not seem cowed by Mr. Kerry, the front-runner for the Democratic nomination, who left the campaign trail on Wednesday after winning five of seven nominating contests the previous day, and returned to Boston for what he said would be an ''administrative day.''
In his speeches, Mr. Gillespie has highlighted several national security and economic votes, but also some of the social issues that have proved so divisive in the past. He noted that Mr. Kerry voted against the ban on a procedure used in second and third trimester of pregnancy, one critics call partial-birth abortion. That legislation was signed into law by Mr. Bush last fall.
Mr. Gillespie also noted that Mr. Kerry voted against the 1996 Defense of Marriage Act, barring federal recognition of same-sex marriages, a measure that was signed into law by President Bill Clinton.
Mr. Kerry said at the time that while he opposed same-sex marriage, he was voting against the bill because ''I believe that this debate is fundamentally ugly, and it is fundamentally political, and it is fundamentally flawed.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
