Mel Gibson and Brian Kulick occupy very different corners of the entertainment universe: Hollywood and the East Village, movie stardom and Off Broadway theater. But they have certain things in common.
Shakespeare for example. Mr. Gibson has played Hamlet on screen; Mr. Kulick has directed ''The Winter's Tale'' and ''Twelfth Night'' in Central Park.
And now Jesus. There has been much debate over whether Mr. Gibson's interpretation of the Crucifixion in ''The Passion of the Christ,'' scheduled for release on Feb. 25, Ash Wednesday, is anti-Semitic. Mr. Kulick, the new artistic director of the Classic Stage Company on East 13th Street, has also learned firsthand how touchy people can be when it comes to matters of faith.
''The Mysteries,'' which Mr. Kulick chose to begin his tenure at the 36-year-old company, and which plays through Feb. 15, offers unusual interpretations of Bible stories from medieval believers and 20th-century skeptics. He said that he had been surprised by the reaction; not so much the mix of positive and negative but the extremity.
''When you're dealing with issues of religion, it is Rorschach,'' he said. ''You learn more about the reviewer than what's being reviewed. I don't know how to reconcile something like The New Yorker, which calls my production radically violent in the tradition of Scorsese and Tarantino, with The New York Times, which says my production is G-rated.''
Mr. Kulick, 41, has a friendly, earnest manner and chubby cheeks that make him come across as a polite cherub who happens to be fluent in matters dramatic and theological.
''He's a fantastically erudite person,'' said Tony Kushner, the playwright, no slouch in the fantastically erudite department himself. Mr. Kulick directed Mr. Kushner's adaptation of ''The Dybbuk, or Between Two Worlds'' in 1997, and the men are friends.
Speaking with Mr. Kulick, much like watching his plays, is not an event to be approached casually. Attention must be paid. In ''The Mysteries,'' a boat is lowered from on high (for those 40 days of rain), while actors leap onto tables and are doused with water and pelted with apples.
In conversation with Mr. Kulick, the verbal calisthenics are equally athletic. Within minutes he can jump from a discussion of Cain and Abel, to a revelation he found in the last 10 minutes of ''The Winter's Tale,'' to a detailed analysis of deconstructing religion as myth, allegory and parable. He says things like: ''You need Shakespeare and Chekhov every 15 minutes of your life because every 15 minutes of our lives we forget we're human beings. Shakespeare and Chekhov grab you by the lapels and say: 'You idiot! You're living! Living your life!' We need that every 15 minutes.''
This kind of intellectual excitement is evident in ''The Mysteries,'' in which Mr. Kulick grapples with his own theological musings through ancient and modern texts.
The first half of the play, dealing with the Old Testament, is based on the British poet Tony Harrison's adaptation of plays from the late 15th century. The second half, dealing with the New Testament, is taken from the works of 20th-century European iconoclasts: Mikhail Bulgakov, the Russian satirist; Borislav Pekic, a Montenegrin author who spent six years in jail on charges of conspiring against Yugoslavia; and Dario Fo, the Italian Nobel laureate.
The medieval portion, taken from British works known as the York and Wakefield cycles, is considered by many to be the beginning of modern theater. The performers took Bible stories and translated them into street theater, humanizing the characters while imposing Christian interpretations on the Old Testament that can seem jolting to modern audiences. For example they added a postscript to the story of Abraham and Isaac, just after God tells Abraham that he does not have to kill his son. God says:
Thy son is spared, but understand
That my own son, free of sin
Will sacrifice to break that band.
That interpolation of Jesus is startling, perhaps especially to Jews who confront the disturbing original Old Testament text during Yom Kippur services. That is when rabbis face the annual ritual of trying to assure their congregants that God is fair despite insisting that Abraham consent to sacrifice his son. For Mr. Kulick, the medieval alteration was refreshingly modern in a way that is often absent in today's intractable discussions of religion.
''Nowadays we want just one meaning, and we get very upset when there's the intimation of several meanings,'' he said. ''This is a problem that burdens not just the Christian right but a secular leftist humanism. We all tend to reduce these stories to one handy meaning. But they don't reduce to that.''
While ''The Mysteries'' may not be a classic in the familiar sense of, say, ''Antigone,'' the Classic Stage Company's next production, it does fall within the nonprofit theater's tradition of reviving plays of textual and historical significance. Even so, some of the theater's supporters considered staging the play an act of bravado.
''It's very bold of Brian to start his tenure with something that deals with this topic at this time,'' said John Turturro, who has appeared before audiences several times at Classic Stage, but has not worked with Mr. Kulick. ''There are not many dramas that do deal with it and anything that does -- like this 'Passion' -- gets people crazy.''
Mr. Kulick said his interest in the medieval plays began with the birth of his son four years ago, but he had long been interested in the parallelism between religion and theater. Though the product of a commonplace American Jewish upbringing -- bar mitzvah, yes; faith, no -- he became interested in Jewish theology as an undergraduate at the University of California, Los Angeles, where he studied drama. ''To me the core of theater and religion is the same,'' he said. ''How do you stay in a perpetual state of wonder?''
He claims not to mind if some viewers find his production jarring. (Or even if some, like Wilborn Hampton of The Times, don't like it much at all. ''A very long sermon indeed,'' he concluded.)
''I like it when people disagree, when people haggle, because that's what makes something happen,'' Mr. Kulick said. He plans to see ''The Passion of the Christ,'' he said, though with trepidation. ''I hope I'll see layers; that's what the culture needs to see,'' he said. ''I fear I'll see anti-Semitism. Is that my problem? Is that Mel Gibson's problem? But I want to hear what Mel Gibson has to say. If I disagree, I disagree.''
Correction:  February 9, 2004, Monday  An article on Thursday about ''The Mysteries,'' a play at the Classic Stage Company in Manhattan that offers unusual interpretations of Bible stories from medieval believers and 20th-century skeptics, misidentified the Jewish High Holy Day on which the story of Abraham and Isaac is read during services. It is the second day of Rosh Hashana, not Yom Kippur.
