Slouched on a couch in the Texas Tech basketball office, a remote control in his right hand, Coach Bob Knight suddenly perked up.
Over and over, he rewound a deft ball reversal against a Baylor zone in a victory Tuesday night. He was so inspired that he sent an assistant coach to the locker room to fetch the team's guards.
Knight summed up a two-minute tutorial with ''that's the importance of ball fakes,'' then dismissed them.
That ended a day of normalcy here, with Knight reverting to his favorite role: teacher. On Tuesday, Knight was cast in another familiar role, as a lightning rod for controversy, after a heated encounter Monday at a local lunch spot with the Texas Tech chancellor, David Smith, brought a reprimand from the university.
''If a nickel-dime incident like that happened to anyone else,'' Knight said in an interview Wednesday, ''no one would care.''
Knight has 826 victories, fourth on the career list, but his temper has often shadowed his success. He denied instigating the incident, saying Smith came at him after Knight took offense to Smith's saying he had been doing a ''good job lately.'' Knight took it to mean that he had not done a good job before that. The university has not supplied its detailed version of the incident.
Knight, 63, said he should have walked away, but he said Wednesday that he had no plans to change his style.
He referred to the movie Western ''Shane,'' in which, as he recalled it, a character is asked why he wears his gun high on his hip and responds, ''Son, I've found my method is as good as any and better than most.''
''That's kind of how I feel about the way I've coached,'' Knight said. ''I feel my method is as good as any and better than most. There's a lot of parts of that that I don't feel need to be changed.''
Knight said he had agreed with the university not to discuss the incident further. But he did say that he was not concerned about how people perceived his actions or their impact on his legacy. He said that he would be remembered for what he had contributed to the game.
''I don't think anyone in the history of coaching has worked harder to study the game than I have or been more willing to share it,'' Knight said.
The Texas Tech athletic director, Gerald Myers, a friend of Knight's since 1972, hired him in the spring of 2001. He estimated Knight's monetary value to the university to be $8 million to $10 million in ticket revenue, increased donations and fund-raising. Myers said it was impossible to calculate the value of the university's enhanced publicity and exposure during Knight's three years in Lubbock.
Knight's success on the court is not in question. Two years ago, he turned a 9-19 team into a 23-9 team that went to the N.C.A.A. tournament. Last season's team finished 23-13 and reached the National Invitation Tournament semifinals. This season, Texas Tech is 17-4 and ranked 19th.
''The positives outweigh the negatives,'' Myers said in an interview. ''Nobody is perfect. I'm pleased that he's our coach. Like I said, he's one of the best. I can't think of anyone that could do a better job with our program than he's doing.''
Knight said that if he had stayed at Indiana -- he was fired in September 2000 for what was termed a pattern of misconduct -- he would have coached only two more seasons. But he said that he had been revitalized in Lubbock and that he planned to coach a few more seasons.
He denied that breaking Dean Smith's record of 879 coaching victories drove him. ''When I quit, I might coach until I win 200 more games than the record. I might coach until I win 10 games less than the record. It will just be where I get to a point where I say: 'This is it. That's enough.' I plan on coaching for a while. I plan to coach the kids that we've recruited. I plan certainly to be here to do that.''
Knight's son, Pat, his top assistant, maintained in an interview that the record does motivate his father, and that it is the ultimate answer to all of his father's critics.
He said he would not be surprised if his father broke the record elsewhere. The chancellor and the president who hired Knight at Texas Tech have left. ''I'm not real thrilled with what happened the last two days,'' Pat Knight said. ''I have a red flag about the situation. That's just from an administrative part. Everything else is great from a basketball standpoint.''
Bob Knight calls Texas Tech and Lubbock ''near perfect'' and only wishes there were more fishing holes on the West Texas plains. He said he was unsure if this would be his last coaching stop. ''Who knows?'' he said. ''There are two words that have never been a part of my language: always and never.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
