Tom Lehman has grown accustomed to hearing players gripe about the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am. Some say the greens are too bumpy. Others say the rounds with amateur playing partners take too long. Others say the weather is often too wet.
None of those factors have ever stopped Lehman from coming, however. To him, the good far outweighs any inconvenience.
''This is one of the greatest spots on earth,'' Lehman said Wednesday as he prepared for the tournament, which begins Thursday. ''The scenery is spectacular. I love the history of Monterey Peninsula golf. Even if it's soggy and wet, the place has a mystique.''
Pebble Beach remains one of the most picturesque golf sites in the world, with the water glistening in the background behind its 18th green, tantalizing golfers watching on television in frigid climates. Despite the place's allure, however, only 4 of the top 20 players in the world ranking are playing Pebble Beach this year -- Vijay Singh; Davis Love III, the defending champion; Mike Weir, the reigning Masters champion; and Phil Mickelson.
Jim Furyk and Kenny Perry, who played last year, are not in this year's field, and the most notable absentee is Tiger Woods, who is skipping for the second consecutive year after playing from 1997 through 2002.
Woods was recovering from knee surgery when he skipped the event in 2003, but a healthy Woods this year still elected to stay home. Woods explained his reasoning on his Web site, admitting that the bumping greens and long rounds with amateur partners weighed into his decision.
''I've made no secret of the fact that I don't like the bumpy greens and the six-hour rounds, but it's also a scheduling issue,'' Woods said. ''I don't want to play five consecutive events, and that could have been the case if I entered the AT&amp;T.
''I just don't want people to get the wrong idea. I've enjoyed going to the Monterey Peninsula since junior golf and it's one of the most beautiful places in the world. The people have always treated me well and I'll definitely go back. I hope they have a wonderful tournament and the weather holds up.''
Every tournament wants Woods, but he plays only 18 to 21 Tour events a year. So the show will go on without Woods, even as some worry about Pebble Beach losing some of its pizazz.
The actor-comedian Bill Murray, one of the celebrities most connected with the tournament, will also not play this year because of a scheduling conflict with a movie he is shooting in Italy. This year's roster of celebrities includes Tom Brady of the New England Patriots and the actors Kevin Costner, Andy Garcia, George Lopez and Ray Romano, but Murray's levity will be missed.
Meanwhile, the potential for rainy weather at Pebble Beach in February is always a concern. Although the tournament has been blessed with good weather the past three years, a horrendous streak of wet weather plagued it during the late 1990's. The tournament was canceled in 1996, the final round was postponed until August in 1998, and the fourth round was canceled in 1999, when Payne Stewart was declared the winner after 54 holes.
Those episodes, coupled with the soft, bumpy greens that can move putts off line on all three of the tournament's courses, have caused some players to stay away.
''The greens can get really beat up, and it can be frustrating,'' Lehman said. ''I look at it with the mind-set that everybody has to putt on them. It's definitely a cause for concern, that even with a huge purse, you're not getting some guys here. But what are you going to do?''
The weather forecast for this week is good, with the lone chance of rain being predicted for Friday, and midday temperatures expected to reach around 60 degrees. Craig Stadler, who has been playing at Pebble Beach since the 1970's, says it helps to come here with a sunny attitude, no matter what the weather.
''A lot of guys, admittedly, don't like playing with the amateurs, but I love it,'' said Stadler, whose playing partner this week will be the musician Glenn Frey.
The players who came to Pebble Beach this year will not spend much time focusing on who's not in the field. Despite the absence of some big names, there remains a core group of players who would never miss this tournament. And those players remained eager to tee off Thursday.
''I think it's the most important event we have on the PGA Tour schedule, because we have a chance to rub elbows with all the C.E.O.'s and the C.F.O.'s and execute V.P.'s,'' said Peter Jacobsen, who broke onto the Tour in 1977 and who won here in 1995. ''Most of our guests here this week that are playing really hold the PGA Tour in their hand in terms of the future success. That's why I think it's very important for our top players to recognize that and play this event. And it hurts me, it bothers me, to see the declining numbers of great players, marquee players not playing this event, because it's so very, very important to our tour.
''Going in, you know the greens are going to be bumpy, you know it's going to be wet. Big deal. It's Pebble Beach.''
GOLF
