The Spanish government, one of the staunchest supporters of the war in Iraq, said Wednesday that it would not investigate possible intelligence flaws on the existence of unconventional weapons there.
Spanish opposition leaders stepped up calls for such an inquiry after both President Bush and the British prime minister, Tony Blair, announced that they would set up independent investigations on their governments' prewar intelligence.
But on national radio on Wednesday, the deputy prime minister, Rodrigo Rato, said that Spain, unlike the United States and Britain, did not support the war because of its own military intelligence.
Instead, Spain relied on reports by United Nations arms inspectors.
The United Nations, he added, is the entity that should ''evaluate how a unanimous resolution could be adopted taking for granted that there were weapons of mass destruction in Iraq, when now that's clearly in doubt.''
Mr. Rato continued: ''Spain was not responsible for the U.N. reports. The inspectors' reports never cast any doubt on the existence of the weapons. They discussed whether or not they would be shown and whether or not they had been destroyed, but there was no report that said, 'Look, since 1991 there have been no weapons of mass destruction.' ''
Prime Minister José María Aznar joined Mr. Bush and Mr. Blair at the decisive March summit meeting in the Azores, when the invasion plans were sealed. He also led the drive to gain European support of the war, defying public opinion at home and breaking ranks with France, a traditional ally.
Spain did not join the American-led invasion, but after the end of major combat operations, it sent 1,300 troops. Since August, 10 Spaniards have been killed.
Mr. Aznar defended his support of the war on Monday, saying he made his decision based on reports of ''inspectors, experts and the national interest of Spain.'' In Washington to address a joint meeting of Congress on Wednesday, Mr. Aznar did not touch on the topic of an independent investigation but said that advances in the fight against the proliferation of unconventional weapons ''would not have been possible without our firm stance.''
He added, ''To close one's eyes to the threat such weapons pose is to mistake the true debate.''
Correction:  February 6, 2004, Friday  A picture caption yesterday with an article about Spain's decision against investigating possible flaws in intelligence on the existence of unconventional weapons in Iraq misstated the title of José María Aznar, who addressed a joint meeting of Congress in Washington. He is Spain's prime minister, not the president.
