Jim Fassel was looking for a way to stay involved in the N.F.L. without taking a step down the career ladder by accepting a coordinator position. Baltimore Coach Brian Billick was looking for someone to help develop his young quarterbacks and pump life into the Ravens' passing game.
So the two, close friends for many years, agreed on an interesting partnership yesterday: Fassel will become what Billick called a senior consultant for the Ravens.
Fassel, fired by the Giants after the season, will work with the quarterbacks during minicamps and training camp and will split his weeks during the season working with the staff in Baltimore and evaluating film at his home in New Jersey.
''This is the perfect, perfect, perfect blend of taking time off and helping a friend of mine,'' Fassel said in a conference call yesterday.
For Fassel, it was a compromise between taking a year off to wait for another opportunity as a head coach or immersing himself in the game again. For Billick, it was a way to help revive the Ravens' moribund passing attack. The Ravens finished the season ranked No. 1 in the N.F.L. in rushing yards a game (166.8), thanks largely to running back Jamal Lewis, but they were 32nd -- last -- in passing yards (141.3).
Billick decided that Fassel was the ideal candidate to work with Kyle Boller, a rookie named the starter last season. Boller was 116 for 224 for 1,260 yards and 7 touchdowns, with 9 interceptions. After a shoulder injury, he was replaced by Anthony Wright, who had several big games but has not re-signed with the Ravens yet. Boller is considered the team's quarterback of the future.
''Outside of Bill Walsh, Jim is the best quarterback coach in the game today,'' Billick said. ''He is going to be a great asset to us.''
Fassel and Billick have been discussing the job since Fassel failed to land a position as a head coach; he had interviews with Washington, Arizona and Buffalo.
Fassel said he would probably spend two to four days each week in Baltimore, except during minicamps, when he would be there all week. He will also be present throughout training camp; he will not be on the sideline during games.
He is to spend the early part of the week with the coaching staff helping with the game plan, then return home to begin scouting the next week's opponent. Billick says the Ravens will have an edge in having Fassel show up each Monday with an evaluation of the next opponent already in hand.
Billick is all but admitting that he has not developed the Ravens' offense as well as he had hoped. When he arrived from Minnesota in 1999, he was considered one of the sharpest offensive minds in the game. The Ravens' defense quickly became one of the most fearsome in the league and led Baltimore to a Super Bowl victory after the 2000 season, but the offense has approached pitiful.
''Until you sit in this chair and become a head coach in the N.F.L., you cannot fully appreciate the demands of the job,'' Billick said. ''To have someone down the hall who has been in this chair will be a tremendous resource.''
For Fassel, the partnership comes with a twist. He will be employed by the team that handed him and the Giants a 34-7 loss in that Super Bowl.
''If you can't beat 'em, join 'em,'' Fassel said, laughing. ''I want to go back to the Super Bowl and win one.''
Fassel, still under contract with the Giants, will collect $2.7 million from them this season, minus his salary with the Ravens; terms of the one-year deal were not disclosed.
Fassel finished his Giants tenure with a 58-53-1 record. His success in bringing the Giants to the Super Bowl -- he also led the team into the playoffs in two other seasons -- made him a candidate for openings as soon as he was fired.
It did not hurt that Fassel eased his exit by insisting that the Giants announce it with two games to go, expressing no bitter feelings in the process.
''Next year, when there are head-coaching changes, it is inconceivable to me that Jim's not going to be the lead name on everybody's list,'' Billick said.
Until then, two old friends and combatants will work together.
PRO FOOTBALL
