BUD AND LYNDA SLOTKY live a quiet life in a hillside development of 65 houses not far from Hollywood. Each day, Mr. Slotky, a mutual fund administrator, looks forward to his leisure hours. He and Ms. Slotky love nothing more than dinner and a movie with friends.
But such evenings do not involve restaurant reservations or theater lines. Instead, chez Slotky, hosts and guests journey all of 20 feet from the dining table to the living room couch.
Wielding his remote control, Mr. Slotky orders an 82-inch reflective screen to drop from the ceiling, activates a digital projector overhead, adjusts the volume on five surround-sound speakers and commands a DVD to play.
Within seconds, the screen is awash in action, the room is rumbling with sound effects and the audience is completely immersed. ''Ice Age'' is a favorite. So is ''Chicago,'' which the Slotkys have seen half a dozen times.
The VCR and the DVD player have changed where and how Americans watch movies, and now home theaters are further transforming the experience. As setups like the Slotkys' become commonplace, TV watching is becoming more of a communal ritual, shared with family and friends.
''People really congregate around it. It's what people do now,'' said Mike Orio, who designs and installs home theater systems in the New York area and is the host of frequent movie gatherings at his Brooklyn home. ''It's an American temple and the screen is the altar.''
Some home-theater owners find that their living room has become a gathering place for neighbors to watch big games and other special events. Others prefer more intimate movie viewings with a few friends.
''Everybody's doing it, said David Bruce Mann, an architect in Manhattan. ''Every apartment I'm doing right now, whether it's high end or just regular people with regular budgets, involves surround sound.''
According to the Consumer Electronics Association, some 3.1 million prepackaged systems -- five speakers, a subwoofer and an audio-video receiver -- were sold last year, nearly triple the number sold in 2000.
The rise of the home theater appears to be having an effect on the movie industry: the number of tickets sold last year dropped to 1.5 billion, from 1.6 billion in 2002. Anthony Kusich, an analyst with ReelSource, a box-office tracking firm in Los Angeles, attributed the decline in part to home theaters. ''Particularly older people who don't want to deal with a theater don't mind waiting for the DVD,'' he said.
The home theater numbers from the electronics association do not take into account more expensive customized systems, to say nothing of rooms made to resemble a movie theater, complete with curtains and reclining seats.
The range in systems is indeed enormous. ''If you ask consumers what a home theater is, you'll get so many different answers you won't know what to do,'' said Nick Donatiello, president of Odyssey, a market research firm in San Francisco.
Home theaters generally have a television with a screen of at least 30 inches combined with surround-sound speakers, but there are plenty of other permutations. Fifty-inch flat-screen plasma TV's, digital projectors, six-foot speakers, special lighting and inclined walls to maximize acoustics are but a sampling of the possibilities. And some custom-built homes are being designed with a home theater in mind.
Not only have the Slotkys, who are both 56, all but eliminated their trips to movie theaters, but since they installed the home theater last summer it has turned into the center of their social life. Last weekend they held a Super Bowl party for about 40 neighbors and friends. ''Everybody brought an appetizer or a dessert, and the seating was great,'' Ms. Slotky said. A few people watched the game from the backyard, through a large picture window.
The home theater has encouraged some people to reconsider the moviegoing experience. Pam Stuchin, 51, a psychiatrist who lives in Manhattan with her husband and two teenage daughters, is increasingly put off when she goes to the movies. She offered a litany of peeves: ''The floor is all sticky, and you can't put your bag on the floor, and someone is always coughing or singing along. And there's always someone taller than you with a big head.''
Dr. Stuchin's 15-year-old daughter, Margot, is not fond of theaters either. Unlike many teenagers -- a group that studios bank on for ticket sales -- Margot prefers to invite friends over for a movie rather than go out. ''You have to be polite in the theater,'' she said. ''And it's more fun at home because if you miss something you can say, 'Wait, I want to see that again.'''
Of course, the comfort of the Stuchins' Park Avenue apartment might be an influence. A cozy den, redesigned 18 months ago by Mr. Mann with the benefit of Mr. Orio's audiovisual expertise, is now a library and media room. It has a 42-inch Fujitsu plasma TV, Bowers &amp; Wilkins speakers and a Sunfire subwoofer, the bass speaker that creates the sounds of explosions, falling buildings, and asteroid strikes. (''The things the guys like and women always turn the volume down on,'' Mr. Orio said.)
The whole setup, which would have cost $30,000 four years ago, cost less than $15,000. ''You don't have to spend huge amounts of money to get a high-quality home theater system any more,'' Mr. Orio said. ''And you don't have to tear the whole house apart to do it.''
Lynn Spigel, a professor of communications at Northwestern University and the author of ''Make Room for TV: Television and the Family Ideal in Postwar America (University of Chicago Press, 1992), said that when television sets first started appearing in upper-crust homes in the early 1940's, they were viewed much as today's home theaters are. ''A TV was very much of a status symbol,'' Professor Spigel said. Box-office ticket sales fell in areas where television was being introduced. Now, Professor Spigel said, ''the home theater is a sign of luxury because you can be back in your private home again.''
Mr. Slotky said that persuading his wife to agree to spend $12,000 on a home theater was not easy. In fact, two years went by before Ms. Slotky, who is a speech therapist, agreed. ''It was a really, really, really long sell,'' he said. Ms. Slotky said she worried that her husband would become an incurable couch potato. But now she loves the theater as much as her husband does.
The couple is careful not to have friends simply come over, watch a movie and leave. ''I still like conversation,'' Mr. Slotky said. ''That's what friendship is all about.''
As he spoke in his living room, blinds drawn, Mr. Slotky demonstrated his system with a swashbuckling scene from ''Pirates of the Caribbean.'' As the sound thundered throughout the room, Ms. Slotky took over the task of answering a reporter's questions -- at raised volume -- while her husband sat staring straight ahead, too transfixed to talk.
Brian Cincera, 35, a computer security consultant in Allentown, Pa., spent 52 weekends working to convert his basement into a theater at a cost of more than $50,000, a sum he managed to conceal from his wife, Tina. Each new component he brought home was scrutinized by Ms. Cincera, and when she inquired about the price, he offered a standard reply. ''Apparently everything costs around $200,'' she said.
Yet like Ms. Slotky, Ms. Cincera is a convert. ''Family members come over and Brian shows them the beginning of 'Toy Story 2' and they think it's amazing,'' she said.
With his home theater finally in place, Mr. Cincera said, he is reluctant to go to theaters, where the picture is ''grainy,'' and he is less enthusiastic about attending sports events, particularly Philadelphia Eagles games, which he receives in high-definition format on his 64-inch rear-projection TV. ''For the headaches of driving to the stadium, and paying for the tickets and the food, you have it much better in your own home,'' he said.
Larry Hertzog, a television writer and producer who lives in Los Angeles, has not bought a movie ticket in nearly a decade. A serious film buff, Mr. Hertzog finally decided that going to movies was too upsetting. ''You'd go to revival houses to see old classics and they'd be out of focus and there would be babies crying. It ruined the experience for me,'' he said. ''I like to be swept away by a Lana Turner and Clark Gable on the high seas, and that's hard when the person behind you is being an idiot.''
He put together a home theater in the late 1980's, then built a far more elaborate one after his house was destroyed in the Northridge earthquake in 1994.
Mr. Hertzog, 52, said his home theater is less of a social focus than some tend to be. Still, over the years he has noticed that when he goes out to dinner with friends and a particular film is mentioned, ''I'll say: 'Oh, you haven't seen that? Let's go watch it.'''
When the group arrives at Mr. Hertzog's house, he plucks the film from his collection of 1,800 movies, turns down the lights and invites his guests to sink into a plush sofa and enjoy a movie on his 10-foot screen.
Mr. Hertzog pointed out that in his room, ''the visual experience is as good, if not better, than what many people would experience in today's chopped-up multiplex theaters.''
Almost as much as the film itself, Mr. Hertzog said, he enjoys ''the afterglow,'' the time spent sitting with friends, discussing what they have just watched. ''It's the only time I really just hang out in that room,'' he said.
Collecting films has become a crucial component of the home theater hobby. Dr. Stuchin said her Manhattan home theater made her want to buy more movies. Indeed, DVD sales have soared. ''Seabiscuit'' sold five million copies in the first six days after its release, and sales quickly surpassed the $120 million the film made at the box office.
Mr. Orio, who lives in Brooklyn in a Park Slope brownstone, has a home theater with a 92-inch screen and projector, which he uses just for movie viewing. Television programs are watched on any of several large-screen TV's.
When ''Seabiscuit'' came out on DVD in December, he held a private screening for four friends. ''We had dinner afterwards, then we went upstairs and watched 'The Sopranos' on one of the TV's,'' he said. ''Then people had coffee and left. It was great.''
Mr. Orio now plans to show movies to his friends every two weeks. Across the continent, Ms. Slotky is thinking along the same lines. She wants to start a movie club, taking a book-club approach. And while she's at it, she is seriously considering buying a theater-style, free-standing popcorn maker.
