Where else but in St. Moritz might you find ski instructors wearing fashion-perfect ski suits by Prada, and a clientele wealthy enough to hire mountain helicopters to ferry skiers past morning lift lines?
Where else but in St. Moritz does it cost $95 for a T-shirt -- on sale; where a woman in a fur coat is like a man in a tie anywhere else; where a bottle of wine at a pizzeria costs $50?
Then again, where but in one of the oldest, most famous ski areas in the world might you find ice-skating rinks sprinkled like frozen puddles on the landscape; babies being towed on wooden sleds as if it were the North Pole, and horse-drawn wagons to take the weary skier home after too many vertical feet?
''I like it here because it is international,'' said Luca Bassani, an Italian entrepreneur, during a recent interview in St. Moritz. Bassani owns Wally Yachts, builder of multimillion-dollar high-tech sailboats and, lately, a fast new 118-foot powerboat. His life is all about technology; he has designed a new carbon-fiber ski using the same technology as in his boat designs. But his reasons for coming to St. Moritz are more about skiing and tradition.
''I've been coming here since the 1960's,'' he added. ''It is so open here, and so beautiful with the lake. St. Moritz has its own airport, and there is also so much to do here.''
He is referring to a winter tourism schedule that began in 1864 to cater to a small group of Europeans who stayed the winter. Now the calendar includes visitors from around the world; 31 percent are Swiss, 25 percent are Germans, but only 4 percent are Americans.
Having organized the Olympic Winter Games in 1928 and 1948, St. Moritz is hooked on elite competition. The resort, which is owned by 15 railway companies as well as private investors, spent more than $1 billion in preparation for the 2003 Alpine Ski World Championships.
The result is a modern mountain network encompassing 13 towns, 217 miles of downhill runs; 56 lifts, including cable cars and railways; 260 snow-making machines, and 112 miles of cross-country trails.
World-class competitions of every kind are commonplace: skiing, since 1904; ice-skating, since 1872; bobsledding, since 1890; curling (a sport remotely like shuffleboard on ice), since 1880; Cresta (similar to luge), since 1885; ski jumping, since 1904; horse racing on ice, since 1907, and greyhound racing on ice, since 1934.
And for recreational athletes, polo and cricket on the ice of St. Moritz Lake came later. (You can see the horses moving in the distance as you're skiing downhill.) The Swiss also offer golfing (red balls on white ''greens''); horseback riding in the snow; a gourmet festival (not on ice); and concerts (Baroque music and opera).
In contrast, American resorts are not so varied. Managers, faced today with a flat skier market, are struggling to find the same kind of alternatives that St. Moritz has had in place for 50 years. But stateside enticements are different: night tubing, mountaintop video arcades, Web centers on the slopes, mountain bike racing on snow and, in the spring, everything from downhill bikini races to speed contests with furniture on skis.
At St. Moritz in recent years, there is the same snowboarding presence as in the States; it includes a lengthy halfpipe and freestyle park. But funiculars, those profoundly European ski trains that go through mountainsides and come out at the top, are unique.
For the few Americans who have found -- or can afford -- St. Moritz, it can be hard to resist. Norm LeComte, an 82-year-old skier from Somerset, Mass., has gone to St. Moritz for at least 30 years.
''You can take a lift up anywhere from town and be skiing right away,'' he said. ''The lifts are fast -- all the chairs have bubble tops, and the cable car is brand-new -- so it's easy to get around.''
But for many, cost is a concern. Bill Skirkanich, a skier from Reston, Va., said he enjoyed the skiing and the spectacular scenery, but prices in the town shops are high. ''I would not even try to buy something to take home to my grandchild,'' he said.
For Nickolas and Kimberly Kalin, of Monterrey, Calif., money was a consideration, in going to Europe, in the first place given the current weakness of the United States dollar. But it was their fifth wedding anniversary, and his 40th birthday, so they went to St. Moritz anyway. ''You only turn 40 once,'' Nickolas said with a shrug.
THE SKI REPORT
