Mike Richter admitted he was overwhelmed by last night's ceremony in which his No. 35 was raised to the rafters at Madison Square Garden.
In an emotionally charged 45-minute ceremony, Richter showed that he had not lost his sense of humor despite retiring in September because of the effects of concussions that cut short his previous two seasons.
''Right about now, I'm wondering whose idea it was to get a guy who retired because of head injuries to memorize a speech to give to 18,000 people,'' Richter told the sellout crowd from center ice.
The Rangers spoiled the evening by losing, 4-3, to the Minnesota Wild, which had not won a road game since Dec. 17. The Rangers head into the weekend's All-Star Game break on a 2-8-2-0 slide.
After the game, Glen Sather, the Rangers' coach, confirmed that he planned to speak to either Phoenix General Manager Mike Barnett or that team's managing partner, Wayne Gretzky.
The subject was sure to be goaltender Sean Burke, who was held out of his scheduled start against Florida in Phoenix last night.
With the Rangers trailing by 2-0, Jaromir Jagr put on a dazzling show in the second period, assisting on Petr Nedved's goal and adding two of his own.
''Jagr took the game over in the second period,'' Mark Messier, the Rangers' captain, said.
The Rangers are 2-5 since acquiring Jagr, who has four goals and four assists as a Ranger.
Minnesota's Sergei Zholtok scored his second power-play play 51 seconds into the third to tie the score, and when Marian Gaborik beat goaltender Mike Dunham with 6 minutes 26 seconds remaining with a wrist shot to the short side from the top of the left circle, the crowd began to chant, ''We want Richter!''
''It's tough to get beat by a wrist shot on the short side,'' Sather said, referring to Gaborik's goal. ''We've got to get better goaltending.''
Messier said at yesterday's morning skate that the Rangers should find it easy to get up for the game. Despite the emotion of seeing Richter's number retired, the Rangers came out flat.
The ceremony began with a video that highlighted Richter's 14 seasons with the Rangers. Then a procession of former Rangers and former teammates of Richter -- Walt Tkaczuk, Steve Vickers, Jan Erixon, Ron Greschner, Glenn Anderson, Nick Kypreos, Stephane Matteau, Adam Graves, Rod Gilbert and Eddie Giacomin -- were introduced to the crowd.
The roar for Graves -- Richter's teammate for 11 seasons -- was so loud, it drowned out John Davidson, the master of ceremonies, as he attempted to introduce Graves. In fact, they were the loudest cheers of the night.
As Giacomin walked onto the red carpet to center ice, the crowd broke into a once-familiar Garden chant: ''Edd-ie! Edd-ie!''
The 37-year-old Richter, the team career leader in victories (301) and games played (666) by a goaltender, then led the Rangers onto the ice, and the crowd rose to its feet and chanted his name.
Graves, who has indicated he would soon announce his retirement, then spoke admiringly of Richter on and off the ice, and the crowd chanted: ''Sign him! Sign him!''
Messier then skated over from the Rangers' bench. ''Every time past, present and future Rangers look up there,'' said Messier, pointing to the rafters, ''they'll know what a champion is supposed to look like.''
Next came a series of gifts. First, Richter was presented with a collage of photographs from his career on behalf of Ranger fans. Then he was presented a silver-plated goal net and cage, with the names of all 219 players he played with engraved into the metal frame.
The creation of a scholarship fund in Richter's name was announced. Richter will attend Yale next fall to complete his degree.
Then the Zamboni doors opened, and out came a reproduction of a 19-foot Cris Craft mahogany boat (circa 1940), a gift from the Rangers players and organization.
''That's got Mess written all over it,'' Richter said during the first intermission.
After he was presented the boat, it was time for Richter to speak to the crowd. Then he was joined by his wife, Veronica, and their sons, Thomas, 3, and James, 1, for the raising of Richter's jersey above the goal at the Seventh Avenue end of the Garden.
The banner joined those honoring Gilbert and Giacomin as the only numbers retired by the Rangers.
Then it was time for the game.
''I've played,'' Richter said during the first intermission. ''These ceremonies get in the way of playing the game sometimes.'
SLAP SHOTS
ERIC LINDROS, still out after sustaining the eighth concussion of his career, stood with his teammates behind the Rangers' bench for the ceremony. . . . NEIL SMITH, the Rangers' former president and general manager who was the architect of the team that won the Stanley Cup in 1994, made his first appearance at the Garden since his dismissal in March 2000. Smith is a television analyst in Canada. ''There are three things I remember about him most,'' Smith said of MIKE RICHTER. ''The first time I ever saw him play, in Hamilton, Ontario, when he was playing for the U.S. in the world junior championships, and I turned to KEN HOLLAND, who I was working with in Detroit, and said, 'The Rangers really have something with this guy.' Then, of course, the penalty shot on PAVEL BURE in the 1994 Stanley Cup finals. And the 1996 World Cup. I've never seen a goaltender play that well.''
Before the game, ADAM GRAVES said, ''The bigger the game, the better he played.'' Graves said he was frequently asked which goaltender he would choose for Game 7 of the Stanley Cup finals. ''I've played with and against the world's best goaltenders and arguably some of the best goaltenders of all time,'' Graves said. ''Not because he's my buddy, but No. 35 would be in the net.''
MIKE KEENAN, who coached the Rangers to their only Stanley Cup since 1940 in 1994, did not attend the ceremony because he felt his presence might take away from Richter's night.
HOCKEY
