He wore a baseball cap and his shirt was untucked and he joked about how his mother had been asking him to clean up his room. Brian Toal might have looked and acted like another high school student, but the surroundings, his entourage and the 30 Rutgers fans staring longingly at him from the other side of a glass window at the ESPN Zone said otherwise. He was not any other teenager or even any other hotshot college football prospect. He was, until 4:45 yesterday afternoon, officially uncommitted.
Everyone loves a top prospect. Everyone really loves one who has yet to announce where he is headed next season. Yesterday was national signing day, the occasion when most high school players sign their letters of intent to play for the university they chose. Toal could have simply made a phone call or sent a fax. It just would not have been this much fun.
Toal, a linebacker and running back who led Don Bosco Prep in Ramsey, N.J., to a 23-0 record over the last two seasons, basked in the celebrity status that is being showered on top college recruits. A 6-foot-2, 225-pounder from Wyckoff, N.J., Toal ran for more than 3,000 yards in three seasons. He had trimmed his list of potential destinations to Miami, Rutgers and Boston College, but he kept the winner secret until yesterday. It may not have been Toal's intention, but delaying a decision to the end all but guarantees that a top recruit's announcement will be received with the maximum hype.
When Toal finally told the college football world that he was going to Boston College, he did so live on ESPNews from the network's Times Square restaurant. Toal was one of three players to announce their decisions live on an ESPN station yesterday.
''This has been a great experience, probably the best experience of my life,'' Toal said, referring to the many months during which he was courted by several of the nation's elite programs. ''I don't know if I'll ever be this big again.
''I had guys like Larry Coker and Tyrone Willingham coming into my living room,'' he said of the Miami and Notre Dame coaches. ''I didn't think about it at the time because I was focused on making my decision. Now that it's over and I'm sitting here today, I'm in awe.''
Toal's decision was first apparent to the Rutgers fans at the ESPN Zone when he pulled a Boston College jersey out of a shopping bag and held it aloft for the television audience. Until then, the group could not take its collective eyes off him. He was the present in the department store window they might or might not get to unwrap.
''It's disappointing, but that we came this close to a player like this shows that Rutgers is up and coming,'' said Richard Snellings, a 1994 Rutgers graduate. ''Coach Schiano has done a lot better job getting top players than any other coach we've had. We came here today to show Brian how much we wanted him. Did he notice there were no B.C. or Miami fans here?''
Toal said that his mind was not made up until shortly before the announcement and that he was so unsure of where he was going that he had a Rutgers jersey in another bag.
It is doubtful a player of Toal's status would have considered Rutgers before the team started showing significant progress last season, when it finished at 5-7.
But one of Toal's reasons for choosing Boston College is sure to set off alarms of concern among the Rutgers faithful. He made it clear yesterday that he was concerned about the Big East remaining a part of the Bowl Championship Series, an issue that had been raised with the announcements that Virginia Tech, Miami and Boston College were leaving the conference for the Atlantic Coast Conference.
''Them not being in a conference with teams like Miami and Virginia Tech was a little disappointing to me,'' Toal said of Rutgers. ''That was a big reason I didn't go there. I loved the coaches and I loved the place. It was amazing when I visited there.''
The news was not all bad for Rutgers, which said it had signed 21 recruits. Many experts believe that Coach Greg Schiano's fourth recruiting class is his best yet. It includes quarterback Mike Teel, who, like Toal, is from Don Bosco Prep.
''The goal when we started was that every class has to be better than the one before, and we continued to do that four recruiting classes in a row,'' Schiano said. ''And that is how you build championship football programs.''
Most recruiting gurus continued to rate Louisiana State and Southern California as having among the best recruiting classes in the nation. Southern California strengthened its impressive group of incoming talent when it signed wide receiver Dwayne Jarrett of New Brunswick (N.J.) High School, another who had been uncommitted. Another big winner was Miami, which landed linebacker Willie Williams, a Miami native who was also considering Florida State.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
