The people trolling the Internet for political news, reading the blogs of presidential candidates and bombarding their friends with campaign-related e-mail notes are not just computer wonks. They are not just college students. They are not even all Howard Dean supporters, according to a study to be released today by George Washington University.
What the Americans who have flocked to the Internet this campaign season have in common, according to the study, is that they are much more likely than the average citizens to serve as an opinion leader in their community. Nearly half have never before participated in organized politics, though they are now significantly more likely to donate money to candidates.
The surge in Internet use for politics has been the focus of much attention in recent months, particularly because of its role in the rise of Howard Dean. After Dr. Dean's string of primary losses, online organizing quickly seemed to lose some of its cachet.
But the George Washington survey, conducted by telephone and on the Internet with the university's partners, RoperASW and Nielsen/NetRatings, provides the first close look at who is actually logging on to get and spread political information. Politicians and anyone else interested in political organizing, the survey's sponsors say, risk considerable harm to their cause by dismissing the importance of the Internet as a potent new tool.
The group of Americans who regularly take advantage of online political forums is still small, but they have potential to be very valuable for candidates, the survey found. Nielsen/NetRatings surveyed 1,392 people online who visited political and news Web sites late last year. Roper interviewed 1,029 people in a random telephone survey.
''The main finding of the study is that if you want to reach the people who are reaching everyone else, that place is still the Internet,'' said Carol Darr, director of the university's Institute for Politics, Democracy and the Internet. ''The growing support for this medium is not dependent on any one candidate.''
Using questions developed by Roper to determine how ''influential'' an individual is -- typically used for marketing purposes by corporations and advertising companies -- the study found that online political activists are nearly seven times more likely than the average citizen to influence their peers when it comes to telling them what to buy, where to go on vacation, and which politicians to support.
Roper says about 10 percent of Americans typically fall into its definition, which requires participation in a combination of community activities that might include making a speech, attending a PTA meeting or writing a letter to a newspaper. Only 7 percent of the American population regularly use the Internet for political purposes, according to the study -- but 69 percent of them are ''influential.''
The study defines ''online political citizens'' as people who have visited the Web site of a candidate or political party in the last two months and participated in at least two other online activities, like sending political e-mail or making a contribution. The study also revises the prevailing impression of online politicos as impassioned Internet or other students with lots of time on their hands. About 60 percent of them have college degrees, and just over one-third are ages 18 to 34. Nearly two-thirds are male, and 86 percent are white, compared with 81 percent of the population.
Many political analysts caution that for crucial elements of political organizing, the reach of the Internet still pales in comparison to traditional media like television or radio. But some said the George Washington survey helped to define its emerging role.
''Internet politics has been a lot of guesswork up till now,'' said Phil Noble, founder of PoliticsOnline, a nonpartisan political newsletter, who had seen an early version of the survey's results. ''The question has always been is the Internet a good way to reach out and mobilize people? This says the answer is yes, and lays out its dimensions.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE INTERNET
