With New York State under a court mandate to provide a ''sound basic education'' to New York City schoolchildren, the plaintiffs in the case put forward a study yesterday showing that an extra $4.1 billion a year would be needed to achieve that aim.
The study, more than 18 months in the making, is the first in which anyone has tried to figure out the cost of making sure that every child in the city -- or anywhere else in the state, for that matter -- is able to obtain a Regents high school diploma.
But it is unclear whether the court will back its findings, or even equate a basic education with a Regents diploma. Rather, the document will probably serve as the starting point for what is expected to be a vigorous debate in the State Legislature over how the state can meet the court order in a year when it faces a $5.1 billion deficit.
The study carries particular weight because its methodology has long been endorsed by the chairman of Gov. George E. Pataki's Commission on Education Reform, Frank G. Zarb, who said yesterday that he and the Legislature should take it seriously. It was even conducted by some of the governor's own witnesses in the lawsuit, which lasted a decade.
Mr. Pataki said he had not had a chance to review the study, but added that along with additional resources for the schools, he would want to ensure there are high standards and accountability.
An extra $4 billion would be a 36 percent increase over the everyday expenses of New York City public schools in the 2001-2 academic year, the most recent year for which statistics are available, the study found. The number does not include whatever buildings would be needed to house students in the smaller classrooms the court demanded.
Expanding the same guarantee to every student in the state, as Governor Pataki has insisted on doing, would increase the price tag by $3 billion more each year, the study has found. Taken together, the two increases would raise the total cost of educating all students, both in the city and throughout the state, by about 22 percent beyond 2001-2 levels, the study found.
With those figures in hand, the two poles that are likely to shape the legislative wrangling over the court order have begun to take clear form.
At one end, the governor has proposed heeding the court mandate to fix the city's schools with the profits from video lottery terminals. In their first year, they would provide a $325 million increase to education spending, an amount the governor's office calls a ''solid foundation and framework'' for meeting the court order. Once the machines are fully up and running, the governor said, they are expected to yield at least $2 billion a year, though the idea has provoked skepticism from those who consider it too experimental and risky to satisfy the court.
Several billion dollars away sit the plaintiffs in the case, a group called the Campaign for Fiscal Equity, which calls its study ''the most extensive, the most expensive and, we think, the most rigorous'' work of its kind. It has no suggestions as to how the extra money should be raised, but contends that the burden should not be borne by local taxpayers.
''The lion's share needs to come from the state,'' said Michael A. Rebell, the campaign's executive director, adding that the extra money should be phased in over a period of three to four years.
In the late 1990's, the state's education expenditures rose considerably, by as much as 32 percent in a matter of four years. But if the state were to shoulder all of the increase, without extra help from local taxpayers, it would have to raise its spending by nearly 50 percent, an increase that has previously taken almost twice as long to achieve.
Bolstering the campaign's findings, the New York State Board of Regents concluded last December that an extra $6 billion a year would be needed to bring the state's education spending up to a ''fair and equitable level.'' But the deficit faced by the state this year is almost as large as the proposed increase, leading some to expect that any huge increases will be hard for the Legislature to swallow.
''Whether it's six or seven billion, the numbers are large, and it's hard to fathom how the state can come up with that, but we're zeroing in on something,'' said Robert Lowry, an associate director of the New York State Council of School Superintendents. He added: ''By itself the governor's $2 billion is out of line with what other parties have arrived at, but the other shoe hasn't dropped yet. We're still waiting for the Zarb commission.''
Next month, the governor's commission, headed by Mr. Zarb, is supposed to report the cost of delivering what the court called a ''sound basic education'' to every schoolchild in New York State.
But the commission's ability to do so was hampered last month when Alan G. Hevesi, the state comptroller, rejected a $1.2 million contract with Standard &amp; Poor's to do the analysis because of a potential conflict of interest. Mr. Zarb said yesterday that the commission would deliver a number nonetheless.
Coming up with a figure has been made more complicated by the many ambiguities of the court ruling itself.
Last June, the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, found that the state had shirked its constitutional obligation to provide New York City schoolchildren with a decent education, and gave it until the end of this coming July to remedy the problem. While the court ruled that only a ''meaningful high school education'' would be adequate, it neither endorsed the state's requirements for graduation, known as the Regents standards, nor specified an appropriate alternative to using them.
Because the campaign's study uses the Regents standards as a baseline, it is open to criticism from those who say it goes beyond what the court requires.
But using the state's own graduation standards as a base, the study found that an average of $11,093 was spent educating each child in the 2001-2 school year. To make sure that every student had a chance of meeting the Regents standards, the number should have been $12,520 that year, the study found. Next year, it will have to be $14,180.
In New York City, the disparities are more pronounced. In the 2001-2 school year, an average of $10,793 was spent educating each of the city's 1.1 million schoolchildren. To help them meet the state's academic standards, that number should have been $13,373, the study found. By next fall, it will have to reach $15,150.
The study was conducted by Jay G. Chambers and Thomas B. Parrish of the American Institutes for Research, as well as by James R. Smith and James W. Guthrie of Management Analysis and Planning.
