The police are investigating the death of an elderly woman who was found on the roof of a Queens nursing home around midnight Tuesday.
The woman, Lillie Gardner, 79, was a resident at the Bishop Charles Waldo MacLean Episcopal Nursing Home in Far Rockaway. She went missing late Tuesday night from the home on Brookhaven Avenue.
A nursing home employee called a relative of Ms. Gardner's at 11:45 p.m. Tuesday, according to Kenneth Mollins, the family's lawyer. The employee said Ms. Gardner was missing.
When the relative called back at 12:15 a.m., he was informed that Ms. Gardner had been found, and that she was at St. John's Queens Hospital, Mr. Mollins said.
When the relative arrived at the hospital, he was told Ms. Gardner had died from exposure.
She was found in a puddle of water on the nursing home's roof, Mr. Mollins said. Nursing home administrators could not be reached for comment last night.
The police said Ms. Gardner was pronounced dead at the hospital at 1 a.m. yesterday. It was not clear what condition she was when she was taken to the hospital. Mr. Mollins contended that hospital workers told Ms. Gardner's relative that she had been close to death when she arrived. The medical examiner's office will determine the cause of death, the police said.
''Everything that happened raises questions,'' Mr. Mollins said.
The police said they were investigating the death as suspicious, because Ms. Gardner, who had Alzheimer's disease, was found on the roof. The family contends Ms. Gardner had bruises on her arms and wrists, Mr. Mollins said. But a Police Department spokesman said there were ''no obvious signs of major trauma.''
Family members also said Ms. Gardner had health problems that would have prevented her from climbing the stairs to the roof without assistance.
''On her best day she could not have gone up those stairs alone,'' her son, Sydney Gardner, said in an interview last night on WNBC-TV, Channel 4. ''We truly intend to get to the very bottom of it.''
Correction:  February 26, 2004, Thursday  An article in some copies on Feb. 5 about an elderly nursing home patient who died shortly after she was found on the roof of a Queens nursing home gave a misspelling from her family's lawyer for the given name of her son, who commented in a television interview. He is Sidney Gardner, not Sydney.
