Attorney General John Ashcroft urged Southeast Asian nations Wednesday to cooperate with one another and the United States in the fight against terror.
But he said the United States could not accede to a request by Indonesia's president, Megawati Sukarnoputri, for immediate access to a top operative of one of the country's major terrorist groups, Jemaah Islamiyah. The operative, Riduan Isamuddin, better known as Hambali, is in American custody and is wanted here for interrogation.
American officials describe Mr. Isamuddin as the organizer of the bombing of two nightclubs on the Indonesian island of Bali that killed 202 people in October 2002. Most of the victims were young tourists from Australia.
Mr. Isamuddin, a member of Osama bin Laden's inner circle, was captured by the Central Intelligence Agency in Thailand last August.
After a meeting with Mrs. Megawati, Mr. Ashcroft said he was ''not able to give a time frame'' for when Mr. Isamuddin would be made available to Indonesian investigators.
The Indonesian government believes that Mr. Isamuddin, an Indonesian citizen, holds information vital to the successful prosecution of suspects now on trial for the terror attack on the Marriott Hotel in Jakarta last August that killed 12 people and injured more than 100 others.
Indonesian officials said they urgently needed Mr. Isamuddin's testimony because in previous trials of terror suspects Indonesian judges have discounted testimony presented either by a videoconference or in writing.
The officials contend that cooperation urged by Mr. Ashcroft in the fight against terror should be a two-way street. A cooperative effort, they argue, does not mean that Indonesia should support the United States in its terror cases without reciprocal gestures.
''Time is of the essence to strengthen our cases against people we're bringing to trial,'' Marty Natalegawa, the spokesman for Indonesia's Foreign Ministry, said. Information from Mr. Isamuddin would be ''very valuable,'' he said.
The United States is holding Mr. Isamuddin in an undisclosed location where he is under interrogation by American officials.
A Bush administration official said that Mr. Isamuddin was being questioned about ''threats against the United States,'' and that there was a reluctance to turn over such a high-level Qaeda operative.
Mr. Ashcroft's trip across the Pacific Ocean came largely at the behest of the Australian government, which initiated the conference and is a co-sponsor along with Indonesia.
The Australian prime minister, John Howard, a close ally of the Bush administration, is up for re-election this year and has made security an overriding theme of his campaign.
This is a presidential election year in Indonesia, too, and American officials said there was some concern that Indonesia's interest in the fight against terror might dwindle as politicians became sensitive about appearing to be too tough on radical Islamic groups.
