The City Council pushed through tough new legislation on lead paint hazards yesterday, overriding a veto by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and overcoming opposition from health officials, landlords and advocates for low-income housing.
The legislation, which is expected to take effect within six months, will regulate the removal of lead paint hazards, including dust, and require owners and landlords of apartments built before 1960 to identify all children under age 7 living inside those units every year.
Council Speaker Gifford Miller said the law would protect the city's children from lead poisoning while allowing landlords flexibility in complying with the new standards. Mr. Miller, who is widely expected to run against Mr. Bloomberg in 2005, also chided the mayor for vetoing the legislation.
''His veto would leave countless of the city's most poor and most defenseless and most vulnerable without protection,'' Mr. Miller said. ''Today, the Council corrects that wrong and together we speak on behalf of those whose voice does not often reach City Hall.''
Council members voted 44 to 5, with one abstention, to override the veto, as a boisterous crowd waved signs and clapped loudly from the second-floor balcony. Mr. Miller and Councilman Bill Perkins, the main sponsor of the legislation, gave speeches that brought cheers.
The Council also moved to override the mayor's veto of legislation to create a citywide electronic death registry, which is intended to expedite the process of issuing death certificates.
Bloomberg administration officials immediately denounced the lead law as misguided and dangerous, saying it would not safeguard the city's children. They have repeatedly warned that the law would be extremely costly to carry out, would pose a hardship for landlords and would waste resources by duplicating programs already in place.
''We think it is a failed bill, a flawed one,'' said Jerilyn Perine, the commissioner of the Department of Housing Preservation and Development. ''Perhaps most sadly, we think we missed an opportunity to create a bill that really would have, in a meaningful way, protected the city's children, instead of just a bill that provides for a very good sound bite.''
Health Commissioner Thomas R. Frieden also issued a statement against the legislation. ''New York City has been at the forefront of attempts to prevent lead poisoning for the past 45 years,'' he said. ''This law would be a giant step in the wrong direction in our efforts to eliminate lead poisoning.''
Still, city housing and health officials said yesterday that they were prepared to enforce the new law even though they had problems with it. These officials said the administration had not decided whether to file a lawsuit over the law, but Council officials said they had been told there would not be a legal challenge.
Of an estimated 1.8 million city apartments built before 1960, 350,000 units are believed to have at least one occupant under age 7 and could potentially be affected by the law, city officials said.
The new law generally requires landlords to remove, or take other steps to correct, a lead paint hazard within 49 days of being cited for a violation by city housing inspectors. Under the previous law, landlords had 60 days to respond.
Several developers of low-income housing said yesterday that while they supported some provisions in the new law, they feared it would make it difficult to obtain liability insurance and would discourage investment in redevelopment projects.
John McCarthy, executive vice president of the Community Preservation Corporation, which finances low-income housing, said that as many as 1,220 planned apartments could be jeopardized by the law. ''It's going to make it easier to sue landlords,'' he said. ''Which is going to make it harder to funnel investment into old buildings to pay for the extensive renovations that 60-, 80-, 100-year old buildings need.''
Supporters of the bill, however, dismissed those concerns and shouted angrily at opponents outside City Hall just hours before the Council vote. ''It's a cynical attempt to divert the issues and immunize landlords from brain-damaging children,'' said Pete Sikora, of the New York Public Interest Research Group, a government oversight group financed by college students and private foundations. It supports the legislation.
