A month after Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg proposed sending tax rebate checks to most homeowners, a poll released yesterday found his popularity has improved to the point that New Yorkers are now evenly divided on whether they approve of him.
The poll, by Quinnipiac University, found that 44 percent of those sampled said they approved of the way Mayor Bloomberg is handling his job, while 45 percent said they disapproved. For Mr. Bloomberg, whose popularity plummeted last year after he raised taxes to balance the budget, it was his best showing since last February.
The poll also showed Mr. Bloomberg gaining ground against the Democrats most likely to run against him in 2005. While a November poll showed Fernando Ferrer, the former Bronx borough president, would beat Mr. Bloomberg by 18 percentage points in a hypothetical race, the new poll showed Mr. Ferrer winning by just 7 points.
The poll also underscored a long-held truth about polling: while it is easy to say that a hypothetical challenger would beat an incumbent, the margin narrows once actual politicians are substituted for hypothetical ones.
So while the November poll showed that voters would prefer ''someone else'' to Mr. Bloomberg by 62 percent to 23 percent, the new poll showed that only Mr. Ferrer and Mark Green, the mayor's opponent in the 2001 election, would narrowly beat him, although the results were within the margin of error. That means it could also go the other way.
Similarly, the new poll showed Mayor Bloomberg narrowly beating the City Council speaker, Gifford Miller, City Comptroller William C. Thompson Jr. and several other Democrats.
The poll, which was conducted from Jan. 25 to Monday, surveyed 1,176 registered voters and had a margin of error of plus or minus 3 percentage points.
''The mayor has an incredible record, and it's no surprise New Yorkers are recognizing it,'' said Edward Skyler, the mayor's press secretary. ''He has led our city through the worst fiscal crisis in a generation, reduced crime, reformed the management of our school system and improved the quality of life so that jobs are coming back.''
