''DID someone famous die in it?'' William I. Koch asked, sounding hopeful.
Mr. Koch (pronounced coke), the multimillionaire investor and yachtsman, was inspecting a carved mahogany four-poster bed at the Palm Beach Classic International Fine Art and Antique Fair on Sunday -- price, $855,000.
Ultimately, the Chippendale period bed, adorned with rose silk damask, was a bit too grand for Mr. Koch, 63, a plain-spoken oilman and entrepreneur who was raised in Wichita, Kan. He also passed up a George I carved gilt gesso bureau for which Mallett, an English dealer, was asking $2.66 million.
The people at Mallett seemed oblivious to the identity of the 6-foot-4 fellow with the aw-shucks Midwestern accent, white hair and rumpled khakis. Too bad. Mr. Koch is one of the most prodigious collectors of wine, art and antiques in the United States. Merchants with antennas for passing multimillionaires quiver at his approach. In this instance, dealers rushed up to ply him with compliments.
''You have impeccable taste,'' François Graff, a well-known jewelry dealer, said after planting a kiss on Mr. Koch's fiancée, Bridget M. Rooney, who was trying on a new 31-carat yellow diamond. Mr. Graff dispensed flattery, solicited dating tips and whispered about cut-price deals for loyal customers.
It's no wonder that Mr. Graff was atwitter. William Koch's spending habits are legend. Two years ago, he and Ms. Rooney made three major purchases at the fair: a giant yellow diamond ring from Graff that was already on Ms. Rooney's hand; Magritte's ''L'Embellie,'' a 1941 painting of three seminude women that now hangs in the Koch mansion on South Ocean Boulevard here, on the waterfront stretch known as Billionaires' Row; and a pair of two-foot-tall silver centerpieces for elaborate flower arrangements, made in 1860 by Queen Victoria's silversmiths, R.&amp;S. Garrard &amp; Company. Mr. Koch bought them from Marks, an English dealer, for $240,000, and they now sit on his dining room table.
The couple were now back at Marks, admiring a vast silver centerpiece created to accompany the two pieces at home. The price was $595,000 (or merely $418,000 with the loyal-customer discount).
''Would you like to see it in situ?'' asked Anthony Marks, who offered to deliver the piece. Mr. Koch seemed unsure. ''We've got two already,'' he told Ms. Rooney. ''And I can't see you across the dinner table.''
Ah, well.
At the stand of Axel Vervoordt, a Belgian dealer, Ms. Rooney spotted a Roman bust of Venus for $375,000. ''This would work in the antiquities room,'' she said, referring to the mansion's repository of ancient statuary.
Mr. Koch's seemingly limitless budget stems in part from the immense fortune amassed by his father, Fred Koch, a founder of Koch Industries, a diversified oil concern that is now the second-largest privately owned company in the United States. William and his three brothers each inherited hundreds of millions. But an epic family feud ensued, with William Koch accusing his brother Charles and William's twin, David, of shortchanging him and their older brother, Fred, in a deal to sell a portion of the company's stock. With Fred and William on one side and David and Charles on the other, William Koch filed a series of lawsuits aimed at Charles, the chief executive of the family firm. In 1981, he also sued his 82-year-old mother, Mary, compelling her to take the witness stand shortly after suffering a stroke.
The brothers finally reached a settlement two years ago, ending two decades of recriminations. Mr. Koch says that ever since, he has been on good terms with his brothers. Last Saturday, David and his wife, Julia, dined chez Koch under Queen Victoria's silversmith's centerpieces.
William Koch cannot be accused of merely mooching off his inheritance. He has been busy since quitting the family firm in 1983. He spent $68 million to win the America's Cup in 1992 -- just one of his interests. ''My brother Charles collects money,'' Mr. Koch said dryly. ''David used to collect girls, but not anymore. Fred collects castles. And I collect everything.''
As a chemical engineer with three degrees from M.I.T., including a Ph.D., William Koch founded and remains the owner of Oxbow, North America's largest importer and exporter of petroleum coke, a byproduct of the refining industry. Oxbow generates nearly $1 billion in annual revenue.
Such wealth has not protected him from trouble, a dazzling array of lawsuits and romantic misadventures that have landed in the gossip columns. In 1995 he filed suit to evict a former girlfriend, Catherine de Castelbajac, from his 3,700-square-foot apartment at the Four Seasons Hotel in Boston. In Boston Housing Court, normally reserved for disputes over rats and malfunctioning boilers, an array of sexually explicit faxes from Ms. Castelbajac were given as evidence, including one hailing him as ''the greatest lover this side of the Rockies.''
On the face of it, Mr. Koch is a guileless, happy-go-lucky guy who always seems to land in hot water. But with Palm Beach haute society awash in suntanned felons and assorted miscreants, and with the imprimatur of sexual high jinks established by Roxanne Pulitzer in the 1980's, there is nothing particularly unusual about Mr. Koch's domestic arrangements. He fathered a son, now 17, with a previous wife, Joan Koch. And he is raising a daughter, Charlotte, now 7, whom he had with a long-ago girlfriend, and two other children -- William, 6, and Robin, 4 -- by his ex-wife Angela Koch. Also part of the household is Liam, the 7-year-old son Ms. Rooney had with Kevin Costner.
It's a version of domestic bliss that might have startled Marjorie Merriweather Post, but these days it's just par for the course. And Ms. Rooney certainly seems a suitable match. She is independently wealthy. And together they claim to be uninterested in the ways of high society.
Mr. Koch's 36,000-square-foot mansion, a three-story quasi-Colonial house on a four-acre ocean-to-lake lot 1,500 feet long, is a testament to his seemingly unquenchable desire to collect. While leading this writer on an encyclopedic tour last weekend, he lamented that the house is ''too bloody big.'' To track down his family and household staff, he complained, ''I have to use the intercom.''
The house's vast size, he said, ''is dictated by the size of my collections.'' The dining room is festooned with nautical paintings, ship models and a cannon. And the 31-by-21-foot living room is crammed with signature works by Monet, Modigliani, Matisse, Renoir, Corot, Chagall and Degas. A state-of-the-art wine cellar holds roughly half his collection of 35,000 bottles. And a loggia that seats 70 for dinner is equipped with ceramics by Léger, Braque and Picasso.
''I've got so much art I've started putting it on the ceiling,'' Mr. Koch said. He wasn't kidding. A Sioux wedding dress hovers above the leather chairs in the Western room, sharing space with an Indian beaded child's shirt and a buffalo hide painted with animal scenes. The Western room contains what is said to be the finest collection in private hands of works by Frederick Remington and Charles Russell. And there's plenty of other valuable memorabilia, including General Custer's hunting rifle and the pistol that killed Jesse James. Recent additions to the collection of Western memorabilia are the bead belt and breastplate that Sitting Bull wore at the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
After 20 years of Mr. Koch's collecting, it is not surprising that the house is bursting at the seams. ''I have a new rule,'' he said. ''Every time I buy something, I sell something.'' Whether that rule will endure remains to be seen. But on Tuesday, Mr. Koch sold a painting by Balthus -- ''Nu aux Bras Levés'' -- at Sotheby's in London for $3.7 million. The day before, he had taken possession of a 1913 masterpiece by Charles Russell: ''Caught With the Goods (Whiskey Smugglers).''
''It's one of the top three Russells in private hands,'' said Baird Ryan of the Gerald Peters Gallery in Santa Fe, N.M., who sold the painting to Mr. Koch.
And where are the other top two? ''They're already in his collection,'' Mr. Ryan said.
Not everything is perfect in this earthly paradise. Billionaires' Row lies beneath the flight path of the busy Palm Beach International Airport. Mr. Koch was in midsentence when a jumbo jet roared overhead. ''That's called the Palm Beach pause,'' he explained.
For a house that holds more than $100 million in art and furniture, the atmosphere seems astonishingly laid-back. It's a house that is definitely lived in, with four children under age 8 in residence. Liam's favorite party trick is to hide under the table and snatch napkins from the laps of dinner guests. Ms. Rooney has also discovered him doing cartwheels on a leather sofa in the Western room among Mr. Koch's multimillion-dollar Remington sculptures. And she says she was initially terrified when they moved into Mr. Koch's mansion nearly three years ago. ''There was an ancient bust of Caligula outside Liam's room,'' she recalled. ''And the first year we were together, I was sure it was going to fall over.''
She is more comfortable now. ''I saw that Bill's so relaxed about it,'' she said. ''So why should I worry?''
In the past three years, Mr. Koch has opened his home to several charity events -- a trend he now hopes to reverse. On Friday night, he was the host at a dinner to benefit the Norton Museum of Art in West Palm Beach. Benefactors who paid $25,000 got six tickets to the gala opening of the Palm Beach antiques fair and to Mr. Koch's dinner, underwritten by Christie's.
Mr. Koch and Ms. Rooney have decided to cut back on charity events at the house, vowing to focus only on those benefiting children, art or medicine.
Do they enjoy attending the grand charity balls that are the mainstay of social life in Palm Beach during the season? ''I go to about one a year,'' Mr. Koch said. ''I always ask, 'How much will it cost me not to go?' ''
Correction:  February 19, 2004, Thursday  An article on Feb. 5 about William I. Koch, the investor and art collector, misstated the inheritance he and his three brothers received when their father, Fred Koch, died in 1967. It was stakes in the family oil business, which was worth $25 million to $30 million at the time. While the company, now known as Koch Industries, has since grown into one of the country's largest privately held concerns, with annual sales around $40 billion, the brothers did not inherit hundreds of millions of dollars each.
The article also misspelled the given name of an artist with sculptures in William Koch's collection. He was Frederic Remington, not Frederick.
