The White House reversed itself on Wednesday and said it would support a request from the independent commission investigating the Sept. 11 attacks to extend its deadline until late July, even though that would mean the panel's final report would be released closer to the height of the presidential campaign.
The White House, which had previously opposed any extension of the May 27 deadline, said it had come to accept the commission's judgment that an additional two months was needed to complete the report.
''The president is pleased to support the commission's request, and we urge Congress to act quickly to extend the timetable,'' said Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary.
Congressional Democrats and members of the commission suggested that the White House was acting to pre-empt a move in Congress to extend the life of the panel into next year, allowing the commission to continue digging through Election Day. Republican political advisers worry that the inquiry could embarrass President Bush and harm his re-election chances by cataloging intelligence and law enforcement blunders before the Sept. 11 attacks.
The White House announcement on Wednesday was welcomed by the commission. At the same time, though, the panel moved closer to a showdown with Mr. Bush and his lawyers in a dispute over access to information included in highly classified Oval Office intelligence briefings given to the president in the months before the Sept. 11 attacks.
Panel members say they could vote as early as next week to serve a subpoena on the White House for access to the intelligence reports, which are known as the President's Daily Brief and are presented to Mr. Bush each morning by the Central Intelligence Agency.
The reports are among the government's mostly highly classified documents, and the White House has confirmed news reports that at least one of them, provided to Mr. Bush in August 2001, suggested that Al Qaeda might use commercial airplanes in a terrorist attack.
The commission threatened last year to subpoena the daily intelligence reports, but an agreement was struck then allowing three members to review them. The renewed threat of a subpoena results from the White House's refusal to let those three members share their notes on the information with the seven others. The White House has cited executive privilege.
'' 'Angry' is not the right word,'' the panel's chairman, Thomas H. Kean, former Republican governor of New Jersey, said in describing his recent negotiations with the White House over access to the notes. '' 'Frustrated' might be a better word. We feel as a commission -- unanimously, I think -- that all commissioners are equal, that they should all have the same information.''
A Democratic member, Timothy J. Roemer, former congressman from Indiana, said he was prepared to introduce a motion to subpoena the White House documents as early as Tuesday, when the commission is scheduled to meet. ''When you give the White House veto authority over access to this material, the commission should not be surprised when they use it,'' Mr. Roemer said. ''This was not a process we should have agreed to in the first place.''
Another Democrat on the panel, Richard Ben-Veniste, who like Mr. Roemer is not among the three members with access, said he was likely to support issuance of a subpoena if the White House did not relent before next week. The subpoena threat, he said, ''is very much alive.''
A White House spokeswoman, Erin Healy, said that she was unaware of the subpoena threat but that ''we've been working with the commission on a number of issues, and we look forward to working with them in a spirit of cooperation.''
Despite the White House request that Congress extend the commission's deadline, Republican leaders there suggested Wednesday that they might not agree. In a radio interview with Michael Smerconish, a conservative talk show host on WPHT in Philadelphia, Speaker J. Dennis Hastert said he was adamantly opposed to an extension.
''I want to have everything out in front now and let them finish this thing,'' Mr. Hastert said. ''They've had a year to do their investigation. They've probably found everything they have to find.''
The speaker accused Democrats on the commission of leaking information to news organizations about the panel's work and initial findings.
''I think there's a belief that they would like to drag this thing out and drag it out and then have death by a thousand cuts,'' he said. ''There are Democrats on this thing that are leaking things already. They will leak it through all the way to the election and make it a political issue.''
Mr. Roemer, one of five Democrats on the 10-member panel, said he was outraged by Mr. Hastert's remarks.
''There have not been any leaks,'' he said, ''either from Democrats or Republicans.''
