If the Bush administration were at all serious about fiscal responsibility, it would have sent Congress a Defense Department budget that reflected the real costs of military operations, cut out cold-war-era programs and focused on the things the military needs in the 21st century. Regrettably, none of that happened. The budget plan is inaccurate, anachronistic and laden with pork, and Congress is only likely to make things worse.
Mr. Bush is proposing to increase basic Pentagon spending by more than $20 billion over last year's budget, and that does not even count operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, which could add a further $50 billion when the bill is presented to Congress after Election Day. Add that money and the nuclear weapons programs run by the Energy Department to the Pentagon's $402 billion request, and the total will approach half a trillion dollars.
Military pay is not the place to make cuts, and the Pentagon needs money for promising new weapons like pilotless aircraft. It needs to invest in whatever ammunition, armor and transport vehicles are required to fight in places like Iraq and Afghanistan. What begs for drastic surgery are the expensive weapons programs predicated on the unlikely notion of a conflict between two technologically advanced superpowers. Cutting these unneeded programs might weaken the profit outlook for defense contractors like Lockheed Martin, Boeing, Northrop Grumman and Raytheon. It would not weaken the war against terrorism.
The biggest cuts should come in the three advanced-tactical and Joint Strike Fighter aircraft: the Air Force's F-22, the Navy's F-18 and the shared F-35. The Pentagon plans to spend hundreds of billions of dollars over the next two decades on these planes, which are designed to replace older models that are already superior to anything any other country can put in the air. They would be ideal for dogfights against the equally futuristic MIG's the Soviet Union might be building if it still existed. But in real places like Afghanistan and Iraq, they have serious disadvantages. Unlike helicopters, they cannot hover over battlefields. Unlike unpiloted drones, they place fliers' lives at risk. They have restricted flying ranges and require expensive airborne tankers for refueling. The Air Force's excessive dependence on short-range fighters also forces Washington to cut deals with dubious allies for bases near shifting combat zones.
The proposed 3.5 percent increase in military pay is welcome at a time when extended tours threaten to make recruiting more difficult. So is the $2 billion for pilotless aircraft like the Predator, which proved its value in Afghanistan. Harder to justify is increasing Air Force spending by 9.6 percent while holding the Army to a 1.8 percent increase. The Army has borne the brunt of recent fighting and is stretched to the breaking point.
Another suitable target for cutting is the more than $10 billion budgeted for missile defense. While a system that worked would be worth having, the administration is wrong to rush the current unreliable technology into service. Operations money should be cut. Research and testing should go forward with more modest budgets.
Congress has had scant appetite for challenging the administration on military spending, especially since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. The American people are ill served by this passivity. The strong defense everybody wants will not come from throwing ever larger sums into the wrong weapons. It can come only from spending responsible amounts on the right priorities.
