Federal prosecutors announced the indictment of 30 gang members across Long Island on Wednesday, saying they were responsible for five murders and multiple stabbings, shootings and a firebombing.
Most of the crimes, which occurred between 2001 and 2003, were committed in Nassau County around Hempstead, Roosevelt and Freeport, but investigators also said gang members were dealing crack and involved with a shooting in the Suffolk County village of Greenport.
Investigators said the 30 defendants, who ranged in age from the late teens to mid-20's, were members of three different gangs: the Bloods, based in Nassau; the Murder Unit, which operates in Greenport; and Long Island's largest gang, MS-13, based in Nassau. Officials said that 29 of the 30 had been arrested in connection with the indictments.
Officials said the Bloods and MS-13 appeared to be regional affiliates of national gangs of the same name. They said Murder Unit operated in New York State and the Northeast.
Law enforcement officials said their efforts would hurt the three gangs, but Sergio Argueta, president of an anti-gang group on Long Island, said well-intentioned sweeps did not make the streets safer.
''With all due respect to law enforcement and their work, it's really not going to do much,'' Mr. Argueta said. ''When you cut a head off in a gang, two will grow in its place.''
Mr. Argueta said gangs and gang violence were now ''out of control'' on Long Island, and had seeped eastward from the Hempstead area to other places in Long Island like Bethpage, Baldwin and Valley Stream.
On Wednesday, prosecutors said the Bloods and MS-13 gangs had been involved in multiple murders and attacks, some directed at their own members, some at rival gangs, and others at bystanders.
''It's very clear from what we're seeing today that we do have a significant gang problem on Long Island,'' the Suffolk County district attorney, Thomas J. Spota, said at a news conference on Wednesday.
The defendants were all arrested over the past month. Some face federal conspiracy and murder charges tied to the defendants' connections to what the indictments call a ''racketeering enterprise'' - their gangs.
In one of the killings listed in the indictment, a member of the Bloods gang shot and killed a 14-year-old boy, Jose White, as he rode his bike in Roosevelt in September 2001. Jose was shot because he was wearing a light blue shirt, the color of a rival street gang, investigators said.
The 30 people who have been charged represent a tiny fraction of the gang population on Long Island, Mr. Argueta said. The gang MS-13 alone has more than 300 members in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, Assistant United States Attorney Andrew C. Hruska said.
Prosecutors said 20 suspects are members of MS-13, also known as La Mara Salvatrucha. Most are Salvadoran immigrants who sell crack and commit robberies in small rings across Nassau and Suffolk.
Prosecutors said various members of the gang shot and killed a 19-year-old member in September because they believed he had been talking to the authorities. Different MS-13 members were also charged with killing two members of rival gangs, and beating up a nightclub bouncer after he asked gang members for identification.
Prosecutors said the gangs make most of their money selling drugs, and run their organizations from parents' basements and girlfriends' living rooms. As with franchises, they wear the same colors and flash the same signs as their parent gangs.
