The Rev. Al Sharpton flew out of South Carolina on Wednesday with his campaign for the presidency deeply in debt, his credibility damaged by a poor showing at the polls and, perhaps more troubling, a sense back home in New York that he has lost the aura of influence that once gave him a strong hand in local politics.
Mr. Sharpton was stunned by his dismal showing in South Carolina, where despite a third-place finish, he did not get even 10 percent of the vote, received only about 1 in 5 black votes, and failed to win any delegates.
For many years, Mr. Sharpton has managed, by force of his personality, to defy expectations. He thought he could do it again.
But he did not. Instead, without the authority that comes with a surprise victory, the weak spots in his campaign came into focus. He was not disciplined about building a campaign structure or raising money. His decision to work closely with the Republican political operative Roger Stone has some of his supporters worried about his long-term prospects. And his apparent refusal to take any of the blame for his weak showing in South Carolina has people close to the campaign exasperated and angry.
''For eight months I have been talking to him about this stuff,'' said Bill Lynch, a political consultant who was a deputy mayor under David Dinkins. ''He kept saying to me he was putting it all together, but I never saw it. The proof was in the pudding. He thought he had a real shot at winning South Carolina.''
It is not just a passing perception problem that Mr. Sharpton is confronted with, political strategists said. Though he says he is going to stay in the race until the Democratic National Convention this summer, his campaign is about half a million dollars in debt, he has not yet been certified for federal matching funds by the Federal Election Commission and the result has undermined his claim as the candidate of minority voters.
Many strategists said his showing in South Carolina meant he would likely be returning to New York sooner than he would have liked. But the New York he will re-enter may not be the same place he left.
''I think that Al sort of diminished any aura of power he had with this campaign,'' said George Arzt, a Democratic political consultant. ''He hasn't strengthened his position. He has weakened it.''
Mr. Sharpton has always been shadowed by the accusation that he does what he does to promote himself, as opposed to helping others. Many people now say that rightly or wrongly, the manner in which he ran his campaign fueled that perception. While his one-liners were entertaining in the debates, and he performed well on ''Saturday Night Live,'' there was a sense that he did not do enough to articulate a rationale for his run. He did not explain the benefits of leverage politics to his would-be voters, did little to raise money and did virtually nothing to build an organization and staff it with legions of workers never before involved in politics, said political analysts, as well as some of Mr. Sharpton's supporters.
''My advice to Reverend Sharpton is to concentrate on the issues important to African-Americans,'' said Ron Daniels, a political analyst who was involved in Jesse Jackson's 1988 presidential campaign. ''Frankly, John Edwards has in some ways led the message that resonates with African-Americans as well, if not better, than Reverend Sharpton.''
Mr. Sharpton dismissed such criticisms, saying that people like Mr. Lynch, Mr. Arzt and Mr. Daniels were out to get him. He admits that he did, at one time, think he could win South Carolina but blames black leaders for working against him, and other candidates for spending money to stop him.
Though some of his own supporters said they simply could not get Mr. Sharpton to focus on the nuts and bolts of building a campaign, he says such criticism is misdirected. He says most of the campaign debt is money owed to him, which he could easily just write off. And he says those who think he has been diminished at home are suffering from a case of wishful thinking.
''I have the support of 19 elected officials in New York -- that is more than I ever had before,'' Mr. Sharpton said in an interview on Wednesday, adding that Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and Senator Charles E. Schumer attended his Martin Luther King Day celebration. ''I have announced that I am supporting candidates to run against incumbents. They are hoping I am diminished, because I have never said that I will do that before.''
Even those who are criticizing him said he it is hard to know whether he will return to the same kind of influence he had with minority voters in New York that he once had. But the circumstances appear to have changed.
In the past, when Mr. Sharpton lost, he argued that he had won. When he ran for the United States Senate and came in third, ahead of Elizabeth Holtzman, that elevated his status. But he has been losing for years now, and many people say that losing no longer means winning. That reality started to emerge at the beginning of the presidential campaign, when most black New York elected officials decided not to back his candidacy. Mr. Sharpton threatened to come back to New York and promote candidates to challenge those who opposed him. And while he is still capable of playing the role of spoiler, he may have to do it with a diminished status.
''In the street, I don't feel his presence in Harlem or Central Brooklyn or Southeast Queens,'' said Mr. Arzt, who has worked the New York political scene for many years as a journalist, a spokesman for Ed Koch and a political consultant.
The early assessment of Mr. Sharpton's presidential bid is not all negative. New Yorkers knew who he was, but for many Americans, it was their first introduction to Mr. Sharpton. And many people, from national party leaders to average voters, said they have new respect for Mr. Sharpton's quick wit and the pungent remarks he brought to the debates.
Even if he fails to win any more than the one delegate he picked up in Delaware, Mr. Sharpton has won himself a role at the Democratic National Convention this summer.
But without delegates, he will not have much leverage to demand as prominent a role as he might have liked. Further, Mr. Sharpton insists that his campaign will continue, which could cost him some of the goodwill he has accumulated. Once the nominee becomes clear, Mr. Sharpton, like other candidates, will be expected to fall in line.
''If Al wants to have a seat at the table and wants to preach from the pulpit in Boston, then Al has to come into the house,'' said Donna Brazile, a Democratic strategist with close ties to the national party. ''You are not going to be the only person in the house. African-Americans don't need a broker. That's 1980's politics. That's old school.''
For now, party leaders are not worried about having to convince Mr. Sharpton when the time is right to drop out. Ms. Brazile said she expected Mr. Sharpton will get that message from voters. She said she expected he would be no more successful in Michigan, Virginia, Tennessee and perhaps even New York than he was in South Carolina.
''Reverend Sharpton is not doing the work that is necessary in order to harvest votes out of the Democratic Party,'' she said. ''He doesn't understand the black electorate. I have been telling him for months, all they want to do is beat Bush.''
