FOR years, advertisers have dreamed of taking advantage of technology that discloses a cellphone caller's location to send text messages promoting nearby restaurants and retail stores. But until recently, when wireless carriers began to upgrade their systems to comply with a federal mandate that they be able to locate anyone dialing 911, few wireless companies had the ability to track the whereabouts of all of their customers.
Now cellphone carriers are planning to roll out features that allow companies or other cellphone users to know a user's location. Already, AT&amp;T Wireless offers ''Find Friends,'' which lets users locate up to five others within a certain distance.
''Marketers are foaming at the mouth about the prospect of sending e-coupons,'' said Jason Catlett, founder and president of the Junkbusters Corporation, which helps customers protect their privacy.
Currently, cellphone users have only two options when it comes to how their movements are tracked: they can turn the feature on or off, although 911 calls will always show their location. Researchers at the Bell Labs division of Lucent Technologies have developed software that will give users more options.
''There is no one-size-fits-all solution to privacy,'' said Rick Hull, director of network data and services research at Bell Labs. ''Our technology puts the user in control of who gets their information and under what circumstances.''
The software, known as Privacy-Conscious Personalization, works like this: Users set their preferences on when they want their whereabouts disclosed through menu-based screens on the cellphone or at the wireless carrier's Web site. They can choose to restrict knowledge of their location depending on their activity, the time of day or who is requesting the data. When someone asks for the user's location, the request is quickly filtered through the user's preferences and the information is either shared or withheld.
For example, traveling employees may want their bosses to be able to locate them during the day but not after 5 p.m. Others may want to receive coupons from coffee shops before 9 a.m. on weekdays but not on weekends when they sleep in. Some may want their friends alerted only when they are within one mile, but not 10 miles.
''This is very fine-grained,'' Mr. Hull said. ''Maybe a salesman wants their important customers to know where they are, but not when they are visiting a competitor down the street, so they could set their preferences only for an accuracy of a few miles.''
The location of a wireless phone is tracked either by the Global Positioning System or land-based triangulation, which calculates the time it takes signals to travel among cellphone towers. G.P.S. is the more accurate of the two methods, although most wireless companies use a combination of both to find their customers.
Under the government's 911 regulations for cellphones, carriers using G.P.S. must be able to locate about one-third of wireless callers within 160 feet, or within 320 feet using land-based triangulation.
Trying to manage the preferences of millions of cellphone users as their calls are being connected has the potential to overwhelm a wireless network. To prevent a bottleneck, Mr. Hull said, the software allows cellphone companies to configure ''preference palettes'' geared toward different types of users. So wireless carriers could set up sample profiles for a college student, an office worker, a heavy user or a casual user.
''As users get accustomed to it,'' Mr. Hull said, ''service providers will have the flexibility to add some sophistication over time.''
To use the software's features, consumers will need a wireless carrier that has installed the technology on its network. Bell Labs is negotiating with several cellphone companies to conduct trials, and Mr. Hull said the hope was that the technology could be available to customers in 2005.
Whether marketers' enthusiasm for cellphone advertising will remain high until then is unclear. Jonathan Linner, chief executive of Enpocket, a wireless-marketing firm, said only about 1 percent of its campaigns use location-based advertising. ''There has to be a good reason to use location, and most of the time there isn't one,'' Mr. Linner said. For instance, cellphone users would probably be annoyed if every time they passed a Starbucks, a coupon was sent to their phones, he said.
In a few cases, however, Mr. Linner said, advertising focused on a person's whereabouts is effective. Enpocket created a campaign for a London taxi company that enables cellphone users to call a central number and connect with the nearest available cab driver within seconds.
While privacy advocates like Mr. Catlett of Junkbusters are skeptical that most cellphone users will reveal their location even if it means getting free offers, Mr. Linner said that research by his company showed that most people who initially opposed the idea changed their mind after they received an offer on their phone.
John Siewierski, manager of e-commerce for GearDirect.com, took part in a four-month test of wireless advertising in Boulder, Colo., in 2000, and he said he used several dining coupons that were sent to him. He liked the service partly because he received only a few messages a day.
''If I was getting stuff all day long, then I would have turned it off,'' Mr. Siewierski said. ''It's a great idea, but you need something to filter out the offers when you're busy.''
WHAT'S NEXT
