Roche Holding returned to profit last year, spurred by strong sales of anticancer drugs and diagnostic tools, the company said on Wednesday.
The Swiss pharmaceutical company, based in Basel, posted a profit of 3 billion Swiss francs, or $2.4 billion, for 2003, after a loss in 2002 of 4 billion Swiss francs. The company released annual results on Wednesday.
Revenue rose 6 percent last year, to 31.2 billion Swiss francs, or $25 billion, lifted in part by the addition of sales from Chugai, a majority-owned subsidiary in Japan that Roche merged with its drugs unit last year. Roche said the merger had helped to increase market share in all regions.
The company's chairman and chief executive, Franz B. Humer, said in a phone interview that the company's restructuring to focus on core businesses had paid off, with sales in its main pharmaceutical business up 14 percent and in its diagnostics division up 3 percent. The company was past the worst, he said, having spun off peripheral operations like its vitamins unit, restructured its equities portfolio and paid off more debt.
Roche further strengthened its position as the world's top maker of cancer drugs, he added. In 2003, Roche had a 30 percent rise, to more than 6 billion Swiss francs, in sales of oncology medicines, among them Rituxan for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma and Xeloda for breast cancer.
Sales of Pegasys and Copegus, which Roche sells as a hepatitis C combination treatment, were brisker than expected, topping 1 billion Swiss francs, the company said.
Roche's second-largest unit, diagnostics, received a lift from the acquisitions last year of Disetronic Medical Systems, a Swiss specialist in diabetes treatment, and Igen International, a company based in Gaithersburg, Md.
''The good results achieved in 2003 confirm that our clear strategy of focus and innovation is on track,'' Mr. Humer said in a statement.
For 2004, Roche said it expected profit margins in its pharmaceuticals business of 26 percent and in its diagnostics unit of 23 percent -- rates that the company said surpassed the sector averages.
Analysts said the 2003 results showed strength for Roche's core units and indicated that the company had left earlier troubles behind. But they also said the 2004 forecasts for operating profit margins were more cautious than they expected.
Mr. Humer said it was too early in the year to be more optimistic.
The company expects approvals of new drugs in the near future as well as continued growth for Pegasys and the company's cancer medicines.
Mr. Humer also reiterated that Roche had ''absolutely no interest'' in combining with Novartis, a rival Swiss drug company. Novartis set off the speculation last month when it disclosed it had increased its Roche stake to 33.3 percent. It denied it planned to buy any more shares in Roche, a move that under Swiss rules would effectively mean beginning a formal takeover bid.
''There is absolutely no interest in any deal with Novartis on the part of Roche shareholders,'' Mr. Humer said.
