Cindy Crawford swanned past a tray of risotto and mushroom tarts. Bryant Gumbel complained about traffic. Sir Howard Stringer, chairman of Sony USA, escorted Nobuyuki Idei, the chairman of Sony, through the crowd with the tenderness of a prom date.
And Larry King, his gray hair brushed and sprayed to television-ready perfection, leaned over a railing on the third floor of the Time Warner Center last night and, gazing at Gov. George E. Pataki, jokingly suggested:
''How much if we both go over the rail?''
In a Federico Fellini-meets-Michael Bloomberg kind of way, it was just another night, and just another New York premiere.
But the starlet trotted out in front of the klieg lights last night was not an actress or a pop star or a debutante. It was the Time Warner Center, the $1.7 billion, 2.8 million square foot consumer biosphere that, after seven years, has risen at Columbus Circle.
As fleets of Town Cars battled honking taxis, the doors to the center opened last night with apple martinis for an expected 5,000 guests, a gymnastic performance by Cirque du Soleil, a ''surprise'' concert by Jewel and Marc Anthony, and a light show that washed the 50,000-square-foot atrium with vivid hues of turquoise, red and green. Even the security detail was festive: undercover police officers dressed as party guests.
More than 8,000 invitations went out to a list that included fixtures from New York society (Anne Bass), politics (Vernon Jordan), media (Wolf Blitzer), business (Mr. Stringer), culture (Renée Fleming) and celebrity (Sean Combs). Even Donald Trump, who has nurtured something of a feud with the developers of Time Warner Center, was invited. (He was in California and did not attend.)
The complex, which was developed by the Related Companies and Apollo Real Estate Advisors, houses the 865,000-square-foot headquarters of Time Warner, which the company will inhabit later this year; 191 luxury condominiums; the new 150,000-square-foot home of Jazz at Lincoln Center; a 504-car parking garage; a 40,000-square-foot Equinox gym; an Olympic swimming pool; a 60,000-square-foot Whole Foods market, the largest supermarket in Manhattan; and a 251-room Mandarin Oriental Hotel, which has already booked bar mitzvahs and weddings until 2006, said Sonia Rendigs, a spokeswoman for the hotel.
''There are only x number of Saturday nights in a year, and a lot of them have been booked up,'' Ms. Rendigs said.
If it seems excessive to hold such a lavish party for a retail complex, New York City has a recent tradition of celebrating buildings and stores as if they were heads of state or debutantes of the year.
In 1983, Trump Tower opened on Fifth Avenue with a series of publicity-grabbing parties; for a time afterward, the building was a more popular tourist attraction than the Statue of Liberty and the Empire State Building, causing high-end clients to flee rather than face lines outside the building and crowded escalators.
In 1987, the Winter Garden at the Financial Center was baptized with a party held by Bergdorf Goodman in honor of the designer Christian Lacroix and his line of pouf dresses. In 1991, the new Galeries Lafayette department store opened in the former Bonwit Teller space on 57th Street with a dinner party for 420 to benefit the Paris Opera and Ballet and the American Ballet Theater. In 1999, the LVMH building on East 57th Street, by noted architect Christian de Portzamparc, opened with a dinner for 650 people -- including such guests as Hillary Clinton and Gwyneth Paltrow -- to benefit the Municipal Arts Society.
In order to avoid the stigma of self-promotion and bestow the gloss of high-mindedess, the festive christening of a building is often promoted as a benefit. True to the formula, last night's evening was advertised on the invitation as a benefit for the Lincoln Center Consolidated Corporate Fund, an entity that allows corporations to give unrestricted donations to the performing arts companies and training academies of Lincoln Center. But none of the guests were required to donate money in order to attend the event. Instead, Time Warner and the Related Companies donated $100,000, Time Warner executives said.
Even the most glamorous openings and the best philanthropic intentions do not guarantee that a building will retain its appeal. Trump Tower lost its Harry Winston boutique but gained a Starbucks. Galeries Lafayette closed its doors after three years.
Party guests last night were generally surprised that the evening was a benefit.
When asked if she knew the evening was a benefit, Sarah Collaton, a producer who most recently produced ''Live From Baghdad'' for HBO, said, ''No. For what?''
Dr. Bob Arnot had the same reaction, as did Peggy Siegal, who was working public relations for the event.
Others were impressed at the mall-like quality of the new complex.
Alex von Bidder, an owner of the Four Seasons restaurant, was not wearing black tie, as the invitation had suggested, and remarked, ''Black tie? Why? It's a shopping mall,'' when he was asked about his attire.
David Hershkovits, the editor of Paper magazine, said he had expected a more glamorous evening.
''I ask my wife out for a night on the town,'' he said, ''and we wind up in a food court.''
Restaurateurs like Thomas Keller, Gray Kunz, Jean-Georges Vongerichten and Charlie Trotter -- who all have restaurants in the complex -- served hors d'oeuvres. At one restaurant, Masa Takayama, an average dinner will cost $400. By 8 p.m. hundreds of guests were lined up at the escalators leading to the restaurant floor.
Governor Pataki said he was thrilled with the center, with what a symbol of a vibrant New York it was, and added that he was especially excited to visit the restaurants.
''And they're cheap too!'' he said, with jovial sarcasm.
Libby Pataki nodded at her husband and said, ''We're coming here for Valentine's Day.''
''Yeah, for breakfast,'' he said.
Kenneth A. Himmel, the president of Related Urban Development, said on Monday that he was impervious to criticism and that his complex would not only thrive but also would change Manhattan. ''New York has never seen anything like this,'' he said.
On Monday, Mr. Himmel eyed the hundreds of construction workers in muddy boots who were trucking in sound and lighting equipment.
''You know, you spend millions to get this place cleaned up, and these guys come in with their boots and tear it all apart,'' Mr. Himmel said. ''And then we have to clean it up by noon Thursday? Good luck.''
