A publicly traded Malaysian oil and gas conglomerate that supplied high-quality nuclear components to Libya is the latest link to emerge in a rogue nuclear trading network stretching back to Abdul Qadeer Khan, the creator of Pakistan's atom bomb.
The components were made by Scomi Precision Engineering of Selangor, Malaysia, a subsidiary of Scomi Group Berhad, Malaysian and Western investigators and the company said Wednesday. The parts were shipped to a company in Dubai in four consignments between December 2002 and August 2003, Scomi Group said in a statement.
Scomi Group's largest shareholder is the son of Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi, Kamaluddin Abdullah. The prime minister's son, who is 35, has no management role in the company and does not sit on the board. He is only a shareholder, a Malaysian official familiar with the company said. Scomi's chairman is Tan Sri Asmat Kamaluddin, a former secretary general of Malaysia's international trade ministry.
The Scomi engineering company was not told by the Dubai company, Gulf Technical Industries, where the components were going, Scomi Group said, declining to answer any questions beyond the four-paragraph statement it issued.
A government official said Wednesday that the prime minister would insist on a thorough investigation of the transaction.
Western and Malaysian investigators said the equipment was ordered by Dr. Khan, who admitted responsibility for trading nuclear secrets in a televised statement to the nation in Pakistan on Wednesday. Dr. Khan made periodic trips to Malaysia over the past few years, according to Malaysian and Western intelligence agencies, not always traveling under his real name.
The components, which were to be used in centrifuges to make weapons-grade uranium, were ''very high quality, very high tech,'' said a Western official. ''It required a lot of expertise.''
United States and United Nations officials are investigating the secret network of trade in nuclear weapons designs and equipment that originated in Dr. Khan's laboratory and extended to Libya, Iran and North Korea.
In its statement, Scomi said that the contract for the components was arranged by B.S.A. Tahir, described as a Sri Lankan businessman based in Dubai. Mr. Tahir is the controlling shareholder of Gulf Technical Industries, which has five employees, Malaysian investigators said.
On one occasion, a Malaysian official said, Dr. Khan came to Malaysia for Mr. Tahir's wedding. A Malaysian government official said that Mr. Tahir is now in this country. He has not been arrested or detained, the official said, and he is cooperating with the investigation.
''Malaysia was an unwitting participant in all this,'' an official in the prime minister's office said. But with the tight control that the Malaysian government has traditionally exercised, many Malaysians and foreign diplomats doubt that a sale of this nature would have been possible without the knowledge of at least some senior government officials, probably in the military.
Scomi was founded in 1982 as a marketing company for industrial chemicals. In 2001, the group began manufacturing precision engineering products through Scomi Precision Engineering.
''Our top-priority question is to find out if any other customers bought into this nuclear network,'' Melissa Fleming, a spokeswoman for the International Atomic Energy Agency in Vienna said.
A diplomat in Vienna said the agency had found similarities in the nuclear gear of Libya and Iran, and was investigating the possibility that the countries used the same Malaysian suppliers.
