If Senator John Edwards wanted to demonstrate that his Southern populism has national and not just regional appeal, the way Jimmy Carter and Bill Clinton did in their successful runs for the presidency, Michigan's caucuses on Saturday would provide a golden opportunity.
Mr. Edwards pitched his campaign squarely at the have-nots in South Carolina, where he won a convincing victory on Tuesday, and surveys of voters leaving the polling places indicated that he ran strongly among those for whom jobs were a major issue, including African-Americans. Michigan has lost one in five of its blue- and white-collar factory jobs in the last four years, a total of 185,000, and more than 14 percent of the state's nearly 10 million people are African-American.
Like New York, Pennsylvania, Ohio and Illinois, this is one of the mega-states whose large blocks of delegates will ultimately decide the Democratic nomination, and where the general-election contest will be most intense this fall. At stake here are 128 delegates, the largest prize to date.
Yet Mr. Edwards is spending most, if not all, of the three meager campaign days before the Michigan balloting in Virginia and Tennessee, which vote next Tuesday. They border on Mr. Edwards's home state of North Carolina, which should help him do well but would hardly burnish his national credentials. Despite his insistence that ''we take Michigan very, very seriously,'' he has confirmed no stops here and bought no radio or television time yet.
The national front-runner, Senator John Kerry, is also the Michigan front-runner, by a huge margin. A Detroit News tracking poll published Wednesday morning gave him 56 percent, with Howard Dean at 12 percent, Mr. Edwards at 7 percent and Wesley K. Clark at 3 percent. The margin of error is plus or minus five percentage points.
Mr. Kerry is due here on Thursday, and will be joined by the state's highly popular governor, Jennifer M. Granholm, who has endorsed him, for a bus tour on Friday.
''Kerry is going to win an enormous victory, not much doubt about that,'' said David W. Rohde, a professor of political science at Michigan State University. ''Maybe half the vote. I think it may be the icing on his cake, nationally, because the question has now become not who can win a state or two but who can compete across the nation.''
More trepidation was expressed by former Gov. James J. Blanchard, a Kerry backer, largely because of the way the caucuses are organized. When in office, he abolished them in favor of a primary, but they were revived by Gov. John Engler, a Republican, who succeeded him.
''If it were a normal measure of strength, I think we'd win in a landslide,'' Mr. Blanchard said. ''But it's not. What you have here is a trifurcated straw poll, combining mail ballots and e-mail voting with actual caucuses. So I'm concerned.''
More than 120,000 ballots had been requested by the deadline last Saturday, said Mark Brewer, the executive chairman of the Michigan Democratic Party, and 25,000 had been cast, either by mail or online. Dr. Dean's supporters pushed early and hard for Internet votes. The Service Employees International Union, which has endorsed him, bought 20 laptops for distribution to places where large numbers of its members work.
It is not known, of course, when or by whom the 25,000 votes were cast, but Kerry supporters like Mr. Blanchard worry that many may have gone to Dr. Dean before his setbacks in Iowa and New Hampshire or to Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who withdrew from the race two weeks ago.
Nor is it clear who will show up for the caucuses at 590 sites across the state. In the past, Democratic voters in Michigan have sprung some notable surprises when one group turned out in far larger numbers than others. In 1972, conservatives (including crossover Republicans and independents) gave Gov. George C. Wallace a crushing victory over Senator George S. McGovern, and in 1988 black voters helped to propel the Rev. Jesse Jackson to an upset triumph over Gov. Michael S. Dukakis.
In any event, the Gephardt withdrawal is expected to hold participation well below the 400,000 that Mr. Brewer and other party leaders had hoped for. Bill Ballenger, who publishes the authoritative Inside Michigan Politics newsletter, said, ''They'll be lucky to get 200,000 votes, which is pretty weak in a state of this size.'' In 1988, 212,000 people voted in the contest won by Mr. Jackson.
One reason for the diminished interest, Mr. Brewer said, is the inactivity of most of the state's big industrial unions, which ordinarily run phone banks and use other techniques to turn out the vote for their candidates. The United Auto Workers has endorsed no one; the Teamsters, the Steelworkers and the Machinists all endorsed Mr. Gephardt and have made no new choice. The most powerful white-collar union, the teachers' Michigan Education Association, is working for Senator Kerry.
Mark Gaffney, the president of the Michigan A.F.L.-C.I.O., which has a million active and retired members, has already cast an Internet vote for Mr. Edwards. He said the exodus of manufacturing jobs ''has decimated our state,'' but his organization has also refrained from endorsement.
Mr. Edwards has the support of a group of 20 black clergymen in Detroit, but beyond that, Mr. Ballenger said, ''he has nothing going for him -- no organization, no presence.'' Despite the bounce Mr. Edwards gained in South Carolina, Mr. Ballenger argued, he could finish third, behind General Clark, who has considerable strength in conservative western Michigan and plans to campaign here on Thursday and Friday.
In his South Carolina victory statement, Mr. Edwards mentioned Michigan in the same breath as Virginia and Tennessee. He said he intended to be competitive in Michigan, and his Michigan chairman, Derek Albert, said Mr. Edwards had ''an enormous amount of support'' in the state. But the senator's spokeswoman, Jennifer Palmieri, sought to lower expectations. ''The big showdown will come in Wisconsin'' on Feb. 17, she asserted.
The voter surveys taken Tuesday pointed toward an opening here for Mr. Edwards, if he could find the time and money to exploit it. He did well among voters with less than a college education, a group that includes 8 out of 10 Michiganders, and with those dissatisfied with United States trade policy. Many here link the exodus of industrial jobs to the North American Free Trade Agreement, which Mr. Kerry voted for and Mr. Edwards has criticized.
But with only 72 hours left until the caucuses, the Edwards camp was still debating whether to commit scarce resources to television advertising in the Detroit market, where costs run high. So far, no candidate has run advertisements here, but Mr. Kerry reportedly made a buy after his near-sweep on Tuesday.
Dr. Dean got an early start in Michigan, buoyed by the expectation that Internet voting would help bring him the support of thousands of young and previously alienated voters. His headquarters in Livonia, near Detroit, is still the busiest of any. He campaigned in East Lansing last Thursday and then in Roseville, another Detroit suburb, last Sunday. He plans to cross the state from east to west on Thursday and Friday.
Detroit's two African-American members of Congress, John Conyers Jr. and Carolyn Cheeks Kilpatrick, have both campaigned for him.
But Dr. Dean, too, has been poor-mouthing his chances lately in a state that his campaign said it expected to win as recently as a week ago. He told MSNBC on Tuesday night in Tacoma, Wash., ''Michigan, we don't think we have any chance of winning, but we'd like to pick up some delegates there.''
At this point, said Ed Sarpolus of EPIC-MRA, the state's leading pollster, ''Dean is a political nonentity in Michigan.'' Dean activity on campuses like that of the University of Michigan at Ann Arbor has faded with adversity, and Mr. Sarpolus's polls show a similar trend. About a third of Dr. Dean's black supporters and supporters under 35, Mr. Sarpolus said, have decided to stay home on caucus day since Dr. Dean lost out in the year's first two tests.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: MICHIGAN
