Like his earlier successes in Iowa and New Hampshire, Senator John Kerry's victory in five primaries and caucuses from Delaware to Arizona on Tuesday was rooted in broad support among virtually all Democratic demographic groups, and in the strong conviction that he is the candidate best able to beat President Bush.
But in South Carolina, Oklahoma and Missouri, Mr. Kerry lacked any similar advantage with voters over Senator John Edwards of North Carolina on the question of whether he cared about people like them, a quality cited by roughly 1 in 5 as the most important. And he did less well everywhere among voters who described themselves as politically independent or ideologically conservative than he did among traditional Democrats and liberals.
Together, those factors amount to slivers of vulnerability for Mr. Kerry as he approaches the next contests. Mr. Edwards has already moved to exploit those openings with his emotional declaration Tuesday night that he is the candidate who cares most about ''the Americans no one pays attention to.'' He is hoping to make that case again next week on his Southern turf in Virginia and Tennessee as he seeks to buttress his own appeal as an alternative to Mr. Bush.
But Mr. Kerry has powerful advantages. Surveys of voters leaving the polls in South Carolina, Missouri, Oklahoma and Arizona showed that he continued to have broad-based backing.
On Tuesday, he showed for the first time that he could perform credibly among sizable numbers of minority voters. In South Carolina, where black voters made up almost half the electorate, he polled 34 percent of their vote, almost equal to Mr. Edwards's 37 percent. In Missouri, where blacks were 15 percent of the electorate, he drew more than half that vote, more than three times Mr. Edwards's share.
In Arizona, where Latino voters made up nearly 20 percent of the electorate, Mr. Kerry won more than 4 in 10 Latino votes, the same level of support he won among whites. That was more than twice the level of either Gen. Wesley K. Clark or former Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont, both of whom had once hoped for strong showings in Arizona.
Perhaps most significant, upward of two-thirds of voters on Tuesday, whether or not they chose Mr. Kerry, said they would be satisfied if he was the eventual nominee. In South Carolina, where Mr. Edwards scored a victory of nearly 15 points, 80 percent of all voters and 73 percent of Mr. Edwards's own supporters said they would be satisfied with Mr. Kerry at the top of the ticket in November. (The surveys did not ask that question about the other candidates.)
The polls were conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for the five television news networks and The Associated Press. Their margins of sampling error were between three and four percentage points either way.
Mr. Kerry's campaign pollster, Mark Mellman, expressed satisfaction that the senator had once again appealed to a broad range of voters.
''We won most every demographic group,'' Mr. Mellman said, ''so clearly we've got coalitional appeal, as opposed to being a niche candidate, which will stand us in good stead in the states to come.''
Since the Iowa caucuses two weeks ago, most surveys have shown that Democratic voters are worried more about the state of the economy than about any other issue. Those concerns were cited by at least a third of voters in all states on Tuesday, and nearly half in South Carolina. A majority of the Democrats who have voted thus far have said they are no better off financially now than they were four years ago.
That response has been coupled with a strong antipathy to the Bush administration: in every state surveyed on Tuesday, upward of one-third of voters described themselves as ''angry'' at the incumbent administration, with the figure approaching one-half in Arizona.
Such sentiment may be Mr. Kerry's biggest advantage. For months, Mr. Bush's job approval rating has hovered around 50 percent, always a danger sign for an incumbent, and in one national survey released this week, the president's standing dropped just below that.
The polling data suggest that Democrats, determined to beat Mr. Bush, have been acting pragmatically. In South Carolina, for example, where the Rev. Al Sharpton had been widely expected to do well among a heavily black electorate, he received fewer than 1 in 5 black votes, compared with just over 1 in 3 for Mr. Kerry.
But if Mr. Kerry has tapped into voters' rational desire for a winner, Mr. Edwards appears to have touched something more visceral. In Oklahoma, where Mr. Edwards dueled General Clark to a virtual draw, more than 4 in 10 voters most concerned about picking a candidate who cared about people like them chose Mr. Edwards, compared with just under 2 in 10 for Mr. Kerry and 3 in 10 for General Clark. Among voters who cited the economy and jobs as the issue that mattered most in determining their choice, Mr. Edwards won 37 percent, compared with 27 percent for Mr. Kerry.
In South Carolina, where Mr. Edwards was born the son of a millworker, nearly one-quarter of voters said the most important quality in choosing a candidate was whether he cared about people like them, and Mr. Edwards won nearly 6 in 10 of this vote, as against 2 in 10 for Mr. Kerry. And among the nearly 50 percent of South Carolinians who cited the economy as the most important deciding issue, Mr. Edwards won just over half the vote, compared with just over one-quarter for Mr. Kerry.
Mr. Edwards also fared better among self-described independent voters, who, if not quite the typical swing voters of a general election, perhaps came closest on Tuesday to reflecting moods among the overall electorate. In Oklahoma, where the contest was so close and independents accounted for just over 10 percent of the vote, Mr. Edwards drew 34 percent of independents, followed by General Clark, with 28 percent, and Mr. Kerry, with 18 percent.
Even in Missouri, where Mr. Kerry won by more than 25 percentage points over Mr. Edwards and independents accounted for a quarter of the electorate, Mr. Kerry drew just 37 percent of the independent vote, compared with 57 percent of Democrats. And even while losing badly over all in Missouri, Mr. Edwards drew the support of 28 percent of independents.
Mr. Edwards's big challenge now is to show that he can not only replicate such support in Southern states like Virginia and Tennessee but also extend and build on it in states, like Michigan or Wisconsin, outside his home region.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: VOTERS
