In a complex three-way deal in search of simplicity, the world's largest food group, Nestlé of Switzerland, will acquire a quarter of the world's largest cosmetics group, L'Oréal of France, when L'Oréal absorbs its own holding company.
The Gesparal Holding Company-- a pure holding company with no other business function -- is the majority shareholder of L'Oréal, but Gesparal's two shareholders, Nestlé and the Bettencourt family of France, want to change that. In an agreement announced Wednesday, the companies agreed to merge L'Oréal and Gesparal to simplify L'Oréal's capital structure.
Nestlé effectively owns the stake in L'Oréal already -- albeit indirectly -- and the deal makes this relationship more transparent.
In the deal, Nestlé's 49 percent stake in Gesparal would be transformed into a 26.4 percent direct holding in L'Oréal. The Bettencourt family, which owns 51 percent of Gesparal -- the controlling stake -- will acquire a total of 27.5 percent of L'Oréal's share capital, the companies said.
Nestlé and the Bettencourt family combined in the form of the Gesparal Holding Company already held a 53 percent stake of L'Oréal and 71 percent of the voting rights. Thus, there is nothing to stop them from winning approval at L'Oréal's annual shareholders' meeting on April 29.
But the deal was also expected to hearten smaller L'Oréal shareholders because it would abolish double voting rights -- permitted under French law -- which give some shareholders disproportionately greater rights over others.
''I am very pleased that we found an agreement that safeguards the interests of all parties concerned,'' Rainer E. Gut, the chairman of Nestlé, said in a statement.
''Nestlé shareholders will benefit from a more transparent valuation of the L'Oréal stake, which remains an important strategic investment for Nestlé.'' When Nestlé acquired its 49 percent stake in Gesparal 30 years ago, L'Oreal was a medium-size French cosmetics company on the way up. For years, Liliane Bettencourt, daughter of L'Oréal's founder, made clear that she was determined to remain the majority shareholder in the Gesparal Holding Company. But finally Mrs. Bettencourt, 82, agreed with Nestlé that the shareholding structure needed to be updated to a clearer form befitting the world's biggest cosmetics company.
''It's a different animal now,'' said François Perroud, a Nestlé spokesman. ''The time had come to develop a common approach and give both parties greater flexibility.''
Under terms of the accord announced on Tuesday, each party agreed not to increase its shareholdings in L'Oréal during the lifetime of Mrs. Bettencourt, or a minimum period of three years. The deal would also cancel a previous agreement that obliged Nestlé to buy any shares the Bettencourt family sought to sell.
Gesparal, which is based in Paris, and Nestlé, which is based in Vevey, Switzerland, agreed that the proposed merger would have no effect on L'Oréal's financial structure or results.
Nestlé added that it would be business as usual for companies held jointly by Nestlé and L'Oréal -- Galderma and Innéov -- as they are unaffected by the deal.
Some analysts argued that the deal would give Nestlé additional voting rights in L'Oréal. Mr. Perroud of Nestlé, however, denied this, saying that both Nestlé and the Bettencourt family had exercised their voting rights in L'Oréal in tandem in the form of Gesparal. He added that in abolishing double voting rights, L'Oréal would gain a standardized shareholding structure.
Gesparal said in its statement that the Bettencourt family and Nestlé had agreed to hold their L'Oréal shares for five years from the shareholders' meeting in April.
It added that only if a third party were to make a public tender offer for L'Oréal shares, would Nestlé or the Bettencourt family have the right to tender their own shares or make a counteroffer.
Both Nestlé and the Bettencourt family would retain the right to nominate three L'Oréal board members each, the companies said.
This week, L'Oréal agreed to support Sanofi-Synthélabo's hostile bid for Aventis, a French pharmaceutical company. L'Oréal and Total, the French oil giant, hold a 44 percent stake in Sanofi.
