Listening to Douglas Faneuil's testimony yesterday at the Martha Stewart criminal trial was a little like reading a steamy Hollywood screenplay. There was detailed dialogue, all parts performed by Mr. Faneuil. There were references to cinematic locations like Rockefeller Center, a dance club and Jamaica.
And there was a lot of talk about drugs.
A big issue was how much the federal district court jury would be allowed to hear about the 28-year-old Mr. Faneuil's acknowledgment that he had used illegal drugs -- many drugs over the course of his young life, marijuana and Ecstasy in recent years.
Prosecutors have argued that the drug use -- which Mr. Faneuil says did not occur while he was on the job at Merrill Lynch as a stockbroker's assistant -- is not relevant to his testimony. He maintains that Peter E. Bacanovic, his former boss at the brokerage firm, ordered him to give Ms. Stewart an illegal tip that prompted her to dump her shares of ImClone Systems just before the stock price plunged.
Lawyers for the defendants, Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic, wanted the jury to hear as much evidence as possible about Mr. Faneuil's adventures with narcotics for several reasons, most obviously because this might make the jury doubt the truth and accuracy of his testimony.
So in the morning, lawyers on both sides duked it out before the judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum. The jury was not present, but plenty of spectators were. During the day, Mr. Bacanovic's parents and brother were in the courtroom; Ms. Stewart's daughter was there, along with Ms. Stewart's friends Susan Warburg and Suzanne Sobel, an executive at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia.
Mr. Faneuil's family was sitting with him when he was not on the stand, his lawyers said, and not in the courtroom.
The drug discussion bogged down almost at once. Judge Cedarbaum, 74, said, ''The expression 'wasted' is not one I have ever heard with regard to drugs.''
A lawyer for Mr. Bacanovic, David Apfel, said that ''as a child of the 60's,'' he disagreed.
The judge retorted, ''You cannot be an expert witness in this case.'' Mr. Apfel quickly said he was not discussing his personal experiences.
Later, the judge expressed unfamiliarity with the drug known as crystal meth. Mr. Faneuil said he did not use it.
When first questioned by Robert G. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's chief lawyer, Mr. Faneuil said the only drug he had used in recent years was marijuana. He said that he had shared ''two or three puffs on a joint'' with friends, about once a month, and that he had not been the buyer.
But then Mr. Morvillo elicited from Mr. Faneuil that he had two or three times used Ecstasy, which he described as a drug that enhances ''tactile sensations and emotions.''
This, Mr. Faneuil said, occurred at a ''particular dance venue.''
Mr. Apfel said Mr. Faneuil had therefore lied ''flat out.''
Karen Patton Seymour, a prosecutor, said Mr. Faneuil had been confused by the questioning.
After he reached a deal with the government that required him to refrain from breaking the law, Mr. Faneuil said, he smoked pot on vacation in Jamaica. He assumed it was legal, he said, ''based on the ubiquity of marijuana use in Jamaica.''
The jury will not be hearing about that; the judge later ruled that the defense cannot bring up the Jamaican marijuana smoking. The defense can raise the issue of drug use, she said, but not to cast doubt on Mr. Faneuil's ability to remember accurately what happened nor to suggest that the government is treating him leniently.
The proper use of testimony about drugs, Judge Cedarbaum said, could be to try to show that ''the witness has an interest in currying favor with the government,'' because in theory he could be prosecuted for using illegal drugs.
During his testimony in the afternoon, Mr. Faneuil was briefly questioned about his drug use by Ms. Seymour. He said that he had fully disclosed it to the government and that he was not aware of any investigation into it.
The matter was raised yet again during the cross-examination by Mr. Apfel. Mr. Faneuil said that in the last five years, he had used cocaine once or twice and ketamine two or three times.
But when Mr. Apfel asked him if he had told a lie earlier in the day, when he first said he used only marijuana while he worked at Merrill Lynch, Mr. Faneuil responded strongly.
''Did you say 'a lie?''' he asked. ''Was that a lie? No, of course not.''
Judge Cedarbaum closed off that line of questioning, and Mr. Apfel returned to less colorful topics. The cross-examination continues today.
