PATTI HAGAN looks very vulnerable as she stands outside her circa-1870 brownstone in Prospect Heights, Brooklyn, clutching leaflets protesting the gleaming arena complex that some fancy-pants developer envisions nearby.
Ms. Hagan is usually loquacious. She is the sharp-witted public face of a scrappy band of neighbors called the Prospect Heights Action Coalition, the group battling the developer Bruce C. Ratner's efforts to bring the New Jersey Nets and a vast commercial and residential complex to Brooklyn.
She is no wallflower. This is the former gardening columnist for The Wall Street Journal, who penned tough-edged prose that often satirically blended horticulture with history and social justice issues for more than a decade, plinking away on her 1933 Royal typewriter by her garden window, binoculars nearby to observe the butterflies, birds and blooms. A former fact checker for The New Yorker and a Stanford University English literature major, Ms. Hagan now crusades full time for her neighborhood.
But on this snow-covered morning, Ms. Hagan, who at 60 is slender with short, layered brown hair, seems to shrink within her black overcoat. She looks distressed, expressing misgivings about agreeing to a chat inside her St. Marks Avenue brownstone.
''The house is a mess,'' she mutters. She disappears behind the front door, which is plastered with a sign, ''This neighborhood is condemned.'' An interviewer is left outdoors to ponder a spindly kiwi vine, a ginkgo tree and small glacial boulders lining the steps.
After some cajoling, Ms. Hagan relents, uneasily. She apologizes for the domestic shambles while squeezing through the hallway stacked high with publications and papers. A tall mound slides to the floor, cascading around her feet.
''Oh Lord, this is total, total mortification,'' she wails. ''I'm addicted to the printed word. If these words are written, I can't just throw them out in the trash. But my clipping gets behind. It's like every time I pick up one of these treasures, one of them is so relevant to what I am doing now, like it's an article on Bruce Ratner!''
ONE immediately softens to this obviously clever partisan, who is rattled at the moment but otherwise comes across as confidently steadfast. Even so, the interviewer is now intensely curious. Ms. Hagan had made a passing quip, a mention of the Collyer brothers, the Harlem hoarders who decades ago buried themselves in urban junk. One enters Ms. Hagan's back parlor, where heaps of yellowing newspapers and magazines tower several feet high, obscuring furniture, including a rocking chair and most of the parquet floor. The room looks as if it is shrouded in a thick layer of newsprint papier-mâché.
''I'm not hoarding them for the sake of papers,'' she explains. ''I'm concerned that I am throwing out a vital piece of information.''
Hmm. It can be established, for starters, that Ms. Hagan is fiercely curious. Shelves heave with books on horticulture, jazz, politics, science, literature, natural history and urban preservation.
The place is odd. Oh, yeah. And there is no convenient place to sit for an interview. So, the conversation continues down Sixth Avenue, over coffee at Maha's, a tiny Middle Eastern deli. Ms. Hagan says she would not be displaced by the development but hundreds of others would be. A three-block chunk would be demolished if Mr. Ratner gets the state to invoke its power of eminent domain.
What about the sentiment that the arena will rejuvenate Brooklyn? ''It's not revitalization when you've got a vital neighborhood that brought itself up by its own hard work and own money without public subsidies and Liberty Bonds,'' she says with a sneer. ''We don't have any crisis in self-esteem in Brooklyn. That is malarkey.''
In 1979, Ms. Hagan, who is single, bought her four-story brownstone when the neighborhood was plagued by crack, prostitution and crime. (A crack dealer once tried to cut up Ms. Hagan with her own heart-shaped spade.) She has been immersed for years in neighborhood battles, like creating community gardens, but she says she did not seek out her present role.
Her last big fight, from which the coalition was formed in July 2002, was with people she describes as predatory developers, profiteers who placed homeless people in two neighborhood buildings.
Ms. Hagan got wind of the arena plan last year while researching a book on her hero, Joel Elias Spingarn, a Columbia professor and early N.A.A.C.P. organizer who was an evangelist for the clematis, a flowering vine. ''He would cross-pollinate in the most wonderful ways,'' she says.
She wears a bright purple sweater and a discarded coat that she found. Yet she is not poor. She can pick her battles, and pay her bills, because she also has income from renting out a Clinton Hill brownstone and her parents' suburban Seattle home, which was inherited after her mother's 1998 death. Her eyes redden at the mention of her mother, a die-hard organic gardener. Her father was an aircraft engineer whose work took the family to the Seattle area and Japan.
Hours have gone by, but Ms. Hagan is not eager to leave. A walk commences, past buildings that would be seized. She gets worked up again, lambasting officials for talking about compensating displaced people, making them whole again. They just don't get it, she says.
''Your home is a sacred place. Mine is sacred, messy as it is. It's where you park your soul.''
PUBLIC LIVES
