To see their Penguins play Tampa Bay on a slushy winter night last week, the hockey fans of Pittsburgh took an upward trek on a slippery slope of their hilly city. At the top stood the round-roofed Mellon Arena, also known as the Igloo, an appropriate nickname on a day filled with snow, sleet and freezing rain.
Inside, despite an announced sale of 9,391 tickets (a season low), the 16,958 seats looked to be about one-third occupied. Those who showed up saw the Penguins lose, 6-2, their seventh consecutive defeat in what is now an 11-game losing streak. The team, which is off for the All-Star Game break, has lost 17 of its last 19 games.
Twice the Stanley Cup champions, in 1991 and 1992, the Penguins are caught in hockey's perfect storm. They have a low budget, the National Hockey League's oldest arena, poor attendance and the worst record among the 30 teams. On this night against the Lightning, most of the scattered customers sat quietly, as if frozen. Even the beer stand behind the center-ice seats was closed.
Just a decade ago, the Penguins were the N.H.L.'s best team and by far its most entertaining. In 1992-93, they won 56 regular-season games. Although in gradual decline since then, they reached the final four of the Stanley Cup playoffs as recently as 2001. They used to sell out most of their games; cheers and music reverberated beneath the arena's quirky curved ceiling. It all seems so long ago.
Their plunge has been drastic, the worst-case scenario in the league, which insists it needs a major revision in its collective bargaining agreement with the N.H.L. Players Association. Although the union is skeptical about some of the league's assertions of financial hardship, everyone pities the predicament of the Penguins.
In addition, the Penguins are the only team in major professional sports whose principal owner is also the star player: labor and management in the same body. And he isn't just anybody. He is Mario Lemieux, 38, who came out of retirement in 2000 after being inducted into the Hockey Hall of Fame and buying the team out of bankruptcy.
But Lemieux is unable to play because of hip surgery after scoring one goal in 10 games this season. People who know him say he is disillusioned by the business of the sport as he watches his mixture of tired veterans and young prospects lose relentlessly under Ed Olczyk, a first-year coach.
Although the Penguins said they are determined to follow their business plan and build for the future with low-salaried prospects, the present is an ordeal.
''I don't sleep,'' Olczyk said. ''There's a lot of pressure.''
In one of last week's defeats, a critical opposing goal came after a Penguin was penalized for arguing with an official about an offsides whistle.
In another defeat, the key goal came after the Penguins were penalized for having too many men on the ice. After losing to Tampa Bay, Olczyk, as he left the bench, yelled at Vincent Lecavalier, the Lightning player who had angered Olczyk almost three months before by celebrating excessively after a goal in a 9-0 victory.
In postgame news conferences, Olczyk often sighs, grimaces, pauses, frowns and shakes his head sadly. There is so much more to fret about beyond the daily grind.
''We know the building issue is hanging above our head,'' Olczyk said, referring to the stalled quest for a new arena. ''Our payroll is not exactly very high. Everybody's waiting to see what's going to happen next September.''
Waiting for Labor Settlement
He was referring to the negotiations between team owners and the union to replace the collective bargaining agreement that expires Sept. 15, before the start of the next season. The league has said it needs ''cost certainty,'' a phrase the union interprets as a synonym for a salary cap.
There is the possibility of a lockout. A 15-week shutdown delayed the 1994-95 season. The union said that lockout, which cut off the cash flow to franchises, contributed to the financial decline of the Penguins, whose payroll of about $22 million is roughly half the N.H.L. average.
The people who run the Penguins say that a favorable labor settlement, along with a new arena, an improving economy and maturing players, could revive a franchise that joined the league in its 1967 expansion to 12 teams from 6. Without a new arena -- even if everything else works out well -- the team may be sold and may leave Pittsburgh after its arena lease ends in 2007.
That possibility was raised last summer by Lemieux, who was owed $32.5 million in 1999 before converting most of that debt into equity in the bankruptcy settlement. Lemieux declined requests for an interview, but the team president, Ken Sawyer, voiced the company view.
''It's really up to the public sector now to come to us and say, 'We're ready to sit and talk about the arena,' '' Sawyer said. ''The clock is ticking: 2007 is when the team could leave town, and that possibility is real.''
Teams in similar circumstances have moved under the administration of Commissioner Gary Bettman. The Quebec Nordiques became the Colorado Avalanche in 1995, and the Winnipeg Jets became the Phoenix Coyotes the next year. Assuming a favorable labor agreement, a growing economy and the improvement of the young players, Sawyer said: ''This team may be attractive to markets which we would not even consider today. So that, in itself, will be kind of a deadline that the community will have to address.''
But the community does not seem eager to address it at the moment. The city government faces a budget crisis. The population of both Pittsburgh, in Allegheny County, and the surrounding region is diminishing. During snowstorms last week, some roads were not cleared quickly because of cutbacks of personnel and trucks.
A regional governmental unit called the Sports and Exhibition Authority recently oversaw the building of a baseball stadium for the Pirates and a football stadium for the Steelers. But the executive director of that body, Stephen G. Leeper, said in a telephone interview that a new hockey arena should not be considered for Pittsburgh until the N.H.L. gets a new financial structure that includes sharing revenue among owners.
''It's not a viable league,'' said Leeper, who said last week that he would step down in two months. ''It's a sport that sort of boggles one's mind. They need to do some soul-searching. They never talk about revenue sharing. Other teams have new arenas and they are still failing. Management doesn't want to address their own failures. Before one comes asking local government to do this or do that, they have to get their own house in order.''
Aiming for a New Arena
Bill Daly, an N.H.L. executive vice president, said that increased revenue sharing ''is almost necessarily a part of the solution.'' Of the Penguins in particular, Daly said ''The vital signs are not as dire as current attendance would suggest.''
The effort to build a new arena in Pittsburgh, Daly said, ''hasn't played out as we all would have hoped.'' But he also said the fan base is strong in Pittsburgh and that the league is ''dedicated to the Pittsburgh market.''
''Pittsburgh, in terms of local television, has been one of the strongest teams in terms of ratings and reach,'' Daly said. As for moving the franchise, Daly said, ''I don't want to consider that as a likely prospect.''
Dan Onorato, the newly elected Allegheny County executive, said: ''We're not in a position to put local money'' into a new arena. Tom Murphy, the Pittsburgh mayor, said through a spokesman, ''There is absolutely no city operating budget funding available for construction of a new arena.''
People close to Lemieux have said he feels misled by elected officials who he believes promised a new arena when he took over the team. Onorato said, ''I don't see anything in writing.''
In recent seasons, the Penguins have traded stars like Jaromir Jagr, Aleksei Kovalev and Martin Straka to cut their payroll. Two months ago, Lemieux turned down a $4 million portion of his compensation for his executive role. Last week, the team sent back Marc-André Fleury, a rookie goalie, to his junior club; he could have made $3 million in bonuses if he had stayed the full season. Sawyer said that the team expects to lose about $5 million on operations this season and that it is carrying debt of about $30 million to $35 million.
Although Lemieux is still one of Pittsburgh's most admired citizens, his fellow residents were not all pleased that public money helped to pay for baseball and football stadiums.
Christopher P. Briem, a regional economist with the Center for Social and Urban Research at the University of Pittsburgh, wrote in an e-mail message: ''The perception that this was all done against people's wishes has some lasting effects. Couple that with a financial crisis in the city and you get a real mean atmosphere for any projected public support for a new arena. In terms of direct economic impact, it's hard to justify public money for sports venues. The common rejoinder is that the advertising effect of a major sports team is worth public investment. That is nearly impossible to quantify.''
Gambling Could Provide Cash
Not everyone is pessimistic. Expressing optimism about the team and offering money to build an arena is Edson R. Arneault, the chairman of MTR Gaming Group. He sponsors the Penguins with arena advertising and runs a resort that includes horse racing and slot machines in Chester, W.Va., about an hour's drive from downtown Pittsburgh.
Arneault said about $60 million toward the cost of a new arena could be raised through gambling if the state of Pennsylvania would grant him a license for thoroughbred racing and slot machines near Pittsburgh. The money would help fill the gap between the $47 million the Penguins say they can invest in an arena and the money the state would provide toward the projected cost of more than $250 million.
''We think it is a win-win situation for Allegheny County,'' Arneault said.
He has worked with Lemieux for four years as a sponsor and has come to know him. ''It's been rough on him because he's not used to the business end of the deal,'' Arneault said. ''He's used to being told he is the greatest hockey player which, arguably, he is. But when you get down to the nuts and bolts of business, it's tough, and he's learning and he's getting a little bit tougher.''
Would the N.H.L. approve of gambling revenues to finance a new building? ''This is mainstream America right now,'' Arneault said. ''We've taken it out of the back rooms into the front rooms. People are no longer shying away. They're saying, 'Look, we like to gamble.' Gaming is becoming a mainstream industry.''
Daly, the N.H.L. executive, was asked what the league thought about the use of gambling money to pay for a new arena. ''I don't think we've ever been asked the question,'' he said, before adding, ''I don't think it would be problematic.''
Ted Saskin, senior director of the players association, said the Penguins' situation is more complicated than just an arena problem. ''They are suffering from the overhang of the last owners' lockout,'' he said.
Regarding Daly's warm words about revenue sharing, Saskin said: ''I'm glad he says that. It's something we feel strongly about.'' Saskin said that although the union is aware of Pittsburgh's problems, ''We're not going to negotiate to the lowest common denominator or the highest.''
When the Penguins played with great energy in a 5-3 loss to Philadelphia last Saturday afternoon, they left the ice to a standing ovation from many of the fans in the Igloo.
''Obviously, they liked the way we played,'' said Ryan Malone, one of the team's best rookies and the first N.H.L. player born in Pittsburgh. ''We played hard and the crowd respects us for it. That's the way the town is. We put on a good effort, but, obviously, it's better when you win.''
HOCKEY
