Democrats who once rebelled at having their presidential choices dictated by big-city bosses seem to have cheerfully handed over that power to small-town Democrats in Iowa and New Hampshire. And this year New Hampshire may have subcontracted its role to Iowa.
How else can John Kerry's five victories, with about two-fifths of the total vote on Tuesday, be explained? After all, according to the National Annenberg Election Survey, only about one-third of prospective voters in those primary states said they knew enough about the Democratic candidates to make an informed choice. What the voters did know was that Mr. Kerry had won in Iowa and New Hampshire, and that polls showed that he was winning or gaining in their states.
The ''winner'' label seems to have been at work in supposedly fiercely independent New Hampshire, too. Mr. Kerry, who had been 20 points behind Howard Dean early in January, started slowly gaining on Dr. Dean in the days before New Hampshire. But Mr. Kerry took off sharply the night of the Iowa caucuses. He overtook Dr. Dean the next day in New Hampshire as his flatland win became known and went on to a 38 to 26 percent victory in the primary.
Missouri may be the best example from Tuesday's primaries of the voters' choosing on the basis of front-runner status. Neither Mr. Kerry nor any other candidate had campaigned in the state until a week ago today, assuming that Dick Gephardt, the native son, had it locked up. Even after Mr. Gephardt dropped out after his disappointing performance in Iowa, none of the candidates rushed to Missouri, deciding instead to spend their time and energy in New Hampshire until that state's primary. Mr. Kerry's visits on Jan. 28 and on Saturday, plus a modest advertising campaign highlighting his Vietnam record, were all Missouri voters got to see of his campaign (though some surely caught glimpses of him on the news and during the MSNBC broadcast of a South Carolina debate). Yet he won going away, taking 51 percent of the vote, undoubtedly because of his previous wins.
Oddly enough, it was Missouri that helped start the process that led to this spate of bunched-up primaries. At the boss-dominated 1968 Democratic convention in Chicago, Missouri's delegation was controlled, absolutely, by Gov. Warren Hearnes. Some of the meetings that had elected delegates were held in secret. One was held at night on a speeding bus. In that case it was impossible for supporters of Eugene McCarthy to participate.
In reaction to the behavior of Governor Hearnes and the other bosses, a party commission headed by George McGovern wrote the new rules that substantially survive today. It said its objective was to give Democratic voters a ''full, meaningful and timely opportunity'' to participate in the nomination process. Those rules encouraged states to hold primaries.
These days Democrats certainly get that opportunity in Iowa and New Hampshire, where the candidates spend enough time so that voters who want to hear them can, and can even have second thoughts, as many apparently did about Dr. Dean.
But in Missouri, this year's version of ''full, meaningful and timely'' was one week. It wasn't much better in any other state, though Senator John Edwards campaigned enough in South Carolina to become known. Nor is there much time for the Democrats in Michigan, Tennessee, Virginia and Wisconsin who vote in the next few days.
Is this bad for the Democrats? Not if Mr. Kerry wins the nomination and the election. Perhaps his wins in Iowa and New Hampshire are the best indication Democratic voters are ever going to get of whether he can defeat President Bush. For even if those two nearly all-white states do not look like the Democratic Party, Annenberg polling shows that their views are very much like those of Democrats across the country.
This year, voters have little time to make a choice. Dropping past practice, the Democratic National Committee let states hold their primaries a week after New Hampshire. In past years there was a gap, though the five-week pause in 2000 was plainly so long that people seemed to forget about the Democrats.
But there has to be a middle ground. The perception of a Kerry steamroller may so cripple his opponents' fund-raising that there is no chance for second thoughts about the current front-runner, whose Senate record consists of 19 years of votes but few great causes. (Something similar could have been said of another Massachusetts senator, although John F. Kennedy had served only seven years when he won New Hampshire.)
Candidate-deprived American voters could spend hours and days and even weeks reading newspaper profiles, tuning in to every televised debate, and checking voting records. But who, besides reporters, has time for that? A gap after New Hampshire would have been a good idea.
Op-Ed Contributor Adam Clymer, former Washington correspondent of The Times, is political director of the National Annenberg Election Survey.
