A Russian billionaire has bought the entire Fabergé collection owned by the family of Malcolm Forbes and is taking it back to Russia.
Just two months before the nine imperial Easter eggs, along with some 180 other pieces, were to be auctioned by Sotheby's in New York, Victor Vekselberg, one of a new generation of Russian industrialists, bought what he called ''perhaps the most significant example of our cultural heritage outside Russia,'' according to a statement released by the auction house yesterday.
The works are a legacy of czarist Russia that was scorned by the Bolsheviks and sold to the West for currency to support the new regime. Now Russia's newly monied class is proudly bringing these trophies of the aristocracy back home. Mr. Vekselberg, 46, intends to put the eggs on public view, his spokesman said.
The price was not disclosed, but experts familiar with the Fabergé market say he probably paid $100 million for the collection, which Sotheby's had predicted would bring a minimum of $90 million at auction. It is the largest private sale ever brokered by Sotheby's, said Bill Ruprecht, its chief executive.
Mr. Vekselberg is the fourth richest man in Russia, according to Forbes Magazine, with a fortune estimated at $2.5 billion. He is the chairman of the Tyumen Oil Company and Siberian-Urals Aluminum.
He was traveling yesterday and could not be reached for comment. But in the statement released by the auction house he said that when he heard the collection was for sale he ''knew immediately that this was a once-in-a-lifetime chance to give back to my country one of its most revered treasures.'' Bob Burkett, a strategic consultant for Mr. Vekselberg, said yesterday that he planned to ''make them available to the Russian people'' in some way. Asked whether this meant putting them on view at the State Hermitage Museum or the Kremlin, Mr. Burkett said it was too early to say.
Christopher Forbes, vice chairman of Forbes, said in an interview yesterday that he was thrilled with the sale. ''It's fun we got to be the custodian of them for as long as we did,'' he said. ''But it's a new Russia, an era of free enterprise. How nice to see them repatriated.''
Forbes's advertising pages have fallen 50 percent in three years. But Mr. Forbes said that wasn't the reason for the sale. ''We're trying to make sure that the real jewel -- Forbes and Forbes.com -- stays within the family,'' he said last month, adding, ''None of us are getting any younger.''
For the last year and a half, Mr. Forbes said, there have been people ''sniffing around'' to see if he and his brothers and sister would sell their father's collection. Some were serious, he said, others were not.
''Initially they were from the U.S., Asia, the Middle East, Europe,'' Mr. Forbes added. It was only after Sotheby's made the announcement last month that some Russians described by Mr. Forbes as ''real serious players'' came forward.
Mr. Vekselberg was one of the most private of Russia's oligarchs. But that changed in 2003 when he brought Tyumen Oil Company together with British Petroleum and Siberian-Urals Aluminum together with Fleming Family &amp; Partners. Recently he has become involved in philanthropic efforts that include restoring monasteries like the one in Solovki, according to a Russian magazine called Who Is Who. Mr. Vekselberg is also on the board of the Bolshoi Theater in Moscow.
While Fabergé experts say this is the first time Mr. Vekselberg has bought an object by Fabergé, he has been collecting Russian art, furniture and decorative objects.
Peter Carl Fabergé, one of Russia's largest and most successful producers of jewelry and art works, received his first royal commission from Czar Alexander III in 1885, to make an Easter present for his wife. His son, Nicholas II, later commissioned treasures for his wife and mother; the imperial Easter tradition lasted more than 30 years.
After the revolution, the Fabergé workshops were nationalized and the Soviet government sold many of the eggs from the workshops and confiscated the imperial ones from the palaces; some were displayed at the Kremlin Museum. The buyers were primarily the American industrialist Armand Hammer and Alexander Schaffer of À la Vieille Russie, the Fifth Avenue gallery that has championed Russian works of art for decades. ''Fabergé died in 1920 and these were considered modern things, not heritage property,'' said Peter Schaffer, Alexander Schaffer's son, who now owns the gallery.
Mr. Ruprecht said yesterday that the deal came through a ''direct proverbial knock on our door,'' adding that for the last month there had been any number of ''characters'' who would have loved to have bought the collection. André Ruzhnikov, an art consultant based in Hillsborough, Calif., said he received a call from a friend two weeks ago who asked him if he thought Sotheby's would be interested in selling privately. He then flew to New York on behalf of Mr. Vekselberg. The entire negotiations took just one day.
Mr. Ruprecht declined to say if Mr. Vekselberg was a Sotheby's client. ''He keeps a low profile,'' he said. ''But he had an intensity and focus and commitment to repatriating these things that made this a great transaction for everyone involved.''
By not holding an auction, Sotheby's is saving hundreds of thousands of dollars on insurance, the catalog, advertising and marketing, as well security guards.
Before the eggs return to Russia, however, Mr. Vekselberg has agreed to let Sotheby's exhibit highlights from the collection at its headquarters, on York Avenue and 72nd Street. The exact dates of the viewing have yet to be determined, Mr. Ruprecht said.
The collection, which has been on view in a special gallery in the Forbes Building at 60 Fifth Avenue, at 12th Street, was formed by Malcolm Forbes, the publishing magnate, over a lifetime. Among the treasures is the fabled Coronation Egg that Czar Nicholas II gave Empress Alexandra for Easter in 1897 to commemorate his ascension to the throne. The egg reveals a velvet-lined compartment containing a replica of the coach in which Alexandra had made her grand entry into Moscow. George Stein, a master in the House of Fabergé, spent 15 months working 16-hour days to complete this composition in gold enamel, diamond and rock crystal.
To those involved in the rarefied world of Fabergé the deal is sure to signal an escalation in prices. ''This will serve to raise prices of Fabergé in general because there will be far fewer pieces coming on the market,'' Mr. Schaffer said. Still, he added: ''I'm pleased that the collection is going back to its homeland where it belongs. It's sad for us. But it's great for the Russian public.''
