On Thursday, Aventis's chief executive, Igor Landau, is expected to make his strongest case yet for spurning a $60 billion hostile bid from Sanofi-Synthélabo, as he presents the company's 2003 results at a hotel ballroom in London.
For Mr. Landau, 58, the battle is highly personal. After all, he spent nearly three decades planning, pruning unessential businesses and buying up competitors while rising through the ranks at Rhône-Poulenc. He was instrumental, former colleagues say, in transforming that company from a chemical and agricultural manufacturer into Aventis, a focused drug company.
And if the deal does go through, Mr. Landau, who has been openly contemptuous of the size of the offer and the rationale behind it, is likely to be out of a job.
''We don't need them,'' he said when Sanofi first made the bid, adding that his rival's actions were based on weakness. Later, he said the offer would need to be raised by as much as 50 percent to be viable.
Those are fighting words - and Mr. Landau is up against some formidable forces. French regulators approved the structure of the original deal on Tuesday.
And Sanofi's chief executive, Jean-François Dehecq, has not blinked. In an interview with The Financial Times of Germany on Wednesday, he said he saw no reason to raise his bid, and added that a merger of equals was unlikely.
But Mr. Landau has some arrows in his quiver. At a Thursday morning presentation to the media and an afternoon meeting with analysts and investors, he plans to emphasize the strength of products in Aventis's pipeline, to persuade skeptics that the company can thrive on its own. The focus will be vaccines and projects in diabetes and rheumatology, among others. Aventis has also been talking to potential buyers like the Blackstone Group, a private equity firm, about shedding some assets, people close to with the negotiations say.
In fact, former and current colleagues say it would be unwise to write off just yet the man they call the ultimate survivor.
''Igor is the single brightest individual I've ever worked with in my corporate career,'' said Randy H. Thurman, chairman and chief executive of Viasys Healthcare, who was president of Rhône-Poulenc Rorer in the 1990's. Mr. Landau is ''politically a very clever man,'' with a knack for getting what he wants, Mr. Thurman said. ''There were a lot of talented executives at Rhône-Poulenc'' who did not survive as long as Mr. Landau has, Mr. Thurman added.
Mr. Landau was born François Gilbert Landau, in the medieval town of St.-Flour, France. In business, he had an unlikely start for a pharmaceutical executive -- a short stint at a furniture company. After four years as a McKinsey consultant he joined Rhône-Poulenc in 1977. It was there that he seemed to find his calling, and he spoke openly as he rose through the ranks about his passion to create drugs that would cure the world's worst diseases.
Mr. Landau, who declined to comment for this article, rarely discusses his family background, and little is known about his upbringing, personal life or why he changed his name to Igor. Colleagues say he is an ardent rugby fan and an occasional cigar smoker who has a penchant for car racing and, sometimes, a heavy foot on the gas pedal.
A year before being put in charge of Aventis in 2002, Mr. Landau would have seemed an unlikely candidate. He had a reputation for strategic thinking, but not necessarily operational excellence. And in line before him were Jean-René Fourtou and Jurgen Dormann, respected managers from either side of the Rhône-Poulenc merger with Hoechst.
But the European corporate meltdowns that followed the late 1990's excesses were good for Mr. Landau's career: Mr. Dormann was called in to shore up ABB, Europe's biggest electrical engineering group, in November 2001. In July 2002, Mr. Fourtou was tapped to clean up the mess left at Vivendi Universal after Jean-Marie Messier's acquisition spree.
That left Mr. Landau at the top of Aventis, a sweet spot for a man who helped create the plan to shed Rhône-Poulenc's nonpharmaceutical units and merge with Hoechst. His tenure has not been smooth, though. Aventis's stock fell by nearly half in the year after Mr. Landau took control, before rebounding somewhat. Before the Sanofi offer, it was still down 30 percent from mid-2001, based on low expectations for new products and patent worries.
Still, one group supporting Mr. Landau is Aventis employees. Perhaps that is because any combination between Sanofi, which has 70,000 employees, and Aventis, with 30,000, may lead to thousands of lost jobs in France and Germany. ''We are confident because we believe he will fight,'' said Michael Klippel, head of the Betriebsrat, a nonexecutive body in Germany that covers employers and employees. ''He is not one of these managers who will sell out for a few marks. He is a very strong leader.''
Even if Sanofi's offer turns into a friendly one, Mr. Landau, like any chief executive fending off a hostile suitor, is unlikely to gain control of the new company, merger experts say. During negotiations, the chief executive is practically required to be disdainful of the bid to increase the price, but that disdain creates ill will that does nothing for his job security if the deal goes through.
''You still have to yell and scream and say it is going to be a disaster, even if that means you are taken out,'' said Tom Taulli, a professor at the Marshall School of Business at the University of Southern California, who also consults on merger deals. Mr. Dehecq said last week that anyone who supported the combination could find a spot at the new company, but he would not elaborate.
Analysts and lawyers say that any ill will notwithstanding, Sanofi might want to keep Mr. Landau around. ''No one at Sanofi has the experience to run a 100,000-person company,'' said Marie Helene Leopold, an analyst with SG Cowen in Paris. ''If you want to do this deal that quickly, you'd better have management on your side. Otherwise, you're going to have an employment problem.''
In fact, Sanofi may want to consider cultivating Mr. Landau, not aggravating him. In negotiating a merger, often ''the most critical social issue is what role the target chief executive will have,'' said Ronald W. Masulis, professor of management at Vanderbuilt University. If the target company is to negotiate a friendly deal, either with the unwanted bidder or a third party, it is crucial to make sure the chief executive of the target has an important position, Mr. Masulis said.
Those who have worked closely with Mr. Landau say they are not worried about his future. ''Mr. Landau's demise has been incorrectly predicted for the whole 20 years that I've known him,'' Mr. Thurman of Viasys said with a laugh.
