With supporters indicating that they needed to see a victory soon, Howard Dean prepared them on Wednesday for a loss in Michigan on Saturday but said in a string of interviews that he would not quit the presidential race now.
''I'm not bowing out no matter what happens,'' Dr. Dean told KCPQ, the Fox affiliate in Seattle, a day after a series of losses in seven states. It was one of 16 satellite interviews he conducted before flying to Wisconsin, where he considers a victory on Feb. 17 crucial. On his campaign plane to Wisconsin, he reaffirmed his determination, saying, ''Right now I think we can still win, and we're going to keep moving forward.''
But before Wisconsin, he faces tests in Michigan, Washington State and Maine. In various interviews beamed into those four states, he said he did not think he would carry Michigan, but he left some room for hope in Washington, which votes with Michigan on Saturday, and in Maine, which votes Sunday and where he plans to attend the caucuses.
''Maine is going to make the biggest difference because Maine people know me,'' he told WABI, the CBS affiliate in Bangor.
But while Dr. Dean stuck to his plan of attempting a slow accumulation of delegates, there were signs of increasing anxiety among some Dean supporters that he had not won a single state among the nine that have voted so far.
''There is concern about the status of the campaign,'' said Representative Jesse Jackson Jr., Democrat of Illinois and one of Dr. Dean's strongest supporters among almost three dozen members of the House. ''I'd be less than honest if I didn't tell you everyone is talking about it.''
Mr. Jackson said Dr. Dean's supporters on Capitol Hill ''will wait for the governor to make the decision about when the fat lady sings.'' But he said that this Saturday in Michigan and Washington was ''an important test.''
He said that ''a number of people after Saturday will certainly want to have personal and intimate conversations with him about 'What next?' ''
Asked by reporters whether Democratic Party officials were pressuring him to quit, Dr. Dean said: ''No. Nobody's called me.'' He declined to say how many delegates he would need to collect this weekend.
Roy Neel, Dr. Dean's new campaign manager, said in an interview that he was optimistic about Washington and Maine because they were caucus states and home to strong Dean organizations. Washington in particular has the right demographics for Dr. Dean, Mr. Neel said, with a lot of independents and progressives.
Still, he said, the campaign was not advertising in either of those states, nor is it running commercials in Michigan, which he said was too expensive and there was too little time to make a difference. The first state where he will advertise since New Hampshire will be Wisconsin.
Earlier in the day, Dr. Dean held a 30-minute conference call with his labor backers to shore up support and plan his strategy. Officials of the Service Employees International Union, whose endorsement of Dr. Dean in November was a significant political victory at a critical time, said they would stick with him at least through Wisconsin. The union has made heavy investments of manpower, time and money on Dr. Dean's behalf, and a senior union official said the workers were ''locked and loaded, certainly through Wisconsin.''
Andrew L. Stern, president of the union, is scheduled to campaign with Dr. Dean in Michigan on Friday. In a statement, Mr. Stern said that Dr. Dean's ''proven track record on health care and other issues important to working families is why S.E.I.U.'s members decided to endorse Dr. Dean and that is why they continue to stand strong with him now.''
Reached on his cellphone, Mr. Stern brushed aside questions about Dr. Dean's string of losses in Tuesday's seven contests, saying: ''What happened last night? I slept through it.'' He added, ''I haven't read the papers.''
And a befuddling scene unfolded in Albany, where Dennis Rivera, president of Local 1199 of the S.E.I.U., the health care workers' union in New York, was addressing a news conference about health insurance.
Asked whether he was beginning to think his union had made the wrong decision in backing Dr. Dean, Mr. Rivera appeared ready to answer. But before he could speak, Jennifer Cunningham, a union official standing beside him, said they would not take any questions other than those on health insurance.
Mr. Rivera said he had ''a lot to say'' about the Dean campaign but said he would discuss the subject later. ''Ah, tomorrow, the day after tomorrow,'' he said.
On Capitol Hill, Representative Zoe Lofgren, Democrat of California, said she and other Dean backers were ''gearing up for a long slog.''
Asked how long supporters could wait for Dr. Dean to win a state, Ms. Lofgren said, ''He is not going to be a spoiler, and if someone else has secured the nomination, he'll support the nominee, but the election shouldn't be delegated to the press and pundits.''
On the campaign trail, Dr. Dean continued to portray Mr. Kerry, now in command of the Democratic contest, as a tool of special interests. And he said that he remained the central force for change in the Democratic Party.
''What I want to remind voters is that it was me that started the backbone transplant for the Democratic Party,'' Dr. Dean told reporters. ''Now we see the other candidates have adopted the message, which is great, but I don't necessarily think they've adopted the backbone.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
