For the first time, some truck-based sport utility vehicles received as many as four out of five stars in rollover ratings, according to 2004 model ratings released yesterday by federal regulators. But the higher ratings may not necessarily mean the vehicles have become safer, because the government has changed the way it tests them.
In the new tests, using real vehicles on a test track as well as mathematical calculations, the four-wheel-drive versions of several similar sport utility vehicles made by General Motors -- the Chevrolet TrailBlazer, GMC Envoy, Oldsmobile Bravada and the new Buick Rainier -- earned four stars, even though they are virtually identical to G.M. vehicles that rated only three stars last year.
The Volvo XC90, a car-based S.U.V. that has been promoted by the Ford Motor Company, Volvo's parent, for its aggressive use of rollover-prevention technology, also received four stars, not the government's highest rating of five stars -- a result that disappointed the company.
Two pickup trucks, the Toyota Tacoma and the Ford Explorer Sport Trac, tipped up on two wheels during the tests, a poor showing in a rollover test. Regulators also said they were reviewing test results on two Ford S.U.V.'s, the Explorer and the Mercury Mountaineer, but did not say why.
Vehicle rollovers kill more than 10,000 Americans every year. They are rare but deadly, occurring in fewer than 3 percent of accidents but accounting for a third of vehicle occupant deaths. And the problem has been on the rise as sales of S.U.V.'s have boomed; sport utilities have higher centers of gravity than cars and are three times as likely to be involved in rollover deaths.
Congress ordered regulators to come up with a more rigorous rollover test in 2000, after nearly 300 rollover deaths in Explorers equipped with Firestone tires. The National Highway Traffic Safety Administration released the results of these new tests on 16 model lines yesterday.
The results were not necessarily indicative of improvements from the 2003 model year, but rather showed that the new test would provide different results and new information about vehicles that had trouble negotiating sharp turns on a test track. The old test was entirely done on paper, by crunching a vehicle's specifications through a mathematical equation. There has been some tweaking to the mathematical formula used in the previous tests.
In the new tests, actual vehicles are also driven through as many as 10 fishhook maneuvers, a jarring series of turns intended to replicate what happens when drivers drift off the road and then try to overcompensate in their steering. The tests are conducted at speeds ranging from 35 to 50 miles an hour.
Vehicles are outfitted with equipment to prevent an actual rollover, and once a truck or S.U.V. tips up on two wheels, the testing is halted and not undertaken at higher speeds.
Consumer groups have said that the new tests will offer more precise ratings that better reflect what happens in real-world driving, but they say the government is still not doing nearly enough to prevent rollovers.
''The new rollover ratings issued today by the federal government start the ignition but don't get the car out of the driveway,'' said Joan Claybrook, the president of the consumer group Public Citizen and a former regulator.
The current ratings are available to consumers on the traffic agency's Web site. Ms. Claybrook says they should be made more visible to the public by being posted on every vehicle's window sticker. And she says there should be minimum performance standards that would keep unstable vehicles off the road.
There are currently proposals in the Senate on both issues.
The ratings indicate how likely a light-duty vehicle is to roll over during a single-vehicle crash. Five stars means a vehicle has a rollover risk of less than 10 percent, four stars means the risk is 10 to 20 percent and three stars indicates the risk is 20 to 30 percent.
Many people in the industry expected that the new tests would demonstrate the safety of vehicles equipped with stability-control technologies. But the most curious results were that the General Motors S.U.V.'s earned four stars. The vehicles are not equipped with antirollover technology, as are some other G.M. vehicles.
So what happened?
The four-wheel-drive models are nearly 200 pounds heavier than two-wheel-drive models. Phil Horton, a safety engineer at G.M., said an extra gear box below the vehicle's center of gravity probably led to better performance in the new tests.
But he also said that differences between the two- and four-wheel-drive versions of the S.U.V.'s were not as significant as a difference between three and four star ratings might suggest. He said the benefits that four-wheel-drive vehicles get from more weight were typically offset by a higher ride height and center of gravity.
''There are clear differences, but not significant in my mind, specifically in terms of rollover resistance,'' he said.
Ford officials said they were disappointed that the XC90 did not perform better. ''It is surprising because we would have anticipated a higher rating,'' said Kristin Kinley, a Ford spokeswoman.
The Volvo S.U.V. has sensors that extrapolate when a driver is losing control of the vehicle and momentarily take over some braking and acceleration control to prevent a rollover. Car-based utilities like the XC90 are constructed like steel egg cartons and a few -- like the Acura MDX and the Nissan Murano -- have earned four-star ratings in the past.
Big pickups and truck-based sport utilities like the TrailBlazer are built on frame rails that run under the vehicle almost like two giant fork tines. No truck-based utilities have previously been awarded four stars, though some pickup trucks with extended cabs have been.
As for the performance of the Explorer Sport Trac, the only vehicle awarded fewer than three stars, Ms. Kinley said that Ford subjects its vehicles to rigorous testing, but not to the fishhook maneuver that the government is using.
That will change, she said.
''The fishhook is a very severe maneuver,'' she said. ''One thing to keep in mind is, in the real world there are so many different variables that affect a vehicle's performance. This one test might not reflect real-world performance.''
Rae Tyson, a spokesman for the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, said ''it's a very positive sign that we're seeing sport utility vehicles in the four-star range.''
He added that ''the fact that the manufacturers are finding ways to build more stability into these vehicles is a plus for consumers.''
Correction:  February 6, 2004, Friday  A chart in Business Day yesterday showing stability ratings from government tests for several vehicles carried an erroneous label. Except for the Ford Focus wagon and the Toyota Echo, vehicles in the chart with two-wheel drive have rear-wheel drive, not front-wheel drive.
