The spread of avian influenza in chickens across 10 Asian countries has devastated the region's poultry industry, but so far has not dented the economies in the way that SARS did last year, economists and regional government officials say.
But they cautioned that Asia's buoyant economic outlook, with expected growth in some countries of more than 6 percent, could change quickly if bird flu mutated into a disease that could be transmitted from human to human.
''If the flu creates a major travel scare, as was the case with SARS, tourism and other economic losses could reach tens of billions of dollars,'' said Jean-Pierre A. Verbiest, assistant chief economist of the Asian Development Bank.
So far, countries have not issued travel warnings regarding bird flu, and there have been few major cancellations by tourist groups to the region, airlines said. Hotels and airlines were reporting none of the pain felt this time last year when SARS left many hotels empty and led to the large-scale cancellation of flights.
But chicken has been removed from many menus, especially in Thailand and Vietnam, where the epidemic has hit hardest. The World Health Organization has said that properly cooked chicken is safe to eat, but consumer confidence in Asian chicken has plummeted.
On Thai Airways, flight attendants explain that chicken ''wasn't safe,'' and offer fish instead. In Vietnam, where the eight KFC fast-food outlets were closed over the Jan. 22-28 lunar New Year holiday, there were plans to introduce an all-fish menu.
But the Thai government has initiated a campaign to ease public concerns by giving away cooked chicken and eggs. And the Bangkok Post reported that the KFC chain would participate in the campaign by giving 50,000 pieces of chicken away over a period of several days. KFC's parent, Yum Restaurants International, denied that the giveaway was intended to counter a drop in sales. KFC's managing director, Panithan Sethabutra, was quoted as saying, ''we are doing this to save the country's chicken businesses as a whole.''
In many countries, the poorest citizens would be the most affected, economists said.
''A major crisis in the chicken industry, which would reduce the supply and push up prices, would disproportionately affect poorer consumers,'' Mr. Verbiest said.
In Indonesia and Vietnam, the governments have said they would compensate chicken farmers, but there were doubts whether the amounts would make up for the losses. The minister for agriculture in Indonesia, Bungaran Saragih, said that 1.25 million people among the nation's 220 million population could lose their jobs.
The World Health Organization has reported 13 deaths from bird flu in two countries, Vietnam and Thailand. Those who have died -- most of them children -- were in close contact with diseased chickens.
Thailand is the world's fourth-largest exporter of poultry, mainly to Japan and the European Union but not to the United States. Both Japan and the European Union have banned the importation of Thai chicken. With one of the most vibrant economies in the region, Thailand stands to suffer the greatest economic losses.
Thailand's $1 billion poultry industry, which employs about one million workers in a country of 62 million, has virtually closed. Yesterday, a government spokesman said that  24.8 million chickens had been culled, according to wire reports.
But the overall impact on the Thai economy, which is strongly based in industrial goods like computer and auto parts, is expected to be limited, financial analysts and government officials say. Poultry accounts for only 2 percent of national output.
The central bank said last week that it expected the bird flu epidemic to cut gross domestic product growth by 0.2 percent this year.
Analysts, however, are offering more sober assessments than the government, saying that gross domestic product would be reduced by 0.7 percent to 0.9 percent by the disease. But in making this assessment, Supavud Saicheua, the head of research at Phatra Securities here, said that Thailand's economy would still fare well this year.
''Given that we expect G.D.P. to grow 6.9 percent this year, our estimates of the impact of bird flu would not alter our overall positive view on the economy,'' Mr. Supavud said in an economic update paper distributed worldwide to Merrill Lynch clients.
Mr. Supavud and other analysts cautioned, however, that they were assuming that bird flu would not mutate into a disease that could be transmitted from human to human.
There is little doubt that the Thai poultry business would change in the wake of the disease, experts say.
Big agricultural businesses like Charoen Pokphand Foods, the Saha Farms Group and the Betagro Group, dominate the Thai export poultry business to Japan and the European Union.
Thailand does not export chicken to the United States, the world's No.1 poultry exporter. Nevertheless, in what was largely a symbolic gesture, the United States yesterday banned imports of poultry products from Asian countries affected by bird flu, the Reuters news agency reported. American poultry exporters have said they are benefiting from Thailand's problems, with bigger sales and higher prices.
Thailand said yesterday that it would offer $640 million in loans to chicken farmers and slaughterhouses to prevent bird flu, according to Bloomberg News.
Thailand's largest producer, Charoen Pokphand Foods, which also has production in the United States, China and Turkey, breeds its chickens in what are known here as ''closed environment'' farms that offer higher health and sanitary standards. However, it also purchases chickens under contracts it has with smaller producers and some of them grow the birds in open-air farms, which are more vulnerable to the spread of bird flu.
The government has said that 90 to 95 percent of the infected birds have come from the open farms. The Thai government has also pledged to compensate individual farmers, but there have been complaints that the amounts offered were too small.
The executive vice president of the Charoen Pokphand Group, Sarasin Viraphol, said that the company's closed farm system allowed for ''an optimal environment that would be safer for the animals.''
Mr. Sarasin said he did not know how many of the company's chickens had been culled. The largest cullings came on small-scale farms that were under contract to the company, he said.
