The Senate is seeking to return life to normal on Thursday by starting to reopen office buildings shut down after the discovery of the deadly poison ricin this week. Congressional leaders said Wednesday that extensive searches had so far turned up no new evidence of ricin and that none of the staff members exposed to the poison on Monday had become ill.
''Everybody is doing great,'' Senator Bill Frist said of staff aides who worked near his mailroom, where the ricin was discovered. ''We're outside the window where one would expect to see any symptoms at all.''
Dr. Frist, the majority leader, said that the Russell Senate Office Building would reopen at noon on Thursday, followed by the Hart building on Friday morning. The Dirksen building, where the toxin was found, will remain closed until Monday.
Investigators expanded their search after finding nothing suspicious in a barrel into which a contaminated letter-opening machine and a nearby stack of opened envelopes were sealed after the ricin was found.
Law enforcement officials said they still had no idea how the poison arrived in the building and had no suspects in the case.
''There's been no 'smoking letter' information that helps tie this thing together,'' Chief Terrance Gainer of the Capitol Police said.
Postal investigators said the absence of a letter or specific information about how the ricin had been delivered to Dr. Frist's office was an impediment to the investigation.
''We need to find out if there's a letter to tie it in with,'' said Daniel L. Mihalko, a spokesman for the Postal Inspection Service, which investigates crimes involving the mail. ''Without a piece of evidence like that, it's kind of tough to move forward.''
With little evidence to go on, law enforcement officials remained focused on two ricin letters that were discovered last fall. One was found an airport mail office in Greenville, S.C., and another, with a Chattanooga, Tenn., postmark, was intercepted on its intended route to the White House.
Those letters contained ricin sealed in a small metal vial, officials said. No such vial has been recovered from Dr. Frist's office. Chief Gainer said that federal agencies had so far found no obvious link between the cases.
That White House incident became public only on Tuesday after the ricin was found in the Senate. One Democratic lawmaker criticized the Bush administration for not making the earlier incident more widely known.
''If it is true that the White House received a letter with ricin in it and did not formally notify other potential victims or targets of such terrorism such as postal workers, mail handlers, or the U.S. Congress, I believe they made a serious mistake,'' the lawmaker, Representative Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts and a member of the Homeland Security Committee, said.
The White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, said appropriate federal officials were consulted at the time. ''If there is a public health threat, we share that information,'' Mr. McClellan said. ''The letter was deemed by public health officials not to be a public health threat.''
After a few anxious hours this week that were reminiscent of the anthrax attacks of 2001, members of the Senate tried Wednesday to buckle down to business. But it was a struggle, with most of their staff members at home or working in borrowed space and most of their documents locked up in the shuttered offices.
The Senate took over hearing rooms in the House buildings to hold sessions with cabinet officials, making the trek across the Capitol complex by underground tunnels and car.
The lawmakers expressed their thanks to the House for playing host to them. At least one senator was particularly taken with his borrowed quarters in the House Armed Services Committee room.
''I am not sure what the precedents are for the Senate Armed Services Committee commandeering the other body's chamber, but nevertheless, sitting up here I feel somewhat like a bishop,'' the senator, John W. Warner of Virginia and chairman of the Senate panel, said. ''Very impressive setting.''
Senators with enough seniority were working in their private offices in the Capitol, which remained open, but things were cramped. ''It is just hard to get things done with five people sitting in a very small room,'' said Senator Bob Graham, Democrat of Florida.
Chief Gainer said as many as 500 workers were sweeping through the Senate office buildings, gathering and inspecting unopened mail.
Dr. Frist told senators on Wednesday that they could go to their personal offices and retrieve essential documents. ''Mail should not be touched,'' he added.
Though a suspect envelope has not been identified, Dr. Frist told reporters that he assumed the ricin had arrived through the mail. And he said that a postal facility in Washington that handles Senate mail had been tested for ricin but that all those tests had come back negative. ''There has been no leakage in the postal system,'' he said.
John Osterloh, a ricin expert and chief medical officer in the National Center for Environmental Health at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, said the ricin in the South Carolina letter appeared to be clumpy and unlikely to have been aerosolized. The ricin found in Dr. Frist's office was also described as clumpy by law enforcement officials.
Dr. Osterloh said that inhaling or injecting ricin, which can be made from common castor beans, was far more dangerous than ingesting it.
Although little research has been conducted involving humans, extrapolations from animal tests showed a thousandfold difference between the amount of ricin needed to kill a human by injection or inhalation and the amount required to kill through ingestion, explaining why government officials were worried about whether the ricin found in Dr. Frist's office had become airborne. He also said it would take a concerted effort to purify ricin enough to aerosolize it. ''You can't just mash up a few beans and extract out the ricin,'' he said.
