Gen. Wesley K. Clark lit into two of his Democratic rivals on Wednesday, saying Senators John Kerry and John Edwards had voted for several Bush administration initiatives only to turn around and criticize them in the presidential campaign.
''I don't think people understand in this country how politicians in Washington can say one thing and do something else,'' General Clark said, sharpening his line of attack a day after claiming a narrow victory in the Oklahoma primary. He edged out Mr. Edwards by about 1,300 votes.
Making Tennessee, which votes on Tuesday, his next and most significant battleground, General Clark planned a new $180,000 advertising purchase in the state, bringing his total spending on commercials here to $1 million since November, aides said. He was also putting up commercials in Virginia and Wisconsin.
But to help finance the commercials, about 250 campaign staff members agreed to forgo a week's salary, Jamal Simmons, a spokesman for the campaign, said.
Eli Segal, chairman of the Clark campaign, said the campaign was grappling with an unexpected drop in fund-raising immediately after General Clark's distant third-place finish in the New Hampshire primary last week. But Mr. Segal said the campaign took in $100,000 from the time the polls closed in Oklahoma on Tuesday through noon Wednesday.
General Clark's aides insisted he could yet emerge as the party's nominee despite Mr. Kerry's continued dominance of the race.
Chris Lehane, a senior strategist, said that come March 2, the biggest round of primaries this year, ''we want to be still standing as a very competitive candidate.''
In a sign of the importance he is placing on Tennessee, General Clark plans to campaign lightly, if at all, in the three states that vote this weekend -- Washington, Michigan and Maine -- and he does not yet have much time scheduled in Virginia, which also votes on Tuesday.
Soon after he entered the race for the Democratic nomination last fall, General Clark criticized his rival candidates for attacking their fellow party members. But at campaign stops in Memphis, Jackson and here at the Catfish Place restaurant, General Clark issued a critique of his rivals that was pointed and harsh.
''You take education,'' he said. ''We know we've got problems in education, and we've got a lot of people in this race who are criticizing No Child Left Behind. My opponents in this race, John Kerry and John Edwards, both voted for it.
''Or take the issue of civil liberties,'' he continued. ''People are worried about the Patriot Act and what it does, and a lot of people are criticizing it. John Edwards and John Kerry both voted for it.''
But General Clark wrongly accused Mr. Edwards of voting for the Bush tax cut. In fact, he voted against the bill on May 23, 2001. Matt Bennett, a campaign spokesman, said General Clark was referring to a budget resolution that served as ''the framework for the bill.''
Aides said the general hoped in the next few days to present himself as an alternative to Mr. Kerry who can win in the South. But with Mr. Edwards, who won South Carolina Tuesday and came in a close second to Mr. Clark in Oklahoma, making the same claim, he tried to separate himself from from Mr. Edwards by portraying himself as the true outsider in the race.
On a bus tour of western Tennessee, General Clark emphasized his Southern roots. ''I can't tell you how many times I've driven through Jackson, Tenn.,'' he said, introducing himself at a rally at a tractor dealership. ''From the time I was a kid all the way through, it seemed like I always saw that Jackson sign, and we stopped here a lot to eat and get gas in the car and all that.''
General Clark also adjusted his pitch on some issues.
''Well, I'm against abortion,'' he said in response to a question from a voter at the Catfish Place, hard by the highway in the hills of West Tennessee. ''But there is a law of the land that comes from the Supreme Court, and that law is called Roe v. Wade. And I support the Supreme Court. I have to support the law.''
Last month, when General Clark spoke to a Planned Parenthood forum in New Hampshire on the anniversary of the Roe decision, he said: ''I want to thank Planned Parenthood for all that you do every day to protect the right to choose.'' He added, ''These are your values. They are my values. And they are the values I defended for 34 years in the United States Army.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE GENERAL
