A CERTAIN brass table has been very patient.
Maybe it tossed me an accusing look every so often over the years, as I skipped by without polishing it yet again.
Possibly, after I moved it outside to the front porch, it started muttering under its breath during the rainy season.
But I had to give it credit for loyalty. Year after year, as the shine faded and the tarnish built up, the table never whined about how much better its previous existence had been when it lived in my in-laws' living room.
The table's fortitude finally paid off. While re-arranging the living room for the four millionth time, I recently had a vision of furniture placement. The fantasy called for a highly ornate antique brass table, a table whose gleaming patina could be attributed to generations of loving care.
At the time, I recall thinking: how hard could it be to polish metal? After all, as a deep believer in specialized cleaning products, I have a closet full of secret weapons to keep every other surface in line all the time.
For instance, for years I've used Polycare on the floors (after it disappeared from local stores, I started to order 20-ounce bottles of concentrate from www.harvesterfloors.com for $9 apiece). Other favorites include Jubilee Aerosol Kitchen Wax and Cleaner for wood cabinets ($5.06 for a 9-ounce aerosol can at scjohnson.com). Bellinzoni MultiClean Marble and Granite Cleaner removes fingerprints and smudges from honed granite countertops ($17.50 for a one-liter bottle of concentrate at stoneboss.biz; call one of the toll-free numbers at the Web site to order). And Nambe polish is essential for shining my aluminum-alloy Nambe serving platter (the polish is widely available online for about $9.50 for a 2-ounce tube; last week I ordered some from marshallfields.com).
This brings me to the main problem with ordering cleaning products online: shipping costs. If you order only a single bottle or tube, the shipping charges might exceed the actual cost of the item.
Bulk orders are the solution. Lestoil, for instance, is a wonder cleaner that removes grease spots from clothing -- just apply a dab directly to the spot before laundering. But since its parent company, Clorox, considers it a ''regional product'' unworthy of nationwide distribution in stores, the most cost-effective way for me to obtain it since moving to California is by the case, eight bottles for $40.58 from instawares.com. Although my last order was a single bottle, we're a greasy family, so my next will indeed be for a case -- bring on the grease spots.
But as I surveyed my stash of cleaners in preparation for tackling the table, I felt a twinge of uncertainty.
Rummaging in the closet behind the Butcher's Wax and the Hosiery Mate, I found a bottle of something that seemed, by label, applicable. So I squirted Mr. Metal onto a clean soft cloth, followed the directions and then wiped away the liquid. I was prepared to face shiny metal.
Instead, an impermeable layer of dark crust, scaly as an alligator's hide, still covered the table.
Faced with a surface that people have been polishing successfully since well before the ancient Romans marched off to battle in gleaming brass helmets, I wasn't about to concede defeat.
Day Two was the day of Brasso, a cleaner obtained from a local hardware store. An hour of polishing with the aid of a toothbrush liberated a dime-sized area of brass.
By then I knew I needed help. But did I need a stronger cleaner? Some top-secret mail-order-only tarnish fighter? Perhaps an abrasive brush? Or a new table?
Accusing, I looked at the table.
Stoically it held its ground.
Day Three: I went online for guidance, where I was instantly gratified to find sites like finishing.com and misterfix-it.com, which dispensed exactly the sort of brass-cleaning advice I sought. Posted suggestions ran the gamut from Wenol (''a metal polishing compound made in Germany'') to Horolene (''used by clock restorers'') to Nev'r Dull (''the magic wadding compound'').
Even more intriguing was the suggestion that certain common household items like ketchup, lemon juice, vinegar and salt would be just as effective. So I warmed a mixture of equal parts vinegar and salt in the microwave, and then scrubbed with a fresh toothbrush. After an hour, large portions of scrollwork were shiny.
But my celebration was premature. Within hours, a faint green tarnish had crept back. By now, my fingers were red and scratched from polishing the sharper, pointier edges of the old table. My lungs were burning from Brasso. My eyes were watering from vinegar. And the table -- well, the table sat patiently.
The situation led me to ponder some of life's big questions. For instance, what exactly was tarnish? And what chemical ingredient might most effectively remove it?
''Ammonia,'' said Ken Geremia, a spokesman for the Copper Development Association, a trade group that represents the copper and brass industries.
Mr. Geremia, who once spent the better part of a weekend working on a 1920's-era brass floor lamp that no one had polished for 80 years, gave me a quick lesson in the finer points of tarnish.
''It's a self-protective layer of oxidation that protects the metal underneath from further corrosion,'' he explained. ''To clean it off, you want to corrode that top layer of the metal surface, but then to stop the corrosion process after the tarnish is removed.''
Mr. Geremia said that anything that's corrosive to metal, from the citric acid of lemons to the ammonia in many cleaners, will remove tarnish. But then, he added, it is necessary to neutralize the cleaner to prevent the tarnish from reappearing.
''What do you use?'' I asked.
''Very honestly? I've always come back to Twinkle,'' he said, citing a metal cleaner widely available in supermarkets. ''But for the really hard stuff, like that floor lamp, I found a company called Gillespie that makes a brass restorer.''
Gillespie. The name sounded like music.
Mr. Geremia said it was a three-step process, with the first consisting of a cleaning paste. ''Then there's a clear liquid that halts the continuing process of attacking the metal,'' he said. ''And finally a lacquer finish you can use, if you choose to. But be cautious with it and use in a well-ventilated area because it has ammonia in it.''
Day Four: I found the Gillespie Brass Refurbisher Kit online at candhsupplyco.com, where the three-step process (''refurbisher, neutralizer and protector'') cost $16.30 plus a whopping $8 for shipping. I ordered it immediately.
When I told the table it would have to wait a few more days, it took the news pretty well. At this point, it's relieved just to be in out of the rain.
ONLINE SHOPPER E-mail: Slatalla@nytimes.com
