Douglas Faneuil, the former stockbroker's assistant who is the pivotal witness in the Martha Stewart trial, described an elaborate cover-up yesterday that began soon after he tipped Ms. Stewart over the telephone to sell her shares of ImClone Systems.
It started, he said, with a claim that she made the trade to balance profits from other stock sales. That was soon substituted, Mr. Faneuil said, with another explanation: that she sold because of an existing agreement to do so if the share price fell below $60.
His testimony buttressed the government's argument that the two defendants -- Ms. Stewart and her former stockbroker, Peter E. Baconovic -- concocted the $60-a-share story for Ms. Stewart's trade. It could be the most damaging testimony for both Ms. Stewart, who watched in silence, and for Mr. Bacanovic. Both are being tried on charges that include conspiracy and obstruction of justice. Mr. Bacanovic is also charged with making false documents, perjury and false statements. Ms. Stewart is charged with false statements and securities fraud.
The sale of 3,928 ImClone shares on the afternoon of Dec. 27, 2001, took place one day before ImClone announced disappointing news about its major drug, which sent the share price into a downward spiral.
In Federal District Court in Manhattan, Mr. Faneuil also described what it was like to go along with what he said was a lie, receiving perks like a free dinner and extra vacation time from Merrill Lynch supervisors, until he finally decided, in June 2002, to tell the truth.
A harsh cross-examination by a lawyer for Mr. Bacanovic did little to balance the day for the defense. At one point, the lawyer, David Apfel, asked Mr. Faneuil if he had taken acting lessons before appearing in court, and Mr. Faneuil responded, ''No, absolutely not.'' And Mr. Apfel dug at Mr. Faneuil's participation in the cover-up.
Mr. Faneuil had a ready answer, telling the lawyer, ''It did not sound kosher,'' referring to the tip he gave Ms. Stewart. However, he added, ''I never dreamed Peter would tell me to do anything criminal.''
Defense lawyers are seeking to taint Mr. Faneuil as a liar and also as a drug user whose account of the events leading to the ImClone trade may not be reliable, in part because he has a cooperation agreement with the government and faces sentencing for his guilty plea to a misdemeanor charge. In a hearing without the jury present, Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum listened to arguments about whether Mr. Faneuil could be questioned about his drug use, which included marijuana and Ecstasy, during the period that he worked at Merrill Lynch. She ruled that the defense could ask some questions about it. Mr. Faneuil told the jury emphatically that he had never used drugs during the day and had smoked marijuana about once a month.
During Mr. Faneuil's testimony, the jury seemed spellbound as he described conversations with his boss, government officials and Ms. Stewart herself, from the cubicles of Merrill Lynch to the glossy interior of the Dean &amp; DeLuca at Rockefeller Center. He appeared boyishly earnest as he tried to explain his shifting accounts to investigators.
''I felt the cover-up was part of my daily existence, and I just couldn't take it anymore,'' he said.
He also portrayed Mr. Bacanovic as a man enchanted with Ms. Stewart, one of his biggest clients. At one point, he told the jury, Mr. Bacanovic pulled out a copy of a photograph from a Martha Stewart magazine published in 2000, in which he was part of a group seated around a long table, everyone in pink or blue bathrobes. ''Isn't it great?'' Mr. Faneuil quoted him as saying.
On Tuesday, Mr. Faneuil testified that on the day of the trade Mr. Bacanovic told him to expect a call from Ms. Stewart and that he should tell her that members of the Waksal family, major shareowners of ImClone, were selling their stock. Yesterday he elaborated on that call, saying Ms. Stewart's first question was, ''What's going on with Sam?''
She was referring to Samuel D. Waksal, then the chief executive of ImClone, who was also her close friend. Mr. Faneuil told her, ''We have no news about the company, but we thought you might like to act on the information that Sam is selling all his shares.'' Ms. Stewart replied, ''All his shares?'' according to Mr. Faneuil. He told her he did not think every share Dr. Waksal owned was held in a Merrill account, but that the executive was trying to sell everything that was there. Then, Ms. Stewart asked about the trading price, and declared, ''I want to sell all of my shares,'' according to Mr. Faneuil. The price was $58.4325 a share, according to a document the government introduced as evidence.
When he offered to send an e-mail message to her assistant, Ann Armstrong, he said, Ms. Stewart reacted strongly. ''She got extremely upset,'' he told the court. ''She said, 'Absolutely not, you have no right to tell Ann Armstrong about my personal transactions,''' he said. So he wound up sending the message to Ms. Stewart's personal e-mail address.
He got the address from Mr. Bacanovic, whom he called soon after the trade went through. ''He said, 'Did you call?' I said yes,'' Mr. Faneuil told the court. ''He said, 'What did you tell her?' I said, 'I told her Sam was trying to sell.' He said, 'Did she sell?' I said yes.''
Four days later, people at Merrill were starting to ask about the ImClone trade, Mr. Faneuil testified. So he called Mr. Bacanovic. ''Peter said it was tax-loss selling, the reason for Martha's sale was tax-loss selling,'' Mr. Faneuil said, imitating Mr. Bacanovic's voice.
An objection from Robert G. Morvillo, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, saying he didn't like ''the acting,'' earned the lawyer a rebuke from the judge.
Mr. Faneuil said he tried to discuss the trade with Mr. Bacanovic, but could not get a word in: ''He just kept saying it was tax-loss selling. He wouldn't let me speak at all. Finally, there was silence. And he said, 'O.K.?' I said, O.K.''
Judge Cedarbaum asked him to explain why the trade was not tax-loss selling. Mr. Faneuil replied: ''Tax-loss selling is a carefully executed plan that has to be followed carefully. It would never be a last-minute, impulsive thing, and furthermore, it resulted in a gain.''
He also told of receiving a telephone call a few days later from Ms. Stewart's business manager, Heidi DeLuca, who demanded to know ''what the hell is going on with this ImClone trade?'' He quoted her as saying: ''It completely screwed up our tax-loss selling. We had everything down to zero. She wasn't going to have to pay taxes.''
The story was soon changed, however, by Mr. Bacanovic, who was in Florida, according to Mr. Faneuil. Over the phone, the broker said to him, ''The reason for Martha's trade was, we came up with a stop-loss order,'' to sell at $60. ''He just continued to repeat it, and made me feel I couldn't say anything.''
Asked if there had been any mention of a stop-loss order on Ms. Stewart's shares before then, Mr. Faneuil replied, ''It was the first time ever.''
When Mr. Bacanovic returned to New York in early January 2002, he invited Mr. Faneuil out to Dean &amp; DeLuca, near their office building. Mr. Faneuil said he tried to bring up Ms. Stewart's stock trade, but Mr. Bacanovic stopped him.
''I told him, I was there, I was on the phone, I know what happened,'' Mr. Faneuil said. ''He put his hand on my shoulder, and said, 'With all due respect, no, you don't.''' By then, both had been interviewed by investigators for the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Mr. Faneuil was growing concerned, he said.
''Don't worry,'' he said Mr. Bacanovic told him. ''I've got everything under control.''
