In a presentation that was high in lofty ambitions but short on important details, officials unveiled four options yesterday for a rail link to connect Lower Manhattan to Kennedy Airport and Long Island.
The release of the proposals at the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation, coupled with the declaration that a final design would be picked in April, may help catapult the commuter rail, once seen as a pipe dream of a few powerful downtown landlords, to near the top of a long list of proposed transportation megaprojects for the region that are competing for money and attention.
But few details were shared yesterday about how much the project would cost and how it would be paid for. Officials said they would address the financing issue when the final design is selected.
''We think we can do all the projects we're talking about,'' Peter S. Kalikow, chairman of the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, said yesterday.
Mr. Kalikow said the authority was prepared to make a ''significant contribution'' from its next capital plan, scheduled for 2005 to 2009. Others, however, wondered how the authority could afford it while also pursuing its two main priorities: connecting the Long Island Rail Road to Grand Central Terminal and building a Second Avenue subway.
''It's not at all clear where the next capital plan is coming from, how much it's going to be,'' said Andrew B. Albert, a nonvoting member of the transportation authority board and president of the Transit Riders Council, a group that represents passengers. ''And there's a lot of big, important projects in the hopper right now.'' Many, he added, would serve far more riders than the airport link.
Politicians have suggested various ways to pay for the project, including using money left over from the $4.55 billion in federal aid set aside for transportation needs after 9/11 and raiding the coffers of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey.
Deputy Mayor Daniel L. Doctoroff mentioned yesterday that as part of its new lease agreement with the city for Kennedy and La Guardia Airports, the Port Authority had promised to put up $560 million toward a downtown airport access project.
In each proposal, trains would run from the AirTrain station in Jamaica, Queens, along existing L.I.R.R. tracks. But they differ in how they would get under the East River. The first option, undoubtedly the most expensive, is to dig a new tunnel.Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg first suggested this possibility last year, citing a $4 billion price tag, but officials said yesterday that more study was needed to determine an accurate figure.
A second option is one promoted soon after 9/11 by the Downtown Alliance and Brookfield Financial Properties, downtown's biggest landlord. It involves appropriating the Cranberry Street tunnel used by the A and C subway lines, but it would require rerouting the C line to the F line tunnel, a prospect that has upset commuter groups. Brookfield quoted a $1.9 billion cost at the time.
A third option would be to use the Montague Street tunnel that now serves the M, N and R subway lines.
The final option is to use both the Cranberry and Montague Street tunnels, borrowing one for commuter service from Long Island and the other for service from Kennedy.
