American Ballet Theater, one of the country's leading dance companies, has returned to its cash-poor days of a decade ago, when it was on the verge of declaring bankruptcy.
Ballet Theater's cash reserves dropped by more than $3 million -- to $3.4 million from $6.5 million -- in the last fiscal year, which ended in July, according to an audited financial statement recently released to its trustees. And a more recent financial report compiled by the company for the four months that ended on Nov. 30 showed an operating deficit of $3.8 million.
People with knowledge of the company's finances say this fiscal erosion has made it difficult for the company to pay vendors and meet payroll. To cover operating losses Ballet Theater recently borrowed $500,000 from two board members, Edward A. Fox and Konrad R. Kruger, both of whom have since been reimbursed, the company said.
In December Ballet Theater also refinanced its New York headquarters, at 890 Broadway, borrowing an additional $1.5 million to create a new mortgage of $2.4 million. The company has set up additional lines of credit worth $1 million, said the troupe's chairman, Lewis Ranieri, an investment banker.
Mr. Ranieri acknowledged that he would like the cash flow ''to be higher.'' But he said coffers had been depleted because the company had been spending more on initiatives like marketing, additional performance weeks, education programs and union-mandated pay increases for dancers. Since Mr. Ranieri became chairman in August 2002, the troupe's operating budget has increased to $35 million, from $29.5 million.
Mr. Ranieri said he was not concerned about being able to pay bills. ''We're in good shape,'' he said, echoing statements that he and other Ballet Theater executives made last year. ''Sometimes we have a lot of cash on hand, and sometimes it ebbs and you have to watch it.''
Many of the city's cultural organizations have had financial ups and downs, and every arts group suffered a decline in ticket sales and contributions after the terrorist attacks of September 2001. But Ballet Theater has come under severe criticism from two former board members, who have alleged mismanagement.
Douglas Burack, a partner at Lutz &amp; Carr, which conducted the audit, said that the drop in cash in the last fiscal year would be made up in the current fiscal year by donations that have been pledged.
''Just the fact that cash is down is not an indication of how an organization is doing,'' Mr. Burack said.
Kelly Ryan, a spokeswoman for Ballet Theater, said recent new gifts included $150,000 from Countrywide Mortgage, $50,000 from Saks Fifth Avenue for the costume fund and $25,000 from Sara Lee. Ballet Theater's total income in the last fiscal year, mainly from ticket sales and donations, increased to $35 million from $33 million. Tickets sales increased to $14.1 million from $13.8 million, and donations rose to $18 million from $17 million, according to the audit, a copy of which was provided to The New York Times by a person connected to the company who is concerned about its financial condition. The $3.4 million cash total includes endowment funds, money that cannot be used for operating expenses, though the interest from it can be spent.
Gedalio Grinberg, the previous chairman, said the company could not sustain such losses. ''This business is cash,'' said Mr. Grinberg, who is also chairman of the Movado Watch Company. ''If you don't have cash to make the next payroll, you are in big trouble.'' Mr. Grinberg said Ballet Theater had refused to give him a copy of the audit when he requested it.
''Three million dollars has been squandered,'' he said on Monday. ''Where did the money go?''
In November Mr. Grinberg ended Movado's longtime sponsorship of Ballet Theater, saying the troupe's finances were being mismanaged. In June he resigned from the board to protest its ouster that month of Lewis P. Geyser, another longtime trustee who has frequently criticized the company's management.
Ballet Theater was near death in the early 1990's. Michael M. Kaiser, who came in as executive director in 1995 and is now president of the Kennedy Center, brought Ballet Theater back to financial health. In 2001 the company started struggling again. An expensive new production of ''Sleeping Beauty'' was canceled, cash reserves dropped by half, and nearly three-quarters of the staff quit, citing the mercurial personality of the executive director, Louis G. Spisto, who eventually resigned under pressure. The company has been through three executive directors in three years.
Mr. Geyser said this week that Mr. Ranieri and other officers of the dance troupe ''have overseen the cannibalizing of the very financial being of American Ballet Theater.''
''They have done it with the full cooperation and approval of the members of the executive committee,'' Mr. Geyser said, ''and the tacit acceptance of the rest of the board.''
In a letter sent on Monday to Mr. Geyser with a copy to Mr. Grinberg, Theodore O. Rogers Jr., a lawyer for Ballet Theater, said the two men had been responsible for ''a series of actions that appear malicious, spiteful and intended improperly to interfere with ABT's continued operations.''
A former Ballet Theater trustee has complained about the company's fiscal mismanagement to the New York attorney general's office. Eliot Spitzer, the attorney general, confirmed that he had received the complaint but said it was not public.
Mr. Ranieri said he was told by the attorney general's office that it was only gathering information in response to a complaint and that an investigation was not under way. ''We sent them the information they asked for, and that's all we've ever heard,'' he said.
John L. Warden, chairman of the troupe's audit committee, said on Tuesday that he and his 57 fellow board members were not worried about being able to sustain the company's new expenses. ''Whatever has been added can always be cut,'' he said. ''We haven't promised to continue increasing performance weeks indefinitely into the future. We haven't promised to continue our education programs indefinitely into the future. We'd like to do all those things, but if we can't, we'll have to pare back.''
Mr. Grinberg also accused Ballet Theater of trying to conceal its true financial condition by altering the format of the financial statement. ''This statement was changed to hide something, because the other statement showed too much,'' he said. ''The intention is not to give you the full picture.''
Mr. Burack said the format was changed to save paper and make it easier to read. ''Not all the detail from 2002 is presented,'' he added. ''Otherwise we'd be cutting down a lot more trees.''
Ballet Theater is Mr. Ranieri's first experience in arts administration. He helped develop the American market for mortgage-backed securities at Salomon Brothers in the 1980's, later built his own investment firm, Hyperion Partners, and he recently became lead director at Computer Associates, a large software company.
At Ballet Theater Mr. Ranieri has adopted a management style that is unusual for the chairman of a nonprofit arts organization. He has acted as executive director since the last one resigned in June. Mr. Ranieri said the board was close to naming someone to that post.
In addition to the annual giving that is typical for trustees, Mr. Ranieri has underwritten some of Ballet Theater's basic operating expenses. He paid $500,000 to add a week to the company's usual two-week fall season at City Center, he paid $850,000 to increase the company's marketing budget for the spring season at the Metropolitan Opera last year, and he said he would spend about $1 million on marketing the spring season this year.
''It will be another legendary great year, and yes, it will require funding from me,'' he said.
Mr. Ranieri has also added several high-paying positions -- including an adviser's job for the former star dancer Susan Jaffe, whose $125,000 salary he underwrites -- and paid for various one-time costs for the dancers, like tickets for their families to attend performances at City Center.
''We had to move this place out of its lethargy, what was happening to the costumes and the scenery and what was happening to the physical premises,'' he said. ''You have to spend the money to get the money.''
Editors' Note:  March 16, 2004, Tuesday  An article in The Arts on Feb. 5 described the financial situation of the American Ballet Theater, reporting that the company had ''returned to its cash-poor days of a decade ago.'' The article described a drop in cash reserves to $3.4 million at the end of the last fiscal year, in July, from $6.5 million. The article also cited a financial statement ended Nov. 30, 2003, four months into the company's new fiscal year, showing an operating deficit of $3.8 million.
The article quoted Ballet Theater officials defending the financial condition of the company and describing the ebb and flow of cash on hand. But The Times should also have given them a chance to comment on the operating deficit. They say that in the same financial statement, the auditors adjusted the figure to show what they considered a more realistic one -- $1.34 million -- given seasonal adjustments. The officials add that by the end of the calendar year, one month later, the auditors put the amount at $600,000.
