AT the Maison &amp; Objet home furnishings fair near Paris last week, the focus was on simplified elegance. Luxurious materials and familiar forms were evident, but with a contemporary twist -- including lamps accented with a single crystal and a Louis XVI-style chair with glass legs. If the show had a slogan, it would be ''familiarity breeds comfort.''
Compared with last year, when riotous color reigned, this year's palette was noticeably subtle and feminine, with the tone dialed down for quiet and reassurance in response to anxious times. The one exception was the conspicuous use of orange. To Americans, orange may suggest cheap plastic, but to the French it is the color of the Hermès gift box and high-quality leather goods.
The number of American buyers jumped 18 percent from the fair held a year ago despite the increased value of the euro against the dollar, said Étienne Cochet, director of the fair, suggesting that Maison &amp; Objet, now in its ninth year, has become an important source of design ideas and products. Many of the goods on display will land in stores in the United States over the coming months, and a selection of the styles will eventually make their way into the mass market in the form of knockoffs. At each fair, to help guide buyers through a maze of some 2,900 vendors, the organizers invite trend forecasters and editors to be the curators of exhibits presenting their style predictions for the coming year. Below are some of their picks, and mine.
Americans may think their primary-colored slipcovers will last a few more years. But Vincent Grégoire (below) in his exhibit, ''Secret Codes,'' predicted that warmer colors, like copper, amber and honey, will appear with black and white in a sophisticated palette for the home. Mr. Grégoire is a director at Nelly Rodi, a trend forecasting agency in Paris.
1. Mr. Grégoire said he expects archetypal furniture to come back, but with a modern spin. For example, the show included Héloïse, a new chair in an old country style with a back upholstered in a Pierre Frey Beauregard cotton; the fabric is available, to the trade only, at Pierre Frey's showroom at Donghia, 979 Third Avenue (59th Street), (212) 935-3713.
2. Similarly, an old African stool acted as a perch for a new glass and iron vase by Vanessa Mitrani, a French designer; $235 at Forty Five Ten in Dallas, (214) 559-4510.
For refuge, white linens and indigo.
FRANÇOIS BERNARD, the artistic director of Croisements, a trend-forecasting agency in Paris, used his exhibit to showcase the pleasures of private spaces. He offered as an example an all-white bed, which he compared to ''clean white paper'' and described as a retreat from stress at the end of the day. He also favors indigo, ''more a material than a color,'' he said. Surrealism was a theme, not just here but throughout the fair.
1. White cotton bedding, by Paola Navone for Orizzonti, comes in sets ($273 in twin size, $306 for queen); from Dormire in Santa Monica, Calif., (310) 393-9288.
2. A frog-shaped crystal and iron lamp by Mathieu Lustrerie is $1,580 from Authentic Provence in West Palm Beach, Fla., (561) 805-9995 or www.authenticprovence.com.
3. A fruit bowl made of sugar was a custom design from Belle de Sucre.
4. An indigo coir rug, by G.T. Design, is six by eight feet and $310; www.coconutrug.com or Les Migrateurs, 188 Duane Street (Greenwich Street), (212) 966-8208.
Softening the mood with off-tones.
A PARIS trend forecaster, Elizabeth Leriche, sitting behind a curtain of fake pearls in her exhibit space, far right, said one thing to look for this spring is home furnishings with a feminine personality. Pastels and muted colors like mauve, olive, brown and lavender, mixed with silver and crystal, create ''private, intimate moments,'' she said.
1. Iksel's Normandy wallpaper, inspired by a pattern on the 1930's ocean liner Normandy, comes in 22-by-68-inch panels, $300 each; in custom colors and sizes from www.iksel.com.
2. A shiny table lamp with a single crystal teardrop, by Mathieu Lustrerie, is $2,720 from Authentic Provence in West Palm Beach, Fla., www .authenticprovence.com or (561) 805-9995.
3. A large lacquered vase in a seashell shape was made in Vietnam and colored a soft celadon green. It will be available, along with other lacquered pieces, including furniture, at the Wetter boutique when it opens at Barneys New York in the spring.
4. Gold-glazed teacups come in a set of six, each a different shape and each saucer a different floral pattern. They are by Pol's Potten. A set is $95 from Lekker in Boston, (617) 542-6464 or www.lekkerhome.com.
Using old materials in new ways.
IN a hall called Now, dedicated to modern design, Chantal Hamaide, the editor of the French design magazine Intramuros, created an exhibit called ''Draft,'' with objects that underscored the importance and ''lightness'' of air in design. She showed an old accordion, fans, kites and chairs with laser-cut holes, along with a concept piece, shown behind her, that began as a wooden kitchen chair and was transformed into an oversize club chair by Matali Crasset, using an inflatable cover. Ms. Hamaide also showed the use of old materials in new ways.
1. An oven mitt, made of clear textured silicone for Mil An's Design, will be $45 at Moss, 146 Greene Street (Houston Street), (866) 888-6677 or www.mossonline.com .
2. The Flare table by Marcel Wanders for Magis, has transparent plastic legs lined with patterned paper, which can be changed to fit the décor. The top comes in two sizes, 63 by 31 inches ($686) or three feet square ($574) and can be ordered from Moss.
3. The K-Bench, which extends to almost 10 feet, is made of white polypropylene and closes like an accordion. It is by Charles Kaisin, a Brussels designer; about $2,050 from Vange Designs, www.vange.be.
PERSONAL SHOPPER
