Much is known about the final hours of Mark Fisher's life -- where he was and who was with him.
In the nearly four months since Mr. Fisher's shooting death, investigators have carefully traced his last steps on Oct. 12 from several Manhattan bars to the Brooklyn house party where he fell asleep in a den, curled in a blanket. Most of the partygoers were gone by the time someone shot Mr. Fisher, 19, a Connecticut college student, and dumped his body two blocks away, before sunrise, on a road of stately homes.
But four young people who remained at the house near the time Mr. Fisher left and was killed are not talking, the police said yesterday. Shielded by their lawyers, they have driven the investigation to a near halt, galling investigators and eliciting angry accusations between the parents of Mr. Fisher and the partygoers, whom the police described as a tight-knit coterie from the Prospect Park South neighborhood where the murder occurred.
In a chess-like maneuver, the Police Department held a news conference yesterday on Stratford Road, steps from the pillared three-story house where Mr. Fisher was last seen alive. Frustrated and desperate for resolution, the dead man's parents stepped forward to point fingers.
''I don't understand how people can keep their kids quiet and hide behind lawyers,'' said Michael Fisher, Mark Fisher's father, his eyes downcast as he spoke into a microphone on the eerily quiet corner where his son's wallet was found in a gutter days after the shooting. ''The only thing I know is that my son Mark died after coming to this house. You don't shoot someone with five bullets at the spur of the moment. Someone wanted him dead.''
Michael and Nancy Fisher had traveled from Byram Township, N.J., in Sussex County, to attend the news conference, which police officials said was aimed at drumming up new leads and sending a strong message to the four people who have been uncooperative. There is a $30,000 reward for information leading to an arrest, $10,000 of which will come from the Police Department and $20,000 of which has been collected by Mr. Fisher's family and friends.
''It is our belief that the people who were present in that house have more information than they've come forward with, and we would of course urge them to do so,'' said Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, who was not at the news conference.
The police did not identify the uncooperative partygoers, but Mr. Fisher's parents named two people during the news conference: a young woman and a man who were with Mr. Fisher that night, and who accompanied him to the party at Stratford Road. The woman was a classmate of Mr. Fisher's at Fairfield University, Mrs. Fisher said. The woman's father, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, called Michael Fisher's comments ''a complete falsehood'' and said his daughter has fully cooperated with prosecutors and detectives.
After a night of bar-hopping on the Upper East Side with a group of friends, investigators believe, Mr. Fisher left the Bar Harbour, at First Avenue and 77th Street in Manhattan, at 2 a.m. with a new group of people and went for pizza. Around 3 a.m., he tried to call some of the friends he had left behind, but could not reach them, the police said.
Then a friend told Mr. Fisher about the Stratford Avenue party in Brooklyn, and suggested he spend the night there and return home to Fairfield in the morning, the police said. Mr. Fisher arrived at the house around 4 a.m. and then left to withdraw money from an A.T.M.
About 20 minutes later, he returned, lay down on a couch in the den of the house and fell asleep, witnesses told the police. At that point, there were nine people at the party, the police said: Five of them left before 6 a.m., while Mr. Fisher was still alive, and have been cooperating with investigators.
The four other people remained at the house. At some point between 6 and about 6:40 a.m., Mr. Fisher ended up inside a white S.U.V., the police said. Investigators now believe that he was shot twice inside the car with a .22-caliber gun, and then a few times more after his body, wrapped in a yellow blanket, was dumped on the street at 150 Argyle Road. Neighbors heard the gunshots and a car speeding away, the police said.
Police officials at the news conference said that investigators do not believe there was an altercation at the party or that the motive for the shooting was robbery: they believe Mr. Fisher's wallet was thrown in the gutter to prevent the police from identifying him quickly. They do not know the motive for the murder, the police said.
No one answered the door at the house on Stratford Road yesterday afternoon. The aluminum blinds were closed in the windows.
The four people the police say have been uncooperative spoke at first to investigators, but then stopped granting interviews after they hired lawyers, law enforcement officials said.
Yesterday was not the first time Mr. Fisher's parents had visited the Brooklyn neighborhood where their son was killed, Mrs. Fisher said. But never was the trip this public.
Mr. Fisher pleaded for people to come forward with more information.
''If it was my kids, I'd tell them to tell the truth and cooperate,'' he said at the news conference. ''This has taken away half of my life. I'll never be the same without him.''
