Following are excerpts from a 4-to-3 opinion by the Massachusetts Supreme Court yesterday that the state must allow gay marriage, not just civil unions, to comply with its earlier ruling in Goodridge vs. Department of Public Health:
In Goodridge the court was asked to consider the constitutional question ''whether the commonwealth may use its formidable regulatory authority to bar same-sex couples from civil marriage.'' The court has answered the question.
We have now been asked to render an advisory opinion on Senate No. 2175, which creates a new legal status, ''civil union,'' that is purportedly equal to ''marriage,'' yet separate from it. The constitutional difficulty of the proposed civil union bill is evident in its stated purpose to ''preserve the traditional, historic nature and meaning of the institution of civil marriage.''
Preserving the institution of civil marriage is of course a legislative priority of the highest order, and one to which the justices accord the General Court the greatest deference. We recognize the efforts of the Senate to draft a bill in conformity with the Goodridge opinion. Yet the bill, as we read it, does nothing to ''preserve'' the civil marriage law, only its constitutional infirmity.
This is not a matter of social policy but of constitutional interpretation. As the court concluded in Goodridge, the traditional, historic nature and meaning of civil marriage in Massachusetts is as a wholly secular and dynamic legal institution, the governmental aim of which is to encourage stable adult relationships for the good of the individual and of the community, especially its children. The very nature and purpose of civil marriage, the court concluded, renders unconstitutional any attempt to ban all same-sex couples, as same-sex couples, from entering into civil marriage.
The same defects of rationality evident in the marriage ban considered in Goodridge are evident in, if not exaggerated by, Senate No. 2175. Segregating same-sex unions from opposite-sex unions cannot possibly be held rationally to advance or ''preserve'' what we stated in Goodridge were the commonwealth's legitimate interests in procreation, child rearing and the conservation of resources. Because the proposed law by its express terms forbids same-sex couples entry into civil marriage, it continues to relegate same-sex couples to a different status. The holding in Goodridge, by which we are bound, is that group classifications based on unsupportable distinctions, such as that embodied in the proposed bill, are invalid under the Massachusetts Constitution. The history of our nation has demonstrated that separate is seldom, if ever, equal. . . .
The bill's absolute prohibition of the use of the word ''marriage'' by ''spouses'' who are the same sex is more than semantic. The dissimilitude between the terms ''civil marriage'' and ''civil union'' is not innocuous; it is a considered choice of language that reflects a demonstrable assigning of same-sex, largely homosexual, couples to second-class status. . . .
We are well aware that current federal law prohibits recognition by the federal government of the validity of same-sex marriages legally entered into in any state and that it permits other states to refuse to recognize the validity of such marriages. The argument in the separate opinion that, apart from the legal process, society will still accord a lesser status to those marriages is irrelevant. Courts define what is constitutionally permissible, and the Massachusetts Constitution does not permit this type of labeling.
That there may remain personal residual prejudice against same-sex couples is a proposition all too familiar to other disadvantaged groups. That such prejudice exists is not a reason to insist on less than the Constitution requires. We do not abrogate the fullest measure of protection to which residents of the commonwealth are entitled under the Massachusetts Constitution. Indeed, we would do a grave disservice to every Massachusetts resident, and to our constitutional duty to interpret the law, to conclude that the strong protection of individual rights guaranteed by the Massachusetts Constitution should not be available to their fullest extent in the commonwealth because those rights may not be acknowledged elsewhere. We do not resolve, nor would we attempt to, the consequences of our holding in other jurisdictions. But, as the court held in Goodridge, under our federal system of dual sovereignty, and subject to the minimum requirements of the Fourteenth Amendment to the United States Constitution, ''each state is free to address difficult issues of individual liberty in the manner its own Constitution demands.
