WHILE architecture and design aficionados debate the merits of the latest Frank Gehry museum or the value of Michael Graves products at Target, Peter Marino, an architect and interior designer, is completing a four-story, 22,000-square-foot boutique for Louis Vuitton this week on Fifth Avenue at 57th Street, one of the most conspicuous corners in the world. And he has started work on the penthouse in the south tower of the Time Warner Center at Columbus Circle, for which David Martinez, the Mexican-born, London-based financier paid $45 million, the most expensive purchase of residential real estate in Manhattan.
Mr. Marino, 55, is not a household name unless you are Alain Wertheimer, the chairman of Chanel S.A., for whom Mr. Marino is building a tower in Japan; or Bernard Arnault, the chairman of LVMH Moët Hennessy Louis Vuitton; or Stephen Schwarzman, the financier, who bought a 34-room, $30 million apartment at 740 Park Avenue, which Mr. Marino designed.
In 26 years of business, Mr. Marino, who now has offices in New York, East Hampton, Philadelphia, Santa Barbara and Paris, has also designed an apartment in Milan and a Madison Avenue boutique for Giorgio Armani, and a private yacht for Valentino. Mr. Marino's first commission, in the 1970's, was from Andy Warhol -- a renovation of his town house on East 66th Street.
For Mr. Martinez, a billionaire with homes designed by Mr. Marino in London and at the Metropolitan Tower in New York, Mr. Marino is creating a seascape of rare blue stone in the 12,000-square-foot parallelogram of an apartment on the top of the Time Warner Center.
''You're surrounded by sky,'' Mr. Marino said last week, standing beside a model of the apartment. ''And we found this amazing stone in Norway that I never saw before. I wanted something different. It felt to me like the clouds, like water, like great movement.''
The two-story apartment is built like a house inside the glass box of the building. It has a shiplike stone-clad interior prow that sails into a sea of glass-enclosed double-height space toward the exterior walls of the tower's south edge. The prow's sharp crest will cut ''like a knife,'' Mr. Marino said, adding that it would have ''the force of an ocean'' going forward.
An ocean of money, certainly. In the last several months, Mr. Marino's office has swept through modernist antiques galleries like Maison Gerard and Doris Leslie Blau, asking for pictures of inventory.
For Louis Vuitton on Fifth Avenue, which will open on Feb. 12, Mr. Marino created a four-story column of L.E.D. panels in a checkerboard pattern that changes colors and that recalls the classic damier design of the leather used on Vuitton steamer trunks. A staircase of blackened bronze and chestnut-wood wraps the column as it climbs to the top. Four large balconies, suspended at different levels, intersect the store like streets in a city of the future, where traffic is airborne and stacked vertically, not on the ground. Jun Aoki, a Japanese architect, designed the store's facade.
Mr. Marino, personally, is a puzzle of many pieces -- ex-Warhol party boy, autocrat, successful designer and businessman, civic patron, bodybuilder, well-liked society arriviste and family man. He is married to Jane Trapnell Marino, a costume designer who worked on the costumes for the television shows ''Kate and Allie'' and ''Beverly Hills 90210.'' They have a daughter, Isabel, who is 12.
''I can't figure Peter out,'' noted Warhol in his diary in 1977, when Mr. Marino was 28. ''He's nutty. I told him how he owed his whole life and architecture career to us -- how we gave him his first job -- took him out of his business knickers and gave him his long pants, and he said that well now he was in Armani suits and that we sure didn't put him in those.''
With work for many of the international luxury goods brands under his belt, Mr. Marino -- whose retail experience began with Barneys New York in 1984, when the Pressman family, who founded the business, repositioned it as a high-fashion label -- is widely credited with proving the theory that architectural design can be a strong component of a shopper's identification with a brand.
''Now we have Rem Koolhaas designing a Prada store; we have very serious Kazuyo Sejima doing Dior,'' Mr. Marino said. ''I was there at the beginning.'' He slipped into an imitation of Giorgio Armani.
''I want the boutique like my clothes, and I want it seemple,'' he said.
On Madison Avenue, Armani's trademark minimalism is also Mr. Marino's. For Chanel's tower in Japan, he has proposed a building that takes Coco Chanel's signature black and white tweed and explodes it into three dimensions.
In conversation, Mr. Marino has an entourage of styles of speech and facial gestures that give the lively impression that you're in a group. He can also swear like a sailor.
''Did Peter start changing his accent when he spoke?'' asked Gene Pressman, who worked with Mr. Marino on Barneys New York, when called. Mr. Pressman characterized him as ''an interesting chameleon.'' He said of Mr. Marino: ''As his clients elevated, so did he.''
Lawrence Lovett, chairman of Venetian Heritage, a preservation group, spoke from Venice of Mr. Marino's well-practiced social sparkle. (You learn quickly that you will most likely be calling Europe, the Caribbean and beyond to speak with Mr. Marino's friends and clients.)
''Peter's a very amusing fellow,'' Mr. Lovett said. Mr. Marino designed Mr. Lovett's apartment in an 11th-century palazzo on the Grand Canal. ''It's very cozy and opulent -- one of the most popular houses to come to in Venice,'' Mr. Lovett said. ''I'm told that he's been difficult to work with, but he listened to me.'' He added, ''He's pretty expensive.''
Sitting in his office on the 36th floor of the Architect and Design building at 150 East 58th Street, Mr. Marino, dressed in a black skintight cap-sleeve T-shirt and black pants, said that he wore only ''Slimane'' now, referring to Hedi Slimane, the designer for Dior Homme. His arms are the size of legs, the result of a workout regime with several trainers that he began when he turned 50. He can bench-press 200 pounds, he said. He stands 5 feet 8 inches tall, has a 28-inch waist and weighs 185 pounds. Most of it is on top. Born in New York, Mr. Marino was a gymnast at Francis Lewis High School in Fresh Meadows, Queens. He also won a city-sponsored gold medal in art, and considered being a painter. He graduated with a bachelor's degree in architecture from Cornell University, working initially for Skidmore, Owings &amp; Merrill and for George Nelson and Associates in New York.
Visitors to Mr. Marino's office wait in a reception area beneath four Warhol silk-screen paintings of an electric chair.
Asked if a gift for diplomacy contributed to his ability to garner and satisfy a glittering roster of clients and their supersize egos, in the worlds of fashion and finance, Mr. Marino, who seems to guard against surprise, burst out laughing.
''I don't think any of my clients would describe me as a diplomat, but that was a nice thought,'' he said, smiling with a kind of sage glee. ''That was a kind and caring thought. Hold on to it.''
Aileen Mehle, better known as Suzy, the Women's Wear Daily columnist, who is an old and close friend of Mr. Marino's, and who reports frequently on the kingly entertainments at the Marinos' palatial apartment on East 57th Street, had the same reaction when told the story.
''He's a little bit mischievous,'' she said, after an uncensored burst of laughter. ''My dealings are always social. He's cheery, thank God. I'm not around people like that all the time.''
Ms. Mehle hasn't seen his arms.
''It's black tie at Peter's,'' she said. ''I always see him in a dinner jacket.''
The Marinos' living room has a raised stage at one end, for musical evenings, which last year included a performance by Aprile Millo, the Metropolitan Opera soprano, on the occasion of the Marinos' 20th wedding anniversary. Mr. Marino is also the chairman of Young Concert Artists, a nonprofit organization that helps young musicians.
Professionally, Mr. Marino has a reputation for being a tyrant, and his office has a reputation for being a revolving door. People who have worked for him or who work for him now agree with all of the above. Peter Marino &amp; Associates Architects has more than 110 employees.
''I liken it to a military operation,'' said Joshua V. Davis, the president of Ascher Davis Architects in New York, who worked with Mr. Marino in 1996 and 1997. ''If you're lucky enough to get into Marino's office, you soak it up, you do what you do and get out. It was very much a revolving door. When I left, after not even a year, I was . . . not an old-timer, but. . . .'' Mr. Davis said it was the ''demand level, not the stress level'' that became untenable, and behavior on Mr. Marino's part that ''wasn't terribly pleasant.''
But, Mr. Davis acknowledged, Mr. Marino asked of others only what he asked of himself.
''I remember being with him in the elevator, heading to the office,'' he recalled of a morning. ''I had a bagel -- Marino sketched out details on my paper bag.''
Barry Winick, an associate with the company who is based in Santa Barbara and who has worked for Mr. Marino's office for 14 years, said without reservation, ''It's a great place to work.''
Contractors like Christopher A. Clark, president of Clark Construction, which built Mr. Martinez's apartment in the Metropolitan Tower, expressed admiration for Mr. Marino, if not his clients.
''He has the most remarkable historical knowledge of his trade; he's a 10-story library of facts,'' Mr. Clark said of Mr. Marino. But, he added, ''It was a difficult job, with an aggressive schedule. Clients who buy high-end New York real estate expect things that are not realistic.'' Mr. Clark's partner, John Houshmand, said that they declined the Time Warner apartment because the client was ''too difficult to work with.''
Mr. Clark said: ''We both agreed to move on.''
Yes, Mr. Marino is also expensive. He enjoys rich materials, and people pay him to use them. There are thousands of square feet of gilding, including 24-karat gold leaf at $65 a square foot, in the Barneys New York store on Madison Avenue, said Michael Kramer, president of the Gilders' Studio in Maryland, which produced the work.
Vera Wang, the wedding-dress designer and a friend of Mr. Marino's, said, ''I haven't been able to afford to be a client yet. I'm a client-in-waiting.'' Ms. Wang, who called Mr. Marino a ''soul mate,'' added, ''It's the same 50 Forbes 400 people we all want to dress, or build homes for, or corporate -- whatever. You're dealing with very large egos. It takes fortitude -- talent is a given.''
Ms. Wang's daughter and the Marinos' daughter are in the same class at the Chapin School on the Upper East Side.
''They do PTA great,'' she said. ''We stare at each other and roll our eyes around. Peter works insanely hard. We're all really, really tired.''
At the Vuitton store on Monday, as workmen banged and scraped and bumped against the clock, small photographs of Jennifer Lopez sat at the corners of vast blank billboards on one towering wall, waiting to be enlarged. But, alas for J.Lo (it has been a bad year), who was the face of the fall 2003 campaign, it was a mock-up. The actual posters will be pictures of Kate, Naomi and Amber, the faces of spring 2004, which a Vuitton publicist at the site said would have an ''old supermodel'' theme.
''As my daughter would say, 'That's so 2 1/2 minutes ago,' '' Mr. Marino said of Ms. Lopez.
Mr. Marino understands the speed of instinct in an industry like fashion or finance, and its importance. It qualifies him as a designer, who can translate that physically. He also knows how to spin gold from straw.
''He's a total self-creation,'' Ms. Mehle said. ''Except his personality. Peter gets it -- I think that's why people like him.''
Though his posture can be defensive, Mr. Marino would never deny it.
''People are, oh, shocked,'' he said last week. Outside his office windows, Midtown burned bright in the twilight. ''My dad's house is still there on 52nd Street. Sometimes I go back -- that's where the Italians always lived, on Second Avenue. I used to make a joke: I started life on 52nd, I made it up to 57th in 50 years.''
Mr. Marino, who can be the concisest of paradoxes, loves New York, paradoxical itself.
''You're a billionaire -- you live in an apartment like everybody else,'' he said. ''Your elevator breaks, and the service there is smelly.''
''It's amazing,'' he said, flexing a huge grin.
