CBS still faces the most substantial fallout from Janet Jackson's breast-baring episode during its broadcast of the Super Bowl on Sunday night: a Federal Communications Commission investigation, with the possibility of of substantial fines to CBS stations.
CBS has already reacted by instituting a special tape delay for its coverage of the Grammy Awards on Sunday night, which could delay the live transmission by up to five minutes. The cable channel TNT announced yesterday that it would add a seven-second delay when it broadcasts the entertainment portion of the N.B.A. All-Star Game on Feb. 15.
But it is MTV, CBS's sister company within the Viacom Corporation, that has been forced to deal with the brunt of the criticism of the halftime show's content. The F.C.C. reported receiving almost 200,000 complaints, many focused on the content of the entire halftime show.
Ms. Jackson has cleared all who were involved with the broadcast by saying she and her partner, Justin Timberlake, concocted the disrobing stunt on their own. But some critics argue that MTV stumbled into this brouhaha because it has blinders on about how mainstream its brand of programming is.
''What were they thinking?'' asked Jim Steyer, chief executive of a nonpartisan group called Common Sense Media, which provides advise to consumers about entertainment choices. He was not referring to the Jackson incident at the end of the halftime show, which also featured P. Diddy, Nelly and Kid Rock. He assailed MTV for many of the show's elements, including dancers simulating sex and Nelly repeatedly grabbing his crotch. Mr. Steyer and others said that MTV overstepped when it concluded that its regular fare would be acceptable to the huge audience that watches the Super Bowl.
MTV is coming off the best year in its 23-year history. Its viewership is up 20 percent in the last year, for an average audience of 1.2 million. It has been on a roll with its nonmusic programming, generating hits like ''The Osbournes'' and ''Newlyweds,'' while its long-running reality show ''Real World'' is enjoying its highest ratings.
For all these reasons MTV has been brimming with confidence about its dominant place in youth culture. Some critics would say the network is overconfident, because its average audience is much smaller than that of the average broadcast network. (CBS, for example, averages 13.7 million viewers.)
Robert Thompson, a professor of media and popular culture at Syracuse University, said that with its Super Bowl show, MTV had stepped into a target area for social critics who usually concentrate their protests on the broadcast networks.
''All those people looking to make a cause out of what they see as indecency in the media have just hit the mother lode,'' Mr. Thompson said. MTV's decision to display, on the biggest televised stage in the world, entertainment usually confined to cable was, he said, ''the equivalent of a 17-year-old inviting her mom to read her diary.''
MTV executives, while clearly embarrassed by the bodice-ripping seen round the world, stand by the rest of the show. ''We were victims of a lewd stunt,'' said Tom Freston, the chairman of MTV Networks. ''What happened was deplorable. But if not for the last two seconds, that show would have been seen as a great success.''
Mr. Freston defended the show as completely within the mainstream of contemporary entertainment. ''These were artists really down the middle of the youth culture.''
''The most dynamic force in pop music for the past two decades is hip-hop,'' he added. ''For anyone under 40 these songs have been heard everywhere, floating out of their cars, on the radio, and on all kinds of television shows.''
The singers that MTV enlisted for Sunday night are indisputably popular. According to Nielsen SoundScan, Ms. Jackson's most recent album, ''All For You,'' sold three million copies in 2001. ''Justified,'' Mr. Timberlake's current album, has sold 3.3 million copies; Kid Rock's ''Cocky'' has sold 4.2 million; and Nelly's most recent album, ''Nellyville,'' has sold six million.
It is unlikely that many of those albums were sold to the members of the N.F.L. hierarchy. But, worried about attracting younger viewers -- the audience most coveted by advertisers -- the league has changed its halftime shows over the last decade.
Mr. Freston emphasized that league officials had approved every artist and were at every rehearsal. Even so, he conceded, ''I felt the crotch-grabbing by Nelly went over the line.'' He said Nelly did not have that in his act during rehearsals.
MTV has strenuously avoided playing any parental role with its audience. Because it is a cable channel, MTV is not subject to the same F.C.C. regulatory scrutiny that CBS is.
Nonetheless MTV has content and language standards that it strictly enforces, Mr. Freston said. It asks artists to redo or edit videos and to change certain lyrics. The rap artist 50 Cent's ''Many Men,'' for example, was kept off MTV because he refused to make changes, as was Eminem's ''Superman.''
Still, Mr. Freston defended the songs chosen for the Super Bowl show, even Mr. Timberlake's, which includes lyrics about getting someone naked by the end of the song.
''Songs that have sexual content are a long tradition in music,'' Mr. Freston said, though he added, ''You could make the case that the lyrics are sharper or rawer now.'' Sexually suggestive dancing, he said, is seen frequently on TV and is part of contemporary choreography.
But in the aftermath of the Jackson unveiling, nobody expects to see another Super Bowl halftime filled with MTV-style musical acts. Yesterday the N.F.L. canceled an appearance by J. C. Chasez from Mr. Timberlake's band 'N Sync at its Pro Bowl on Sunday.
The Fox network, which will broadcast next year's Super Bowl, is already calculating how far to pull back. ''I told my people to start thinking about Andre Kostelanetz,'' said David Hill, the chairman of Fox Sports.
