Joe Girardi is so prepared for his life after baseball that he is starting it before he retires. The YES Network announced yesterday that Girardi would work more than 50 Yankees games this season. At the same time, the Yankees announced that Girardi would be active during spring training as a catcher.
''Either way, I'm going to be a part of the Yankees, and that was important to me,'' Girardi said on a conference call. ''I wanted to be a part of this organization when I was done playing. If things don't work out as a player, I'm still around. Hopefully, one day, I can do a lot with this organization.''
For Girardi, 39, those aspirations include managing. Girardi played for the Yankees from 1996 to 1999 and was a favorite of Manager Joe Torre. He has never made a secret of his desire to manage.
''I've always talked about managing ever since I've been playing,'' Girardi said. ''It's been something that has sparked my interest. It's just a matter of when. I think someday, I will try to give it a try.''
Girardi's chances of making the major league team probably depend on the status of last year's reserve catcher, John Flaherty. The Yankees were pleased with Flaherty and re-signed him to a one-year, $775,000 deal. If Flaherty stays healthy, he will almost certainly return as Jorge Posada's backup.
Girardi would then head to the broadcast booth, where he is scheduled to work more than 50 games as an analyst during, before and after games. He played for the Chicago Cubs from 2000 to 2002 and was limited to 16 games for the St. Louis Cardinals last season because of a herniated disk in his back.
Familiar Faces in Camp
Joe Girardi was one of 16 players the Yankees officially invited to spring training yesterday. One of Girardi's teammates on the Yankees' 1998 championship team, Homer Bush, is among them. Bush, a reserve infielder for the Yankees in 1997 and 1998, did not play last season after splitting 2002 between Toronto and Florida.
Others with major league experience include Donovan Osborne, a left-hander who pitched for Joe Torre with the Cardinals in the 1990's, infielder Felix Escalona, catcher Sal Fasano and the right-hander Jim Mann. The Yankees have also acknowledged signing infielder Tyler Houston and outfielder Darren Bragg.
The Yankees have not announced their trade for another third-base candidate, Mike Lamb. The Texas Rangers have agreed to send Lamb, who was designated for assignment, to the Yankees for the Class A pitcher Jose Garcia. Lamb is a .282 career hitter, but he hit just .132 for Texas last season after Hank Blalock, who emerged as an All-Star, took his job.
Lamb, 28, will join the Yankees' growing list of third basemen in the absence of Aaron Boone, who tore the anterior cruciate ligament in his left knee playing basketball on Jan. 16. Enrique Wilson, Erick Almonte, Miguel Cairo and Houston will also compete for the job. The Yankees may try to use the best defensive third baseman among those candidates until the market for a proven full-time player expands during the season.
Floyd Says He'll Be Healthy
Mets left fielder Cliff Floyd said yesterday that he expected to open spring training without any physical limitations. Floyd had surgery last Aug. 29 to remove a bone spur under his right Achilles' tendon.
''By the time six months comes up, I should be 100 percent,'' Floyd said on a conference call.
Floyd has been working out regularly at a Miami hotel and said that with spring training approaching, he would wear spikes today for the first time since the injury. Floyd said he had been doing yoga and pilates exercises in an effort to be less bulky.
He said he was looking forward to playing beside center fielder Mike Cameron this season. The Mets signed Cameron, a two-time Gold Glove winner, to a three-year contract as a free agent.
''He's an Andruw Jones type of guy out there in center field,'' Floyd said. ''You want to keep the ball away from him. When you hit the ball to him, you just run for the heck of it, because you know he's going to catch it.''
Mets and Erickson Agree
Scott Erickson and the Mets agreed on a minor-league contract yesterday, capping an exciting week for him.
Erickson celebrated his 36th birthday Monday. On Tuesday, he married Lisa Guerrero, the ''Monday Night Football'' sideline reporter.
Erickson has missed two of the past three seasons because of injuries. He was out in 2001 after having Tommy John surgery on his right elbow and was out last year after a shoulder operation.
He is expected to be ready for spring training. The Mets are hoping Erickson can compete for the fifth spot in the rotation, behind Al Leiter, Tom Glavine, Steve Trachsel and Jae Weong Seo. (AP)
BASEBALL: NOTEBOOK
