Studiously avoiding any mention of the scandals that have plagued his administration, Gov. John G. Rowland unveiled a spending plan Wednesday that seemed intended to please both parties, and earned a polite but cool reception from legislators.
Mr. Rowland sketched a hopeful portrait of the state's slowly recovering economy and promised to balance a $41 million budget deficit while avoiding both layoffs and cuts in state aid to cities and towns. He even offered new money and support for programs like drug sentencing reform and early education.
''For the first time in several years, I'm optimistic about our state budget,'' Mr. Rowland said, in his annual State of the State address.
But a number of legislators said they felt profoundly uncomfortable as they sat listening to Mr. Rowland, a Republican, who is facing the first impeachment inquiry of a sitting governor in state history.
Most of the lawmakers rose and clapped as he was introduced, and there were none of the rowdy protests that had been predicted.
But while Republican lawmakers gave the governor standing ovations at several points, there was often a cold silence on the Democratic side of the chamber. A number of legislators were absent, and at least two Democrats stayed away as a gesture of protest.
Although Democrats did not find a great deal to dislike in the governor's budget, many of them clearly viewed the speech as little more than an appeal for sympathy. Mr. Rowland punctuated his address by introducing three veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, four students from a New Haven public charter school and an elderly volunteer who works in the state's prisons. To some Democrats, that was a transparent effort to draw applause.
''It certainly was well orchestrated to elicit sympathy for other people which would hopefully be transferable to him,'' said Kevin B. Sullivan, the Senate president pro tem and a Democrat. ''Today was a magnum opus of introductions.''
It has been almost two months since Mr. Rowland first admitted he had lied about receiving free gifts and work on his private cottage in Litchfield. Since then, a number of officials have called on him to resign, including some of his fellow Republicans. A House committee was formed last week to decide whether to recommend his impeachment.
The closest Mr. Rowland came to addressing his own precarious position was at the end of the speech, when he said - in an ostensible reference to the state's economic recovery - ''Adversity can beat you down, or it can make you stronger.''
At that point, the governor's wife, Patricia Rowland, smiled for the first time during the speech.
For most of his 34-minute address, Mr. Rowland emphasized crowd-pleasing topics like providing aid to the families of soldiers killed in battle, providing new assistance to the state's smaller cities and an opposition to new casinos. He promised to avoid a possible $55 million cut in state aid to cities and towns.
He also included several items that could be seen as olive branches to Democrats, who control both houses of the legislature. He received a standing ovation when he promised to look at prison reform efforts that have been championed by Representative Bill Dyson, a Democrat, saying, ''it's time to put greater emphasis on substance abuse treatment and prisoner re-entry programs.'' He also promised new money to remove 750 people from a waiting list to get into group homes run by the state's Department of Mental Retardation, and he spoke of financing a transportation initiative proposed by House Speaker Moira K. Lyons.
Mr. Rowland is better placed to afford new spending than he was a year ago, when a huge budget deficit led to bitter struggle with legislators that lasted for months. The legislators agreed on a two-year budget, and Mr. Rowland now has the luxury of tinkering with that agreement rather than seeking a substantially new spending plan.
The speech also included some more controversial items. Although the governor said he would not raise any income or business taxes, he proposed to raise cigarette taxes to $2.05 from $1.51 per pack, which would tie Connecticut with New Jersey for the highest rate. He also proposed increased taxes on chewing tobacco and alcoholic beverages.
Lawmakers from both parties expressed doubt about the idea.
''I don't think those taxes are going to go anywhere,'' Ms. Lyons said. ''I don't think my caucus is going to support them, and the Republicans say they aren't going to support any taxes.''
She and other leading Democrats also said they would oppose another item in the budget: a school voucher program for 500 students in low-performing schools that would cost the state $1.5 million.
To many, the budget proposals were overshadowed by the anxious drama of the governor's appearance in a house full of angry and skeptical lawmakers.
''I really wasn't sure how it was going to be, and I was nervous,'' said Senator Judith Freeman, one of 11 Republican senators who has called on the governor to resign. But she added, ''It was a good speech - a little bit of everything.''
