The letter was brief and to the point.
''I'm a fleet owner of a tanker company,'' it said. ''I have access to castor pulp,'' a reference to the raw material to make the deadly compound ricin. ''If my demand is dismissed, I am capable of making Ricin.''
The note, attached to a metal vial containing the powder and addressed to the Transportation Department, was dropped off in October at a mail-sorting office at Greenville-Spartanburg International Airport. A similar letter appeared in November at a mail-processing center that serves the White House. Both notes were signed ''Fallen Angel,'' law enforcement officials said.
As investigators explore possible links between the parcels and the presence of ricin in a Senate mailroom, trucking executives and the drivers who haul the nation's goods wondered whether one of their own might have used bioterrorism to publicize opposition to trucking rules that took effect last month. The regulations, which aim to reduce accidents by reducing how long drivers can stay on the road, have roiled the industry, which is already reeling from a recessionary drop in freight and higher fuel costs.
The president of the South Carolina Trucking Association, Rick Todd, said if the person responsible for the ricin contamination was a trucker ''it is certainly awful for the image of our industry, especially for the millions of hard-working truck drivers across America.''
''It's hard to imagine anyone could be this upset about these changes,'' Mr. Todd said.
Among the road-rattled drivers who were filling their fuel tanks at a truck stop near here, passions ran high, especially among independents, drivers who own their rigs and who say the regulations lead to longer hours and less money.
''This guy must be a kook, but at least folks are going to listen to what he's saying,'' said Joe Thompson, who has been driving his 18-wheeler for 10 years. ''The feds are killing us with their bureaucracy.''
After the letter was found here, Daniel Somerson, an advocate for owner-operators whose homemade Web site criticizes the rules, said F.B.I. agents had interviewed him and his wife. A spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in Columbia, Tom O'Neill, would not comment on the investigation but said agents were looking into the possibility that a disgruntled trucker was responsible for the parcels.
Federal transportation officials say the rules, which took effect on Jan. 4 and have a 60-day grace period, would save 75 lives and prevent 1,300 fatigue-related accidents a year by establishing a routine for truck drivers that they say more closely mirrors natural work and sleep rhythms.
Officials say the changes are the most far-reaching for the industry in 65 years, reducing daily driving time, to 10 hours from 11.
The most contentious change involves calculating workdays. Drivers can be on duty only for 14 hours a day, meaning that if a driver spends 6 hours awaiting goods at a factory, a delay that truckers say is not uncommon, the driver can stay on the road for just 8 more hours.
Time spent stopped for fueling, napping or eating is not counted as rest time. Some drivers say that keeps them behind the wheel for longer uninterrupted periods. In some cases, drivers say, the rules make them drive faster.
''We've got to get the same work done in less time, and that makes the job more stressful,'' said Bob Williams, a ''tanker yanker,'' a hauler of hazardous chemicals. ''Listen, we're adults, and we know when it's time to rest. If we didn't, we'd be in a graveyard already.''
Coming on the tail of higher fuel costs and a three-year recession in the industry, trucking companies and owner-operators say the rules will lead to higher costs, which will ultimately be passed on to consumers.
''This is not good for the economy,'' Mr. Williams said at the counter of the Travel Centers of America truck stop as other truckers nodded assent. ''The government just threw this in our lap. Understandably, we're not very happy.''
Not everyone is displeased over the new rules, especially those that mandate a 10-hour break after every 14 hours. Fleet drivers who receive steady salaries or hourly wages are the biggest winners. But for owner-operators who are paid by the mile, less driving time means less money and more time away from home.
''These new regs are going to put us under,'' said Rodney Snyder, a driver for 14 years. ''I'm thinking of getting out of the business.''
