A DECADE ago, the prevailing wisdom was that cities grow, sprawling ever wider. As the world population hit six billion, experts warned of explosive overcrowding in the megacities of the developing world. Shrinking cities were considered an anomaly, the result of isolated economic upheaval or traumatic political events. ''Smart growth'' became a rallying cry.
In fact, while city dwellers make up nearly half the world's population, new research by the United Nations and other demographers has shown that for every two cities that are growing, three are shrinking. Some cities that were bustling centers of commerce just a generation ago have become modern-day Pompeiis. Cities that have lost more than a third of their population include St. Louis, Phnom Penh and Johannesburg.
The shrinking city syndrome is leaving planners and city officials with, among other things, the challenge of preserving and reusing buildings with architectural and cultural interest.
In Manchester, England, where the population has fallen by 48 percent since 1931, dress patterns still hang on the walls of derelict textile mills. And in the former East Germany, which experienced a mass exodus after the Berlin Wall fell in 1989, dozens of midsize cities have shrunk, forcing those left behind to grapple with job losses, empty schools and a falling tax base.
The problem is so acute that a group of researchers based in Berlin is holding an international competition to address it. The competition, which aims to find fresh approaches to dealing with population loss in urban areas, is sponsored by a $3 million research project, Shrinking Cities (www.shrinkingcities.com), financed in large part by the German government.
''Even though the development in Germany is quite shocking, it is not the first or only place that this kind of crisis is taking place,'' said Philipp Oswalt, the project director.
More than 450 cities with populations above 100,000 have lost 10 percent or more of their populations since 1950, including 59 in the United States alone, the project found.
It has enlisted teams of architects, artists, journalists and others to study four regions in particular that have hemorrhaged people and jobs: Manchester and Liverpool; Ivanovo, Russia, a state-sponsored manufacturing center in the days of the Soviet Union; the Detroit metropolitan area; and the Halle-Leipzig area of what was East Germany. Their research will culminate in Berlin in September with an exhibition of 10 proposed projects from each area.
''The classic urban planning tools don't work,'' Mr. Oswalt said.
Traditionally, urban planners advise bulldozing eroded neighborhoods and starting from scratch, he said. Now some of the same sites that were singled out for ''slum clearance'' in the 1960's are undergoing a second round of urban renewal.
Efforts in the 1990's to spur economic growth have also failed, Mr. Oswalt said. Entire streets -- along with sidewalks, lights and sewerage and electricity lines -- were plopped into the Halle-Leipzig region, for instance, after the reunification of Germany led to a 14 to 30 percent drop in population in the cities there. Planners assumed that if enough was invested in infrastructure, private investment would follow. Instead the result was a series of ''illuminated meadows,'' as they are known in Germany.
Every city, of course, is different. But research by Shrinking Cities has revealed that planned development is often counterproductive. And buildings left vacant often lend themselves to curious and unexpected uses that can trigger development at the grass-roots level.
Manchester failed to perk up in the 1960's despite investments in new building projects. Then, in the 80's and 90's, musicians flowed in, attracted by rock-bottom rents. The ''Mad-chester'' music scene spawned not only homespun record labels and illegal raves, but also new condominiums, bars and businesses in the city center.
In order to prepare for the Commonwealth Games in 2002, Manchester decided to ''brand'' many abandoned and run-down buildings rather than demolish or renovate them. Shrouded with positive slogans, the buildings helped put a positive spin on Manchester's shifting landscape.
In Detroit, churches now occupy a number of abandoned bank buildings, and the Michigan Theater, once a lavish jazz-era movie palace, has become a private parking garage (complete with velvet curtains).
''Planners, developers and some architects see these wastelands and they say, Let's just make it a tabula rasa. Let's just knock it down and start again,'' said Dan Dubowitz, an architect in Glasgow. ''They don't think imaginatively about how culturally rich these structures can be.''
Mr. Dubowitz has spent 12 years documenting discarded spaces in Europe and New York and now works with planners to redevelop them. ''There's a lot that goes on while these places are decaying that make them very important to the life of the city,'' he said. ''So something quite negative happens when you come along and erase these sites.''
The challenge, he and others say, is to overcome the fear many associate with abandoned spaces.
''We have to think about shrinking cities in more than just a negative way,'' said Dan Pitera, director of the Detroit Collaborative Design Center, a community-building architectural practice at the University of Detroit Mercy.
Mr. Pitera, who is one of the curators from Detroit participating in the Shrinking Cities project, said that he and a team of other architects and researchers estimate that Detroit loses people at the rate of 1.7 every hour. Even the dead are leaving: suburbanites exhume up to three graves a day to move loved ones out of the city, Mr. Pitera said.
Rather than ''filling in the gaps'' or recreating a city in an image of its past, Mr. Pitera said, Detroit should infuse new life in discarded spaces, erasing the ghosts without erasing the buildings themselves.
Working with community groups, the Detroit Collaborative Design Center has, for example, converted wrecked houses into temporary art installations. In a similar project, an artist, Tyree Guyton, helped turn dilapidated houses on one block into polka-dot found-art sculptures, and they are now a tourist destination.
''We need to define density as something other than just buildings and structures,'' Mr. Pitera said. Detroit may never grow back to its former glory, he continued, but that doesn't mean it can't be a vibrant city. ''We need to start tapping into the creative, spontaneous solutions that are already happening in these cities and turn them into strategies,'' he said.
In other words, smart growth in reverse.
