DEUS EX: INVISIBLE WAR -- Developed by Ion Storm and published by Eidos for Windows 95 and later and the Xbox; $50; for ages 17 and older.
MAX PAYNE 2: THE FALL OF MAX PAYNE -- Developed by Remedy Entertainment and published by Rockstar Games for the Xbox, PlayStation 2 and Windows 98 and later; $50; for ages 17 and older.
VIDEO game players must occasionally make moral choices, choosing actions that will identify them as good or bad people. In Ion Storm's action/role-playing hybrid science fiction game Deus Ex: Invisible War, however, the choices are not between bad and good but among different flavors of bad. No matter which decisions you make, there will be no one to judge you heroic or villainous.
Invisible War begins 20 years after the original Deus Ex, which ended when the player made one of three choices. Your choice, whichever it was, precipitated a period of financial chaos known as the Collapse. Most of the world is now controlled by the capitalistic World Trade Organization, whose main opposition, the Order, preaches a return to spirituality. The divisions between these two groups are heightened when a terrorist using a nanotechnology device destroys Chicago.
The game's protagonist is Alex D., a trainee in covert operations who can be biologically modified for various purposes. (The player's initial decisions are whether Alex should be male or female, white or black.)
After the academy where Alex lives is overrun by hostile forces, she (I like female action heroes) escapes and finds herself caught in a major power struggle between the W.T.O. and the Order. Both groups ask for Alex's help, yet neither completely deserves it. The W.T.O. has created a rigidly controlled world divided into haves and have-nots; holograms of a Britney Spears-like pop star, ostensibly there to allow fans to communicate with her, are actually part of the government's surveillance system. The Order is riven by internal strife between its merely ruthless members and its ruthless, psychotic members. Other factions, equally distasteful, will approach you later, each with its own deeply unsatisfactory vision for the world.
I played mercenary style, accepting assignments from both the Order and the W.T.O. when they didn't conflict. Both sides complained, but neither stopped seeking my support.
Invisible War, which aims to adapt itself to your preferred style of game play, allows you to operate as a heavily armed killing machine, a melee fighter, a stealthy pacifist or any combination. The game neither rewards nor punishes you for your choice. Your game style will affect your choice of skill enhancements; you will find yourself choosing between computer-hacking skills and short-term invisibility, or between health regeneration and X-ray vision.
At first I played the game as though it were a first-person shooter. After a few episodes of rushing through a building leaving bodies in my wake only to discover a secret unguarded path to the same destination, I started playing a stealth game instead, although sometimes I would kill everyone in a level just to scope out the area before replaying the level stealthily.
Invisible War is a wildly ambitious game, a serious attempt to shape the video game into something far grander and more complex than it has been until now. It is largely successful. The story, which is filled with compelling details and takes several ingenious twists, has many clever ideas. Enemies sometimes throw down their weapons, raise their hands and surrender. Guards do something I have always wanted guards in a game to do: they say hello to one another in passing. And the option to replay the game with different missions and using different skills and approaches made it one of the few games I wished I had the time to play a second time.
Invisible War is so good that one feels an extra measure of frustration at the flaws that keep it from being perfect. The stealth elements are somewhat underdeveloped. The game's area maps are sometimes useless. A game of ideas, Invisible War lacks real feeling, and the characters with whom you interact rarely have even rudimentary personalities.
The game's artificial intelligence is also weak. Enemies rush you stupidly. Guards hear the slightest noise you make, yet they hear nothing if, while using your bot domination skill to control a robot, you accidentally run it into a wall or over a pile of boxes. When I used a device to scramble a robot's programming, causing it to attack its allies, they shouted incongruous comments like ''Hey!'' and ''Watch it!'' as they were shot.
Invisible War is a tremendous amount of fun, and even as I noted its weaknesses I was always caught up by its dark vision and intricate environment. The game has so many ideas that it can't help but seem unfinished, like a preliminary sketch for an ultimate Deus Ex game that will create a true living, breathing world. Although brilliant and absorbing, the game is not completely successful. Yet it does achieve a primary goal: it is entirely dissimilar to games like Remedy Entertainment's shooter Max Payne 2: The Fall of Max Payne.
If Invisible War wants every player to have a unique experience, Payne goes to equal pains to give everyone exactly the same experience. As the protagonist, the world-weary Max, wanders through a deserted, gangster-themed fun house called Noir York City, he describes a fun house as ''a linear sequence of scares,'' and the game flaunts this formula, funneling players through a series of exciting scenarios in which the developers have predicted their every move. The linear structure suits the game's narrative approach: fate has chosen Max's destiny, and all he can do is move toward an inevitable tragedy.
While sequels generally try to expand or alter the original formula, this Max Payne is almost indistinguishable from its predecessor.
Once again the film noir-influenced story unfolds as a graphic novel divided into chapters with titles like ''Waking Up From the American Dream.'' Once again, there are eerie dream sequences, ruthless gangsters, shady cops and a femme fatale. Once again you can slow time for brief periods, creating a beautiful cinematic slow-motion effect while gaining the ability to shoot bad guys before they can even lift their guns.
One of the few additions to the game is the power to recruit help. At one point you are assisted by a voluble, gun-toting alcoholic and by a prostitute who spends as much time deflecting the alcoholic's advances as she does shooting the bad guys.
It is an amusing addition, but one used so rarely that it feels more decorative than substantial, as though the game's developers knew that additional features were expected, but didn't have their hearts in developing them.
In the final analysis, Max Payne 2 is Max Payne with a more confusing story line, but that's enough to make it a thrilling ride.
Payne shares two traits with Invisible War. First, both are eager for you to see the finale, unlike games that ramp up the difficulty until only the most skilled player can win. Invisible War allows you to change the difficulty setting at any time, while Payne keeps track of how often you are shot and makes the game a little easier or harder accordingly. The developers spent a lot of time on their stories, and they want you to see what a good job they did.
In both games, the odds are stacked against you from the start. Max is a doomed character, riding a roller coaster while knowing that the track will run out.
Ultimately, Alex D. can only choose the dystopian society she feels will be the least unpleasant. In a way, Payne is the more optimistic game. In Max's world, those who choose to live in that twilight world between good and evil are doomed, but in Invisible War, we all are.
GAME THEORY E-mail: Herold@nytimes.com
