Often regarded as a social-protest artist but strongly focused on form and abstraction, Bill T. Jones is not an easy choreographer to fit in among postmodern dancers who emerged in the 1970's.
Rejecting the lead of the 1960's dance avant-garde, he has no dogma about what dance is or is not, refusing to be contained in a system. He shifts directions and themes, making people uncomfortable.
As Paul Robeson once said, ''You can knock on the door, but sometimes you have to break it down.''
''The Artificial Nigger,'' a short story by Flannery O'Connor that lends itself to multiple interpretations, is now the springboard for a multilayered major dance piece by Mr. Jones -- ''Reading, Mercy and the Artificial Nigger.''
That title is less provocative than the unpredictable treatment of narrative in the choreography.
At the opening of the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company on Tuesday night at the Brooklyn Academy of Music, the actress Susan Sarandon and Mr. Jones read a condensed version of the story onstage, thoroughly integrated with the dancers who did not so much illustrate the words as probe aspects of O'Connor's vivid imagery.
This New York premiere is immediately followed on the program by another new piece, ''Mercy 10 X 8 on a Circle,'' which distills the tale further into a pure movement version. There are no spoken words, but some choreography is repeated and refined from the first dance.
Both pieces are highly stimulating to mind and eye, often stunning in their visual imagery and, for all their formal polish, affecting in their emotional wallop.
There are times when Mr. Jones communicates a message directly: at the start of the evening, he poked his head out between the curtains and shouted, ''Don't forget to register to vote.''
Ostensibly, this exhortation had nothing to do with the program, which began with ''Chaconne,'' a new solo danced by Mr. Jones to Bach; it was followed by video clips from past pieces.
The Brooklyn engagement, through Saturday night, is part of a 20th anniversary celebration of the company founded by Mr. Jones and by Mr. Zane, who died in 1988.
Yet a reminder to vote may also remind all that the O'Connor story is set in the segregated South, where the right to vote was not taken for granted.
Much of its drama comes from its protagonist, Mr. Head, who finally realizes that as a rural poor white man he is as marginalized as the black people whom he hates so much. Intent on instilling his bigotry into his 10-year-old grandson, Nelson, who has never seen a black person until a trip to Atlanta, Mr. Head is constantly challenged on all levels by the boy. In a moment of fear he disowns his grandson. But when they see a plaster statue of a black boy, they seemingly identify with it, this ''artificial nigger,'' and reconcile.
O'Connor's story, with a subtext of redemption, is deceptively linear, but Mr. Jones parallels her literary structure with a fragmentary dance structure in ''Reading, Mercy and the Artificial Nigger.''
In a brilliant stroke he has the grandfather and Nelson personified not by one pair but by five pairs of dancers.
Moreover, the male characters are sometimes depicted by women and dancers of many races portray the whites. The two main characters are thus always changing as one pair supersedes another.
This device is an ingenious way of showing how the roles of the two characters in the story are often interchangeable: the moral teacher, ostensibly the grandfather, is the grandson by the end.
When Nelson is betrayed, the backdrop, designed by Bjorn Amelan, turns red, while Daniel Bernard Roumain's nicely insidious score includes several bangs on a drum. There is nothing like melodrama, no matter how abstract.
But along the way, the five pairs engage in different dances, variations on a theme of a relationship, going beyond a tale of race relations. When, at the end, two dancers sit back to back and the woman personifying the boy kneels with head to the floor, the poignancy of the moment is indisputable, and it keeps its echo when it is reproduced in ''Mercy 10 X 8 on a Circle.''
Here the music is Beethoven's ''32 Variations on an Original Theme in C Minor,'' played on the piano by Jed Distler. Just as the music does the maximum with restricted material, the choreography achieves the same.
Ms. Sarandon's characterization of each person was perfect, and Mr. Jones was no slouch as a reader.
The dancers, often bursting into concealed virtuosity, were more than fine, with a special nod to Shaneeka Harrell as a rightly defiant Nelson. The films included a touching prayer sung by Estella Jones, Mr. Jones's mother, who died last year. She was, it seemed, the implicit and loving subject of ''Chaconne,'' in which Mr. Jones danced against video images of himself.
DANCE REVIEW
