John E. Sununu took the political equivalent of a promotion last year when he joined the Senate after six years in the House. On Wednesday, though, he was back where he started.
With Senate office buildings shut for a second day for the inquiry on the the poison ricin in a mailroom in the Dirksen building, much of the Senate business was conducted in space that belongs to the House.
So when Mr. Sununu, a New Hampshire Republican, needed to attend a hearing of the Senate Governmental Affairs Committee, he hopped the Capitol subway to the Rayburn House Office Building.
Did he remember the way? ''Barely,'' he said as he stepped off the train. ''I followed the bread crumbs.''
It is an axiom at the Capitol that the 100 Senate members hold a loftier position than their House colleagues. Many House members spend considerable effort -- and money -- trying to make it into the Senate. So House members responded with a certain amusement at the thought of displaced senators' begging for space.
''It's kind of like the press; we've reached a mutual accommodation,'' said Representative Bill Thomas, the California Republican who as chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee lent his hearing room to Senator Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee and with whom Mr. Thomas has famously disagreed.
Senators, for their part, acted as if it were old home week. ''It's nice to be back,'' Senator Thomas R. Carper, the Delaware Democrat who was in the House 10 years, said as the Governmental Affairs Committee began a hearing on mail.
Beneath the lightheartedness, there was a sense of frustration, as lawmakers and aides coped without access to their offices and, more important, the documents stored there. The Senate majority leader, Bill Frist, praised his colleagues for their patience ''in uncertain times'' and reminded reporters that this was hardly the first attack on the Capitol. One such assault, of course, was the anthrax attacks in 2001, which many people here said prepared the Senate for the challenges this week.
''We would not have been able to do this two years ago,'' Michael Bopp, staff director for the Governmental Affairs Committee, said as the hearing started.
Mr. Bopp went on to explain that all the committee's papers were locked in the Dirksen Senate Office Building. But after the anthrax attacks, he said, Senate officials ordered that documents be filed on shared computer drives, so technical-support people could gain access to them from home in an emergency.
With electronic copies of the documents, Mr. Bopp said, the committee staff set up shop on Tuesday near the White House, in space borrowed from the Office of Personnel Management. They put together briefing books and background material.
As the hearing began, Mr. Bopp looked as though a burden had just been lifted. He was asked how he felt.
''Relieved,'' he said.
