In the closing seconds of the Knicks' stirring victory over the Indiana Pacers on Tuesday night at Madison Square Garden, Penny Hardaway delivered the final blow, a spinning jumper that banked in and set off a minor celebration.
In the Pacers' locker room afterward, Jermaine O'Neal said: ''We just have to have a long memory. They played very well. They celebrated like they won a championship, though. We'll remember that.''
On Wednesday, the Knicks dismissed the comment more easily than they had beaten the Pacers.
''Jermaine O'Neal hasn't won any championships,'' Stephon Marbury said. ''If that was Shaquille O'Neal saying that, it's one thing. But he hasn't won one championship. He hasn't won one playoff series playing in Indiana yet, so for us, we felt like we were making strides. I would rather us feel like how we felt last night than to act like we didn't do something. They're a really good team, and beating a really good team and going where we came from, you know, we're making really big steps.''
The Knicks moved four games away from .500 at 23-27, second in the Atlantic Division and seventh in the Eastern Conference. What O'Neal may not have grasped is that while the Knicks were well aware that this was not a championship game, victories of this sort have been so sparse that it excited the crowd and the team.
It wasn't just that the Knicks won, it was how they did it. Rather than relying solely on Marbury or Keith Van Horn, the Knicks received clutch performances from Kurt Thomas, Michael Doleac and most of all Hardaway.
It would be difficult to blame Hardaway, 32, for being excited about a moment that raised memories of the player he once was.
''I think that's immaturity on his part,'' Hardaway said of O'Neal and his comments. ''Anybody can celebrate the way that they want to. You don't know how much it meant to players, the organization or to anybody. You can't worry about it. If you lose the game, you say, 'They outplayed us,' and move on. You can't be saying, 'We'll remember,' because this is a league where anything can happen at any given time.''
Hardaway's play since the Jan. 5 deal that brought him to New York with Marbury has been a revelation for the Knicks.
After a string of operations on his knees left Hardaway a shadow of the athletic player he once was, he emerged healthy this season in Phoenix. But an inconsistent and uncertain role left him frustrated, and a contract that will pay him $30.3 million over the next two seasons made him expendable in the Suns' youth movement.
In New York, Hardaway has found a team that needs him again, serving as a versatile sixth man, and a coach in Lenny Wilkens who has confidence that even without the jumping ability he once possessed he can be a dangerous player. He has averaged 10 points and 4.7 rebounds in 29.6 minutes for the Knicks.
''Stephon was the All-Star coming in,'' Hardaway said. ''My name hasn't been used for anything good in like five years. So it's like everybody was like, 'And we have Penny Hardaway.' I wasn't worried about this because I knew I still have the game to play. I knew once I got here I'd be able to show that.''
The goals are modest for Hardaway, a four-time All-Star, an Olympian and a leader of the Orlando Magic team that went to the N.B.A. finals in 1995. Hardaway is content to fit in now, coming off the bench, playing a secondary role to the brighter stars. He was once that star and, as on Tuesday night when he contributed 14 points, he insists he could do it again.
''I think the hardest thing is not getting a chance to do it again,'' Hardaway said. ''A lot of people can talk and say I can't do it, but if you give me the opportunity to do it then I'll show. The hardest thing hasn't been losing what I had. It's just not being able to get 20 shots a night and do the things that I used to.''
Marbury said that Hardaway would never be able to jump and dunk as he once did, ''but he's still smart and he knows the game so well that when he goes out on the court and plays, he makes the game easy for himself.''
And on Tuesday night, Hardaway got his chance. That was worthy of celebration.
''It felt like a playoff game,'' he said. ''It definitely reminded me of Orlando, down the stretch having to win a game in the playoffs to hold home court. That's what it felt like.''
PRO BASKETBALL
