In a potential boon for the New York metropolitan region's transit system, a Senate committee approved a measure on Wednesday that would give the state at least $7.1 billion in federal mass transit aid over the next six years.
The measure is expected to pass in the full Senate but faces a scornful reception in the House, where Congressional leaders and conservatives see transportation projects as one of the first ways to cut back the budget and reduce the deficit.
The $7.1 billion for New York, which carries a third of the nation's rail and bus riders, was part of a $56.5 billion spending bill that the Senate Banking Committee approved to finance the nation's buses. The measure will, in turn, be tucked into a broader $311 billion transportation bill that the Senate is in the process of completing despite strong objections from President Bush, whose proposed budget has called for spending significantly less money on roads, bridges and mass transit.
The Bush budget for 2005 has projected $256 billion in transportation spending. That sets the stage for a showdown between Mr. Bush and lawmakers in both parties, who are interested in delivering as much money as possible to constituents this election year.
Initially, leading members of the Banking Committee had proposed giving less money for mass transportation than was contained in the measure that the committee approved on Wednesday, meaning New York's share would be smaller.
But the amount was increased amid protests from an unusual bipartisan alliance of lawmakers, including Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York and Senator Rick Santorum, a Republican from Pennsylvania, whose state has mass transit needs similar to New York's.
Mr. Schumer called the developments in the Senate a victory for the city and state. ''We were expecting the worst,'' he said. ''But we are coming out on much higher ground, though we have a ways to go.''
Through a spokesman, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, a Republican, said Wednesday that he was grateful to the members of the Banking Committee and singled out Mr. Schumer, a Democrat, for his efforts, describing the senator as someone ''who always fights hard for New York.''
The package also drew praise from Gov. George E. Pataki, a Republican, who last week phoned the chairman of the Banking Committee, Senator Richard C. Shelby, a Republican from Alabama, to lobby for additional money for New York.
''New York is one-third of the nation's transit riders and therefore deserves the funds necessary to maintain its transit system,'' said Lynn Rasic, a spokeswoman for the governor.
New York officials pointed out that the $7.1 billion earmarked for New York represented an increase over the $5 billion that the state received six years ago when Congress enacted the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, or TEA-21.
