Appearing shaken and contrite, Abdul Qadeer Khan, the founder of Pakistan's nuclear weapons program, went on national television Wednesday night to admit that he had shared Pakistani nuclear technology with other countries and to ask his nation for forgiveness.
''I take full responsibility for my actions and seek your pardon,'' said Dr. Khan, for two decades one of the most powerful men in Pakistan.
Wearing a tan suit jacket and a striped tie, Dr. Khan, 67, spoke in English and said he was appearing with the deepest ''sense of sorrow, anguish and regret.'' He said that his actions had been taken in ''in good faith'' but were ''errors in judgment.''
He said he had acted entirely on his own. ''There was never, ever any kind of authorization for these activities from the government,'' he said.
The three-minute speech placed Dr. Khan, a national hero for turning his country into a nuclear power, in the unaccustomed role of supplicant. It was widely perceived in Pakistan to be a carefully staged attempt to defuse a potentially grave political crisis for the president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, and to prevent Dr. Khan from naming senior military officials who knew of his activities.
Hours earlier, Dr. Khan visited General Musharraf to request a presidential pardon, and a silent video of their meeting was also broadcast. General Musharraf was expected to announce at a news conference on Thursday whether the government would punish Dr. Khan and six close aides, officials said.
The White House had little to say about the confession, but American experts on proliferation of nuclear weapons said their concern was not whether Dr. Khan was punished but whether the illicit spread of nuclear technology could be stopped.
For months President Bush's strategy has been to put as much pressure as possible on the Musharraf government, a crucial ally in the campaign against terrorism, to close down Mr. Khan's network. The administration has been careful not to take a public role, for fear of triggering a backlash in Islamabad, where General Musharraf's opponents already charge that he is doing Washington's bidding.
But American officials in Washington said they assumed that Dr. Khan and General Musharraf had struck a deal -- perhaps an agreement not to put the scientist on trial, in return for Dr. Khan's announcement that no government officials had been involved in his two decades of proliferation.
That contention is one that few American intelligence officials believe. The Military retained tight control over the nuclear program and government transport planes were used to trade weapons with North Korea. But it is a polite fiction that the White House may be willing to live with if it is the only way to keep a close ally in power while dismantling the Khan trading network.
''We don't know what kind of deal was struck, and we may not know for a while,'' one administration official said. ''With Pakistan, sometimes you never know.''
Pakistani officials say Dr. Khan and intermediaries from Sri Lanka, Germany and the Netherlands shared nuclear technology with Iran, Libya and North Korea from 1989 to 2000. Their activities appear to be one of the most successful efforts to evade international controls on the spread of nuclear weapons technology.
In an interview with a reporter from state-run television after the meeting, Dr. Khan said he had asked for the meeting with General Musharraf and described the president as very kind. ''He listened with a kind heart,'' the scientist said. ''God willing, he will discuss with the cabinet, with the prime minister and other colleagues and then he will take a decision how to proceed.''
A senior Pakistani government official and a Pakistani military official said Wednesday that Dr. Khan's statement and the visit to General Musharraf seeking a pardon had been carefully negotiated in meetings on Tuesday.
American experts on the spread of nuclear weapons said the critical issue was not whether Dr. Khan would be punished, but whether Pakistan would thoroughly investigate all aspects of Dr. Khan's nuclear black market and convey every detail to the United States. They said the smuggling network and sales of nuclear technology must be stopped.
A former senior American diplomat in Pakistan said this week that he believed that successive Pakistani military and civilian leaders had intentionally turned a blind eye to Dr. Khan's activities. The former diplomat said Dr. Khan had come up with things that Pakistan felt it needed -- ballistic missile technology from North Korea, for example -- to counter its nuclear-armed rival, India. Dr. Khan also became a potent political force of his own.
''It's like Iran-contra -- they didn't want to know,'' said the former diplomat, referring to the Reagan administration scandal involving clandestine sale of weapons to Iran and illegal use of the proceeds to finance Nicaraguan insurgents. ''They needed the things he brought them.''
Dr. Khan's request for a pardon, which opposition political leaders called coerced and humiliating, marked an ignoble end for a scientist lionized at home but derided in the West. His fall from grace also represented another public humiliation for Pakistan, which has struggled since coming into existence in 1947 to establish a clear national identity.
''In a way it shatters the confidence of the people in their leaders,'' said Talat Masood, a retired Pakistani general and political analyst. ''They built up an image of this man. And all that explodes in the faces of poor, innocent Pakistanis.''
Dr. Khan's career began auspiciously. He was urgently called to government work in 1975, the year after India detonated its first atomic bomb, and was placed in charge of Pakistan's uranium enrichment program. Before that he worked in Holland as a metallurgist, and he is believed to have stolen plans for centrifuges used in enriching uranium, a key part of creating an atomic bomb.
For the next 20 years in Pakistan he oversaw a sprawling global effort by Pakistan to covertly acquire the components, machines and other technology needed to build hundreds of centrifuges.
Pakistani officials said this week that Dr. Khan had operated with virtually no government or military oversight. The officials said the brigadier general in charge of security at the Khan Research Laboratories, the top-secret nuclear facility named after Dr. Khan, reported to Dr. Khan, not the army.
''His superior was Dr. A. Q. Khan,'' a senior Pakistani official said. ''He was not under the supervision of the armed forces at that time.''
Pakistani military experts have said that is virtually impossible. Pakistan's military intelligence agency, Inter-Services Intelligence, must have tightly monitored the lab and Dr. Khan, the experts say, if only to prevent Indian agents from sabotaging the lab or harming Dr. Khan.
After Dr. Khan retired in March 2001, he opened scores of charities, foundations and schools across Pakistan. Reports of lavish houses, large bank accounts and shady business dealings surfaced, but no officials challenged the national hero. Pakistani officials angrily dismissed foreign news reports about covert nuclear proliferation.
Former colleagues who have fallen out with Dr. Khan described him as domineering, fame-obsessed and egomaniacal. All of that seemed gone Wednesday night as a tired, downtrodden figure said he had been humbled. But even in his plea for forgiveness, the truth was elusive.
Dr. Khan said the proliferation the government described was ''invariably initiated at my behest.'' But he was vague about what, exactly, he had initiated.
''I have voluntarily admitted,'' he said, ''that much of it is true and accurate.''
