LIKE most Americans, and certainly most men, I have always approached housecleaning in a desultory, if not explicitly amateurish, fashion. If a surface needed dusting, I damped an old cloth and dusted it. If the frame of a painting seemed grimy, I yanked it off the wall and gave it the once-over. If the rungs of a venerable chair were gathering soot, I cleaned them off and perhaps applied a thin coat of Pledge. That's how you cleaned furniture -- you dusted, you vacuumed, you polished. This wasn't rocket science.
Not until I attended a three-hour ''collections care workshop'' at stately Van Cortlandt Manor in Croton-on-Hudson, N.Y., did I realize how pitifully unprepared I was to shield my precious possessions from the remorseless depredations of time, nature and filth.
The session was held in a tiny building down the road from the manor house and was designed as a refresher course for the curatorial staff at Historic Hudson Valley's signature properties. Those include Sunnyside, Washington Irving's home in Tarrytown; Montgomery Place in Annandale-on-Hudson; and the old Dutch mill at Philipsburg Manor in Sleepy Hollow, which abuts the bridge where Brom Bones, in the guise of the Headless Horseman, terrorized the hapless Ichabod Crane.
The organization also oversees the Rockefeller family's curiously demure Kykuit estate, and the postage-stamp Union Church, with its famous Chagall windows and its rose window by Matisse. Both sites are in Pocantico Hills.
The session was directed by Patty Pinsonnault, the collections manager for Historic Hudson Valley, with ample assistance from Kathleen Eagen Johnson, the organization's curator. And their recommended reading includes the invaluable ''National Trust Manual of Housekeeping'' from England, a book crammed with advice ranging from how to remove a book from a shelf (by clasping the spine) to how to clean ormolu (''dust lightly with a pony-hair brush and only once or twice a year''). Copies are available for $25 from the Royal Oak Foundation, (212) 480-2889 or www.royal-oak.org.
Right at the start, Ms. Johnson and Ms. Pinsonnault reminded participants that one should never attempt to clean a valuable piece of furniture without taking a few preliminary steps. Scarves and necklaces had to come off. Belts, which could scratch the backs of valuable furniture, were to be removed. Wristwatches, wedding rings and bracelets were verboten. Obviously, any cascading jewelry with ''bling bling'' associations needed to be set aside, though the group, which consisted of about a dozen women and two men, was quite obviously not a bling-bling crowd.
Next would be washing the hands. To me, washing my hands before cleaning something that would only make my hands dirty again seemed self-defeating, like showering before playing rugby. But Ms. Pinsonnault and Ms. Johnson pointed out that natural oils could damage older textiles and artworks. In those instances, they advised wearing gloves.
If I have any single failing in the household hygiene department, it is in overall strategy. I am forever picking up chairs and paintings without having any idea where I am going to clean them. Thus, I learned, I might set something down on a wet surface and cause irreparable damage. As my wife's dowry includes an antique tobacco chest that may have been rescued from the 1857 Sepoy Rebellion by someone named Clive Piggott-Smythe, as well as a very old, very classy set of engravings depicting Charles Dickens characters, I consider myself lucky that these irreplaceable items had escaped so many oafish cleanings.
As the session proceeded, we gathered information that included how to remove a painting properly from the wall. (Always grip the bottom with one hand. Otherwise the John Singleton Copley could be in smithereens.)
''Always wear gloves when cleaning metal objects,'' Ms. Johnson counseled us, ''as oils on your hand will leave an imprint and could damage the pot.''
Duly noted.
About a third of the session was devoted to watching an instructional video titled ''Housekeeping for Historic Sites.'' Just ever so slightly mischievous, the video referred to ''time and its myriad allies: dirt, dust, mildew, mold, etc.'' The staff in the film were cheekily identified as ''collection technicians,'' as opposed to ''skilled housekeepers,'' much the way I refer to myself as a ''raconteur'' rather than ''journalist.''
Later in the session, we were told to avoid using commercial products when cleaning historic metal objects. Nonionic detergents were recommended. Coarse, commercial products were to be eschewed. The video reminded viewers that while ''a vacuum cleaner is your most important tool, no one vacuum cleaner will do the job.'' To whit, older carpets should never be subjected to the direct, withering blast of a Hoover, and truly precious materials should always be vacuumed through some sort of screening material. Moreover, the nozzle of the appliance should be moved up and down, never side to side.
Not all the material was a revelation to me. I already knew how to move cabinets -- get someone to help you. I knew how to lift chairs properly -- by the lowest weight-bearing members, which is to say the legs. I realized that one must never confuse glazed ceramics with lacquered objects (duh!) and should refrain from using water or detergent to clean iron. And, of course, I recognized that a good housekeeper piously resists the temptation to wax too often. But I had not previously understood that ''knowing when not to clean is as important as not knowing when to clean.'' In retrospect, it seems that both my children knew when not to clean -- ever -- but had no idea when to clean -- at least once every solar eclipse.
And many tips would never have occurred to me. I had no idea that one should vacuum inside drawers just twice a year. I had no idea that water was the enemy of historic ceramics and that those should never be washed, because ''water will find hairline cracks'' and cause additional damage. Finally, it would never have occurred to me to dust books with a blow bulb. Much less with an ear syringe.
At the conclusion of the session, Ms. Johnson explained that in the 19th century the very notion of cleaning played a vital role in shaping the nation's psyche. Once a year, during the proverbial spring cleaning, the entire house was emptied out and everything was laid on the front lawn for a proper cleaning. At some level, Americans were seeking to celebrate their belief that cleanliness was next to godliness and the hope that the message would be transmitted to immigrants.
But the practice probably had the additional effect of making homeowners question whether some of the junk they had dragged outside was really worth hauling back in. I would love to persuade my family to adopt the practice. There's just no way anyone would dream of polishing all those broken halogen lamps and particle-board bookshelves and then taking them back into the house. But I digress.
I arrived for the workshop in the full belief that I had forgotten more about cleaning than most people ever knew. But after I learned that cloth diapers made an excellent dusting tool, that silver should be polished only with materials containing calcium carbonate and that lint should be tweezered off old surfaces rather than vacuumed, I realized that I was a pygmy among giants. Never again would I wear a belt buckle while moving my cedar armoire. Never again would I take down those Dickens engravings without making sure that the frame had not rotted away.
And never again would I dismissively refer to a curatorial housekeeper as a cleaning lady.
GOOD FENCES
