A group of Navajo officials, cattle ranchers and environmentalists sued the Bureau of Land Management on Wednesday over federal efforts to increase natural gas exploration in northwestern New Mexico, an area rich in mineral resources.
The lawsuit, filed in Federal District Court in Washington, also names the Department of the Interior as a defendant. It seeks to limit the drilling of oil and natural gas wells in the San Juan Basin of New Mexico. Federal officials recently said that they would permit nearly 10,000 new wells in the basin over the next two decades.
Over the last year, Navajo officials and environmental groups have tried to roll back plans by the bureau to permit energy companies to explore for natural gas on religious sites and in areas they consider environmentally fragile. Despite Navajo protests, however, the bureau has approved the drilling plans and the construction of 1,000 miles of roads to give drillers access to the area.
Many large gas companies, including the El Paso Corporation, Burlington Resources and BP, are already looking for natural gas in the San Juan Basin, which accounts for 7 percent of the nation's natural gas production. Many companies hope to increase activity in the area, which includes parts of the Navajo Nation, as natural gas prices spike.
Several cattle ranchers joined the unusual coalition because, they said, they had few options for preserving their ranches from the disruption caused by widespread drilling and road-building.
''What's happening now in Northwestern New Mexico will happen 10 years down the road in many other parts of the West,'' said Tweeti Blancett, a cattle rancher and hotel operator in Aztec, N.M. She said she was disillusioned with the Bush administration's energy policies; she served on Mr. Bush's presidential campaign in New Mexico four years ago.
Celia Boddington, a spokeswoman for the bureau in Washington, declined to comment on the lawsuit, which seeks to require greater consultation by federal regulators on the environmental and religious impact of increased gas drilling.
Representatives from the Interior Department did not respond to requests for comment.
