When finance ministers of the Group of 7 leading industrial countries convene on Friday in Boca Raton, Fla., the European delegation may find itself stranded on the sidelines.
The fall of the dollar against the euro has frustrated exporters and political leaders in Europe, and there is little hope that they can reverse the policies of either the Bush administration, which seems content to let the market push the dollar downward, or Asia's central banks, which have intervened heavily to curb the rise of their currencies against the dollar.
''The U.S. and Asia have entered a symbiosis, in which Asia is financing the American recovery,'' said Thomas Mayer, the chief European economist for Deutsche Bank in London. ''For Asia, that's fine, and for the U.S., that's also fine. The problem is for the bystander.''
European officials seem resigned to their currency's bearing the brunt of the dollar's downward adjustment. Exchange rates are likely to be Topic A among the United States, Japan, Germany, France and other countries, but few here expect the Boca Raton meeting to yield more than a general statement, carefully worded to avoid roiling the markets.
Similarly, the European Central Bank is not expected to lower interest rates when its policy board meets here in Frankfurt on Thursday, even though many analysts worry that the surging euro could derail Europe's fledgling recovery by dampening exports. The consensus forecast is that the bank will keep its benchmark short-term interest rate at 2 percent.
So far, the bank's president, Jean-Claude Trichet, has limited himself to speaking out against ''brutal'' movements in exchange rates -- a strategy known as verbal intervention, which analysts said had been effective in slowing the euro's rise in recent weeks.
The euro was unchanged today at $1.2531.
With so much about the direction of global exchange rate movements now beyond Europe's control, some experts say that the 12 nations sharing the currency should turn their attention instead to reviving their domestic economies. That would make Europe less reliant on exports for growth, and less susceptible to collateral damage from a stampeding currency.
The disparity between exports and domestic demand has become striking here. In Germany, exports rose 4.1 percent in November, compared with the previous month, even though the euro strengthened. Retail sales, however, fell 2.3 percent in the fourth quarter despite heavy Christmas promotion and discounting.
''There was a virtual collapse in retail demand in Germany,'' said Jörg Krämer, the chief strategist at Invesco Asset Management in Frankfurt. ''This is the really problematic spot in the German economy.''
Mr. Kramer attributed Germany's continued weakness to a confluence of factors: the stubbornly high unemployment rate, confusion over the government's efforts to overhaul its tax code, and the fear shared by many Germans that their incomes will stagnate in a slow-growth economy.
Fixing those problems will not be easy.
The German and French governments are already running budget deficits well in excess of the European Union's limits, giving them little room to pursue looser, more stimulative fiscal policies. And Europe's political leaders may be losing their taste for broader changes-- like opening up their labor markets or rewriting tax codes -- now that their countries are no longer in a recession.
''It would be nice if Europe did something about demand, but unfortunately, there's not much it can do,'' said Daniel Gros, the director of the Center for European Policy Studies in Brussels.
Mr. Gros and other Europeans take comfort in the fact that the rising euro has not had the calamitous effect on exports that many predicted. In fact, he said, Europe's exports to Asia have been buoyed by the Japanese central bank's frequent and heavy interventions in the currency markets.
''Asia is experiencing extremely lax monetary conditions,'' Mr. Gros said. ''These countries are flooded with money.''
Over the last year, the German apparel maker Hugo Boss has struggled in its home market, as well as in France and the United States. But its business has soared in Asia, particularly in China and Japan. Sales in Japan, where Hugo Boss opened two new stores in Tokyo, jumped 19 percent in the first nine months of 2003, the most recent period with results available.
''It's a booming region for us,'' said Philipp Wolff, a spokesman for Boss, based in the southern town of Metzingen.
Like many German exporters, Hugo Boss has protected itself somewhat against fluctuations in the exchange rate through hedging transactions with banks. That is one reason exporters have not been more clamorous in calling for a cut in interest rates.
Many of the hedge positions will, however, expire halfway through 2004, according to executives at several companies. If the euro stays as high as it is now, people here said, the drumbeat will grow for a rate cut or even an intervention by the European Central Bank.
Until now, the bank has taken the position that the revival of the global economy offsets the negative effects of a stronger euro. Recent comments by members of the bank's governing council signaled that it remains more focused on inflation than on the exchange rate.
''Foreign exchange rates are not a target for the E.C.B.,'' said Ernst Welteke, the president of the Bundesbank and a member of the European bank's council. ''They only play a role insofar as they impact on the price level, and that is why we are monitoring them closely.''
By regularly expressing concern about exchange rate movements, Mr. Welteke and Mr. Trichet are reminding currency traders that there are risks to buying euros, analysts said. The message is that the bank could, if necessary, intervene in the currency market.
For the most part, though, Europeans who worry about the euro must pin their hopes on changes elsewhere.
''You hope that in the U.S., domestic demand growth will slow,'' Mr. Mayer of Deutsche Bank said. ''You hope that the Chinese will be comfortable in letting their currency go up versus the dollar. You hope that the Japanese will not be able to buy up every dollar offered to them.''
