HIGHLIGHTS
HUNTINGTON HARTFORD'S ARCHIVE -- The personal archive of G. Huntington Hartford II, including manuscripts, personal correspondence, photographs and a model of the Columbus Circle museum designed for him by Edward Durell Stone in 1964, have been acquired by the Howard Gotlieb Archival Research Center at Boston University. An heir to the A.&amp;P. fortune, Mr. Hartford, now 93, whose interests extended to real estate, writing plays and film production, intended the museum as a home for his personal art collection. The museum, now owned by the city of New York, is an object of dispute between those who would buy and redesign it and those who would preserve it unchanged. ''The 60 crates of papers and memorabilia, which constitute the G. Huntington Hartford II archive, comprise an extraordinary portrait over half a century of the social, cultural, artistic and business life of this country,'' said Howard B. Gotlieb, the founder and director of the center, which houses the archives of 2,000 notable figures of the 20th century.
FILM: FAMILY AFFAIR -- Add another Barrymore to the Hollywood Walk of Fame, Agence France-Presse reported. At 28, Drew Barrymore, below, who began her film career in ''Altered States'' in 1980, followed it with ''E.T. the Extraterrestrial'' in 1982 and moved on more recently to stardom in ''Charlie's Angels'' films and ownership of a production company, has joined her grandfather John Barrymore; father John Jr. or John Drew Barrymore; great-uncle Lionel; and great-aunt Ethel on the Walk of Fame.
HONORS: LEONORE ANNENBERG -- Leonore Annenberg has been awarded an honorary C.B.E. by Queen Elizabeth II in recognition of her contribution to the preservation of important British cultural and educational institutions and her work in promoting British-American relations. Mrs. Annenberg, the widow of Walter Annenberg (a United States ambassador to Britain), financed the Annenberg Information Center in the Round Reading Room of the British Museum and has been a benefactor of the Royal Ballet, the Royal Academy, the National Gallery, the Tate Gallery and Westminster Abbey, among many other institutions. In the United States, among other activities, she founded the American Friends of the Royal Ballet, created the American Friends of Covent Garden and is honorary president of the American Friends of the British Museum. C.B.E. -- commander of the most excellent order of the British empire -- honors civilian and military personnel for public service and other distinctions. Acting on advice from the Foreign and Commonwealth Office, the queen confers honorary awards on foreigners for important contributions to British interests.
CLOSING: 'RETREAT FROM MOSCOW' -- William Nicholson's play ''The Retreat From Moscow,'' directed by Daniel Sullivan and starring Eileen Atkins, John Lithgow and Ben Chaplin in the story of a disintegrating marriage, will close after its performance at 3 p.m. on Feb. 29 at the Booth Theater. It will have played 24 previews and 147 regular performances.
PHOTOGRAPHY: BEATON RETROSPECTIVE -- Marilyn Monroe is there. So are Tallulah Bankhead, Twiggy, Orson Welles, Gary Cooper, Marlene Dietrich, Johnny Weissmuller, the Sitwells, the Rolling Stones, the Duke and Duchess of Windsor, Coco Chanel, Picasso, Katharine Hepburn and Audrey Hepburn. All are gathered, beginning today at the National Portrait Gallery in London, for an exhibition through May 31 commemorating the centenary of the birth of the stylish British photographer Cecil Beaton (1904-1980). ''Cecil Beaton: Portraits'' has more than 150 photographs spanning five decades of fashion, art and celebrity.
TOKYO: NO HITLER PAINTING -- Reversing a day-old decision, a Japanese film distributor decided yesterday not to display a watercolor by Hitler to promote a film loosely based on his life, The Associated Press reported. The painting of the Karlskirche, or St. Karl's Church, in Vienna was to have been exhibited for a week beginning on Saturday in connection with the opening of ''Max.'' Directed by Menno Meyjes, the 2002 film stars John Cusack as a Jewish artist who befriends a Hitler who is a desperately ambitious 30-year-old painter. A spokesman for the distributor, Toshiba Entertainment, attributed the cancellation to difficulties in having the painting shipped from Germany in time for the opening.
FOOTNOTES
Mos Def, left, the rapper, actor and host of the HBO series ''Def Poetry,'' is to star in ''The Hitchhiker's Guide to the Galaxy.'' The film, based on the Douglas Adams novel about a British man saved from the destruction of Earth by his best friend, who turns out to be an alien, is to go before the cameras in April. . . . The producer and Oscar-winning actor Michael Douglas has donated $1 million to his alma mater, the University of California, Santa Barbara, for its new Center for Film, Television and New Media. The lobby will be named in his honor, The Associated Press reported. . . . A memorial service for Keiko, the killer whale who starred in the ''Free Willy'' films, is to be held at the Oregon Coast Aquarium in Newport, Ore., on Feb. 22, The Associated Press reported. Keiko died in Norwegian waters in Dec. 12 and was buried in a nearby coastal pasture. Keiko was taken to Oregon from an amusement park in Mexico City in 1996 to prepare him for a return to the wild. The memorial will include a eulogy, reminiscences by the whale's keepers and the unveiling of a sketch of a sculpture the aquarium hopes to commission as a permanent tribute.
