SO you think you want a home theater. Where do you go from there?
The range in what qualifies as a home theater is vast. The simplest systems come packaged as a home theater in a box. One example is Pioneer's HTP-230, which includes five speakers, a powered subwoofer and an audio-video receiver; the combination costs about $450. Add a $75 DVD player and a large cathode-ray tube TV (32-inch Philips and Toshiba models, for instance, are around $425) and you are ready to watch.
Beyond that, the level of sophistication climbs rapidly, along with the prices. You can spend hundreds of thousands of dollars to modify and equip a room with a large flat-screen plasma TV (Fujitsu's 63-inch model costs $20,000) or a digital projector (Marantz's VP 10-S1 is $38,000) and top-of-the-line speakers (the Bowers &amp; Wilkins Nautilus Prestige goes for $20,000 each).
The first thing to do is set your budget. Next, decide which type of display you want, because it is likely to be with you for several years.
''Americans are not used to replacing their televisions at the rate they replace PC's,'' said Nick Donatiello, the president of Odyssey, a market research firm in San Francisco. ''TV's are supposed to last a very long time.''
As you do your research, keep in mind the room you will be using. If the space is small, there is no need for a very large screen. ''There's a certain distance you should sit from the screen,'' said Dave Hirsch, the owner of Horizon Install Group, a company in Los Angeles that specializes in home theaters. ''A basic rule of thumb is two times the height of the screen.''
Plasma TV prices are falling, with some smaller models available for about $3,500. But if your budget is tight, you might want to think twice before paying even the lowest price for a plasma television. ''The plasma TV is wonderful to hang in places where rear-projection TV's can't go,'' Mr. Hirsch said. ''But inch for inch, a plasma screen still costs considerably more.''
The advent of L.C.D. televisions has confused matters still more. L.C.D. sets currently have significantly smaller screens -- the largest is 37 inches -- but like plasma TV's, they are flat.
Then there are rear-projection units, which use several different technologies, including liquid crystal, liquid crystal on silicon, digital light processing and conventional picture tubes. Rear-projection units were once bulky affairs, but they have gotten shallower in recent years and image quality has improved.
If that isn't enough to consider, there is also the front-projection option. Digital projectors that produce high-quality large-screen pictures start at $2,000 and can produce screen images from 80 inches to 120 inches.
Then think about the speakers. Typical popular surround-sound systems use five to seven speakers as well as a subwoofer to produce rumbling bass. There are hundreds of speaker manufacturers, with prices starting at around $150 and going way up. Mike Orio, a home theater designer and installer in New York, said that shoppers should not base a decision on price alone, ''because there are lots of speakers that aren't that good.''
If all this seems too daunting, you can hire a professional home theater installer. The Custom Electronics Design and Installation Association Web site (www.cedia.net) can direct you to dealers who will guide you through the fog of choices for anywhere from $65 to $150 an hour.
KATIE HAFNER
Getting Started
