BACK in the dark ages of high-definition television -- about four years ago -- HDTV pictures suffered in quality.
The problem was not with the technical standard, but with some of the digital television sets that were sold. ''The weakest link in the HDTV chain was the display,'' recalled Joe Flaherty, a CBS senior vice president for technology who was one of the people responsible for instituting digital high-definition TV. ''It was like Mark Twain's comment that Wagner's music is better than it sounds.''
The biggest sets at the time, supersize rear-projection monstrosities priced around $10,000, used conventional cathode-ray-tube technology to create images. As a result, the high-definition pictures were not very sharp and had some problems common to big-screen TV's in general: inaccurate color registration and pronounced ''hot spots'' that limited where viewers could sit and see the picture.
Today, consumers have a much wider and better choice of display technologies in HDTV models, some of which are priced considerably lower than those available a few years ago.
Flat-panel TV's using plasma and liquid-crystal-display technology have captured the public's imagination. But plasma is pricey and has its own problems, like image burn-in, decreasing brightness over time and high energy consumption. L.C.D. panels do not have those problems, but the largest sizes cost even more than plasma.
To offer consumers advanced displays at lower cost, manufacturers have focused on improving rear-projection technology. By using smaller image-generating micro-display devices like single-L.C.D. chips, rear-projection sets can be made lighter and thinner than those that use cathode ray tubes.
Because it is a transmissive technology, L.C.D. can be used in both direct view and projection sets. In a direct-view screen, light passes through the liquid crystals and color filters and appears on the front of the display. In a rear-projection L.C.D. television, a light source and a series of lenses magnify the image. By using mirrors to direct the image to the screen, the back of the set can be kept relatively shallow.
Another rear-projection technique uses D.L.P., or digital light processing, technology to create the image. The D.L.P. chip, made by Texas Instruments, measures less than one inch across diagonally and contains hundreds of thousands of tiny mirrors that pivot to allow more or less light and color to be reflected to the screen. Today D.L.P. sets can be created that rival the depth of flat-panel displays. At the Consumer Electronics Show last month in Las Vegas, RCA showed its new Profiles rear-projection D.L.P. models, 61- and 50-inch sets that are just 6.85 inches deep.
Another rear-projection technology, liquid crystal on silicon, or LCoS, shows promise, too. Like an L.C.D. chip, an LCoS chip uses liquid crystals to determine how much light reaches the viewer. But that light is reflected off the LCoS chip rather than passing through it. Built into the chip are aluminum plates that function as both electrodes and fixed mirrors.
LCoS chips, their proponents say, create a high-resolution, good-contrast, long-lasting image without the problems associated with some other techniques.
Philips is first on the market with a single-chip LCoS set, and several other companies, including Intel and the MicroDisplay Corporation, have entered into agreements with electronics manufacturers to deliver components that will make sets available later this year. In addition, JVC will make a series of three-chip LCoS displays marketed under the D-ILA name.
LCoS has been tried before. RCA marketed an LCoS rear-projection TV in 2001, a 50-inch set that sold for $8,000 and was withdrawn after one year. And last month Toshiba announced that it would abandon its promise to sell LCoS sets and concentrate on making D.L.P. TV's instead.
LCoS sets have inherent advantages over D.L.P. and L.C.D., proponents of the technology say. Because light shines through an L.C.D. chip, the circuitry that controls the liquid crystals blocks some of the light. With an LCoS chip, all the circuitry is in a silicon layer behind the reflective layer.
Unlike D.L.P., LCoS has no moving parts, making it relatively easy to shrink the size of each pixel within a given space, thereby increasing resolution. And because D.L.P. chips use tiny mirrors secured to individual posts, ''each post shows up as a dimple on the screen,'' degrading the image, said Sandeep Gupta, president of MicroDisplay.
D.L.P. proponents dispute these claims.
''Both D.L.P. and LCoS make a great picture,'' Dale Zimmerman, general manager for D.L.P. television at Texas Instruments, said. ''Our new HD2+ chips, shipping this year, have the same performance as LCoS. We've created a dimple fix.''
LCoS sets will be price-competitive with D.L.P. TV's of the same size. Philips' first LCoS model, a 55-inch set, is currently priced at $4,499.
Whichever technology eventually captures the pocketbook and the imagination of the American consumer, it is clear that the first HDTV's were the worst HDTV's the world will ever see.
HOW IT WORKS
