Teresa Weatherspoon tried to look on the bright side yesterday as she talked publicly about the end of her seven-year career as the Liberty's point guard.
But Weatherspoon, a five-time W.N.B.A. All-Star, also sounded hurt.
Weatherspoon, who became an unrestricted free agent at the end of last season, said she had signed a contract with the Los Angeles Sparks. Terms were not announced.
Weatherspoon, 38, said that General Manager Penny Toler and Coach Michael Cooper of the Sparks had made it clear that they thought she could still contribute and wanted her to play for Los Angeles, which has won two Women's National Basketball Association championships.
Weatherspoon said the Liberty, on the other hand, had made it clear since the end of last season that her contract would not be renewed when it expired at the end of 2003.
''I did not walk away on my own terms,'' she said in a 20-minute telephone interview. ''I wasn't offered a contract to play with a team I've been with for seven years, and that hurts me more than anything.''
In a conference call with Cooper and Toler, Weatherspoon sounded upbeat about the possibility of winning a championship, which she had not accomplished with the Liberty.
''I'm being given an opportunity to play for a championship team and to be with a truly great organization,'' Weatherspoon said. ''I may do some crazy things, but I'm not stupid.''
Carol Blazejowski, the senior vice president and general manager of the Liberty, called the decision to let Weatherspoon go ''very difficult, very uncomfortable and emotional.''
''It was purely business,'' Blazejowski said. ''We wanted to be younger, more athletic and to make some material changes.''
Blazejowski said she spoke with Weatherspoon in New York last week. She told Weatherspoon that if she decided to retire, the Liberty wanted her to work for the Madison Square Garden organization full time.
Weatherspoon said she was willing to give up her starting role and play fewer minutes to stay with the Liberty.
''It was never about money,'' she said. ''It's about loving the game, loving the fans, the city. My heart, soul, love and tears will always be in New York.''
Weatherspoon, who played with the Liberty since the league was founded in 1997, was one of seven of the team's players designated as free agents last month.
Weatherspoon, a former defensive player of the year who is the Liberty's career assists leader, struggled last season. She averaged 2.9 points, 4.4 assists and 24.2 minutes last season after averaging 6.2 points, 6.2 assists and 32.3 minutes in her first six seasons. But Weatherspoon said she was still capable of playing and could bring something to the Sparks.
Cooper agreed.
''She will get significant minutes,'' he said. ''Any time we play New York, she will get many significant minutes.''
PRO BASKETBALL
