So it wasn't Jeff Van Gundy clinging to Alonzo Mourning's leg in the playoffs at Madison Square Garden, but Lawrence Frank ran on to the court in defense of his star player Wednesday night and pulled an opponent away.
That will serve as the lasting image of Frank's first game at Continental Arena as the Nets' head coach.
While the team won its sixth game in a row, 99-88, over the Miami Heat, Frank won another measure of respect. After Miami's Malik Allen committed a flagrant foul on Jason Kidd with 2 minutes 21 seconds remaining in the third quarter, Frank left his spot on the sideline and abandoned his meek and mild image.
''I thought it was a frustration foul,'' Frank said. ''Anytime you make an effort to go after someone like that, you're risking someone's health.''
Kidd was breaking away for a layup when Allen pushed him into the stanchion underneath the basket. In response, Kidd threw the ball back at Allen. Richard Jefferson, who usually does more talking than fighting, shoved Allen, earning a technical foul. Players swarmed the court, and while Frank grabbed Allen's arm, Heat Coach Stan Van Gundy and Kidd barked at each other. Finally, Kidd laughed and walked in the opposite direction.
''That was teammates trying to protect each other,'' Kidd said. ''I'd do the same thing in that position unless it was the wrong weight class. If it was a real big guy, then I'd have to wait.''
Frank, who lists himself at 5 feet 8 inches and about 145 pounds, did not exactly match up with the 6-10, 280-pound Allen, but at this point, he cannot feel limited by a lack of size or experience.
Fittingly, his first home victory came against the team that made his ascent possible. The last time the Nets faced Miami, less than two weeks ago on Jan. 23, they appeared to quit on Byron Scott and lost a game that Rod Thorn, the team president, called ''the nadir.''
''There was a lot going on then,'' Jefferson said. ''There was stuff inside. We were frustrated with what was going on in the organization.''
Scott, the source of their discontent, was fired three days later, Frank was promoted, and the Nets have hardly been threatened since. Asked to elaborate on the problems inside the organization, Jefferson said, ''They're over and done with now.''
The outcome of this game with the Heat, compared with the last one, was both striking and revealing. Perturbed that some Miami players said they could play with any team in the Eastern Conference, the Nets outscored the Heat in every quarter. Urged by Frank to get the ball inside, they scored twice as many points in the paint. The Nets even won the battle of the technical fouls -- Miami finished with four; the Nets were called for two.
Having been denied a place on the All-Star team, Lamar Odom scored 27 points for Miami, but he picked up his fifth foul in the third quarter and made only one field goal after halftime. Kenyon Martin, meanwhile, demonstrated his endurance and showed why he is headed to his first All-Star Game. He scored 18 of his 24 points in the second half, ripped down 13 rebounds and even threw a rare lob pass to Jefferson for a dunk.
''We've grown a lot since that Miami game,'' Martin said. ''We're playing harder for longer and we're defending like we know how to defend. It taught us a lot.''
Unlike some coaches, who might have tossed the Miami tape into the Hudson River, Frank forced the Nets to relive a ghastly performance in which they scored a season-low 64 points, shot a season-low 28 percent and made a franchise-low 21 field goals.
''This is a different team now, in the sense of preparation and understanding what's at stake,'' Kidd said.
Once again, Kidd gave the credit to Frank, who knew something was different Wednesday when he arrived at Continental Arena and was not stopped by security personnel, who often mistake him for an eager fan.
Frank appeared more comfortable, partly because he tested out the sideline in the Nets' last home game, when Scott was ejected in the third quarter. Fewer than 24 hours later, Frank was given Scott's job.
''I thought you'd be nuts that I'd even be hired,'' Frank said.
Apparently, the rest of the league has not gotten used to the idea yet, either. After Frank guided his team to a victory at Orlando last week, a guest in the team hotel approached him and asked: ''Were you at the game tonight? Who won?''
Frank hardly hesitated: ''The Nets.''
He can say that again.
REBOUNDS
RUSTY HARDIN, the lawyer for Nets forward EDDIE GRIFFIN, indicated that he would not appeal a judge's decision to keep Griffin in the Harris County (Tex.) jail without bond. After a hearing Feb. 13, Hardin said, he hopes Griffin will be able to enter the John Lucas Rehabilitation Center in Houston.
PRO BASKETBALL
