A year has passed since President Bush promised to overhaul the Clean Air Act, and nothing has happened. He has not exerted himself on the issue, and his allies in Congress have refused to engage the Democrats in negotiations. His Environmental Protection Agency has sown doubts about his sincerity by undermining important parts of current law before any new rules are put in place. The hostility of the environmental community toward the White House increases daily, resulting in an atmosphere of general and mutual mistrust.
The nation's top scientific advisory group, the National Research Council, the research arm of the National Academy of Sciences, has stepped into this mess almost accidentally with an exhaustive report on the Clean Air Act, which will soon be 34 years old. The report identifies common ground as well as areas where the act could be improved without causing ideological warfare. It makes clear that the act has already done a world of good in reducing the pollutants that cause acid rain, smog and respiratory diseases, mainly by setting tough air quality standards that have in turn driven industry to develop new technologies.
The report also says the law's regulatory structure could be made clearer and more coherent. Pollutants, now regulated in isolation, could be grouped together so companies could devise more cost-effective strategies that apply to specific groups. And the federal government needs far more authority to regulate pollution that drifts across state lines. Ideas like these should be able to win bipartisan support, as should the panel's endorsement of the ''cap and trade'' strategy for cutting pollution, which would set national limits but allow companies to figure out the most cost-effective ways of getting there.
One sticking point remains: what to do about carbon dioxide emissions, which contribute to global warming. Present law does not address carbon emissions or, for that matter, warming, which was not an issue when the Clean Air Act was passed. Indeed, Congress, which requested the study, did not even ask the panel to address climate change. Not surprisingly, it was impossible to leave carbon dioxide out of the equation -- why ignore one pollutant while controlling the others? So the study recommended that carbon dioxide be included in any future clean air strategy.
The administration continues to resist the idea of mandatory limits on greenhouse gases. The panel suggests that it is an idea whose time has come.
