The White House on Wednesday defended its decision not to make public in November the discovery of a letter containing ricin, saying that testing at the time had determined the substance was not a risk to public health.
Under questioning from reporters, Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, provided a chronology of the episode in November that he said showed that the administration had promptly notified the Federal Bureau of Investigation and other agencies about the letter.
But law enforcement officials said the F.B.I. had not been made aware of the details for a week or more after the letter's discovery. They said the F.B.I. had been upset about the delay because it was investigating a similar letter containing ricin discovered in October at an airport mail office in Greenville, S.C.
It is not clear whether the two letters found last year have any link to the discovery of ricin this week in the mailroom of Senator Bill Frist of Tennessee, the Republican majority leader. But the partial shutdown of the Capitol and the continued concerns about the use of chemical and biological agents in terrorist attacks put pressure on the White House to explain its handling of the November episode.
Mr. McClellan said the White House was informed late on Nov. 12 that the Secret Service ''had identified and intercepted a suspicious substance at the offsite White House mail facility,'' which is at Bolling Air Force Base in Washington.
In the early hours of Nov. 13, Mr. McClellan said, White House officials conducted a conference call ''to make sure appropriate law enforcement and public health officials were informed and to determine the next steps.'' That call included representatives of the F.B.I., the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and the Postal Service, he said.
The next day, Nov. 14, the Centers for Disease Control completed ''exhaustive'' testing on the substance in the letter and found that it ''did not pose a public health risk,'' Mr. McClellan said.
Law enforcement officials said the ricin was sealed in a keychain-type vial inside the letter, and Mr. McClellan declined to discuss why it was not considered a health risk. He said he did not believe the president had been told of the letter at the time.
''We obviously take public health risks very seriously, and if there is information that needs to be shared, we share it appropriately,'' he said. ''I think you see that by what we have done to act on other threats that we face.''
