SUPPOSE you wanted to send an e-mail to someone's cellphone, but you only knew the phone number, not the entire e-mail address. Each cellular provider has its own e-mail domain, and the address syntax is neither consistent nor intuitive. What can you do?
If you're Guy Botham, you figure out a way to let your computer do the work for you. Mr. Botham created Teleflip (teleflip.com), an e-mail service that allows anyone to send an e-mail message to any text-equipped cellphone in North America without knowing that phone's e-mail address. The sender simply uses the telephone number followed by@teleflip.com, and the message reaches the phone a few minutes later.
''Even if you knew your friend had, say, Cingular, you'd never be able to figure out that the e-mail domain is mobile.mycingular.net without looking it up,'' Mr. Botham said. Neither he nor his business partner, Steve Stephani, who worked with him to write the programming behind Teleflip, would discuss the method by which each e-mail is steered to the proper phone, and they said they had applied for a patent on the algorithm.
Mr. Botham is in the process of incorporating Teleflip, which was born in a moment of frustration over a gift. ''I bought a friend of mine his own Web site for his birthday,'' said Mr. Botham, 40, who was working as a media marketing consultant in Los Angeles but was a computer systems analyst for Touche Ross in London in the 1980's. ''I wanted to surprise him by setting up all his e-mail addresses, but I didn't know who his cellular provider was. And that was that.''
The more research he did into the problem of how to send e-mail to a cellphone without knowing the service provider, the clearer it became how useful such a system would be. ''When you send e-mail to a computer, you don't know if the person is logged on and sitting at their computer at that moment,'' Mr. Botham said. ''When you send e-mail to a cellphone, you know there's a much better chance that the person is going to get the e-mail right there, right now.''
Teleflip's user base has doubled each week since the site was activated on Thanksgiving. ''It was just for friends and family at first, and then a few people started using it, and now I've got thousands of unique users,'' Mr. Botham said. ''I don't even recognize their area codes.''
Not surprisingly, Teleflip's rapid growth has attracted the attention of cellular companies, which say their main concern at this point is that the service will be used to send unwanted messages to their subscribers. ''There obviously are some concerns with how this is used, because one of the things everyone is trying to guard against is spam,'' said Ritch Blasi, a spokesman for AT&amp;T Wireless.
Mr. Botham, while acknowledging that no e-mail service is spam-proof, insists that he will do everything he can to prevent Teleflip from being used to send spam.
''We use many antispam measures,'' he said. ''We've just placed a limit on the number of e-mail addresses you can send to in a single message, and we've also limited the number of messages coming from any given e-mail server or I.P. address in a single day.''
Mr. Botham said he was currently seeking financial backing to expand Teleflip, although he said that such talks were at an early stage. He expects the service to make money by selling short advertisements that would be attached to e-mail messages using the Short Code standard. Under this system, which is widely used in Europe and Asia, where cellphone text messaging has been popular for years, a five-digit ''sponsor's number'' is appended to each message. The recipient can dial the number to receive, say, a free coupon for a product or service.
Jeffrey Nelson, a spokesman for Verizon Wireless, said the company expects substantial growth in text messaging. ''We're starting to see a huge uptake in text use, especially in the late teens, early 20's demographic, which is not a surprise,'' Mr. Nelson said.
He said Verizon and other companies were working on their own Short Code applications. ''With a code,'' he explained, ''users can vote somebody off an island, drive a plotline on a TV show, or vote for N.B.A. All-Stars.''
Mr. Nelson noted that cellphone e-mail has been slower to catch on in the United States than it has in the rest of the world. ''There's a very different way of communicating in the U.S. than in Europe and Asia,'' he said. ''We are much more a voice-centered, voice-telephone-using society.''
But Howard Rheingold, whose book ''Smart Mobs: The Next Social Revolution'' (Perseus Publishing, 2002) examines how people are using wireless technologies, discounts that explanation. ''In America, from the beginning, cellular voice calls were cheaper than they were in the rest of the world,'' he said. ''If we'd had the same pricing structure they had in Europe, where text was cheaper than voice, we would have been using text on our cellphones too.''
Mr. Rheingold said that systems like Teleflip represent the first wave of a significant cultural shift. ''Taking the kind of communications that the Internet provides, untethering it from desktop and putting it in your pocket creates something more than just the Internet on a telephone,'' he said. ''It changes where the Internet is, and who uses the Internet. The cellphone is now the poor person's Internet terminal.''
Mr. Botham himself is not yet ready to say where Teleflip is headed. ''Honestly, I'm not sure how it's going to evolve,'' he said. ''This is all happening so fast. I just sit here at night watching the logs coming through, and it blows me away that someone in Alabama is sending a message through my server.''
