If there was any question about the level of animosity that Steven P. Jobs, the chief executive of Pixar Animation Studios, has for Michael D. Eisner, the chairman of Walt Disney, it was answered Wednesday during Pixar's quarterly earnings call.
Mr. Jobs, who had maintained a public silence since breaking off talks with Disney last week on extending their 13-year partnership, described two of Disney's recent animated films, ''Treasure Planet'' and ''Brother Bear,'' as bombs. He said Disney's sequels to ''The Lion King'' and ''Peter Pan'' were ''embarrassing.'' And he even took a swipe at Mr. Eisner himself, pointing out a recent newspaper article in which Mr. Eisner said Pixar was headed for a reality check with the release of ''Finding Nemo.''
''As you know, it turned out differently,'' Mr. Jobs said, noting that ''Finding Nemo'' had already brought in $792 million at the worldwide box office, making it the top-grossing movie last year.
It was classic Steve Jobs, part showman, part salesman. But Mr. Jobs also laid out future plans for Pixar without Disney as a marketing or distribution partner. Mr. Jobs told analysts that further talks with Disney were ''not very likely'' and that beginning with movies released in 2006, Pixar would finance 100 percent of its own films. (Disney and Pixar currently have an agreement to finance Pixar films jointly and split the profits equally.) Mr. Jobs also said that he would begin negotiating in March with four major Hollywood film studios to distribute Pixar's films, though he declined to identify them. He said he also planned to make a decision by the fall.
''It is clear we are wanted by others,'' Mr. Jobs said.
In contrast to rivals like DreamWorks and now Disney, Mr. Jobs said that Pixar did not plan to produce more than one film a year, largely because of the difficulty in finding talented storytellers. ''Disney tried to go from one picture to two, one of the factors prescribed to its downfall,'' he said in an interview. ''We'd rather have one great one a year than two so-so ones.''
And in what seemed to be one of the most contentious points in the talks between Disney and Pixar, Mr. Jobs said he did not foresee making sequels to highly successful films like ''Monsters, Inc.'' and ''Finding Nemo'' that were jointly financed with Disney.
Further, he did not endorse Disney doing so either, even though it can. ''We feel sick about Disney doing sequels,'' Mr. Jobs said.
Disney's response to Mr. Jobs on Wednesday was no less pointed. ''It is unfortunate that Steve Jobs has grossly mischaracterized good-faith negotiations to reach agreement on an extension of the present, successful partnership that has been beneficial to shareholders of both Pixar and Disney,'' said Zenia Mucha, a spokeswoman for Disney. ''It's sad and unfortunate that he has resorted to insults and name-calling in the wake of the disagreement. We expected better of him.''
One person who has talked to Mr. Eisner said earlier this week that he would not be opposed to renewed talks with Mr. Jobs, but only if Disney could strike what he thought was an equitable deal. Mr. Eisner is the largest owner of Disney stock now and, the person said, ''thinks like a shareholder.''
Some executives in Hollywood have wondered whether calling off the talks was a negotiating tactic by Mr. Jobs to drive Disney back to the bargaining table. But that seemed unlikely at this stage, given the barbs between the two companies on Wednesday. Two executives of Disney's competitors, which Mr. Jobs is expected to negotiate with, said they thought that Disney was the best partner for Pixar despite the failed talks. But they added that they would be glad to distribute Pixar's movies.
That is because Pixar is still considered a money maker. Pixar reported what Mr. Jobs said was the most profitable year in its history. The company reported net income of $83.9 million for the fourth quarter, or $1.44 a share, compared with $17 million, or 31 cents a share, in the period a year earlier. The increase was largely from the theatrical and home video success of ''Finding Nemo.''
Revenue was $164 million, compared with $39 million in the quarter a year earlier. For fiscal 2003, net income was $124.7 million, compared with $89.9 million the year before. Annual revenue was $262.5 million, up from $202 million.
''We know there is clearly change in the air,'' Mr. Jobs said. ''Some people are disquieted by change. We know the best is yet to come.''
