Attorney General John Ashcroft rebuffed calls from Congressional Democrats and abortion rights groups on Thursday to drop the Justice Department's demands for abortion records from a half-dozen hospitals.
Mr. Ashcroft said the records were essential to the department's courtroom defense of a new law banning what he called ''the rather horrendous practice of partial-birth abortions.''
A group of doctors have sued to overturn the law, which was passed by Congress last November and signed by President Bush. They say they have performed medically necessary abortions that would now be banned.
Mr. Ashcroft told reporters that ''if the central issue in the case, an issue raised by those who brought the case, is medical necessity, we need to look at medical records to find out if indeed there was medical necessity.'' He refused to say whether he had personally signed off on the subpoenas for the records.
The department has subpoenaed at least six hospitals, in New York City, Philadelphia, Chicago and Ann Arbor, Mich., to obtain medical histories for women who have had abortions in the last three years performed by the doctors now suing the government. A federal judge in Chicago has thrown out a subpoena against Northwestern University Medical Center because he said it was a ''significant intrusion'' on patient privacy, and hospital administrators in other cities are contesting the demand as well.
Government lawyers do not want the names or other identifying information about the women, Mr. Ashcroft said. He said the Justice Department was sensitive to privacy concerns, ''and so we took, I believe, every precaution possible'' to protect patient confidentiality.
But some Democrats in Congress, abortion rights groups and civil liberties advocates condemned the records demand on Thursday and called for Mr. Ashcroft to drop the subpoenas.
''It is clear from both federal and state laws that strong privacy restrictions are in place to prevent the kind of intrusive breach of medical privacy that these actions represent,'' said Representative Rahm Emanuel, an Illinois Democrat who has written legislation restricting the public use of medical records.
Representative Eliot L. Engel, Democrat of the Bronx, said, ''All Americans should have the right to visit their doctor and receive sound medical attention without the fear of Big Brother looking into those records.''
