Directed by Manuel Boursinhac  In French, with English subtitles  R, 116 minutes
A fumbling tribute to the philosophical French gangster films of the 1950's, like Jean-Pierre Melville's ''Bob le Flambeur'' and Jacques Becker's ''Touchez-Pas au Grisbi,'' Manuel Boursinhac's film ''La Mentale the Code'' shifts the underworld action from its traditional location in the Pigalle neighborhood of Paris to the new loci of criminal activity, the so-called citis. Vast concrete-block structures, the citis were built on the fringes of urban areas to contain the poor in an environment removed from actual economic and historical centers.
This warehousing of the poor (the residents are mainly of North African descent, lured to France in search of work) was meant to remove minorities from the old urban slums but succeeded mainly in cutting them off from all political and economic life. There are few jobs around the citis and, with little or no public transportation, few ways of escaping them to find legitimate employment.
The film, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, features two stars of the new French action cinema, Samuel Le Bihan (''Brotherhood of the Wolf'') and Samy Naceri (the resourceful cab driver in the ''Taxi'' series, produced by Luc Besson, now in its third successful installment). Though ''Brotherhood'' had a brief American run, these films are usually not exported, for the very good reason that American audiences are generally not interested in European imitations of their own genre cinema.
''La Mentale the Code'' (the awkward title is a result of the distributor's melding of the French original title and its English translation) probably should have stayed on a shelf back in Paris as well. The story is yawningly familiar: Mr. Le Bihan plays Dris, a former gangster who has emerged from four years in prison determined to make a new life with the squeaky-clean, blue-eyed Lise (Marie Guillard). But his best friend from childhood, the successful gangster Yanis (Mr. Naceri), wants Dris in on a big armored-car heist he is planning. He assigns the Gypsy prostitute Nina (Clotilde Courau, a burgeoning Jennifer Jones type), to rekindle her old romance with Dris and pull him back into the fold.
There is a lot of talk about ''la mentale'' (a mental state more than a code) that unites the suburban gangsters: no snitching, no betrayals, no invasion of other gangs' territory. Of course, the Napoleonic Yanis, like boatloads of Scarfaces before him, sees no reason that these petty rules should apply to him.
A gang war inevitably ensues, pitting Yanis's men against the armies of an older mob chieftain, an equally unscrupulous type who does not hesitate to kidnap Yanis's callow younger brother. The violence is convulsive but not cathartic, and the philosophizing hardly has the world-weary authority of Jean Gabin in ''Grisbi.'' It remains to be seen what the New York art-house audience will make of this bloody, low-brow Euro-programmer, grandly inflated in prestige by the mere fact of being imported.
''La Mentale the Code'' has been rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has gunplay, some salty subtitled language and occasional eroticism.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
