In a decision likely to carry ramifications for Indonesia's first direct presidential elections this year, the country's Supreme Court on Thursday overturned a corruption conviction against a powerful politician.
The court ruling in favor of the politician, Akbar Tandjung, 58, the parliamentary speaker and leader of the Golkar Party, leaves the way open for Mr. Akbar to run for the presidency.
Golkar was the main political vehicle for the deposed authoritarian leader, Gen. Suharto, whom Mr. Akbar served for many years.
After an all-day reading by a five- judge panel, Judge Paulus Lotulong finally got to the crux of the ruling at dusk on Thursday evening.
''According to the team of judges, we find that the defendant should not have been found guilty,'' the judge said. He called for Mr. Akbar's name to be ''rehabilitated.''
Columns of riot police officers and a water cannon were positioned outside the courthouse, but the judge's reading took so long that many of the student demonstrators who planned protests against Mr. Akbar had left by the end of the day.
Mr. Akbar was found guilty in September 2002 of embezzling nearly $4.8 million of state funds intended for a 1999 food program for the poor. The money ended up in the Golkar Party's coffers, the prosecution said.
In January 2003, the Jakarta High Court upheld the guilty verdict. Mr. Akbar was sentenced to three years in jail, but he remained free and continued to hold his top government and political jobs.
Thursday's positive outcome for Mr. Akbar, whose political fate had been in doubt, will allow him to consolidate his already firm control of the Golkar Party machinery, considered the most disciplined in the country.
He is described in the current issue of the respected weekly magazine Tempo as one of the ''old faces'' of ''unstoppable'' political endurance.
Indonesia, the world's most populous Muslim country, is scheduled to hold direct presidential elections on July 5. Parliamentary elections, in which political analysts believe Golkar will do well, are scheduled for April 5.
Both the presidential and parliamentary contests will be dominated by the two nationalist secular parties, Golkar and President Megawati Sukarnoputri's party, the Indonesian Democratic Party for Struggle. The less well-established religious Islamic parties are expected to receive a smaller percentage of votes, political analysts say.
The court's decision will dampen the presidential prospects of Gen. Wiranto, a retired general, who is running for the Golkar nomination and whose charismatic style appeared to be proving popular among grass-roots voters.
The general has been campaigning on an anticorruption platform aimed at both Mrs. Megawati and Mr. Akbar.
General Wiranto has been charged by a United Nations Human Rights Court in East Timor with crimes against humanity. He was the head of the Indonesian military during the 1999 violence when the East Timorese were voting for independence from Indonesia.
In one respect, the court's ruling is considered a positive development for Mrs. Megawati, whose popularity had faded in the past year. She had feared a strong challenge from General Wiranto, and some of her political colleagues have made no secret of their hope that the official clearing of Mr. Akbar's name could cripple the general's campaign.
