One of the three credit-rating agencies that follow Westchester County downgraded its rating on the county's bonds on Thursday, citing outside budgetary pressures.
The agency, Fitch Ratings, lowered the rating to AA+ from AAA, the highest. The other two agencies, Moody's Investor Service and Standard &amp; Poor's, did not move to lower their ratings, which remain at AAA. But Moody's has had the county on a ''watch'' list for a month, meaning it could soon lower its rating. The county has $782.3 million in outstanding general obligation bonds.
Fitch's downgrade, which is likely to make it somewhat more expensive for Westchester to borrow money, came after the County Legislature amended its budget on Tuesday by enacting a nearly 19 percent increase in property taxes. A credit rating is one factor that determines the interest rate paid on bonds.
The agency said the downgrade reflected rising state-mandated expenses like Medicaid and pension costs and the county's exposure to the financial troubles at Westchester Medical Center in Valhalla. The county, which operated the hospital until it was spun off in 1998, guarantees about $260 million of its debt.
County officials expressed disappointment over the downgrade, but said they were buoyed that the other agencies had so far maintained the AAA rating. Westchester is the only county in the state with such a rating.
''This is only a slight downgrade, and it's not that surprising in light of what they're really focusing on,'' said William J. Ryan, chairman of the County Legislature. ''We have an excellent record of addressing problems and overcoming them, and we'll play a major role in the corrective action necessary to put the medical center back on its feet.''
Robyn Kapiloff, a vice president at Moody's and the lead analyst for Westchester, said there was ''nothing imminent'' in terms of a downgrade and praised this week's budget resolution.
The Legislature closed a large gap by increasing property taxes and by winning permission from state lawmakers to raise the sales tax, as well as mortgage and auto-use taxes. And it created a contingency fund to help with the hospital's financial crisis.
''They generated significant recurring revenue, and they added flexibility back into the budget with the contingency reserve,'' Ms. Kapiloff said. Still, she cautioned that the county's recent placement on the agency's ''watch list,'' coupled with a ''negative outlook,'' indicated growing concern.
Robin L. Prunty, a director in the public finance department of Standard &amp; Poor's, which has a ''stable outlook'' for the county's credit rating, also liked the terms of the 2004 budget, calling it ''proactive.''
