Win a Date With Tad Hamilton!  Kate Bosworth, Topher Grace, Josh Duhamel, Nathan Lane, Sean Hayes, Gary Cole, Ginnifer Goodwin  Directed by Robert Luketic  PG-13 91 minutes
With a wholesome image tarnished by high-profile carousing, the screen idol Tad Hamilton (Mr. Duhamel) needs to tone down quite a few notches and get back into his boy-next-door mode. So his agent (Mr. Lane) and manager (Mr. Hayes) run a contest offering him as a date for someone out there in his huge fan base, and the cleaner and sweeter the better.
The winner, Rosalee Futch (Ms. Bosworth) of Frazier's Bottom, W.Va., is tailor-made. Rosalee works at the local grocery store and is the warmest, nicest, most genuine Tad Hamilton fanatic any Hollywood hustle could hope for. And, Tad notes, she's pretty.
Whizzed to Los Angeles in Tad's jet and deposited in his limousine, she gets carsick and throws up. Otherwise their date goes moderately well, with Tad driving her out to an overlook above the city and suggesting they retreat to his digitally operated house.
Before Rosalee left home, her secret admirer, Pete (Mr. Grace), her boss at the store, advised her to ''guard her carnal treasure.'' That's a strange way to put it, but the sensible Rosalee needs no prompting on that score and demurely has Tad drop her back at her hotel.
But Tad is smitten (sort of) and follows her back to West Virginia, where he buys a farm and hopes that Rosalee's goodness will rub off on him. A rivalry ensues with Pete, who realizes he is outgunned and in a display of his own nobility advises Tad on how to plumb Rosalee's feelings. Will Pete's behavior be rewarded?
VIOLENCE -- None.  SEX -- Activity is suggested but doesn't proceed beyond kissing in a prone position on a bed.  PROFANITY -- Some strong language.
For Which Children?  UNDER AGE 10 -- There's nothing particularly damaging, but this isn't the most suitable fare.  AGES 10-13 -- Parents might object to some slightly off-color elements, but basically the film is fine.
Disney's Teacher's Pet  With the voices of Nathan Lane, Kelsey Grammer, Shaun Fleming, Debra Jo Rupp, David Ogden Stiers, Jerry Stiller  Directed by Timothy Bjorklund  PG 74 minutes
On the last day of school, Spot (Mr. Lane), the talkative blue dog of the animated television series, finds himself on the wrong end of the leash. Raising his voice in song, he belts out his ambition: ''I Wanna Be a Boy.'' Around humans he dresses up in shorts and Clark Kent glasses and becomes Scott (Mr. Lane), a bright kid and, as the title states, a teacher's favorite.
Still, he aspires to be more than man's best friend to Leonard (Shaun Fleming), his 8-year-old master. Spot wants to be Leonard's best human pal, too, and is crestfallen when Leonard's mom, Mrs. Helperman (Ms. Rupp), herds the boy into the family motor home and heads off for two weeks in Florida. The dog stays home.
For a while Spot-Scott copes with being left behind, but then he hears about a Dr. Krank (Mr. Grammer) who can turn animals into humans. Krank is based in Florida. Catching up with the motor home, Spot-Scott assumes many disguises to fool Mrs. Helperman and get himself on board.
Leonard thinks Spot has caught up with the motor home out of friendship. That's true in part, but eventually the dog has to admit his other motive. But while Krank can indeed perform transformations as advertised, the creatures he works on tend to be reptilian lower forms that turn into ugly mutations. Spot volunteers to be Krank's first mammal, which is a mistake. Krank's device is almost too efficient, necessitating some desperate attempts at role reversal. Will Spot end up being Leonard's dog or his daddy?
VIOLENCE -- None.  SEX -- At one point there is a possibility that the human Spot will wind up sleeping with Leonard's mom, but this will go over the heads of young children.  PROFANITY -- Some naughty talk that will offend few.
For Which Children?  AGES 3-6 -- With characters breaking out in song at every juncture, the film becomes a witty, stylized spoof of a Broadway musical. This bracket won't understand or appreciate that, and some will be put off by an animated movie that is anything but standard. But most will find Spot and Leonard entertaining enough.  AGES 7-10 -- It may be a little too special for some, but most should love it.  AGES 11 AND UP -- Very fine.
The Perfect Score  Erika Christensen, Chris Evans, Bryan Greenberg, Scarlett Johansson, Darius Miles, Leonardo Nam  Directed by Brian Robbins  PG-13 110 minutes
In terms of grade point average (G.P.A.) and class rank, they are all over the spectrum, but all share more or less the same aversion: the SAT, the aptitude test that hangs heavily over their college plans.
Kyle (Mr. Evans), with a 1020 combined SAT score in a trial run, needs a 1430 or so to have a chance at Cornell. Anna (Ms. Christensen) ranks second in their class, but she froze up during her first try and learns that a 1390 is the lowest SAT score ever to get into Brown, her first choice (or her parents' first choice). Matty (Mr. Greenberg) has a G.P.A. of 2.3 (out of 4), and his SAT misses the cut at the University of Maryland.
So Kyle decides to break into the offices of the Educational Testing Service, which devises the tests, and steal the answers. The coolest kid, Francesca (Ms. Johansson), isn't that exercised about the SAT's, but her father owns the office building, so she has access and thinks a break-in might be different.
Then there's Desmond (Mr. Miles of the Portland Trail Blazers), the frustrated basketball prospect who needs a combined 900 to get into St. John's and knows he'll score a perfect 800 in the math part of the test. It's the other 100 (in English) that he's worried about. In many ways the smartest of the crew, Roy (Mr. Nam) ranks 281st in a class of 281 and isn't planning on college, but he handles the computer finagling during the break-in.
This isn't mission impossible. A casual pace during the heist allows plenty of talk about the pressures and faults of standardized testing. (Rich white guys make up the test, while Asian chicks get the best scores.) In the end maybe they don't need the answers after all.
VIOLENCE -- None.  SEX -- A simulated situation and some strong suggestions.  PROFANITY -- A lot (including that word).
For Which Children?  UNDER AGE 11 -- Inappropriate in many respects, and too talky and slow-moving.  AGES 11-13 -- Parents willing, a teenage comedy has appeal.
TAKING THE CHILDREN
