Ted Sampley, a retired Green Beret who runs a Web site for veterans devoted to defeating John Kerry, says he spent months looking for a photograph of Mr. Kerry and Jane Fonda, the actress whose antiwar protests still evoke bitter memories. Then, last week, a message from a stranger arrived by e-mail, telling him precisely where he could find one.
For $179, he bought the image and posted it on his site. By Wednesday it was popping up all over the Internet and on television. Mr. Sampley, of Kinston, N.C., says he does not know who tipped him off to the photograph, and he does not care. ''I'm going to use it as much as possible,'' he said.
He is not the only one. With Mr. Bush answering questions about his National Guard service, conservatives are working hard to shine an unflattering spotlight on Mr. Kerry's antiwar activities and his record on military and intelligence matters in the Senate.
Commentators, including Rush Limbaugh and Sean Hannity, have been talking up the Fonda photograph. National Review has a cover article entitled ''The Senator's Other War Record.'' It says Mr. Kerry, who returned from Vietnam a highly decorated veteran and then led protests against the war, ''helped to slander a generation of soldiers who had done their duty with honor and restraint.'' The Weekly Standard is highlighting a 1971 book co-written by Mr. Kerry, ''The New Soldier,'' which commemorated a march on Washington by Vietnam Veterans Against the War.
And on Thursday, a new photograph of the senator and the actress began circulating via e-mail. Unlike the image Mr. Sampley bought, which shows Mr. Kerry seated several rows behind Ms. Fonda, this picture -- its origins are unclear -- shows them side by side, Ms. Fonda behind a microphone and Mr. Kerry, holding a notebook, to her right.
In a sense, the examination of Mr. Kerry's record as a war protester is the mirror image of the Democrats' focus on Mr. Bush's military record. Spokesmen for the president's re-election and the Republican National Committee say they have no connection to the Kerry-Fonda photographs or the articles about Mr. Kerry's past. And some Republican strategists privately say the president and his campaign are best served by avoiding the issue altogether.
But just as Mr. Kerry has organized fellow Vietnam veterans on his behalf, the president's re-election campaign is putting together ''a very strong organization of veterans in support of President Bush,'' a campaign spokesman, Scott Stanzel, said. One of them, Joe Repya, a retired Army lieutenant colonel from Minnesota, says he has been writing letters to newspaper editors defending Mr. Bush. He said none had been published so far.
At the same time, Ed Gillespie, the chairman of the Republican National Committee, has been giving speeches around the country detailing Mr. Kerry's votes on military and intelligence programs, including his 1984 opposition to the missile defense program promoted by Ronald Reagan and his 1991 Senate vote opposing the use of force in Iraq.
''John Kerry has a history of hypocrisy on defense issues,'' said a spokeswoman for the committee, Christine Iverson. She said Mr. Kerry's ''rhetoric as a presidential candidate does not match his record as a United States senator.''
But officials with the Kerry campaign provided documents showing that Mr. Kerry questioned the science behind the Reagan-era missile program, and quoting him as saying he believed the country needed more time in 1991 to build support for the war in the Persian Gulf.
''This is part of an overall slime-and-defend strategy,'' said Max Cleland, the former Georgia senator and Vietnam veteran who has been campaigning for Mr. Kerry. ''They don't want to talk about Vietnam, and they don't want their candidates to talk about veterans' issues because it hurts the president.''
One Republican, a friend of Mr. Cleland who is running for statewide office in Nevada, said he attended a meeting where officials from the Bush re-election campaign urged Republican candidates not to talk about Vietnam.
''Basically, they're saying don't bring up veterans' issues and don't bring up Vietnam; our surrogates will take care of it,'' said the candidate, Ed Gobel.
Mr. Gobel is running in a Republican primary for a seat in the Nevada state assembly, but says he is opposed by a candidate who has the backing of the party.
Bill McInturff, a Republican pollster, said Republicans believed Mr. Kerry's Senate votes would be a ''potentially very potent'' issue against him. ''You could not ask for a clearer contrast with a Republican position than that entire array of issues over 20 years,'' he said.
But whether an exploration of Mr. Kerry's antiwar record will hurt him politically is unclear. Bill Kristol, the editor of The Weekly Standard, which ran the article about Mr. Kerry's 1971 book, said he did not believe voters would pay much heed to what either Mr. Bush or Mr. Kerry did more than three decades ago. ''This election will turn on the war in Iraq, not on the war in Vietnam,'' Mr. Kristol said.
Even so, Jane Fonda still draws the ire of some veterans. She earned the nickname Hanoi Jane for her 1972 trip to North Vietnam, where she criticized the United States government over Hanoi Radio.
The photograph with Mr. Kerry was taken two years earlier. But it brings up deep memories for people like Mr. Sampley, who said he had been seething for years over Mr. Kerry's protests, including one in which he threw away his ribbons and some war medals, though not his own. Mr. Sampley publishes an Internet newspaper for veterans; two weeks ago, he established a Web site, www.vietnamveteransagainstjohn kerry.com.
''Jane Fonda, to Vietnam vets is the symbol of all this,'' said Mr. Sampley, who says he is not supporting any presidential candidate, including President Bush. ''That's why they don't want these pictures out, and that's why, I'm sure, some other people want them out.''
