Americans poured a near record amount into stock mutual funds in January, suggesting that last year's rebound from a three-year rout had restored investors' confidence in stocks.
But the inflow of $40.8 billion last month may not be as positive as it appears. Some analysts consider it a sign that investors may be too bullish, too willing to expect last year's enormous gains to be repeated. The mutual fund data show that many investors are jumping into 2003's best bets, like foreign and smaller company stocks, which have already had big runs.
''The economic fundamentals are good -- no one disputes that,'' said Thomas McManus, equity strategist at Banc of America Securities. ''But expectations are high. People should rein in their expectations after a big year like 2003.''
The January flows into stock mutual funds, reported yesterday by AMG Data Services and the third best for any month since 1992, show that investors remain strongly connected to funds despite regulatory investigations into trading practices.
Part of the stock fund gains appear to be coming from people saving for retirement. Transfers to stock accounts from fixed-income accounts in 401(k) plans last month were at their highest rate since the Hewitt 401(k) index began tracking such changes in 1997. After a long lull, trading has picked up in recent months at brokerage firms as well. At Charles Schwab, investors placed an average of 221,000 stock trades daily for the first 12 days of January, the highest level in three years and nearly double that for the full month of January last year.
Other gauges of sentiment support the notion that stocks are the place to be. The Market Vane Bullish Consensus, which measures the recommendations of market advisers, stands at 70 percent, a 24-month high and above the 61 percent level it reached in January 2000, before the bull market began unraveling in March of that year. The average of the bullish sentiment index of the American Association of Individual Investors is 61 percent this year, up from 47 percent last year.
There is reason for the renewed faith. No less than Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, said this week that the economy should grow at a brisk pace this year. Mr. Greenspan also said he expected worker productivity to be strong and interest rates to remain low, which should buoy corporate earnings.
The three main stock market gauges are up 43 percent or more since the market revival began last March, and neither the Dow Jones industrial average nor the Standard &amp; Poor's 500-stock index have suffered a significant sell-off since April. The Dow closed at its highest level in more than two and a half years on Wednesday, fueled by Mr. Greenspan's remarks and the Disney takeover proposal, though it and the market's other main gauges slipped yesterday.
Despite the stock gains and all the positive indicators of sentiment, many analysts see reasons to be cautious. The last time money poured into stock mutual funds at a pace like this was in the first two months of 2000, with $42.7 billion in January and a record $46 billion in February, according to AMG's data, which goes back to 1992. In March, the stock market bubble burst, sending the S.&amp;P. 500 index down as much as 49.1 percent in the three-year sell-off and the Nasdaq composite index down 77.9 percent.
Analysts are not predicting a sell-off like 2000 now. But some are more inclined to restrain investors than to say keep on coming. The Market Vane Bullish Consensus ''is in what we consider nosebleed territory,'' said Rich Ishida, senior market analyst at Market Vane, which compiles a broad range of market indicators. ''We are advising anyone who is real bullish to be cautious.''
Some analysts are predicting that the market is ready for a fall of 5 percent or more because the Dow and the S.&amp;P. 500 have been rising without such a correction for 318 days, the 11th-longest run since 1932, according to Birinyi Associates.
At the Leuthold Group, which is a money management and research firm in Minneapolis, managers have reduced their allocation of stocks to 60 percent from 70 percent at the beginning of January. ''We are a little bit concerned by the overall bullishness in the market right now,'' said Andrew Engel, senior research analyst at the Leuthold Group.
Mr. McManus of Banc of America Securities says many people begin the year putting their money where they wish they had put it the previous year. Nearly 24 percent, or $9.7 billion, of the $40.8 billion that went into stock funds in January flowed into international stock funds, which invest most of their money abroad, according to AMG.
The amount is a record, surpassing $8.9 billion in February 2000. It also suggests that investors are betting on a decline in the dollar to help bolster their returns, as the dollar's fall did last year. (When the dollar falls in value, investments made abroad in other currencies are worth more when translated back into dollars.)
About $2 billion, or 4.9 percent of the January total, went into global funds, which invest their money both abroad and in the United States.
''The numbers are less supportive of the market than you would think,'' said Ken Safian, head of Safian Investment Research. ''If a lot goes into international, that will not have a big impact on our market.''
The data show that $5.4 billion, or 13.1 percent, went into small-cap funds, which invest in smaller companies. That was the fourth-best month since 1992. Some of these stocks can be found in the Nasdaq composite index but not in the Dow or the S.&amp;P. 500.
Mr. McManus said that the money flowing into smaller-company stocks was one reason the Russell 2000 index of these companies was up 6.4 percent this year, more than 1.75 times the rise of the three main market gauges. Last year, the Russell index rose 45.4 percent, almost as much as the Nasdaq and about 20 percentage points more than the Dow and the S.&amp;P. 500.
''There is very little value in the small-cap area at these prices,'' Mr. McManus said. ''But people are still chasing what worked last year.''
Mr. Engel of Leuthold expects stocks to end the year with gains. But he considers the surge in bullishness and the pursuit of last year's hot stocks a sign the market is ready for a fall -- maybe a decline of 7 percent to 10 percent in the S.&amp;P. 500.
''It may be time,'' he said, ''to take some money off the table for a better buying opportunity in the next month or two.''
THE MARKETS
