Two New York City police detectives and a sergeant have been placed on desk duty and a second sergeant has been transferred in connection with an investigation into corruption accusations in a Queens police precinct, several police officials, who spoke on the condition of anonymity, said last night.
The investigation has focused in some measure on accusations of shakedowns of members of the immigrant community in the 102nd Precinct, which covers Richmond Hill, according to several people with knowledge of the inquiry, who also spoke on the condition of anonymity. And while the overall scope of the investigation and the accuracy of the accusations was unclear last night, some of them said it could also include accusations of misconduct involving green cards and passports and off-duty employment.
Investigators from the Police Department's Internal Affairs Bureau were at the precinct on Wednesday, examining documents as part of the inquiry, several officials said.
Among the Internal Affairs officials at the station house, at 87-34 118th Street, was the bureau's second-highest ranking chief, an unusual level of attention, one person with knowledge of the inquiry said.
The investigation comes just two months after a detective and his retired partner were arrested in a stunningly audacious scheme in which, prosecutors said, they conspired with a drug-money courier and stole $169,000 in narcotics proceeds in broad daylight.
That investigation expanded to focus on several other active and retired officers who worked in a narcotics unit in Upper Manhattan.
One of the two detectives reassigned yesterday, Rudranauth Toolasprashad, served as the 102nd Precinct's community affairs officer, officials said, and the other, Ramon Reuther, worked in the precinct's detective squad. Both men have been on the force since 1990.
Detective Toolasprashad served as a liaison with the diverse community in the precinct, which includes people from Guyana, India and Pakistan, often serving as a translator, one person with knowledge of the inquiry said.
The actions taken against the two detectives and a sergeant, Christophe Olsen, left them on the department payroll, a less stringent move than an unpaid suspension.
Neither criminal nor administrative charges have been filed against any of the men, several officials said.
Part of the investigation seems to focus on whether any officer used his power to extort money from immigrants, a person with knowledge of the inquiry said, indicating that he may have used that relationship to extort money from illegal immigrants with a promise of protection.
Sergeant Olsen was also reassigned to desk duty as part of the investigation, several officials said. A second sergeant, who headed the detective squad, was transferred to another command for failing to supervise, but he remained on full duty.
At least two other detectives who work in the precinct squad have been questioned, but they do not seem to be targets of the inquiry, according to one person with knowledge of it.
