In ''The Dreamers,'' Bernardo Bertolucci's celebration of youthful cinephilia, two youthful cinephiles argue about the relative merits of Buster Keaton and Charlie Chaplin. Keaton seems to be prevailing until the Chaplin fan plays his trump card -- the famous scene from ''City Lights'' in which the blind flower seller, her sight restored thanks to an operation paid for by the Little Tramp, recognizes her benefactor by touching his face. That moment, which Mr. Bertolucci inserts into ''The Dreamers,'' provides the final image in Richard Schickel's ''Charlie: The Life and Art of Charles Chaplin,'' a new documentary that opens today in Manhattan.
Chaplin, perhaps the first film artist to become an international pop-cultural icon, has also inspired some of the most memorable writing on film. Mr. Schickel is an invaluable critic and historian, and this film, made up of old clips and talking-head interviews, is in effect a biographical and critical essay. As such it makes a fitting companion to Robert Warshow's matchless explication of Chaplin's appeal and James Agee's great essay, first published in Life in 1949, on the masters of silent-film comedy. ''Charlie'' is very much a writer's film: Mr. Schickel's elegant, occasionally knotty prose, read by Sydney Pollack, offers a clear, nuanced interpretation of the artist's work in relation to his life.
Chaplin's personal life and political views, which caused him frequent trouble, are duly investigated, but it is clear that Mr. Schickel's greater interest is in the movies themselves, and he is generous in his attention to the intricacies of Chaplin's work as a filmmaker and as a performer. He is helped by the expert analyses of Johnny Depp and Bill Irwin, who illuminate the physical and emotional dimensions of the Little Tramp persona.
Chaplin's skill as a director is explored by Martin Scorsese, who once again demonstrates, as he did in his own documentary ''Il Mio Viaggio in Italia,'' that he can apply the same ardor and intelligence to explaining movies that he does to making them. Mr. Scorsese's shot-by-shot explication of ''A Woman of Paris'' -- the critically beloved, widely ignored 1923 melodrama in which Chaplin appeared only in a fleeting cameo -- is like a mini-seminar in film appreciation.
And Mr. Schickel's film, dawdling over some phases in Mr. Chaplin's career and hurrying through others, is like a course in cultural history taught by a witty, slightly dyspeptic professor. As the jaunty images flicker past -- including immortal gags from the early Keystone shorts, elaborate comic flights from the silent features, and bits of old newsreel -- two parallel narratives, one personal and one historical, start to emerge.
The intimate story of Chaplin's life is full of sorrow and scandal, which in Mr. Schickel's account shadowed even his most antic and carefree art. His childhood of poverty and parental abandonment and his many dalliances and marriages, often with teenage girls, are dealt with circumspectly and with a hint of reluctance. Mr. Schickel is admirably uncomfortable with both sensationalism and psychobiography, but he also acknowledges that the scars of youth and the desires of adulthood are part of any artist's creative personality.
The larger history is equally fascinating and in some ways just as elusive. Chaplin's career, which began in 1914 and stretched into the 1950's, coincided with the growth of the movies as a powerful, global medium of mass entertainment. Chaplin, who grew up in the music halls of working-class London, embodied both the humble cultural origins of the movies and their universal, democratic potential.
In the 1930's Chaplin's stubborn humanism led him to make more overtly political films like ''Modern Times'' (which Schickel, perhaps overly suspicious of didacticism, underrates) and ''The Great Dictator.'' His politics eventually landed him in trouble, as McCarthy-era red-baiting (and the personal animus of J. Edgar Hoover) drove him into exile in Switzerland.
Chaplin's reputation has waxed and waned, but his appeal can never be exhausted, as anyone who has watched his films with even the most media-saturated, prematurely jaded modern child can attest. Woody Allen, another of Mr. Schickel's interview subjects (and the subject of one of his previous documentaries) declares that some of Chaplin's bits will still inspire laughter a thousand years from now. And he is surely right, assuming that our species and our technologies survive. Like the blind girl in ''City Lights,'' we cannot fail to recognize Chaplin, even when we see him for the first time.
CHARLIE  The Life and Art of Charles Chaplin
Written and directed by Richard Schickel; directors of photography, Kris Denton, Thomas Albrecht, Rob Goldie, John Halliday, Ross Keith and Graham Smith; edited by Bryan McKenzie; music by Charles Chaplin; produced by Mr. Schickel, Doug Freeman and Mr. McKenzie; released by Warner Home Video. At Landmark's Sunshine Cinema, 139-143 East Houston Street, East Village. Running time: 133 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Sydney Pollack (Narrator) and Woody Allen, Martin Scorsese, Johnny Depp, Bill Irwin and Robert Downey Jr.
FILM REVIEW
