There were teapots on the tables set alongside the catwalk at Cynthia Rowley's show last night, so why not a tempest? Backstage at the conclusion of Ms. Rowley's show, titled ''Midnight Tea,'' a guard wrestled away a camera she was carrying as she headed onto the runway to take the traditional bow. ''He grabbed it right off me,'' a shaken Ms. Rowley said, proferring a scratched hand.
At issue was sponsorship. The red plastic instant-image camera slung from a cord on Ms. Rowley's arm was a Polaroid, and its maker had provided financial support for her show as well as souvenir cameras to be placed on the cafe tables, where editors and retailers were seated. But the title sponsor of Fashion Week is Olympus cameras, which signed a multiyear contract last fall with Seventh on Sixth, the overall producer of the shows.
Even before the backstage run-in, problems arose over the placement of the Polaroid cameras on the tables, where guests were served tea by uniformed waitresses hired from Citarella. Representatives of both Ms. Rowley and Seventh on Sixth delayed the show's start for 45 minutes while negotiating the removal of the offending cameras.
''The designers sign contracts saying they won't use products that compete with our sponsors,'' said Fern Mallis, executive director of Seventh on Sixth. ''You can't put Poland Spring water on the tables,'' Ms. Mallis added, because one of Fashion Week's other major sponsors is Evian. ''Cynthia understands what corporate sponsorship is about, obviously,'' Ms. Mallis said.
Ms. Rowley is no stranger to sponsorship concerns, having written the best-selling Swell books and produced collections of Swell products for Target. Among other brands that received credit for helping to produce her show yesterday were Tylenol PM, Redken, Saga Furs and Whaler's Rum. But yesterday she called the incident over the Polaroids ''the worst possible example of bullying designers over creative issues.''
Her presentation of gauzy print dresses marked what Ms. Mallis called a welcome return for the designer to the tents in Bryant Park. For a number of seasons, she preferred to show at locations like a lot in Little Italy where garden statuary is sold.
''We were really happy to have her back,'' Ms. Mallis said.
For her part, Ms. Rowley said the show would be her last in Bryant Park. ''I will never, ever come to the tents again as long as I live,'' she said.
FASHION DIARY
