National Gallery Adds to Collection
At an acquisitions meeting late last month the board of the National Gallery of Art in Washington approved an unusually disparate group of artworks, from a 17th-century Dutch still life to a piece by Dan Flavin. The Flavin is in many ways the most interesting addition to the gallery: it is not a finished work, but a drawing that serves as a certificate for one of the artist's pieces.
The work is ''untitled (to Barnett Newman to commemorate his simple problem, red, yellow and blue),'' a plan for a light installation 12 feet tall and 8 feet wide, conceived for the corner of a room. Flavin gave a drawing of the piece, one of a small group inspired by and dedicated to Newman, to Newman's widow, Annalee, shortly after that artist's death in 1970. It was authenticated and given to the gallery by the Barnett and Annalee Newman Foundation.
The work has never been made. ''This is extremely rare,'' said Michael Govan, director of the Dia Art Foundation and the curator of a Flavin retrospective opening at the National Gallery this fall. ''Generally, the artist made the fluorescent light constructions and gave the owner a certificate of authenticity.''
The installation is now being fabricated by the Dan Flavin studio on Worth Street in Lower Manhattan and is expected to be on display in the retrospective. ''Flavin did a number of works dedicated to Barnett Newman, and this is the grandest,'' said Tiffany Bell, associate curator of the retrospective and project director of Flavin's catalogue raisonné, which Dia is overseeing.
The acquisition, yet another example of the gallery's efforts to beef up its holdings of American art from the 1960's and 70's, complements two other Flavins from the ''monument'' for V. Tatlin series, which the gallery bought in 2001.
Earl A. Powell III, the gallery's director, said the acquisition resulted from discussions that Jeffrey Weiss, the gallery's curator of contemporary art, was having with the foundation over the retrospective.
The exhibition, scheduled to run at the gallery from Oct. 3 through Jan. 9, 2005, is the first retrospective of Flavin's work since 1969. (He died in 1996.) It is to include 35 to 40 works from the early 1960's through the early 1990's, and will travel to the Modern Art Museum of Fort Worth next February through June and to the Museum of Contemporary Art in Chicago from July through October 2005. The show will then travel to Europe, Mr. Govan said, although the stops have yet to be decided.
The National Gallery has also been given ''View of the Cloaca Maxima, Rome'' (1814) by Christoffer Wilhelm Eckersberg, considered the father of the early-19th-century Danish Golden Age. While the acquisition has been approved, the gallery is waiting to receive Danish approval for an export license. Part of an exhibition of the artist's work on view through Feb. 29, it is the first Eckersberg in the gallery's collection.
Another artist who was not represented in the collection until now is Jan Weenix, one of the best-known 17th-century Dutch game painters. The gallery bought ''Still Life of a Swan and a Hare With a View of a Country Estate Garden'' (circa 1685) through Sotheby's.
It has also bought ''The Virgin Swooning Over the Body of Christ at the Foot of the Cross'' (1710), its first sculpture by Pierre-Étienne Monnot, a French-born sculptor who worked in Rome, from Daniel Katz, the London dealer. This Baroque high-relief carving is the gallery's first marble sculpture of its kind.
Another acquisition, Horace Vernet's ''Departure for the Hunt in the Pontine Marshes'' (1833), is the missing half of a pair of French Romantic landscapes; one of them, ''Hunting in the Pontine Marshes,'' was acquired by the gallery in 1989. Richard Feigen, the Manhattan dealer, tipped off the gallery when he discovered the painting, Mr. Powell said, adding, ''It's a nice reuniting of two paintings that were always meant to be together.''
Big Gift in Houston
Caroline Wiess Law, a Houston philanthropist who died on Dec. 24, her 85th birthday, has left her collection of 52 works by 20th-century masters -- including Picasso, Miró, de Kooning, Kline and Warhol -- to the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston. Officials at the museum estimate that the gift, one of the most important in its history, is worth $60 million to $85 million.
Ms. Law, a longtime trustee, also left the museum $25 million: 60 percent of it is to go to operating costs, and 40 percent to acquisitions.
Peter C. Marzio, director of the museum, said what he found particularly exciting about the bequest was ''how extraordinarily well it goes with our collection.''
The gift includes three paintings by Kline that, together with the paintings already in the museum's collection, now make Houston the home of one of the most important group of Klines in the world. A 1927 Miró, the first major painting by the artist to join the museum's collection, complements a later Miró sculpture.
The gift also fills gaps. Two de Kooning paintings are the first works by that Abstract Expressionist to enter the museum's collection, and a 1937 Gorky painting, ''Composition,'' is the first Gorky to be acquired.
Highlights of the gift will be on view from Feb. 22 to April 25.
Gallery Moves
After 17 years at 41 East 57th Street, the Jan Krugier Gallery is moving to 980 Madison Avenue, at 76th Street. Instead of being open to the public with exhibitions of works by 19th- and 20th-century masters, it will become a by-appointment-only space.
''We want to concentrate on enhancing the advisory part of the business,'' Izabela Grocholski, a spokeswoman for the gallery, said, ''and work more with institutions.''
Andrea Crane, who had been an expert in the Impressionist and modern art department at Phillips, de Pury &amp; Luxembourg, is director of fine arts for the gallery. Emmanuel Benador is in charge of its print department.
Promotion at Christie's
Marc Porter has been made president of Christie's in the Americas. Mr. Porter, a specialist in books and manuscripts, has been at Christie's since 1990, most recently as its international managing director.
Inside Art
