The Roman Catholic bishop of Long Island issued a detailed denial yesterday of allegations that he shielded priests accused of child sex abuse while he was serving in the Archdiocese of Boston.
The bishop, William F. Murphy of the Diocese of Rockville Centre, covering Nassau and Suffolk Counties, said, ''I was not involved in the handling of priests who had been accused of the abuse of minors, in any part of their being removed from parish ministry or being reassigned to parish ministry.''
When the accusation was made on Wednesday, the bishop gave a general denial but did not comment on specific details because he had not seen them. His new statement offered a rebuttal on the cases of 14 priests who were cited.
The charges were made by Laura A. Ahearn, based on her review of thousands of court documents. Ms. Ahearn, who called for the bishop's resignation, once advised him on abuse issues and is the founder of Parents for Megan's Law, a national group that works for the protection of children.
In four cases, Bishop Murphy said that Ms. Ahearn had confused him with another William F. Murphy who also worked in the Boston chancery and for a time handled abuse complaints. The bishop said that others had made the same mistake before.
''The indiscriminate confusion of me with Father William F. Murphy is the most glaring but not the only example of her incomplete, faulty and mistaken research,'' the bishop said.
In her presentation, Ms. Ahearn said she was aware of the two Murphys and had distinguished between them. Some correspondence she cited bore both names, as sender and recipient. While the other Father Murphy was in charge of abuse cases, she contends that the bishop, who was the chief deputy to Cardinal Bernard Law, also played a role.
In the case of three of the priests she cited, Bishop Murphy said he had had no role whatsoever. In several other cases, he indicated that his involvement had been minimal and entirely proper.
In some cases the bishop offered explanations differing from Ms. Ahearn's version. For example, she said that he helped create a program to reassign accused priests and put a priest in charge who had himself been accused. But the bishop said ''that office never materialized'' and the priest ''never performed the work.''
Ms. Ahearn said that the bishop allowed another priest, for whom $35,000 was paid to settle a complaint, to work in a parish by ordering ''let him serve.'' But the bishop said that the priest's role was administrative and lasted only ''a week or two.'' The bishop said: ''My words 'let him serve' indicated I approved that he could write checks for that brief period, not that he could serve in any pastoral way. And he did not.''
