IF Comcast succeeds in its takeover bid for Disney, what name ought the combined company operate under?
When it comes to considering that question, everyone, it seems, is a comedian, from professional comics like Wendy Spero, who suggested the company be named Versacorp, after a team on the NBC reality series ''The Apprentice,'' to Robert Passikoff, a brand and customer-loyalty research consultant, who offered names like MouseCom and suggested the new company introduce a brand character called Digital Duck.
To be sure, a hostile takeover of the Walt Disney Company is not entirely a laughing matter, particularly to Michael D. Eisner, Disney's chief executive, who might be out of a job if the bid from the Comcast Corporation is accepted. Still, the subject has inspired some light-hearted thoughts from people who typically take such matters more seriously, as well as from people paid to be funny for a living.
''That Disney name is a magical name, so I wouldn't change Disneyland to Comcast Disneyland,'' said Donny Deutsch, chairman and chief executive at Deutsch in New York, an agency owned by the Interpublic Group of Companies that works for clients like Expedia.com, Mitsubishi and Snapple.
Still, Mr. Deutsch could not resist proposing a post-takeover television series featuring a cast of attractive young performers called the Comcastateers who ''instead of wearing mouse ears would have little cables coming out of their hats.''
Taking a somewhat more serious tack was Alan Siegel, chairman and chief executive at Siegel &amp; Gale, a corporate identity consulting company in New York that developed the name Novartis for the company formed in 1996 by the merger of the drug makers Ciba-Geigy and Sandoz.
''A lot of the companies that come out of these kinds of takeovers are negatively named,'' Mr. Siegel said, listing examples like AOL Time Warner; Exxon Mobil; Morgan Stanley, Dean Witter, Discover &amp; Company; PricewaterhouseCoopers; and ''the one I think is the worst,'' Kyocera Mita.
''The negative names are cumbersome and cause more problems,'' Mr. Siegel said, adding that he preferred renamings like Citigroup, the combination of Citicorp with Travelers, or standing pat, as when Hewlett-Packard acquired Compaq Computer and retained the Hewlett-Packard name.
''Comcast is not a great name,'' Mr. Siegel said, ''but maybe it could be made into one.''
That idea of the combined company operating under the Comcast name rather than the Disney name -- one of the most storied in corporate history -- seems counterintuitive. But other corporate identity consultants agreed it might be effective.
''The safe thing to do would be to stick the names together as Comcast Disney, to buy some time until you figure out how to combine the two companies,'' said Allen P. Adamson, managing director at Landor Associates in New York, a corporate and brand identity company owned by the WPP Group. ''But the more gutsy thing to do would be to use Comcast as the corporate brand and Disney as the brand at the product level.''
''You could make the case that Comcast is the corporate brand the stock market respects: its management, its leadership, its ability to create value,'' Mr. Adamson said. ''So Comcast should be the Wall Street name, and the Disney name should be used as the product brand, for entertainment that delights families, not as the corporate name.''
Clive Chajet, chairman of the Chajet Consultancy in New York, a corporate and brand identity company, warned of weakening the Disney brand image, which, he said, ''is in its own league'' and ''approaches the American flag.''
''I would not make the error of using the Disney name for any product or service other than one for children,'' Mr. Chajet said, ''as Disney itself has avoided by making family films under the Walt Disney brand and other films under brand names such as Touchstone and Miramax.''
Anthony Johndrow, executive vice president at Straightline International in New York, another corporate and brand identity consultant, said that as ''the most family-friendly brand in the world,'' Disney ''has a lot of brand equity'' that would not be worth jeopardizing by using it as part of a corporate name.
Mr. Johndrow suggested that a combined company use Comcast as its corporate name and Disney as the name ''for new branded offerings'' like cable television service, now sold under the Comcast brand.
''Since Disney is about family and trust,'' he added, ''cable that could come with a guarantee of reliability and family-friendly content, 'trustmarked' under the Disney at Home brand, would represent a real opportunity.''
Mr. Passikoff, the research consultant who is president of Brand Keys in New York, said that whatever name the combined company bears, it ought to avoid ''all those letters,'' alluding to perhaps the most derided name in media-merger history, AOL Time Warner.
''You want people bonding with you, and the letters start to put distance between you and consumers,'' Mr. Passikoff said. ''Salving people's egos in the boardroom should be less important than avoiding alienating your consumer base.''
Just as bad as the AOL Time Warner name itself, said Julie Cottineau, managing director for naming and verbal identity at Interbrand in New York, a corporate and brand identity agency owned by the Omnicom Group, was the decision to first embrace the name and later flee from it by reverting to Time Warner.
''You don't want to do it and redo it and redo it again,'' Ms. Cottineau said. ''That sends the worst kind of message.''
While ''Disney is obviously the stronger brand'' of the two, she added, a name change ''is not something I would make lightly or quickly before considering what is the future direction of the business.''
''Disney has tremendous equity and you have to be careful not to dilute it.''
On the principle of always leave a reader laughing, this column ends with the thoughts of the professional humorists.
Ms. Spero, voted female comic of the year by Time Out New York, suggested that the combined company should use the Versacorp name from ''The Apprentice'' -- the series featuring teams of would-be billionaires battling to win a job with Donald J. Trump -- ''to make reality TV all that much more real.''
Another name Ms. Spero offered played on the concerns of critics that a merged Comcast/Disney would join the ranks of too-powerful media conglomerates like NBC/Vivendi Universal, the News Corporation, Time Warner and Viacom: ''Universally Feared.''
Mark Katz, a speechwriter, humorist and author (''Clinton and Me,'' Miramax Books, 2004), who once worked at agencies like Hal Riney &amp; Partners and McCann-Erickson, had three potential names.
One was En-run. The second was Pixaren't.
The third, which he called his favorite: AOL Disney.
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: ADVERTISING
