What constitutes a marine painting? John Zarobell asks that question in the catalog for ''Manet and the Sea,'' an exhibition that opens on Sunday at the Philadelphia Museum of Art with 33 Manet seascapes (review, Page 31). Mr. Zarobell, the museum's assistant curator of European painting, continues: ''Is it any scene that includes water, or does it have to be all sea? What about harbor or beach scenes? Does there have to be a ship or sailboat? Salt or fresh water? The list of potentially defining questions goes on, and each successive generation of marine painters sought new ways of answering them.''
If one considers the paintings in Christie's maritime art sale last Tuesday, the answer is all of the above. The lots included boat portraits, Romantic takes on roiling seas (with and without ships), picturesque views of exotic ports and several legendary America's Cup yachts. There were oils of once-  famous ships, epic naval battles, schooners, steamers and frigates.
Americans like maritime art. ''The highest percentage of new buyers of art is buying maritime art,'' said Marie Kotsonis, Christie's specialist in maritime pictures in New York. ''The largest subscription base for any category of catalogs at Christies is for maritime art.''
''People who collect maritime art tend not to buy other kinds of art,'' Ms. Kotsonis added. Collectors include amateur sailors, Navy veterans, marine historians, interior designers and art consultants helping corporations form collections.
''Greek shipping magnates form a category all their own,'' said Ms. Kotsonis, who once worked for one. ''Now we are beginning to see mainland Chinese buying Chinese Export pictures.''
Prices for a maritime painting range from a few thousand to several hundred thousand dollars. Dealers at this year's Winter Antiques Show in New York and at the Palm Beach Classic seemed to agree that the American painter James E. Buttersworth (1817-1894) is currently the most sought-after maritime painter. The Peabody Essex Museum in Salem, Mass., whose collection of maritime art is among the most extensive in the world, has five works by him.
''His market has escalated,'' Ms. Kotsonis said, with paintings now selling for $50,000 to $1 million each.
James Buttersworth was the son of Thomas Buttersworth (1768-1842), a British naval artist who followed the British Navy around the world. Lot 187 at the Christie's sale on Tuesday was a Thomas Buttersworth oil of a Navy ship under full sail, patrolling off the mouth of the Tagus River near Lisbon. Estimated at $15,000 to $25,000, it sold for $23,900.
At the Winter Antiques Show the Richard Green gallery of London had two James Buttersworth paintings. One, dated about 1878, was a large oil of the Resolute, a New York Yacht Club schooner, heading around Castle Garden (a building that once stood near the Battery in lower Manhattan). Jonathan Green, Richard Green's son, said the price was $900,000. The second oil was of the New York Yacht Club schooner Columbia leading another New York Yacht Club schooner, Dauntless, at the Hurricane Cup Races, from around 1875. Its price was $600,000, and it was sold. Jonathan Green said the views of New York Harbor had increased the first picture's value.
The Christie's sale had four paintings by Montague Dawson (1895-1973), a British artist who painted magnificent clippers under full sail on the high seas. ''Dawson is probably the top 20th-century maritime artist,'' Ms. Kotsonis said. ''He had plans and models of the ships he painted, so he knew exactly how a ship looked, which is important to some collectors.''
Dawson has been popular for 50 years, since Dwight D. Eisenhower purchased one of his paintings. ''His name sprang to prominence when Ike bought a Dawson painting from us that he kept in the Oval Office,'' said David M. Mason of the London gallery MacConnal-Mason at the Palm Beach Classic. ''That's when he became famous in the United States.''
Sotheby's London sold a Dawson painting of the clipper ship Great Republic for $113,420 on Dec. 2, the top lot of 275 sold in its marine art sale.
''We sold a Dawson in July 2001 here in New York for $185,000,'' Ms. Kotsonis said. ''Lot 256 in this week's sale was one of the best Dawsons ever to come on the market at auction. It's rare because it depicts a harbor in China, and Dawson didn't do many harbor scenes.''
''Night Anchorage at Whampoa'' recreates a mid-19th-century scene at the conjunction of the Pearl River and Whampoa Reach. At dusk, two small Chinese junks with red sails and glowing lanterns glide by several towering clipper ships. Several of the nearly 200 paintings by unidentified Chinese artists in the Peabody Essex collection are of Whampoa, a favorite subject. The Christie's catalog notes that clippers waited there for their cargo of tea after the crop was harvested; they loaded the ships and raced one another home either to London or America.
Ms. Kotsonis said the clipper in the foreground of Dawson's Whampoa oil is probably the Thermopylae, one of the fastest clippers in the China tea trade. Estimated at $150,000 to $200,000, the painting sold for $309,900, a record price for a Dawson at auction.
Lot 254 in the sale was a more typical Dawson: a clipper ship on the high seas. It sold for $125,100. The ship, Lightning, was built in 1854 for James Baines by Donald McKay of East Boston. That year it raced to Liverpool in 13 days and 19.5 hours. ''This painting shows Dawson's later, more confident style,'' Ms. Kotsonis said. ''It's got exactly what you want in a Dawson: a tea clipper built out of Boston in the 19th century, frothy waves, blue sky, fluffy clouds and dappled light on the waves.''
Lot 253 was a Dawson portrait of Flying Cloud, called an extreme clipper. It, too, was built by Donald McKay. In 1851 it sailed from New York to San Francisco via Cape Horn in 89 days and 8 hours, a sailing-ship record that the Christie's catalog reports is still standing for that route. It sold for $89,625.
Because they are sold in a different category, the Christie's sale had no maritime paintings by Manet, Delacroix, Monet, Courbet or Whistler -- many of which can be seen in ''Manet and the Sea.'' The museum has also organized an accompanying show of nearly 40 American marine paintings and pre-Civil War naval battle scenes, precursors to Manet's 1864 painting ''The Battle of the U. S. S. Kearsarge and the C. S. S. Alabama'' near the port of Cherbourg, France.
Even in the 19th century, the United States was a healthy market for marine paintings, especially of American sea battles and particularly from the Revolutionary War and the War of 1812. Genre paintings were also valued. ''Portraits of ships made by professional painters or sentimental sailors for proud sea captains and shipowners, dominated the genre,'' said Norman Keyes, a spokesman for the Peabody Essex museum. ''Another popular category included illustrations of the exploits and disasters of American whaling crews in faraway seas.''
ANTIQUES
