Irish Repertory Company  132 West 22nd Street, Chelsea  Through March 7
Billy and Breda have been married 11 years and have two daughters, though neither can remember the last time they had sex together. Billy compensates by having erotic fantasies about the teenage daughter of a couple who are regulars at his local pub; Breda resorts to reading and rereading Page 174 of an anthology of sexual daydreams, a passage involving two guards at a sultan's harem.
Billy and Breda are the only characters in ''Eden,'' a shaggy-dog story of a play by Eugene O'Brien, and they tell their individual tales in alternating monologues without any direct interplay. It's a form that in the hands of a master storyteller can make a riveting evening of theater, like Conor McPherson's play ''This Lime Tree Bower'' or ''The Weir.'' In the case of Mr. O'Brien's ''Eden,'' it results in two hours of slightly embarrassing confessions of middle-aged lust, the sort of story that would cause you to move to the far end of the bar if a stranger started telling it to you in a pub.
In the narrative Billy and Breda have specific if disparate objectives. Whether through impotence or indifference, Billy has not wanted Breda sexually in ages, and she has a plan to seduce him back to the conjugal bed after a big disco night. Billy, who should probably ask his doctor about Viagra, has tunnel vision about the teeny bopper, and plans to make his move on her at the same party. When the big night arrives, both Billy and Breda drink an inordinate amount of booze, and it ends with predictable results.
All of this is padded with adolescent prattle about penis sizes and gossipy innuendo about the promiscuity of Billy and Breda's friends. The opening monologues introduce more characters than a soap opera, but the only one you need to remember is the traveling salesman of portable putting greens.
''Eden'' would be even more tedious without fine performances by Ciaran O'Reilly as Billy and, especially, Catherine Byrne as Breda, both accomplished actors who, under John Tillinger's skilled direction, make their characters seem much nicer and more sympathetic than they really are.
WILBORN HAMPTON
THEATER IN REVIEW
