Among portraits of artists' mothers, few are as complicated as ''Materia'' (1912), a very large image of his mother by the Futurist painter-sculptor Umberto Boccioni (1882-1916). She sits in the window of an apartment in Milan, a work-worn woman with enormous gnarled hands that are given frontal prominence, folded in her lap. Her pose is an ironic reflection of the Renaissance Madonna with a background of a tranquil landscape.
But the painting is by no means as easy to read. The Futurist concept of simultaneity -- a view that fuses events by depicting successive phases of movement in one image -- brings activity in the street below directly into the room: a man walking, a horse trotting. Details of adjacent buildings, like the smokestacks of a nearby power plant, the doorway of a recently built mill and a mélange of roofs and chimneys, also seem to occupy the room.
What's more, the woman's face and hair are broken up in a distinctly Cubist style, as in Picasso's 1909 portraits of his mistress Fernande Olivier, and the disruptive effect is enhanced by strongly delineated shafts of light that enter the window.
Intense color saturates the painting, with greens and oranges predominating, but they layer and meld confusingly into one another, in accordance with Divisionist ideas (adopted by the Futurists) about the ''intuitive disorder'' that reigns in the universe.
The painting is the centerpiece of ''Boccioni's Materia: A Futurist Masterpiece and the Avant-Garde in Milan and Paris,'' an ambitious show at the Guggenheim Museum that studies ''Materia'' in relation to other paintings and sculptures by Boccioni and some of his European contemporaries, among them Braque, Delaunay, Duchamp, Gleizes, Gris and Picasso. The indebtedness of Italian Futurism to French Cubism -- and their rivalries -- are also addressed.
The show was organized by Laura Mattioli Rossi, guest curator, with Vivien Greene, associate curator of the Guggenheim. It has a catalog with informative interpretive essays by Ms. Rossi and Ms. Greene, among others, but, alas, no index and little biographical data.
Boccioni, the real intellectual of Futurist art, chose the name ''Materia,'' derived from the Latin word mater, for mother, but extended to mean the matter of the universe. It was used by the French philosopher Henri Bergson in his 1896 treatise, ''Matter and Memory: An Essay on the Relation of the Body to the Spirit.'' He was beloved by the Futurists for his view that we receive intimations of objects from the continuous flux of color and form that surrounds us.
Boccioni wanted to shake up the antiquated academic and classical traditions that still prevailed in Italy. But before he arrived at his Futurist mode, he was doing more conventional portraits.
One of the most appealing is ''The Story of a Seamstress'' (1908), a depiction of his friend and mistress Ines before an open window. Next to her, on a table, is her sewing machine. Soft, lovely colors permeate the picture, painted in short Divisionist strokes that enhance the light coming in through the window, giving Ines's figure a poignant ethereality.
Farther along in Boccioni's evolution toward Futurism is ''The Street Enters the House'' (1911), painted the summer before ''Materia.'' Leaning on the balcony rail of their top-floor apartment, his mother regards the city of Milan and its dynamic sprawl.
The bustle of people, horses and street noises becomes all of a piece with the apartment itself: new excavation, a swarm of laborers, buildings leaning into the picture, a multiplicity of windows. The heads of two horses can be seen within the balcony railing, while blades of summer light and the profile of a fan pass through the mother's figure.
The painting is Boccioni's first depiction of the burgeoning Milan from the standpoint of Futurist simultaneity. The title, ''The Street Enters the House,'' refers not only to the bustle and noise of the construction site but also to the larger issue of urban expansion, which affects the private lives of citizens by invading their interior space with the hubbub of the world outside.
By 1912 Boccioni and other Futurists had become obsessed with making sculpture, which they meant to do over as radically as they had painting. ''Let's proclaim the absolute and complete abolition of finite lines and the contained statue,'' Boccioni wrote in his ''Technical Manifesto of Futurist Sculpture'' (1912). ''Let's split open our figures and place the environment inside them.''
Several of his drawings for sculptures are on view, but disappointingly, only two in the round are displayed. ''Development of a Bottle in Space'' (1913) is a posthumous cast in silvered bronze of a plaster original, which interprets in 3-D the volumes of Cubist still lifes. The movement of the bottle is projected over time and space, altered at the same time by the impact of the surrounding environment. The dynamic energy pulsing out of it breaks up the bottle's mass, releasing the inner volume in a spiral trajectory.
But the figure that Boccioni considered his sculptural masterpiece is here: a baroque image in bronze, titled ''Unique Forms of Continuity in Space'' (1913). It is a tribute both to Rodin's ''Walking Man'' (circa 1900), an enlargement of which Boccioni had admired at the 1911 Universal Exhibition in Rome, and to the Hellenistic sculpture ''Victory of Samothrace'' (circa 190 B.C.) at the Louvre.
In it Boccioni didn't try to depict the human form directly but rather the impact of its movement through space. The striding figure (in this version a posthumous cast from one of Boccioni's original plasters) seems to wear a flowing garment composed of the very air that its movement disturbs. On its head is a helmet derived from ''Victory.''
It is a beautiful, fluid work whose energy seems to embody the very dynamics of Futurism itself. The movement's art phase (it later became a political movement) more or less faded out with Boccioni himself, who was killed in 1916 by a fall from a skittish cavalry horse.
Much can be learned in this show by observing the now fairly familiar works of Boccioni's Cubist and other avant-garde colleagues (even Duchamp's ''Nude Descending a Staircase'' is here) in relation to his own. In this context they also seem incidental to the charisma and tough-mindedness of Boccioni's own work.
Not to be scanted is a touch-screen adjunct to the show. It presents illuminating photographs of the artist's studio, his relatives and his 1913 sculpture show in Paris, to say nothing of Boccioni's camera-conscious self-presentation.
''Boccioni's Materia: A Futurist Masterpiece and the Avant-Garde in Milan and Paris'' is at the Solomon R. Guggenheim Museum, 1071 Fifth Avenue, at 89th Street, (212) 423-3500, through May 9.
ART REVIEW
