A SPECTATOR nearly died from hypothermia one year. Another year, a snowmobile racer was rushed to a hospital when his corneas froze. And then there was the year the temperature dropped to 31 degrees below zero, and the portable toilets filled with ice. But none of that kept Kim Taylor from standing outside for eight hours last weekend to witness 33 souped-up sleds compete in the International 500 Snowmobile Race here -- an indigenous sport that is equal parts Nascar, gladiator games and Arctic ''Survivor.''
Not that Mr. Taylor, 45, an engineer in a General Motors plant in Saginaw, Mich., came unprepared. On the first Saturday of every February, Mr. Taylor and his buddies arrive at dawn to claim their spot along the snow banks of the mile-long oval racetrack, where they dig a skybox with a $10 shovel to watch teams of snowmobilers log 500 laps throughout the day.
This year, Mr. Taylor brought four foldable chairs, a junkyard hibachi, six cardboard boxes filled with hot dogs and firewood, and an old mailbox flipped upside-down and used as a potbelly stove. While he stokes the fire, his nephew, Eric Taylor, wields a cordless drill and creates a drinking apparatus they dub, ''the liquor luge.'' It consists of a homemade block of ice slightly larger than a gasoline can, held up at an angle by a makeshift wooden frame. Two gutters are carved out to facilitate the flow of alcohol.
Mr. Taylor's brother, Al, 47, takes the luge for a test drive. ''This is the breakfast of champions,'' he says, wiping peppermint schnapps from his mustache. ''We've got lots of wine, we've got bourbon, we've got beer, we've got Pucker. And Coca-Cola for those who are nonalcoholic. But that stuff won't keep you warm.''
The temperature this morning was a balmy 8 degrees in this pocket of the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, and as the race got under way, fans were towing cases of beer on plastic sleds, stomping their heavy boots to create trenches in the snow, and otherwise turning the ungroomed hill, which looks out over Canada, into an endurance sport of its own. There are converted school buses with stripper poles and furnaces, a heated beer tent run by the Elks, and a pick-up truck with a watchtower made from two-by-two studs and Dupont house wrap.
''This is the only thing I like about winter -- that and deer hunting,'' said Missy Nelson, 33, who works at the Big Lots store in town. ''If you sit in your house all winter, it lasts twice as long and is twice as cold.''
In its 36th year, the I-500, as the event is known, is the biggest race of its kind. Modeled after Nascar -- with competitors using stock vehicles over a 500-mile race, and with the attendant red, yellow and checkered flags -- the volunteer-run competition takes place over six days, during which time Sault Ste. Marie opens up its streets to snowmobile traffic. At night, more snowmobiles than cars are at some bars and hotels.
Starting the Monday before the race, teams arrive from as far as Alaska and pay a $500 registration fee. Through the week, the field is winnowed to a final 38 through a series of time trials, with teams paying $150 for every two attempts to qualify. Nearly 100 recreational vehicles and campers arrive a week earlier to stake a position on top of the hill. ''Everyone comes here after work to watch the time trials, drink, go to bed and then go back to work,'' said Scott Ellis, 24, a service technician for a local propane company, who paid $70 for the parking privilege. ''It's a week-long party.''
ON race day itself, 6,000 spectators join Mr. Ellis on the hill as the reigning champion, Corey Davidson, 33, a construction worker from Holt, Minn., seeks to make history by becoming the first person to win the I-500 five times.
At 10 a.m., the green flag comes down and the snowmobiles shoot out from their starting positions with an ear-splitting roar and a spray of snow dust. The smell of gasoline quickly dissipates in the bitter cold air. The sleds average 70 miles per hour, with top speeds approaching 100. At that clip, snowmobiles are notoriously prone to tipping. There are no seat belts or cages; the only thing connecting a racer to his sled is a plastic tether that kills the engine when yanked. Last year, Mike Kolbus of Munising, Mich. died when he flew off his sled on Lap 40 and was struck by two other racers.
Seconds into this year's race, the pole-sitter, Troy Dewald, 34, a burly Dodge mechanic from Au Gres, Mich., is clipped from behind and thrown off his Polaris on the very first turn on Lap One. Mr. Dewald is not badly hurt, but two hours later, the driver who took his place, Nathan Dzurka, loses balance on Lap 133 as his bib becomes entangled with the snowmobile's rubber belt, mangling his left knee. The announcer briefly mentions the accident, but the spectators don't seem interested in the details.
Merle Vollick from Sault Ste. Marie has a front row seat inside his 22-foot-long Mallard R.V., customized with large picture windows. ''I've been coming here for 27 years, and we don't care about the actual race that much,'' Mr. Vollick says. An indoor thermometer reads 67 degrees, which attracts a steady flow of friends and passersby in various stages of inebriation. ''This is quality time with your friends.''
A few steps away along a frozen path, the beer tent is packed shoulder-to-shoulder. Two men dressed in deer-hunting camouflage stand out against a sea of neon racing jackets. To the uninitiated, it looks like a rowdy Power Rangers fan club. Rick Wonsey, 41, a tree trimmer from Mount Pleasant, Mich., seems more interested in the opposite sex than the races. ''This is hunting season,'' he says, as he scopes the crowd.
Unlike Nascar, this is a race where the machines overshadow the daredevils driving them. The buzz this year centers on the new Yamaha RX-1, the only sled with a four-stroke, 1,000 cubic-centimeter engine. The smart money says that the two-stroke Polaris Pro XR 440, which took home the past 13 races, is past its prime.
''We don't care who wins, as long as it's a Yamaha,'' says Mr. Ellis, who has a Yamaha sign on the roof of his Wildcat camper. His mother, sister, uncle and their spouses are all wearing Yamaha racing jackets and bibs. ''The whole family has been Yamaha before I was born.''
Just like Nascar's stock cars, these stock snowmobiles have been modified beyond recognition. Plastic skis are replaced with carbide tips, the front suspensions and sway bars are custom-made, the engines are overhauled to run on special fuel and the rotating rubber tracks are studded with 288 spikes to grip the ice. Even the seats are re-sewn for the drivers' posteriors. Racing guidelines dictate that ''you have to use the stock bulkhead, the hunk of aluminum upfront,'' explains Mark Goss who owns the J &amp; M Racing team from Grand Rapids, Mich. ''Other than that, there are no rules.''
THOUGH it has long been a niche sport, snowmobile racing seems to be enjoying something of a renaissance, buoyed by the ever-growing popularity of extreme sports and of all things fast and furious.
''It's starting to come back because of its Nascar style,'' says Rob Powers, the manager of snowmobile marketing for Yamaha Motor, which dispatched its $250,000 support rig to the I-500 for the first time this year. ''Attendance at the events is up, and the Internet chatter is much higher.''
The I-500 is the Super Bowl of Enduro racing, a three-month circuit that starts in January and comprises six smaller snowmobile races, most in northern Michigan. But Enduro still struggles for attention and the big bucks, while snocross (from motocross on snow) gets primetime exposure on ESPN. The I-500 purse this year totaled $40,000, split among 15 winning teams.
''We have to spit and polish the show,'' says John Kalchik, a car detailer from Northport, Mich., who moonlights as the agent for Mr. Davidson, the four-time champion. In fact, Mr. Kalchik suspects that he is the only agent at the race. ''Until recently, most snowmobile racers weren't even concerned about making their sleds look nice.''
Some argue that the event is too cold to draw larger crowds. And the only time the I-500 receives national exposure, it seems, is when someone is maimed or worse. This year is no exception. During Lap 174, a freak accident unfolds: a Canadian team loses control on the back straightaway and veers wildly toward the infield pit area. Three onlookers standing on a snow berm are hit. The mother of a racer suffers multiple leg fractures. A pit crew member bleeds from major internal injuries. And Alynn Burke, 24, the girlfriend of another Canadian racer, is pronounced dead at the hospital.
With the red flag down, the race is suspended while ambulances clear the track. Then, at 2:30 p.m., an hour after the accident, the race is placed on indefinite hold. As officials debate what to do, spectators mill about looking for warmth and entertainment. Back at the liquor luge, a small crowd gathers around the hillside fire. The block of ice is now green and red from generous pours of Pucker and Hot Damn schnapps.
As the sun falls over the race track, the word finally comes that the 2004 race has officially ended and that the current leader, John Hoos of Ossineke, Mich., (whose mother is among those injured) is the winner. The deciding factor: The local emergency room needed to reserve its last two beds for the rest of the community. With 326 laps left unrun, it would be the shortest and bloodiest race in I-500 history -- as well as another win for Polaris.
Many fans start streaming for the exits, but some people stay behind. Tim Ward, 50, a construction worker from Hubbardston, Mich., has 20 people staying in his modified school bus, which he has painted black in honor of Dale Earnhardt, the Nascar driver killed in a 2001 crash. There are four bunk beds, a 40-gallon hot shower, a toilet, two dinettes, a four-burner stove and a furnace. ''We'll be here until the beer is gone,'' Mr. Ward says, who is parked at the back of the hill. ''This is my second home on wheels. I got here last Wednesday and missed getting to the front row by one. I was No. 44 out of 43 spots. Next year, I'll get here earlier so we can be up there with the action.''
SPORTS GUIDE  Snowmobile Races This Season
THE world of snowmobile racing includes Enduro races, modeled on Nascar and sanctioned by the Midwest International Racing Association; cross-country, in which racers traverse lakes and other open terrain; and snocross, similar to motocross on snow. Here are some upcoming events.
ENDURO
Tomorrow and Sunday  Gladwin County Ice Carnival  Albright Shores, Mich.  (989) 435-3372  www.albrightshores.com  Admission: $10 to $35
Feb. 28 and 29  Drummond Island Winter Carnival  Drummond Island, Mich.  (800) 737-8666  www.drummond-island.com  Admission: $15
March 6 and 7  Bay Mills Casino MIRA Race  Brimley, Mich.  (888) 422-9645  www.4baymills.com  Free admission
CROSS-COUNTRY
Feb. 27 to 29  Seven Clans Casino 500  Thief River Falls, Minn.  www.sevenclanscasino.com  (866) 255-7848  Free admission
SNOCROSS
Feb. 28 and 29  Arctic Cat Snocross at the Speedway  Brooklyn, Mich.  www.mispeedway.com  (517) 592-6666  Admission: $20 to $40
DRIVING
