Opening today in Manhattan, the writer-director Greg Pak's ''Robot Stories'' -- a fantasy anthology that details the ways robots have complicated human lives -- has a dexterous sense of wonder that nonetheless leaves the film feeling a bit detached. Perhaps it's because the film's four stories, well told, have the gentle lull of whimsy. But Mr. Pak's fascination with the material goes a long way; many of the loveliest moments seem to owe to touches from Isaac Asimov's sweeping ''Robot Chronicles.''
''Robot'' had its debut at last year's Slamdance Film Festival in Park City, Utah, and its ambition in fashioning intrigues also reveals the director's generosity of spirit. (As a director, Mr. Pak is good at maintaining a poker face. His 2000 effort ''Asian Pride Porn'' is a hilarious almost-documentary featuring the playwright David Henry Hwang hustling the virtues of, well, the title, as if he were comparing the vitamin content of bowls of Total to other leading cereal brands.)
Mr. Pak's stylized stoicism is discernible in ''Machine Love,'' the segment in which he can be seen as Archie, an android office worker who gamely endures the ridicule of the other drones around him because of his single-mindedness. With a clever economy of means, ''Machine Love'' conveys the blooming of feelings inside the android, who is slowly developing an attachment to a woman who works nearby. The director is using the material to joke about the coldness of humanity and the intimidating power of loneliness. (Humanoid cognoscenti may note an intersection between Asimov and George Lucas's directorial debut, ''THX 1138.'')
''Machine Love'' could have been the title of the four pieces that make up ''Stories.'' In ''My Robot Baby'' the intensity of a driven would-be mother (Tamlyn Tomita), desperate to pick up parenting skills by caring for a robot baby so she can qualify for adoption, is easily the most compelling element in the vignettes. Mr. Pak's feel for melodrama adds a piercing and thoughtful end note similar to the emotional gravity found in Stephen King novellas like ''The Body'' and ''Rita Hayworth and the Shawshank Redemption,'' both in Mr. King's collection ''Different Seasons.''
But it's the director's respect for the actors he's selected that seems to be his strong suit, a duty and a focus that work hand-in-exoskeleton with the thematic mission of the protagonists in each of the chapters of ''Stories.'' This aspect links the film's segments closely to ''Different Seasons.'' The films ''The Shawshank Redemption'' and ''Stand by Me'' grew out of tales in ''Seasons'' of similarly intelligently observed moments of everyday life poised on the brink of horror.
The influence of others is most glaringly apparent in ''The Robot Fixer,'' another story of motherhood and determination. Bernice (Wai Ching Ho), who refuses to be struck down by grief -- though its damage to her is visible -- slaves to restore robot toys belonging to her comatose son. Her hope is that her efforts will restore him to consciousness. Mr. Pak's restraint and taste keep this particular part mild, and his attentiveness to his star is gracious and sure. She responds by providing Bernice with a visibly disintegrating purposefulness, trying to keep her pain from rattling her psyche into smithereens.
The most nakedly striving of the stories seems to be ''Clay,'' which jumps to a future a few years away in which the infirm will download their memories -- their conscious minds -- from their failing bodies, so that a part of them is left behind. ''Clay'' tries to deal with the philosophical ramifications of such an act; John Lee (Sab Shimono), an elderly artist, is reluctant to submit to the process.
''Clay'' is also the piece that could have used more consideration: it's a notion in search of a story, but captivating enough to make us want to see it more fully realized than the available resources allow. (Another of Mr. Pak's scripts, ''MVP,'' a Detroit-set urban melodrama combining a noirish gang war and politics, directed by Harry Davis, was shown at this year's Sundance festival. In both cases you can feel the projects running out of cash.)
The most startling aspect of ''Robot Stories'' is not the mix that the director built from spare parts left on the curb but the evolving dramatic acumen of its maker; he's a talent with a future.
ROBOT STORIES
Four related short films written and directed by Greg Pak; director of photography, Peter Olsen; edited by Stephanie Sterner; music by Rich Knutsen; production designer, Shane P. Klein; produced by Mr. Pak and Kim Ima; released by Pak Film Inc. At the Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village. Running time: 85 minutes. This film is not rated.
MY ROBOT BABY  WITH: Tamlyn Tomita (Marcia), Vin Knight (Doug) and James Saito (Assistant).
THE ROBOT FIXER  WITH: Wai Ching Ho (Bernice), Louis Ozawa Changchien (Wilson) and Cindy Cheung (Grace).
MACHINE LOVE  WITH: Greg Pak (Archie), Julienne Hanzelka Kim (Lydia), Bill Coelius (Bob) and Julie Atlas Muz (Janet).
CLAY  WITH: Sab Shimono (John Lee) and Eisa Davis (Helen).
FILM REVIEW
