With negotiations for a new collective bargaining agreement looming, the National Hockey League released a report yesterday by Arthur Levitt, the former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, who said he found the league in dire financial shape.
The report said that the league lost about $273 million last season and that of the nearly $2 billion the league took in during that period, 75 percent was spent on salaries, bonuses, benefits and other items for players.
''As a former investment banker and investor, I'd have to say that is totally inconsistent with any sound business practices,'' Levitt said at a news conference yesterday at a Midtown Manhattan hotel. In the National Basketball Association and the National Football League, he said, players receive a smaller share of revenue.
The N.H.L. clearly intends to cite the report, which cost well over $1 million, as it prepares to negotiate a contract for the first time in nearly 10 years with the players union. Gary Bettman, the league's commissioner, said he hoped that the independent confirmation of the N.H.L.'s financial data would influence the union's stance in contract talks. The contract expires Sept. 15.
''Now is really the time to get this behind us,'' Bettman said at the news conference. He declined to specify what share of league revenue he thought should be paid to players.
The National Hockey League Players Association was not told of the report's existence until Wednesday, when its executives also learned for the first time of the league's decision last year to hire Levitt.
In a statement yesterday, the executive director of the players association, Bob Goodenow, said: ''Because we received the report from the league late this morning, it will take more than a couple of hours of review to fully comment. Selected media outlets received this report days before us, which speaks volumes about its intended audience.''
Levitt's report also concluded that the league's financial reporting, which the players association has criticized in the past, ''presents a comprehensive and accurate statement, in all material respects, of the combined financial results of the entire league.''
But Lynn Turner, who was chief accountant at the Securities and Exchange Commission under Levitt and who worked on the N.H.L. report with him, said that the league's unified report of operations -- an aggregate financial report based on data provided by the 30 teams -- did not apply generally accepted accounting principles because it excluded interest on debt and the impact of depreciation or amortization. Including those items, the league's loss grows to $374 million.
Ted Saskin, senior director for business affairs of the players association, criticized some of the assumptions made in the report. The definition of revenue, for example, excluded income that it should not have because the report followed the model set by the N.B.A., he said. But the N.B.A.'s definition was a result of negotiation, he added.
When the players association reviewed financial data provided by four teams -- Boston, Buffalo, Los Angeles and Montreal -- it found that they had underreported revenue by $52 million.
''It's not an accounting issue of making sure the numbers add up, but a much more complicated task,'' said Saskin, who dismissed the report as ''a new public relations initiative'' by the N.H.L.
The players association in the past has also complained that the N.H.L. excluded from its revenue calculation money paid for suites at arenas, an issue that Levitt said was carefully studied. The study did not support that argument, Levitt said.
''We audited those arenas,'' he added.
Levitt and the league took pains to emphasize that Levitt was completely independent in conducting the study. He was paid $250,000 -- in advance, to avoid the appearance of influencing his findings -- for his work on the report, which took about 10 months to complete. Eisner LLP, the accounting firm, was paid more than $500,000.
Those amounts do not approach the full cost, however, because Levitt required individual teams to obtain additional evaluations from their own auditors.
The report said that of the N.H.L.'s 30 teams last season, 11 were profitable, earning nearly $70 million or an average of $6.4 million each. The other 19 lost a total of $342 million or, on average, $18 million each.
Levitt would not discuss the financial performance of specific teams.
At the news conference, after Levitt compared the N.H.L. to a publicly traded company whose results would scare off investors, Bettman was asked whether he had any plans to step down, as chief executives of public companies are occasionally are compelled to do by shareholders.
''Thank you for that vote of confidence,'' Bettman said, adding a moment later, ''You should hold me accountable -- if we don't fix it.''
HOCKEY
