The Senate approved a $318 billion highway and mass transit measure on Thursday in the face of a presidential veto threat and resistance from conservatives who accused their colleagues of embarking on a spending spree despite a rising deficit.
After easily defeating a series of challenges aimed at cutting the cost of the measure, senators voted 76 to 21 in favor of the six-year proposal, which exceeds by $62 billion the spending level President Bush has said is acceptable.
''As a fiscal conservative, I say that I believe in spending more in certain areas,'' said Senator James M. Inhofe, the Oklahoma Republican who is chairman of the Environment and Public Works Committee. ''One area is national defense, one area is infrastructure.''
While the bill had strong support from most Democrats, Republicans spent the day in a pitched intramural fight over the price tag of legislation that is developing into an early test of Republican willingness to hold down spending. Some conservative Republicans said their colleagues were ignoring the implications of a deficit estimated to reach $521 billion this year in a rush to win local road and bridge projects.
''It's spend more now, get the political benefit and pass on the bill to the future generations,'' said Senator Rick Santorum, Republican of Pennsylvania. He said he was fighting the measure in violation of a Washington axiom, ''Never get between a congressman and asphalt because you will get run over.''
Despite such objections, the Senate voted 86 to 11 to cut off a filibuster slowing the measure, then voted 72 to 24 against requiring the spending in the bill to fall within limits set in the Congressionally approved budget. Senators also rejected 78 to 20 an effort to hold the spending to the $256 billion acceptable to the White House.
Backers of the measure that will pay for road and transportation projects across the nation said the spending level could be adjusted in future negotiations with the House and the administration. They said the bill would provide hundreds of thousands of new construction jobs while paying for needed repairs to the nation's deteriorating and overcrowded highways.
''Are these roads magically going to fix themselves?'' asked Senator Jim Talent, Republican of Missouri. ''I think we should do our part here and we should face honestly what we need.''
The bill represents about a 47 percent increase in spending over the current six-year highway and mass transit program.
Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, called on Congress to demonstrate it was serious about reining in the cost of new legislation. ''We urge Congress to hold the line on spending,'' he said.
The $375 billion highway bill emerging in the House is even more expensive than the Senate version. The political push for highway dollars there sets up a probable collision between advocates of more road money and the Republican leadership, which this week said it would explore reducing spending below what the president has requested.
In the Senate, those opposed to the measure said it was time for Republicans to make good on their claim to be the party of fiscal responsibility.
''When are we going to start backing up our words with our actions?'' asked Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, who said the measure was the product of ''reckless fiscal insanity.''
Senator Don Nickles, Republican of Oklahoma and chairman of the Budget Committee, supported blocking the measure because it exceeded the budget limits.
''I'm amazed at people thinking we're going to be able to get all these new highway monies for nothing,'' Mr. Nickles said.
But the authors of the measure, backed by a majority of senators interested in the hundreds of millions of dollars the legislation would provide to each state, prevailed. ''This is a good bill,'' said Senator James M. Jeffords, an independent from Vermont and a senior member of the public works panel. ''I'd like to see it a little bigger.''
The Senate majority leader, Bill Frist of Tennessee, said he recognized the objections being raised by some lawmakers and indicated he might favor eventually lowering the cost to about $290 billion. ''I hope we will be able to find a compromise with the House of Representatives and the administration that will meet all concerns,'' Dr. Frist said.
