No one did more to bring about the peace that has settled over Northern Ireland in recent years than John Hume, the professorial politician, civil rights advocate and admirer of Martin Luther King, who announced this month that his current terms in the European and British Parliaments will be his last. After years of subordinating his health to his sense of mission, he is finally heeding his doctors' call to take a well-earned retirement. He will be missed.
Mr. Hume's greatest achievement, among many, was convincing Gerry Adams, leader of Sinn Fein, that more could be accomplished through politics than terror. Sinn Fein is essentially the Irish Republican Army's electoral wing. Mr. Adams was already rethinking his views when the two men began secret talks in the late 1980's. What helped complete his change of heart were Mr. Hume's formidable intellect, patience and persuasive skills. Sinn Fein's retreat from violence coincided with the rise of more enlightened Protestant politicians like David Trimble, the Ulster Unionists' leader. Together, these changes made possible the 1998 Good Friday peace accord, which, despite setbacks, endures as a foundation of Northern Ireland's peaceful revival. Mr. Hume and Mr. Trimble shared the 1998 Nobel Peace Prize for their contributions to it.
Perhaps predictably, Sinn Fein's movement into the mainstream has come largely at the expense of Mr. Hume's own Social Democratic and Labor Party, once the largest vote-getter among Northern Ireland's Roman Catholics. In the province's legislative elections last fall, Sinn Fein outpolled Mr. Hume's party for the first time. On the Protestant side, Mr. Trimble's party was edged out by the far less enlightened Democratic Unionists, led by the Rev. Ian Paisley. Those election results have complicated plans for reviving Northern Ireland's home rule government. Despite this, the peace that John Hume did so much to achieve becomes more entrenched with each passing year. There could be no more fit tribute to this man of vision and courage.
DAVID C. UNGER
APPRECIATIONS
