Deborah Hay has been through many choreographic transformations, beginning with relatively traditional work and then moving into the experimentalism of the 1960's and on to ''protofolk'' pieces, as the dance writer Don McDonagh put it. But one continuing theme has been the individual natures of her performers. And that is the central theme of ''The Match,'' a new work Ms. Hay presented on Saturday night at the Danspace Project.
You could have been forgiven for imagining that this East Village theater had been turned into an asylum by the four mad creatures occupying the stage. Nothing they did -- or muttered -- was expected or made much sense.
But Ms. Hay has worked in dance long enough to have developed an easy authority. And she chose performers who were witty as well as fearless about losing themselves in this bizarre dance.
They are dressed in ordinary street clothes. Jennifer Tipton's lighting looks almost perfunctory, as in a rehearsal, except for frequent dimmings and blackouts. There is no musical accompaniment, so the focus is on the dancers: their mystifying travels and relationships, both spatial and personal, and the satisfying way Ms. Hay distributes them about the space.
Ms. Hay's idea was to develop a quartet and then let her dancers continue to work on solos drawn from the piece, which itself contains rotated solos for each of them. The two women, Chrysa Parkinson and Ros Warby, should grab and make their own the solo material they performed on Saturday, which, like their performing, looked a good deal richer than the quiet contributions of Wally Cardona and Mark Lorimer.
Ms. Warby is a treasure. She moves with an operatic fullness and emotes with shameless, nutty abandon, all the while remaining fascinatingly inscrutable. Ms. Parkinson got things off to a telling start with a long solo in which she tripped about the stage like a well-behaved but drifting schoolgirl, blank-faced and eventually hilarious.
Who knows what was going on, seemingly in real time, in the strange and surprisingly handsome little world of ''The Match''? There was nowhere else to look, however, and that was good.
DANCE REVIEW
