Greek organizers of the 2004 Olympics like to bill it as the competition's heady return to its birthplace, and their favorite, most frequently trumpeted illustration of that modernity-meets-antiquity theme is the planned marathon route.
It is supposed to mimic the long-distance dash for which the race is named: a Greek soldier's legendary run to ancient Athens from a battlefield in Marathon. To make that happen, construction crews began improving the relevant roads for a stampede of international athletes.
But about two weeks ago, the work stopped, because the contractor encountered financial trouble. Scurrying to fix the problem, the Greek government has now pushed the deadline for the project's completion from late March all the way to late June.
That would be about seven weeks before the Summer Games begin on Aug. 13, and it is a bracing example of how close Athens is cutting its own ragged race to the finish line. With just six months to go, this city and country have little if any time to spare.
The new soccer arena is not close to ready. The main Olympic stadium still awaits a mammoth dome, the tricky installation of which is giving many Olympic officials palpitations. Several essential mass-transit systems have yet to be tested, let alone put into operation.
In interviews this week, Greek government officials and Olympic organizers said that none of that was surprising, that most projects were on schedule and that Athens had recovered from early delays that consigned some key endeavors to vise-tight timetables.
''The thing is not if they are completed now,'' said Gianna Angelopoulos-Daskalaki, president of the Athens Organizing Committee, which is stage-managing the 2004 Olympic Games.
''The thing is if they are completed and tested for Games time,'' said Ms. Angelopoulos-Daskalaki, who is widely credited for rescuing a dire situation when she took the helm of the committee in 2000.
She added that all the projects would indeed be ready; how far in advance, she said, was immaterial.
But among the International Olympic Committee officials who are monitoring Athens's progress, a palpable nervousness remains.
Denis Oswald, an I.O.C. inspector who has been making monthly visits here, said that none of the planned athletic events were in jeopardy and that he and other officials were ''more confident than we were two years ago.''
But, he added, Athens has left more work to the final months than most other Olympic hosts did.
As a result, he said, any unexpected difficulties, like a long spell of bad weather or a contractor's broken promise, could force compromises and adjustments around the edges of the main events. He expressed special concern about the smooth, quick transportation of athletes and spectators, a challenge that bedeviled Atlanta, for example, in 1996.
''When you have no reserve at all and every day counts, these unexpected difficulties create some tension,'' he said in a telephone interview on Wednesday from Switzerland, where the international committee resides. ''Really, we can say there's no reserve.''
Greece was the home of the ancient Olympics, and it played host to the first modern Summer Games in 1896. But to play host to the Summer Games of 2004, it has had to repave, rejigger and rejuvenate itself in countless ways, an overhaul of unimagined difficulty.
''I think nobody realized how big a task it was,'' said Dr. Antony Stathopoulos, a civil engineering professor at the University of Athens. ''Nobody could make any meaning out of it.''
Traffic-clogged and chaotic, Athens needed a subway system, which it got in 2000. It needed a new airport, which it got in 2001.
It needed new roads, many of which have been completed, and it needed a new suburban rail system to connect the airport to the city.
That rail system, which Mr. Oswald said was vital, is still under construction. So is another rail line that is supposed to run south from the center of Athens to coastal areas where many event sites, including the soccer arena, are situated.
Those transportation projects and the construction of some event sites have been hampered by lawsuits, labor strikes, environmental protests, archaeological impediments -- just about everything but a plague of locusts.
They were also hampered, in the beginning, by dithering and dallying, and by having to put together the multibillion dollar combination of public and private financing. Many Greeks concede that after the country won its bid for the 2004 Olympics back in 1997, it promptly proceeded to procrastinate.
''Let's say we could be more disciplined with deadlines,'' said Panos K. Protopsaltis, who is in charge of transportation for the Olympics, referring to what he cast as a certain ineluctable Greek tendency.
Since 2000, Greeks have been trying to buck that nature, and they have been battling time. ''They have been working well in the last months,'' Mr. Oswald said.
But they have had to whittle around the edges of a few of their grander notions, eliminating a planned traffic overpass here, contemplating one less rail stop there.
They have also begun to manage expectations downward, casting Greece as the little engine that could, and that will, but only barely.
''Look, it's a very big event for Greece,'' said the Athens mayor, Dora Bakoyanni. She noted that Greece, with about 11 million people, is one of the smallest countries to play host to the Olympics in recent decades.
''Greece's Olympics will be the human-scale Olympics,'' Ms. Bakoyanni said.
One of her aides said it might be best for outsiders to think of these Olympics in terms of the ''challenge of the underdog overcoming the odds.''
That underdog would be Greece, and she would be panting right about now. There is a nearly nonstop frenzy of construction around the planned stops for the rail lines and at the soccer arena, which is in the nearby port city of Piraeus.
Work on the arena began only nine months ago and is supposed to be completed, like the marathon route, in late June, said Costas Cartalis, the Greek government's special secretary for the Olympics.
''It's a tight project,'' he said. ''It needs very careful attention.''
And if some unpreventable delay occurred? What then?
Mr. Cartalis simply smiled, then explained that response by saying, ''I smile because I don't have any other option.''
''You have to minimize risks,'' he said, ''and you have to be lucky.''
