Computer salesmen and technicians wandered around in shock, and the receptionist could not handle the number of calls that were coming in from around the world on Thursday to the sleek headquarters of SMB Group, an information technology company.
The cause of the disruption was President Bush's speech to the National Defense University on Wednesday, in which he described the nuclear black market network created by the Pakistani nuclear scientist Abdul Qadeer Khan. Mr. Bush said that Dr. Khan's deputy was B. S. A. Tahir, who ''ran SMB Computer, a business in Dubai,'' which was a ''front for the proliferation activities of the A.Q. Khan network.''
Puzzled employees said they had more questions than answers and declined to comment. In a telephone interview on Wednesday, Seyed Ibrahim Bukhary, the owner and manager of SMB Group, said it dealt only in legal computer sales. He said the man Mr. Bush mentioned, Bukhary Sayed Abu Tahir, has no ownership in the group, and is not involved in the management at any level. Mr. Bukhary is Mr. Tahir's younger brother.
In the trading network that Dr. Khan spawned to sell nuclear equipment and designs, some companies involved were doing legitimate business in finely tooled parts without knowing where the components would end up. Others were agents for Dr. Khan, forwarding secret shipments to Libya, Iran and other countries, knowing these countries were working on secret nuclear programs.
Like the SMB Group, another company that said it did not intentionally take part in Dr. Khan's network was Scomi Precision Engineering, a manufacturing firm in Malaysia. It produced centrifuge parts that were intercepted last year on the BBC China, a ship bound for Libya.
A Scomi corporate executive said Thursday that the company had negotiated the contract for the parts with Mr. Tahir, but he had never mentioned SMB Computer.
''I have never heard of it,'' the executive, Meena Kanthaswamy, said in a telephone interview, referring to SMB Computer. ''None of us have.''
Scomi executives said that Mr. Tahir said he was representing Gulf Technical Industries, a Dubai trading firm that, according to American and British investigators, put the shipment of centrifuge parts aboard the Libya-bound ship.
Gulf Technical was founded and is partly owned by Peter Griffin, who supplied material to Dr. Khan when he first developed Pakistan's nuclear capabilites, according to Mr. Griffin.
According to government records in Dubai, Mr. Tahir, a resident, established SMB Computer, a limited liability company, in 1981. At the outset he owned 49 percent. As required by law, 51 percent belonged to a citizen of the United Arab Emirates.
In Malaysia, Prime Minister Abdullah Badawi expressed displeasure with Presdent Bush's speech. ''We are not involved in such activity,'' he said, referring to allegations that Malaysia had been a key link in Dr. Khan's nuclear network. He did say that the Malaysian authorities were questioning Mr. Tahir.
After the company expanded, SMB Group was formed, with SMB Computer as one division.
