It is, perhaps, somehow reassuringly democratic that a multimillionaire owner of a penthouse apartment on Fifth Avenue must regularly empty buckets of rainwater leaking through his roof. Or at least have someone do it for him.
For more than two years, that's how it has been for the fashion designer Elie Tahari, known for his disco-era tube tops and as ''the jacket king'' for his demure women's business suits. And over that time, the complex concoction of funnels, hoses, tubes and pails that wends through Mr. Tahari's 21st-floor, 3,600-square-foot apartment at 860 Fifth Avenue has become the wellspring for a convoluted legal battle between members of the building's co-op board, who have split 6 to 5 on Mr. Tahari's proposed solution to the problem.
Last week, Justice Saralee Evans of State Supreme Court in Manhattan extended a temporary restraining order sought by the board's minority, barring the majority from holding a meeting of all shareholders.
Such legal divides on boards are unusual, said Dennis H. Greenstein, a former assistant state attorney general who specialized in real estate cases. ''From time to time there's posturing,'' he said, ''but it's very rare that an actual lawsuit is commenced.''
The purpose of the shareholders' meeting at 860 Fifth Avenue, originally scheduled for Feb. 3, was to vote on whether the board should proceed with Mr. Tahari's proposal that he pay $1.2 million to repair the roof, contingent on the co-op's allowing him to build up to 3,500 square feet on top of his penthouse and out over the existing rear terrace. Mr. Tahari would pay the co-op an additional $2.5 million for rights to build the addition.
''The roof has terrible leaks, like waterfalls,'' he said this week. ''The building tried some patchwork, but they need to put an entire roof there.'' A year ago, Mr. Tahari and his wife and child moved into a rental apartment at the Trump International, across Central Park, after ''my wife threatened to move out,'' he said.
The beige-brick building near 68th Street was built as a co-op in the 1950's. It has about 160 apartments, as well as a gym and a wine cellar in the basement. In November, a 2,050-square-foot, seven-room apartment on an upper floor sold for $1,925,000.
Mr. Tahari paid $325,000 for his apartment in 1979. But these days, with Fifth Avenue penthouses regularly selling for about $2,000 per square foot, the current Tahari residence, including the terrace, could sell for more than $8 million, according to one appraiser who spoke on the condition that he not be identified.
The board's lawyer, Aaron Shmulewitz, said the six-member majority believed that Mr. Tahari's proposal was a good idea ''because the co-op stands to receive roughly $3.7 million, and there would be a release of liability from his damage claims for the roof leaks.''
The shareholders' meeting was scheduled, Mr. Shmulewitz said, ''because this has been such a political hot potato, and at least the majority felt the temperature of the shareholders should be taken before the corporation pursued this transaction.''
Not so fast, said the five-member minority. ''They don't want the meeting to take place until there has been full disclosure of all the legal issues and risks,'' said Jay Fialkoff, a lawyer who represents the minority. ''There was a failure to disclose that this needs a zoning variance; there's no architect's opinion that this will not have a detrimental effect.''
Mr. Shmulewitz took issue with Mr. Fialkoff's position. ''We vehemently disagree that there has not been full disclosure,'' he said. ''Not only that, the minority directors have papered the building with numerous communications and held two open meetings of shareholders where they discussed all the issues.''
One open question, Mr. Fialkoff said, concerns the fact that the roof is legally a common area, though unused by other building residents. The question, he said, ''is whether this proposal -- selling the entire roof to a single shareholder and taking away from the rest of the shareholders the right to use that roof -- is really according special rights to one shareholder.'' If so, he said, the plan requires approval by two-thirds of the shareholders because it would constitute an amendment to the proprietary lease.
Mr. Shmulewitz countered, ''Legally speaking, a shareholder vote is not necessary; the board has the absolute authority to enter into this type of transaction itself.'' ''However,'' he added, ''if the shareholders do not support this transaction, the corporation will not pursue it.''
Still, if the shareholders grant initial approval, Mr. Shmulewitz said, ''I would interpret that vote as: 'Go ahead and get an architect's opinion, an engineer's opinion, land-use experts, zoning experts, Buildings Department approval, landmarks approval, and negotiate a contract with Mr. Tahari without going back to the shareholders, as is the board's right.'''
Mr. Tahari is frustrated. ''I want an end to it,'' he said. ''I have a piece of real estate in ruins. I can't sell. I can't fix it. I have to move on in my life. In my mind, I gave them all they asked for.''
Residential Real Estate
