''Make love, not war'' is one amendment I wouldn't mind seeing written into the United States Constitution, and into every other civic document across the world. The idea has a long history in art (as, of course, does its bellicose opposite). And it reigns supreme in the pulsing little valentine of an exhibition titled ''Echoing Images: Couples in African Sculpture'' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
In the show, as in life, a couple means many things, all of which in African art are intended to be read as primarily spiritual rather than libidinal: man and woman, woman and woman, man and man, parent and child, human and divine, human and animal. Some individuals are couples unto themselves, fusing contrasting and complementary traits. The general idea seems to be that when a concept of personal allegiance is nurtured by a society, rather than fettered or enforced, the possibility of some larger harmony increases, encouraging further growth and variety.
Art operates more or less the same way. At its most stimulating, it signifies an ideal of equilibrium that is built on and embraces all that is mutable, transformative, unconventional, intrepid, unknown. That's why some of us love it the way we do. And you would have to have a heart of stone not to love the 50 sculptures brought together for the Met's show, organized by Alisa LaGamma, associate curator in the museum's department of the arts of Africa, Oceania, and the Americas, and installed in the Michael C. Rockefeller wing.
Let the infatuation begin with the sight of the three great images that introduce the show. The first, in a case by itself, is one of the Met's classic treasures, the carving of a seated man and woman called ''Primordial Couple,'' created by a Dogon artist in Mali, possibly as early as the 16th century. Judging by size, this was a significant commission, probably for funerary display. Whatever its date and use, it is a model of balance enlivened by variation, structure surprised by pleasure.
The two figures, of equal height, sit erect, side by side, their faces candid and a little shy, like those of people in daguerreotypes. At the same time, the artist has interrupted symmetry in gentle ways. The heads tilt ever so slightly away from each other. The woman's hands lie flat on her knees, but the man's right arm loops up around her shoulders; his descending hand touches her breast.
And this play of sameness with telling departures continues on the back: the man carries a quiver suspended from his shoulders; the woman has a corresponding bundle, but hers is an infant in swaddling.
Beyond these figures, a standing twosome is holding court, perched on either side of a saucer-shaped throne from Cameroon. Although nearly nude, both man and woman -- a king and his favored wife, most likely -- look richly attired, as their skin is made entirely of blue glass beads. Such imported baubles carried heavy symbolic weight connected to fertility. But their massed sheen is what matters here. Like an encrustation of pearls on a plain-cut Balenciaga coat, they give stolid emblems of leadership a classy, labor-intensive verve.
The mood shifts to adagio in a pair of life-size figures from Madagascar, carved as commemorative sculptures for an important burial in the 19th or early 20th century. They were set up outdoors near the grave, where, the plan was, the elements would wear them away. By the time they were collected, erosion was far advanced. The lines of their sheathlike gowns are now barely visible; their faces seem to be suspended in perpetual dissolution, like those of Medardo Rosso's eternity-traveling children.
Just behind them, though, inside the enclosed space that houses the rest of the show, passion smolders and flares. Two smaller tomb figures, weather-warped like driftwood, are as animated as the others are still. They dance a pas de deux of longing, like partners in a tragic ballet.
The two lovers in a terra-cotta sculpture nearby are oblivious to them: fused in an embrace, they have eyes and bodies only for each other. The sexual heat generated by this sensational piece, found at the ancient site of Djenne-Jeno in Mali, is rare in traditional African art, though more restrained depictions of intimacy are common.
In another terra cotta from Djenne-Jeno, dated as early as the 12th century, two men kneel side by side, their arms fluidly intertwined so the hand of one figure clasps the shoulder of the other. The Djenne civilization also produced brass figurines of male couples, as did the Kulango people of Ivory Coast centuries later. The Kulango figures at the Met, small enough to work as amulets, tend toward androgyny. One pair is so intimately bonded that two bodies share a single head, in a true meeting of minds.
Female couples embrace on headrests made by the Luba peoples in Congo, for whom women are crucial mediators with the spirit world. And, in fact, many pairings in many African cultures represent close encounters between the human and the divine.
Such is the case in a Baule sculpture of piggybacked male figures, thought to depict a diviner on whom a summoned spirit has descended. A set of two-figure Yoruba brass sculptures from Nigeria have a similar vertical configuration, but with a different meaning. In one of them a male figure carries a female figure on his shoulders; in the other, a female carries a male. The heads of all the figures, outsize to suggest expansive force of knowledge, are identical.
These sculptures are made to be worn as insignias by male and female elders of the Osugbo society, an important judiciary body in the community. Within the society itself, distinctions based on sex are discarded. As Ms. LaGamma writes in a slender catalog full of tantalizing ideas, ''Osugbo members try to obliterate dualities and, in doing so, to attain the ultimate level of enlightened consciousness.''
Sometimes, it is true, dualities are hard to ignore. The splendid figures of a nude man and woman carved by a Mangbetu artist of Congo announce their difference loud and clear from across the room: their genitals are carefully highlighted with paint. In other essentials, though, the man and woman are as one. On the evidence of their elongated skulls and ornamental scars, they share the same taste for smart, expensive, look-at-us chic that provides the glue for many a contemporary New York marriage.
Finally, from the Mangbetu also comes a small, less aggrandizing piece, with paired figures and transcendental functions. It's a terra-cotta container made from two pots connected in the middle. Each is topped with a woman's head; the two heads face each other, their lips almost touching. The vessel is thought to have been used to dispense a hallucinogenic elixir, which gave its drinker the ability to see coming events and ensure the health of the community.
Whether the presence of the women, at once sensuous and restrained, helped inspire pacific visions, I don't know. But seeing them among the profoundly humane images in Ms. LaGamma's heartfelt show, I'm inclined to think so, and look forward with confidence to the collective future I imagine being sealed with their same-sex kiss.
''Echoing Images: Couples in African Sculpture'' remains at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street, (212)535-7710, through Sept. 5.
ART REVIEW
