A senior United Nations envoy said Thursday that he supported a powerful Shiite cleric's call for elections to install a new sovereign government, but did not offer a specific timetable.
''Elections are the only way to bring Iraq out of the tunnel,'' the envoy, Lakhdar Brahimi, told reporters after meeting Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani in the holy city of Najaf.
Mr. Brahimi, who is leading a United Nations team that arrived this week to assess the possibility of holding direct elections, did not say whether he thought elections could be held by May 31. That is the date by which the Bush administration hopes to put a transitional national assembly in place to appoint the new government.
Though the Bush administration has yet to acknowledge that security also poses a problem for elections, many experts say the country is too unstable to stage a fully democratic process.
An explosion killed one American soldier and wounded two others in a Baghdad suburb late Thursday, The Associated Press reported Friday.
The blast occurred at 10:40 p.m. on Thursday in the Abu Ghraib part of the capital, striking a patrol by members of the 16th Military Police Brigade, said Cpl. Craig Stowell, an American military spokesman.
The American military said Thursday that two soldiers from the First Armored Division were killed in a roadside bomb attack in Baghdad during a patrol on Wednesday night.
Ayatollah Sistani has been insisting on elections to appoint members of the national assembly and strongly opposes the Bush administration's plan for a caucus-style selection process. The White House last month asked the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, to intervene because Ayatollah Sistani had said he would seriously weigh the opinion of the United Nations.
After meeting with the ayatollah, Mr. Brahimi said ''we are with him on this 100 percent because elections are the best means to enable any people to set up a state that serves their interest.'' Mr. Brahimi added that ''we also agree with his excellency that the elections must be well prepared and well arranged and must be done under the best possible circumstances to get the results that Ayatollah Sistani wants and the people of Iraq and the U.N. want.''
Fred Eckhard, the United Nations spokesman, said the United Nations team had found a consensus among Iraqi leaders that elections were the best way to establish a ''fully representative and legitimate government.'' But first, he said, the right ''technical, security and political conditions'' must be in place.
Mr. Brahimi's statements on Thursday morning make it increasingly apparent that the White House will have difficulty selling Iraqis on its plan for caucus-style balloting.
American officials have indicated they are willing to make adjustments to their plan, but want to stick to a deadline of June 30 to hand over sovereignty. Direct elections are not possible before then, they have argued, because proper voter rolls and laws cannot be set up in time.
Ayatollah Sistani has said he is willing to postpone direct elections if the United Nations team so recommends. What mechanism the United Nations might suggest is unclear.
Dan Senor, a spokesman for the Coalition Provisional Authority, said American administrators were still awaiting a report from the United Nations.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: GOVERNMENT
