The new Adam Sandler movie ''50 First Dates,'' a philosophical brain-damage romantic comedy that also stars Drew Barrymore -- but wait. Don't turn the page. This review is not going where you think it's going, because neither, thank goodness, is the movie.
It starts out looking very much like another of Mr. Sandler's infantile exercises in id gratification. First, a montage of anonymous women appears on screen to marvel at the sexual prowess of one Henry Roth, who is not the legendary author of ''Call It Sleep'' but rather a Maui veterinarian with a special interest in marine mammals and, off the job, in short-term romances with vacationing mainlanders. Once we meet Henry (Mr. Sandler), we are treated to a joke involving bruised testicles, a gag in which a walrus vomits all over Henry's sexually ambiguous Russian assistant. There is also Mr. Sandler's fellow ''Saturday Night Live'' alumnus Rob Schneider, who plays a goofy Hawaiian stoner named Ula.
Luckily, the subject of this film, directed by Peter Segal from a script by George Wing, is short-term amnesia, which should help you forget its first abysmal minutes. As soon as Ms. Barrymore shows up, the forces of coarseness and idiocy surrender before her bright, soft smile and sly good humor -- a rout symbolically enacted a bit later, when she takes after Mr. Schneider with a baseball bat. Of course, some bits of puerile humor remain; we're talking about Adam Sandler, remember, not Eric Rohmer. But the occasional bouts of scatology and crude sexual humor function, if you'll permit the oxymoron, as vulgar grace notes, decorating a surprisingly graceful and, in the end, impressively daring romantic comedy.
Ms. Barrymore plays Lucy, whom Henry encounters one morning at a diner. A year earlier, she suffered an injury to her temporal lobe in a car accident. As a comic premise, this may sound somewhat less than uproarious; something similar afflicted the tormented hero of ''Memento.'' But the makers of ''50 First Dates,'' like the Farrelly brothers at their best, have an ability to combine mockery with sympathy that disarms any impulse to take offense. Lucy, who wakes up each morning thinking that it is the day of the accident, lives in a perpetual present maintained by her gruff father (Blake Clark) and steroid-addled brother (Sean Astin, a long way from Middle Earth). They keep a ready supply of old newspapers, and each night they watch ''The Sixth Sense,'' feigning amazement at the discovery that Bruce Willis is a ghost.
Henry, who is instantly smitten with Lucy, upends their settled, sad routine. As he woos her, starting from scratch each time and contriving new ways to win her heart, your own memory may be stirred, since the conceit of an endlessly repeated day is also the subject of Harold Ramis's ''Groundhog Day.'' The less ambitious ''50 First Dates,'' which opens today nationwide, lacks that film's giddy metaphysical grandeur, and Mr. Sandler does not have either Bill Murray's prickliness or his range. But this movie does manage to be a deft and touching variation on the theme that, in brief measures and with enough practice, we can find some perfection in our lives.
When Lucy's doctor (Dan Aykroyd) patiently informs her, for the hundredth time, that her condition is permanent, he articulates the challenge facing both Henry and the filmmakers. For the film to succeed, what Henry does -- using his temporal advantage to manipulate Lucy into loving him -- must seem charming rather than cruel. His motives must be pure, which may at first glance seem like a lot to ask of Mr. Sandler. But, as in Paul Thomas Anderson's ''Punch-Drunk Love,'' the stubborn decency and fierce loyalty often obscured by his natural belligerence shine through, and you never question the ferocity or the steadfastness of Henry's love for Lucy.
Along with Emily Watson, the love interest in ''Punch-Drunk Love,'' Ms. Barrymore (who also appeared with Mr. Sandler in ''The Wedding Singer'') is this actor's best romantic counterpart. Rather than dwell on Lucy's helplessness, she emphasizes the character's pluck and intelligence, and, most crucially, she does not let Mr. Sandler monopolize the jokes.
Mr. Segal, whose filmography consists almost entirely of vehicles for ''Saturday Night Live,'' skips nimbly from one joke to the next and manages the story's sentimental turns with impressive agility. There are a few harsh, unfunny notes; it's one thing to make light of brain injuries, but quite another to turn Gary Busey's real, near-fatal motorcycle accident into a punch line.
But the unlikely sweetness of the story carries the day. What is most astonishing is the confidence with which the filmmakers push their premise to its logical conclusion, turning an ending that could have been either laughable or appalling into something so effortlessly heartfelt as to be nearly sublime.
''50 First Dates'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some predictably crude sexual jokes, some surprisingly tasteful sexual innuendoes and a few scenes involving drug use and its consequences.
50 FIRST DATES
Directed by Peter Segal; written by George Wing; director of photography, Jack Green; edited by Jeff Gourson; music by Teddy Castellucci; production designer, Alan Au; produced by Jack Giarraputo, Steve Golin and Nancy Juvonen; released by Columbia Pictures. Running time: 100 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Adam Sandler (Henry Roth), Drew Barrymore (Lucy Whitmore), Rob Schneider (Ula), Sean Astin (Doug Whitmore), Lusia Strus (Alexa), Blake Clark (Marlin Whitmore), Amy Hill (Sue), Allen Covert (Ten-Second Tom) and Dan Aykroyd (Dr. Keats).
FILM REVIEW
