Ronald O. Perelman, the financier and majority owner of Revlon Inc., has struck a deal with Fidelity Management and Research, a large mutual fund company, to help cut his company's $1.9 billion debt almost in half by swapping bonds for company shares.
Revlon disclosed the terms of the refinancing, which it said would reduce debt by $930 million, at the same time on Thursday that it announced its financial results for 2003.
Revenue at Revlon was $1.3 billion for the year, an increase of 16 percent over 2002, and the company's net loss narrowed to $154 million, from $287 million in 2002. The loss of $12.6 million in the fourth quarter of 2003 was the company's 21st consecutive quarterly loss.
Under the debt-reduction plan, Mr. Perelman has committed $775 million to buy Revlon shares while Fidelity agreed to exchange $155 million in debt that it holds for Revlon stock.
The company said that $780 million of the total debt reduction would occur before the end of March.
Sean J. Egan, managing director of Egan-Jones Ratings in Wynnewood, Pa., said it was not surprising that a large Revlon lender would agree to swap debt for stock.
''The company has been treading water for quite some time -- it has lost over $1 billion over the last five fiscal years, including $153 million in 2003,'' he said. ''As far as the debt-for-equity exchange, typically you see it when a company has few alternatives. The bottom line is, the company has to solve its operating problems.''
Revlon's shares fell to $3.19 yesterday, a decline of nearly 10 percent. The stock has rallied 42 percent so far this year.
The chief executive, Jack L. Stahl, said Revlon's 2003 results were a sign that his plan to reinvigorate the company was working.
''Our progress now enables us to attract resources to dramatically strengthen our balance sheet by increasing equity and reducing debt,'' Mr. Stahl said in a statement. ''While we have much work to do, we believe that the combination of our business-building initiatives and balance- sheet-strengthening efforts will put us in a position to deliver stronger results in 2004 and beyond.''
The company projected sales increases of 8 percent for 2004. It also said that it might raise money through additional stock offerings.
Since Mr. Perelman took over Revlon in 1986 using high-yield bonds, the company's debt load has been a major source of trouble.
Last November, he put up $125 million to help the company win an extension from some lenders, which it secured in January.
Earlier in 2003, Mr. Perelman agreed to lend the company $200 million to finance the turnaround plan that was devised by Mr. Stahl, a former president of Coca-Cola.
In 2000, Mr. Perelman spent almost $250 million to buy Revlon bonds that were set to mature.
Fidelity is the largest outside shareholder of Revlon shares. Mr. Perelman, controls 83 percent of the company through his investment firm, MacAndrews &amp; Forbes.
