Like many fans, Bob Costas looks at Barry Bonds in wonder. For Costas, the sportscaster and author, it is not simply Bonds's home run prowess that amazes. It is also his remarkable discipline at the plate.
''If he only gets a couple of pitches to hit, he hits them,'' Costas said yesterday. ''The guy is right on it. He is so locked in, so disciplined. There's no doubt in my mind that his mental approach to the game has changed as dramatically as his body.''
Bonds's body has changed so much over his career that Costas cannot help noticing, and wondering, in a different way. Bonds has 658 home runs, six Most Valuable Player awards and more suspicion directed at him than any other player in the major leagues.
The specter of steroids haunts Bonds, who has denied using them but has close ties to two of the central figures in a continuing steroids scandal. Bonds's personal trainer, Greg Anderson, and Victor Conte Jr., the head of the Bay Area Laboratory Co-operative, were among those indicted by a federal grand jury in San Francisco yesterday on charges of providing illicit performance-enhancing drugs to numerous professional athletes.
Bonds testified before the grand jury on Dec. 4 but was not charged or named in court documents yesterday. Anderson is a longtime friend of Bonds's who has been an occasional presence in the San Francisco Giants' clubhouse. Bonds has credited Anderson and Conte with helping him develop and adhere to his training regimen. ''Victor will call me to make sure I'm taking my supplements, and my trainer, Greg, will sit near my locker and stare at me if I don't begin working out right away,'' Bonds told Muscle &amp; Fitness magazine last June. ''I have these guys pushing me.''
Bonds began working with Conte before the 2001 season and went on to hit 73 home runs, breaking Mark McGwire's three-year-old record. Bonds won the National League M.V.P. award in 2001 and again in 2002, when his combined on-base and slugging percentage, 1.3807, broke a record held by Babe Ruth since 1920. Bonds won another M.V.P. award last season. The late-career surge has elevated Bonds, 39, from simply a Hall of Famer to one of the all-time elite. Bonds's page on the Web site baseball-reference.com has received 200,000 more hits than any other player in major league history.
''He's a remarkable talent, maybe the greatest ever,'' the former commissioner Fay Vincent said yesterday. ''It would certainly be hard for me to argue with that.''
Vincent was ousted as commissioner in 1992, when the N.L. home run leader, Fred McGriff, hit 35. Last season, 11 N.L. players hit more, including Bonds, who had 45 in just 390 at-bats. Vincent said the possibility of widespread steroid use could tarnish the escalating numbers.
''It strikes me that it is a cloud,'' he said. ''It's an issue, an asterisk, if you will. But it's impossible to quantify. And the fact that Bonds is stronger -- lots of guys are stronger. A weight-lifter couldn't hit a fastball if his life depended on it.''
Bonds's ever-sharpening knowledge of the strike zone may be most responsible for his dominance. Roger Angell, the longtime baseball essayist for The New Yorker, said a manager once played down to him the steroid accusations involving Bonds, saying, ''Are they shooting the steroids into his eyes?''
Bonds has also been the beneficiary of weaker pitching throughout the majors, small ballparks on the road and the so-called body armor -- the oversize elbow pad on his right arm that allows him to lean over the plate. ''It's like looking over a worktable for him, watching what he's doing,'' Angell said.
To fight the notion that he has been aided artificially, Bonds has cited his statistics. He has been consistent, he has said, noting often that he has hit more than 50 homers just once. Then again, pitchers now fear Bonds so much that he took 65.9 percent of the pitches thrown to him last year, the highest percentage in the National League. He walked 177, 198 and 148 times the last three seasons.
''He hasn't hit 60 or 70 again because he walks almost 200 times a year,'' Costas said. ''No one pitches to him. The home runs per at-bat that some of these guys, especially Bonds, have put up are dwarfing Ruth. If you give Barry Bonds 550 at-bats at his present level, then he'd hit 70 again.''
For years, Costas has publicly stated his suspicions about steroids use in the majors. He said that it was unfair to accuse any player without proof, but that the questions about Bonds must be raised. He is listed at 228 pounds, up from the 185 he weighed as a rookie for Pittsburgh in 1986.
''Look at him with the Pirates in 1992, when they played the Braves in the playoffs, and look now,'' Costas said. ''Like many players, he's had extensive changes in his body. And he's Barry Bonds. He isn't somebody that's hit 45 or even 50. He's hit 73. It's understandable why the questions arise. It's not necessarily fair to jump to conclusions, but it's unrealistic to think there won't be questions.''
One of the pleasures of following baseball, Angell said, is comparing players of different eras. That is joyless now, he said, with so many doubts about the chemistry behind modern feats. Bonds's accomplishments seem destined to be looked at with skepticism, at least until more about the investigation comes out.
''They're in some kind of parentheses until we can find out more of what he's been doing and what the real effects of steroids are,'' Angell said. ''It's too bad. It really is.''
DRUG TESTING
