ImClone Systems' cancer drug, Erbitux, won approval from the Food and Drug Administration yesterday, more than two years after an initial rejection set off the stock-trading scandal that sent the company's former chief executive, Samuel D. Waksal, to prison and put his friend, Martha Stewart, on trial.
But the approval was accompanied by its own unusual stock trading. Soon before the approval was announced, shares of ImClone suddenly plunged by more than $9, to $34, before trading was halted. The decline was apparently touched off by a rumor that the drug would be rejected.
When trading resumed after hours, ImClone's shares rose by more than 30 percent, to more than $45. A spokesman for the Securities and Exchange Commission declined to comment except to say it was standard procedure to look at stock trading in advance of market-moving news.
Erbitux, which is given intravenously, was approved as a last-ditch treatment for cancer of the colon or rectum that has spread to other parts of the body. It is to be used with irinotecan, a commonly used chemotherapy drug, by patients that have not responded to irinotecan alone. It can also be used by itself by patients who cannot tolerate irinotecan, the F.D.A. said.
ImClone and its marketing partner, Bristol-Myers Squibb, said the drug would be available within two weeks. They did not disclose the price but said it would be comparable to other biotechnology drugs, which can cost tens of thousands of dollars a year.
The F.D.A., citing shoddy data from ImClone, refused to review the company's first application in 2001. Dr. Waksal tipped family members to sell their shares before the news was announced. Ms. Stewart is now on trial on charges of obstructing a federal investigation into her sale of ImClone shares at the same time.
Erbitux, known generically as cetuximab, is a monoclonal antibody, a type of protein, which blocks a molecule called the epidermal growth factor receptor that spurs cancer cells to grow. Such so-called targeted therapies generally have fewer side effects than conventional chemotherapy, some doctors say.
The main side effect of Erbitux is a rash. However, about 3 percent of patients will suffer severe reactions, like a drop in blood pressure and difficulty breathing, the first time they receive the drug, the F.D.A. said.
Erbitux can cause remarkable improvements, but only in a small minority of patients, doctors say. As many as 25 percent of patients will not be eligible for the drug because their tumors lack the molecule that Erbitux blocks. For those who are eligible, Erbitux shrinks tumors in about 23 percent of patients who have failed to respond to chemotherapy.
Erbitux is the first approved drug made by ImClone, a 20-year-old New York company that should finally become profitable. The approval entitles it to a $250 million payment from Bristol-Myers as well as royalties of 39 percent of sales of the drug.
The approval might also help the company put its past behind it. As if to make that point, the company filled two jobs yesterday that had been vacant for 10 months because of the scandal. Daniel S. Lynch, the former chief financial officer, was named chief executive, a post he had been filling on an acting basis. David Kies, a lawyer with Sullivan &amp; Cromwell and one of the few board members left from before the scandal, was named chairman.
For Bristol-Myers, the approval represents a delayed payoff for the unprecedented $2 billion deal it signed with ImClone for marketing rights in September 2001. Bristol was desperate for a new product to replace its cancer drug Taxol, which began facing generic competition.
The Erbitux approval ''begins our return to the position that we intend to occupy in the field of oncology, which is one of preeminence,'' said Andrew G. Bodnar, a senior vice president. Shares of Bristol-Myers fell 14 cents, to $29.89.
Its rejection of ImClone's initial application has subjected the F.D.A. to criticism from patient groups, some of which continued yesterday.
''Sufficient evidence of safety and efficacy existed more than two years ago to justify making Erbitux available to dying patients with no remaining treatment options, the same indication the F.D.A. approved today,'' said Frank Burroughs, president of the Abigail Alliance for Better Access to Developmental Drugs, in a statement yesterday. ''Tens of thousands of colon cancer patients waited and died.''
The F.D.A. defended its previous decision, saying that ImClone's original application was missing crucial information needed to judge if the drug worked. Karen Weiss, who supervised the drug's reviewers at the F.D.A., said the delay did not mean unnecessary deaths because ''all these treatments for advanced cancer don't cure people.'' Even now, she said, it is not known whether Erbitux prolongs life, only that it shrinks tumors and delays their growth.
TECHNOLOGY
