Microsoft has three options in the Comcast-Disney takeover fight: play the savior, the banker or stay on the sidelines.
Microsoft, which holds 7.4 percent of Comcast and has helped the company in deals in the past, is saying nothing about Comcast's unsolicited $54 billion bid for Disney, or any role that it might play in a corporate drama that could run for some time. And Wall Street investment bankers say they have not yet detected any signs of the Microsoft deal machine rumbling into motion.
Still, Microsoft has options that are intriguing, and potentially decisive. And Microsoft's ''no comment'' does not rule out a role in the future.
Wall Street analysts say that Comcast will have to sweeten its bid if it is to succeed in acquiring Disney. Well, Brian L. Roberts, Comcast's chief executive, could not find a larger, more friendly piggy bank than the one in Redmond, Wash., Microsoft's corporate headquarters.
The company is sitting on more than $52 billion in cash, and it has helped Comcast in the past. In 1997, Microsoft invested $1 billion in Comcast, now the nation's largest cable television operator.
In late 2001, Microsoft sided with Mr. Roberts so that Comcast's bid for AT&amp;T's cable business prevailed over an offer from AOL Time Warner, a Microsoft rival. Microsoft's vote was decisive because it held a stake in the AT&amp;T cable business after making a $5 billion investment in 1999.
So, given the friendly history with Comcast, one option for Microsoft is to add some cash to the Comcast war chest.
Yet just this week, Microsoft announced a long-term partnership with Disney. The two companies agreed to work on antipiracy technology for delivering Disney movies and television programming on all kinds of digital devices, including a hand-held device Microsoft plans to introduce this year.
The Microsoft ''portable media center'' will play both music and video, and it will be promoted as a next-generation alternative to Apple's hit music player, the iPod.
Analysts doubt that Microsoft would enter the fray and make a friendly offer for Disney as a so-called white knight bidder, an acquirer that Disney would prefer to Comcast.
Microsoft once had visions of becoming a media company. In the 1990's it invested with abandon in media properties, taking a large stake in NBC, including both the MSNBC cable network and its Web site. In 1996, Wired magazine ran a cover story that seemed to capture the company's ambitions, ''Microsoft Morphs Into a Media Company.''
In the last few years, however, Microsoft has pulled back and focused again on software. Its strategy now is to sell software to media companies, not take over the media business.
The antipiracy technology -- or digital rights management software -- is central to that strategy, especially because Microsoft wants movies and music to be played on consumer devices using its Windows media player software, and stored and edited on personal computers running Microsoft's Windows operating system.
''Microsoft's focus now is to help media-content companies like Disney combat piracy and help them recapture ownership of their product,'' said Charles di Bona, an analyst for Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company.
If it does not make an outright bid, investment bankers note, Microsoft might want to supply Disney a pile of cash -- say, $10 billion -- that could be used to pass along a special cash dividend to mollify disgruntled Disney shareholders so that they will reject the Comcast bid. In exchange, bankers say, Microsoft would presumably obtain an exclusive contract to provide Disney with digital rights software.
But Microsoft, analysts say, also has business reasons to remain on good terms with Comcast rather than siding with Disney. Microsoft's investments in cable television operators have mostly been financial failures, except Comcast.
The strategic rationale for Microsoft was that its investments would help ensure that its software was on set-top boxes used for interactive TV, which would allow video-on-demand, online shopping and a host of other services. Yet interactive TV has remained a vision on the horizon for years, and Microsoft has made no real inroads in putting its software in cable set-top boxes.
But Comcast, analysts say, is experimenting with a newer, trimmed-down version of the Microsoft set-top software. Interactive TV may finally become a commercial reality soon, they say, and Microsoft has not given up. ''It's the dream that refuses to die within Microsoft despite the billions invested,'' said Richard Doherty, president of Envisioneering, a technology research company.
So for now, Microsoft's best option may be to remain on the sidelines rather than making an enemy of either business partner.
''I'm skeptical about Microsoft plunging into this,'' said Mr. di Bona of Sanford C. Bernstein.
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: THE STAKEHOLDER
