Contending that the growing influence of Asian-Americans, as well as issues that concern them, are being overlooked in an election year, a coalition of organizations that represent Asian-Americans announced on Thursday a unified platform intended to increase politicians' involvement with the ethnic group.
The platform, dealing with issues like poverty, hate crimes and immigration changes, is intended to educate the parties and help Asian-Americans judge candidates.
''Our issues are being ignored because the candidates are not focused on our communities as voters,'' Karen K. Narasaki, executive director of the National Asian Pacific American Legal Consortium in Washington, said. ''Our population has grown so rapidly that a lot of politicians don't have a sense that there are sizable Asian-American communities outside of California and New York.''
The Asian-American population grew 72 percent from 1990 to 2000, to nearly 12 million, the Census Bureau says. Although the number is 4.2 percent of the total population, the concentrations in pivotal states like California and the rapid growth of the population in battleground states like Nevada and Florida signal growing power, organizers said.
Some Asian-American leaders have lamented the attention paid to other groups, saying the diversity among Asian-Americans -- a mix that includes an array of languages, religions, cultures and partisan leanings -- might make them harder to focus on than other groups. The unified platform, organizers said, should help bridge that gap.
''We don't care if the candidates are politically correct, if they can say hello to a crowd of voters in a dozen Asian languages,'' Christine Chen, executive director of the Organization of Chinese Americans, said. ''That's superficial. We want them to familiarize themselves with our communities and with our issues.''
The coalition of 18 groups delivered copies of its agenda to the Democratic and Republican National Committees on Wednesday. At a news conference on Thursday, organizers said few presidential campaigns had Asian-Americans in senior positions. The organizers called for party leaders and candidates to meet Asian-American groups, attend voter forums and commit money to register, educate and collect information on Asian-American voters.
Neither party nor any presidential hopefuls responded to the requests, the organizers said, although minority-outreach coordinators from each party were at the news conference.
Some issues in the policy paper counter a longstanding perception of Asian-Americans as a ''model minority'' with little need for social assistance. Though Asian-Americans have high median incomes overall, not all segments are economically secure. In 2000, the report said, the poverty rate among the Hmong ethnic group, primarily from Laos, was 38 percent. The rate among Cambodian-Americans was 29 percent, and it was 16 percent for Vietnamese-Americans.
The report noted that more than two-thirds of Asian-Americans where born overseas. Limited English proficiency and a lack of bilingual providers, Ms. Narasaki and others said, block a significant segment of the group from equal access to education, health care, housing and other services.
Although much of the discussion on immigration has recently focused on Hispanics, Asian-American leaders said comparatively little attention had been paid to the many people in their communities who had been detained, deported or delayed in applying for permanent residency as a result of stricter procedures. New restrictions also have hampered family reunification for immigrants with family members threatened by ethnic, political and religious persecution in Asia.
Civil rights issues also weighed heavily in the report, which advocated strengthening hate crimes laws and modifying the new antiterrorism law to protect privacy and civil liberties.
''There is a growing realization among Asian Pacific-Americans that equal justice issues affect us all,'' said Preetmohan Singh, national director of Sikh Mediawatch and Resource Task Force.
The participating organizations said they had planned large-scale voter education and registration programs to improve civic involvement in Asian-American communities.
