Dana Gioia, the new (as of a year ago) chairman of the National Endowment for the Arts, appeared for a public talk and question-and-answer session on Monday afternoon at Harvard. I had never met him, I was up at Harvard, and so I went.
Mr. Gioia is a nationally recognized poet, critic and all-purpose arts polymath. It is not my purpose here to write about him, especially as an artist. But recent developments at the beleaguered agency (Mr. Gioia reported with studied bemusement that he was tired of being described as beleaguered) and what Mr. Gioia said at Harvard offered some insight into the peculiar, misshapen thing that is American arts support.
The good news first. His talk may have been at Harvard, but Mr. Gioia gave what sounded like his standard stump speech, or corporate motivational speech, slick and interchangeably appropriate to almost any audience. He has sought to build consensus, to create ''win-win'' programs that will bridge lingering divides left over from the culture wars (which he suggested were long past but which, of course, bubble just below the surface, poised for instantaneous eruption).
The endowment has announced several touring initiatives, two of which await financing or implementation (touring jazz masterpieces, touring all-purpose American cultural masterpieces), and one of which is healthily under way. That is a project to tour Shakespeare plays to cities and schools and military bases that might otherwise never encounter Shakespeare, or even live theater.
Not least of these dollops of good news, in his recent budget proposal President George W. Bush recommended boosting the endowment's budget by $18 million (making for a total of $139 million), the largest increase in two decades. That's a far cry from the steady whittling to which the agency has been subjected in recent years, and a striking show of support from a Republican administration, because it has been the right that has spawned the agency's most persistent, not to say hysterical, critics.
This is all well and good. Really it is. But it does provoke some questions.
Clearly, giving money to touring masterpieces and to institutions, not to artists, will still benefit our country. This is a policy that dates back to the mid-1990's and Mr. Gioia said it would remain in place, a few safe categories (''traditional arts'') aside. The endowment has always given some of its money to big institutions to do noncontroversial things. Better something, indeed more than the recent something, than nothing.
But the endowment also had -- until the violence of the right's attacks against it in Newt Gingrich's Contract With America -- an honorable tradition of supporting individuals who make edgy work. By now, self-censorship seems firmly in place. In theory, the institutions to whom the endowment awards grants could turn around and commission artists to make edgy work. In practice, if they did so, they might well lose agency support the following year.
Mr. Gioia said on Monday that given the theatrical emphasis of the Shakespeare touring project, theater companies were ''making out like bandits.'' He said it in a good-natured way. But tell that to the Philadelphia Shakespeare Festival, which, The Philadelphia Inquirer reports, has just postponed its final production of the season and laid off three of its six employees.
Mr. Gioia has plausibly argued that Shakespeare, while un-American, still provided the soil from which American theater grew. But what happened to multicultural disdain for dead white European males? If touring Shakespeare is such a win-win deal, just how does transgressive, transsexual, multiracial, confrontational performance art ''win''? And what happened to breaking down the barriers between traditional high art and popular culture? Mr. Gioia, to judge from his policies, seems to accept jazz (which by now is sadly noncommercial) but to show less enthusiasm for showcasing commercial television (which he has attacked in articles) or contemporary pop music.
And then there's that budget increase of $18 million. Mr. Bush is being excoriated for his budget deficits. Conservatives are among the most fervid excoriators. Those who aren't congenitally opposed to all government intervention may be content with Shakespeare or with the proposed tour of ''American Masterpieces: Three Centuries of Artistic Genius,'' which was announced on Jan. 29 by Laura Bush on a state visit to the agency (culture in Washington has long been women's work). But for fiscal reasons, many Republicans may still vote to ax the agency's increase. As Mr. Gioia conceded on Monday, state arts councils and arts education are struggling, since politicians of every stripe seem prone to cut culture first.
Mr. Gioia correctly pointed out that American arts support has always been a bizarre yet oddly functional patchwork. It's based on private (or corporate) philanthropy, encouraged by our distinctive system of tax breaks. The National Endowment at its best functions as seed money, providing an imprimatur that stimulates local giving.
But if public arts grants can annoy some parts of the populace and seem elitist -- the endowment's ''peer panels'' stereotypically passing the grant goodies around the table -- private support has its own severe limitations, too. Rich people support major arts institutions disproportionately, and rich people are mostly conservative. So with Mr. Gioia's consensus built on the presuppositions of conservative political control in Washington, and with private donations more likely to support Franco Zeffirelli than, say, Peter Sellars, the deck at present is decisively stacked against challenging new art.
None of which Mr. Gioia addressed at Harvard. He didn't confront such issues in his talk, and he managed to forestall annoying questions by announcing in advance that he was sick of them. Perhaps it was the inherent good manners of the Cambridge-Boston arts community, but most of the questions -- every one of which Mr. Gioia praised for its intelligence -- were on the order of ''what do you think of European arts support systems?,'' or ''how do you tour a 15-ton sculpture?'' Plausible questions, but not very challenging ones.
Given the climate in Washington, Mr. Gioia may be doing as good a job as anyone could, quite likely better than most. Certifying masterpieces and making them available to all is not inherently evil. Censorship of transgressive art cannot be equated, as too many transgressive artists seem wont to do, with the failure to give it grants. Edgy art was made long before public arts support became a reality in this country; not all rich patrons are conservative.
Still, one hopes that Mr. Gioia at some point can find a way to push his consensus toward helping artists create the masterpieces of tomorrow, masterpieces that challenge or even scare the assumptions of today. That would be a win-win policy not just for the present, but for the future.
REVERBERATIONS
