WHO -- Jean Carper, 72, USA Weekend columnist and author of ''Stop Aging Now!''  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house with a guest-party house  WHERE -- Key West, Fla.
I first came to Key West in 1991 on a book tour. I had never, ever contemplated getting a second house outside of Washington, D.C., where I had lived since 1967.
I immediately saw the house and said, ''This is my house.'' I felt like this is where I belong; I felt that the instant I walked in, and I have no other explanation. I did know when I bought it that it was for fun and relaxation and entertaining and joy and excitement.
When I got to Key West -- I'm a very serious person, having written lots of serious books -- I suddenly developed a fascination with dancing. I never was a dancer. People said, ''You have no rhythm.'' But here I found plenty of people who were willing to dance with me whether I had rhythm or not. Now lots of people think I have rhythm.
I bought a smaller house behind me. There is a connecting deck and garden. People arrive at my main house and then go through the garden and over the deck to the party. My architect built this stage on the new house; it's elevated and wraps around the kitchen area. We have plenty of wonderful bands here; my favorite is Barry Cuda and the Sharks. There's a deck for dancing and an eight-foot movie screen.
I had a huge millennium party here and the house caught on fire. Right at 11:25, we had a malfunctioning grill, flames going up about 30 feet in the air. We had to evacuate in our black-tie outfits into the street, and the fire department came. It added a lot of excitement. Some people accused me of doing it on purpose. Not true.
As told to Seth Kugel
ON THE MARKET  Information on properties was provided by the listing companies.
WHERE -- Mammoth Lakes, Calif.  WHAT -- 5-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $2.85 million  This new house is known as the Lodge in Starwood. The open great room has arched ceilings and has been used for fund-raising parties of 50. There is a free-standing fireplace of hand-cut stone, a media area, an adjacent patio that is on the fairway of the Sierra Star Golf Club. There are five and a half bathrooms. Mammoth Lakes is on the eastern side of the Sierra Nevada Range near the Mammoth Mountain ski area. Agent: Cheryl Wood, Coldwell Banker Mammoth Real Estate, (760) 914-0557; www.mammothfineproperty.com.
WHERE -- Peyton, Colo.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $330,000 --  Just outside Colorado Springs, this house is in the Woodmen Hills subdivision and includes access to the community's new 18-hole golf course and to two clubhouses with indoor and outdoor pools. The house has a deck with outdoor speakers and unobstructed views of Pikes Peak. There are three and a half bathrooms. Agent: Guy Bennett, RE/Max Real Estate Group, (719) 337-6640; www.coloradomove.com.
WHERE -- Rehoboth Beach, Del.  WHAT -- 5-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $2.5 million  The foyer of this 9,000-square-foot house is large enough for dancing. There are also a great room with a fireplace, a gathering room with a built-in media center and a family room with a wet bar, an ice machine and a refrigerator. The house also has a separate home theater, a billiards room and four full and three half bathrooms. It is two miles from Atlantic Ocean beaches and on a cul-de-sac overlooking Kings Creek Country Club's 16th hole. Broker: Jack Daggett, RE/Max Realty Group, (302) 226-4100; www.jackdaggett.com.
WHERE -- Osage Beach, Mo.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom town house  HOW MUCH -- $279,900  This 2,050-square-foot waterfront town house in Lake Pointe Condominium on Lake of the Ozarks has a covered deck that can accommodate a party of 30. It overlooks the two 10-by-24-foot boat slips that come with the property. Sliding doors connect the deck to a family room area with an open kitchen. The house has a stone fireplace and three bathrooms. It was built in the late 1980's, has since been professionally decorated and is offered fully furnished. Broker: Pam Shelton, Century 21 Lake Realty, (800) 598-1354; www.homeslakeoftheozarks.com.
WHERE -- Mountain Park, N.M.  WHAT -- 4-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $698,500  This split-level house has a patio with an 18-by-38-foot swimming pool, a garden area and a gazebo for large events and a small deck with expansive views of the basin and surrounding mountains for smaller groups. The house is 3,200 square feet and has an indoor racquetball court, two full and two half bathrooms, a separate greenhouse and an 40-by-70-foot R.V. barn. It is less than an hour from the Ski Apache resort in Ruidoso. Agent: Suzie Phillips, United Country Professional Realty, (888) 523-7104; www.unitedcountry.com.
WHERE -- Montauk, N.Y.  WHAT -- 4-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $2.5 million  This two-story house on eight-tenths of an acre has a lighting system for its outdoor heated whirlpool, fountain and the copper beech trees in the backyard. For indoor parties there is a great room with 30-foot cove ceilings, Brazilian cherry floors and a chandelier. The house has four wood-burning fireplaces, five full and one half bathrooms, a media room, radiant heat, slate and stone floors, central cooling and a wine cellar. Broker: Sonia Gaviola, Atlantic East Realty, (631) 668-6565; www.atlanticeast.com.
HAVENS: LIVING HERE
