Violence is no stranger to South Africa, whose major cities suffer some of the highest homicide rates anywhere. But police officers and ordinary citizens alike are reeling this week in the wake of a report by the police that an angry employer may have literally thrown a disgruntled ex-worker to the lions.
In Limpopo Province in the country's northeast, a wild, hardscrabble region abutting Zimbabwe and Mozambique, the police have jailed four men while they investigate the apparent death of Nelson Shisane, a former worker for a construction company in Limpopo.
Mr. Shisane's skull and legs -- or, at least, body parts believed to be his -- were found with scraps of clothing earlier this month in an enclosure at the Mokwalo White Lion Project, a reserve for rare albinos and other lions near Kruger National Park.
Police officials say they believe that Mr. Shisane was beaten at a nearby game farm, then carried to Mokwalo and tossed into a lion pen after a dispute with his former boss, Mark Scott-Crossley. Mr. Scott-Crossley and three of his employees have been jailed, but not charged, while the inquiry continues. A court hearing is set for Tuesday.
Forensic examiners completed an autopsy on Thursday on the remains found in the lion pen, but the results were inconclusive. The police urged relatives of Mr. Shisane to step forward so that their DNA could be compared with that of the remains.
Ronel Otto, superintendent of the Limpopo Police Department, said in a telephone interview that the case was bizarre, even by the survival-of-the-fittest standards of bush country.
''You'll hear of animals catching people -- crocodiles, for instance,'' she said. ''And you hear, maybe, of people trying to come in from Mozambique through Kruger and getting caught and eaten by lions.
''But never of anybody being fed to animals. Never.''
Ms. Otto said that the men in custody had made statements to investigators, and that she expected charges to be filed against them.
The ''lion's den case,'' as South Africa's tabloid press calls it, has earned front-page play since word of the four arrests became public on Monday. But little is known so far of the investigators' theory as to what may have happened.
Conflict between white farmers and their black employees has been a major issue in post-apartheid South Africa, but this case may not quite fit the mold. While Mr. Shisane is black and Mr. Scott-Crossley white, the three arrested employees are black.
Nor is Mr. Scott-Crossley a farmer. Rather, he operates a construction company based on a farm owned by his brother near Hoedspruit, not far from a main entrance to Kruger National Park. The police say Mr. Scott-Crossley's brother knew nothing of the incident and is cooperating with investigators.
Efforts on Thursday to reach the Scott-Crossleys and lawyers in the case were unsuccessful. A spokesman for the national Labor Ministry said the ministry was investigating whether Mr. Scott-Crossley's company was in compliance with labor laws.
According to news reports, Mr. Shisane was fired from the construction concern last year and filed charges against Mr. Scott-Crossley after his belongings were burned in a dispute.
The police say that they believe that Mr. Shisane was attacked and beaten sometime between Jan. 31 and Feb. 2, then tied up and loaded into a truck. After being drive about 10 miles to the White Lion Reserve, according to the police theory, he was dumped into an enclosure where lions attacked and ate him.
