''Harlemworld: Metropolis as Metaphor,'' the new architecture show at the Studio Museum in Harlem, cannot be recommended for those who are keen to avoid the topic of identity politics and their role in cultural enterprise. But then, neither can New York.
Organized by Thelma Golden, the museum's deputy director, the show presents the work of 18 architects in a group analysis of Harlem's unstable identity in changing times. To judge from the results, the identity is anxious at present. Property values are on the rise in Harlem. Outside investors are moving in. Housing stock is being gentrified. A trend that some business leaders may see as good news is viewed as a threat by the community directly affected by it.
For Harlem's architects, that might translate as being trapped between a rock and good times. By tradition the first law of architecture is ''get the job.'' In New York it is debatable whether second and third laws exist. It is rare, in any case, to see a public searching of the architectural soul conducted quite as candidly as we see here. ''Harlemworld'' aims to be a show of conscience.
A critical context is established at the entrance by a video documentary loop. Made by Emmanuel Pratt and Olalekan B. Jeyifous, the video features brief man-on-the-street interviews with residents about development. Not one of those interviewed has anything positive to say about it. The imbalance of opinion is refreshing. How many other cultural institutions in this once intellectually aggressive town would have the guts to represent truth at the expense of television-style fairness?
The age of irony hasn't ended in Harlem, it would appear. Several of the show's projects focus on the collision between the new signs of upscale living and Harlem's conventional associations with the urban underclass. The most mordant of these is a full-scale sales office for ''Reparation Tower, Harlem,'' a luxury high-rise designed in the form of an upraised fist.
A straight-faced parody by Ronald Norsworthy, the project entices potential buyers with the familiar upscale images. ''History. Destiny. Luxury,'' reads the tower's motto. ''Reparation Tower, Harlem sets a new standard for luxury living in New York and is matched only by opulent shopping and cultural landmarks just steps away.''
Architecturally the tower is a theme park throwback to 18th-century architecture parlance: a symbol of defiance aimed at indifference. But the symbol is handsomely fitted with interiors that signify bourgeois complacency. And the views from within must be fabulous.
In fact, fabulousness, ostensibly a more egalitarian form of identity than luxury, is the explicit theme of one project. ''Harlem: The Ghetto Fabulous,'' by Nathaniel Belcher and Stephen Slaughter, tries to humanize the modern buildings of 20th-century urban renewal without erasing their history.
One feature of the project envisions rolling lawns planted atop high-rise housing, for example. The design recalls successful experiments in retrofitting carried out by Christian de Portzamparc on bleak buildings of the same period in Paris.
In ''House for Josephine Baker (Parody Series),'' Darell Wayne Fields proposes Harlem as an urban factory for the production of blackness, whatever that might be. Here blackness takes the form of dissecting Adolf Loos's unbuilt 1929 design of a house for this great entertainer whose dancing revolutionized the world of Paris fashion.
Using a model for structural analysis developed by the social anthropologist Claude Lévi-Strauss, the project parodies academic efforts to link defined spatial forms to the complexities of cultural difference. Such efforts may actually be exploitational, the project suggests, a high-brow version of using black models in commercial advertising.
For the most part, however, ''Harlemworld'' consists of conceptual projects, not plans for direct intervention in the city's material fabric. ''Metropolis as Metaphor,'' the show's subtitle, establishes the theoretical orientation. It is sometimes objected that conceptual work shirks the architect's responsibility to the real world. The truth is that a show like this describes the extent to which the real world has already changed in the eyes of its designers. The show would be valuable even if it did no more than hold the perceptual ground.
Too, ''Harlemworld'' reveals that architecture has become an effective medium for educating the public about the ideologies encoded in urban forms. Some time ago the architect Diana Agrest described the city as the subconscious of architecture. In this show the situation is reversed. Architecture has become the practice of exposing the emotional content and above all the energy beneath the well-dressed urban facade.
In ''Visuals of a Harlem Brand,'' Shawn Rickenbacker manipulates facades into declaring the marketing of Harlem as a producer of violent images. ''Introducing the Fall 2004 Line of Black Culture,'' declares Mr. Rickenbacker's design for a billboard. Hip-hop, wildin', graffiti: such images of inner-city menace have become valuable commodities in the globalized marketplace of hot brands.
''There is no inevitability so long as there is willingness to contemplate what is happening,'' the media guru Marshall McLuhan once pronounced. The problem with architecture is that it is often a means of dissuading people from looking at what is going on. Projects by Olalekan B. Jeyifous, Todd Palmer, Emmanuel Pratt and Zevilla Jackson Preston present serious, penetrating analyses of Harlem's complex social and visual texture.
To a degree, these architects reverse the typical developer's ploy of contrasting a Bleak Before (urban blight) with a Happily Ever After (cityscapes sanitized of all sense of place). In works that demonstrate the enduring influence of the critic Jane Jacobs, they propose historical awareness as the most vital piece of equipment in an architect's studio.
A vast megaphone flares out from the corner of one gallery, the work of a team led by Coleman A. Jordan. Entitled ''Harlem Speak: Streetsigns &amp; Soapboxes,'' the speaking device is a reprise of a concept presented 20 years ago by Laurie Hawkinson, John Malpede and Erika Rothenberg. Clearly, the desire to be heard does not go out of style. Mr. Jordan roots his version in the lapsed tradition of soapbox speakers who once animated Harlem street corners.
The technological enhancement of voices is the subject of Gordon Kipping's ''Harlem Mediatech.'' Using vacant and abandoned lots, Mr. Kipping proposes a decentralized information bank spread out across Harlem as if the neighborhood were an exploded campus for learning.
The concept recalls the work of the London architect Cedric Price in its educational slant, its emphasis on access and its transformation of disconnected, underutilized resources into organized social systems.
''Harlemworld'' offers a multiplicity of voices, speaking in a broad range of media. In addition to conventional models, drawings and renderings, the architects use maps, videos, street signs, photographs, collages and above all written texts. Architecture is now a hybrid, mongrel medium.
This is perhaps the most important point the show has to make. Its expressive possibilities are limited only by the individual talents of those who choose to operate in the field. It's up to them to improvise the laws of architecture as they go along.
But if ''Harlemworld'' has a poetic heart, it is found in Leyden Ynobe Lewis's project, ''Drawing Closer Making Home.'' A composite work, it consists of a drawing applied directly to the gallery wall and a video of Mr. Lewis executing it. Brain, hand, body, surface, pencil, eye, memory: such a reduction to basics stands out in a show that pops with visual sensation. Here is the practice of architecture, honest and unadorned.
''Harlemworld: Metropolis as Metaphor'' is on view at the Studio Museum in Harlem, 144 West 125th Street, (212) 864-4500, through April 4.
ARCHITECTURE REVIEW
