''It's almost like a religious occasion,'' said Burt Tansky, the chief executive of Neiman Marcus, in a tone of wonder. Yes, the nuns and fashion pilgrims were out yesterday, headed for Ralph Rucci.
Sometimes Mr. Rucci's clothes too literally evoke a nunnery (an elegant nunnery, but still), and the music for his show in the tents at Bryant Park had the moodiness, without the irony, of the theme music from ''Six Feet Under.'' But then out comes a tiger-striped coat in silk chenille velvet, and you realize that Mr. Rucci invariably has more up his sleeve than he is prepared to show, at least all at once. Not everything about his fall collection was special; there were reprises of infanta skirts, now in dusky chartreuse with a wrap shirt. But when the pieces were special, they were sensational, like a maxicoat in sable tied high on the waist and a little black dress that looked unpromising from the front but was laced across the back, like vertebrae.
As if timed for Valentine's Day, Anna Sui played Cupid to Coco Chanel on Wednesday night, sending out witty takes on the famous cardigan jacket and those indelible images of Chanel looking both pretty and powerful in her many bangles and ropes of chains. A model, her hair crimped and fried as if from contact with an electrical socket, appeared with a candy-box-shape hat tipped over her brow, and some of the girls swung heart-shaped purses -- a Valentine? -- flecked with stones. Other designers this season have had Chanel on their minds, most of all Rei Kawakubo at the Paris men's shows, with her shrunken tweed jackets. Like them, Ms. Sui treats the style with more irony than moldy reverence.
Ms. Sui's backdrop evoked Christian Bérard's drawings for Parisian theatrical sets and were duplicated in printed crepe de Chine dresses. And though it sounds clichéd, Ms. Sui offered something for every woman, regardless of age or conviction. In her jubilant mix, there were vampish fox shrugs in orchid shades of purple, and also a slinky beige cardigan sweater with fake fur clustered at the wrists.
Peter Som brought a great deal of energy to his show yesterday; a sense, too, of someone willing to take chances. ''Great beauties gone mad'' was the theme, if not the spirit, of taffeta blouses with sleeves exploding like peonies and breezy pantsuits in Donegal tweed, worn loose on the hips and sometimes with a deb's cashmere cardigan peeking from under the hem of the jacket. Mr. Som also refused to treat retro fabrics and styles with kid gloves, and one of his most charming looks was a two-piece sleeveless dress in a pale peach tweed, fringed at the edges and worn with a chunky sweater in lilac cashmere tied at the neck.
On the deficit side, Mr. Som's lily-print skirts and mink stoles, drooping from the shoulders and belted over sweaters, looked like last season's Prada. And he should have ditched the gloves. Mr. Som has enough ideas of his own not to depend on anyone else's.
Looking backward must be tempting for young designers, but when they have little experience and present their clothes on models who have all the expression and charm of a piece of cardboard, they end up with something like tedium. You could see from the offhand mixes at Jeffrey Chow's show yesterday -- a popcorn-knit cardigan in blush pink over a brown pinstriped dress, a loose pullover worn with a pie-crust-collar blouse and skinny iridescent khaki pants -- that he wants casual to seem glamorous, and vice versa. But while the collection showed concentration to detail and finishing, many of the high-waisted coats and layers gave him a more fundamental problem: how to get the proportions right. Forced into making hip statements, the clothes suffered from a lack of ordinary élan.
Here a shrug, there a shrug, everywhere a shrug. Even the Miami designer Esteban Cortazar, barely through his teenage years, had them in his collection yesterday, to give electric-blue pop to black cashmere coats and pantsuits. It's plain from Mr. Cortazar's tasteful (read ''commercial'') jackets and one-shoulder cashmere minidresses that he wants to show he can do grown-up clothes. But in a season of embellishment and Latin ruffles, no one, especially store buyers, would have taken him any less seriously if he had had more fun.
