To people in the placid neighborhood at the golf course's edge, where the median price of a home is $450,000, it seemed there was an awful lot of traffic at a house on East Shea Boulevard in Scottsdale, Ariz., the most exclusive suburb of Phoenix.
Eventually, someone had had enough, and called the police. When law enforcement officers peered through a rear window of the four-bedroom house on Wednesday morning, they could barely believe their eyes.
''Instead of wall-to-wall carpet, it was wall-to-wall people,'' said Russell Ahr, a spokesman for the local office of the United States Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement. ''They were packed so closely, sitting with their knees drawn up to their chests, that you couldn't see the floor. All you could see was their heads and shoulders. There was no place you could walk. It was appalling.''
By the time they were done counting, Phoenix police officers and federal border agents had arrested 136 people, 16 of them children or adolescents and all of them illegal immigrants from Mexico, Ecuador, Honduras and other Latin American countries. An additional 23 people, who had left the house moments earlier in a van and a pickup, were followed by the police and also taken into custody.
Yesterday the police, who recovered an AK-47 assault rifle and a 9-millimeter semiautomatic handgun as well, were questioning at least five of those arrested in the belief that they might be members of a smuggling ring that had brought the others to the house and were holding them for ransom.
''Usually these people are charged outrageous sums to be smuggled to Arizona, and then they're held until their families pay additional sums,'' the mayor of Phoenix, Phil Gordon, said in a telephone interview. ''What you have is criminals who are preying on people who are just trying to survive.''
The migrants discovered on Wednesday had already paid their smugglers as much as $6,000 each, Mr. Ahr said. Some had not eaten in three days. The house into which they had been crammed lies along the course at the Orange Tree Golf Resort, just over the city line from Phoenix.
The toilets in the house were inoperable. Twenty-six of the migrants were women, some with swollen feet and limping -- classic signs, Mr. Ahr said, of having walked for miles in the desert.
Mr. Ahr said it was becoming increasingly common to find such so-called drop houses in more affluent neighborhoods, perhaps because smugglers believe that having customarily operated in low-income areas, they can find refuge in a change of tactics. Generally, he said, the houses are vacant or rented. The house on East Shea was rented, although the authorities said yesterday that they did not yet know to whom. The owner, who neighbors said was in California, may well not have known what was occurring, Mr. Ahr said.
It was the next-door neighbor, Nicholas Zendelbach, who called the police. Mr. Zendelbach said in an interview that late one night two weeks ago, he saw a pickup truck and three 10-passenger vans pull up and disappear behind the house.
''I thought, 'Gee, that's not right,' '' said Mr. Zendelbach, a computer expert whose own house, he said, is worth about $900,000.
The squalid conditions that the officers found inside on Wednesday were matched by those discovered the same day in a house southeast of Los Angeles near Perris, Calif., where smugglers had been holding 64 men and women captive until one escaped and summoned the authorities.
''It was the most deplorable and dehumanizing conditions that some of these agents have ever seen,'' Sean Isham, a border enforcement spokesman, told The Press-Enterprise, of Riverside County. Three men were arrested.
