AT the age of 10, the Eurotunnel can be considered a success. Trains whisk travelers between London and Paris in two and a half hours, less time than it takes to get from New York to Washington.
Financially, however, Eurotunnel is in ''a stable equilibrium of failure,'' as Richard Shirrefs, the company's chief executive, put it as he proposed yet another restructuring, one that was long on talk and short on details.
Eurotunnel was supposed to be a private-sector company. Margaret Thatcher, then the British prime minister, was adamant about it when the tunnel under the English Channel was being planned in the 1980's. But it was never really a commercial proposition. So there were fudges and absurdly optimistic forecasts, not just at the beginning but during repeated restructurings.
Lewis Carroll's promise of jam tomorrow but never jam today should resonate with shareholders. When Eurotunnel sold shares in 1987, dividends were forecast in 1995. By 1990, the jam was expected to arrive in 1999. In 1997, dividends were forecast for 2006.
Now 2006 looks like the year of disaster if nothing is done. Eurotunnel is paying its bills now only because the British and French railroads pay for capacity they do not use. Those excess payments bring in about 30 percent of Eurotunnel's revenues, and the contract requiring the payments ends that year.
After repeated restructurings, Eurotunnel has so many different layers of debt that it is almost impossible to keep track. Michael Wilkins, a managing director at Standard &amp; Poor's, says Eurotunnel's senior debt is investment grade, but its lowest-rated debt is in the low junk category, and there are billions in debt below that, ''most of it toxic waste.''
The toxic waste ought to be close to worthless, but it is regularly purchased at a discount by the company, which expects people to view lower debt levels as a sign of progress. It gets the money to do that by selling tax losses to other British companies. That is a peculiarly inefficient way for the government to subsidize Eurotunnel, through reduced tax payments from profitable companies, but at least it keeps the subsidies off the government's budget. (The French government evidently does not allow that game to be played with its taxes.)
The shares are down about 90 percent from the 1987 offering, but they are still wildly overvalued. This week, they lost 20 percent of their value in the two days after the bad news came out, but then recovered a bit as speculators came back in. Institutional investors have long since abandoned the stock, leaving it largely to French individuals, who really poured in last year as the shares tripled from their lows on some unrealistic optimism.
With officials unwilling to admit that the shares have no intrinsic value, there is a potential for mischief. A group of shareholders wants to throw out management at this year's annual meeting. Mr. Shirrefs says the dissidents' strategies ''are neither consistent nor credible,'' but in reality, he has little to offer shareholders either.
What is really needed is a plan to reduce debt, now £6.3 billion, or about $11.9 billion, by at least half. Then the company might be able to cut fees for trains. That would increase use of the tunnel, as Mr. Shirrefs says is necessary. But his talk of a global settlement involving competitors and governments seems vague and could run into a host of problems.
Shedding that much debt would require unpleasant truths to be faced. Don't be surprised if the result is another half measure, assuring the need for yet another restructuring, employing more investment banks. Four are already working on this restructuring, and more may be added. At least someone is profiting.
Floyd Norris
