On the way to a women's suffrage meeting in 1912, the radical agitator Alice Paul (Hilary Swank) freezes in her tracks at the sight of a pink cloche in a shop window. She and her friend Lucy Burns (Frances O'Connor) banter winningly over who saw the hat first, then flip a coin to settle who should have it.
The scene, shown early in Sunday's HBO film ''Iron Jawed Angels,'' is intended to disarm: early 20th-century feminists like Paul may have been zealots, but they were still feminine. Pretty, funny, sexually attracted to men and fond of shopping, the heroines of ''Iron Jawed Angels'' have been made over to suit today's ambivalent notions about the women's movement -- ''Legally Blonde III: The Suffragette Years.''
The film is not a romantic comedy, of course. It is a sober, at times moving tribute to the suffragists who bravely went to prison to secure women's right to vote. But the HBO film also exposes the timidity of the women who made it, so conflicted about their subject that they have imposed a postfeminist sensibility on the dissidents they honor.
The German director Katja von Garnier uses dizzying camera angles and pop music by Lauryn Hill and Sarah McLachlan to lend her heroines a hip, contemporary flair; the insistence that Paul and her sisters in arms were ''just like us'' turns out not to be much of a compliment.
Alice Paul, who was born in 1885 to a well-to-do Quaker family, was one of the most important figures behind passage of the 19th Amendment in 1920. Using tactics she learned from the Pankhursts in England, she led marches and hunger strikes, and she dared to picket Woodrow Wilson's White House even after the United States entered World War I and society pressed women to put patriotism ahead of their own civil rights.
She continued the struggle for equality until her death in 1977, when the battle over the Equal Rights Amendment was reaching its height. But Paul is not as well known now as early feminist leaders like Susan B. Anthony and Elizabeth Cady Stanton. Even Carrie Chapman Catt, who founded the League of Women Voters in 1920 and early on tried to squelch Paul for being too militant, is better known today.
''Iron Jawed Angels'' is the nickname given suffragists who went on hunger strikes in prison. (They were force-fed with metal clamps and rubber tubes.) The film presents Paul and Burns as leaders of a younger, more irreverent generation of feminists who break with the moderate, white-glove politics of the National American Woman Suffrage Association, led by Catt (Anjelica Huston).
The lean, fierce-looking Ms. Swank (''Boys Don't Cry'') does a persuasive job of conveying her character's determination, but a wry, girlish sweetness undercuts Paul's ardor and single-mindedness. In a scene in which she coaxes a well-known labor lawyer, Inez Milholland (Julia Ormond), to be the movement's figurehead, Paul sounds more like Carrie Bradshaw than Carry Nation as she says with a knowing smile, ''The new suffragist is single, young, independent and very, very beautiful.''
And only a lack of confidence in the historical record can explain why Ms. von Garnier and the film's four screenwriters (three of whom are women) decided that when Paul arrives in Washington to lobby for a constitutional amendment giving women the vote, she should stumble upon romance as well as political roadblocks.
Almost all the characters in the film are based on real people, yet Ben Weissman (Patrick Dempsey), an illustrator for The Washington Post, is what the film's producers call a composite, a male lead invented to fluff up Paul as a young woman torn between her heart and her conscience. She wants to use her suitor's newspaper connections for her cause (and uses her feminine charms to soften him up). He finds her convictions adorable. In a scene borrowed from a Harlequin novel, he teaches her to dance in a country field at sunset to the Sarah McLachlan song ''Fumbling Towards Ecstasy.'' (The camera cuts from their spinning to Paul, alone in her tub, indulging in erotic reverie.)
Ridicule, not hate, is the quickest antidote to the women's movement. Feminists have always been most easily defused with mockery; the challenge was in enduring it without flinching. The makers of ''Iron Jawed Angels'' are so eager to duck any lingering notions that feminists are ugly, humorless and frigid that they airbrush Paul's personality. (Like so many other rabble-rousers, Paul was not known for her sense of humor or perspective; would HBO films about Samuel Adams or Aleksandr I. Solzhenitsyn try so hard to explore their feminine side?) Worse, the film resists showing the amused disdain that Paul and her ilk faced down every day.
The film captures the fear, resentment and persecution the women's suffrage movement fanned, but it resists showing how silly these women seemed to so many Americans, men and women. Yet sometimes the greatest act of political courage is not just the willingness to go to jail for one's beliefs, but the willpower to endure a lifetime of belittling jokes and condescension.
The filmmakers try so hard to make their heroines likable in conventional Hollywood ways that they squander the chance to explore their unconventional heroism. This seems to have been the director and the producers' own decision, not one imposed from above, since the film was made for HBO, a premium cable channel that does not have the same ratings or box-office expectations as networks or movie studios.
The film has moments of historic accountability as well as emotional grace notes. In a scene that reflects the racial discrimination that festered inside the women's suffrage movement, Paul rebuffs the leader of a black suffragist delegation from Chicago, arguing that its presence in a protest parade would alienate Southern Democrats.
The prison scenes are brutal and affecting. The friendship between Paul and Burns is beautifully drawn, their sisterhood and sentimentality hidden beneath a teasing camaraderie. The slow, reticent emancipation of Emily Leighton (Molly Parker), a senator's sheltered wife who, like Nora in ''A Doll's House,'' makes the painful choice to grow up and confront her patronizing husband over suffrage, contrasts well with other suffragists' resolution. And Ms. Huston, haughty in black taffeta and silk, is riveting as the formidable, forbidding Carrie Chapman Catt.
The decades-long struggle to grant women the vote and the passionate dedication of Alice Paul and her allies is an amazing, often neglected tale of tenacity and true grit. ''Iron Jawed Angels'' tells a slightly different story. The film celebrates freethinkers who made huge personal sacrifices to wage a critical battle for human rights, yet it does so by bowing to commercial orthodoxies and the meekest modern notions of womanhood.
Oddly enough, ''Iron Jawed Angels'' suggests that women have not come such a long way after all.
IRON JAWED ANGELS  HBO, Sunday night at 9:30, Eastern and Pacific times; 8:30, Central time.
Directed by Katja von Garnier from an original screenplay by Sally Robinson and Eugenia Bostwick Singer and Raymond Singer and Jennifer Friedes; Paula Weinstein, Len Amato, Robin Forman and Lydia Dean Pilcher, executive producers; Laura McCorkindale, Denise Pinckley, and Jim Bigwood, co-producers. Story by Ms. Friedes. A Spring Creek Production.
WITH: Hilary Swank (Alice Paul), Frances O'Connor (Lucy Burns); Molly Parker (Emily Leighton), Julia Ormond (Inez Milholland), Laura Fraser (Doris Stevens), Brooke Smith (Mabel Vernon), Vera Farmiga (Ruza Wenclawska), Lois Smith (Anna Howard Shaw), Patrick Dempsey (Ben Weissman), Bob Gunton (President Woodrow Wilson) and Anjelica Huston (Carrie Chapman Catt).
TV WEEKEND
