''After the Life'' is the last film in Lucas Belvaux's ''Trilogy'' to be released, a decision by the film's American distributors that may well be arbitrary, since the three episodes were made simultaneously and can be watched in any order. But the choice nonetheless feels apt: this installment, a sorrowful, sunlit melodrama about addiction and marital malaise, is the one that most convincingly carries both the ambitions and the cumulative richness of Mr. Belvaux's project.
I've been sorry to report, over the past weeks, that ''The Trilogy'' does not consist of three equally good movies, and the unevenness of the parts throws the whole off balance. Still, Mr. Belvaux's sensitive, generous way with actors suggests that, with more discipline and less gimmickry, he might have made a single masterwork, and ''After the Life'' provides the best support for this assessment.
The two principal characters will be familiar to viewers who have seen ''On the Run'' and ''An Amazing Couple.'' In the first film, Agnès (Dominique Blanc), a schoolteacher with a morphine habit, was saved from a drug dealer and an accidental overdose by Bruno le Roux (Mr. Belvaux), an escaped left-wing militant hunted by Agnès's husband, Pascal (Gilbert Melki), a police detective.
''After the Life,'' which opens today in Manhattan, revisits these events in the context of Pascal and Agnès's marriage, which for many years has been structured around the maintenance of her addiction. Through an arrangement with a local drug lord, Pascal has been Agnès's supplier, keeping her safe and stable even as he struggles to keep his disgust and disappointment at bay.
All three films were scored by Riccardo del Fra, who adapted somewhat clumsily to the demands of the pseudo-political thriller (''On the Run'') and the perky domestic farce (''An Amazing Couple''). In this case, though, he finds just the right melancholy tone, a deep, cello-laden sound at once lush and austere, to bring out Agnès and Pascal's torment. Ms. Blanc, with her wide eyes and high forehead, has an air of damaged, heartbreaking innocence; you can see that Agnès's youthfulness has been preserved by her drug use, and also corroded by it. Mr. Melki moves with feline quiet, the long, downturned features of his face poised on the edge of either sleep or rage.
Pascal's infatuation with Agnès's colleague Cécile (Ornella Muti) was played for comedy in ''An Amazing Couple,'' and its reappearance here, in the light of his marital troubles, exposes a logical flaw in Mr. Belvaux's conception, since the character must move in two antithetical dramatic directions at once.
The heart of ''After the Life'' is the agonizing dilemma imposed on Pascal by the drug dealer, who tries to blackmail Pascal into killing le Roux by cutting off Agnès's supply of morphine. This may be a contrivance -- very little in ''The Trilogy'' is not -- but Mr. Melki and Ms. Blanc play it with aching realism.
There is a simplicity to their scenes together that calls the integrity of Mr. Belvaux's three-film cycle into question even as it fulfills some of the promise of the enterprise. If he would only make his movies one at a time, he might be a first-rate filmmaker.
THE TRILOGY  After the Life
Written (in French, with English subtitles) and directed by Lucas Belvaux; director of photography, Pierre Milon; edited by Danielle Anezin; music by Riccardo del Fra; produced by Patrick Sobelman and Diana Elbaum; released by Magnolia Pictures. Last of three segments; the first, ''On the Run,'' and the second, ''An Amazing Couple,'' are currently playing; this segment opens today at the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village. Running time: 124 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Ornella Muti (Cécile Costes), François Morel (Alain Costes), Catherine Frot (Jeanne), Lucas Belvaux (Bruno le Roux), Dominique Blanc (Agnès Manise) and Gilbert Melki (Pascal Manise).
FILM REVIEW
