It has been almost 40 years since a Beatles song suggested imposing a tax -- or as certain New York politicians prefer to say, ''user fee'' -- on part of the human anatomy: ''If you take a walk, I'll tax your feet.''
Now, the city's Independent Budget Office is floating the possibility of taxing, if not your feet, perhaps the worry lines across your forehead or the unwanted 20 pounds around your waistline.
More precisely, the budget office wonders whether the cost of removing those wrinkles or excess fat, as well as other forms of cosmetic surgery and Botox treatments, should be subject to New York City's 8.625 percent sales tax, which currently does not apply to medical procedures.
The so-called botax is among a raft of money-making options for the city being circulated by the budget office, a nonpartisan fiscal monitor that for the last three years has issued a collection of ideas, some bordering on whimsical, for how to cut spending and raise revenues.
Taken together, they would have the harshest impact on latte-drinking, ferry-riding liposuction patients whose children go to private schools.
Among them: Impose a 10-cents per cup tax on specialty coffee drinks; reinstate fares for the Staten Island ferry; end city subsidies for private school buses and textbooks; and eliminate grass clippings from trash collection. There is also a proposal to raise $1 million by adding cafes to 125 libraries where, presumably, the new latte tax could be collected on double caramel macchiatos.
Douglas M. Turetsky, a spokesman for the budget office, said about 20 of the 70 options in the most recent report, released yesterday, are new this year, including applying the sales tax to elective cosmetic surgery, which his office estimates could generate $62 million to $83 million a year.
''A lot of these ideas are in the public domain already, but our staff came up with that one,'' Mr. Turetsky said. ''You have to figure that New York is probably the capital of that sort of surgery.''
The mayor's office, whose own tax-and-spending proposals are far less exotic, was not impressed by the Independent Budget Office's unsolicited advice on raising revenue. Asked about it, Jordan Barowitz, a spokesman for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, was ready with a one-liner.
''Where's the plan to buy 50,000 lottery tickets?'' he said.
To be sure, most of the budget office's 76-page report contains mainstream ideas for new or expanded taxes and for reducing spending. For instance, bringing back the tax on workers who commute into the city has been advocated for years, most recently by Peter F. Vallone Sr., the former City Council speaker, who insists on calling it a user fee.
Other ideas include reducing the number of paid holidays for city workers (for a savings of $26 million a year), imposing a $1 fee to rent a video from the library (estimated to raise $6 million) and saving $195 million annually by increasing class sizes by two students in grades kindergarten through eight.
