On his way to winning a series-high eight races on the Nascar Winston Cup circuit last season, Ryan Newman met both praise and skepticism over his seeming ability to run longer on a tank of gas than other drivers.
Some called Newman a lucky gambler. Others were less complimentary, openly wondering how his car could stay on the racetrack when every other driver had to stop in the pits to fill up.
''I've always admitted and I openly admit that we don't cheat,'' Newman said last week during Nascar's annual media day at Daytona International Speedway in advance of the season-opening Daytona 500 on Sunday. ''Our cars are straight-up racecars and our strategy is a straight-up strategy. When I hear things like that, the first thing that comes to my mind is the people that make comments or say things are the people that are cheating and still can't win. That's what makes it funny.''
If Newman is laughing, maybe it is because he has really found a way to outsmart the rest of Nascar. After all, Newman is an engineer, having earned a degree in vehicular structural engineering at Purdue. That makes him an anomaly in the garages of Nascar's elite racing series, and perhaps the prototype of the driver of the future.
Every team has an engineer, but Newman's team is full of them, including the crew chief, Matt Borland; the chief engineer, Mike Nelson; and the shocks engineer, Pat Stufflet. Some teams tinker; the Newman team plays with the numbers, viewing speed as a series of mathematical equations. As Borland said Tuesday, ''You've got to make the car be capable of going as fast as possible, and that's all mathematics and physics.''
There is more to it than that. Newman was a racecar driver before he became an engineer, growing up in South Bend, Ind., and working his way up through open-wheel racing.
Newman, 26, said he attended college to become a better driver and to have a fallback plan if racing did not work out. Even before he graduated from college in August 2001, Newman began driving for Roger Penske, a legend in open-wheel racing for his success at the Indianapolis 500. Penske runs an elite program in Nascar as well.
Newman drove in one Winston Cup race for Penske in 2000 and seven in 2001 before joining the circuit full time in 2002 and becoming the rookie of the year. He won only once that season, but his sixth-place finish in the point standing served notice to the rest of Nascar that he belonged among the brat pack of young drivers taking over the sport.
His performance last season, including a series-best 11 poles on his way to another sixth-place showing, makes Newman a driver to beat in the first year of the newly named Nextel Cup. Not that the competition is watching.
''I don't think you ever focus just on one driver or one team and try to necessarily catch up to what he's doing,'' said Matt Kenseth, the Winston Cup champion last year. ''They did a great job of calling races last year. He won the most races. But honestly, you don't know who the guy's going to be to beat until you get into the season. There's 20 or 25 guys or teams that are capable of winning races and being out front, and you just don't know who that's going to be until the season gets going.''
That will come this weekend, although Daytona is not Newman's best track. He had a spectacular crash in the Daytona 500 last season; he skidded, hit the wall, flipped over and found himself upside down with a slice of infield grass on his lap. Newman walked away without injury, but finished last in the race.
Poor finishes like that one prevented Newman from being a serious contender to Kenseth for the title despite his eight victories. It is part of the reason Nascar added 5 points to the winner's take for each race, a slightly larger reward.
Still, Newman does not like the new points system, in which drivers compete through the first 26 races to be in the top 10, with a 10-race runoff after that for the championship.
''The whole focus was supposed to be on winners being able to be the Winston Cup champion and now a guy can win eight races in the first 26 and be in the points lead and finish 10th in the points,'' he said. ''I don't think the total thought process was defined or enacted for the 2004 points system.''
There are some who wonder if Newman will continue the success of last season. Nascar has instituted significant changes to the tires and spoiler of Nextel Cup cars this year. The new, softer tires will wear out more quickly, requiring more pit stops. Fuel mileage may no longer be a significant edge for Newman as it was in some of his victories last season.
''I don't think I did ever figure out exactly how they were getting that kind of mileage,'' the driver Jeff Gordon said. ''He might still have that edge, but the tires are going to change fuel mileage drastically, so you don't have to worry about fuel mileage being near as much of a factor this year.''
Newman could not hide the smirk when he heard Gordon's theory. As far as Newman is concerned, it is just a new set of mathematic equations to be solved.
''It's all opinion based,'' Newman said. ''Obviously, he doesn't know that. But he might be, No. 1, trying to get under my skin; No. 2, trying to build confidence for himself; or No. 3, not have a clue what he's talking about. Or he could be exactly right. When one door closes, another opens. That's just the way I look at it.''
AUTO RACING
