AFTER 50 minutes, the afternoon ferry from Point Judith, R.I., pulled into Block Island's Old Harbor at 5 o'clock, just as the setting sun forced a blush from the enormous, thin-blue sky. A string of pretty little shops with ''closed'' signs hanging in their doors faced the ferry dock. At the end of the street stood the grand Victorian pile of the National Hotel, its porch roof supported by two-by-fours while the lower portion was being rebuilt.
Block Island, part of Rhode Island, sits 14 miles east of Montauk, N.Y., and 12 miles south of the Rhode Island coast, and, of course, winter cannot change that. But everything else, it does.
Gone are the 16,000 tourists who pour onto the 3-by-7-mile island each summer weekend, vying for rooms at fashionable inns and clogging the narrow roads with expensive cars. Boutiques, fudge shops and nightclubs shut their doors rather than shell out for heat and winterization. The refreshing sea breezes become biting winds, and visitors can forget sunning themselves on the soft sand, dipping into a swimming hole or even renting a motor scooter.
Indeed, with only a few of the island's 60 or so hotels open for business, along with three restaurants (one of them a takeout shack and another serving only on weekends), Block Island in January would be unrecognizable to many summer visitors. There's also the possibility of being stranded. In summer, up to five ferries carry thousands of tourists to and from New York, Connecticut and Rhode Island nearly every hour. But in winter, for those who don't want to fly, there is only the Point Judith ferry, which makes 16 round trips a week and had to cancel a handful of trips in January because of high winds. On the other hand, getting a car reservation is a comparative cinch (some summer days are already booked up).
What's left? Scenery like a revelation, and about a thousand robust souls -- this year's annual Groundhog Day census, held in a bar called the Albion Pub, counted 904 -- who work mostly in tourism or construction or at Block Island School (enrollment 136). But the island's desolation has its own romance, fueled by a crystalline night sky and the intimacy borne of smallness. Or maybe it is the copious liquor -- the island's bootlegging era is over, but residents nurse its spirit.
On a cold weekend in one of the coldest Januaries in a century, my boyfriend, Jonathan Starr, and I rode the ferry out to Block Island, headed for the 1661 Inn, a Victorian bed-and-breakfast whose winter virtues include being open and slashing rates on its antiques-filled rooms by almost half. In the afternoon light, the snow tinted pink, the island's fields of gold faded to a quiet luster, and from our room we saw the rolling surf laid out under the vast tent of a purpling sky. A cozy dinner by a warm fire would have been perfect.
But the inn gets so few guests in the winter that its owners shut their nearby restaurant. The Beachhead, down on Ocean Avenue, however, was still open. Though the Beachhead makes some efforts at swank -- soft lighting, black-clad waitresses -- it cannot overcome its pervasive maritime theme. A weather-beaten fisherman carved from a tree trunk greets diners at the door, miniature painted anchors and portholes dance on the interior walls and lobster traps hang from the ceiling. It's like a local version of Red Lobster -- without the lobster. ''We keep it on the menu, but we don't buy it in the off-season,'' our waitress said. But it seemed to work: Almost all of the restaurant's 50 seats were taken, by tourists and locals alike.
Block Island, like many summer resorts, has been trying to extend its Memorial Day-to-Labor Day season for several years. The Block Island Tourism Council promotes a shoulder season that starts at Labor Day and runs through the winter holidays, then starts up again in the spring with the annual Shad Run (a 10-kilometer road race). Many innkeepers and restaurateurs now stick around until Columbus Day to capture business brought by Block Island's growing wedding industry. Year-round residents say they notice more summer residents returning to the island to celebrate Thanksgiving and Christmas. An increase in residential construction brings workers to the island for the winter.
And each season has its own flavor, said Susan Shea, the tourism council's executive director. Summer tourists tend to let loose in the island's restaurants and bars, while shoulder-season tourists kick back. ''These are people who are looking for nothing to do. Maybe sit on an Adirondack chair and read a book,'' Ms. Shea said.
But even the tourism council won't touch January through March. ''It doesn't seem so promotable,'' Ms. Shea said.
Indeed, many residents find Block Island winter's disagreeable, high-tailing it for the mainland when the tourists and balmy temperatures leave. Rita DiTraglia, a Block Island innkeeper for 44 years and owner of the Sea Crest Inn, recalls her only visit to the island in winter, some 20 years ago: ''You didn't have to walk. The wind would take you there.'' Ms. DiTraglia cut short her two-week visit by 12 days and retreated to her Florida home.
Still, there has been a steady long-term growth in the winter population, said Lew Gaffett, owner of the Albion Pub, who restarted the Groundhog Day census about 30 years ago, he says, to give residents something to do in the dead of winter. The acknowledged unscientific tradition captures the island at its ''low population point of the year,'' Mr. Gaffett said. ''Anyone who's going to Florida has already gone and hasn't come back.'' This year's tally was about double the numbers of the early 1970's, he said.
But Mr. Gaffett's census has never reached 1,000, and residents still have the run of the island in winter. Keys are left in cars, doors stay unlocked and seeing another vehicle on the road is an event that calls for mutual waving.
''It's a whole different life in the winter,'' said Rosemary Tobin, a real estate agent, ''more of a community.''
AS for the weather, many year-rounders say they like it cold. ''Forty degrees is lousy,'' said Geoff Hall, a lifelong Block Island resident who loves ice sports. On a recent Sunday, Mr. Hall took his wife and 6-year-old son skating, joining about 50 others (or about 5 percent of Block Island's population) gliding around Fresh Pond in the afternoon sunshine. Strains of the ''Nutcracker'' emanated from a boom box.
And there is the Block Island Hard Water Yachting Club, a half-dozen iceboaters who race across the island's Sachem Pond on wind-powered craft capable of highway speeds. Ed McGovern, a tavern owner, spent hours every day in January on his boat, whose 45-square-foot sail and modern lightweight frame leave the competition's older wood-framed boats (some built before World War II) behind.
But whizzing across a frozen pond at 50 miles an hour can be perilous: Four boats have gone through the ice this winter (they were pulled out), and Mr. McGovern bruised a bone when a heavy gust tipped his boat onto his leg. He was back on the ice in three days.
Mr. McGovern often offers newcomers informal lessons and a ride. ''I can't imagine anyone not liking it once they try it,'' he said.
In lieu of that, Jonathan and I scheduled a taxi tour with the island's resident eccentric, Avery Kirby, who chauffeured us on a hourlong soliloquy on the island's history and personality. ''Blockitis,'' Mr. Kirby pronounced, is ''the disease that winter people have here. You have to enjoy the solitude.'' A private key to the package store also helps, he noted, after pointing out the statue ''Rebecca at the Well'' at the confluence of Water, High and Spring Streets, erected in 1898 to honor a temperance worker.
Mr. Kirby drove us to Mohegan Bluffs, where we took in the view of the Southeast Lighthouse, a National Historic Landmark that sits atop a 150-foot-tall headland and overlooks an ocean that was the most intense, richest blue I've ever seen. The view may be as gorgeous in the summer, but it's not as serene.
One of the island's rowdiest places in winter -- outside, anyway -- is Manisses Farm, a small pasture home to exotic animals that bray, squawk and warble through the day. It is owned by the owners of the 1661 Inn and the Hotel Manisses and is open to the public. Over a low wooden fence, visitors nuzzle long-lashed llamas and admire emus, swans, geese and a Scottish Highland steer. (One recent addition to their menagerie is Nyla, an 11-month-old dromedary that doesn't spit.)
As bustling but somewhat more orderly is the scene on the Groundhog Day census. Dividing the island up into nine sections, teams come up with a count based on their knowledge of the neighborhoods (whose lights have been on, for instance), then work the phones. The ferry landing and airport are checked to see who has left and who has returned for the day (tourists who are on-island for the day are counted; residents who are away are not), and a board of checkers (a woman at the power company, the U.P.S. deliveryman, the bus driver) is consulted to make sure no one has been forgotten. Around 6 p.m. residents start wandering into the Albion Pub to mingle, drink and, for a dollar, guess the results.
This year, among those counted were Michael and Carol Rose, tourists from Buckingham, Pa. They had heard about the census last summer and decided they wanted in.
Besides, Mrs. Rose said, ''We were curious to find out whether there was life here in the winter.''
IF YOU GO  Block Island Puts On a Sweater
UNTIL April, the only regularly scheduled ferry service to Block Island leaves from Point Judith, R.I. Most days there are three departures. It is operated by Interstate Navigation (401-783-4613). The adult round-trip fare is $16.45; round-trip car fare on top of that is $51.90.
WHERE TO STAY
The Sea Breeze Inn (Spring Street, 401-466-2275) is a 10-room inn that sits near a swan pond and meadow. Some rooms have porches and ocean views. The free breakfast includes fresh fruit, croissants and muffins. The winter rate is $90.
The Blue Dory Inn (Dodge Street, 401-466-5891) is an intimate bed-and-breakfast with 11 rooms, 3 suites and one year-round cottage, and a long stretch of beach. The free breakfast includes freshly baked scones and eggs and pancakes to order. Winter rates start at $95.
The 1661 Inn (Spring Street; 401-466-2421) has nine Victorian-themed rooms, some with ocean views and Jacuzzis. A breakfast buffet with fresh fruit, pastries, cereal and eggs is included; free brandy in every room. Winter rates are $50 to $195.
DINING
At the Beachhead, (Ocean Avenue, 401-466-2249) the menu runs to prime rib, red-sauce pasta and seafood, but no lobster in the off-season. Appetizers, entrees and drinks for two, with tax, runs about $75.
Club Soda (Connecticut Avenue, 401-466-5397) is a local hangout in the basement of the Highview Inn, with a mural of Block Island circa 1940. On the menu are barbecued ribs, burgers, salads and huge plates of gooey nachos. Snacks and drinks for two, about $25.
NIGHT LIFE
On summer weekends, McGovern's Yellow Kittens Tavern (Corn Neck Road, 401-466-5855) is one of the island's major music clubs. In winter, it features a pool and foosball table and moves the table tennis set to the dance floor.
The Albion Pub (Ocean Avenue, 401-466-9990) is the site of the Groundhog Day census. Its jukebox is considered among the best on the island, and many a long winter night is fueled by takeout sandwiches and burgers from Woody's (401-466-7775) next door.
JOURNEYS
