Directed by Robert Parigi  Not rated, 88 minutes
The director Robert Parigi shows a kicky sense of humor in his low-budget ''Love Object,'' which played at last year's TriBeCa Film Festival, and ably creates a smirking menace. The loner Kenneth (Desmond Harrington), who labors as a technical writer in Los Angeles and whose talents seem to include a lack of social skills, decides to order an inanimate physical companion, an anatomically correct doll that he nicknames Nikki.
The attention that Kenneth lavishes on Nikki is both funny and creepy -- a tone that Mr. Parigi must have lifted from old Hammer Films movies -- and his obsession is that of a master trying to rule his own small world. (Amusingly, the sex shop that Kenneth visits before fleeing into the safety of mail order is so seedy and spooky that you wonder why no one has set a horror movie in one; you half expect the Crypt Keeper to be behind the counter.)
Kenneth, as slender as a riding crop, throws himself into his relationship with Nikki with loving devotion; the item is a stand-in for a close encounter of the third kind with Lisa (Melissa Sagemiller), who works in his office. Having Nikki around the house for his reindeer games helps Kenneth open up, and gives him the nerve to ask Lisa out. (Ms. Sagemiller is an inviting object herself, though she sometimes seems a bit unsure of her delivery; this misstep is where Mr. Parigi's direction seems a little underwhelming.)
When Kenneth gets to know Lisa, Nikki starts to strike out in jealousy -- or does she? -- and Kenneth's natural discomfort level redlines. He teeters convincingly between nervousness and composure; sometimes the digital camera moves almost make him jump.
In ''Love Object'' Mr. Parigi draws from a segment of the classic 1945 horror anthology film ''Dead of Night'' that features Michael Redgrave as a schizophrenic ventriloquist, and adds sexual undertones. Mr. Parigi maintains a chilly tone throughout the meager proceedings; one of the most disturbing, and delectable, elements of the movie is that Nikki looks like an extravagant line item in the film's budget. You get the sense that so much care is being taken with the unliving doll because she has to be returned to a warehouse with as few scuffs as, um, humanly possible.
And Mr. Parigi also knows that there are few better ways to keep the atmosphere unsettled than to invite the participation of Udo Kier, who plays the bothersome and obtrusive manager of Kenneth's apartment building. Rip Torn also appears as Kenneth's fire-breathing boss; he is lighted to look as if he has just taken the express elevator from Dante's ninth circle.
The modestly assembled ''Love Object,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is only periodically derailed by its tone; Mr. Parigi sometimes overplays the humor in the midst of all the deadpan. Occasionally the movie seems to be parodying itself, a danger of slim-budget affairs in which we can almost see a meter ticking away the dollars, and you feel as if you have spent almost as much on admission as the filmmaker did on the project.
Understandably, Mr. Parigi wants to exercise some control -- besides striking a spark while pinching pennies -- and the comedy allows him to maintain a knowing pitch, just enough to keep ''Love Object'' brisk.
ELVIS MITCHELL
FILM IN REVIEW
