Women! Yuck! Ptooey!
That's the way the menfolk gathered around the House of Atreus seem to feel about the opposite sex in the Aquila Theater Company's version of Aeschylus' ''Agamemnon.'' In this stiff, achingly atmospheric production, which opened last night at the John Jay College Theater, a fellow can't even say the word woman without a rattle of contempt creeping into his voice.
Is it any wonder that poor Clytemnestra, played by the formidable Olympia Dukakis, starts to feel homicidal in such company? Wearing a drapey mauve shmatte among a gaggle of gossipy men in drab overcoats and fedoras, this proud queen looks distressingly besieged and outnumbered. And it must be awfully irritating to hear the boys keep blaming the whole Trojan War on her sister, Helen. Of course she was bound to snap.
Translated by Peter Meineck, who directed the show with Robert Richmond, this ''Agamemnon'' is by no means forcing a feminist sensibility onto a hallowed play that can't accommodate it. To reread the ''Oresteia'' trilogy, of which ''Agamemnon'' is the opening play, is to be sharply aware of a dangerous divide between the men who make war and the women who wait for them.
Playing with this perspective has become a familiar game in recent theater, in shows from Ariane Mnouchkine's colossal ''Atrides'' to Ellen McLaughlin's ''Iphigenia and Other Daughters,'' in which she poetically deconstructed the House of Atreus to emphasize the invisibility of its women. But if it isn't exactly original, Mr. Meineck's variation on the same theme at least has clarity and verve, lending a spark of fractious life to his generally leaden staging.
For the most part this ''Agamemnon,'' which also stars Louis Zorich (Ms. Dukakis's husband) in the title role and runs through Feb. 22, appears to have been created according to a checklist of standard souping-up devices for classical plays. (If you've seen a Shakespeare in the Park production in the last decade or so, you'll know what I'm talking about.)
There are expository flashbacks to Agamemnon's nasty family history (as well as a tacked-on prologue), acted out in silent slow motion by the ensemble; a Martha Grahamesque dance sequence, performed by household servants standing in for the Furies; and the requisite onstage jeep, in which Agamemnon returns from the wars.
All this is set off by ominous mood-cueing lighting and sound effects that turn the House of Atreus into the Haunted Mansion at Walt Disney World. Whenever Clytemnestra makes an entrance, for example, she is accompanied by a heavy creaking that brings to mind the door of a crypt, while screeching ''Psycho''-style chords accompany violence. (The composer is Anthony Cochrane.)
The men of the chorus, who include estimable New York theater regulars like Nicholas Kepros and John Sierros, bring an irritable, trembling-voiced quality to their descriptions of grim events and fearful portents. They don't wail so much as kvetch about the fate of humankind. In contrast, Miriam Laube as the captive Trojan prophetess Cassandra, chooses all-out hysteria.
Cassandra, by the way, would seem to come from an Arab culture in this staging, inviting comparisons to the war in Iraq. To increase the topicality quotient, Mr. Meineck's translation eliminates all references to Greek deities, so discussions of destiny refer to only one almighty god. It is a jolting interpolation, especially when the script avoids all mention of Apollo, Cassandra's lover and destroyer, describing him instead as a lascivious angel. (All you can conclude is that the distraught girl really must be mad.)
Mr. Zorich, a Broadway veteran who specializes in feisty urbanites, and Ms. Dukakis, who won an Oscar for ''Moonstruck,'' certainly have the presence to hold the stage. But their very specific, idiosyncratic personas don't meld naturally into those of their characters here. (I kept expecting Mr. Zorich to say, ''Oy, Zeus!'') And they don't seem comfortable in the frozen postures in which they are required to declaim their lines. Well, who would?
As rueful and wry as always, Ms. Dukakis never quite convinces as the scheming, duplicitous Clytemnestra of her early scenes. But she achieves some stunning moments of rage and pain in her climactic speeches, in which her voice assumes the harrowing deep notes of a dybbuk. She may look kind of frail, but if those whiny men of Argos know what's good for them, they'll keep out of this scorned woman's way.
AGAMEMNON
By Aeschylus; translated by Peter Meineck; created by Mr. Meineck and Robert Richmond; directed by Mr. Richmond with Mr. Meineck; movement director, Mr. Richmond; music by Anthony Cochrane; costumes by Theoni V. Aldredge; lighting by Mr. Meineck; setting by Mr. Meineck and Mr. Richmond; assistant director/co-choreographer, Mira Kingsley; associate costume design, Wallace G. Lane Jr.; associate lighting design by Dan Scully; production dramaturg, Helene Foley; stage manager, Francesca Russell; production assistant, Michele Hillen; set construction, Jeremiah Thies; general manager/technical direction, Nate Terracio; production coordinator, Jennie Connery. Presented by the Aquila Theater Company, Mr. Meineck, producing artistic director. At the John Jay College Theater, 899 10th Avenue, at 58th Street, Clinton.
WITH: Olympia Dukakis (Clytemnestra), Louis Zorich (Agamemnon), Marco Barricelli (Aegisthus), Louis Butelli (Watchman), Miriam Laube (Cassandra) and Carissa Guild (Iphigenia).
THEATER REVIEW
