There was great relief here last week when a suspicious powder found in a Wallingford mail distribution center on Feb. 2 turned out to be a harmless substance with no connection to terrorism.
Some lawmakers say, though, that the incident revealed a new aspect of the ethical and legal scandal in the administration of Gov. John G. Rowland. If the powder had turned out to be poison sent by a terrorist, the man in charge of coordinating a response would have been Vincent J. DeRosa, an old friend of Mr. Rowland's and the state director of homeland security.
Mr. DeRosa previously worked as Mr. Rowland's driver, and the head of the state agency who hired him as homeland security chief said during a hearing on Tuesday that his main qualification for the post, aside from his experience as a state trooper, was the governor's endorsement. Mr. DeRosa, who is now being audited in the possible misuse of state overtime funds, also violated state regulations for years by running a used-car dealership while on the state payroll. When that fact became public last week, he announced that he would retire on March 1.
Although Mr. DeRosa's background has been known for years, new questions about his qualifications and conduct have overshadowed his connections to the impeachment investigation of Mr. Rowland.
''We all know that to the victor belong the spoils,'' said Representative Michael P. Lawlor, a Democrat. ''But there are some jobs where you really need a qualified person. The director of homeland security needs to have an understanding of public health, law enforcement, transportation. Why would you give a job like that to Vinnie DeRosa?''
Mr. DeRosa did not return telephone calls Thursday. Dean Pagani, Mr. Rowland's chief of staff, said, ''Vinnie DeRosa had 20 years of experience as a state trooper, eight years as head of the governor's security detail, and the fact that he has a personal relationship with the governor should not be counted against him.''
Mr. DeRosa, who has been head of homeland security since 2001 and makes more than $100,000 a year, is no stranger to controversy. He was one of the state officials and contractors who provided free renovations or gifts at the governor's private cottage in Litchfield. Mr. Rowland admitted lying about the renovations and gifts, an admission that led to the current impeachment inquiry.
Mr. DeRosa was also involved in the sale of a boat and a car to the governor that are now the subject of an F.B.I. investigation. Mr. DeRosa, who runs a marine equipment business, gave Mr. Rowland a $3,000 trade-in allowance on a boat that had sold, eight years earlier, for $750.
Mr. DeRosa, who is from Waterbury like Mr. Rowland, was a volunteer in Mr. Rowland's 1990 and 1994 campaigns for governor. He began serving as the governor's driver during the 1994 campaign. Mr. Rowland has often relied on Mr. DeRosa for advice about state police matters.
Mr. DeRosa is far from being the only Rowland associate who was advanced, only to have his credentials and conduct called into question. In most cases, those officials were judged to have less sensitive positions than Mr. DeRosa, Mr. Lawlor said. But some had important roles. Last year Lawrence E. Alibozek, a former deputy chief of staff to Mr. Rowland, pleaded guilty to accepting cash and gold bribes for steering state contracts. Mr. Alibozek directed the state's efforts to avoid computer problems as the millennium approached. He insisted on gold because he believed it might be more valuable if widespread computer failures developed, said House Majority Leader James A. Amann.
On Tuesday, old suspicions about Mr. DeRosa took on a new seriousness during a hearing of the legislature's public safety committee. In a tense and often hostile exchange, the Senate president pro tem, Kevin Sullivan, asked Arthur Spada, the director of the state department of public safety, about Mr. DeRosa's qualifications. He also suggested that Mr. DeRosa had misused homeland security money.''He was well-liked,'' Mr. Spada said, when asked about Mr. DeRosa's qualifications. ''He got along well with people, and I thought that would be critical.'' Mr. Spada also said that there had been no search for the job and that Mr. Rowland had expressed his preference for Mr. DeRosa.
''When any governor asks any commissioner to consider a matter, it has to be given serious consideration,'' Mr. Spada said.
