COMING along the snow-packed trail, Jim Connolly, 44, is dragging a sled filled with birch logs, half a case of stout, hamburger patties, salmon fillets, a large-blade shovel and a jumble of hockey sticks and skates. There is an abundance of sunshine, but the temperature hovers near zero. Through the pines, we can make out the clean, windswept span of ice, burnished like onyx and marked at either end by regulation hockey goals.
Mr. Connolly, 6-foot-4, with a hooded fleece pullover and a beard streaked with white, raises the spare goalie stick he's using as a staff and yells, ''Game on,'' his voice echoing among the trees.
This is Daniels Lake, a small, crescent-shaped body of water nestled alongside Route 114 in Weare, about 12 miles west of Manchester. New England is dotted with thousands of such ponds, which are covered with thick lids of ice from early December until March. Every Sunday afternoon in the coldest part of the year, the Connollys, who live in a comfortable, rambling house beside the lake, gather their friends for a leg-churning, lung-searing pond hockey tournament. And this brand of hockey, or ''shinny'' as it's called in Canada, is egalitarian: anyone with skates, a shovel for clearing snow and ice shavings and a willingness to take a hit is invited to join in.
Soon a blaze is roaring on shore, and the sticks are deposited at center ice and flung to either side to make the teams. The hockey players are a cross-section of America: Mr. Connolly's determined pixie of a wife, Maryanne, who plays for a local women's team; their 23-year-old son, Sean, an Army Ranger home on leave; a physical therapist; a computer technician; an airline pilot; a plumber; a college professor; and a mill worker. Almost all are rugby players, which brings a certain joyful violence to the proceedings.
The games are played four on four, with one substitute for each team, and the lead changes hands often. The competition is fierce, wisecracks and insults fly back and forth, and more than one wannabe Wayne Gretzky ends up deposited on his rump in a snow bank.
Our voices ring out in the dry winter air as we charge back and forth, exhaling little white plumes of condensation. Although my toes are numb and my face grown stiff as leather, there's a sense of speed and unrestricted movement that brings back the exhilaration of youth. Out here you can fly again, and during a short breather I notice that all my typical adult worries have receded to the horizon.
With the score tied late in the rubber match, Sean Connolly rushes down the middle with the puck. Hustling back on defense, Ms. Connolly looks serious, her blades carving into the ice.
''Sean,'' a teammate yells, ''make a move on your mom.''
''We call that the Oedipal offense,'' jokes 36-year-old Jason Massa.
Dressed in his Ranger cold weather gear, Sean Connolly sweeps toward the goal with the puck cradled on the blade of his stick. In the net, a cigar-chomping Dave Rolla, who plays goalie in work boots instead of skates, puts down his can of stout. ''C'mon, Ranger boy,'' Mr. Rolla says, puffing on his cigar. ''Show me what you got.''
Sean Connolly shoots, Mr. Rolla saves, and Ms. Connolly races the other way with the loose puck and scores the winning goal.
''You won't live that down anytime soon,'' Jason Massa says to Sean.
Long blue shadows stretch across the lake, and the woods grow dark. On shore, the aroma of roasting salmon fills the air, and we remove our skates and gather near the fire, warming our frozen digits. We pick at the fish while discussing the merits of Steve McQueen's acting in movies like ''Nevada Smith'' and ''The Sand Pebbles.'' More cans of stout are popped open, and the sound of our laughter carries across the frozen lake.
Chris Pierce, a physical therapist and a former wrestler at Ithaca College, notes that playing hockey in such cold weather is both an aerobic and anaerobic activity. ''The heart is pumping, the lungs are burning and our muscles are working, stimulating the body to respond to the stresses placed on it,'' he says.
It takes superior endurance to skate up and down for such a prolonged period, Mr. Pierce says. And the explosive movements associated with hockey create microscopic tears in the muscles, which will grow as a result.
''Of course, in this environment, we increase our chances of hypothermia and dehydration'' he adds as he raises his can of stout, ''but we have the fire to keep us warm, and the beer.''
IF YOU'RE LOOKING  You Want a Backyard That's Center Ice?
WHERE -- Willow River, Minn.  WHAT -- 4-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $375,000  This house, on 18 acres about an hour and a half north of the Twin Cities, has a ravine with a pond, right, that freezes for skating or hockey. The house has two bathrooms and a walkout basement recreation room with a wet bar. There are two barns and a heated workshop. Agent: Ernie Gertzen, United Country-Banning Junction Real Estate, (218) 485-0229; www.unitedcountry.com.
WHERE -- Quechee, Vt.  WHAT -- 4-bedroom condominium  HOW MUCH -- $450,000  Built in 2003, the Newton Village town houses are in Quechee Lakes, a 5,500-acre year-round private resort community between Woodstock, Vt., and Hanover, N.H. Unit 6B has a deck, a gas fireplace, three bathrooms and is near a pond that freezes and is used for winter recreation. The community has two golf courses and a ski hill with chairlifts. Quechee Lakes Real Estate Center, (802) 295-7525; www.realtor.com.
WHERE -- Everson, Wash.  WHAT -- 2-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $240,000  This 1,500-square-foot house, two hours north of Seattle, has a sauna, two bathrooms and a pond that ices over every few years for skating. It has views of the Canadian Rockies and the Washington Cascades. The 4.8-acre property includes pasture, woods and a barn. For sale by the owner, Cathy Luther, (360) 815-4665; www.greenacreshaven.com.
HAVENS Jay Atkinson is the author of ''Ice Time: A Tale of Fathers, Sons and Hometown Heroes,'' recently published in paperback by Three Rivers Press.
