The Credit Suisse Group on Thursday reported a fourth-quarter profit of 1.2 billion Swiss francs ($976 million), in contrast to a loss of 950 million Swiss francs in the year-ago period.
The company attributed the turnaround to cost-cutting, streamlining and more buoyant global markets.
Revenue for the quarter, however, was down 11 percent, to 5.72 billion Swiss francs, from the period in the previous year. Analysts said that 2003 profit was better than expected, but ascribed this to one-time factors as much as to improved performance.
Instead of paying a dividend for 2003 -- it was 0.10 Swiss franc a share in 2002 -- Credit Suisse proposed reducing the par value of its shares by 0.50 Swiss franc and said it would pay that difference in lieu of a dividend to shareholders in July.
Investors were disappointed, and the shares fell about 5 percent on the Zurich bourse.
The bank, Switzerland's second largest, said that its full-year profit of 5.2 billion Swiss francs represented a ''significant turnaround'' after 2002, when the company reported a loss of 3.3 billion Swiss francs -- the most dismal performance in its 147-year history.
The joint chief executives, Oswald J. Grübel and John J. Mack, said in a statement that tough measures put in place at the end of 2002 had paid off, including cost reductions of 4.9 billion Swiss francs, reorganizing the private banking business in Europe, and returning the insurance subsidiary Winterthur to profit.
Some 3,500 employees were let go last year, and the group sold noncore business units: Credit Suisse First Boston's clearinghouse, the Pershing securities company; Winterthur's Italian business; and the British insurer Churchill.
Mr. Grübel and Mr. Mack were installed as joint chief executives to rescue the group after their much-criticized predecessor, Lukas Mühlemann, resigned in 2002. His ambitious expansion plans had left the group exposed to the market downturn that began in 2000.
The bank's recovery in 2003 was driven by the Credit Suisse Financial Services division, which includes retail, corporate and private banking. That division reported total profit of 977 million Swiss francs for the quarter, up 58 percent from the year-ago period.
Those gains helped offset a weak performance in the asset management business at Credit Suisse First Boston, the group's New York-based unit, which saw a net outflow of 11.7 billion Swiss francs in assets under management for the year, a reduction of 0.8 percent from 2002.
Despite client defections, First Boston's embattled investment banking division still managed to turn a profit of $220 million in the fourth quarter compared with a loss of $795 million in the year-ago quarter.
Mr. Mack said that ''2003 was a critical turning point for C.S.F.B.''
''We set out to be consistently profitable, and we were.''
''I am confident that C.S.F.B. is now well positioned to build on its progress and achieve growth in 2004 as global markets rebound,'' he added, predicting growth for the division in 2004, despite continued fluctuations and risks in global capital markets.
One of the world's largest asset managers, Credit Suisse gained net new client assets of 2.9 billion Swiss francs in the fourth quarter, increasing group assets under management to 1.2 trillion Swiss francs.
The financial services division experienced net client asset inflows, thanks to the private banking business, which had inflows of 4.2 billion Swiss francs in the fourth quarter.
Private banking posted a fourth-quarter profit of 508 million Swiss francs, a 62 percent increase from the final quarter of 2002.
Regina Anhorn, a banking analyst at the private Swiss bank Lombard Odier Darier Hentsch &amp; Compagnie in Zurich, said that while big issues had been dealt with, the bank still needed to address the weakness in Credit Suisse's flagship private banking business amid a competitive market.
Credit Suisse has turned around, though earnings were not as bright as analysts had expected, she said. ''Now they have to convince that they are competitive with their peers,'' Ms. Anhorn said.
