Eve Ensler once said she named her one-woman play ''The Vagina Monologues'' because the word vagina makes people feel anxious and awkward. ''I say it because I'm not supposed to say it,'' she said.
The challenge to social norms made the play a sensation in the United States. But in China, where the word vagina carries even greater shock value and is rarely spoken in public, ''The Vagina Monologues'' roiled the wrong people -- the country's censors.
This week, propaganda officials ordered the indefinite postponement of the play's China premiere in Shanghai, nominally the country's most Westernized city. In the capital, Beijing, the authorities stopped an avant-garde art gallery from staging an informal, nonprofit rendition of ''The Vagina Monologues'' that had been scheduled for Valentine's Day.
Though Ms. Ensler's play addresses some still sensitive women's rights issues and violence against women, the content does not appear to have set off official censure. Instead, it is simply the word vagina, which appears in most standard Chinese dictionaries but is almost never printed in the mainstream media, that broke an unwritten rule.
''Perhaps if we had come up with another title it might not have happened this way,'' said Zhang Baoquan, a real estate entrepreneur whose privately run Today Gallery had planned to stage the play on Saturday. ''I guess genitals cannot be named in a frank way. We did not know that before.''
The title chosen was ''Yindao Dubai,'' which is a literal translation of ''The Vagina Monologues.''
''China should explain to people what it is about vaginas that they find shameful,'' Ms. Ensler said Thursday in a telephone interview after being told about the cancellations. ''The point is that there is nothing vulgar, shameful or immoral about the word.''
Ms. Ensler said she was disappointed because she had hoped that China would join the international celebration of V-Day, which takes place on Valentine's Day and is intended to combat violence against women.
She said the play was being staged in 1,100 cities around the world and that censorship had been rare, even in deeply religious countries. The exceptions have been some Catholic colleges in the United States, which have not allowed it to be performed. The authorities in India and Congo temporarily banned the production in the past, but later allowed it to go ahead, Ms. Ensler said.
''China really needs to join the world,'' she said.
China does not have a Judeo-Christian heritage and is not traditionally a prudish country. In recent years, sexual norms have eased considerably, with premarital and extramarital sex becoming common. Prostitution is illegal but widely tolerated in every major city.
Shanghai has a sex museum that includes explicit exhibits of non-pharamaceutical sex aids and aggrandizements that might be considered too racy for general admission in the United States.
Still, Communist China has long treated open displays of sexuality, particularly by women, as a form of Western decadence. Repeated campaigns against ''bourgeois liberalization'' and ''spiritual pollution'' took place into the 1990's, and until recently the government dismissed its exploding AIDS crisis as a symptom of moral decay among a small minority of the population.
Last month, officials from China Central Television said they had temporarily shelved plans to broadcast the American hit comedy series ''Friends,'' because sex or sexual innuendo infused nearly every episode.
Officials prefer to practice censorship with an invisible hand, and they gave vague and varied reasons for preventing the staging of ''The Vagina Monologues.''
The Shanghai production was to be China's first large-scale commercial version of the play, fully translated into Chinese. Li Shengying, the director, said in a telephone interview that the play had been canceled, after hundreds of tickets were sold, because the authorities told him ''the production was not yet mature.''
Backers in Beijing had more modest ambitions. Today Gallery had scheduled a single performance of the play, to be read in English, as a complement to an exhibit of paintings with sexual themes. The paintings are hung, but the gallery had to scrap the performance at the last minute because they were told they had not received proper permission to use the gallery as a theater, according to Shang Fang, the curator.
Written by Ms. Ensler, the play is based on interviews with women around the world. It celebrates their sexuality and details the abuses they suffer. The Beijing performance was supported by the Network for Combating Domestic Violence, the Ministry of Justice and the Chinese Academy of Social Sciences, according to an invitation issued by the sponsors.
Organizers said they sought to explain to the authorities that the play was intended to spread awareness of violence against women and that it did not promote promiscuity or permissiveness.
But the script includes dozens of mentions of the word vagina, which carries a special stigma here even though it is technically a neutral term. That may be because another term for vagina has become a common and particularly nasty curse word in Mandarin.
The authorities did not rule out staging the play at some point in the future.
''We are still hopeful,'' said Ms. Shang of Today Gallery. ''Our goal was to be pioneering and to explore issues that are cutting-edge both in China and the world. But it might have been a bit too soon.''
Beijing Journal
