The knots that bind the biggest media companies were poised to pull tighter yesterday with Comcast's $54 billion bid for the Walt Disney Company. As rivals scramble to react, they could get tighter still.
The offer is the latest escalation in an arms race of mergers as the major media conglomerates vie for the upper hand in multisided negotiations over the distribution of movies, sports and television programs. For Comcast, the proposed deal would answer the News Corporation's acquisition two months ago of control of the satellite service DirecTV. It would step up a race between cable and satellite companies to court consumers with elaborate new video and telecommunications services like set-top recorders similar to TiVo and telephone service delivered over cable lines.
But the proposed deal also puts new pressure on smaller cable operators or independent programmers, driving them into mergers or out of business as they struggle to compete with the conglomerates' bargaining power -- a trend some in the industry say may narrow the variety of new programming or make it harder for newcomers to break into the business.
As soon as the bid was announced, eager investment bankers trolling for new deals began pelting executives of Time Warner and Viacom with phone calls warning of dire implications. The advice went like this, two media-industry investment bankers said:
For Time Warner, allowing another major cable company to gain control of Disney's studios and television networks would badly undercut Time Warner's bargaining power over programming costs. Disney's ESPN network, for example, could more easily squeeze Time Warner Cable for higher fees, while Comcast's cable systems could be more stubborn in haggling with Time Warner's HBO, CNN and TBS. And Time Warner would miss its chance to own Disney's ABC television stations, another valuable bargaining chip.
The pitch: bid for Disney.
For Viacom -- owner of CBS, MTV and the Paramount studio -- standing by while Comcast swallowed Disney would leave it surrounded by three integrated media giants, counting Time Warner and the News Corporation, all combining major studios and television networks with cable or satellite systems.
The pitch: merge with the satellite service EchoStar to match its rivals' reach.
Representatives of Time Warner and Viacom declined to comment or did not return calls, but in truth neither company's situation is desperate. Both companies control the large portfolios of popular programming -- like Viacom's MTV, VH1 and its local CBS stations and Time Warner's CNN, TBS and TNT -- that Comcast's cable systems need.
Time Warner executives, speaking on the condition of anonymity, said that it was unlikely the company would enter the bidding, citing repeated comments by Richard D. Parsons, the company's chairman, that the company is most interested in acquiring other smaller cable companies.
''In a world where you have Warner Brothers, Turner and AOL and Time Warner Cable and a WB Network in the control of one company, and in a world where there is a DirecTV and a Fox and Fox Studio and the Fox Cable networks,'' said Larry Gerbrandt, chief content officer of the research company Kagan Media World, ''Comcast can make a strong case that this just gets them back to a level playing field. With some relatively small exceptions, they have been pretty much at the mercy of the content owners, the studios and the network owners without any means of really effectively addressing their single largest expense, which is programming costs.''
The biggest advantage for Comcast, Mr. Gerbrandt and others said, may be in defending itself from the the threat of competition from Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation since it took control of DirecTV. In a conference call with investors on Wednesday, Mr. Murdoch ruled out entering the bidding for Disney but predicted a three-way battle for the commanding heights of the media business among his company, Time Warner and Comcast.
Mr. Murdoch has already vowed to pour resources into improving DirecTV's marketing, customer service and interactive features, offering customers TiVo-style set-top recorders or the ability to select from multiple shots during news or sports programming.
He is borrowing from a playbook he has tested in the News Corporation's satellite operations in Britain and elsewhere with devastating effect on his cable competitors. And unlike other cable companies, which are limited to their respective territories, DirecTV also competes nationally against every cable company in the country.
For Comcast and other cable companies, News Corporation now poses a dual threat. Competition from DirecTV for subscribers could drive down revenue while News Corporation may drive up the costs to carry its Fox News, Fox sports and other cable networks. And News Corporation also controls the Fox film studios and its library of films, which cable companies want to sell to their customers as video-on-demand services over digital cable, one of the high-tech features the companies hope will keep their customers from switching to DirecTV.
Acquiring Disney, however, would give Comcast more bargaining chips, including a film library of its own as well as cable networks like ESPN that DirecTV needs. ''The ante gets raised, because Comcast is less exposed,'' Mr. Gerbrandt said.
He and other analysts said they expected Comcast's bid for Disney would only spur Mr. Murdoch to spend more heavily and push even harder to win cable subscribers, especially while the deal is still pending. His efforts, in turn, are pressing cable companies to push their high-tech features, including their own TiVo-like set-top boxes, cable modems and phone service over cable lines.
The proposed deal could also tip the balance in a power struggle between cable companies and film studios over the rights to sell films to subscribers via digital video-on-demand services. Brian L. Roberts, chief executive of Comcast, has been leading an effort to license the right to make new films available to subscribers for high fees at or near the date they appear in video stores or even theaters.
In a note to investors, Jessica Reif Cohen, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, said selling access to Disney's films through video-on-demand could be a major source of revenue for Comcast.
But although the proposed deal may intensify the growing competition in video, data and telephone service to the benefit of consumers, the competition would also tax smaller players in the media business. In the last year, Cox and many other small or medium-size cable companies have repeatedly called for Mr. Roberts of Comcast to use its power as the largest cable operator to drive down the rising cost of programming, especially for ESPN and Fox's regional sports networks.
Acquiring Disney would give Mr. Roberts much less incentive to drive a hard bargain with ESPN or other Disney channels. Although regulations would require the combined company to offer ESPN on the same terms to other cable companies as to Comcast, Mr. Roberts may still have more to gain by raising the fees ESPN charges to other cable operators than by lowering them for Comcast.
Analysts said the proposed deal was likely to accelerate an expected consolidation of the cable business as smaller companies like Cox Communications, Cablevision or Adelphia which have the less bargaining power against rising programming costs and fewer resources to fight off Mr. Murdoch's satellite attack. ''It may force them to decide what they want to be when they grow up,'' said Ms. Cohen, the analyst at Merrill Lynch.
The consolidation of the cable and satellite business, in turn, only further makes life harder for independent studios, channels or producers. If Comcast acquires Disney, for example, it will only tighten the screws for MGM, the last major free-standing studio in a business of intertangled conglomerates.
''That is why you hear talk of MGM selling,'' Mr. Gerbrandt of Kagan media world said. ''The independent content producer has already suffered from consolidation. They are pretty much gone, or a shadow of their former selves.''
Some in the industry -- including Barry Diller, chairman of InterActiveCorp, and Ted Turner, founder of Turner Broadcasting -- have warned that too much unrestricted consolidation may be hurting the media business by diminishing the variety of new programs on the air.
''These people essentially only accommodate each other; there is no way in any more,'' Mr. Diller said of the media giants, arguing against a pending deregulation in an interview last spring. Among other things, the rule changes allowed a cable company like Comcast to own local television stations in its markets, enabling a company like Comcast or Time Warner to acquire Disney's ABC stations. Yesterday, Mr. Diller declined to comment further.
Still, many in the industry argue that the proliferation of channels with digital cable and satellite services has partly offset the obstacles to entering the business. Quirky shows like ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,'' for example, can still bubble up on basic cable.
''The three broadcast networks used to have 90 percent of the viewing out there and now they have less than half,'' Mr. Gerbrandt said. ''People have voted with their remotes.''
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: THE RIVALS
