Three white men have been indicted on charges of assaulting a black college student and her friends in a park last September, prosecutors said yesterday.
The defendants, Christian Rudge, 20; Christopher Zitelli, 19; and Anthony Improta, 18, were charged with two counts each of second-degree assault as a hate crime and with other counts of assault, attempted assault and criminal possession of a weapon, according to the Staten Island district attorney, Daniel M. Donovan Jr. If convicted, the three could face maximum sentences of 15 years in prison. The grand jury declined to indict a fourth person, two people briefed on the proceedings said.
The assault, in which officials said one victim was cut with a sickle and another with a broken bottle, led to community soul-searching about racism on Staten Island and the suspension without pay of two police officers who, the college student said, discouraged her from making a complaint after the incident.
The indictment was the first on Staten Island under the Hate Crime Act of 2000. An assault designated as a hate crime is prosecuted as a charge one degree higher than it would be otherwise.
''These indictments send the message that crimes involving bias and prejudice on Staten Island will be thoroughly investigated and vigorously prosecuted by this administration and that anyone who engages in this kind of criminal behavior will face the appropriate consequences,'' Mr. Donovan, a Republican who took office in January, said in a written statement.
Mario Gallucci, the lawyer for Mr. Rudge, expressed incredulity at the hate-crime part of the indictment. ''Did a fight happen? Without a doubt,'' he said. ''Was it racially motivated? I don't think so.''
Joseph Sorrentino, a lawyer for Mr. Improta, said the grand jury was controlled by prosecutors. ''We will wait for our day in court to present our defense, and we are confident that my client will be exonerated,'' he said. Lawyers for Mr. Zitelli did not return a call for comment.
The two police officers, Glenn Glennerster and Samuel Perez, have been returned to modified duty at full pay but are still awaiting a departmental trial, the police said.
