All Stars Project Performing Arts and Learning Center  543 West 42nd Street, Manhattan  Through March 7
More than 12 years have passed since the day a 7-year-old African-American, Gavin Cato, was killed when a car ran off the street and crushed him against a building in the Crown Heights section of Brooklyn. The car was part of a motorcade escorting Menachem M. Schneerson, the grand rebbe of the Lubavitcher sect. Three hours later a young rabbinical student, Yankel Rosenbaum, was stabbed to death nearby. The neighborhood's two ethnic groups, African-Americans and Hasidic Jews, were at urban war.
Youth Onstage! and the All Stars Project are presenting their dramatization of those events with ''Crown Heights,'' a one-act musical.
In fairness, All Stars does refer to itself as community theater at the beginning of the show. In this case that means a cast of young New Yorkers who are not professional performers. Still the show gets off to a promising start with a sad, engaging rap, beginning ''These are the facts and/These are the stats'' and including the lines ''There's a black boy bleeding as the ambulance come/There's a black boy bleeding as the rabbi just run.'' But the subsequent musical numbers are disappointing in artistry and pointed, to say the least. The police are described as having ''bloated pink faces,'' ''fat bellies overlapping thick belts and underwears'' and ''twisted thin lips, smirks and sneers.''
This show is more concerned with re-enacting the events of Aug. 19, 1991, than with examining it. The show begins with a video documentary that includes numerous ill-advised group line readings and finally takes a sharp turn away from credibility. The names of the real people involved in the incident have been changed, as have many of the facts. Tynell (played alternately by Michael Alcide and Richard Ibyn Muhammid Clarke Jr.) is arrested for fatally stabbing Yohuda (Caleb Farmer). In this telling Yohuda runs into Tynell's knife. Tynell is facing life imprisonment just as his mother announces she has terminal cancer; her death will leave Tynell's beloved little sisters alone in the world.
His much older white Jewish social worker, Stella Horowitz (Susan Finch), sympathizes and begins spending time with the girls. And then Tynell suggests taking their relationship to another level. Conveniently Sheila was once married to a black man, so there's no question that she's open to interracial romance.
The ''Crown Heights'' chorus includes blacks playing Jews and white Jews playing blacks. The work, written by Fred Newman and Dan Friedman and directed by Mr. Friedman, doesn't achieve quite that much balance.
In real life Lemrick Nelson, the young man on whom the character Tynell is based, was sentenced last year to 10 years in prison. The driver in the crash returned to Israel.
ANITA GATES
THEATER IN REVIEW
