After a marathon of impassioned speeches, behind-the-scenes political maneuvering and an 11th-hour filibuster, Massachusetts legislators were unable Thursday to reach an agreement on gay marriage and shelved the issue for a month.
The lawmakers, many of them determined to counter a ruling by the state's highest court establishing same-sex marriage in Massachusetts, ended the second day of a constitutional convention called to consider an amendment that would ban gay marriage but also allow civil unions for same-sex couples.
But after ardent speeches from opponents, who ran out the clock by speaking until the rules required the legislature to adjourn at midnight, the lawmakers agreed to put off further discussion on the subject until March 11.
''Realizing that we have five minutes to go, I don't suspect that we will involve ourselves in a vote,'' said Senator Robert E. Travaglini, the Democratic Senate president and presiding officer of the convention, who was also a sponsor of the civil unions amendment.
As the legislators left the chamber they were met by a couple hundred gay-marriage supporters who whooped, cheered and sang ''God Bless America'' for the lawmakers who had delivered the speeches to forestall the vote.
Sponsors of the amendment said they were not disappointed.
''Every proposal has serious social, cultural, and legal implications and the members are approaching this task in a very thoughtful way,'' said a statement issued by the speaker of the House, Thomas M. Finneran, a Democrat and a civil union opponent who ultimately lent his muscle to the amendment, which had been billed as a compromise. ''No one should expect that decisions of this magnitude would be made casually or quickly.''
The 12-hour session was full of emotional public debate and a whirl of political maneuvering behind the scenes. Around 10:45 p.m., supporters of the amendment walked out of the chamber to protest what they saw as filibustering by one of the amendment's opponents, Senator Brian A. Joyce, a Democrat, who spent some of his time at the lectern reading the text of an earlier amendment and a newspaper opinion column. Moments later, the speaker of the house called a recess and ordered all legislators into a meeting, resuming the debate about 10 minutes later.
Some of the amendment's sponsors had hoped to push through a vote.
''I believe it is imperative that we leave here today not deadlocked, not arguing, but at last agreeing on a fundamental concept that we ought to let the public be heard, let the public vote on an amendment defining marriage between a man and a woman,'' said Senator Brian P. Lees, a Republican and one of the sponsors of the amendment. ''But we are a caring and compassionate legislature, and we would not want to send a signal to anyone in this commonwealth that we do not care about their rights.''
But opponents filled the chamber with speeches like that of Representative Elizabeth Malia, a Democrat and the only openly gay member of the House.
''I ask you please to look into your hearts,'' Ms. Malia said. ''I understand that is not a possibility for all of you. Do not codify, do not carve in stone a status that is less than equal. Civil unions is a very, very wonderful concept. It's not enough.''
On Wednesday, after more than six hours of wrangling, the legislature narrowly defeated two amendments: one that would have defined marriage solely as a union between a man and a woman, and a second that would have also allowed same-sex couples to form civil unions. On Thursday, before the civil unions amendment was introduced, the legislature voted 103 to 96 to defeat another amendment that would have defined marriage as a heterosexual institution, but included a line that said, ''nothing in this article requires or prohibits civil unions in Massachusetts.''
As Thursday's convention opened at noon, with scores of gay marriage supporters chanting in the corridors of the state house, it was apparent that several lawmakers who wanted to ban gay marriage had decided to adjust their positions to appear more sympathetic to civil unions, so that some kind of prohibition of same-sex marriage could be passed.
Representative Thomas M. Finneran, the influential Democratic speaker of the House who had opposed including civil unions in an amendment, joined with other legislative leaders to prepare a new amendment that would do just that. On Wednesday, Mr. Finneran sponsored an amendment that did not require civil unions, but on Thursday he sponsored an amendment quite similar to the civil union amendment that failed on Wednesday.
The new amendment included fewer specifics about what civil unions would include and how they would be established, but it said that couples in civil unions would get ''entirely the same benefits, protections, rights and responsibilities that are afforded to couples married under the law.''
The court's decision said gays could begin to marry in May, and any amendment passed by lawmakers would not take effect until November 2006 at the earliest because it would have to pass a vote by the legislature two years from now and a popular referendum. The amendment introduced Thursday does not indicate what would happen to those couples who marry in the years before the amendment could get final approval.
Gay rights activists were incensed by the new amendment.
''You can wrap discrimination in burlap, you can wrap it in gold and you can wrap it in civil unions,'' said Mary Bonauto, a lawyer for Gay and Lesbian Advocates and Defenders. ''It's still discrimination in the end.''
Arline Isaacson, the co-chairwoman of the Gay and Lesbian Political Caucus, said the amendment was worse for gays than if the legislature had voted for another amendment that would have simply banned same-sex marriage and not established civil unions.
''This will take away our rights, and it's going to be very hard to win a ballot question like this,'' Ms. Isaacson said, adding that it would be difficult to explain to voters in a referendum the idea that the measure was discriminatory, even though it would give same-sex couples the same rights as marriage. ''The people who are doing this are bent on segregating us to a separate class and trying to feel good about themselves while doing it.''
In an unusual alliance, conservatives were opposed as well, saying that the Constitution should be used only to define marriage, and that creating civil unions was making new law, something that should be taken up in a regular session of the legislature.
Thursday's constitutional convention displayed a curious dynamic of the legislature. While behind the scenes many of the more influential members were trying to forge a viable compromise amendment to ban gay marriage and include civil unions, most of the legislators who spoke, often in stirring and personal tones, argued against any amendment at all so that gay marriage could go forward.
They included Representative Shaun P. Kelly, a conservative Republican from a rural section of western Massachusetts. Speaking of Representative Malia, Mr. Kelly said: ''Is she eight-tenths of a citizen? Nine-tenths? Ninety-nine one-hundredths?'' Mr. Kelly proposed that the convention adjourn without voting on any amendment, letting gay marriage go forward unchallenged. The vote was defeated by a vote of 153 to 44.
Another impassioned speech came from Senator Jarrett T. Barrios, a Democrat the only openly gay member of the Senate. Mr. Barrios sponsored an amendment to recognize the marriage of any two individuals.
He described an instance when his 7-year-old son was sick and a nurse at the hospital questioned whether Mr. Barrios was the boy's parent. ''He could die on my watch,'' Mr. Barrios said, ''while I was fighting with a nurse over whether I was his parent or not.''
Some opponents of gay marriage also spoke in strong terms.
''Let's not get carried away with rights,'' Representative Maria J. Parente, a Democrat, told the chamber. ''When they talked about gay couples being good parents, I don't doubt that -- I don't doubt it for one moment. But you know what, when you talk to the kids it's not the same.''
Senator Robert A. Havern III, a Democrat, injected levity into the hotly-charged chamber by saying: ''You should be for gay marriage. You're all married. Who knows better than you -- after marriage there is no sex.''
Mr. Havern added: ''Allow people to get married and love each other, see how it works out. And my guess is it will be the biggest nonevent in the history of Massachusetts.''
