If you still believed in the tyranny of the male gaze in the late 1990's, well past the point at which academia had moved on, you might have turned to the work of a designer named Tom Ford as proof that fashion viewed women through the narrow prism of what a man with a healthy ego and a well-stocked humidor might be looking for when he went out looking. The Gucci woman always seemed a construct of male fantasy, even if Mr. Ford envisioned her in command of her own erotic destiny. But who could believe him when he served up women in studded thigh-high boots, metal-heel stilettos, gold lamé and skirts that made sitting down as hard as a full lotus? If the Gucci woman of Mr. Ford's imagining was so convinced of her own desirability, why had she never thought of going out for a quart of milk in a flannel shirt?
Mr. Ford's ideas about sex predate the era of the Internet, which has enabled women to acquire a stronger sense of themselves as consumers in the sexual marketplace. Few people believe a woman has to parade about like a Bond girl in order to find a bed mate or a husband when it is clear she can reach those goals sitting in front of her iMac in her pajamas.
Perhaps because they are children of the technological age, a generation of younger designers seems particularly skilled at translating the subtler dimensions of sexual expression. Jack McCollough and Lazaro Hernandez, both in their 20's and partners in Proenza Schouler, offered a show on Wednesday afternoon that refused to capitulate to outmoded notions of what a woman should look like. The two young men know how to balance their affinity for body-conscious clothes with an understanding that few women are interested in physical self-promotion. Narrow skirts were balanced with, say, loose hooded satin shirts, which were worn under cropped jackets. The impact of a quilted satin bustier was mitigated by tweed. Wool knickers articulated the body but looked as if they were meant for lying around the living room.
Behnaz Sarafpour is another young designer whose sensibility is especially timely. At her show yesterday afternoon, she offered a perspective on traditional notions of femininity devoid of the references to the 1950's that have been so heavily on display on runways in recent months. Ms. Sarafpour is beholden to neither of fashion's newly favorite archetypes. She doesn't embrace the young loving mother who is never far from an oven, or the secretary who is never far from the man in the gray flannel suit. She presented a series of accordion skirts, which were lean rather than full in silhouette. The skirt suit of a Hitchcock heroine was modernized with silver studs attached to its capelet. Other skirt suits fell to the knee in slit panels that revealed long stretches of leg as the models moved, and concealed when they stood still posing for the camera.
On Wednesday afternoon, the house of J. Mendel, known for its fur, presented a collection of lunch clothes and evening dresses that was reliant on animal skins. Mendel seems committed to the idea that women should spend sums of money equal to the mortgage on a good-size house in the pursuit of looking unostentatiously rich. Dresses and jackets made of mink were disguised to resemble the texture of velvet. Jackets that looked like Peruvian rugs came with discreet fur collars. The clothes were unquestionably beautiful, if seemingly out of reach even for the charmed socialites lining the front row.
Women of considerable means were hard to miss at the showing of Lela Rose's collection at the Inn at Irving Place. Ms. Rose is a pretty and well-connected Texan who served petits fours in advance of her show, which was apt given the mood of her clothes. Ms. Rose presented poofy layers of tulle. Even her wool plaids came in poofy layers. Her clothes are not so much for the socialite who spends a lot of time on Air France as they are for the one who spends lots of time at the Cotton Ball.
Matthew Williamson dresses London jet-setters like Jade Jagger, who delivered herself to the tents in Bryant Park for his show on Wednesday. The collection -- rolled-up jeans, flimsy chiffon dresses, airy bell-sleeve ethnic dresses -- confused, given that they were warm-weather clothes presented for fall and winter. On the other hand, balminess, for some, is always just a plane ticket away.
