Luring Minds With Hearts
February is a perfect month for celebrating the heart. But the activities at the Long Island Children's Museum have more to do with the heart as a vital organ than as the symbol of love and romance. Rather than honor Valentine's Day, they commemorate Black History Month.
That's because Dr. Daniel Hale Williams, a black physician in Chicago, is widely credited with performing the first successful open-heart surgery, in 1893. His patient, James Cornish, had been wounded in a knife fight and might easily have been denied medical care because he was black. Williams opened Cornish's chest and sewed a tear in the pericardium, the sac surrounding the heart. To everyone's amazement, Cornish survived.
Every Saturday this month the museum is saluting Williams's little-known achievement with ''The Heart of It All,'' workshops led by members of the Black and Latino Student Association at Stony Brook University Medical School. The programs let children play both pioneering doctors and voyaging red blood cells.
From noon to 4 p.m. youngsters can accompany medical students on walks through the heart and its major vessels, depicted on a huge floor map. Conveniently, visitors are equipped with their own sound effects, which they can hear on stethoscopes. ''The valves are like doors,'' Brett Smith, a medical student, said last Saturday. ''The first 'lub' in the heartbeat is the valve closing.''
Children who want more realism can look at heart tissue under microscopes from 3 to 4 p.m. And intrepid souls 8 and older can register for limited places at the star attraction: a 2 p.m. dissection of a human heart. A video monitor shows the action close up, and youngsters can follow along on a paper diagram and even inspect the heart at the end. Last Saturday's procedure elicited a lot of oohs and ahs, most in fascination rather than disgust. My own unfazed 9-year-old was disappointed not to see blood. For that, he learned, he would have to wait for medical school.
''The Heart of It All,'' Saturdays through Feb. 28 from noon to 4 p.m. at the Long Island Children's Museum, 11 Davis Avenue, off Charles Lindbergh Boulevard, Garden City, N.Y., (516) 224-5844. Free with admission: $8; 65+, $7.
Sesame Street Fever
Few places are more familiar to children than public television's Sesame Street. But onstage at Madison Square Garden, this old neighborhood is undergoing a few transformations. At times you could swear that it's Bourbon Street, Eight Mile in Detroit, Hollywood Boulevard or Studio 54 in the 1970's.
These changes all come from the tunes in ''Everyone Makes Music,'' the latest Sesame Street Live production. It celebrates both the simplest sounds (hands clapping, feet stomping) and the most artificially orchestrated ones (disco).
The story begins when Jenny, a new music teacher and neighbor, discovers that the truck with her musical instruments hasn't arrived. The Muppets decide to surprise her by improvising instruments. When Cookie Monster shakes a jar of cookies, he makes a beat for the Latin-flavored ''Crumba Rumba''; Big Bird's tweeting segues into a rousing ''Rockin' Robin,'' performed by birds in Day-Glo plumage.
That tune reveals a secondary purpose: to entertain parents. So while your little ones boogie in the aisles, you can go down a musical memory lane with stops at ''The Hustle,'' ''Dance to the Music'' and a song about the number 8 sung to ''Fame.''
One scene alone is worth the price of a ticket: Bert in a white disco suit as he moves to the Bee Gees' ''You Should Be Dancing.'' Unlike John Travolta, he hasn't aged a bit.
''Everyone Makes Music,'' at the Theater at Madison Square Garden. Today at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m.; tomorrow and Sunday at 10:30 a.m. and 2 and 5:30 p.m.; Monday at 10:30 a.m. and 2 p.m. Tickets: $15 to $52.50. Ticketmaster: (212) 307-7171.
The Name Game
If MTV were to produce a tale by the Brothers Grimm, the results might be something like Manhattan Children's Theater's ''Rumpelstiltskin.'' Here the king wears a silver trench coat and travels by skateboard, and the courtiers croon and sway like medieval incarnations of the Backstreet Boys. Rumpelstiltskin is said to live in a magic forest ''with the fairies and the gnomes -- and the Beatles and the Stones.''
But the central issues are still Grimm: Mary (Leah Sprecher) will lose her head if she doesn't live up to a boast by her father (Robert Anton) that she can spin straw into gold. (In a nod to urban children, these straws are the drinking variety.) And although the wily Rumpelstiltskin (Ellen Zolezzi) saves the day and ensures Mary's marriage to the king (Chris Alonzo), he still demands that she turn over her first-born child.
Mark Sarto, who adapted the fairy tale, is almost as versatile as Rumpelstiltskin himself, having written a funny script and a score that at times recalls early music as well as pop. Children can sing along during ''The Rump Song'' (Rumpelstiltskin's ballad) and add their names when the royal court tries to figure out what this pesky troll calls himself.
Directed by Laura Stevens, this ''Rumpelstiltskin'' delivers the usual comeuppance to its diminutive gangster but also rewards him with a role for which he may be especially qualified: royal godfather.
''Rumpelstiltskin,'' tomorrow and Sunday at noon and 2 p.m. at Manhattan Children's Theater, 380 Broadway, fourth floor, two blocks south of Canal Street, TriBeCa, (212) 352-3101. Tickets: $15; ages 2 to 16, $10.
Family Fare
