Alan Greenspan, the Federal Reserve chairman, said on Thursday that Congress should make President Bush's tax cuts permanent only if it made up for the lost revenue with cuts in spending or other tax increases.
Testifying before the Senate Banking Committee, Mr. Greenspan provided modest political support for one of Mr. Bush's top priorities but explicitly disagreed with the president's proposals on how to pay for it.
Permanently extending the tax cuts that Congress passed in 2001 and 2003 would increase projected deficits by $1.5 trillion over the next 10 years, according to the Congressional Budget Office.
Mr. Bush's budget proposal does not address that shortfall in detail, but it does call for Congress to adopt new spending rules that would restrict its ability to increase spending on discretionary domestic programs.
Mr. Greenspan, who expressed increased alarm this week about the prospect of large budget deficits for years to come, called for reinstating Congressional restraints that were in force during much of the 1990's and required lawmakers to offset new tax cuts and spending proposals.
''I am in favor, as I have indicated in the past, for continuing the tax cuts that are in dispute at this particular stage,'' he said. ''But I would argue strenuously that it should be taken out on the expenditure side.''
When asked whether he would apply the restrictions to new tax cuts as well as to new spending, the Fed chairman said he would. ''That's what they're there for, taxes and spending,'' he said.
Mr. Greenspan expressed similar opinions last year, when he gave tepid support to Mr. Bush's last round of tax-cutting proposals. This year he has escalated his criticism of the deficits, which are expected this year and for the foreseeable future.
A Republican whose views have enormous influence among lawmakers from both parties, the Fed chairman did not criticize Mr. Bush's fiscal policies directly and made it clear that he preferred to reduce deficits by spending less rather than taxing more.
But his proposals went much further than those of Mr. Bush, who has promised to reduce the budget deficit primarily by freezing or cutting most federal programs outside of defense and homeland security.
Mr. Greenspan, by contrast, urged lawmakers to examine cuts in mandatory entitlement programs like Social Security and Medicare. The entitlement programs are far more sensitive politically, and Mr. Bush has just enacted a law that will add prescription drug benefits to Medicare at a cost of $540 billion over 10 years.
Congress adopted what were known as ''pay-go'' rules in the early 1990's, under which new spending programs and new tax cuts had to be financed by either spending cuts or tax increases in other areas. Those rules expired in the last few years, and Congress has not renewed them.
Conservative Republicans as well as many Democrats, complaining about a budget deficit that is expected to exceed $500 billion this year, have begun calling for a return to budget restraints that would include taxes as well as spending.
On Thursday, a bipartisan group of senators sent Mr. Bush a letter pleading for a full reinstatement of the old rules.
''The government needs to restore and strengthen the federal budget process by, among other things, enacting statutory pay-as-you-go requirements for both spending and revenues,'' said the letter, which was signed by Senator Max Baucus, Democrat of Montana, as well as Senator John McCain, Republican of Arizona, and Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina.
A spokesman for the White House budget office, Chad Kolton, tried to put the best light on Mr. Greenspan's comments by noting that the administration shared some of the Fed chairman's views.
''The chairman said frequently in his testimony that restraining spending is the preferred method for reducing the deficit, and we agree wholeheartedly with that,'' Mr. Kolton said. ''He also said he agreed with discretionary spending caps, which are also part of the president's proposal.''
