Directed by Agust Gudmundsson  In Icelandic, with English subtitles  Not rated, 105 minutes
A pleasant comedy in the deadpan, gently self-mocking Scandinavian style represented by Lone Scherfig's ''Italian for Beginners'' (Danish) and Petter Naess's ''Elling'' (Norwegian), Agust Gudmundsson's film ''The Seagull's Laughter'' brings an Icelandic legend down to earth.
In the early 1950's a small fishing village on the outskirts of Reykjavik is thrown into turmoil by the return of Freya (Margret Vilhjalmsdottir), a prodigal daughter who left the village to marry an American serviceman during the war. She appears, husbandless and apparently at the end of her rope, on the doorstep of her grandfather, a bluff, hearty sea captain (Eyvindur Erlendsson) who leads his life on his ship and leaves his household to the management of the women in the family: the matronly Granny (Kristbjorg Kjeld), the mildly retarded Ninna (Gudlaug Elisabet Olafsdottir), the marriageable Dodo (Edda Bjorg Eyjolfsdottir) and the inevitable tart-tongued adolescent, Agga (Ugla Egilsdottir).
Freya, as the program notes helpfully explain, is the name of the goddess of love in Old Norse mythology, and with her glamorous wardrobe of American ball gowns, hourglass figure and waist-length chestnut brown hair, this Freya does seem to have emerged from another dimension. Entering into an immediate conspiracy with the other women of the house (though still a suspicious, threatening figure to the presexual Agga), Freya sets out to reconquer her home territory. She sets her sights on the town's most eligible bachelor, a member of the village's tiny professional class, the engineer Bjorn Theodor (Heino Ferch).
As in many Scandinavian comedies, the situation settles into a low-key battle of the sexes, with the traditionally passive local women led into a new sense of themselves and their power by the indomitable Freya, and the men reduced to hapless, easily manipulated infants. (When one of the men refuses to be conquered, the women simply kill him, a strategy the film seems to endorse.)
As Freya, Ms. Vilhjalmsdottir is a lively, radiant presence whose marquee smile alone does a lot to warm up the icy hearts of the villagers. The film's main dynamic passes between Freya and her initially suspicious young friend, Agga, who at first views Freya's manipulativeness with scorn but, as she herself grows up over the course of the action, eventually enrolls herself as Freya's apprentice and enabler.
Adapting his film, which opens today in New York, from a popular novel by Kristin Marja Baldursdottir, Mr. Gudmundsson has created a sleek, light and entertaining work, with a few contrasting pockets of darkness and mystery. The treeless Icelandic landscape is used to good effect when Freya goes capering among the volcanic rocks -- the same primeval landscape that produced the mythic Freya, and to which the Freya of this film seems compelled to return.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
