ITS breathtaking setting on the banks of the Hudson River has long drawn both day-trippers and potential homeowners to Cold Spring, and the area is an outdoor enthusiast's dream, with the Appalachian Trail just seven miles away.
But in recent years, Cold Spring, in Putnam County, seems to have become better known as a place to buy a home if you're looking for a weekend getaway that combines rural charm with urban sophistication. Typical of the recent converts are Becky and Rick Rudolph, who have an apartment in Manhattan and are renting a three-bedroom house until they buy a home. The Rudolphs, who are in the wholesale clothing business, set up in Cold Spring in April after renting a home across the river in Cornwall-on-Hudson but finding themselves going to Cold Spring to dine out or to board a direct train to Grand Central Terminal. ''One day we said, 'This is nuts. What are we doing?' '' Ms. Rudolph said. ''Cold Spring isn't the city, and it's not the suburbs. The blend is wonderful. It's a nice melting pot of people and a quaint village.''
The village flourished in 1818 after the opening of the West Point Foundry, which made military equipment, including the Parrott gun, a cannon that helped the Union win the Civil War. Picturesque Main Street is now laden with specialty shops and antiques stores, and the park on the east bank of the Hudson, with its old-fashioned bandstand and benches, is an ideal place for taking in panoramas of West Point and Storm King Mountain across the river.
Elegant 19th-century houses grace a nearby avenue. One of them, a 5,000-square-foot Second Empire house that is under contract was listed at $995,000, the village's highest residential list price.
But, Cold Spring, a village in the town of Philipstown, isn't a stodgy, picture-perfect spot. Storefronts are whimsical and even a memorial on Main Street to a local teenager who was killed in an auto accident several years ago takes the unconventional form of ''Godzilla on the Hudson,'' a bright purple shrine that contains the late teenager's beloved model of Godzilla.
''We're a tightknit community where people know each other and get involved with each other, but the village is quirky enough to give it an interesting feel,'' said Jonathan Kruk, a former resident of New York City and president of the Cold Spring-Garrison Chamber of Commerce. His career as a professional storyteller says something about the area. ''It's a Norman Rockwell meets David Byrne kind of thing,'' he said of the village.
The Scene
When weekend villagers move here, they tend to shed their city ways, often stopping by Hudson Valley Outfitters to buy hiking boots, learn to kayak or stock up on trail maps.
Before long, they're at Cathryn's Tuscan Grill, a contemporary Northern Italian restaurant, where during a recent lunar eclipse diners left their tables to view the night sky. Or, weekenders gather at Riverview, a contemporary Mediterranean restaurant. ''I love going there,'' said Glenn Andersen, a weekender who is a trust officer at J. P. Morgan Chase. ''I often know half the people there, and the owner treats everyone like long lost friends.'' In 1998, Mr. Andersen bought a three-story 1830's Federal-style home a block from the river for $275,000.
The village is also home to full-time residents, many who moved from New York City but still commute to work there, as well as so-called Springers, people born and raised in Cold Spring. On weekends, if there aren't too many tourists, they, too, frequent the village's antiques shops, galleries, specialty shops and increasingly sophisticated restaurants. They also gather at cultural events like concerts at the riverfront bandstand and, in summer, at the Hudson Valley Shakespeare Festival at the nearby Boscobel Restoration, a Hudson River mansion and museum. Organizations like the Garrison Art Center and the Philipstown Depot Theater welcome weekender volunteers.
Although Cold Spring doesn't have a Starbucks or even parking meters, it does have some urban touches, including Byte, a new cybercafe that also serves natural foods.
Pros
Cold Spring's natural beauty is its greatest draw. Weekenders can launch their kayaks right from Foundry Dock Park across from the railroad parking area or walk to scenic trails offering spectacular views of the river and Hudson Highlands State Park.
''It was important for us to be close to the Hudson River,'' said Bob Bickford, a retired lawyer, who with wife, Wendy, and their 9-year-old twin boys, spends most weekdays at his co-op in Manhattan but also owns a three-bedroom house on 27 acres near the Cold Spring village. He is on the boards of two local organizations and is able to attend weeknight meetings thanks to the easy commute from Manhattan. ''We're here for the river, the hills and the railroad,'' he said.
Easy access to the city was also a deciding factor for Mr. Andersen, who considered Tarrytown in Westchester County, N.Y., which was more expensive, and Piermont in Rockland County, N.Y., which involved a more complicated train commute.
It's not necessary to have a car in Cold Spring because there is so much within walking distance. And, while some longtime residents wish the city people would go elsewhere, weekenders and Springers get along well for the most part, villagers say, as long as newcomers don't try to turn a quick profit selling their homes or try to add five-car garages to quaint houses.
Cons
While Cold Spring's chumminess may be charming to some, others say it's a nuisance, and just about the time the weekenders arrive, so do the tourists, creating traffic jams and parking shortages.
As a remedy, some weekenders have done as Lauri Cohen and Manuel Molina, Manhattan lawyers who live in Brooklyn during the week, have. A year ago, they bought a contemporary house on 3.8 acres just outside the village and, though they don't have a car, they can hike into the village.
As more people discover the village, residents say they must be vigilant about protecting its character. The most potentially contentious issue in the village now is a plan to build 11 condominium units at an abandoned lumberyard on the river's edge.
Perhaps the biggest drawback, though, is that, while Cold Spring has a respectable number of restaurants and shops for a village its size, weekenders are used to having more. ''I need my sushi, and there's no place where I can get it,'' said Sheila Diente, an acupuncturist who has an apartment in Manhattan and one above an antiques shop on Main Street in Cold Spring that rents for $900 a month. ''But it's coming.''
The Real Estate Market
About 75 percent of the village is in a historic district, and homeowners who want to make exterior changes must seek approval from the Historic District Review Board. Meanwhile, new construction is scarce.
Some Springers grumble that their children are being priced out of the market. Property values have about doubled in the last four years, said Melissa Carlton, an associate broker with Houlihan Lawrence, and Mr. Andersen, the weekender who paid $275,000 for his house about six years ago, has spent another $200,000 on renovations; he estimated that it was now worth about $800,000.
A typical two-bedroom, one-and-a-half bathroom home in the village sells for about $325,000, while a three-bedroom, two-bathroom house usually costs about $450,000, Ms. Carlton said. A two-bedroom, one-and-a-half-bathroom condominium sells for about $200,000, she added, and two-bedroom, one-bathroom apartments usually rent for $1,200 to $1,500. City residents looking for huge second homes on expansive properties aren't likely to find them in Cold Spring; such weekenders usually buy outside the village or in Garrison. With inventories low, realty agents often tell weekenders who long for the camaraderie of the village to do an un-New York City thing: ''We tell them to be patient,'' Ms. Carlton said.
LAY OF THE LAND  So Close, Yet Far From City Life
POPULATION -- 1,983.  SIZE -- 0.6 square mile.  MEDIAN HOUSE PRICE -- $430,000.  RECENT SALES -- A three-bedroom house built in 1840 with a covered porch, country garden with a gazebo and a stone garage, sold for $440,000 after six months on the market; it sold for $239,000 in 1996. An 1857 house with a pool sold for $625,000 after 10 months on the market. It is 2,470 square feet and sold for $435,000 four years ago. An updated 1,200-square-foot home, which sold for $155,000 in 1996, sold for $349,000 after 69 days on the market.  DISTANCE FROM NEW YORK -- 55 miles.  TRAVEL TIME -- About 75 minutes from Manhattan by car or train.  GETTING THERE -- From Manhattan, take the George Washington Bridge to the Palisades Interstate Parkway. After traveling north about 35 miles, look for signs to the Bear Mountain Bridge; immediately after going over the bridge, turn left on Route 9D toward Cold Spring. Metro-North Hudson Line trains from Grand Central Terminal run about every hour.  WHILE YOU'RE LOOKING -- The 12-room Hudson House River Inn (2 Main Street, 845-265-9355) has a popular restaurant and spectacular views of the river and Storm King Mountain. Weekend rates are $155 to $225. The Pig Hill Inn (73 Main Street, 845-265-9247) is a charming three-story, nine-room inn where almost everything inside is for sale. The inn has no TV's or telephones in the rooms, though there is a well-stocked library. Rates are $150 to $220 on weekends.
HAVENS
