Drew Henson worked out for 20 National Football League teams in Houston yesterday in a bid to demonstrate that he can pick up where he left off several years ago as a young quarterback with considerable potential.
Henson, the former Michigan quarterback who was a full-time minor leaguer with the Yankees in recent years and last called signals at the line of scrimmage in the 2001 Citrus Bowl, recently decided to switch back to football. In anticipation that he might do so, the Houston Texans grabbed his rights in the sixth round of last year's N.F.L. draft.
Because the Texans have invested their future in quarterback David Carr, their goal was to trade Henson's rights and gain a higher pick in a future draft if Henson ever decided to leap to the N.F.L. Now Henson has decided to do that. But no trade can be made until on or after March 3, when the league's trading period opens.
Henson could yield the Texans an enviable return, with Houston even possibly obtaining a first-round pick in the draft on April 24 and 25, or in a future draft. If Henson remains unsigned 24 hours before the draft, either with Houston or a team it trades him to, he would become available to be drafted again.
The last game film on Henson came during Michigan's 2000 season, when he threw for 2,146 yards, 18 touchdowns and 4 interceptions while playing as the part-time starter. The quarterback Henson was challenging for playing time was Tom Brady, who has now won two Super Bowls with the New England Patriots.
Yesterday, Henson had the stage to himself. ''The workout was excellent,'' said a personnel chief from an American Football Conference team who requested anonymity for competitive reasons.
The personnel director, who sent a scout to attend Henson's performance in the Texans' indoor practice facility near Reliant Stadium, said his scout provided him with the following assessment: ''He came in at 6-4, 235 pounds and that's great size. He showed very good accuracy, good zip on the ball, and a nice touch. If you want to nitpick, he was a little rusty on his deep-ball accuracy. But he moves well and rolls out well. He didn't do any of the measurables, the broad jump or 40-yard dash or things like that. He carried himself well. He answered any real questions or doubts about him on if he is a player.''
Henson passed 75 times to four receivers in the workout that was attended by, among others, Packers Coach Mike Sherman and Bills Coach Mike Mularkey. The Bills were also represented by their general manager, Tom Donahoe, and their new quarterbacks coach, Sam Wyche. Ernie Accorsi, the Giants' general manager, was present, as was Dolphins General Manager Rick Spielman. The Jets were represented by a scout.
''I felt good,'' The Associated Press quoted Henson as saying after the workout. ''I threw as good as I could have hoped today.''
Henson signed a $17 million, six-year deal with the Yankees in 2001 but struggled on the final rung of the team's minor league ladder: Class AAA Columbus. In 501 games over six seasons, he hit .248 and had 67 home runs, 274 runs batted in, 556 strikeouts and 136 walks. He settled with the Yankees by giving up $12 million over the final three years of the contract to return to football.
Another A.F.C. personnel chief, requesting anonymity and noting that his team did not attend yesterday's workout, said about Henson:
''I see Henson as a very good athlete with overall good arm strength. There is not any one thing he's great at, but a lot of things he's good to very good. I don't know what his decision-making mind is like. He has good tools. But so much with a quarterback is what's between the ears.''
Soon, Henson will get to a chance to address that issue, along with everything else that is demanded of an N.F.L. quarterback.
PRO FOOTBALL  Correction:  February 16, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, a sports article on Friday about Drew Henson's workout for National Football League teams misidentified the player with whom he split time at quarterback in his final season at the University of Michigan. It was John Navarre, not Tom Brady.
