Newark's cheerleader-in-chief, Mayor Sharpe James, donned skates and took to the ice at a recreation center here Thursday to rally support for the city's plan to build an arena for the New Jersey Devils.
In what was billed as a ''pep rally,'' Mayor James put on hockey gear with the East Side High School hockey team and joined the owners of the Devils, some of the team's stars and local corporate and political leaders in welcoming the team to the city.
No mention was made of comments by Gov. James E. McGreevey this week supporting the continued operation of the Meadowland's Continental Arena, which some economic studies have indicated would pose crippling competition for the proposed $300 million, 18,000-seat arena in Newark. Nor did Mayor James or the Devils' officials release financial details of the proposal, insisting that those had yet to be worked out.
Instead an ebullient Mayor James and a more diffident Lou Lamoriello, the Devils' president and general manager, mugged like new in-laws at a wedding. It was a ceremony in the Ironbound Recreation Center's ice rink, with the singing of the national anthem, balloons and a Zamboni. ''While we will cheer you affectionately as the Devils,'' said Mayor James, wearing skates and a jersey with ''Newark '07'' on the back, ''we will always see you as angels of hope.'' More than 250 people gathered to cheer the mayor and the speakers who portrayed a revived downtown Newark as the home of hockey's Stanley Cup champions.
''Our moving here will give the state the opportunity to get out of a business they should never have been in the first place,'' said Mr. Lamoriello, referring to the operation of the Continental Arena by the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
Mayor James said that for the Devils to play here in 2007, the team and the city would have to wrap up their deal in time for construction to start before the end of the year.
About $200 million of city revenue from the leasing of Newark Liberty Airport and about $100 million from the Devils would pay for the arena.
