Two lesbians who have been living together for more than 50 years were the first to marry at city hall Thursday under a new city directive, leading the way for a host of other same-sex marriages and setting the stage for a heated debate over the legality of the ceremony.
California family law states that ''only marriage between a man and a woman is valid or recognized in California.'' Nonetheless, the San Francisco county clerk issued the women, Phyllis Lyon, 79, and Del Martin, 83, an official marriage certificate and said the act was legal. They were married by the county assessor.
By late Thursday afternoon, at least 50 other gay couples had been married and others, some dressed in wedding gowns and dark suits, were waiting their turn.
''The marriages will be recognized in San Francisco, but I can't say how they will be viewed anywhere else,'' said the county clerk, Nancy Alfaro.
Mayor Gavin Newsom had urged the county clerk's office this week to begin issuing the marriage certificates, asserting that the state Constitution prohibits discrimination in such matters.
The clerk had not been expected to act on the request until next week, but the schedule was moved forward when the Campaign for California Families, a group that opposes gay marriage, announced it would file a lawsuit against the city and county on Friday.
Ms. Lyon said ''it was exciting'' to get married, even though the couple had no rings, had not written vows and just found out Wednesday night that the ceremony could take place.
Although Ms. Lyon, who met Ms. Martin in 1953, said she opposed marriage for straight and gay couples during the women's movement, she said it had become an increasingly important political issue for gay men and lesbians in the last two years.
''It's of crucial importance for the movement,'' Ms. Lyon said. ''We are fairly well united behind this because it's being fought against so hard by the other side. If we let them beat us down on this one, it will be a long time before we make other advances.''
Mathew D. Staver, president and general counsel of Liberty Counsel, the lawyers for the group that plans to sue, said the marriage certificates issued Thursday were ''not worth the paper they are written on.''
He added that Mr. Newsom was ''giving the impression that mayors are above the law.''
Hallye Jordan, a spokeswoman for the California attorney general, Bill Lockyer, said Mr. Lockyer had not been asked to render an opinion on the matter, but that he was investigating the constitutional issues surrounding gay marriage.
Asked if the marriage certificates issued in San Francisco were legal, Ms. Jordan said, ''We don't know.''
Kate Kendell, executive director of the National Center for Lesbian Rights, served as a witness to the Lyon-Martin marriage.
Ms. Kendell acknowledged that under California law marriage must be between people of opposite sex, but she said the requirement was unconstitutional.
''It is in the highest order of civic responsibility when you see a law that does not treat your citizens equally,'' Ms. Kendell said, ''to make a stand.''
