Lining Up At Public Theater
Directors and producers are feverishly polishing their résumés in hopes of replacing George C. Wolfe, who announced on Wednesday that he would step down next season as producer of the Public Theater. While it's too early to tell with any certainty who has the inside track, speculation about the job -- arguably the most important (and difficult) in the nonprofit theater world -- has become the hottest guessing game in town.
The names frequently mentioned fall into roughly two categories: A-list directors who have worked at the Public, like Michael Greif (''Rent'') and Joe Mantello (''Take Me Out''), and veteran artistic directors, like Jim Nicola of the New York Theater Workshop, Nicholas Martin of the Huntington Theater in Boston, or Doug Hughes, formerly of Long Wharf Theater in New Haven.
Despite the wealth of candidates, there is currently no obvious choice. But the theater-world consensus seems to be that the leader of the Public must be able to thrive in dramatically different worlds -- Broadway and Off, rehearsal rooms and fund-raisers. Mr. Wolfe's successor (who, most say, must be American) should also be something of a community leader, as well as a programmer with a culturally broad and politically active sensibility.
Not only is this a tall order, but it's also unlikely that the next producer will arrive with the same kind of cachet Mr. Wolfe had. He started at the Public in 1993, fresh from his success in directing ''Jelly's Last Jam'' on Broadway, and when both parts of his ''Angels in America'' opened later that year, his reputation as one of New York's major creative forces was cemented.
The board has put together a search committee led by its chairman, Kenneth B. Lerer, and Gail Papp, the widow of the Public's founder, Joseph Papp. A search firm should be chosen next month.
A Critic Out in the Cold
As bad reviews go, it seemed fairly gentle. So why did Jeremy McCarter's pan of ''The Importance of Being Earnest,'' which he wrote over the summer for The New York Sun, cause the Aquila Theater Company's producing artistic director, Peter Meineck, to bar him from the company's new production of ''Agamemnon,'' which opened last night? (Review, Page 3.)
Mr. Meineck accuses Mr. McCarter of being motivated by ''personal vindictiveness'' and says Mr. McCarter used ''privileged information'' from friends in the company. He wouldn't be more specific on either point.
Mr. McCarter says he has had an amicable relationship with Mr. Meineck but no relationship with anyone in the acting company. ''My criticism was solely based on the merit of the performance I saw,'' he said by telephone on Wednesday. ''I have zero privileged information about the show. I have no idea what he's talking about.''
Both parties agree on what happened Tuesday evening: after being refused press tickets for the production, Mr. McCarter went to the John Jay Theater to pay out of pocket but was stopped at the door. Mr. McCarter said that Mr. Meineck told him that he was not welcome and that if other producers would only follow suit, he'd be out of a job.
Mr. McCarter says that he doesn't mind artists' firing back at critics, but that barring him sets a bad precedent. ''Producers don't pick the critics, editors pick the critics,'' Mr. McCarter said. ''I'm very troubled by the potential ramifications.''
Robert Messenger, the Sun's deputy managing editor, said he planned to send Mr. McCarter again later in the run. Mr. Meineck responded that he would let Mr. McCarter in only if he received assurances that there would be no vindictiveness. ''Then,'' he said, ''I'd be happy to have him.''
Spanish Moss Time
Well, I declare: those charming belles from Robert Harling's ''Steel Magnolias'' are bringing their beauty products and Southern manners to Broadway. The revival, directed by Jason Moore (''Avenue Q''), is aiming for an opening this fall. Agents representing drawling actresses should start sending inquiries soon.
The producers Roy Gabay and Robyn Goodman have already made a list of 50 potential stars for the six main female parts. ''There's no exercise more fun than casting 'Steel Magnolias,' '' said Mr. Gabay, the lead producer. The only group not considered was the cast of the 1989 film version, which included Julia Roberts, Dolly Parton and Daryl Hannah. ''We want to introduce the play to an audience who only knows it from the movie,'' Mr. Gabay said. ''Steel Magnolias'' had its premiere in 1987 at the WPA Theater and transferred to the Lucille Lortel.
Homesick for Broadway
Two days after the Grammy Awards, in which she was a nominee for best new artist and best female R &amp; B performance, the Tony winner Heather Headley sounded wistful about the Broadway stage. ''I miss it,'' she said in a telephone call from Los Angeles. ''My blood is boiling to get back there.'' Since her recording career currently fills her schedule, the next best thing to a new musical will have to be ''Home,'' a one-night-only concert on May 24 in which she will sing her favorite songs, including some from her recent album ''This Is Who I Am'' and several of her hits from ''Aida'' and ''The Lion King.''
Ms. Headley, who says she receives offers to star in Broadway shows every few months, is concentrating on her second album, produced by Clive Davis. Despite the two Grammy nominations, her first album didn't exactly catapult her to superstar status in the music industry. The next could be pivotal.
Asked about the kind of career she would want, Ms. Headley cited Whitney Houston, Alicia Keys and even Beyoncé. ''That doesn't mean I'll be shaking it,'' she added quickly.
Moving Quickly
Sutton Foster doesn't waste any time. Less than a week before she leaves the cast of ''Thoroughly Modern Millie'' (Susan Egan replaces her on Monday), she has signed on for the role of Jo March in the new musical version of Louisa May Alcott's ''Little Women.'' A Broadway opening is scheduled for late 2004.
On Stage and Off
