Unilever, the British-Dutch conglomerate that makes consumer products from Dove soap to Hellman's mayonnaise, lowered its forecasts for sales growth as it presented year-end results Thursday. The company also said that its co-chairman, Niall FitzGerald, would step down in September.
Unilever is in the last year of a five-year program that Mr. FitzGerald spearheaded to raise profit margins and sales by culling noncore products. Over all, it has been a success, though Unilever disappointed investors twice last year by missing sales forecasts. Unilever's low-fat, carbohydrate-heavy Slim-Fast products contributed to the slowdown, as they were hard hit by the popularity of the Atkins diet. Its stock has bounced between $52.27 and $70.05 on the New York Stock Exchange over the last 12 months.
Unilever said on Thursday that it expected 3 to 5 percent sales growth a year in the future, down from the 6 percent the company forecast in 2000. The revision ''shows a bit more realism,'' said Richard Withagen, an analyst with Delta Lloyd Securities.
Unilever's sales have generally lagged those of its competitors Nestlé and Danone, though its profit margins are higher.
Analysts also said the new approach could reduce stock price volatility in 2004. ''They've been quite clever in saying ''We're not going to give you a target, we're going to give you a range,''' said Andrew Saunders, an analyst with Numis Securities. ''It's a convenient way of widening the goal posts.''
Unilever, which also owns the Lipton tea, Knorr soup and Pond's cream brands, reported a fourth-quarter net profit of 811 million euros, which it said was the equivalent of $763 million, based on what it called a ''constant rate of exchange,'' which it described as the average daily exchange rate for the year 2002.
At the current exchange rate, the fourth-quarter net profit would equal $1 billion. Unilever said that was nearly double that of a year ago, though its sales in the quarter dropped 4 percent to 11.9 billion euros. For the year, net profits were up 38 percent, to 2.94 billion euros. The company has been focusing on new products based on core brands, like a Dove shampoo and deodorant that expand on the bar soap.
Net debt fell to 12.6 billion euros at the end of 2003 from 16.97 billion euros in 2002. Unilever said that when debt reached 10 billion euros it might return some cash to investors, but did not specify how.
Unilever had other upbeat news for shareholders, who pushed the stock up on Thursday despite the lower growth forecasts. From 2005 to 2010, Unilever said that it hoped to increase the return on invested capital to 17 percent, up from 12.5 percent in 2003.
The company's stock closed up 2.91 percent on the London exchange, to 548.50 pence.
Patrick Cescau, who heads the company's flagship foods division, will succeed Mr. FitzGerald. His previous experience as the chief financial officer of Unilever, combined with training in his current job, make him a strong candidate for chairman, analysts said.
Mr. FitzGerald, 58, has been at Unilever for 37 years, and shares the post of chairman with Anthony Burgmans. Mr. FitzGerald said in a statement that his departure was in the best interests of the company; he did not elaborate on his plans.
''By the end of this year, we will have completed the path-to-growth program and, in the interests of an orderly succession, Patrick should be in place in good time to carry our strategy to the next stage,'' Mr. FitzGerald said.
Mr. FitzGerald's unexpected departure ''is likely to fuel persistent speculation that he is a favorite to be appointed as the next chairman of the news and information company Reuters Group,'' according to a Reuters story about Unilever's announcement.
Mr. FitzGerald joined the board of Reuters, the global news agency, in October of 2000, as its shares were sinking. Mr. FitzGerald was part of a move to diversify the Reuters board.
