Rattlestick Playwrights Theater  224 Waverly Place, West Village  Through Feb. 29
Adam Bock's ''Five Flights'' may not be the most coherent play ever written, but hilariously daft performances by the six-member cast make you not care. Rattlestick's production features bird worship, half-naked hockey players and one of the longest man-on-man kisses you're likely to see. So what if it leaves you more flummoxed than fulfilled?
Mr. Bock isn't much interested in conventional theater. Instead he mixes effervescent dialogue with incongruous structure until your head is spinning. ''Five Flights'' begins with an intriguing premise: two brothers and a sister have to figure out what to do with an elaborate aviary their newly deceased father had constructed in honor of his wife, who had died years before. ''He built it to house the soul of my mother,'' one son, Ed (Jason Butler Harner), explains as the play begins. ''All of this was just asking her to stay.''
From there, ''Five Flights'' ricochets from sibling to sibling, as well as occasionally going backward in time. Ed falls for a hockey player (Matthew Montelongo), while his sister, Adele (Lisa Steindler), becomes enamored of a woman named Olivia (Alice Ripley) who wants to start a church on the site of the aviary (''the Church of the Fifth Day,'' after the day in the biblical creation story on which God created birds). The third sibling is never seen, but his strangely rigid and detail-obsessed wife, Jane (Joanna P. Adler), tells you everything you need to know about him. The sanest person in the sextet is another heterosexual hockey player (Kevin Karrick), but before it's over he, too, is sliding, seeming to fall under the spell of Olivia's bird religion.
Kent Nicholson, the director, does a nice job of keeping all the actors on the same screwball plateau, and their comic timing is impeccable. Ms. Ripley is simply great, with Mr. Harner not far behind.
Themes of commitment and faith and loss float around Mr. Bock's play, never quite landing -- as elusive as a quick bird, probably deliberately so.
NEIL GENZLINGER
THEATER IN REVIEW
