Words are wonderfully adaptable. They can be spoken, sung, written, printed, painted and electronically illuminated. And, as ''Talking Quilts'' at the American Folk Art Museum demonstrates, they can be worked into the fabric of the handmade quilt.
Quilts have been valued by modern audiences mainly for their visual qualities: bold compositions, rich colors and ingenious patterns. Though traditionally made by people without high-art aspirations, quilts by Amish artisans, say, or the women of Gee's Bend, Ala., have often come uncannily close to Modernist abstraction in painting and graphic design.
The best examples in ''Talking Quilts'' reveal an inventive play with the visual aspects of letters, words and sentences that also has a distinctly modern appeal. This new exhibition, organized by the museum's senior curator, Stacy C. Hollander, presents about 20 quilts, dating from 1843 to 1998.
A quilt made about 1930 by Lena Moore of Canton, Miss., has a conceptual ingenuity and an all-over rhythm that any professional graphic designer would envy. Its lively red letters on an ivory ground spell out the 23rd Psalm from top to bottom and side to side, the lines of text divided by yellow rules as if the whole were a giant sheet of paper.
Equally compelling is a quilt from the mid-1870's by Cornelia Catharine Vosburgh of Red Hook, N.Y., whose large red letters are pieced together from small squares of calico on a white ground. The religious text looks nearly illegibly pixilated, creating a hypnotic tension between the visual and the verbal.
To read such objects only formally, of course, would be to miss a great deal. Quilts, traditionally made exclusively by women, practically and symbolically integrate multiple dimensions: the personal, the domestic, the religious, the social and even the political.
By working religious messages into a quilt, for example, a homemaker could feel that she was providing comfort and protection not only for the bodies of loved ones but for their souls as well.
Ms. Hollander speculates that Moore's impulse to fill the rectangle of her quilt from edge to edge with the text of the 23rd Psalm may have been motivated as much by a desire to afford complete spiritual shelter for its user as by her extraordinary aesthetic instinct.
A quilt made by Lavinia Rose of Cortlandville, N.Y., in the 1860's is an unintentionally amusing example of such layered meanings. A gift to newlyweds named Daniel and Amarilla, the quilt has blocky letters that read: ''The Bible chart keep in full view/'Twill lead you safe the journey through. Love to you and yours, Mother.'' It may give you pause to think of the young husband and wife embarking on their conjugal life under this gift.
For some quilt makers, the process itself was metaphorical. A quilt made by an unidentified artist around 1880 has letters made from many different fabrics, arranged in horizontal rows. The background, too, is of small, variously patterned patches, so that it is hard to decipher the text.
With some effort, however, you discern that it begins, ''Gather up the fragments, let not things be lost'' (John 6:12). The museum's label points out that this line has been found in other quilts, indicating an idea that quilt makers shared: that the process of making a whole out of many parts had higher meaning.
It is tempting to interpret further: might the impulse to camouflage the text have its own meaning, too? Perhaps that you must learn to read not only with ordinary eyes but with spiritual eyes as well?
Camouflaged text is used for a very different purpose in ''The Secession Quilt,'' sewn in 1860 by a South Carolinian, Jemima Ann Cook. Made entirely of white fabric, the quilt has stitching that faintly outlines an American eagle and a goddess cradling a bundle of wheat in the midst of much ornate, neo-Classical-style patterning.
What you would not know, without reading the museum label, is that names of prominent leaders of the Confederate States of America, including the artist's own husband, a general in the Confederacy's Coast Artillery, are stitched in throughout but are now mostly unreadable. We learn, too, that the quilt was used to wrap a box of family valuables buried in anticipation of advancing Union soldiers.
The historic resonance of ''The Secession Quilt'' is heightened by its proximity to a quilt created more than 100 years later by Jessie B. Telfair of Parrott, Ga. In Telfair's quilt, big block letters, one in each square, spell freedom over and over. The museum label explains that Telfair was inspired to make this quilt -- significantly, in red, white and blue -- after she lost her job when she tried to register to vote. Knowing this, you read the repetition of the word as a civil rights chant of protest and self-empowerment.
Between the Southern gentility of ''The Secession Quilt'' and the fierce vernacular populism of ''Freedom Quilt,'' a breathtaking panorama of American history opens.
''Talking Quilts'' remains at the American Folk Art Museum, 45 West 53rd Street, Manhattan, (212) 265-1040, through Aug. 1.
DESIGN REVIEW
