With its rich mix of prestige and lucre, the proposed Comcast-Disney deal has attracted an all-star lineup of Wall Street's most famous dealmakers.
The $50 million or more in possible fees has been enough to lure Felix G. Rohatyn and Steven Rattner, who during their time at Lazard Frères in the 1990's, put their imprint on some of the decade's flashiest media deals before parting ways as their soaring ambitions clashed.
Mr. Rohatyn, 75, left Lazard in 1997 after close to 50 years at the firm to become the ambassador to France and has recently gotten back into the business of whispering his counsel into the ears of a new generation of chief executives.
Mr. Rattner, 51, left Lazard in 2000, starting an investment firm, the Quadrangle Group, to break free of the firm and its associations with Mr. Rohatyn, the deal-making icon who gave him the stage to become a star.
Bringing the two men together is Brian L. Roberts, the chief executive of Comcast and the mastermind of the Disney takeover attempt.
Bankers involved in the deal say that Mr. Rattner has been a central presence in the meetings.
Mr. Rohatyn has been less visible, these bankers say, offering his counsel to Mr. Roberts privately.
''I'm a small card, just an adviser,'' Mr. Rohatyn said with a self-deprecating laugh. ''I'm just delighted to be in a situation where Steve and I can work together again.''
When Comcast acquired AT&amp;T's cable operations, Mr. Rattner provided advice, and Mr. Rohatyn was on the Comcast board, which he recently left.
Each man has a long history with the Roberts family.
Mr. Rohatyn has known Ralph J. Roberts, Comcast's co-founder and Brian's father, for more than 30 years; Mr. Rattner has been a personal friend and an adviser to the younger Mr. Roberts for nearly 20 years.
In the mid-1980's, both Roberts worked with Mr. Rattner, then an up-and-coming media banker at Morgan Stanley on several important cable deals that laid the foundation for Comcast to become the world's largest cable company.
When Mr. Rattner moved to Lazard in 1989, the Roberts moved with him and the banking relationship continued to flourish.
The younger Mr. Roberts was an initial investor in one of the funds that Mr. Rattner manages at Quadrangle, though he has since sold his stake to avoid any potential conflict.
Taking the lead with Mr. Rattner is Paul J. Taubman, of the co-head of mergers and acquisitions at Morgan Stanley, who worked for Mr. Rattner in the 1980's, and Robert Kindler, the global head of mergers and acquisitions at J.P. Morgan.
Advising Disney are Alan D. Schwartz of Bear Stearns who has counseled Disney for years and Gene T. Sykes of Goldman Sachs, a longtime adviser to C. Michael Armstrong, the former AT&amp;T chief executive who is now chairman of Comcast.
In many ways the deal -- an unsolicited attempt by Comcast to merge its cable business with Disney's content -- harks back to 1980's, an era of hostile takeovers and rip-roaring corporate egos.
It has been 10 years since Mr. Rohatyn and Mr. Rattner worked on their last high-profile media deal -- Viacom's $10 billion takeover of Paramount.
In that deal, a contentious battle that involved Sumner Redstone, then the chairman of Viacom; Barry Diller, chairman of QVC, the home shopping channel; and Marvin Davis, the chairman of Paramount, Mr. Rohatyn played a leading role in crafting the agreement, supported by Mr. Rattner.
''I learned a lot from Felix during my eight years with him,'' Mr. Rattner said, ''and I couldn't be happier that Brian asked him to be part of the team.''
Mr. Rohatyn, who runs a boutique firm called Rohatyn Associates out of an apartment on Park Avenue, is the first to admit that his role in the Comcast-Disney deal is different. Mr. Rohatyn salutes his former protégé for his heavy lifting on the deal.
Eight years ago, while the two men were still at Lazard, there was a moment when Mr. Rohatyn sang a different tune.
In a New York magazine article, he had some bitter words for Mr. Rattner. He said that Mr. Rattner had become too enamored of himself as a deal maker and a man about town. In the article, Mr. Rohatyn referred to Mr. Rattner as ''monomaniacal'' and a ''social climber,'' obsessed with securing a post in the Clinton administration.
''It was not my finest moment,'' Mr. Rohatyn said. ''But since then, Steve has offered me office space, and we have had a number of lunches together.''
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: THE BANKERS
