A privacy dispute with airlines has derailed the government's effort to modernize the system used to pick out suspicious passengers at airports, and officials of the Department of Homeland Security said Thursday that they would not say when it would be running.
Congressional auditors reported Thursday that the plan faces unanswered questions about preventing abuse of the data, guarding privacy and coping with inaccuracies.
The report, by the General Accounting Office, was issued as British Airways acknowledged that it had canceled a London-to-Washington flight for the fifth time this year, because of intelligence information about possible terrorist threats. It also canceled a flight from London to Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
Responding to the report on the delay, officials of the Department of Homeland Security said that the auditors were largely correct, and that they had been stymied in testing the system because the airlines were afraid to volunteer sample data on passengers for fear of offending their customers. But the officials said parts of the program could be in place by the end of the year.
''They are right to point out there are a number of unanswered questions,'' said Nuala O'Connor Kelly, the department's chief privacy officer. ''But that is not to say that they are unanswerable questions.''
The government has already issued two sets of draft rules, and will issue a third set, officials said. The changes included cutting the length of time that the government would retain the records, to a few days after the last flight of an itinerary is completed; the first proposal was up to 50 years.
But privacy advocates, including the American Civil Liberties Union, said the report was a sign that the concept was fatally flawed.
The system determines who will be pulled aside for ''secondary screening'' at airport checkpoints. The program now in use, the Computer-Assisted Passenger Prescreening System, was developed in the late 1990's by Northwest Airlines at the behest of the Federal Aviation Administration, which was then in charge of aviation security. The system is operated by the airlines based on their computer records about passengers, and some computers are so old that they cannot store all the letters in a passenger's name.
The replacement system, known as CAPPS II, was mandated by Congress, and would be operated by the Department of Homeland Security. Airlines would submit the name, address, telephone number and birth date of each passenger. The department would turn that information over to a commercial database company, which would try to learn whether the name represented a real identity. The company would report back with a numerical score akin to a credit rating but not with any other data on the passenger.
The government's aim is to cut the number of people who are now diverted for ''secondary screening'' to about 4 percent from 14 percent now. Secondary screening generally refers to close use of a metal-detecting wand and a hand search of carry-on bags.
Asa Hutchinson, the under secretary for border and transportation security, said Thursday in a news briefing, ''Our system right now is not effective.''
Mr. Hutchinson would not say what intelligence led to the cancellation of the British Airways flights on Thursday, but he said it had been a decision of the British government, based on intelligence that was shared and jointly analyzed.
Federal law enforcement and intelligence officials said the intelligence had been similar to information that led to cancellations in early January and early February.
The intelligence, they said, included information obtained in interrogations of captured terrorists from Al Qaeda, as well as information from electronic intercepts of communications among Qaeda suspects, and other information that they would not describe.
At least some of the information, the officials said, referred to specific threats on specific days against British Airways flights, including direct references to threats against British Airways Flight 223, a midday flight from Heathrow Airport near London to Dulles International Airport near Washington.
In a meeting with reporters last week, Homeland Security Secretary Tom Ridge said the threats of terrorist attacks in December and January had been the most compelling and credible he had seen since the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. Mr. Ridge said he believed that government actions during the last three months, including the request for the cancellation of several international flights, had probably prevented a catastrophic terrorist attack.
