Tacked up on the board at a bagel shop on Main Street here recently were offers for baby-sitting and furniture and a love poet for hire.
The last proposed transaction was straightforward: a poet named Monique would, for a fee, write a Valentine's Day poem for your beloved. Whether you told your loved one that you had contracted out for your romantic ode was up to you. But in an age of Hallmark cards, a case could be made that a personalized poem, even if written by a stranger -- a hired one at that -- was a step up.
''I got the bright idea and put up the sign,'' said Monique Avakian, 41. Someone who could help put a romantic's breathless ideas in writing, she thought, would be needed around this time of year.
''I figured that people could come over, and I'd help them write poetry for the person they were madly in love with or the one they were in a tense relationship with,'' Ms. Avakian said. She listed among her qualifications the ability to get people to open up and drop the hang-ups they might have about expressing themselves on paper.
By the standards of this wealthy county where tutors have been hired even to teach children how to ride bicycles, the fees seemed reasonable. One or two sessions for one love poem would cost $50. If more time were needed, $100. For poems that just needed some editing, $25.
Ms. Avakian put the sign up, but before anyone called, she conducted a test. She sat down to write a love poem for her husband, Carter Smith, 40. ''I couldn't accomplish it,'' she said, laughing. This could have been a problem, but so far no one has called for her services.
''I was so relieved,'' she said. Ms. Avakian said she does not think the lack of demand for love poems is a sad statement on the unromantic nature of the modern man. She said it is more likely that people just lack ease with the poetic form.
''It just gives them visions of eighth grade,'' she said. ''People don't know what to think about poetry.''
Asked if customers and inspiration might arrive in the headiness of a last-minute rush -- a Valentine's Day standard -- Ms. Avakian said she was not preparing for any such thing. Rather, she is packing.
''Nobody is going to call,'' she said. ''Or, at least, I hope not.''
Ms. Avakian and Mr. Smith are going away together, for a romantic weekend.
