IT was one of the hottest things to hit the opera scene when it had its premiere. It had a trendy theme: hapless Westerners imprisoned by an Eastern potentate. It had an all-star cast. And it had a wonderful, lively score that helped carry its composer's fame throughout Europe.
But Rossini's opera ''L'Italiana in Algeri'' has hardly been news since. Today, 191 years after its premiere, its plot is less trendy than trite. While many operas of its generation languished forgotten from the late 19th century until the bel canto revival of the mid-20th, ''L'Italiana'' never needed to be ''rediscovered'': it had its Met premiere in 1919. It has stayed in repertory pretty constantly ever since, with productions sprinkled across the Western hemisphere -- an inordinate number of them by Jean-Pierre Ponnelle, the French director who died in 1988 but whose Rossini productions hang on.
So the Met's reviving its 1973 Ponnelle staging of ''L'Italiana'' tonight is not, in itself, noteworthy. The news is that the Met has reverted to another tradition by including some of today's biggest opera stars in the cast. As Lindoro there's Juan Diego Flórez, the Peruvian who has few rivals for the title of today's best light lyric tenor. And in the title role of Isabella there's the Russian mezzo-soprano Olga Borodina. James Levine conducts.
This is deluxe casting. It's also surprising casting. Not surprising in the case of Mr. Flórez, who, with his bright, brilliant and slightly driven sound, has made Lindoro his own; but very surprising in the case of Ms. Borodina. Endowed with a creamy, sensuous voice, suffused with a heavy languor, she is known for big dramatic roles: Dalilah in Saint-Saëns' ''Samson et Dalilah,'' Marina in Mussorgsky's ''Boris Godunov,'' Carmen in Bizet's ''Carmen.'' She hasn't done a Rossini part since she made her American debut in ''La Cenerentola'' at the San Francisco Opera in 1995. And this is the first time she's ever done a comic role. (''La Cenerentola'' is a comic opera; but its heroine, Angelina, is a straight man -- or, rather, straight woman -- in the buffo crowd.)
''I'm worried for the moment,'' she said after her second day of rehearsals, sitting complacently on a sofa in a salon at the Metropolitan Opera and looking not at all worried. ''I'm not a comical type by nature,'' she added, lapsing into Russian and relying on the translator at her side to get her meaning across. ''I have to say it's a lot more difficult to do comic parts. It's very hard to be funny. Especially if your character in real life doesn't lend itself to being comical. There are people who are comical and like to tell jokes, by their very nature. But I'm not like that. I'm very domestic.''
''Domestic'' is not, in fact, the first word that springs to mind in connection with Ms. Borodina. Dramatic seems a more apt D description. (Supporting Ms. Borodina's assertion of domesticity, however, is the fact that she travels with her two younger children and her husband, Ildar Abdrazakov, a bass who will make his Met debut as Masetto in ''Don Giovanni'' on March 1 and appear as Mustafa in the final ''Italiana'' performance with Ms. Borodina on March 17.)
And dramatic singers today don't usually do Rossini. Because Rossini is, well, not serious.
Rossini is among the more popular opera composers -- but he's mainly popular, in this country, for ''Il Barbiere di Siviglia,'' which is probably performed more than his other operas combined. His serious operas -- ''Guillaume Tell,'' ''La Donna del Lago'' -- are done relatively seldom. There's a resulting tendency to stereotype the composer's works as mere light entertainment. In the case of ''L'Italiana,'' the frothy plot hardly belies this claim. (Isabella arrives shipwrecked on the shores of Algiers, having set sail in search of her beloved Lindoro, who has been imprisoned by Mustafa Bey, and so on and so forth.)
What's perhaps overlooked is that Rossini was writing for the major voices of his day, and what advances even his silly plots is dazzling and not very easy music. The first Isabella, Marietta Marcolini, was accounted a serious dramatic soprano (the line between mezzo and soprano was not a hard-and-fast one in Rossini's day), and her music reflects this. The part remains one of the meatiest roles for mezzo-soprano in the repertory.
The difficulty the music presents for a big dramatic voice is that, rather than loud, powerful sounds, it demands agility, flexibility and lightness. Even for a singer like Mr. Flórez, whose province is the lighter bel canto roles, returning to ''L'Italiana'' after, say, Donizetti's ''Maria Stuarda'' (which he recently sang in Barcelona) requires considerable adjustment.
''In Rossini, especially 'L'Italiana,' you need to have a very high position of the voice,'' he said, sitting in the same Metropolitan Opera room that Ms. Borodina had graced the day before. ''You have to sing thinking about the high notes, that you're going to do them like diamonds, very clear and very forward. In Bellini and Donizetti, you're singing full voice, and those high notes might not come so much like this. They have to be brilliant, but they are more wide. You have to be aware that there's a change when you pass to Rossini. You have to practice a lot. Because the voice is not so high anymore, the runs are not so perfect.''
''The first time I did these things, I did not know what was happening to me,'' he added, and pantomimed his panic at the time. '' 'Ah! My voice! I cannot sing this! What is happening to me?' ''
Nothing bad, evidently, because Rossini has remained Mr. Flórez's calling card since he was hired for his first-ever professional engagement, in 1996 in a bit part in the little-known ''Matilde de Shabran'' at the summer Rossini festival in Pesaro, Italy, and ended up learning the main part and jumping in for the ailing tenor lead at the last minute. A few months after his storybook success there, he was singing at the opening night of La Scala. He was 23. He's since sung Rossini around the world: at Covent Garden, Vienna, the Met. His first solo album for Decca, which came out in 2002, was called ''Rossini Arias.''
Talking to Mr. Flórez, it's clear he knows how to work for his success: his knowledge about singing is impressive. He tapes every rehearsal and spends hours going over specific passages with his manager, Ernesto Palacio, another Peruvian tenor who retired from his own career to manage Mr. Flórez's and is thus qualified to perform this eminently nonmanagerial function.
Mr. Flórez is expanding his repertory carefully and steadily: coming up in future seasons are his first ''Puritani'' (Bellini) and his first ''Così Fan Tutte'' (Mozart). But Rossini remains a kind of home base -- and many people have been taking the composer a lot more seriously since Mr. Flórez has been around to sing it. ''For the moment, he's the best singer for Rossini,'' Ms. Borodina noted admiringly.
Ms. Borodina, like Mr. Flórez, has a role model, though not one she works with directly: Marilyn Horne, whom she calls ''the best in the world.'' Coincidentally, Ms. Horne and Mr. Palacio appeared together in this same Met production of ''L'Italiana,'' an opera they also recorded together. You could call this a second-generation performance.
If lightening the voice for Rossini is difficult for Mr. Flórez, it's an even bigger step for Ms. Borodina, fresh from the rigors of Dalilah in Chicago, a role she said was ''made for my voice and my character.'' Relocating her Rossini technique was proving to be hard work. ''Many years ago, it was very easy for me, but now it's not so easy, and I am older now,'' said Ms. Borodina, who is 40. ''Actually, for the muscles it's a great idea. Because if I have all the time heavy music, it's not so good for my voice.''
Still the hardest thing about learning the role, for her, was mastering the recitatives. Since she does not speak Italian, she has had to memorize the comic dialogue phonetically.
One comic element is built in: the discrepancy in size between the sylphlike Mr. Flórez and the beautiful, statuesque Ms. Borodina. ''Next to him, I feel myself to be a large woman,'' she observed wryly.
This may be an ''Italiana'' to take seriously. But as for funny -- Ms. Borodina is already working on it.
The Schedule
Performances this weekend of the Metropolitan Opera production of Rossini's ''Italiana in Algeri,'' featuring Olga Borodina and Juan Diego Flórez, will be tonight at 8 and Monday at 7:30 p.m. Other performances during the season will be at 8 p.m. on Feb. 20, Feb. 25, March 4, March 8, March 11 and March 17; and at 1:30 p.m. on Feb. 28. (Mr. Flórez is not appearing on March 8; Barry Banks replaces him.) Tickets range from $25 to $295. Information: (212) 362-6000.
