As contract talks resumed yesterday between the New York City teachers' union and the Bloomberg administration, the topic turned from weighty matters of salaries and work rules to the decidedly more humble topic of carpet dust.
Randi Weingarten, president of the United Federation of Teachers, complained that the classroom rugs that kindergarten, first- and second-grade students sit on as their teachers read them books are not cleaned properly. She demanded that the rugs be cleaned more often, and that carpets that are believed to be contributing to health problems, like asthma, be removed. She cited an analysis the union commissioned last fall, which examined carpets at nine city schools and found them excessively dusty. The analysis of the dust found mold spores, animal hair, feathers, wood chips and human skin cells. In some classrooms, the report said, mouse droppings were visible.
The rugs are intended to be a ''comfort zone'' for students. But after emerging from the bargaining session, Ms. Weingarten said, ''What we're seeing more and more is that this comfort zone has become a contamination zone.''
This school year, carpets are no routine maintenance matter.
As part of the centralization of the city school system under Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, a new literacy curriculum is in place that requires that rugs be placed in most elementary school classrooms, for reading aloud and other activities. As such, the carpets have become a touchstone in the debate this year over what teachers charge is micromanagement.
In a telephone interview yesterday, Ms. Weingarten said that she had raised the issue of dusty carpets as a health matter but that she had brought up other issues under the rubric of overregulation. In particular, she cited mandates that teachers break down lessons into easily digestible, 10-minute ''mini-lessons,'' and that classroom desks be arranged in clusters instead of straight lines.
Deputy Mayor Dennis M. Walcott declined to discuss the contract talks. But he said that the issue of dirty carpets had been resolved before the talks, and that the city had already agreed to clean the school carpets during the winter break next week.
''I'm not sure what Randi is trying to do, raising these types of issues when these issues have already been addressed,'' Mr. Walcott said. ''It baffles me at this point.''
On the general topic of overregulation, Mr. Walcott said: ''I don't feel that the department is micromanaging at all. I feel that we all have the best interests of the students in mind.''
Ms. Weingarten said she knew of no agreement to clean the carpets next week. She said she took her demands about carpets and classroom micromanagement to the bargaining table only after Department of Education officials failed to address the concerns earlier in the year.
''The school system has imposed cookie-cutter factory models in all schools,'' she said. ''Now we're responding in a cookie-cutter manner.''
Despite the bitterness over carpet dust and other issues, talks are expected to continue in the coming weeks.
