The Bush administration, signaling a major shift of policy on the Middle East, has indicated that it may support Israel's new proposal for a unilateral withdrawal from parts of Gaza and the West Bank, according to administration and Israeli officials.
A senior American official said that the administration is ''taking a close look'' at the policy, and that the president would send three senior aides to Israel next week to get questions answered before the proposal was endorsed. But administration and Israeli officials say they expect a favorable American response.
In the past, the administration has maintained that peace can be achieved in the Middle East only by reciprocal concessions agreed upon in negotiations between Israel and the Palestinians.
Embracing Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's plan would depart from that principle by accepting the idea that such negotiations are not possible, at least for now.
Deputy Secretary of State Richard L. Armitage said Thursday that a pullout from Gaza would be ''a step in the right direction.'' Another official said the withdrawal plan, if implemented properly, ''could reduce friction between Israelis and Palestinians and improve Palestinian freedom of movement.''
The Israeli policy, outlined in recent weeks by Mr. Sharon, proposed withdrawing Israeli troops and dismantling settlements in parts of Gaza and smaller parts of the West Bank. American officials have expressed concern that it would in effect abandon the idea of negotiating with the Palestinians to achieve final statehood.
Mr. Sharon has repeatedly said he would turn to unilateral withdrawal only if he concluded that the approach backed by President Bush, known as the road map, had failed.
Mr. Bush has come under criticism from Democratic candidates for what they characterize as his failure to press for peace in the Middle East. Many of Mr. Bush's supporters, particularly evangelical Christians, are staunchly pro-Israel. If Israel takes unilateral actions with American blessings, Mr. Bush could campaign by citing progress in Israel and his own hard line against Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader.
Under the road map, drawn up by the United States, the European Union, the United Nations and Russia, each side would offer simultaneous negotiated concessions to move along the road to peace. Now, in a gesture to American concerns, Israeli officials are maintaining that Mr. Sharon's approach does not abandon the road map, but would break an impasse in Israeli-Palestinian relations and improve the prospects for peace.
''Our assessment is that the administration is very receptive to the plan of Prime Minister Sharon, on the basis that it is within the context of the vision of President Bush and also within the road map,'' said Ambassador Daniel Ayalon of Israel.
While they are in Israel, the American officials will seek assurances that a unilateral withdrawal does not rule out negotiations with the Palestinians in the future.
They will also ask for changes in the barrier Israel is constructing in parts of the West Bank, which has walled off many Palestinians from their farms, schools and homes.
Israeli officials say Mr. Sharon and his aides will make those assurances next week to Elliott Abrams, director of Middle East affairs at the National Security Council; Stephen Hadley, the deputy national security adviser; and William J. Burns, head of the Middle East bureau at the State Department.
American officials say they are extremely concerned that they are not seen as walking away from the idea of a negotiated settlement or from pressure on the Palestinians to take charge of security in Gaza and the West Bank.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell told the Senate Foreign Relations Committee on Thursday that in the last day he had talked with several foreign ministers to get the Palestinians ''to come forward with a security plan to start taking action against terrorists in a very significant and decisive way.''
In private, however, American officials -- and indeed European and United Nations diplomats -- say the Palestinian Authority is, more than ever, riven by factions and in the full grip of Mr. Arafat, whom the Bush administration refuses to deal with.
Palestinian spokesmen maintain that this state of affairs is the result of Israel's harsh crackdown in Gaza and the West Bank and the failure to make concessions that might give moderate leadership an opportunity to emerge.
''Sharon has done everything he can to destroy the Palestinian Authority and the moderate Palestinian leadership,'' said Edward Abington, a former State Department official who now consults with the Palestinians and who just returned from a weeklong visit during which he met with Mr. Arafat and others.
For the administration, endorsing a unilateral withdrawal is likely to be seen by Palestinians and some others as a retreat from its insistence on negotiations as the only solution. But increasingly, administration officials have said negotiations were impossible because of Palestinian recalcitrance.
In January, for example, Vice President Dick Cheney told the Los Angeles World Affairs Council that progress was ''virtually impossible'' as long as Mr. Arafat was in charge. Since then, his control has become even more undisputed than before.
When Mr. Sharon first broached his withdrawal plan in a speech in December, it was greeted with considerable skepticism in the Bush administration. A senior official told reporters not to pay attention to such a plan because it was only hypothetical and to pay more attention to Mr. Sharon's promises to ease harsh conditions in the West Bank.
Now administration officials say that the withdrawal plan might accomplish the objective of easing such conditions, if it leads to removal of scores of checkpoints and closures in the West Bank area.
Administration officials are also concerned about turning Gaza and parts of the West Bank over to Palestinians, if that means effective control by Hamas or other militant groups that have considerable support in those areas.
In addition, it is not clear what Israel would do to curb rocket attacks or other anti-Israel actions from Palestinian areas placed under Palestinian control.
But many Middle East experts, including veterans of the Clinton administration, said Mr. Bush had little choice but to endorse the Sharon plan.
''How can the United States say it is against withdrawal of Israelis from Palestinian areas?'' said Dennis Ross, the Clinton administration's Middle East negotiator. ''The administration sees this as a tremendous development because if you don't have diplomacy going on, at least you have something that creates space for future diplomacy.''
Martin S. Indyk, ambassador to Israel under President Clinton, said the Bush administration's challenge was ''to get behind this plan and shape it to make it work to the benefit of an ultimate settlement.'' Israelis, he said, had given up on the Palestinian Authority because it had failed to stop terrorism.
''The Sharon plan's advantage is to keep it consistent with the road map but not to generate a road map negotiation with the Palestinians,'' said Mr. Indyk, who is director of the Saban Center for Middle East Policy at the Brookings Institution.
The road map calls for negotiations to create a Palestinian state over three years' time. It has been frozen because Israel has not stopped military operations in Palestinian territories and Palestinians have not halted attacks on Israelis by militant groups.
By contrast, Mr. Sharon's plan would create a Palestinian unit that might be able to control its affairs, even if it constitutes perhaps half of the territory the Palestinians want for their state. Israel would not necessarily declare the entity a state.
Even the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, has spoken positively of Israel's taking unilateral actions, as long as a negotiating process with the Palestinians is kept alive. Last week he said that a Gaza pullout was ''a positive development'' and ''a first essential step'' leading to ''a new dynamic'' in the peace process.
