THEY stood on Fifth Avenue across from Saks, three women who will probably not mind being described, however ungallantly, as no longer young. It was they, after all, who chose to call themselves ''Grandmothers Against the War.''
There they were as the sun faded on Wednesday, holding cardboard placards that described the human toll of the war in Iraq and demanded an immediate end to the American occupation. They have been there every Wednesday for the last five weeks, usually in somewhat larger numbers, said Joan Wile, a songwriter with four grandchildren.
Taking this genteel form of antiwar protest to the streets was Ms. Wile's idea. It made sense to her to settle on a part of Midtown heavily trafficked by office workers, shoppers and sightseers.
''I think it's good for them to see some opposition to Bush,'' she said. ''Especially from old grandmas like us.''
In truth, not many passers-by broke stride to react to Ms. Wile or her companions, Marjorie Perces and Judith Cartisano. Normally, they get more of a response, Ms. Wile said -- most of it favorable, though there is no escaping the occasional raspberry.
The quiet street reaction was emblematic of the antiwar movement in general these days. It is quite a contrast from a year ago. You will recall that last Feb. 15, with the invasion of Iraq drawing near, many tens of thousands of demonstrators rallied near the United Nations, part of a worldwide day of protest. Nothing since has approached that mass action.
You'd think it might be otherwise, especially now that the original reason for going to war, Saddam Hussein's supposed arsenal of unconventional weapons, apparently holds as much water as a clenched fist.
It could be that New Yorkers as a group stand solidly behind the president and his foreign policy. But somehow, given political realities, that seems unlikely. Even the hard-charging rightist Bill O'Reilly complained this week about being misled by the White House.
There has been some protest activity, by venerable groups like the War Resisters League and Internet-era upstarts like MoveOn.org.
''But obviously that's not as dramatic as putting tens or even hundreds of thousands of people in the streets,'' said Leslie Cagan, national coordinator of the antiwar coalition United for Peace and Justice. Then again, ''we're not on the eve of war,'' Ms. Cagan said. There isn't the sense of urgency that prevailed a year ago.
Colleen Kelly, a leader of a group called Sept. 11 Families for Peaceful Tomorrows, said that many protesters felt ''deflated'' once the war began. But the mood may be shifting again, said Ms. Kelly, whose brother, William H. Kelly Jr., died in the attack on the World Trade Center.
''It feels like Round 2,'' she said. ''I think there's this new galvanizing for accountability, for holding them to their word. There's a lot of antiwar sentiment, but maybe just not the traditional protester who takes to the streets.''
The streets may not be quiet much longer. A demonstration on the order of last February's is planned for March 20. That could be a prelude to a summer of protest as the Republicans hold their national convention here, starting in late August.
A lot could be on the line. Protest leaders will be tested on their ability to maintain order in the ranks. The Police Department will surely be tested, too.
MANY New Yorkers feel the police did not do themselves proud last February when they refused to let demonstrators march and kept many thousands from reaching a rally on First Avenue.
Spirits were not lightened in April when dozens were arrested in another Midtown protest, on charges that went nowhere. Yesterday, the Center for Constitutional Rights said it had sued the department in federal court, and called the arrests ''part of a pattern of N.Y.P.D. harassment.''
Nor do the police score high with civil libertarians for asserting a right to question arrested protesters about their politics, albeit anonymously. To Donna Lieberman, the executive director of the New York Civil Liberties Union, this policy is ''intimidating and threatening.''
Important issues, all. At least they were not of immediate concern at the grandmothers' protest on Fifth Avenue.
Thumbs up from passers-by definitely outnumbered thumbs down, Ms. Wile said. There was one fellow, though, who pointed a finger at the women and made motions as if he were firing a gun.
Ms. Cartisano was unfazed. ''His aim was bad,'' she said.
NYC
