It's early days yet, over at Riingo, which Marcus Samuelsson and his business partner, Hakan Swahn, opened a few weeks ago in the lobby of the Alex Hotel, on East 45th Street in Manhattan. There's beauty everywhere, and the awkwardness of a newborn foal.
The menu is Japanese, of a sort. Mr. Samuelsson is 33. He was born in Ethiopia and grew up in Sweden and has lived and cooked in New York for more than a decade. Riingo is a result of that history and Mr. Samuelsson's wit; it is postmodern global food, devoted not exclusively to fish, but to the clean flavors of Tokyo and Gothenburg, as experienced in Manhattan.
And so. You might have before you monkfish liver on a long, elegant ski jump of an appetizer plate, served next to a low plait of char ceviche. These two combine into some kind of crazy elegance in the mouth. And then, to follow, a wrist-size hunk of braised pork belly strewn with enough honey-glazed garlic to make a mockery of the divide between sweet and savory: bacon, idealized and good enough to cheer.
But there are stumbles. It sure is hot up there on the mezzanine, where the music skips along at what seems like 500 beats a minute. A portable air-conditioner struggles to keep up, even as the temperature outside plunges. One minute sushi is unavailable, the next -- presto! -- it's back. And the waiters, servers, busboys and coat-check personnel are still in training; it often takes three to do what one might accomplish over at Aquavit, where Mr. Samuelsson first made his name. More food, please, and fast.
Because there is great promise in nori-wrapped foie gras, served next to a neat piece of watermelon topped with a finger of vinegar-washed, salt-cured Boston mackerel, and in the sheer simplicity of a hunk of smoked char sushi or delicate, wildly fresh fluke. A restaurant in a hotel must serve a Caesar salad, and Riingo's, with crimson sheets of tuna sashimi beneath the romaine and a sea urchin vinaigrette atop it, mixed with odd little croutons made of cheese and tiny dried anchovies, displays real respect for both the form and the chef's ambitions.
That chef, by the way, is not Mr. Samuelsson. Executing the food at Riingo is Johan Svensson, who worked under Mr. Samuelsson at Aquavit, and then at Bond Street, and at Nobu in London. The scents of all three restaurants mingle in the air here. The result is fresh, and not unwelcome.
Riingo, 205 East 45th Street, Manhattan, (212) 867-4200. Dinner entrees, $14-22.
Diner's Journal
