After examining the financial records of National Hockey League teams for almost a year, Arthur Levitt came to a conclusion. ''This is totally bush league,'' he said.
And he meant this as a compliment. Levitt, the former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, was not describing the quality of play or the competence of management in a troubled professional sports business.
After being paid $250,000 by the N.H.L. to look at the financial records of its 30 franchises, Levitt was comparing what he found in those sheets to ''the kind of skulduggery that I've seen in accounting misdeeds in the past 10 years of my life.''
Compared to much of corporate America, Levitt said, ''there is none of that kind of statisculation, none of the kind of managed numbers.'' By those standards, Levitt said, accounting in the N.H.L. is straightforward. And he concluded that the N.H.L. lost about $273 million in the 2002-3 season, based on revenues of $1.996 billion.
Levitt said salaries of players account for 75 percent of revenues and that is too much. ''The league as it is going now is not viable,'' he said. ''It's not a business that makes sense. I'm telling you the business model is severely flawed. It's a rotten business.''
Levitt's conclusion, immediately disputed by the N.H.L. Players Association, was the second major pronouncement from the league in the week after its All-Star Game. The first was the proposal for rules changes to encourage offense, including limiting how much goalies can handle the puck.
These efforts come while the N.H.L. and its union prepare to negotiate another collective bargaining agreement, and as the goals-per-game total is at 5.0, the lowest in a half century. Both developments seem to suggest that the N.H.L. thinks its product needs repair, both on the ice and in the ledger books.
Levitt's findings were announced at an N.H.L. news conference yesterday and discussed more extensively in a conversation afterward. Levitt was asked whether he had consulted the union, which does not agree with the N.H.L.'s methods of accounting.
''No,'' he said. ''I thought about that at first. There was nothing that the union had that I particularly had an interest in.''
Levitt said he was an independent agent not looking to take the side of management, adding that he was not familiar with the hockey business.
In a discussion of context and mutual mistrust, he said he was unaware that the former chairman of the N.H.L.'s Board of Governors, Bruce McNall, and the former executive director of the Players Association, Alan Eagleson, both served time in jail in the 1990's for financial fraud in unrelated cases.
Levitt also said he did not learn the definition of Zamboni until recently. ''I thought it was some kind of Italian romantic instrument,'' he said. ''The Zamboni is the machine that cleans the ice!'' Well, yes.
Bob Goodenow, the executive director of the union, said in a statement, ''The Levitt report is simply another league public-relations initiative. To suggest the report is in any way independent is misleading.''
Goodenow also said that the union continued to believe in ''a market system, not a team of hired-gun accountants.''
The effort to change playing rules could have a larger impact than yesterday's financial debate, assuming next season is not eliminated by a lockout. The 1994-95 season was delayed for 15 weeks while the two sides negotiated the current collective bargaining agreement. Under changes suggested by the general managers on Tuesday, the goal lines would be moved toward the back boards, from 13 feet to 10, and goalies could not play the puck behind the lines.
This could lead to more fore-checking and an increase in the ''dump-and-chase'' style. Once derided as cruder and less-appealing than free skating and passing, the ''dump-and-chase'' approach now seems preferable to the passive system of neutral-zone traps that have enhanced defensive systems while lowering scores and lessening entertainment value.
Other suggested enhancements, to be tested first in the minor leagues, would be to eliminate all tie games by deciding them with shootouts after overtime and to encourage efforts to win in regulation time by awarding a victorious team 3 points in the standing for a regulation victory, instead of 2.
If a game is decided after regulation, the winner would get 2 points and the loser 1, as is the case now.
But none of these rules can be implemented until passed by the Board of Governors. In that the changes suggested are radical by N.H.L. standards, the ideas could be diluted or vanquished before a vote.
All this talk comes between the Super Bowl baseball's training camps, when hockey's visibility traditionally rises. This year, the N.H.L. authorities are choosing to put their biggest problems in the display window. They can make people see, but can they make them believe or care?
HOCKEY  Correction:  February 16, 2004, Monday  Because of an editing error, a sports article on Friday about a report on the National Hockey League's finances misstated the timing of an interview with the document's author, Arthur Levitt. It was on Wednesday, not after his news conference on Thursday.
