It is becoming doubtful that space shuttle flights will resume this fall, as NASA has planned, because there have been problems developing some required safety upgrades, the space agency's administrator, Sean O'Keefe, said on Thursday.
Mr. O'Keefe, speaking at a House Science Committee hearing, said there was a ''very low prospect'' of shuttles returning to flight during the Sept. 12-Oct. 10 launching period because more work was needed to modify the external fuel tank and develop a device to inspect the heat shield.
Mr. O'Keefe would not speculate whether a shuttle would fly before next spring if a fall launching was missed. Daylight launching opportunities of only a few days are available in November and January, but some officials of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration have questioned if that is enough time to perform all the preparations for a first flight.
Efforts to understand and reduce the loss of foam insulation from the fuel tank have been expanded to include more of the 154-foot-tall structure, Mr. O'Keefe said, requiring more testing. In addition, work has been going slower than expected in developing imaging instruments that would be attached to a boom on the shuttle's robot arm for examining heat tiles and other remote parts for possible damage.
These problems ''aren't insurmountable,'' Mr. O'Keefe said, but resolving them will probably require extra time that makes launching in early fall increasingly unlikely.
Mr. O'Keefe repeated NASA's position that the shuttles' return to flight would not be driven by a schedule, but when all recommendations by the board that investigated the Columbia accident had been met.
At the hearing, lawmakers told Mr. O'Keefe that they generally supported President Bush's initiative to send humans back to the Moon by 2020, and later on to Mars. But several congressmen said they would need more information on the program's costs before they signed on.
''I remain open-minded about this proposal,'' said Representative Sherwood Boehlert, a New York Republican who is the committee chairman. ''But I still need much more information about the goals and costs before I can decide whether I support the particular choices the president has made in this proposal.''
Lawmakers also questioned Mr. O'Keefe's decision to cancel a shuttle servicing mission to the Hubble Space Telescope that would extend its life into the next decade. Mr. O'Keefe repeated his contention that the mission was too risky to the crew because, unlike other shuttle flights, it was not to the International Space Station, which could serve as a refuge if a shuttle problem developed.
Representative Mark Udall, Democrat of Colorado, noted that $167 million worth of instruments built for the Hubble would now go unused and suggested that if it was safe enough to fly the shuttle with its safety modifications to the space station, it was safe to fly to the telescope.
''If we are too risk-averse to send a mission to Hubble,'' Mr. Udall said, ''where does this place things with regards to missions to Mars or the Moon?''
