The Philadelphia Flyers lost their two All-Star centers, Jeremy Roenick and Keith Primeau, to serious injuries in a span of 32 seconds of the third period at Madison Square Garden last night.
The Rangers lost another game, and might also have lost their best player, Jaromir Jagr, for tomorrow's rematch with the Flyers in Philadelphia because of a nagging groin muscle injury.
After the Flyers lost Roenick to a shattered jaw on a frightening play and Primeau to an apparent concussion after he collided with the Rangers' Bobby Holik, Sami Kapanen scored the winning goal from the slot midway through the third period, and Philadelphia held off the Rangers, 2-1.
The defeat dropped the Rangers to 3-9-2-0 over their last 14 games. Since obtaining Jagr from the Washington Capitals on Jan. 23, the Rangers have lost six of nine games.
Jagr had an assist last night. He should also have been credited with a third-period goal. But there was no video review after Philadelphia's Sean Burke made a save on Jagr with his glove over the goal line less than a minute after the Flyers lost Primeau.
The goal would have given the Rangers a 2-1 lead.
''It went in,'' said Rangers Coach Glen Sather, who was furious there was no review. ''That should be the job of the video-replay expert up top who has all kinds of equipment. Plus you have 25 guys in Toronto watching the games every night. You would think somewhere along the line they would catch that kind of stuff.''
When asked what he could do, Sather said: ''I can whine about it. Once the puck is dropped, it's over with. But that's why they have people sit up in the booth and that's why people in Toronto study the replays.''
An hour after the game, meanwhile, Jagr was getting treatment on his groin muscle, which he said started acting up on him during his second game with the Rangers.
''But I was getting better and better,'' said Jagr, who added he started feeling pain again during Wednesday night's 3-1 victory over the Devils in New Jersey.
Jagr said he had not had any groin muscle problems for two years.
When asked if he could play, Jagr said: ''It depends how does it feel tomorrow. Sometimes you just never know. As soon as I feel I can help the team, I'm going to go play. That's for sure. I don't want to go on the ice and hurt the team.''
Jussi Markkanen was in goal for the Rangers last night, one game after the team's No. 1 goaltender, Mike Dunham, made 28 saves to defeat the Devils. Meanwhile, Burke, the 37-year-old goaltender whom the Flyers obtained from Phoenix earlier this week, made his debut in his second stint with Philadelphia.
Both goaltenders were sharp through two periods, as the teams entered the third period with the score tied at 1-1.
Brian Leetch opened the scoring for the Rangers at 18 minutes of the first period, when he pounced on a loose puck off the left wing post and then banked the puck off Burke and over the goal line for the score. The goal was Leetch's 11th of the season. Martin Rucinsky and Jagr were credited with assists.
But Philadelphia's Simon Gagné tied the score at 11:28 of the second period, with the Flyers on the power play. With Holik in the penalty box for roughing Kapanen, Gagné scored from off the right wing post on a shot that glanced off Markkanen's glove, then off the post, before Markkanen accidentally knocked the puck over the goal line with the back of his glove.
The score was still tied at 1-1, when the Flyers lost Roenick and Primeau.
Roenick was injured at 4:09. After losing a face-off to Petr Nedved, Roenick was hit on the left side of his jaw by a slap shot from Rangers defenseman Boris Mironov.
Roenick crumpled to the ice, where he remained face down and motionless for several minutes, blood streaming from his mouth.
A preliminary examination revealed that Roenick had a fractured jaw and probably had a concussion. After being helped off the ice to cheers from the crowd at the Garden, Roenick, who waved back to the crowd, was taken on a stretcher to St. Vincent's Hospital in Lower Manhattan for further tests.
''I was unconscious for about a minute,'' Roenick told a spokesman for the Flyers in a taped interview late last night. ''When I came to, I wanted to make sure I didn't choke on the blood.''
Then, at 4:41, Primeau, the Flyers' captain, went down after he collided with Holik at center ice.
Neither Primeau nor Holik seemed to see the other as they collided leg on leg; Holik also caught Primeau on the chin with his left shoulder.
Like Roenick, Primeau had to be assisted off the ice. Philadelphia Coach Ken Hitchcock seemed to think the hit was intentional and yelled at Holik after the game.
''It was completely accidental,'' Holik said of the hit.
HOCKEY
