Franco Scalamandré opened his fabric mill in 1929 in Long Island City, Queens, and one of the first orders was a silk brocatelle for the estate of William Randolph Hearst.
Since then the orders have kept coming, keeping Scalamandré at the pinnacle of the luxury interior design market.
The company's handmade silk fabrics, used mostly for expensive drapery, wall coverings, upholstery and other furnishings, have furnished thousands of prestigious and historic places over the decades. Company officials boast that Scalamandré fabric has been used in White House redecoration by every administration since Herbert Hoover.
But one thing at Scalamandré is changing: the company announced this week that it had recently sold the mill in Queens, and plans to relocate much of its manufacturing to a modern textile mill in South Carolina.
The company insists, however, that Scalamandré's distinctive weaving process will not change.
The company is now owned by Mr. Scalamandré's family and run by two of his grandsons: Mark J. Bitter and his brother Robert F. Bitter.
Mark Bitter, the company's chief executive, said it had long outgrown the Queens mill and must move to escape the high costs of manufacturing in New York, despite various incentives offered by New York City and New York State to remain.
''It's a shame we can't stay,'' Mr. Bitter said. ''It's a great old facility, but we can't expand manufacturing in it. We're handcuffed.'' Franco Scalamandré, who died in 1988, passed control of the company to his son-in-law, Edwin Bitter, who eventually turned over control to his sons. Mark Bitter, who played in the mill as a child, called the move ''a bad thing and a good thing.''
''My heartstrings are attached to the mill, but in business you often have to put your emotions aside,'' he said. ''We can't keep losing money hand over fist. Business-wise, we should have moved 30 or 40 years ago.''
Scalamandré silks, which Mr. Bitter said sell to interior designers for up to $2,000 a yard, have furnished such New York City hotels as the Hôtel Plaza Athénée, the Four Seasons and the St. Regis. Scalamandré created the curtain at the Metropolitan Opera House and the fringe on Big Bird's legs.
Mr. Bitter said the company would phase out most of its work in the Queens mill in May and June, but would continue to rent a portion of the mill from the new owners for the company's trim manufacturing division, archives and studio offices. He would not name the buyer.
Mr. Bitter said that of the 90 employees at the mill, some would remain there, and some would relocate to work at the new mill. He said 50 workers would be laid off but would be given severance packages and help in finding new jobs.
The company has showrooms worldwide -- its largest is on the Upper East Side -- and Mr. Bitter said the company was always able to show important New York customers the mill, ''but that's a luxury we can no longer afford.''
The 115,000-square-foot mill, which occupies two adjoining buildings on 24th Street in Long Island City, contains about 200 specialty looms and other machinery for converting raw, sticky silk strands from Brazilian and Chinese silkworm farms into refined fabric with patterns that have vibrant color and depth.
Skeins of raw silk are boiled and cleaned and dyed in the basement and then converted into finely wound thread on spinning flywheels called swifts. Spools of it are then placed on warping machines, which collate up to 1,000 strands at a time across the room onto a large flywheel. On the first floor, women seated at long tables hand-stitch ornamental trim with rich brocades and hand-woven tassels. A half-dozen old wooden looms powered by worn wooden pedals resemble the 1786 winding machine (said to have belonged to Marie Antoinette) on display in the reception room. Some of these looms will be donated to a textile museum in Pennsylvania in June.
''It's really a lost art,'' said Kyle Homan, 40, Scalamandré's vice president for manufacturing. He picked up a piece of a powder blue silk with a zebra pattern he said had been made for the designer Kate Spade. He passed four narrow tables each 55 yards long, where wallpaper is silk-screened by hand using a four-foot template. In the next room, fabric is painted on five 65-foot tables.
Years ago, the company hired many Italian immigrants living in Queens, but now it employs many local Hispanic immigrants who retain textile skills from mills in their home countries. On Wednesday, Alexandra Abalos, 31, an Ecuadorian immigrant who lives in Astoria, Queens, guided raw silk onto a winding wheel and then onto smaller spools.
Mr. Bitter said the new plant would let the company grow and improve consistency and quality. The 13 tall jacquard looms, which can weave 10,000 silk strands at one time into densely woven silk finery, are being moved to the new mill and enlarged.
He said the move to South Carolina would reduce costs 40 percent and increase productivity 300 percent.
''Down there,'' he said, ''you have lower overhead, lower taxes, lower occupancy costs, lower labor costs, lower everything.''
