They called him the Last Don, an old-style Mafia boss who issued his orders from a table at a Queens restaurant. And for years, Joseph C. Massino, the burly suspected leader of the Bonanno crime family, frustrated federal prosecutors by carefully staying out of their reach.
Now, prosecutors in Brooklyn have Mr. Massino in a cell awaiting two federal trials. And next month, because of one of their cases, a dark chapter in the annals of the Mafia is to begin.
The Brooklyn federal prosecutors will begin a formal process of weighing whether to seek his execution. That prospect is making Mr. Massino, who prosecutors said was the last of the official Mafia chiefs still at large, an unlikely symbol in the capital punishment debate.
Since the new federal death penalty laws were enacted beginning in the 1980's, the Justice Department has often sought capital punishment of black and Hispanic leaders of drug or street gangs. But federal prosecutors have never sought the execution of a top Cosa Nostra boss.
For years, critics, including some in Congress, have said the disparity raised questions about whether the popular fascination with the mob gave its leaders what amounted to immunity from capital punishment.
''We have demonized young black men and young Hispanic men who engage in violent gang activity in a way that we have not demonized -- and arguably have romanticized -- white men who engage in the same conduct,'' said Elisabeth Semel, a capital punishment critic at the law school of the University of California at Berkeley.
The story behind the case that may make law enforcement history could come from one of the mob movies that helped shape cultural images of the Mafia. As the chief prosecutor, Greg D. Andres, has outlined his case in court filings, it is a tale of murder, drug abuse and betrayal in the top ranks of a storied crime family.
The prosecutors say a top Bonanno informant, believed to be Mr. Massino's underboss and brother-in-law, is to provide critical testimony that could send him to the death chamber. ''In March 1999,'' the prosecutors said in describing their unidentified informant's information, ''Bonanno family boss Joseph Massino told him, in sum and substance, that Sciascia 'had to go.'''
Gerlando Sciascia, 65, a Sicilian-born Bonanno captain who is said to have crossed Mr. Massino, was soon gone. His body was discovered on a Bronx street with three bullet holes in his head.
Federal prosecutors in Brooklyn seem to have the momentum in their pursuit of Mr. Massino, with a series of cases against the Bonannos bolstered by more than a half-dozen made members of the family who have become informants. In April, Mr. Massino, 61, is to go on trial in Federal District Court in Brooklyn in a racketeering case involving seven murders from the 1980's that could land him in prison for the rest of his life.
The Sciascia case has drawn notice since the charges were filed last summer. Unlike other murders in which prosecutors say Mr. Massino was involved, that killing occurred after a federal death penalty law was put in place. Some death penalty experts say it is a test case of whether there are different standards in the Justice Department's approach to the death penalty.
''In the Mafia case, the killing of a rival family member and the dumping of the body looks exactly like a crime in the drug-ring case in a minority-dominated drug organization,'' said Samuel R. Gross, a death penalty expert at the University of Michigan Law School. ''So why is one person facing the death penalty and the other is not?''
Mr. Massino's case is awkward for death penalty critics. To press for a capital case against him, they would have to abandon their opposition to execution. But if they oppose capital charges in the case of an alleged Mafia chief, they would undercut their argument that the failure to seek the death of mob boss shows the unfairness of the system.
Ms. Semel, who is director of the Berkeley death penalty clinic, was asked in a recent interview whether Attorney General John Ashcroft might seek the death penalty against Mr. Massino to try to show that the federal capital punishment law was implemented fairly.
''What is called for,'' she said, ''is a rethinking of the use of the federal death penalty entirely, not a decision to go after a single white male who is allegedly affiliated with the mob.''
The final decision on Mr. Massino's case is expected to be made by Mr. Ashcroft. For Mr. Massino, that is hardly good news. Mr. Ashcroft, some lawyers say, might be pressured to use a capital prosecution of a top mob figure to blunt criticism of prosecutors for seeking the execution of minority gangsters so often. At least 129 minority gang members, many of whom had leadership positions, have faced the federal death penalty since 1988, according to the Federal Death Penalty Resource Counsel Project, which provides information to lawyers defending in capital cases.
Only once, according to the project, did federal prosecutors seek death against a white Mafia member, in 1992. In that case, a jury in Federal District Court in Brooklyn rejected the death penalty for a Bonanno killer, Thomas Pitera, who dismembered some of his victims. He is serving a life term.
Monica Goodling, a spokeswoman for Mr. Ashcroft, declined to comment on Mr. Massino's case. But she said the Justice Department's ''process for evaluating death-eligible cases is designed to ensure consistency and fairness in the application of the death penalty nationwide.'' In past cases, that explanation has sometimes been advanced to explain Mr. Ashcroft's decisions to seek death, sometimes against the advice of United States attorneys.
In response to questions about the relative frequency of capital cases against nonwhite gangsters, Ms. Goodling added that lawyers at the Department of Justice's headquarters in Washington who reviewed possible capital cases ''are not told the race of either the alleged perpetrator or the victim -- specifically to protect against these type of concerns."
The killing of Mr. Sciascia, according to the prosecutors, was a quintessential mob hit. Mr. Sciascia, the prosecutors say, had criticized another Bonanno captain, Anthony Graziano. He is said to have complained that Mr. Graziano had a cocaine problem.
Mr. Massino was close to Mr. Graziano and had elevated him into the leadership of the family. He is said to have viewed the complaint about Mr. Graziano as meddling. After he decided Mr. Sciascia ''had to go,'' the prosecutors said, Mr. Massino sent out the order, assigned the killers and arranged for the gun.
After the murder order, the prosecutors say, Mr. Massino and his wife, Josephine, went on a trip to Mexico. While they were gone, in March 1999, Mr. Sciascia was invited, in the age-old ways of the mob, to meet another Bonanno captain.
The meeting was on East 79th Street in Manhattan. Later, the police found Mr. Sciascia's body on Boller Avenue in the Bronx. One of their informants, the prosecutors say, will testify about Mr. Massino's detailed knowledge of what happened after the 79th Street meeting.
''Sciascia,'' Mr. Massino is supposed to have told the informant, ''must have bled to death given the amount of blood in the car.'' The car has never been found.
The Justice Department's consideration of whether to seek capital punishment begins when the first arguments urging prosecutors not to seek execution are due from Mr. Massino's lawyers next month. Typically, in potential death penalty cases, defense lawyers use those first arguments to portray their clients' humanity, to give heart-rending accounts about their troubles or to dwell on the vulnerable relatives who would be left behind if a defendant were put to death.
Mr. Massino's lawyer, David Breitbart, said Mr. Massino was not guilty of any of the murders with which he has been charged. He said the potential death penalty case was nothing but a negotiating ploy by the prosecutors to try to pressure Mr. Massino into pleading guilty to charges in the racketeering case.
Mr. Breitbart said his investigation showed that Mr. Sciascia was a major heroin dealer and was killed not by Mafia rivals but by Albanian drug traffickers with whom he had a dispute.
But he said that when they filed their arguments next month the defense lawyers would not likely make the typical bids for sympathy. ''We have to be pragmatic,'' Mr. Breitbart said. The prosecutors are likely to plow through their files looking for unvarnished insights into Mr. Massino and the mob way of life. After Mr. Sciascia was killed, one court filing says, one of the government's informants told them that Mr. Massino had reviewed the killing in detail.
In addition to the three gunshot wounds in Mr. Sciascia's head, there were two shots to his torso and one in his neck. The prosecutors say one of their informants described Mr. Massino's bottom line on the killing.
Mr. Massino is supposed to have said to an informant, ''It served him right for telling me how to run the family.''
