In an abrupt change, the Department of Correction announced yesterday that it had scrapped a four-year-old plan to build a new maximum-security lockdown unit on Rikers Island to house inmates with severe disciplinary problems.
Instead, the department will build a unit that will house 700 to 800 inmates from the island's general population, Commissioner Martin F. Horn told the city Board of Correction.
The new focus on building new general population housing on Rikers drew praise from some of the Correction Department's most frequent critics, including Legal Aid Society's Prisoners' Rights Project, which had criticized the design of a new lockdown unit where inmates are kept in isolation for 23 hours a day. The group had called the lockdown unnecessarily harsh and lacking basic amenities like outdoor recreation space and direct access to sunlight.
''Such conditions promote psychiatric deterioration, self-mutilation and suicide attempts among prisoners,'' said John Boston, the project's director, in an e-mail message yesterday. ''The Department of Correction has jails on Rikers that are falling apart, and it is to their credit and the public's benefit if they focus their efforts on replacing them.''
Building the new housing unit will cost about $126 million, $14 million less than what any new, 448-bed lockdown unit would have cost the city, Commissioner Horn said. The new general housing unit is scheduled to open in the summer of 2006, he said.
The current Rikers lockdown unit, known as the Central Punitive Segregation Unit, will remain open, Commissioner Horn told the board, an oversight agency that monitors operations within the jail system. In killing off the plan for a new disciplinary housing area, Commissioner Horn eliminated a project conceived and championed more than three years ago by his predecessor.
''I'm happy to hear that Commissioner Horn has taken the advice of the Council,'' said City Councilwoman Yvette D. Clarke, a Brooklyn Democrat who, as chair of the council's Committee on Fire and Criminal Justice Services, has repeatedly criticized the project.
