JUST when it seemed that all innovative exhibitions about Impressionism had been done, along comes ''Manet and the Sea'' at the Philadelphia Museum of Art. And given that Impressionism, the world's most popular art movement, is arguably foremost an art of the city, the country and the riverbank, this show hails from an unexpected realm, that of Neptune.
''Manet and the Sea,'' which opens on Sunday, examines the movement's roots in the seascapes and harbor scenes of the great Édouard Manet, as well as those by Gustave Courbet, Eugène Boudin, Johan Barthold Jongkind and James McNeill Whistler. It then traces seafaring motifs through the work of full-fledged Impressionists like Monet, Renoir and Berthe Morisot.
In many ways this exhibition -- organized by the Philadelphia Museum in concert with the Art Institute of Chicago, where it opened last fall, and the Van Gogh Museum in Amsterdam, where it will be seen this summer -- is based on a nearly simplistic equation of subject matter to form. It correlates the fluidity of the sea with the loosening brushwork of late-19th-century French painters. It suggests that the natural tricolor of beach, water and sky encouraged tendencies toward the simplified compositions and flattened, abstract space that became so basic to 20th-century art.
But at the same time, ''Manet and the Sea'' reaffirms the importance of the world, of reality, as a guide and inspiration for the artists whose work is often seen as the beginning of ''art for art's sake.'' The sea had a liberating effect on these painters in every way, and not just because its infinite surfaces and incessant movement loosened the bonds of one-point perspective. If the exhibition's bottom-line message were reduced to a T-shirt slogan, it might be: No Ocean, No Modernism.
Of course there is no life without the ocean, but that obvious fact doesn't make the show any less revelatory, whatever the level of your involvement with painting. This show can enhance anyone's visceral understanding of the often magical way that touch, technique, artistic personality and vision collude in the fashioning of painted surfaces that command the eye's complete attention, sometimes from across a crowded room.
Such commands ring out regularly in Philadelphia, where the show is installed in a single enormous gallery free of major divisions. Manet's works -- paintings, oil studies, watercolors, sketches and one etching -- march down the center of the space, displayed, usually one at a time, on narrow temporary walls. Everyone else's paintings straightforwardly line the outside walls. The design seems intended to create broad vistas, reiterating the sea's liberating visual power. You can usually see where you have been or where you are going, and you can almost always scan several artists' work at once, a bonus that distills aesthetic differences in telling ways.
The show's title has an elemental ring. ''Manet and the Sea'' is not exactly what you would expect from the most dandyish and Parisian of French painters. ''Manet and the City'' or ''Manet and Modern Life'' would be more like it.
In fact, Manet ranks among the most bona fide sailor-painters in the history of art. And in the 1850's and 60's, when many of the works in this show were made, the railroad was making the French beaches accessible to city dwellers for the first time: the canvases here are not completely devoid of well-dressed Parisians.
Manet originally planned to spend his life at sea and seems to have stumbled into art only after failing the entrance exam to the French naval officers' academy -- not once but twice. His attempts to pass included, between his first and second failures, a four-month voyage from France to Rio de Janeiro and back with 47 other students in 1848, when he was 16. He later wrote that he had spent hours studying the ocean's surface and the effect of light upon waves.
During this trip his drafting skills and abilities as a caricaturist were widely admired; on the trip home, the captain pressed him into service as a drawing teacher. By the early 1850's, Manet was back in Paris, studying art, but until the last years of his life he spent many summer and spring months at various French and occasionally Dutch seaside towns, painting and sketching. Although his 400-canvas oeuvre included almost no landscapes, it has more than 40 seascapes.
For historical background, the show starts with a few 18th-century Dutch and early-19th-century French marine paintings whose capable creators tended to treat the sea as an often-too-solid stage on which to enact battles between fastidiously detailed men-of-war. In his own way, Manet bowed to the tradition of nautical history painting with his first large-scale seascape, ''The Battle of the U. S .S Kearsarge and the C. S .S. Alabama'' (1864), a rendition of a naval battle of the Civil War that took place that year off the coast of Cherbourg, with crowds of French citizens looking on. (This work and a second painting of the Kearsarge that was recently acquired by the Metropolitan Museum of Art formed the core of a small show at the Met last summer; in many ways it was a prologue to Philadelphia's.) There are also two wonderful paintings by Delacroix that remind us that the turbulent ocean was an emblematic subject of Romanticism.
Manet and company saw the sea differently from all these artists. For them it was sufficient on its own -- without man, ship, dramatic storm or spit of land, as Courbet's boundless ocean views demonstrate. They saw it as an active thing to be actively built out of, rather than merely rendered in, paint. The resulting images mirrored actual experience more effectively than any expanse of carefully scalloped waves or delicately plumed foam; they also expanded the possibilities of personal expression.
If the Romantics had forced the idea of individual expression and artistic freedom into their work, the artists of Manet and Courbet's generation seemed to let these qualities rise easily to the surface, as natural as handwriting, in the translation of experience into paint. It's the distinctions between these different sensibilities that make this beautiful show so rich. Each artist weighs in on the subject.
There is one Renoir in which tumbling surf is rendered in thick Burma Shave strokes of white paint that might as well be by Robert Ryman, and another -- a fluorescent sunset -- whose staccato surface reminds you that Turner might have been included in the show's starting gallery. Morisot's harbor views seem incredibly daring in their lack of finish -- de Kooningesque at times -- and depart strikingly from the cautious deliberation that informs so much of her work.
The most startling juxtaposition is a string of Courbet's rugged palette-knifed seascapes, followed by a series of gauzy, languidly silken beach scenes by Whistler. The artists are polar opposites -- the alpha and omega of the show -- and their sharp contrast makes one re-experience some of the shock their paint handling must have inspired in 19th-century viewers. (It also makes it almost titillating to read in a caption that Courbet and Whistler spent a summer painting side by side on the French coast.)
There is a similar but more subtle back-and-forth between Manet, with his studied nonchalance -- partly inspired by Japanese prints, partly endemic to his cerebral personality -- and Monet, whose 14 canvases form the center of the show. Manet often paints like someone walking a tightrope, always about to teeter over into sloppiness or incoherence. This precariousness can infuse even ambitious works, like the magnificently mysterious ''Moonlight, Boulogne,'' an inky image with an oozing dark-blue sky and watery moon; it seems like a homage to Rembrandt's ''Night Watch.''
Sometimes he teeters in the opposite direction, regimenting his images with a marked severity, as in an 1868 painting of the jetties at Boulogne, with its edge-to-edge march of black pylons, and to a lesser extent in his ''Port of Calais.'' Manet's smaller works are often little more than a few swipes of beautifully modulated blue-greens, some rapidly dashed off whitecaps and a cluster of gray commas and triangles (sails) on the horizon. Manet's penchant for decentered compositions is visible even when he pulls back from the sea. In ''The Beach at Boulogne,'' he scatters people about as randomly as if they were boats.
Monet plays the straight man to Manet's balancing acts. It is almost a relief to reach the long, glorious wall of his works midway through the show. In painting after painting, Monet plants both feet on the ground and makes sure that every centimeter of canvas is attended to and every milligram of paint counts for something.
This is supposed to be Manet's show, but Monet, taking the best from Manet and Courbet, may be its secret hero. And lest you think he is too well behaved, toward the end of the exhibition three paintings of breaking waves from 1881 lie in wait. In these, Monet stirs and spirals shades of pale blue, pale green and white into an almost comical froth, often, it seems, using a paintbrush handle.
You may be inclined to think that this show goes down like butter, but don't forget that fat is the richest of nutrients.
''Manet and the Sea'' opens on Sunday at the Philadelphia Museum of Art, Benjamin Franklin Parkway at 26th Street, (215) 763-8100, and runs through May 31.
ART REVIEW
