DOT IN THE UNIVERSE  By Lucy Ellmann  Illustrated. 199 pages. Bloomsbury. $13.95.
If you can picture Larry David as a ditsy, suicidal blonde living in England and collecting tea cozies, then you have a pretty good idea of Dot Butser, the heroine of Lucy Ellmann's batty and highly amusing screed of a novel.
Dot is annoyed with, well, just about everything.
She hates the smell of newly mown grass, the ceaseless movement of the sea, the clackety clack of computer keyboards (which sounds like ''mice MASTICATING''). She hates little old ladies. She hates scientists. She hates herself, and her body's disgusting functions. In fact, she hates the whole human race, ''so unprepossessingly UPRIGHT, gangly, and so BARE,'' without fur or feathers: ''Tiny despots in a universe that may be equally despicable.''
She is grossed out by American suburbs and by the fat people who live there. She is incensed that people get horrible illnesses and die hideous, random deaths. And she is in an existential fury over the stupid, horrible meaninglessness of life, the absurdity of it all.
About the only things that Dot likes are sex with her husband, John, and dreaming about pie. Dot may resemble some of the author's earlier heroines -- cranky creatures all, embittered by romantic disappointments and family deaths -- but ''Dot in the Universe'' emerges as Ms. Ellmann's most fully realized novel yet.
It's a blackly comedic fable that dispenses with the awkward collagelike method employed in ''Man or Mango?'' (1998) and ''Sweet Desserts'' (1989), in favor of a narrative that's loonier and more direct, a narrative that perfectly showcases the author's eccentric talents: her knack for turning rage into zany humor; her daft but feisty misanthropy; her ability to extract poignancy and even lyricism from ridiculous and scatological situations.
At its best ''Dot in the Universe'' reads like Mr. David, Tracey Ullman and Will Self channeling Jonathan Swift; by turns scathing, self-pitying and operatic, the novel manages to be manic, nutty and Rabelaisian all at the same time.
When first we meet Dot she is married to John and living in the seaside English village of Jaywick, a town ''originally conceived as a low-cost summer retreat for car-factory workers,'' and ''subsequently taken over by ill-judging old folk like John's grandmother (who'd left her house to him).''
Dot and John set about having lots of energetic sex and eating lots of fancy meals. For a while Dot, who looks like a would-be Princess Diana -- ''the perfect face for her era: tight-lipped, pointy-nosed, pink-skinned, blonde-haired'' -- is able to keep her existential terrors at bay, but bit by bit she grows increasingly unhinged. And as she does so Ms. Ellmann's narrative grows increasingly surreal.
Dot, who has been hiding a Fatal Flaw, which fills her with shame and despair, finds that her marriage is unraveling. She accidentally sideswipes a young boy with her car, mistaking him for a traffic cone, and she embarks on a career as a serial murderer, knocking off several of her old-biddy neighbors.
Her first suicide attempt is a bust. But her second is a spectacular success.
From there it's on to the Underworld, the weakest section of this novel, as it is depicted as a predictable pastiche of Dante, Milton and cartoon visions of purgatory and hell. Dot learns that reincarnation is an option, but is startled to find herself reborn as a baby possum, who will die a particularly awful death on the altar of science.
Her second reincarnation is decidedly more auspicious. This time she is an all-American girl -- a person! -- in Cincinnati, brought up with her genius brother Ferdinand on popcorn, toasted marshmallows, pickles, Popsicles and Girl Scout cookies. After her parents' death, however, Dot's life quickly assumes a less wholesome aspect: incest, pornography and scandal, leading to more death and despair.
Ms. Ellmann, who grew up in the United States and England, the daughter of the eminent biographer Richard Ellmann, orchestrates these dire events with cheerful aplomb and large helpings of bile. Although the novel occasionally threatens to spin apart into a series of stand-up rants and kvetchings, it is held together not only by an ingenious plot and cleverly interwoven motifs but also by the author's distinctive, choleric and thoroughly unstoppable voice.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
