Elisa Monte established herself as a choreographer with a belief in the equality of the sexes from her first piece, which was a sensual 1979 duet called ''Treading'' that is now a modern-dance classic.
That equality is an unstated but strong element in three of the four dances presented by Elisa Monte Dance on Tuesday at the Joyce.
The fourth, Ms. Monte's new ''Shekhina,'' addresses female sexuality directly. Her inspiration was a recently published book, of the same name, with photographs by Leonard Nimoy that explore the female manifestation of God in the ancient Jewish texts of the cabala. But what poured out across the stage in ''Shekhina'' looked more like a 21st-century version of the billowy Doris Humphrey-Ruth St. Denis ''Soaring.''
Ms. Monte performed with Pilobolus after a career as a principal dancer with Martha Graham. Her dances tend toward a dramatic urgency that is very Grahamesque. Pilobolus takes over in ''Shekhina,'' a full-company piece in which gauzy fabric unspools from the wings to fill the stage with what looks like white light made three-dimensional. The fabric wraps around and unfolds to hide and reveal the dancers' bodies.
Those bodies angle into jagged shapes that draw the eye. There is exhilarating cross-stage travel. But the frequent lifting high of women, their bodies often spread-eagled, seems more Pilobolus than Monte and very undivine. The music has a strong Old World Jewish flavor in a score that includes traditional music and contemporary work by Frank London, Lorin Sklamberg and Shmerke Kaczerginski, some of it recorded by the Klezmatics. The religiosity of the music is like oil, though, to the water of this suite of pretty, imagistic dances.
The gauzy lighting and costumes, by Clifton Taylor and Karen Young respectively, do not help. Even Ms. Monte's impressive dancers -- Natalie Turner, Marden Ramos, Bafana Solomon Matea, Po-Chieh Chen, Nicole Corea, Jennifer Hardy, Fabrice Lamego and Rafeal Ferreras -- look less fiercely engaged than usual.
Ms. Monte seems not to have settled completely into her theme in ''Shekhina.'' The connection feels stronger in last year's ''Light Lies,'' which opened the program. There is a gutsier underpinning to the visual beauty of the piece, in which Ms. Monte and Mr. Taylor respond to the color theories of the Bauhaus painter Josef Albers.
Set to music by Michael Gordon, David Lang and Julia Wolfe, ''Light Lies'' sends its eight dancers moving through light that looks saturated with colors, which shift as subtly as the choreography juxtaposes continuous motion with moments of vibrant stillness. Ms. Monte's gift for making each moment count at least as much as the dancers' trajectory is evident in ''Light Lies'' and the program's two other dances.
Lyrical, heroic and filled with quiet dignity, the dancers are at their best in ''Light Lies'' and in ''Dextra Dei,'' a male quartet whose buried narrative suddenly pushes through at the end in a single harrowing image. Set to music by Tibor Szemzo with exquisitely nuanced dramatic lighting by Craig Miller, ''Dextra Dei'' was performed by Mr. Ferreras, Mr. Matea, Mr. Lamego and Mr. Ramos.
The program, one of two to be presented at the Joyce, also included ''Treading'' performed in an interestingly cool and distanced way by Ms. Turner and Mr. Ramos.
The company performs through Sunday night at the Joyce, 175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, in Chelsea.
DANCE REVIEW
