Alan Feinberg's explorations in the piano repertory are always refreshing, and usually surprising. Having built his reputation playing contemporary music, with a subspecialty in the music of Ives, he devoted a concert this season to Haydn sonatas, played beside music of two contemporary composers, Mauricio Kagel and Judith Weir. When the Abby Whiteside Foundation presented him in another recital on Wednesday evening at Weill Recital Hall, he offered a program that at a glance seemed equally eclectic.
Its focal point, though, was the composer Robert Helps, who died in 2001, and who had been among Mr. Feinberg's teachers. In the first half of the program, Mr. Feinberg played Helps's ''Hommages'' and Three Études, as well as the Sonata No. 3 by Roger Sessions, who had been one of Helps's teachers (as was Abby Whiteside). After the intermission, he played Debussy Preludes as a way of acknowledging Helps's interest in French music, and then a set of Helps transcriptions.
The program brought Helps to life in a way that commemorations of this kind usually don't, not least because Mr. Feinberg's selections conveyed not only a sense of Helps's flexible compositional style, but also an impression of how Helps heard and thought about other composers' music.
The ''Hommages,'' for example, are meditations on the styles of Fauré, Rachmaninoff and Ravel, and they focus concisely and precisely on those composers' musical thumbprints. The homage to Fauré, for example, is characterized by a graceful, Gallic melody supported by harmonies that grow increasingly dense, and the Rachmaninoff paraphrase puts rippling surfaces in the foreground as a virtuosic fig leaf covering adventurous harmonic twists. The Ravel was less successful: its winding lines, heavily pedaled, touch on Ravel's atmospheric sense of mystery, perhaps, but if Ravel's name were not in its title, it wouldn't immediately come to mind.
Mr. Feinberg's pianism ranges from elegant to reckless, depending on the music at hand. His performance of the ''Hommages'' was at the graceful end of that spectrum. There was a touch of that quality as well in the more energetic, forceful Études, a set of remarkably contrapuntal works for the left hand only. And several of the transcriptions -- most notably John Ireland's ''Love Is a Sickness Full of Woes'' -- relied on Mr. Feinberg's capacity for gentle nuance.
The Sessions Third Sonata, a work with ruminative outer movements and a steely explosive core, demands the less cautious side of Mr. Feinberg's playing, and he was at his best when its textures were at their spikiest.
Between those extremes, a half-dozen of Debussy's Preludes sailed along uneventfully. And if an account of Liszt's transcription of Schumann's ''Liebeslied'' placed a higher value on Liszt's fire than on Schumann's poetry, it was certainly a plausible approach.
MUSIC REVIEW
