CYNTHIA ADLER collects New York personalities. They bubble out of her as her voice dips into low octaves or climbs to the squeaky squeal of a child who has had one too many sugar highs. Her body, with each new impersonation, kaleidoscopes itself into postures that pump her up into a Queens garage mechanic or diminishes her to the size of a frail, elderly doyenne, oozing snobbery, from the Upper East Side.
As she swings from one impersonation to the next it is hard to keep pace. But in her cross section of characters lies not only New York, but the world beyond, a world that, as she makes plain, is sharply divided by class, money and the rhythm and inflections of speech.
If there is a common denominator among her characters, on display in her one-woman show, ''Downloaded and in Denial,'' now at the Passage Theater in Trenton and soon to be at the Stella Adler Studio in New York, it is the way we have all been knocked off balance by a world that seems to be spinning at a faster and faster rate.
''We are saturated with information overload,'' she said. ''We live in an intensely exciting time, but one that pushes us away from intuition. We don't know what is real anymore.''
Ms. Adler declined to give her age, saying slyly, ''I'm not giving it.''
But it is safe to say that she remembers the Beatles.
''I am a woman and an actress,'' she said with a slight imperiousness as she stretched one leg out on the stage. ''If I tell you, I will tell you the wrong age anyway. I don't believe in age. Life is like a bouquet of flowers. When the petals fall off that's it. You don't need to know how long I have been in the water.''
She has one of those varied lives where it is hard for even her to keep track. She left her home in Long Island for New York City and the High School of Performing Arts. She bombarded Mad magazine with little poems and jokes in the hopes of being published, which she was occasionally. And then she went to New York University to study journalism but was miserable and never finished.
''I wanted the excitement of the street,'' she said. ''I wanted to go out and see the world.''
She wrote for several publications that no longer exist, tried her hand at writing ad copy, drifted to California, worked on radio doing gigs and stumbled into a job doing cartoon voices for Hanna-Barbera. She stops to do a rendition of a cartoon duck. She was engaged, broke it off, was ''really depressed,'' was engaged to someone else, married and then divorced.
By then she was back in New York with her trunk full of voices doing voice-overs for companies like Revlon, Mercedes-Benz, Pampers and Estée Lauder. She did most of the female characters in the animated feature ''Fantastic Planet'' and wielded Muppets for Jim Henson and Frank Oz in London. She also dubbed roles in movies like Lina Wertmuller's ''Swept Away'' and ''Seven Beauties.''
But steady work on television came with an HBO show called ''Real Sex.''
''Real stories,'' she says in a voice that seems to rise up from her gut and sounds heavy with cigarette smoke, ''real people, real sex.''
''Look at this little place where whips and chains are everyday occurrences,'' she drawls.
SHE stops, as if the screen has just been flicked off.
''The show was about sex practices around the world,'' she said, ''such as a school for dominatrixes. They did a lot of stories about charming brothels where women love their work.''
She put together cabaret shows, often based on the lives of artists like Johnny Mercer. And then she went to see the actress-playwright Claudia Shear do a show called ''Blown Sideways Through Life.''
''She was heavy at the time,'' she said. ''It was wonderful. I cried for two nights. It was all about her jobs, her revelations. Her life was laid bare, all her shortcomings and fears in the characters she brought to life.''
She walked away determined to pull from her own theatrical closet the worlds she knew, the characters of the city where she has spent most of her life living on the Upper West Side.
''I take the characters I know and have them discuss the very subjects they know least about,'' she said. ''It gives it a comic edge and then forces us to think.''
She portrays a mechanic from Astoria who shot his mother-in-law to death and was acquitted by the jury, and who is teaching a class at the Learning Annex called Anyone Can Spin. She becomes a woman who at 29 has periodic preventive plastic surgery ''so even when I am 80 I can look 25.'' And she morphs into a wealthy matron who lives at the Carlyle Hotel with her husband and loves the depletion of the ozone. ''It would take me five days to get a decent tan. Now I can get the same tan in three hours.''
Ms. Adler, who married the actor John Henry Cox in 1994, has an irrepressible optimism, despite making fun of the world around her. She insists that we can see through it all, past the hype and the graphics, the steady bombardment of information and images.
''My audiences are mostly young,'' she said. ''They get what is going on. They know the manipulation. They are pretty awake.''
PUBLIC LIVES
