Although a dancer's injury onstage affected the New York debut of Configuration, a new contemporary ballet company from Massachusetts, its aspirations were apparent on Monday night at Symphony Space.
Those who wonder what became of Joseph Cipolla, once a principal at Dance Theater of Harlem, will now find him and his wife, Catherine Batcheller, directing this chamber troupe, founded in 1999 in the Cape Cod town of Orleans. Both dancers were American principals in England with Birmingham Royal Ballet, which Mr. Cipolla joined in 1986.
Like the directors, a few of the dancers in Configuration have left major companies to experiment on less than an opera-house scale. Edwaard Liang, formerly a New York City Ballet soloist, stood out favorably as both dancer and choreographer here.
The other choreographers, Harrison McEldowney, Thaddeus Davis and Peter Quanz have come to notice in New York in recent years. Mr. McEldowney, working in Chicago with Hubbard Street Dance Theater, has used that company's jazz and social-dance roots to creative purpose.
In ''Swan Tango'' he had Mr. Cipolla and Ms. Batcheller trying to mix ballet technique and partnering with tango moves. Sometimes it worked and sometimes it didn't, although there was some fancy leg flicking in tango's Milonga style.
It was not such a clever idea to dance a balletic tango to the adagio from Act II of ''Swan Lake.'' Tchaikovsky came up short on tango rhythms.
There is an exciting contemporary thrust to the company's repertory, but its emphasis on partnering, sometimes awkwardly executed, is limiting.
Mr. Davis's untidy ''Situation Red'' was a stab at something different, although here again Juan Rodriguez alternately partnered Bonnie Pickard and Heather Hamilton. The women may have been two aspects of the same character: they often had the same wide, leg-swinging movement on toe with rear end abutting, although Ms. Hamilton had more exhilarating attack. Peter Wyer's jazz score, studded with words (''I've got lots of baggage'') added to the undefined drama.
Mr. Liang's ''Flight of Angels'' used John Tavener's choral music for Olivier Wecxsteen's undulating encounter with Ms. Batcheller as a muscular angel in a white tunic. The man spends most if not all his time manipulating the woman into overhead lifts and holds. Better danced, the choreography would have a stronger intensity.
Mr. Rodriguez twisted his ankle and exited some 10 minutes into Mr. Quanz's ''Corelli Variations,'' with Rachmaninoff's music played on the piano onstage by Philip Kraft. What looks like a neo-Romantic piano ballet for three couples will have to be judged another time.
But Mr. McEldowney's ''At the End of the Road,'' set to Irving Berlin songs, was a winner. This time the mix of idioms explored relationships. And the choreographer received a big hand for stepping in to replace Mr. Rodriguez and partnering the exuberant Ms. Hamilton. He also had a comic turn with Megan Martiros. Ms. Batcheller and Mr. Liang were the cool couple, and Ms. Pickard and Mr. Wecxsteen were elegant.
BALLET REVIEW
