New Jersey state health officials said yesterday that a strain of avian flu virus that was found in four live chicken markets that were ordered closed recently in the northern part of the state posed no threat to human health.
Inspectors found traces of the virus in the markets during routine annual inspections of the state's 30 or so live chicken markets, said Dr. Clifton R. Lacy, the state commissioner of Health and Senior Services. But the strain they found is not the same as the virulent variety that has spread from poultry to the human population in Asia, killing at least 19 people.
''There is thorough screening to prevent the transportation of infected poultry from Asia and from other infected areas in the world from entering this country,'' Dr. Lacy said in a teleconference with reporters yesterday. ''But specifically, here there isn't a risk.''
''The form that's here in New Jersey is not hazardous to human health,'' he said. ''The form we have here has been with us for 15 years.''
The strain found in New Jersey may be the same as that found in Delaware, where state officials ordered the slaughter of almost 80,000 chickens at poultry farms in the central part of the state this week after evidence of the flu was found. Officials there have also said that the flu virus found is not harmful to humans. Delaware officials have not identified the strain of virus, Dr. Lacy said.
But Dr. Nancy Halpern, the New Jersey state veterinarian, said New Jersey and Delaware faced different situations, so there was no need for slaughter of chickens in New Jersey.
''In Delaware you have commercial flocks of birds that were infected, hence they were depopulated to prevent further spread in a state where you have a billion-dollar industry in broilers,'' she said. ''In New Jersey we do not have a broiler industry, and further, we've only documented the virus in our live bird market and only a few of them.''
Dr. Halpern said the chicken houses in northern New Jersey, which her department did not identify, would be closed for a week to give the owners time to disinfect them.
She said that it was not uncommon to find evidence of the flu at the chicken farms, and that the owners of the markets had been given more information about how to keep their establishments free of the virus.
The officials said that in addition to the live chicken markets, New Jersey has some poultry farms, and most of them produce eggs rather than selling off the chickens as broilers. They are also inspected regularly, but no virus has been found.
The officials said the virus in the chickens would not harm humans, and would in fact die off if the chickens were cooked. They urged people to follow proper cooking procedures with poultry, beef and eggs, as they should have been doing anyway.
But news of the discovery of a virus in chickens has already affected shoppers.
At the Crescent Live Halal Poultry Market in Paterson, N.J., Hamid Mansury, the owner, said his customers were hearing news of the flu discoveries. ''People are panicking,'' he said as he looked out the window.
