Dana Vollmer is here at the United States spring swimming championships with her entire entourage: mother, father, brother, coach and portable defibrillator.
This is not just a story of an athlete overcoming physical problems and getting an opportunity to compete against world-class athletes. At 16, Vollmer is a world-class swimmer, the winner of three gold medals last summer in the Pan American Games and a strong candidate to make the United States team for the Athens Olympics in the 200-meter freestyle and the 100-meter butterfly. She came here ranked fourth among Americans in both events.
Her heart problems -- two, not one -- have hardly detoured her. Before they developed, Vollmer was the youngest swimmer in the United States Olympic trials at 12 and won a bronze medal in the summer nationals at 13. At 15, she swam in a national championship 11 days after a heart procedure.
Here, she is swimming six events over four days. On Wednesday night, she finished fourth in the women's 100-meter freestyle final in 55.94 seconds, her fastest ever. On Thursday night, she placed eighth and last in the 200-meter freestyle final in 2 minutes 3.01 seconds. Lindsay Benko, the defending champion, won in 1:58.62.
Vollmer is from Granbury, Tex., a 45-minute drive from Fort Worth and Dallas. She is 6 feet tall and weighs 145 pounds with, she says, no muscle. She is a high school sophomore with a straight-A average.
In 2002, Vollmer's heart would sometimes race when she trained, and it took 10 or 15 minutes to slow down. She developed a different problem that May in a club basketball game when she tore the anterior cruciate ligament in her right knee.
''The orthopedist said she could have surgery then and miss the rest of the swimming season or train if she could stand the pain,'' Ron Forrest, her swimming coach the last four years, said Thursday. ''He said the knee wouldn't get worse. She decided to train through the pain, freestyle only because she couldn't do the butterfly kick.''
Pain or not, she qualified for the Pan American Games the next year. ''Six or seven months after the knee came the heart,'' her mother, Cathy, said.
In an interview here, Vollmer picked up the story. ''A week and a half before the 2003 spring nationals, I was training when my heart rate jumped to 250,'' she said. ''I got out of the water. The heart rate wouldn't go down for five minutes.''
She had always had a racing heart, but this sent her to a doctor.
''He tested me on a treadmill, and he found I had an extra electrical pathway,'' Vollmer said. ''They did surgery called radiofrequency ablation. They put a wire into my leg and up into my heart and burned off that extra pathway.''
Two days after that procedure, she was back swimming. Nine days after that, she finished fifth in the 100-meter butterfly in the nationals.
Her problems were not over. During the procedure, doctors discovered another heart problem.
''It's called Long QT,'' Vollmer said. ''The resting period between heartbeats takes too long randomly. The doctors said my heart could just stop, so they told me to get a portable defibrillator and have it there whenever I swim. My mother and my coach have it here. My friends have learned how to use it. So far, I haven't needed it.''
SPLASHES
MICHAEL PHELPS, who won two finals Wednesday night in the Y.M.C.A. Aquatic Center's 50-meter pool, took the 200-meter freestyle Thursday night by 5 meters in 1:46.47, close to his American record of 1:45.99. In the 400-meter individual medley, KEVIN CLEMENTS won the men's final in 4:18.91 and 14-year-old KATIE HOFF the women's in 4:42.32.
SWIMMING
