A driver led police officers on a frantic chase through several New Jersey municipalities yesterday afternoon, swerving onto sidewalks, bashing into cars and driving the wrong way. He also careered through a park, and, according to those who had watched the chase live on television, at least three lawns.
The pursuit was broadcast on several television stations. The driver, identified by the police as John Dobrowolski, 27, of Bayonne, was finally caught by police officers in his father's driveway at 5:20 p.m., after traveling about 50 miles.
The Jersey City police said the ordeal began about 3:30 p.m. when Mr. Dobrowolski rear-ended a pickup truck in Readington Township, got out of his Jeep and struck the driver of the truck with a pool cue. The police also said he exchanged gunfire with police officers, but they had not found a gun in his car.
Mr. Dobrowolski was being treated last night in the psychiatric ward in the Jersey City Medical Center, the police said. A man reached by telephone last night, who identified himself as Mr. Dobrowolski's older brother, said Mr. Dobrowolski had recently been taking medication for what doctors thought might be schizophrenia.
A police officer was injured in the arm and a few other people received minor injuries during the chase, which left many viewers in the region glued to their television sets.
Tom Clare, a bartender at Booney's Saloon in Jersey City, said he was watching ''The Oprah Winfrey Show'' when the picture changed 15 minutes before the show's normal 5 p.m. end. Scenes of the chase flicked across the screen.
''It was just unreal,'' he said. ''Like one of those pseudo-reality cop shows.''
Mr. Clare, 27, compared the broadcast to the decade-old televised scenes of the O.J. Simpson chase along a California highway, ''but this guy was a lot crazier.''
''He was going through the park, through people's lawns, down the sidewalk,'' he said.
At one point, the car stopped and two police officers approached it, Mr. Clare said. The driver slammed the car into reverse, bashed another car and spun around, eluding the police officers.
''It was definitely a case of road rage,'' said Glenn Cunningham, Jersey City's mayor.
The police said Mr. Dobrowolski will face charges of aggravated assault and possession of dangerous weapons.
Along the way, Mr. Dobrowolski sideswiped a cab, and the cab began to chase him, said Santiago Rivera, a Jersey City resident who watched the chase on television.
''It made for some pretty interesting visuals,'' Mr. Clare said.
