Jacqulyn Buglisi and Donlin Foreman, who have danced with Martha Graham, are seen by some as taking the Graham canon into the 21st century. But one of the most enjoyable aspects of a program presented by Buglisi/Foreman Dance on Wednesday night at the Joyce Theater was the way it reached back into the past.
The music, choreography, production values and artistic themes were larger than life. The performers moved with a grandeur that identified them, in ways good and bad, as Graham dancers or their direct descendants. And while Ms. Buglisi has an often startling visual imagination, she and Mr. Foreman seem happiest luxuriating in movement and gesture and leaving the experimentation to others.
The centerpiece of the program was Ms. Buglisi's new ''Rain,'' a visually stunning homage to rain forests. Handsomely photographed projections of teeming vegetation and tumescent raindrops interact with dancers behind a scrim, in an impressive double feat of choreography. The overall look is lush, but the greatest attraction of ''Rain'' is how its eight dancers come together and separate, as if engaged in a mysterious real-time ritual or intent on some private errand. The dancers dip and swirl and eddy through this secret enclave, seemingly unaware of being watched. Nothing happens. Everything happens.
The projections and set design are by Jacobo Borges, a Venezuelan environmental painter and filmmaker who collaborated with Ms. Buglisi on the first dance in a trilogy, inspired by environmental issues, that has been completed by ''Rain.'' The lighting is by Clifton Taylor and the music by Glen Velez, who performed live, and by Lori Cotler, Villa-Lobos and Mahler. The handsome costumes are the work of Ms. Buglisi and A. Christina Giannini.
The quality of movement and the rapture of Mr. Foreman's new ''Cascade,'' a group work danced to Chopin piano pieces performed by Steven Ryan, are more Isadora Duncan than Graham. The piece is lusciously pretty, though with a jarring false ending. Its seven dancers move in fluid sequences, heroic humans whose bodies are embraced by their costumes. But ''Cascade'' would benefit from being on a different program, given its similarity in tone to what has come before.
Jack Mehler designed the lighting and Ms. Giannini the costumes. Walter Cinquinella stood out for the crisp attack and precise physical articulation he brought to a central solo in ''Cascade.''
The program was completed by Ms. Buglisi's ''Requiem,'' danced by five women to Fauré's Requiem, and Mr. Foreman's uneasily playful ''Lisa D.,'' set to music by Lisa DeSpain, performed by the Cassatt String Quartet. Ms. Buglisi uses squatting bodies and processionals to evoke the music's weight. She also makes interesting use of five boxes that are both seats and pedestals. The dancers' quickness and guts recall the wonderful way that Ms. Buglisi moved when she performed for Graham. But this piece, and Mr. Taylor's lighting, degenerate into kitsch near the end. Jennifer Emerson and Helen Hansen were notable for their eager freshness in a cast completed by Christine Dakin, Virginie Mécène and Miki Orihara.
The program will be repeated tomorrow and Sunday nights at the Joyce (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
DANCE REVIEW
