MOST trial watchers focused their attention yesterday on Centre Street in Manhattan. You could hardly blame them.
Federal court had Martha Stewart and the burning question of what she was wearing for her latest date with the jury. Up the block, in state court, there was L. Dennis Kozlowski, the former Tyco International chief executive and, for many, the embodiment of corporate greed.
It is pretty hard to top the revelations in the Kozlowski trial, best of all the $2.1-million birthday party that he held for his wife on the island of Sardinia, complete with an ice sculpture of Michelangelo's ''David'' urinating vodka. ''Money,'' the Beatles once said, ''can't buy me love.'' Or, apparently, good taste.
Meanwhile, across the river in Brooklyn, real people were in the dock.
On Schermerhorn Street, a mile and a half and a world away from the Centre Street shows, seven people from the Williamsburg neighborhood went to Criminal Court. They were called to account for an act of civil disobedience last May.
Unlike the case with Ms. Stewart, their clothes were of zero interest to anyone. And unlike Mr. Kozlowski, they were concerned not with ice but with fire.
The Williamsburg Seven were arrested after occupying a firehouse, Engine Company 212 on Wythe Avenue, in a vain attempt to keep it open. Engine 212 was one of six firehouses ordered shut by the Bloomberg administration, a budget-cutting measure that saved $6 million during unusually hard times. In Tyco talk, that's the equivalent of three birthday parties on Sardinia.
Fighting the bureaucrats is part of a long tradition in Williamsburg, where residents call Engine 212 ''the people's firehouse.'' (Never mind that every firehouse in the city belongs to the people.)
The Seven sought to connect the closings last spring to an increase in fire deaths and to a slight rise -- 11 seconds on average citywide -- in firefighter ''response time.'' That link is debatable. But the earnestness of the Williamsburg group is not. Tears shed yesterday by several defendants attested to their emotional investment.
There was, however, a question of how far were they were prepared to go in a case that had people invoking the nonviolent protests of Mohandas K. Gandhi and the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
Both of those men went to prison for their beliefs. Indeed, their readiness to accept punishment for breaking the law enhanced their actions. One of Dr. King's most important writings was ''Letter From Birmingham Jail.'' Would its impact have been the same if he had to call it ''Letter From Community Service in a Birmingham Day Care Center''?
With the Williamsburg Seven, each faced a possible jail term of 30 days and a fine of $500 if found guilty of disorderly conduct and trespass. Convictions seemed quite likely this week after the judge, James M. Burke, rejected the group's ''necessity defense,'' an argument that civil disobedience was justified to ''avert a greater harm'' -- the potential risk of fire deaths.
Yesterday, it became clear that neither the prosecution nor the defense wanted martyrdom. So they compromised.
Their agreement, accepted by Judge Burke, was an ''adjournment in contemplation of dismissal.'' In plain English, it means that if the defendants stay out of trouble for six months, the charges will be tossed. They offered no guilty plea. And they were given time to tell the judge why they felt they had to do what they did.
''It was an act of last resort in defense of my community,'' Teresa Toro said.
Outside the courtroom, Adam Perlmutter, a lawyer for the group, went up to Felice Kirby, another defendant. ''As far as I'm concerned,'' he said, ''the fact that you are people of conscience is on the record.''
STILL, questions nagged. Was this a cop-out? Wouldn't jail time have made their point more dramatically?
''It's for the philosophers to debate the right way to do civil disobedience,'' Ms. Kirby replied. ''If going to jail would advance our cause, then we'd go to jail. I feel we've advanced our cause.''
Besides, she said, Gandhi and Dr. King had to deal with repression. She may not like City Hall, but let's get real. ''I don't think the Bloomberg administration is brutal,'' she said.
The civil liberties lawyer Norman Siegel, who also represented the group, seconded her point. ''One of the principles of civil disobedience is to bring public attention,'' he said. ''They did that. Gandhi and King would have given them an A-plus.'' For effort, anyway.
NYC
