With Howard Dean regrouping and other Democratic presidential candidates rejiggering, Senate Democrats decided maybe they should get a little election-year advice, too.
So they huddled behind closed doors on Thursday for a session with a veteran political strategist, one with his own string of victories and a proven record against an incumbent Bush administration.
''I gave them a few little ideas,'' former President Bill Clinton said as he emerged from about two hours of dispensing political wisdom on Capitol Hill. ''I don't know if they are any good.''
Those who attended, including the junior senator from New York, certainly thought it was worth their while. ''He is the master,'' said Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of her husband. ''I, just like everybody else, watch and listen with admiration.''
Facing what promises to be an intense election-year battle of political wits with the Republicans, Senate Democrats summoned Mr. Clinton to the Hart Senate Office Building to confer with them on shaping a message that could be intertwined with those of the eventual Democratic presidential nominee and their counterparts in the House.
Those who attended the session said Mr. Clinton advised them not to be afraid to draw contrasts with President Bush and the Republican Congress over tax cuts, the deficit and national security. They said he sounded themes he has in recent speeches that President Bush and his administration are making a series of bad choices that will drive the nation into debt left for future generations.
Or, as Mr. Clinton told reporters, the Bush White House is ''taxing less and spending more.'' He added, ''It is fun in the short run but it is a recipe for disaster.''
As Senate Republicans headed to their own planning retreat in Philadelphia this weekend, they said they viewed the counseling by Mr. Clinton as a clear sign that Democrats are worried they could sink deeper into the minority this November. ''We fortunately have President Bush leading our team,'' said Senator George Allen of Virginia, chairman of the National Republican Senatorial Committee. ''They have to bring back Bill Clinton to tell them how to run their place. I find it a bit of desperation on their part.''
Other Republicans, while acknowledging the former president's political smarts, said the invitation was a commentary on the current state of Democratic thinking.
''That is about where they are, one administration behind the times,'' said Senator Rick Santorum of Pennsylvania, the No. 3 Republican in the Senate. ''They want to nationalize health care, have more taxes, more government, more spending.''
Participants at the Democrats' session said Mr. Clinton was upbeat about the party's prospects.
''He encouraged people, and candidates specifically, not to be too timid and reticent,'' said Senator Bob Graham, Democrat of Florida, who is giving up his seat this year.
Others at the session put it even starker terms. ''His view is the Republicans will try to set the agenda and intimidate us and that is why we lost in 2002 and we cannot let that happen again,'' said one attendee, who refused to be identified by name.
Mr. Clinton told reporters, ''We talked about what Senate Democrats could do to be more focused in their communications strategy and what was likely to happen in the coming year.''
At least one Democrat groused privately that Mr. Clinton was not always a tonic for his fellow Democrats considering the Republicans gained the House on his watch and have yet to relinquish their hold.
But for the most part, Democrats opened their arms for any help they can get in their fight to reclaim the Senate and House. Mr. Clinton remains a star and a sought-after attraction for raising money for Democratic lawmakers.
''This is an opportunity for Democrats to get together and talk about issues in a setting that is more personal and devoid of all the daily interruptions that you have when the Senate is in session,'' said a spokeswoman for the Senate Democratic leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, who invited Mr. Clinton.
Mr. Daschle, who is in a re-election fight of his own, has a major fund-raising dinner with Mr. Clinton next month and House Democrats have invited Mr. Clinton to be a keynote speaker at their own retreat next week.
''There is no better strategic mind in politics than Bill Clinton,'' Mr. Graham said.
Drawn into observations on the presidential race, Mr. Clinton dismissed suggestions that Senator John Kerry -- who was busy campaigning and was not on hand for the brainstorming session -- was too liberal to win in November. Mr. Clinton rose to Mr. Kerry's defense, saying that the Massachusetts senator assisted him during his own years in the White House. ''He was good on security, good on fiscal responsibility, good on welfare,'' Mr. Clinton said.
He made clear, however, that he was not taking sides in the Democratic primary race. ''I like all these people,'' he said, calling the contenders a good field. ''I admire them, they made a contribution to whatever good I was able to do for the American people and I am not going to get involved in this.''
And, he demurred, he was not all that plugged in, spending much of his time in New York. ''All I do is sit up there and write my book,'' he said, ''so I am a little out of it.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER PRESIDENT
