Harriet Powers (1837-1911), a freed slave from Clarke County, Ga., couldn't read or write. But she had deep religious convictions, and like many African-American women of her day, her lively way of getting them across was through the time-honored medium of quilts.
Only two of her creations are known now, both in prominent museum collections. And they are masterpieces. The first, dated 1886, deals with stories of biblical heroes who successfully overcame catastrophe, among them Moses, Noah and Job, along with phenomena like the miracle of creation, the temptation of Eve and the birth of Jesus.
In her second quilt (1895-98), Powers mixed biblical motifs with local historical events and astronomical occurrences like eclipses, meteors and comets. Her spare but eloquent quilt language involved a mastery of appliqué techniques, tribal emblems, Masonic devices and biblical imagery. Showing the effect of African and European beliefs on those of African-American women, her quilts were worked with such inspired skill and design sensitivity that they earned her the designation ''mother of African-American quilting.''
Her spirit presides over ''Threads of Faith: Recent Work From the Women of Color Quilters Network,'' at the Gallery of the American Bible Society, a vibrant show of 53 quilts with religious themes recently made by African-American women (and one man). One quilt, dedicated to Powers, is dominated by a likeness taken from the only known photograph of her. She is dressed in a white apron with a cross embroidered on it and bordered on either side by squares interpreting her imagery.
This loving commemorative was made in 1995 by Peggie Hartwell, a member of the Women of Color Quilters Network. Ms. Hartwell, who has searched in vain for Powers's burial place around Athens, Ga., writes in the show's catalog that its creation ''might be the closest I would ever get to placing a tombstone on her grave.''
But the sophistication of Ms. Hartwell and her colleagues in this show is a far cry from the humble circumstances of Powers and other African-American quiltmakers, including the famous geometricists of Gee's Bend, Ala., the subject of a traveling show soon to open at the Corcoran Gallery of Art in Washington. Most of the exhibitors here have solid educational and professional backgrounds; many, including Ms. Hartwell, are trained artists or artisans. Their imagery ranges from realistic to abstract. And their religious convictions are not always simple, though they are generally linked by Christian beliefs.
It was the broader scope of today's African-American quiltmakers and the need to ''create a forum where the drive toward personal expression would be understood'' that led Dr. Carolyn Mazloomi, an aerospace engineer and a quilt historian in West Chester, Ohio (with Patricia Pongracz of the Bible Society, she was co-curator of this show), to found the quilters network in 1985. The group now has some 1,700 members, who range in age from the 30's to the 80's and come from highly diverse backgrounds.
Using cowrie shells, cloth scraps inherited from mothers and grandmothers, pieces of African jewelry, buttons, fabrics of African design and ancient stitching techniques, the members combine elements of their heritage with contemporary imagery and social concepts.
One portrait quilt by Alice Beasley, a lawyer in Oakland, Calif., depicts observers standing behind the yellow tape of a disaster scene reminiscent of the 1996 Oklahoma City bombing. She describes her imagery as showing people of ''many ages, races, beliefs and cultures'' helplessly ''watching our society and innocence transformed.''
The wide-ranging interests of these quiltmakers divide the show into five areas: biblical narratives; women and family; prayers and spiritual meditations; worship through the arts; and African-American experiences.
A heavy hitter in this last category is L'Merchie Frazier's ''Jubilation: Is Freedom Visible?'' In this complex creation, Ms. Frazier, director of education at the Museum of Afro-American Art History in Boston, explores the theme of the underground railroad, and the multipatterned silk and cotton ground of the quilt is layered over with replicas of written texts and photo-transferred pictures.
The many pertinent documents recorded by this ambitious and highly charged quilt include diagrams of slave-ship hulls; the Emancipation Proclamation; maps of underground railroad routes; a photo of the First African Baptist Church in Boston, hub of the Underground Railroad; a letter from a black Union soldier; and a replica of General Order No. 3, which legally ended slavery in this country.
A more sardonic approach in this same category is taken by Denise M. Campbell in her ''Would the Real Aunt Jemima Please Stand Up and Claim Her Inheritance?'' The biblical Jemima, Ms. Campbell points out, was the eldest daughter of Job in his new life, a symbol of beauty and restoration.
Many people still associate the name Jemima with the derogatory one of ''Aunt'' Jemima, the buxom mammy used to advertise pancake mix. Ms. Campbell, a doctoral candidate at Claremont Graduate University in Claremont, Calif., means to redeem the image -- and that of all black women -- from the ''negative misrepresentations'' they have been subject to over the generations. Her quilt succeeds by means of its appealing color and piquant design.
The show, not surprisingly, is full of paeans to black women, and another wonderful one, this in the women and family category, is Yvonne Wells's ''Woman I Am.'' A very large hand-appliquéd and hand-quilted cotton hanging, with a zig-zag border of African derivation, it portrays a woman in a pink dress, her left breast adorned by a white cross on a red heart.
Her head is topped by a shiny silver mortarboard; she holds a broom in one hand and a purse in the other. She stands over an infant attached to her by an umbilical cord of string. Ms. Wells, a retired teacher from Tuscaloosa, Ala., intends this witty representation as a comment on the conflicting roles of black women today.
Not all of the hangings here are in the traditional format of quilts. One, made by Cleota Proctor Wilbekin of Cincinnati, is a communion robe with a cross attached, an ethereal creation of white lacework from four generations of her family and pieces from her own wedding gown, to be worn by her Lutheran pastor.
An amazing, totally abstract piece by Frances Hare of Pittsford, N.Y., incorporates many scraps whose different patterns are cunningly repeated in an elegant, irregular collarlike shape with tentacled edges. It symbolizes the individuality of each person's spiritual journey.
Another wonderful surprise is an abstract polygon by Cynthia Lockhart, a professor at the University of Cincinnati. Rhythmically patterned in curving stripes of multiple colors and adorned with beads and paint, it celebrates the joy she feels when singing and shouting praises to the Lord. It echoes the joyous vibrations in the gallery set off by this exuberant show.
''Threads of Faith: Recent Work From the Women of Color Quilters Network'' is at the Gallery at the American Bible Society, 1865 Broadway, at 61st Street, (212) 408-1500, through April 17.
DESIGN REVIEW
