It was almost post time for the first race on the first night of a new era at Saratoga Gaming and Raceway, where, nine hours earlier, the slot machine parlor had opened its doors for the first time. The horseplayers, a couple here, a couple there, milled about, hoping to find a winner among the field of seven about to meet in a $2,200 trot. It wasn't much different from any other cold winter Wednesday night at this track: the place was uncomfortably quiet.
On the floor below, Dawn Valvala from nearby Clifton Park was eating a snack inside the slots parlor, fuel for her planned attack on some of the 1,323 video lottery terminals, or slot machines, housed in the glitzy Las Vegas-style $15 million casino area that takes up most of the first floor of the facility. She would soon become one of an estimated 10,000 players who played the slots on opening day on Wednesday. She would not be betting on any horses.
''I don't think I even knew they were racing tonight,'' she said.
It was an understandable oversight. There were no betting windows for the horses inside the slots parlor, no television screens showing the races, no one selling track programs. Though the homestretch was no more than 100 feet from the closest machines, walls blocked the slot crowd's view of the races. The competition between harness racing and slot machines to attract gamblers, an unfair fight, turned into a predictable rout for the machines.
''I used to come here every once in a while,'' Lynn Henderson said from the front of the line of some 300 people waiting to get in when the slots area opened at 10 a.m. ''I'd be here and it seemed like there'd only be 100 people. I'm going to come here two or three times a week now. I prefer the slots. I've bet the horses, but the slots are a lot more fun.''
Opening day for the slot machines, which will eventually be installed at seven other New York tracks, met every expectation. There was a large crowd, a noticeable sense of excitement, and it was clear that Saratoga Gaming and Raceway was making a lot of money. Track officials would not disclose how much money was wagered, but they have predicted that each machine will produce $300 to $400 a day in profit, or about $450,000 total. Nine percent of the profits will go toward purses.
Track management has vowed it will also attempt to show the slot players the beauties of horse racing, but there was no evidence of that effort Wednesday night.
And that was of little concern to the owners, trainers and drivers at the pleasantly attractive harness track near the renowned Saratoga Race Course, a thoroughbred track. Locked in a battle for survival for years, harness horsemen will now take whatever help they can get. They may not like slot machines, but they certainly like the substantial contributions those slot proceeds make to purses.
''In a perfect world, I'd want this product to stand on its own,'' said Doug Morton, a retired New York State trooper who owns a stable at the harness track. ''For whatever reason, people like to take the easy way out when it comes to gambling. With the horses, you can make an educated guess and that can give you an opportunity to make money. There's no educated guess involved when pulling the lever on a slot machine. People just don't want to work.''
Morton said he has stayed in the business because it has been a labor of love. He now has a realistic chance to make a profit with his stable. Purses are expected to rise drastically this year, and some believe they will eventually be six times larger than preslots levels. For that reason, the opening day of the slots brought the sense of enthusiasm to the track's backside that had been missing for years.
''I am very, very excited,'' the trainer Frank Salino Jr. said. ''I'm turning horses away. The biggest problem I have now is finding stalls. It's unbelievable. People call every day looking to give me a horse or buy a horse. I turn people down every day.''
Trainers at the seven other New York tracks that will eventually add slots should soon find themselves in the same position. Even owners on the New York Racing Association circuit, which consists of Aqueduct, Belmont and Saratoga Race Course -- tracks with some of the biggest thoroughbred purses in the nation -- say they need slots to keep their heads above water.
''The estimate is that 80 to 90 percent of people who own horses in New York lose money,'' said Richard Bomze, the president of the New York Thoroughbred Horsemen's Association, which represents owners and trainers at the N.Y.R.A. tracks. ''Maybe we'll get it down to 50 percent with the slots. I don't think that's too much to ask for.''
Slots are set to open at Aqueduct in the fourth quarter of 2004, and they will most likely pump millions into purses. The N.Y.R.A. did not pursue adding slots to the gambling options at the Saratoga thoroughbred track, meaning horses alone will compete head-to-head with the machines at the neighboring harness track. With the six-week Saratoga thoroughbred summer meeting so popular, it remains to be seen if the slots across the street will hurt attendance, but it is a possibility. Slot machines are wildly popular with this country's gamblers, and horse racing seems merely along for the ride.
HORSE RACING
