THERE are two morality tales to be seen in the war for control of the media empire built by Conrad M. Black, the Canadian publisher turned British lord. Which one you find more compelling may depend as much on your place in the social structure as on the facts.
In the first story line, Lord Black rode roughshod over the interests of public shareholders, ignoring his fiduciary duty so that he could finance a lavish lifestyle.
For that tale to end justly, Lord Black must be forced to repay the money he wrongly took, and then the assets of the company, including The Daily Telegraph of London, The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post, should be sold to benefit all shareholders equally.
The alternative morality tale makes Lord Black the victim of self-righteous institutional investors, aided by the Securities and Exchange Commission, which are out to deny him the fundamental rights of ownership. In that version, justice requires that Lord Black be allowed to sell his stock to his preferred buyers, David and Frederick Barclay, who would inherit his absolute domination of the company while owning a minority of the stock.
The Sarbanes-Oxley law in the United States plays a role in each of those plays. In the first, the threat of action under it helped force previously compliant directors chosen by Lord Black to stand up to him, order an investigation and then seek repayment of money wrongly paid to him and his associates.
In the second play, fear of action under Sarbanes-Oxley keeps the Hollinger International directors from agreeing to a reasonable deal with Lord Black and is scaring foreign companies away from listing their shares in the United States.
Lord Black controlled the Hollinger properties through a pyramidlike structure in which he had only 15 percent of the equity but complete control. He controlled a Canadian company called Hollinger Inc., which is minority-owned by the public, and that company controlled Hollinger International, an American company, through supervoting shares.
At the moment, there is stalemate. Lord Black's efforts to sell the shares to the Barclays quickly -- without having to deal with United States courts -- appear to have been frustrated. The offering memorandum circulated this week flatly says that the deal may die if one Hollinger International tactic is allowed by Delaware courts.
Time may not be on Lord Black's side. Hollinger Inc. has a $7.4 million bond interest payment due March 1. It can delay that payment for 30 days, but it is not clear where the cash will be found if the Barclay deal is held up in court. This could be a pivotal case in determining how much protection minority shareholders can expect in the wake of recent scandals.
A reasonable settlement would be for Lord Black to pay a sizable amount to public shareholders of Hollinger International, while the company or its properties are sold to the highest bidders. But there is no indication that such a settlement is on the horizon. The Barclays seem to have asked about the possibility of buying Hollinger International shares for $18 each, but not to have made an offer. The stock then leaped to $17.25 but fell back to $16.35 yesterday.
Lord Black seems to have hoped to get his money and then wait for any legal actions to produce a final verdict, perhaps years later and with his assets difficult to seize if he loses. Hollinger International directors seem determined to prevent that and assure that control of the empire passes only as part of a complete deal.
If this goes on, there is a risk that the Hollinger Inc. vs. Hollinger International legal battles will come to resemble Jarndyce vs. Jarndyce, as told by Charles Dickens in 1852, three years before The Telegraph was founded. That suit ended with only the lawyers showing a profit.
Floyd Norris
