The snowstorm that forced the closing of schools in New York City on Wednesday also forced students to miss Regents exams, some of which are required for graduation. Now the state must decide what to do next.
Some public officials are calling for the test to be rescheduled, but education officials say that would not be easy and could cost roughly $3 million.
''It would be very difficult,'' said James A. Kadamus, a deputy commissioner of the State Department of Education. Because some schools elsewhere in the state gave Wednesday's tests -- chemistry, physics, global history and geography, United States history and government, and reading and writing tests for special education students -- the same tests could not be given again without the risk of cheating, he said.
But developing and distributing new tests, he said, takes as long as a year and a half.
''We do not have one in the bank that we could pull out,'' Mr. Kadamus said.
State Senator Carl Kruger, a Democrat from Brooklyn, said the state clearly should have had a backup exam.
''A 10-inch snowfall should not be treated as an aberration,'' he said. ''I think they should be embarrassed and ashamed of themselves if they say it takes a year to a year and a half.''
In New York State, Regents examinations are given three times a year: January, June (the busiest time) and August.
January tests are often taken by special education students, students who have failed before and students completing semester-length courses.
Some students may have needed Wednesday's exams to graduate this month.
Oleg Ozersky, 17, a senior at Brooklyn Technical High School who is applying to colleges, said he had hoped a high score on the American history Regents would give his transcript a boost.
Mr. Kadamus said the state would decide how to proceed next week. In the meantime, it is collecting information on how many students missed Wednesday's exams, and how many of them are seniors.
Joel Littman, an associate principal at the Yeshiva of Flatbush Joel Braverman High School, said had he realized that a makeup exam was unlikely, he would have administered the Chemistry Regents exam to the five students scheduled to take it, regardless of the snow.
''They studied for the exam,'' he said. ''It's not fair.''
Joel I. Klein, the New York City schools chancellor, declined to take a position on whether the state should schedule a makeup exam.
