The Rangers practiced yesterday, but Eric Lindros was not there. Instead, after the eighth documented concussion of his career, he flew to Montreal and was examined by Karen Johnston, a concussion specialist who has previously treated him.
Lindros is out indefinitely, said a Rangers spokesman, John Rosasco. Lindros, a 30-year-old center, has been the best player on a team that has lost five of its last six games, has sunk to 10th place in the Eastern Conference and is in danger of missing the playoffs for a seventh consecutive season.
Whether all that will lead Lindros to put pressure on himself to get back in the lineup is not clear. Also unclear is whether Lindros may decide that after eight concussions it is time to call it quits. And the decision is not necessarily just Lindros's, because he cannot return to action without being medically cleared, presumably by Johnston.
At yesterday's practice, Glen Sather, the Rangers' president, general manager and coach, was asked whether he might recommend to a player like Lindros that it was time to retire because of all the concussions he had sustained. Sather said that decision would have to be made by the player.
Mike Richter, a former Rangers teammate of Lindros's, said yesterday that he spoke to Lindros on Wednesday night after he was injured, and that he urged him to proceed with the utmost caution.
Richter, in effect, is an expert witness, having retired in early September because of post-concussion syndrome and having consulted with Johnston during his own physical struggles.
''I gave him a piece of his own advice, and it was great advice: ''Don't rush back,' '' said the 37-year-old Richter, who played for 14 seasons with the Rangers and compiled more victories than any other goaltender in Rangers history.
''I really feel a head injury is a different classification of injury,'' Richter said. ''Bending rules does not apply to this one.''
Richter announced his retirement after Johnston would not clear him to play. He said the protocol that Johnston had established was that ''you really shouldn't be working out until you're symptom-free'' for a set number of days.
''And then there are a hierarchy of challenges you have to go through,'' Richter added, the last of which is being able to go through an entire practice at full speed.
Until being leveled by Capitals defenseman Jason Doig in the second period of Wednesday's game at Madison Square Garden, Lindros had not had a concussion since Dec. 28, 2001.
Still, all of Lindros's eight concussions have come since March 1998, and the last six have come in a little more than four years. Because Lindros has had so many concussions, Richter said, he is knowledgeable about what is required in the recovery process.
What remains unclear, said several experts, is whether a person who has sustained a concussion is more susceptible to future concussions.
''That's very controversial,'' said Elliot Pellman, the medical director of Prohealth Care in Lake Success, N.Y., who has a substantial background in professional sports and, among other things, is the medical director of the Islanders and the chairman of the National Football League's committee on mild traumatic brain injury.
''In my work with the N.F.L., we actually believe the majority of players do not become more susceptible,'' Pellman said. ''But there certainly does seem to be a subset of guys who are more susceptible.''
Mark Lovell of the University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, who oversees the neuropsychological testing programs for the N.F.L. and the N.H.L., said: ''The research we've done with kids has suggested there is an accumulation that can take place. After a child has three or four concussions, they tend to occur with a little more frequency and less provocation. With professional athletes, it's much less clear. Studies have not clearly suggested that.
''But some people are more vulnerable to concussions -- I'm convinced about that,'' he added. ''What all of us want to know is how do we identify those people. We don't know how to characterize that subset yet.''
Lovell also said that he advises athletes who have sustained concussions that ''when you're having difficulty with your memory and your concentration, you should start to look at your retirement.'' He and Pellman declined to specifically address Lindros or the issue of whether he should consider retiring.
Lindros's younger brother, Brett, a former first-round draft choice of the Islanders, retired after a brief career because of concussions. So did Pat LaFontaine, a Hall of Fame center who starred for the Islanders, the Rangers and the Buffalo Sabres.
LaFontaine retired from the Rangers at age 33 in August 1998 after sustaining a concussion from an accidental collision with a teammate, Mike Keane, in March of that year. ''I don't think there is any such thing as a minor concussion anymore,'' LaFontaine said in a telephone interview yesterday.
Before his final concussion, LaFontaine had missed most of the previous season because of post-concussion syndrome. And even after going through post-concussion syndrome a second time, after the collision with Keane, LaFontaine, like Richter, wanted to keep playing. But he, too, was never cleared to return.
''I'm thankful for that now,'' LaFontaine said yesterday. ''I went through it twice. Anyone who has gone through it once and chooses not to come back and play, I would understand. I hope Eric doesn't go into post-concussion again and the symptoms aren't too bad. Most people thought I should have retired and I came back.''
HOCKEY
