Ten years after the end of apartheid, one of the largest companies to divest itself of its South African holdings is coming back. The General Motors Corporation, which sold its operations here to local management in 1987, will buy back the remaining 51 percent of the Delta Motor Corporation under a deal approved earlier this week by South African regulators.
Delta, which has been 49 percent owned by G.M. since 1997, will become General Motors South Africa and join G.M.'s money-losing Latin America, Africa and Middle East division.
Seventeen years after General Motors pulled out of South Africa because of the country's policies of racial segregation and pressure from shareholders, analysts say it is still hard to count the costs of the company's decision to divest.
G.M. is one of the last major companies that left during apartheid to return, and while its cars -- made and sold under license by Delta -- are known, the name of the parent company is less familiar.
Terms of the deal, like the terms of the original sale, were not disclosed, although Tony Twine, an economist, estimated Delta's value at $6 billion rand or about $849 million. The company, based in Port Elizabeth, has about 3,400 employees and assembles Opal cars and Isuzu pickups. It also imports Suzukis and, since November, Chevrolets.
When Delta was formed in 1987, many analysts expected it to fail. But it survived and, by maintaining the popularity of affordable brands like Opels, slightly increased its share of the South African market, to about 10.7 percent last year, from 9.3 percent in 1985, the last full year G.M. had operations here.
But Mr. Twine, of the South African consultant firm Econometrix, and other analysts say Delta has yet to do what most rivals have done: transform itself into an export-oriented business. That failure, he says, is a result of the continued private ownership of a majority of Delta shares. The company is the last of South Africa's major automobile makers to remain privately held.
''The simple equation is that the multinational parent will produce vehicles wherever it can take the lion's share of the profits,'' Mr. Twine said, ''and obviously if the majority of equity is held by someone else, you're not going to give them the right to make exports for the global market, because you're not going to get all of the profits.''
South Africa's automobile exports are booming, making cars one of the country's fastest-growing industries, largely because of new trade agreements and domestic regulations that give companies credits for cars and parts they export. Most of South Africa's major manufacturers -- BMW, Volkswagen, and Toyota -- used to make small numbers of a wide variety of cars for domestic sale, but now manufacture one or two models for domestic sale and export. Other models are imported.
But Delta's factory still produces primarily for local sale. According to the National Association of Automobile Manufacturers of South Africa, Delta exported 1,370 vehicles last year, 1 percent of the country's total, mostly to neighboring countries. The company also exports auto parts.
Without a strong export program, G.M. is at a disadvantage when it imports cars made elsewhere in its 32-country network and especially as it tries to introduce brands previously not available in South Africa, like Chevrolet. Though a small market in global terms, South Africa is the second largest after Brazil in G.M.'s Latin America, Africa and Middle East division. That division lost $331 million in 2003, largely because of weak economic conditions.
''One of the expected outcomes of General Motors taking control and reinvesting would be that South Africa would be more fully integrated into the global General Motors strategy and sourcing plans,'' said Nico Vermeulen, director of the automakers' association. ''It will open up export opportunities.''
In an interview earlier this week, G.M. executives declined to comment on specific plans for Delta, except to say a planned 1.5 billion rand ($213 million) capital program would go ahead. But they did say that they planned to use South Africa as a hub for growth in Africa and were considering exports to elsewhere in the world. Analysts said Australia and Europe would be the most likely overseas destinations for South African-produced G.M. cars.
Maureen Kempston Darkes, a G.M. group vice president who met with South African President Thabo Mbeki Wednesday, said the buyout was a vote of confidence in the new South Africa and its role in a changing Africa.
''Certainly we're here because South Africa has changed and we see political and economic stability in the country,'' she said. ''We hope our involvement will lead to growth.''
Correction:  February 3, 2004, Tuesday  An article in Business Day on Friday about General Motors' purchase of the 51 percent of the Delta Motor Corporation in South Africa that it does not already own misspelled the name of a car assembled there. It is the Opel, not Opal.
