It certainly looked like a farewell gesture Thursday night. Andre Agassi does not typically blow kisses and bow to the crowd unless he wins a match. He lost this one in five sets, and considering how well Marat Safin had served and returned and hustled in their Australian Open semifinal, there was no shame in losing, no glaring reason for Agassi to question whether he still belongs at the highest level.
But Agassi is not certain he will be back as a player at Melbourne Park, the Grand Slam site that suits his quick-hitting, quick-thinking baseline game the best. So the 33-year-old Agassi, who is deeply attached to on-court rituals, decided to break with habit, walk to center court while Safin was still exulting near the umpire's chair and say a formal adieu, just in case.
''They've been great to me over the years, just a lot of fun to compete in front of,'' Agassi said of the Melbourne crowd. ''And you never know when it's your last, right? So you want to say bye properly.''
If this match does indeed turn out to be his last, it will be an appropriately dramatic closing scene to one of the greatest acts in the Australian Open's 99-year history. The level of play in Safin's 7-6 (6), 7-6 (6), 5-7, 1-6, 6-3 victory over Agassi, a four-time champion, was often astonishingly high on both sides.
''I think I played one of my best matches in my whole life probably,'' Safin, the 2000 United States Open champion, said.
Safin's game, for now, needs no improvement. After struggling with motivation and missing much of 2003 because of a serious left wrist injury, the unseeded Safin has roared back here to reclaim his place among the elite: defeating the world's No. 1 player, Andy Roddick, in the quarterfinals in five sets and eliminating Agassi, the defending champion with a 26-match winning streak.
Now Safin will face the winner of the semifinal Friday between No. 2-seeded Roger Federer of Switzerland and No. 3 Juan Carlos Ferrero of Spain. Asked if Safin was the toughest opponent he had faced in Melbourne, Agassi replied, ''It's definitely the toughest day I've had.''
The first two sets were consistently remarkable, beginning with the first point, an extended, corner-to-corner duel that Agassi won when Safin knocked a forehand out. In the 3 hours 42 minutes of tension that followed, there were many more forced errors than unforced errors, many more winners and attention-commanding rallies than flubbed opportunities and anticlimaxes.
The difference was Safin's brilliant serving on big points and his ability to attack Agassi's second serve consistently. The swaggering Safin, who had not played in a Grand Slam tournament for a year and arrived here ranked 86th, slammed 33 aces and not one double-fault. Agassi typically puts pressure on servers with his big returns.
The quick start has become Agassi's trademark. Though no one had won a set from Agassi in this event since Nicolas Escudé took one in the third round last year, Safin held his ground against Agassi from the start. Safin chose to match strength against strength from the baseline and grabbed the early lead after saving a set point on his serve at 4-5 and another at 5-6 in the tie breaker.
Safin saved another at 5-6 on his way to winning the second-set tie breaker, and when he jumped out to a 0-30 lead on Agassi's serve at 5-5 in the third set, it appeared that Safin was very close to the final. But Agassi won the next four points, then broke Safin with relative ease to win the third set. After an early break in the fourth, Safin began husbanding his resources for the fifth.
Agassi should have been the fresher man, mentally and physically. Coming into this match he had spent less than half as much time on court as Safin, who needed five sets to beat Todd Martin in the third round, four sets to beat James Blake in the fourth round and five to beat Roddick.
But Safin, who tore a ligament in his left wrist here last year, has worked overtime on his fitness, working with a trainer six days a week in December in Monte Carlo. He worked out on the track, using interval training devised by the former British Olympian Sebastian Coe. Safin threw the medicine ball; he lifted weights; he ran up hills, as many as 36 times in a session.
In the fifth set, Safin took charge in the fourth game by breaking Agassi's serve with the help of three unforced errors from Agassi, who was about to become Safin's fifth American victim in this tournament.
''I feel sorry,'' Safin said to John McEnroe in an on-court interview after the match.
Agassi had shuffled off to the locker room. Asked later what the chances were of seeing him here again, Agassi responded: ''Well, right now, pretty good. I mean I have no plans to do otherwise, but, you know, a year's a long time.''
If it proves too long, no one who was at Rod Laver Arena on Thursday night can say that Agassi didn't take the time to wave goodbye.
TENNIS
