After a season of quick-fix rests, Allan Houston finally realized he could not continue to play while healing his arthroscopically repaired right knee.
His shooting was suffering, and so was his left knee, from overcompensating. Houston, the Knicks' leading scorer with an average of 19.5 points a game, said yesterday that he was taking an indeterminate time off to rehabilitate.
''It could be four days or it could be to the All-Star break,'' Houston said. ''I don't know. I want to make sure I can be strong for us when I need to be, going into the second half of the season and the playoffs. I want to be the player I know I should be.''
In seven previous seasons with the Knicks, Houston, 32, missed a total of 10 games. But he has had knee and back pain after knee surgery last June. He missed six games this season, the last stretch of them in early December.
After talking with the team's president, Isiah Thomas, Tuesday night after a loss to San Antonio, Houston told Coach Lenny Wilkens before yesterday morning's practice that he planned to miss tonight's game in Boston and that he would most likely miss tomorrow's home game against Phoenix.
''I just want to take it one day at a time,'' Houston said. ''I haven't thought about going on the injured list at all because I don't think it's to that point.''
Houston would not be eligible to come off the injured list for five games. The Knicks play only seven games in the next two weeks until the All-Star Game break, which begins Feb. 13, a schedule that factored into his decision.
The Knicks, who have been struggling on offense the last five games, are also concerned about Keith Van Horn, who sprained his shoulder in Tuesday's loss. But Van Horn said he would play tonight and did not need a magnetic resonance imaging exam.
Penny Hardaway, averaging 9.8 points a game since coming to the Knicks, practiced with the starting unit and is likely to fill in for Houston against the Celtics. Shandon Anderson, who has been upset with his diminished role, started when Houston was previously out and averaged 21 points in that span.
Anderson will play, Wilkens said, but he added that he has not made any decisions about how much playing time he would get.
With the addition of Stephon Marbury and Hardaway in the trade with Phoenix, Houston said he felt more comfortable taking some time off.
''When I sit out a day or two, and I feel like, 'Man, I can play,' that's always been good enough for me,'' Houston said. ''But right now I need to think a little bit more than that.''
Houston said talking with Thomas helped him make this difficult decision.
''When a guy like Isiah comes and says, 'I understand,' he's played, he knows what it's like to play injured, that made me feel a lot better,'' Houston said. ''I know I don't have to prove anything.
''To me, it's a matter of getting the rest and getting the strength back. It's beat up and it's worn down.''
More Headaches for Anderson
Shandon Anderson was upset after hearing that Isiah Thomas had wanted to place him on the injured list Monday, although they have not spoken to each other directly.
''You can't put me on I.R. just because I miss a game and a day of practice,'' Anderson said. ''There's nothing wrong with me, just simple migraines. I've been dealing with it all my career.''
Thomas is trying to trade Anderson, who could also be a candidate for a buyout, which he and the Knicks have not yet discussed. Anderson said he would rather stay with the Knicks.
McDyess Knows the Feeling
Antonio McDyess said yesterday that he felt pressure to keep playing through pain when he was with the Knicks and returned in December after nearly a two-year layoff from three knee surgeries.
''I can understand what Allan's going through,'' McDyess, now on the injured list with Phoenix, said in a telephone interview about Allan Houston.
''Just trying to play in the month of December, it was one of the worst months, with back-to-back games and not having an opportunity to rehab because of soreness.''
McDyess said he did not want to go on the injured list because he felt the Knicks were depending on him.
''I didn't say it, but I just kept telling them, my leg is weak, my leg is weak,'' he said.
McDyess added that Greg Brittenham, the Knicks' strength and conditioning coach, ''did everything to keep it strong.''
PRO BASKETBALL: KNICKS NOTEBOOK
