Cold? Zhang Shixiang pulls off his wool cap, peels off his thick sweater and stands smiling in a peach-colored bathing suit. The afternoon sun is leaking out of the sky, and skaters cut across the frozen lid of the finger lake named Houhai. The temperature is a degree or two above freezing.
It's a perfect day for a swim.
Mr. Zhang, 62, slaps his bare stomach and steps down a rusted ladder into a V-shaped swimming lane chopped from the ice. The water is migraine cold. He does a dog paddle, then the butterfly stroke for a minute or so. Then he climbs out, his skin pink and goose pimpled, his soul invigorated.
''I've got a fire inside me,'' he declared. ''If I don't swim for two or three days, I don't feel well.''
For Mr. Zhang and at least 1,200 other arguably nutty Beijingers, winter is perfect for swimming. And not just a once-a-year polar bear plunge for the cameras. The Beijing swimmers arrive daily from around this chaotic, sprawling capital for an icy dip in a willow-lined lake that is a rare remnant of the city's disappearing past.
The mostly older men who happily strip down to skimpy bathing suits are sort of an extreme sports version of the public performance art on daily display in Beijing. Parks are often filled with retirees doing tai chi or with couples twirling in folk or ballroom dancing classes. Choral groups regularly gather outside to sing traditional Chinese songs.
Usually, the bitter winter weather drives many people indoors. Not the swimmers. They say they come for their health, citing various studies attributing health benefits to swimming in cold weather.
''I never get colds,'' Mr. Zhang said, claiming that the waters also helped his digestion. After swimming, he said, ''everything tastes good.''
Except perhaps the Houhai water. In any season, the primordial craving for water is hard to quench in Beijing. The landlocked city is near the Gobi Desert and is without a significant river. The chain of canals and lakes, including Houhai, that link the Forbidden City to the Summer Palace is beautiful but also polluted.
''Foreign countries have much cleaner water,'' said another swimmer, Zhang Baozhong, 50. ''You just have to get by in China. The water kind of smells. There are no places that are really clean in Beijing to swim outside. We've just gotten used to that.''
The Beijing winter has no shortage of cold. Temperatures usually loiter in the 20's, though the winds blowing down from the steppes of Mongolia make it colder. It is often so cold that the first swimmers who arrive in the mornings break the ice literally and figuratively. If the swimming lane freezes over during the night, they split it open with axes and fishing gaffs.
The winter swimmers first started coming to Houhai in the 1970's, toward the end of the Cultural Revolution, and they have not stopped. Li Zhixin, president of the Beijing Municipal Winter Swimming Club, said the club now has 2,000 paying members, including 1,200 to 1,400 who swim regularly in the winter. He described winter swimming as ''gymnastics of the blood vessels.''
There are plenty of modern health clubs in Beijing, some with cold pools. But many of the Houhai swimmers are retired while others are jobless. ''We're the Old Hundred Names,'' said Yu Yang, 55, using the Chinese phrase for common people.
Xiao Shaohua, 54, started swimming in 1989, after watching others from the warmth of the bank. ''When I was watching people here the first time, I thought they were mentally ill,'' Mr. Xiao said, laughing. ''Now other people think I am.''
He added: ''By swimming in the winter, it almost changes your personality. You become more free spirited.''
Others see it in more epic terms. ''This is a challenge between man and nature,'' Zhang Baozhong proclaimed. ''It's an exercise to strengthen the will.''
The swimmers show up throughout the day, including some who wait until after sundown so they can swim nude. The busiest time is afternoon, and a crowd usually gathers to watch. Zhang Shixiang enjoyed the attention. He pretended the ladder was parallel bars and lifted his legs like a gymnast. Another swimmer quickly shed his clothes and pulled on dark goggles as he mingled with onlookers dressed in heavy winter coats.
''Don't buy tickets, don't buy tickets,'' he joked as he climbed over the fence lining the lake. ''There's no need.''
The swimmers usually stay in the water for no more than five minutes. They bring a change of clothes, jugs of warm water to pour over themselves after their swim and, often, hot cylinders of jasmine tea. No one seems in a hurry. Some spend hours heckling their friends or kicking a hackeysack.
Nor do they seem to notice the battered metal sign posted not far from the ladder. It reads, ''No Swimming.''
Beijing Journal
