The federal Bureau of Indian Affairs yesterday formally recognized the existence of an Indian tribe based in northwestern Connecticut, to the dismay of political leaders and residents who fear that the designation will lead to the creation of a third casino in the state.
Richard L. Velky, the chief of the tribe, the Schaghticoke Tribal Nation, based in Kent, said he wanted time to savor the news before tackling the topic of whether the tribe would pursue the gambling business, but he did not rule out the possibility of a new casino.
''I've always said a casino might be within our view for economic development,'' he said. ''But we would need a host community before we pursued anything.''
The Schaghticokes (pronounced SKAT-a-coke,) are the fourth tribe in Connecticut to receive federal recognition. Two of the tribes, the Mashantucket Pequots and the Mohegans, each operate a highly profitable casino. A third, the Eastern Pequots, was recognized in June 2002.
The state's political leaders swiftly condemned the federal government's decision to recognize a fourth tribe and vowed to appeal.
''I support the attorney general's efforts to overturn the ruling,'' Gov. John G. Rowland said in a statement released shortly after the decision was announced. ''I also wish to make clear at this time my complete opposition to the further expansion of casino gambling in Connecticut.''
Richard Blumenthal, Connecticut's attorney general, said federal recognition of the tribe was ''astonishing and appalling because it is so clearly wrong.'' He said the tribe had failed to meet the criteria for federal recognition, which include showing consistent political leadership and evidence of an ongoing community.
''There's a gap of 150 years, which the B.I.A. says can be overcome,'' Mr. Blumenthal said. ''This is not the law, nor has it been.''
The Schaghticokes have sought federal recognition for 25 years. In December 2002, the federal government denied the request, but the group sent more than two dozen binders of evidence to fortify its claims, said Linda Gray, the tribe's genealogist.
In a statement, the Bureau of Indian Affairs acknowledged that the Schaghticoke Tribal Nation had more than 300 members on a reservation ''established by the Colony of Connecticut in 1737 and confirmed in 1752.''
Mr. Velky, the chief, said he had visited more than two dozen parcels of land, mostly outside of Kent, to gauge their suitability for economic development if the tribe achieved federal recognition. Such development could include a casino.
''But only in a town that wants one,'' he said.
That would appear to rule out the town of Kent, whose first selectwoman, Dolores Schiesel, flatly said there was no support for a casino.
The tribe owns 400 acres of land in Kent, and its new status alarmed Ms. Schiesel for several reasons.
''The tribe receiving federal recognition means change for us,'' she said. ''If the decision stands, there won't be a community of Kent. You won't recognize it as it exists right now.''
Whether or not the tribe pursues a casino, recognition means that it is regarded as a sovereign nation, exempt from local control.
It also entitles tribe members to federal benefits, like scholarships, low-interest loans and medical care. Steven Austin, the tribe's cultural anthropologist and a former employee of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, said the federal status meant that land taken from the tribe could be restored.
Since 1981, the Schaghticoke Tribal Nation has sought 2,000 acres adjacent to its reservation, claiming that it was taken from them.
The bulk of the parcel includes land owned by the Preston Mountain Club, a private fishing club, and about half the campus of the private Kent School. It also includes acreage on the federally managed Appalachian Trail, and other town and private land. The town, school, and federal government are among the parties fighting the land claim.
David J. Elliott, the lawyer for Kent School, said the school would contest the tribe's status.
''The Kent School feels the Schaghticoke Tribal Nation does not satisfy the criteria for an Indian tribe under federal law,'' he said.
Ms. Schiesel expressed concern that the recognition would bolster the tribe's claim on the land.
Mr. Austin said it would indeed. ''We expect it will back up our claim to land that was taken from us,'' he said. ''The land could be returned to us as acreage or as part of a cash settlement.''
