Every Thursday night, a slick restaurant called the G-Bar attracts a professional crowd with live jazz, lobster ravioli and valet parking. It's one block from a 900-seat concert hall, around the corner from a soon-to-open Spanish rock nightspot, just west of where a theater group is building a $2 million performance space.
This is the South Bronx?
Drop the question mark. This is the South Bronx. The same place that suffers from a nasty reputation that gets nastier the farther away you get. New Yorkers and regular visitors might have heard about massive housing investments, new loft space for artists and sharply reduced crime. For others the old images are probably more entrenched: Fort Apache. Jimmy Carter comes to Charlotte Street. The Bronx is burning.
The South Bronx is still no paradise, as any housing project resident or child asthma sufferer will tell you. But on a recent evening wine glasses and Corona bottles clinked and ties were loosened at the G-Bar as patrons heard the jazz repertory of 22-year-old Jennifer Jade Ledesna, a Bronx native who sang a trilingual set of Afro-Cuban boleros, Brazilian bossa nova and American jazz standards. Ms. Ledesna, who is Dominican and Puerto Rican, sang from under her wild curls from the back of the warm-hued wooden dining area. She was accompanied by musicians who included the Lincoln Center Jazz Orchestra pianist Eric Lewis. The following week the two would perform at Chez Suzette in Midtown. But this night, the Bronx.
The Bronx has never lacked for musical talent, from doo-wop to salsa to hip-hop, but these days things are different. ''The big change is it was always rich culturally, but we were venue poor,'' said Wally Edgecombe, the director of the arts program at Hostos Community College since 1982. In 1994 a 900-seat concert hall was built (along with a repertory theater and art gallery); previously, Mr. Edgecombe attracted big names like Celia Cruz and Dizzy Gillespie, but they had to perform in the school's gym.
The Bronx Tourism Council has even made a formal effort to attract people with the Bronx Culture Trolley, a bus that takes visitors on a structured visit of arts spots the first Wednesday of most months.
But striking out on your own can be fun, and the G-Bar at 150th Street and the Grand Concourse is a good place to start. The G-Bar literally grew out of Giovanni's, a pizza and pasta takeout place with a big local following (as evidenced by the movement of delivery cars). When the business behind the pizza shop closed, the owners, three brothers, decided to turn it into an upscale Italian restaurant and bar. That was 2001, and it was almost immediately a success, frequented by Bronxites and courthouse, government and social-service workers whose offices are nearby. Last year, when the deli next door closed, G-Bar expanded further, adding a chic, sinuous wavy bar with an overhanging balcony.
Caribbean Poetry
One block west on Walton Avenue the 25-year-old Pregones Theater recently staged ''Baile Cangrejero'' (loosely rendered as ''Dance of the Freed Slaves,'' from the name of a San Juan neighborhood where freed slaves gathered) in an intimate space called La Casa Blanca, which the company will continue to use until its new 100-seat hall is ready. ''Baile Cangrejero,'' a performance of Caribbean poetry, much of it exploring the variegated racial identity of the Hispanic Caribbean, was chanted, interpreted, acted out and otherwise performed by the actors Jorge B. Merced and Sandra Rodriguez, accompanied by a four-person band.
The first poem, performed in both Spanish and English (with translations by the associate director, Alvan Colón), was ''And Your Grandma, Where's She At?'' It told the story of a family ashamed of their dark-skinned grandmother. Mr. Merced mesmerized the crowd with an energy level so high that his eyes seemed ready to burst from his head. The audience chanted along with the Caribbeanized Spanish version of the title: ''Y Tu Abuela, A'onde Ehta?''
On that night, the crowd was mostly Puerto Rican and the intimacy of the space made the performance seem as much like dialogue as a performance.
The small stage will stay open after the new theater is built. ''When they get done with what they're going to do, this is going to be a hot little corner,'' said Mr. Edgecombe, who took over the Hostos arts program in 1982 and has been one of the South Bronx's biggest boosters ever since.
The Hostos Center for the Arts and Culture, built together with the new college campus at the major subway junction of 149th Street and the Grand Concourse, opened in 1994. Its various sites held almost 300 events in the 2002-3 season, attracting 85,000 people, Mr. Edgecombe said. Orquesta Aragón, the Cuban charanga group, sold out last fall; this coming season Hostos will present the salsa pianist Larry Harlow and the Puerto Rican reggaeton rapper Daddy Yankee. The performance hall also attracts big-name dance groups. Mr. Edgecombe brokers events with Alvin Ailey American Dance Theater and Dance Theater of Harlem that allow them to rehearse at Hostos in exchange for a performance.
And at the same time Hostos's halls shift easily into community-event mode, as evidenced earlier this month with the 11th annual Three Kings Day celebration, which brought together Mexican mariachi, Puerto Rican bomba and traditional Andean music from groups around the city for $12 admission.
Downtown Bronx
With all this arts activity, not to mention parallel efforts in housing development and commercial enterprise, some have suggested renaming the neighborhood the Downtown Bronx. The idea has yet to catch on, in much the same way that few have cared to drop the Hell's Kitchen image in favor of kinder, gentler Clinton. But the name will get a boost next month when the Downtown Bronx Cafe and Bar opens on 149th Street and Walton Avenue, filling a big gap in the local Latin music scene by focusing on rock en Español.
Spanish-language rock groups like Maná have always played second fiddle to salsa, merengue, bachata and Latin pop in New York City, despite their immense popularity in Latin America. That bothers Oswaldo Mejía and his cousins Otto and Alfonso Conde, three Guatemalan immigrants in their 30's who resent having to go to Queens to hear the music they love. So they are opening their own business: a 2,500-square-foot restaurant and bar that on weekend nights will have D.J.'s spinning groups like Hombres G (G-Men), Héroes del Silencio (Heroes of Silence) and Enanitos Verdes (Green Dwarves).
Arts activity is hardly limited to the two square blocks around Hostos. Ten blocks south Aronne Baietti, a commercial fisherman by trade, opened the Blue Ox on Third Avenue and 139th Street a little more than a year ago to serve a growing group of local professionals looking for a place to kick back. Today the bar still provokes pedestrian double takes. It looks completely out of place, as if some tornado had swept it off the Upper East Side and planted it in the Bronx.
But on the inside it's just a friendly watering hole that serves inexpensive mixed drinks and questionable frozen pizza. The bar holds poetry readings on Bronx Culture Trolley nights, and two Tuesdays a month it is taken over by the Acentos Poetry Series. Despite the name, which means ''accents'' in Spanish, the work is mostly in English with a few Spanish terms thrown in.
Acentos always has a headliner -- the first January event featured Hector Rivera of the Welfare Poets -- but the meat of the evening was the open-mike session, where more than a score of poets read and performed before a friendly, encouraging crowd of 40 (half of whom, of course, were poets themselves).
The performer to make the strongest impression called himself Harlym 125, a teacher by day who gave a loud, fiery discourse about the state of urban education that, were it not so coherent, would have qualified as a rant. Everyone took a hit -- from President Bush, an easy target in this crowd, to teachers who do not take action to change the fate of their students, an admonition that may have resonated with some participants.
''That was dope, dude,'' said Oscar Bermeo, the show's master of ceremonies, after raucous applause. ''The next time, more intensity, a'ight?'' Mr. Bermeo, whose organization, louderARTS, holds similar events downtown, said later that the site makes the event: ''If we did the same thing in Manhattan, we'd probably have two or three times the crowd. But it's not about that. It's about the opportunity to say, 'Yo, I read in the Bronx.' ''
A Special Living Room
Five blocks down Third Avenue the interdisciplinary artist Wanda Raimundi-Ortiz and her husband, José Ortiz, have created an innovative place for the venturesome. The couple hold a gathering about every other month in which Ms. Ortiz displays her art and a band performs Latin music. The event, open to the public, is called ''Mi Sala.'' Despite the name -- Spanish for ''my living room'' -- the crowd mostly speaks English; admission is $15.
Their building, 220 East 134th Street, is just off Third Avenue, four blocks and a turn from the No. 6 train. The walk to its warehouse on an industrial dead-end block can seem intimidating until you remember that crime in the 40th Precinct is one-third its level 10 years ago. Once you've arrived inside, wariness gives way to awe: their living space -- including Mr. Ortiz's recording studio -- measures 3,100 square feet. To a Manhattan apartment dweller, this seems more like 3,100 acres.
But the size is not half as interesting as what fills it -- walls with murals painted by Ms. Ortiz, an open bar manned by friendly neighbors, Mr. Ortiz at the D.J. booth, a k a the kitchen, under a neon sign that reads ''Rican Struction.'' At the December event ''Mi Sala'' attracted an upbeat, informal, eclectic crowd, ranging across ethnic and generational lines. Ms. Ortiz, her hair in a gravity-defying ponytail and wearing leg warmers that made her seem like a grown-up Puerto Rican Punky Brewster, pulled the willing and not so willing onto the dance floor when the band played salsa and other Latin rhythms.
''Mi Sala'' has, at times, inspired its guests to consider major life changes. Han Van Hees, a physical therapist from Bellmore, N.Y., attended a ''Mi Sala'' party a while back and came away ''very impressed by the whole aura.'' Recently he was back in the neighborhood, this time by day to scout out potential real-estate investments. The plan: move his wife and pets from the relative peace -- and, for him, boredom -- of Long Island into a South Bronx building he can renovate. (His college-age daughter has already taken dibs on the top floor of whatever he buys.)
A BAAD! Place
There will be no ''Mi Sala'' in February, but it will be replaced by, as if it were possible, a more idiosyncratic event. The Ortizes are lending their space to their friend Sandra García Rivera, a writer and singer, to hold La Feria del Beso II, or, as she translates it, the Kiss Fair II, on Feb. 14, Valentine's Day. She will sing boleros, or romantic ballads, with her band and there will be a kissing booth as well as other ''sensual surprises.''
Farther east, the Hunts Point peninsula, which in the mid-20th century was a hot spot for Latin clubs, has bounced back today with film festivals, art shows and theatrical and musical events, based mostly at the constantly buzzing Point Community Development Corporation, known as the Point, at 940 Garrison Avenue. Nearby in the Bank Note building at 841 Barreto Street is the Bronx Academy for Arts and Dance, or BAAD!, home to Arthur Aviles Typical Theater, a dance company, and host to several festivals throughout the year.
Northeast of Hunts Point, perhaps not physically in the South Bronx but there in spirit, is Willie's Steak House on Westchester Avenue between Thieriot and Taylor Avenues under the elevated No. 6 train. It is an old-school version of the G-Bar, where steak and plantains substitute for veal and linguine. Wednesdays and, starting recently, Fridays bring in the crowds for Latin jazz. On Saturdays a more family-oriented audience comes in to hear Puerto Rican guitar-playing trios sing ballads that have the extraordinary power to make listeners nostalgic for someone else's home country.
On a recent Saturday evening the trio Los Auténticos was playing, the bar was bustling and the tables were crowded. On one side of the dining room a long table of 14 women and one man (O.K., a 2-year-old boy named Kaylon) ate under bunches of balloons as they celebrated several birthdays of group members. Unfortunately they did it without the cake because the party's organizer, 62-year-old Neyda Sigmone, had left it in the limousine, but Los Auténticos made up for it by singing them a bilingual happy birthday.
On the other side of the room, Elias Martinez, a 69-year-old lawyer, was having dinner with his wife, Lucy, at the same table where they have been eating dinners for years. They go to Willie's for the food, which ranges from porterhouse and pork chops to Puerto Rican dishes like the soupy stew called asopao and fried green plantains. But even more they go for the music. ''It's the kind of music that never dies,'' Mr. Martinez said. ''It's part of our custom. It's part of our heritage.''
One could think that Willie's and the G-Bar might see each other as competition, but that is not the way it works in the South Bronx. Kenneth Giordano, the proprietor of Willie's, helped the G-Bar book its acts when it first opened, and so far, just about everyone's attitude is, the more venues the merrier. The scene, it would appear, is barely in its reborn infancy.
What to See  The sites in the article on the South Bronx.
THE BLUE OX, corner of 139th Street and Third Avenue, Mott Haven, No. 6 train to 138th Street, (718) 402-1045.
BRONX ACADEMY OF ARTS AND DANCE, 841 Barreto Street, Second floor, Hunts Point, (718) 842-5223, No. 6 train to Hunts Point Avenue. Tomorrow at 3 p.m., an open rehearsal and preview of ''The Disco Project,'' a new work by the Arthur Aviles Typical Theater, to open in April; seating is limited and reservations are advised. Donation, $5; free for the first 20 people (www  .bronxacademyofartsanddance.org).
BRONX CULTURE TROLLEY, leaves from Hostos Community College, Longwood Art Gallery at the Hostos Center, 450 Grand Concourse at 149th Street, Mott Haven, (718) 931-9500 Ext. 33. Feb. 4 and on the first Wednesday of the month at 5:30, 6:30 and 7:30 p.m. (www.bronxarts.org). Free.
DOWNTOWN BRONX CAFE AND BAR, 141 East 149th Street, Mott Haven, (718) 585-5255. Trains: Nos. 2, 4 or 5 to 149th Street/Grand Concourse. Opens next month.
G-BAR, 575 Grand Concourse, at 150th Street, (718) 402-6996. Trains: Nos. 2, 4 or 5 to 149 Street/Grand Concourse (www.toscanyc.com.)
HOSTOS CENTER FOR THE ARTS AND CULTURE, Hostos Community College, 450 Grand Concourse at 149th Street, Mott Haven, (718) 518-4455. Trains: Nos. 2, or 5 to 149 Street/Grand Concourse (www.hostos.cuny.edu/culturearts). On Feb. 4 at 10:15 a.m. and 12:15 p.m., a performance by the Forces of Nature Dance Theater; tickets, $5.
''MI SALA,'' 220 East 134th Street off Third Avenue, Mott Haven, (718) 665-7470. Train: No. 6 to 138th Street.
THE POINT, 940 Garrison Avenue, at Manida Street, Hunts Point, (718) 542-4139, No. 6 train to Hunts Point Avenue (www.thepoint.org). On view through mid-March, ''Vantage Point 11,'' an exhibition of photographs by students at the International Center of Photography at the Point; viewing hours, 9 a.m to 9 p.m., Monday through Friday; 10 a.m. to 5 p.m., Saturdays. Also, silk-painting workshops every Saturday, 2 to 5 p.m.
PREGONES THEATER, at La Casa Blanca, 571-575 Walton Avenue, between 149th and 150th Streets, (718) 585-1202. On Feb. 4 at 6:10 and 7:10 p.m., a concert by the Bronx Arts Ensemble. Trains: Nos. 2,4,5 to 149th Street/Grand Concourse (www.pregones.org).
WILLIE'S STEAK HOUSE, 1832 Westchester Avenue, between Thieriot and Taylor Avenues, (718) 822-9697. No. 6 train to St. Lawrence Avenue.
Correction:  February 6, 2004, Friday  An article in Weekend last Friday about musical entertainment in the South Bronx misidentified the agency that sponsors the Bronx Culture Trolley, which takes visitors to arts sites on the first Wednesday of most months. It is the Bronx Council on the Arts, not the Bronx Tourism Council.
