Dmitri Shostakovich lived through the darkest hours of the tragic Soviet experiment, and his music spoke from its void with unparalleled impact. But for all the celebration and controversy that has surrounded him, how well do we actually know his work beyond the war horses?
In a concert at Zankel Hall on Sunday the violinist Gidon Kremer and his colleagues offered three seldom-performed works, and explored Shostakovich's influence on two composers who followed in his wake.
Shostakovich's Piano Trio No. 1 was written in 1923 when he was 16, and the work was later overshadowed by his popular second trio. Precisely because of its early date, it is fascinating listening. The music suggests a post-Romantic exploration refreshingly unburdened by subtext, and marked by only slight hints of his later acid and sardonic tone.
The more complex First Piano Sonata came only three years later, but one can already hear the sharp edges of an older voice. That sonata, along with the beautiful settings of seven poems by Aleksandr Blok, made up the remainder of the Shostakovich portion of the program and reminded listeners of just how narrow a slice of his output we usually hear.
As for Shostakovich's heirs, Mr. Kremer and colleagues offered Alfred Schnittke's Violin Sonata No. 2 and Valentin Silvestrov's ''Postludio DSCH'' scored for piano trio and soprano. The former is more challenging, with episodic music that whipsaws between tonal and atonal worlds, speaking in powerful sonic aphorisms and studded with gnashing dissonance. Mr. Silvestrov's piece, by contrast, had an Arvo Pärt-esque meditative quality, with the soprano singing slowly arcing vocal lines above simple harmonies that shimmered with a quiet iridescence.
The performances by Mr. Kremer, the soprano Yulia Korpacheva, the cellist Wendy Warner and the pianist Andrius Zlabys were tasteful, communicative and utterly absorbing. Never one to dazzle with cheap effect, Mr. Kremer chose to repeat the Silvestrov as an encore, ending the evening with its slowly drawn chords fading into a long capacious silence.
MUSIC REVIEW
