Lucas Belvaux's ''Trilogy,'' whose first part opens today in New York, tells three overlapping stories in succession, going back over some of the same events and showing them from different points of view. This fragmented, looping approach to storytelling might once have seemed radical, but after ''Pulp Fiction'' (and ''Run Lola Run'' and ''Go'' and ''Amores Perros'' and so on and so on) it has become a convention, a hallmark of what film historians of the future will most likely identify as a curious turn-of-the-century style.
This is not to say that the sequential narration of simultaneous happenings is without interest. Last year, in the sadly overlooked ''Lawless Heart,'' the British directors Tom Hunsinger and Neil Hunter split a single complicated story into a witty, touching triptych about the emotional crises of three men on the Isle of Man. Mr. Belvaux has tried something similar: each installment in ''The Trilogy'' focuses on the travails of a different man in the French alpine city of Grenoble. The director's chief innovation -- which cost him a great deal of effort and will cost moviegoers more than the usual investment of money and time -- is to spread his entwined plots across three different movies, each one belonging, at least on paper, to a different genre.
In theory, each chapter -- a political thriller, a domestic farce and a melodrama of love and addiction -- can stand alone, even as each helps to complete the others. ''On the Run,'' which begins the series, subjects this theory to the most demanding test, with decidedly mixed results. Of the three, it is the most self-contained and also the least interesting.
The movie follows Bruno le Roux, a left-wing militant who has escaped from prison and returned to Grenoble to resume his campaign of shooting and bombing and to settle some old scores. He proceeds through a series of safe houses and strangely effective disguises (the hard-working French police, it seems, are easily fooled by stick-on mustaches and goatees), pursued by a gloomy detective (Gilbert Melki) and watched by the minions of a local drug lord.
Since Bruno is played by Mr. Belvaux himself, it is tempting to link the character's glum, earnest fanaticism with the director's. Bruno is capable of decency and compassion: he saves the life of a drug addict (Dominique Blanc), whose affliction will dominate the third portion of the trilogy. But he has not given up his belief in the revolutionary proletarian cause, even though his former comrade Jeanne (Catherine Frot) has settled into a life of bourgeois normalcy.
As a filmmaker Mr. Belvaux shares some of Bruno's grim, misguided conviction. There are some scenes that display impressive technical cunning, and others that show an astute regard for the emotional capacities of his able cast, but ''On the Run'' amounts to a sullen display of skill in a dubious cause.
Mr. Belvaux takes his three-movie gimmick more seriously than he takes the requirements of his chosen genres: ''On the Run,'' the supposed thriller, is more numbing than thrilling. (You will have to wait for future reviews to discover how funny the comedy is, and how moving the melodrama.) The movie seems to be aiming for the Zenlike deliberateness that Jean-Pierre Melville showed in transcendent policiers like ''Le Samouraï'' and ''Le Cercle Rouge,'' but without the necessary rigor or wit.
THE TRILOGY On the Run
Written (in French, with English subtitles) and directed by Lucas Belvaux; director of photography, Pierre Milon; edited by Ludo Troch; music by Riccardo del Fra; produced by Patrick Sobelman and Diana Elbaum; released by Magnolia Pictures. First of three segments; the second, ''An Amazing Couple,'' opens Feb. 6, and the last, ''After the Life,'' opens Feb. 13. At the Angelika Film Center, Mercer and Houston Streets, Greenwich Village. Running time: 117 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Ornella Muti (Cécile Costes), François Morel (Alain Costes), Catherine Frot (Jeanne), Lucas Belvaux (Bruno le Roux), Dominique Blanc (Agnès Manise) and Gilbert Melki (Pascal Manise).
FILM REVIEW
