For the past week, senior government and intelligence officials, speaking anonymously, have steadily disclosed details of a deepening inquiry into what seems to have been the transfer of Pakistan's nuclear technology to Iran and other countries in the late 1980's and early 1990's.
Their version of events -- expected to be released publicly this weekend -- blames the country's nuclear scientists, including Abdul Qadeer Khan, the father of Pakistan's nuclear bomb, for selling technology for personal gain.
But one issue rarely addressed by officials of the military-led government is the extent to which the inquiry has examined the role Pakistan's powerful military -- which had tight control over the nuclear program -- may have played in the sale or sharing of nuclear technology.
In interviews this week, retired Pakistani civilian and military officials, former American diplomats and proliferation experts said the country's military-led government appeared to be glossing over evidence that senior military officials might have approved the sales.
More recent reports of proliferation -- including allegations that the governments of the current president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, and former Prime Minister Benazir Bhutto shared nuclear technology with North Korea -- are also being given short shrift, they said.
The officials and analysts emphasized that they had no proof that the army was involved, but wondered why Pakistani investigators had not questioned any senior army officials.
George Perkovich, a proliferation expert at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, in Washington, said General Musharraf, who seized power in 1999, was trying to appease American demands for an investigation while not angering the army, his base of support.
''The problem for Musharraf is that people in the army would know about this,'' Mr. Perkovich said in a telephone interview. ''And he wants to protect his club.''
One focus of suspicion is Gen. Mirza Aslam Beg, the commander of the Pakistani Army from 1988 to 1991, American analysts said. Robert B. Oakley, who served as the American ambassador in Islamabad from 1988 to 1991, said in a telephone interview that General Beg told him in the spring of 1991 that he was discussing nuclear and conventional military cooperation with Iran's Revolutionary Guards.
''He said he had a good conversation with the Revolutionary Guards about nuclear cooperation and conventional military assistance,'' Mr. Oakley said. ''Iran was going to support Pakistan with conventional military aid and petroleum and the Pakistanis would provide them with nuclear technology.''
In an interview this week, General Beg denied ever sharing nuclear technology with Iran. But he did confirm that he proposed that Pakistan adopt a doctrine of ''strategic defiance'' involving an alliance between Pakistan, Iran and Afghanistan.
General Beg said such an alliance would thwart an American invasion of all three countries that he expected after the United States defeated Iraq in the Persian Gulf war of 1991. This week, he predicted that history would prove him right and that an alliance similar to the European Union would form and the three countries would become ''the core of the Muslim world, to emulate.''
Mr. Oakley said he was so concerned by General Beg's statements in 1991 that he went to Pakistan's prime minister at the time, Nawaz Sharif, and urged him to quash any such arrangement. Mr. Oakley said that Mr. Sharif agreed to speak to Iran's civilian leaders.
Mr. Sharif, who was toppled by General Musharraf and now lives in exile in Saudi Arabia, declined a request for an interview this week.
Chaudry Nisar Ali Khan, a cabinet minister and senior aide to to Mr. Sharif, said he remembered that General Beg proposed an alliance with Iran and Afghanistan. But he said senior civilian officials did not take General Beg's ideas seriously.
Lt. Gen. Hamid Gul, who served as the director of Pakistan's military intelligence agency, Inter-Services Intelligence, from 1987 to 1989, said some officers joked that the country, which at the time was on the verge of defaulting on loan payments, should sell its nuclear technology. But he said none of the proposals were taken seriously.
''It was nothing more than loose talk,'' said General Gul, who is now retired. ''Bizarre talk. Wild ideas.''
Asked if he turned a blind eye to nuclear shipments, General Beg said no reports of proliferation came to him during his tenure.
Lt. Gen. Assad Durrani, who served as director of military intelligence from 1988 to 1990 and intelligence director from 1990 to 1992, said he received no reports of proliferation. General Durrani, now retired, said the agency only tracked efforts by foreign intelligence operatives to penetrate the nuclear program.
He said a separate branch of the nuclear program run by both civilians and military officials monitored the scientists. Government officials have said investigators are questioning two retired generals in charge of nuclear lab security. ''The security of Dr. A. Q. Khan was not our responsibility,'' he said. ''The I.S.I. is not a security-providing agency.''
General Durrani and a close aide to General Musharraf both suggested that the intelligence service and the army were not the invulnerable, all-knowing institutions Pakistanis perceived.
''I have seen the workings of the I.S.I. and I have seen the workings of the military mind-set,'' said the aide, who spoke on the condition of anonymity. Military officials probably saw the scientists as ''national heroes'' and never suspected them of wrongdoing.
But more recent allegations of proliferation involving North Korea, if true, are more likely to involve direct army involvement, said Mr. Perkovich of the Carnegie Endowment. American officials believe that Pakistan traded nuclear technology for ballistic missile technology with North Korea in the mid-1990's. Pakistani officials vehemently deny it.
In 1993, Benazir Bhutto, then prime minister of Pakistan, visited North Korea and was given the plans for a ballistic missile, current and former Pakistani officials said.
In an e-mail response to written questions this week, Ms. Bhutto, who lives in exile in London, declined to comment on specific details of the nuclear program. But she said she consistently opposed the proliferation of Pakistani nuclear technology while in office.
She said that during her first term, from 1988 to 1990, she tightened security after concern grew that a foreign country might arrest a visiting Pakistani scientist to slow the country's clandestine nuclear program.
''I therefore directed that no scientist should leave the country without written government permission,'' she wrote, ''and without being accompanied by a security detail.''
There are also questions about General Musharraf's tenure. In July 2002, American satellites tracked a Pakistani plane as it picked up ballistic missile parts in North Korea, American officials have said. American intelligence officials also believe that within the last two years Pakistani centrifuge designs helped Libya's nuclear program.
But none of the accounts prove that the army, or Pakistan's government, approved the transfer of nuclear technology. American and Pakistani analysts said the evidence that could prove the military approved the transfer would be the discovery of Pakistani nuclear hardware in Libya, North Korea or Iran. They said it was nearly impossible for hardware to leave Pakistan's tightly guarded nuclear facilities, and the country, without at least the tacit approval of the Pakistani Army.
