One day after a storm left 10 inches of snow in the city, the Sanitation Department yesterday dispatched legions of workers to issue summonses to property owners who had not shoveled their sidewalks.
The number of summonses issued yesterday was not available as of last night, but Keith W. Mellis, a department spokesman, said the department had aggressively enforced the law, with just about all of its supervisors, police officers and enforcement agents assigned to patrol city sidewalks to enforce the law.
After the snowstorm that hit the city on Jan. 18, the city issued 6,908 summonses from Jan. 19 through Jan. 23 for failure to clear snow. Last winter, the city issued a total of 9,000.
Earlier this week, Sanitation Commissioner John Doherty announced that department officials would be diligent in issuing summonses to people who failed to shovel their sidewalks even as Bloomberg administration officials have insisted that no ticket blitz is in effect in New York.
By noon yesterday, most city property owners seemed compliant. Sidewalks in residential and commercial areas alike were shoveled. In fact, some city residents complained that the biggest offender in uncleared walkways was the city itself. For example, on several treacherous stretches of sidewalk along Roosevelt Avenue near 99th Street in Corona, Queens, pedestrians slipped along bumpy snow compacted into an icy thoroughfare.
''It's a mess around here,'' David Fernandez, a college student, said in describing conditions in his Corona neighborhood.  ''Everyone has to do their part in clearing the sidewalks, but so does the city. Look at this sidewalk; people are falling all over.''
The councilman for that area, Eric N. Gioia, said yesterday that an elderly man had fallen on a walkway along Roosevelt Avenue that should have been shoveled by the city and had broken his pelvis and his collarbone.
''The city has its priorities backwards,'' he said. ''It should send out sanitation workers with shovels, not ticket books. You have an absolute obligation to clean your own house before pointing fingers at someone else. Instead, it is picking the pocket of people who can afford it the least.''
City law requires property and business owners to clear their sidewalks of ice and snow, from their building facade to the curb, within four hours after the snow stops falling. If the snow stops after 9 p.m., the owner has until 11 the following morning to comply.
If the sidewalk is icy and particularly difficult to clear, a path for pedestrians must be cleared and some type of granular material -- whether salt, sand, sawdust or cat litter -- must be spread for traction. Snow may not be thrown into the street but must be piled up on the edge of the sidewalk near the curb.
The first fine is $100 and repeat offenders can be fined up to $350.
''Our goal is not to start issuing notices of violation,'' Mr. Mellis said. ''Our first concern is the safety of residents on the street and the people who live in the buildings.''
Elena Diaz, 52, who owns the Roosevelt Laundromat, on Roosevelt Avenue and 112th Street in Corona, said that she kept her sidewalk clear of snow for the safety of her customers but also to avoid being fined.
''I keep on top of it,'' she said. ''But it's a shame when the city doesn't clean their part.'' She said she feared getting a ticket for a mound of ice that forms on the sidewalk in front of her coin laundry in the cold weather, from a leaking pipe suspended from the elevated train tracks above the avenue.
