He's Going to Wait Till the Midnight Hour
In the annals of that subset of rhythm and funk that might be described as tomcat soul there is, of course, JAMES BROWN (''It's a Man's, Man's, Man's World''), recently arrested on spouse-abuse charges but still a box office draw.
And then there is everyone else, a few of whom are the subjects of ''Only the Strong Survive,'' a testosterone-fueled documentary about soul men and a few soul women.
On Wednesday, when Mr. Brown was having his latest run-in with the law, CYNDI LAUPER, the singer, and ROGER FRIEDMAN, a journalist for Foxnews.com, were hosts at the Cutting Room nightclub in Chelsea for a party celebrating the documentary's release on DVD.
In the film and at the party were MARY WILSON (of the Supremes), CARLA THOMAS (''Gee Whiz, Look at His Eyes'') and SAM MOORE (''Soul Man'').
Also there from the film was WILSON PICKETT (''Mustang Sally''), who was in high spirits and too-cool-for-school shades. A woman asked Mr. Pickett, 62, what he admired in the opposite sex and Mr. Pickett's thoughts did not turn to questions of moral constitution.
''I like the booty,'' he rasped, and then let his ardor turn quickly to questions of physical technique, which good taste and innumerable editors will not allow us to detail.
Mr. Pickett, while professing exhaustion from nonstop promotion of the documentary, did eye our Boldface correspondent and conclude, ''I like big women.'' Not for nothing was one of his albums titled, ''The Wicked, Wicked Pickett.''
Suddenly, Mr. Pickett part-crooned and part-wailed, ''Tell me about you and your m-m-m-m-m-m-m-man!''
Perhaps our correspondent registered consternation.
No longer singing, Mr. Pickett persisted, '' 'Cause you got one and you're in love with him, right? Don't you try to fool me! Hey! Don't try to fool me!''
Trying to move Mr. Pickett's needle to another track, our correspondent asked him to sing another song. ''The thrill is g-o-o-o-o-n-e,'' he wailed. ''G-o-o-o-o-o-n-e away from me.''
Wait, isn't that B.B. KING?
''I'll turn it around,'' Mr. Pickett said, switching to full soul strut: ''The day has c-o-o-o-m-e. The day has c-o-o-o-m-e for you and me.''
Small Woodland Animal Opens Off Broadway
For most people familiar with ANNA PAQUIN, there are two prevailing images of her: the tiny, startled, speechless, gobsmacked girl who won an Academy Award at the age of 11; and Rogue, teen queen of the summer movies ''X-Men'' and ''X2,'' the energy vampire with a white stripe streaking her dark hair.
But the Anna Paquin that sipped coffee in an Upper East Side restaurant on an arctic morning last week had her dark hair pulled sedately back and without a stripe.
Almost 22 and a Columbia University student, she stared at her coffee cup, as if reading tea leaves. She wore heart-shaped earrings and something leathery and ringed that resembled a motorcycle jacket (''It's not a motorcycle jacket, I don't want to scare my mother!'').
Ms. Paquin is performing in a six-person ensemble, a dark comedy that begins previews today at the John Houseman Theater. Called ''Roulette,'' it was written by PAUL WEITZ, who was nominated for a screenwriting Oscar for the HUGH GRANT film ''About a Boy.''
The ''Roulette'' cast also includes ANA GASTEYER, formerly of ''Saturday Night Live,'' GRANT SHAUD, formerly of ''Murphy Brown,'' and as the troubled father who decides to take charge of his life by playing Russian roulette, LARRY BRYGGMAN, nominated for a Tony for his portrayal of the tragic mathematician in ''Proof.''
Ms. Paquin plays the wisecracking daughter in the play. So, what is her function -- nemesis, Greek chorus? The gobsmacked little girl returns, but with a different vocabulary. ''What's my function in the play?'' she said, seeming stricken. ''I didn't know this was going to be an English Lit test!''
Perhaps Ms. Paquin isn't good at self-examination because her acting skill seems innate. After all, her acting experience, before she won an Oscar, was confined to playing a small woodland animal (a skunk) in a ballet recital based on ''Snow White.''
''I was 6,'' Ms. Paquin said.
with Paula Schwartz
Boldface Names
