One of the tasks for football announcers like Phil Simms and Greg Gumbel, who will call the Super Bowl between New England and Carolina for CBS on Sunday, is to talk to the teams' coaches a day or two before a game. Some coaches cooperate, providing insight into their game plans, and some would rather surrender their children.
There was the time when Simms and Gumbel met with Steve Spurrier during his tenure as the head coach of the Washington Redskins.
''He sat us down, and you could see he was fidgety,'' Simms said.
''He never put his visor down,'' Gumbel said. ''He held it in his hand and he gave us just the bare minimum we asked for.''
Simms said: ''I got about two questions out and he said, 'Well, is that it? I gotta get a haircut.' I said, 'Good to see you, Coach,' and Greg and I had a good laugh. Spurrier doesn't mean to do it. He can't do it any other way.''
A good briefing by a coach provides Simms, especially, with a way to describe what a team wants to do and how it will do it.
''Forget my opinion, forget Greg, that's what's going to be on the air,'' said Simms, who is announcing his second Super Bowl for CBS after two at NBC. ''It's about setting up the game for the fan at home, not about first-guessing.''
Gumbel and Simms have gradually grown closer to New England Coach Bill Belichick, partly because of the many Patriots games they have broadcast (five this season), but also because of their familiarity from the years when Simms was a Giants quarterback and Belichick a defensive coach under Bill Parcells.
By contrast, the pair has never announced a Carolina game; Simms knows Panthers Coach John Fox but never played for him.
Belichick doesn't embrace the meetings with the announcers, and he does not easily surrender information.
''Sometimes he gives us unbelievable information,'' Simms said. ''Sometimes it's too little. Sometimes we have to beat it out of him with a sledgehammer.''
Still, he has grown friendlier, more open with feelings that on television look throttled. ''There are some teams he has a great deal of respect for,'' Gumbel said, ''and about others he says, 'If we don't win, we might as well pack and go home.' ''
Before the American Football Conference championship game on Jan. 18, Belichick told Simms and Gumbel that he was stressing physical play against Indianapolis.
''He made the point with his look and body language about how tough and physical they had to be,'' Simms said. ''Well, you could say, 'Doesn't everybody say that?' This was different. It was about getting his players into the mind-set, and that we have to be more physical than the Colts. He kept talking and talking about it, and he kept going and the players came out with a mad-at-the-world attitude, and I said, 'Oh, oh, they want to slug it out.' And I made that point all game.''
Simms and Gumbel understand when coaches won't hand over their secrets for the greater good of CBS.
''If I were in the coach's position,'' said Gumbel, who will be calling his second Super Bowl, ''and I deemed it important not to give information to a broadcaster, I'd hope the decision would be respected.'' He added, ''I don't think a coach is comfortable at baring his soul to a broadcaster.''
Another element of their pregame work is viewing game films, with analysis provided by Simms. For the Super Bowl, film analysis has focused primarily on becoming conversant with Carolina. Unlike most regular-season games, when the films are analyzed midway through a long Friday after arriving at a game site, there has been plenty of relaxed time this week.
''Inevitably, someone will fall asleep,'' said Gumbel, who is a viewer along with Larry Cavolina, the director; Mark Wolff, the producer; and Armen Keteyian, the sideline reporter. ''Sometimes it's Phil.''
Simms added: ''I fell asleep as a player, why wouldn't I fall asleep as an announcer? There's the buzz of the machine. We're sitting in comfortable chairs, and with that controller in my hand, I want to take a nap. I may doze off for 10 seconds, and when I wake up I act like I haven't fallen asleep, I go back and forth with the film, and nobody realizes I was sleeping. Not this week, though. We're energized.''
Beyond expecting to be fully awake for Sunday (although viewers may need to be awakened after six and a half hours of CBS's pregame programming), Simms vowed that he would not try to throw in everything he knows. He said he had not overprepared as he had for previous Super Bowls.
''If we can just keep it simple and not annoy anyone, it would be great,'' he said. ''If somebody makes a tackle, I won't give his life story. That's how to be a good announcer. Don't annoy the fan.''
TV SPORTS
