A federal judge delayed the testimony of the main witness in the trial of Martha Stewart on Thursday in an embarrassing setback for prosecutors. The order came after lawyers for her co-defendant accused them of unfairly withholding an important document that could exonerate their client.
The development upended the government's plans for presenting its case and may drive a wedge between Ms. Stewart and her co-defendant, Peter E. Bacanovic. The judge refused to dismiss any charges, but she ordered a week's delay in the testimony of the witness, Douglas Faneuil, a former assistant to Mr. Bacanovic when he was Ms. Stewart's stockbroker.
Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer said the document at issue, an interview Mr. Faneuil's former lawyer had last year with federal agents, suggests that Mr. Bacanovic may not have given the order to tell Ms. Stewart that major shareholders of ImClone Systems were selling their stakes. Ms. Stewart and her former broker are accused of lying to cover up the reasons for that trade. Mr. Faneuil's testimony is expected to center on his knowledge of what Ms. Stewart was told about ImClone before she sold nearly 4,000 ImClone shares, ahead of a critical company announcement that sent the share price plummeting.
''This is tantamount to the eyewitness at a murder scene saying, 'I'm not sure who the shooter is,''' said Jim Walden, a former federal prosecutor now with the law firm of O'Melveny &amp; Myers in New York.
The document is not likely to help Ms. Stewart, since it supports the notion that she received information that led to her stock trade. But it could lend weight to Mr. Bacanovic's argument that he did nothing wrong. While they are being tried together and both assert that they are not guilty, their defense arguments may begin to compete at this point, several lawyers said. With a new story that may implicate Ms. Stewart but exonerate Mr. Bacanovic, their paths could diverge.
The delay also gives lawyers for both defendants additional time to prepare for their cross-examination of Mr. Faneuil. The session is expected to be harsh; Mr. Faneuil has already been called ''an admitted liar'' in court by Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer, Richard M. Strassberg.
Other lawyers involved in the case said on Thursday that the impact of the document was unclear. ''I don't think it helps or it hurts,'' said Robert G. Morvillo, who is defending Ms. Stewart, as he left the courtroom. ''The question is what the next step in the trial will be.''
The disclosure of the document, however, was clearly a setback for prosecutors, who were chastised by Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum.
And the government may have the most to lose from the delay because the order of testimony is crucial. Only two witnesses, the acting chief executive of ImClone and a compliance officer from Merrill Lynch, have testified so far. One of the prosecutors, Karen Patton Seymour, told the court that she thought the delay was too long under the circumstances, which prompted Mr. Strassberg to accuse the government of ''chutzpah.''
Ms. Seymour said she had scrambled to find substitute witnesses in time for Thursday afternoon's court session, but none were available.
The fireworks in the closely watched case took place without the jury present. Judge Cedarbaum told jurors only that there had been ''a bit of a mix-up'' and that they would be going home early. The trial resumes on Monday, but it is not known which witness will take the stand.
The document in question came from an interview federal investigators had on Jan. 15 of last year with Mr. Faneuil's former lawyer, Jeremiah Gutman. According to a person who saw the document, it reads in part: ''Faneuil told Gutman that he had been instructed by Bacanovic or Waksal to pass information on to Martha Stewart regarding ImClone.'' The information is based on Mr. Gutman's recollection of a discussion he had with Mr. Faneuil a year earlier, on Jan. 7, 2002, which was two weeks after Ms. Stewart's ImClone trade.
The Waksal referred to may be Samuel D. Waksal, the former chief executive of ImClone, although that was not immediately clear. Mr. Waksal is serving a seven-year sentence for an assortment of crimes, including securities fraud. He tried unsuccessfully to sell 80,000 shares on Dec. 27, 2001, the same day Ms. Stewart sold hers, and one of his daughters, Aliza, sold 40,000 ImClone shares.
Elsewhere the document mentions that ''Bacanovic, Waksal, or someone else'' may have told Faneuil to give Ms. Stewart information, the person who saw the document said.
Mr. Faneuil had been expected to testify that Mr. Bacanovic ordered him to tell Ms. Stewart that members of the Waksal family, who then ran ImClone Systems, were dumping their shares in the company. Ms. Stewart sold her entire stake a few minutes after she talked to Mr. Faneuil. After initially backing the explanation Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic gave investigators -- that her trade took place because of an existing agreement to sell if the price fell to $60 a share -- Mr. Faneuil eventually said that he had been persuaded to lie in exchange for money, a plane ticket and an extra week of vacation. He pleaded guilty in 2002 to a reduced charge of lying to the government, and agreed to cooperate in the case against Ms. Stewart and her broker as part of the plea agreement.
Mr. Strassberg told the judge that he had only received the document by fax the night before Mr. Faneuil was to appear, and that the government had had it for several months. ''It is very disturbing that we are here, in trial, after openings, and all of a sudden this clearly exculpatory material is provided to us,'' he said. ''This presents to us a whole different line of potential questioning.''
While conversations between lawyers and their clients generally do not qualify as evidence, the judge agreed earlier this week to allow material from Mr. Gutman, who had already spoken to investigators about Mr. Faneuil, after a request from defense lawyers.
The document raises other questions. Ms. Seymour said that when the investigators interviewed Mr. Gutman, he did not have notes from his 2002 meeting with Mr. Faneuil, and consequently ''we are depending on Mr. Gutman, who is in his 80's, to recall what Mr. Faneuil said.''
Mr. Faneuil's character has come under attack from the start. Mr. Morvillo has said that Mr. Faneuil was probably overwhelmed when he was alone in Mr. Bacanovic's office at Merrill Lynch and calls began coming in from Waksal family members. Mr. Strassberg maintains that Mr. Faneuil was trying ''to be the big man'' when Ms. Stewart called, and that whatever he told her did not come from Mr. Bacanovic.
On Thursday, as the Gutman document was discussed, Mr. Morvillo asked the judge to bar Mr. Faneuil from testifying as punishment for the government's failure to release it. ''The government has failed to fulfill its obligations,'' he said.
Ms. Seymour ran afoul of the judge for failing to turn over the document as possible evidence of a defendant's innocence, as required by law based on a case known as Brady v. Maryland. Ms. Seymour had argued that the document did not contain such evidence.
''You are the custodians, or the guardians, of the law,'' Judge Cedarbaum said, ''and I am telling you that your understanding is too narrow.''
One lawyer not involved in the case said the postponement of Mr. Faneuil's testimony would have no real effect on the trial.
''They're going to get more time, but it's really not going to change much,'' said Charna E. Sherman, who specializes in white-collar crime for the law firm of Squire, Sanders &amp; Dempsey in Cleveland. ''It shouldn't be surprising that he didn't tell the truth at the beginning. He's admitted as much.''
