Cheim &amp; Read  547 West 25th Street, Chelsea  Through Feb. 21
This astounding exhibition simultaneously reshapes and confirms William Eggleston's claim to greatness. Its heart is ''Precolor,'' a cache of 69 little-known vintage black-and-white photographs by the man who is often credited with elevating color photography to a fine art.
Contradicting the widespread assumption that his mature work began with color, these images reveal that in the early 1960's, when Mr. Eggleston was in his early 20's, his vision was all but formed and his attraction to the banal and nondescript corners of American life was well defined. Equally apparent was his instinct for images of emblematic ordinariness taken on the fly, whose stillness and compositional rightness are the antithesis of the snapshot tradition.
Inanimate or not, the subjects of these photographs have been around for a while, but they lack the comforting patina of age or wisdom. As in his color images, cars, trucks and convenience stores loom -- forlorn but unaccountably beautiful, usually because light is fully exploited. People often seem incidental, almost part of the scenery, yet they can convey novelistic, if not historic, fullness. For example: a black woman at a bus stop stands near a bench; it is emblazoned with an advertisement for a car dealership that includes the harshly rendered face of a white man.
Novelistic also describes a roiling videotape that counters the vaunted stillness of Mr. Eggleston's photographs while also placing him at the forefront of early 1970's artistic experiments. Shot in 1974 with a Sony Porta-pak, the crazily careering ''Stranded in Canton'' documents a cast of hard-drinking Southerners with the intimacy, ease and instability of a seasoned participant.
In one sequence, a man with peroxide hair, makeup and a sequined T-shirt sings old love songs, swanning around with a toilet-paper boa. In others shots are fired; good old boys decapitate chickens; and a young bearded man with an angelic face raves about being stranded in Canton, a colloquialism for being out of one's mind on drugs or alcohol. Whiffs of Southern Gothic are not new to Mr. Eggleston's work, but here they rise to the surface -- fierce, tragic and proud.
ROBERTA SMITH
ART IN REVIEW
