The struggle for the Democratic presidential nomination is not just about personalities and programs, but also about the direction -- maybe even the soul -- of the party. While still very much a work in progress, the Democratic Party emerging from Iowa and New Hampshire is different from the careful centrism of the Clinton era.
Howard Dean may not have won a primary or caucus yet, a circumstance that led to a major shake-up of his campaign on Wednesday, but his mark on the party is unmistakable. His defeats are less a victory for the Democratic establishment than a sign of the other leading candidates' ability to adjust, and harness the energy originally tapped by Dr. Dean's insurgent campaign: the anger at President Bush, the opposition to the war with Iraq, the demand for a different direction in domestic policy.
This is a Democratic Party spoiling for a fight. Dr. Dean's rallying cry was, and is, ''It's time to take our country back!'' Senator John Kerry throws Mr. Bush a defiant challenge that becomes an empowering group chant: ''Bring it on!'' Senator John Edwards cites his long legal career fighting big corporate lawyers and declares, ''I am so ready for this fight!''
At Thursday night's debate in South Carolina, Dr. Dean brushed aside the talk of turmoil in his campaign and declared: ''Everybody on this stage, or a lot of people on this stage, have now embraced my message. They all talk about change. They all talk about bringing people into the party. The truth is I stood up for that message when nobody else would.''
In contrast to Bill Clinton, today's leading Democratic candidates are not much interested, at least so far, in critiquing liberal orthodoxy and apologizing for past Democratic sins. The Democratic pollster Stanley Greenberg, an adviser to Mr. Clinton in 1992, noted that these candidates must appeal to a far more polarized, us-against-them electorate than existed when Mr. Clinton first ran. Theirs is a party that is utterly shut out of power in Washington -- the Democrats of 1992 had big majorities in both the House and the Senate -- and that feels its powerlessness acutely.
Forty-six percent of those who voted in the New Hampshire Democratic primary described their feelings toward the Bush administration as angry, according to exit polling; an additional 37 percent described themselves as dissatisfied.
Dr. Dean drew on that sentiment early on, around the war with Iraq and, to a lesser extent, the Bush administration's tax cuts. His declaration that ''I'm from the Democratic wing of the Democratic Party'' thrilled Democrats outside Washington who felt that their Congressional leaders had been far too accommodating to the administration on the war. Many of these Democrats argued that the party establishment had repeatedly compromised with Mr. Bush and, essentially, been rolled -- not just legislatively, on issues like Medicare and education, but also at the polls in the 2002 midterm elections.
The other leading candidates soon began sharpening their own attacks on Mr. Bush and his conduct of the war with Iraq, even if they had voted to authorize the war, as Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards had. Like Dr. Dean, ''they recognized the dynamic that this was about who was going to stand up to President Bush,'' Mr. Greenberg said. ''Dean thought he had a lock on it, and he thought that Iraq was the sole component.''
In fact, the war itself was not the most important concern by the time Democrats went to vote in Iowa and New Hampshire; domestic issues like health care and the economy were, judging from the exit polls. When the race moved to New Hampshire, Dr. Dean took credit for causing his rivals to oppose the war, and said this shift would now let him return to the bread-and-butter domestic issues that got him into the race at the start.
But several Democratic strategists said Dr. Dean had failed to adjust to this new focus on the domestic agenda, as well as the rising concern among primary voters with each candidate's ability to defeat Mr. Bush, not just confront him.
Dean allies complain bitterly that the other candidates have borrowed heavily from their message, as often happens in a long election race. The other major campaigns assert that their messages flow naturally from their candidates' biographies and public careers, and the political times they are running in.
In mid-November, after a shake-up in his own campaign, Mr. Kerry began delivering a sharper stump speech, including the climactic line ''Bring it on,'' which hits the same rebellious chord as Dr. Dean's rallying cries. His speech also emphasized what he characterized as special interests' grip on Washington.
That is another major feature of the Democratic message these days: an unabashed populist critique against Mr. Bush's Washington, the ''special interests'' and ''corporate cronies'' that the Democrats assert now dominate the government.
Mr. Edwards talks about ''two Americas -- one for the privileged few, and another for everybody else.'' Mr. Kerry, in spite of his patrician style, sounds like an avenging populist street fighter: ''I have a message for the influence peddlers, for the polluters, the H.M.O.'s, the big drug companies that get in the way, the big oil and the special interests who now call the White House their home: We're coming. You're going. And don't let the door hit you on the way out.''
Bill Clinton slipped comfortably into populism at times. But there is a razor's edge to the Democrats' attacks on powerful special interests these days that has everything to do with the current Bush administration, many Democratic strategists say.
''One of the great weaknesses that Bush has is that people see him as beholden to special interests,'' said Mark Mellman, Democratic pollster and adviser to the Kerry campaign. ''They believe these interests are preventing us from dealing with issues like health care, drug costs, environmental issues and the like.''
David Axelrod, adviser to Mr. Edwards, said, ''Nobody's done more for populism than George Bush.''
Al Gore ran a populist campaign in 2000, of course, casting his message as ''the people versus the powerful.'' The Democratic Leadership Council, the incubator of Clinton Democrats, was critical of that message after the election, arguing that Mr. Gore had run as an old-style populist instead of a ''new-economy Democrat.'' But these are different times, officials of the leadership council say.
''There's nothing wrong with sticking up for the little guy against this administration,'' said Bruce Reed, the group's president. ''Bush has relentlessly shifted the tax burden off of wealth and onto work.'' Council officials assert that Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards are advancing a more ''positive populism'' aimed at protecting the broad middle class and all who ''play by the rules.''
In the end, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards often sound more like populist outsiders and agents of change than like incumbent senators, a source of considerable frustration to the Dean camp.
As the race for the nomination moves on, to the South, the West and the industrial Midwest, the Democratic message will no doubt change. And it will change again for the general election. For now, though, the populists prevail. The man whose supporters believe he started it all was carrying the banner high on Thursday night.
''When you go to elect a president, you want somebody who's going to stand up for you,'' Dr. Dean said at the debate, reciting the tough stands he had taken against Mr. Bush. ''How do you know anybody else is going to stand up for you if they wouldn't do it when it really counted and when it wasn't popular?''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
