THE sun is two fists (a k a 20 degrees) above the horizon, which means there is about an hour and 20 minutes until sunset -- almost time for me to head to the Mucky Duck. I am at a beach near a small cemetery on Captiva Island, the more northern of two barrier islands off the mainland at Fort Myers, Fla., the other being Sanibel, and only a mollusk's throw from the Duck, the beachfront bar where I will join the congregation for the sacred island rite of watching the sun set over the Gulf of Mexico.
I have spent the last few hours floating on my back in the gently rolling gulf waters, something that is impossible to do in the pounding Atlantic, which beats upon Florida's much more popular (and therefore, to me, much less desirable) east coast beaches. Because I am adhering to a strict vacation regimen requiring that I engage in no exercise whatsoever, the constant hand paddling necessary to keep from sinking is too much exertion.
So today I am master and commander of an inflatable plastic raft aboard which I have lain the afternoon away, suspended between warm azure sea and cloudless sky, wearing only bathing trunks and a pair of shades so dark that I can behold the sparkling sun without fear of permanent retina damage.
When the sun is a fist and a half from the horizon (it appears to traverse the sky at 15 degrees an hour), I stow my raft in the trunk of the rental car and stroll along the beach as far as the artist Robert Rauchenberg's estate and Jensen's on the Gulf, a palm-shaded beachfront inn that somehow manages to be at once luxurious and homey.
A short walk across the island brings me to the same family's inn on the leeward side of the island, Jensen's Twin Palms Resort &amp; Marina, where a manatee lolls just below the surface of the waters that lap at the marina pier's pilings. The dress code at the Mucky Duck is lax, and I feel comfortable strolling to the bar in flip-flops, baggies and a T-shirt, ordering a beer and sitting at one of the picnic tables arrayed for optimum sunset viewing. Passing up the British pub food offered inside, I enjoy a one-course double order of the Duck's succulent garlicky broiled shrimp as the sky turns a shimmering golden color. The celestial spectacle is as close to a glimpse of heaven as the living are allowed, and no one looks askance as I sit at my perch and raise my glass, thankful for the daily blessing.
Later tonight I will drop in at Doc Ford's Sanibel Rum Bar &amp; Grille and join the gathered fishing guides and sport anglers in a discussion of the fine points of the tarpon and grouper fishing for which the local waters are famous. The former is inedible, but the latter fish is delectable and served almost every way it can be -- even with breakfast -- at the Lighthouse Cafe on the east end of Sanibel.
I've booked a charter at Sanibel Marina for tomorrow. I know, it's an exertion, but one with a payoff -- exhilaration. But that's tomorrow. For now, I'll just sit here and do nothing. And leave today's exertions to the spinning Earth and setting sun.
Sanibel and Captiva Islands are linked to the mainland by a causeway and are about 24 and 36 miles, respectively, from Southwest Florida International Airport in Fort Myers, which is served by 27 carriers. Where to go: the Mucky Duck, on the beach at Andy Rosse Lane, Captiva, (239) 472-3434; Doc Ford's Sanibel Rum Bar &amp; Grille, 975 Rabbit Road, Sanibel, (239) 472-8311; Sanibel Marina, 634 North Yachtsman Drive, Sanibel, (239) 472-2723; the Lighthouse Cafe, 362 Periwinkle Way, Sanibel, (239) 472-0303. Where to stay: Jensen's Twin Palms Resort &amp; Marina, 15107 Captiva Drive, Captiva, $120 to 190, (239) 472-5800; Waterside Inn, 3033 West Gulf Drive, Sanibel, $160 to $228, (239) 472-1345,; Jensen's on the Gulf, 15300 Captiva Drive, Captiva $210 to $550, (239) 472-4684.
JOURNEYS
