Dismal results have lifted the fog of hype. The visionary founder who until a few weeks ago was heralded as a revolutionary genius who would forever change the way business is done is out, replaced by an ''old economy'' suit who must try to turn around the floundering enterprise. Staff members have been asked to forgo pay, and advertising has been suspended to slow the organization's cash ''burn rate.'' Haven't we seen this tale before?
Howard Dean's implosion calls to mind the fate of too many high-flying dot-com companies in the wake of the 2000-2001 crash. Dr. Dean relished being anointed as the Internet presidential candidate last year, when he was riding high, but now the title is proving disconcertingly prophetic.
Candidate Dean still has a chance to turn things around in the primaries to come, but he will be different -- just as Time Warner is different now that the adults have removed ''AOL'' from the name. His original campaign was a cybercampaign. This wasn't a case of one candidate's creating the best Web site, but a case of the Internet's creating a viable candidate, for the first time. Dr. Dean didn't just use the Internet as a tool. His entire message and organization were imbued with an online ethos.
Joe Trippi, the recently ousted campaign manager, essentially created the ''Dean.com'' brand. Dr. Dean had to ask in a meeting early in the campaign what a blog was, but Mr. Trippi, a lifetime political operative, had spent the bubble years out in Silicon Valley, marveling at the Internet's networking capacity. He advised tech companies and promoted his favorite stocks on online message boards. He was so bullish on Wave Systems, an information services company whose stock has since cratered, that Wave hired him, much as Mr. Trippi would later hire some pro-Dean bloggers.
In many interviews over the last year, Mr. Trippi complained, tongue-in-cheek, that he didn't really run the campaign. This was a reference to the campaign's decentralized nature, in which he served more as a Webmaster. He liked to say that true power lay at ''the edges of the network,'' as if describing the Valley's open-source-software movement.
The Dean campaign's most fervent supporters felt uniquely empowered because they believed, with some justification, that they and other idealists like them (whom they had seen at the local Meetup) had defined the campaign. The intensity of their support translated into such an impressive stream of venture capital -- $40 million last year, mostly in small sums -- that the campaign decided to bypass public financing limits and spoke of matching the Bush juggernaut's fund-raising. This was Priceline taking on the big airlines, or Webvan taking on Wal-Mart. The Dean campaign spent its seemingly endless money early and indiscriminately to build the brand, and its supporters' enthusiasm seemed to will its poll numbers ever higher, like some dot-com's stock price in 1999.
In retrospect, as at many other dot-coms, the campaign's self-congratulatory buzz and hype masked plenty of serious problems with the business plan. Dr. Dean's volunteers and supporters were like online investors who promoted a company's stock before a single profit -- or vote, in this case -- had been booked.
Investors and customers are not the same thing, and the Dean campaign's decentralized, ad hoc nature became a liability when it came time to convince the customer -- the Democratic voter -- that Candidate Dean was the best product to force George Bush into retirement.
Because the Dean candidacy was defined by cyberenthusiasts as much as it was by the former governor's inner circle, it never reconciled some core contradictions. Their alignment on the war was clear enough, but what else did a fiscally conservative, relatively pro-business governor have in common with the activist left? And why was the insurgent Washington-bashing candidate being endorsed by the likes of Al Gore?
There may be compelling responses to these and other voter concerns, but the Dean campaign has been hurt by its almost haughty unpreparedness. Dr. Dean's devastating third-place finish in Iowa -- on top of his infamous caucus-night yelp -- seemed to elicit a whimper from the Dean cyberuniverse: we're the high-flying Internet candidacy, remember?
The ultimate indignity for the true believers is that Mr. Trippi was replaced by Roy Neel. Not only was Mr. Neel a top adviser to Al Gore (an über-inside-the-Beltway politico), but he was also the chief Washington lobbyist for the Baby Bells, the old local phone monopolists, the ones with the wires. Anyone remember the days of dial-up?
Editorial Observer
