Though the construction of luxury apartment buildings in Manhattan has commanded far more attention, new census data show that New York City is in the midst of a more surprising housing boom that extends across much of Brooklyn, Queens and the Bronx, including neighborhoods where developers once feared to tread without large government subsidies.
The number of permits for new housing units in the city rose last year to the highest level in 30 years, while the total was stable or fell across the rest of the metropolitan area. City planners say those figures, released this week by the Census Bureau, document a new wave of interest and investment in middle-class neighborhoods outside Manhattan.
It has been decades since developers showed much appetite for building private, unsubsidized middle-income housing in the city, largely because it was so hard to turn a profit. Now, though, the construction boom stretches from the South Bronx, where a surge in privately financed development has led to a tripling of land prices, to Bensonhurst in Brooklyn, where houses are being torn down and replaced by six- and seven-story rental buildings and condominiums for an influx of recent immigrants, prompting calls for new zoning restrictions.
''This is market-driven, and the market is clearly making a vote of confidence in the city as a place to invest,'' said Eric Kober, director of housing, economic and infrastructure planning at the City Planning Department. ''We call it reverse urban sprawl.''
The number of new-home permits issued by the city has been rising strongly since the late 1990's, and still lags way behind the rising demand for housing as the city's population grows. The census figures are striking: Last year, builders obtained permits for 21,218 new privately owned apartments and houses, more than in any year since 1973, though far fewer than during the construction boom of the early 1960's.
The number of new homes approved rose by 15 percent from the year before, even though the number in Manhattan fell slightly for the second year in a row. In the last five years, the greatest increases both in numbers and percentages have occurred in Brooklyn, the Bronx and Queens.
Developers and planners say the trend is driven by several forces, like increased demand, lower crime rates and better-kept neighborhoods. Low interest rates have cut building costs and have expanded the pool of people who can afford homes enough to include recent immigrants.
Much of the new development outside Manhattan has involved smaller projects: one- and two-family houses and small apartment buildings that can be built more cheaply than steel-trussed Manhattan high-rises, in part because they often use less expensive nonunion labor. Some builders are immigrants who have recently made the transition from contractors to developers, according to builders and planners.
The increased development in the city is taking place as new home construction in the rest of the metropolitan area -- which includes portions of New Jersey, Connecticut, New York and Pennsylvania -- is stable or falling slightly, despite rising home prices and the lowest interest rates in a generation. Throughout the region, the number of jobs has grown faster than new homes have been built, leading planners to worry that a housing shortage could hurt economic growth.
According to the Census Bureau figures, the total of new home construction in 2000 through 2003 rose 77 percent in New York City over the previous four years, while it increased by 2.4 percent in the rest of the metropolitan area. The city's share of new-home permits rose to 32 percent from 21 percent. Outside the city, the number of new homes approved last year -- 37,180 -- was slightly lower than in the year before, and remained 15 percent below the peak year of 2000.
Robert D. Yaro, president of the Regional Plan Association, an independent planning group, said the permits data reflected two trends. Many outer suburbs are ''pulling up the drawbridge'' out of concern for overburdened schools and services, he said, and rezoning to require larger lots or converting residential lots for commercial and industrial development.
At the same time, he said, Manhattan ''has run out of neighborhoods below 110th Street to revitalize.'' So development has spread beyond there and the brownstone neighborhoods of Brooklyn, to other Brooklyn neighborhoods, Queens and even the Bronx, which has long lagged behind the rest of the city economically. With housing prices in the suburbs climbing ever higher, many families looking to buy their first home are staying in the city.
''The Bronx is becoming once again what it was for most of the 20th century, a center for middle-class families and working families with kids,'' Mr. Yaro said. ''It's got good bones -- good parks and good transit.''
Development could slow, however, if interest rates rise sharply, land prices jump or denser housing leads to widespread zoning restrictions.
Joshua D. Weissman, the treasurer of the Jackson Development Group, has watched the boom but sees some risks ahead. Last year, his company completed 70 homes on 15 sites, typically in two- and three-family houses on vacant lots in the South Bronx, which are being marketed at about $450,000 per house, and is planning to build and sell 100 more units this year. The houses were built without special government subsidies or land provided by the city, something that was unthinkable just a few years ago, he said.
''We had one lot on 180th Street and Hughes Avenue,'' he said, ''a corner lot full of cars and tires and garbage. It was terrible. We went in there and built four houses, and two houses over another company was building as well.''
He said the vacant lots the company has relied on, which are often illegal parking lots on the sites of buildings burned out and torn down during the decline of the South Bronx, were getting harder to find because prices have tripled since 1999. The nationwide housing boom has raised the prices of construction supplies like plywood and metal studs; the cost of wood flooring has risen 20 percent, he said.
Development in Manhattan declined only slightly last year, according to the census figures, as the number of new homes approved fell by 175 from a year earlier, to about 17 percent below the peak of 6,109 in 2001, although real estate industry officials note that those numbers excluded projects in which downtown office buildings are being converted to housing.
From 1985 to 2001, there were more than two Manhattan homes approved for every home approved in Brooklyn, the city's most populous borough. Last year, though, there were more new homes approved in Brooklyn than in Manhattan, 6,054 to 5,232.
R. Randy Lee, a developer and chairman of the Building Industry Association of New York, said low interest rates were driving the resurgence of construction for the middle class. In the early 1990's, he said, he built subsidized houses in the Bronx that were affordable to families earning $30,000 to $40,000 a year, but as costs rose, minimum incomes rose to as much as $75,000 or $80,000. But as interest rates have fallen in the last few years, reducing monthly mortgage payments, minimum incomes have fallen again to where they were in the early 1990's.
''As the immigrant population continues to expand, there are a lot of first-generation immigrant buyers,'' he said. ''People who have green cards and jobs are strong buyers for homes.''
Many developers attribute the resurgence to city housing programs, which have provided subsidies and city-owned land and buildings for renovation and new construction of housing. But as the city develops plans for its last remaining properties, the number of new apartments and projects begun has started to decline, and the momentum has shifted to private developers.
''Their ability to lead the market has diminished,'' Mr. Lee said of city housing programs. ''But by giving those neighborhoods a kick-start, they created an atmosphere where private sites could be developed.''
Contributing to the boom is a rising city population, which grew by 900,000 between 1980 and 2000, and an additional 84,000 through July 2002, according to census data. Mr. Kober said city demographers believe that the population has continued to rise since then, in part because of continued immigration.
At the same time, unlike many suburban communities, New York City has a large reserve of unused building rights, since, under a 1961 zoning resolution, many neighborhoods outside Manhattan are zoned for far denser development than the single-family homes already there.
