THE plush white mat was thick enough to fall asleep on and the surrounding 1970's architecture seemed to enhance the effect of my Pucci bikini. And the only objects obscuring my panoramic view of the rocky hillside to the east and the deep blue waters of the Sea of Cortez as it joined the Pacific Ocean were a few knee-high rocks, desert flower bushes and cactuses planted into the stone terrace surrounding the pool.
I was in the midst of some serious sunbathing at the Hotel Twin Dolphin in Cabo San Lucas, Mexico, a desert city at the tip of Baja California that in the last few years has become the West Coast equivalent of South Beach in Miami. Outrageously luxurious multimillion-dollar resorts line the coast with imposing facades, each trying to one-up their neighbor in style and chic.
So when it came to spending an entire afternoon parked on a chair, it was important to choose not just any pool, but the right pool. I considered some of the decadent new hotels: Esperanza, inspired by an idyllic Mexican village, and the celebrity-packed Las Ventanas, where Gwyneth Paltrow and Chris Martin spent their honeymoon.
In the end I decided on the Twin Dolphin, which evoked the classic jet-set-era Cabo, before the arrival of so many cruise ships and Cabo Wabo, a nightclub owned by Sammy Hagar, the former lead singer for Van Halen, which is popular with the spring-break crowd. The tasteful, modern resort, made of streamlined desert rocks and concrete slabs, felt like old-money Palm Springs. It was one of the first grand hotels in town, so naturally it's on one of the best pieces of real estate.
The temperature on this day in January was in the high 70's, and all this high-stakes sunbathing, was making me overheat. So I walked to the edge of the long rectangular pool and plunged into the unknown. The temperature was just right; cool enough to be refreshing but not an arctic shock. I swam unobstructed by other bathers, who at the moment were distracted by the sun as they lazed on their mats.
After a few minutes, the palm-thatched bar at the end of the pool seemed like the best idea, and I sat on a submerged stool and ordered a fresh piña colada. (The margaritas looked tempting, but I didn't want to capsize.) Whoever said sunbathing was bad for you was obviously at the wrong resort.
Several airlines, including Continental, American and Northwest, fly from cities in the Northeast United States to Cabo San Lucas with one connection. Where to stay: Hotel Twin Dolphin, Transpeninsular Highway 1, $350 to $545, (800) 421-8925); Esperanza, Transpeninsular Highway 1, $575 to $5,000, (866) 311-2226; Las Ventanas, Transpeninsular Highway 1, $575 to $4,000, (888) 767-3966.
JOURNEYS
