Chris Rock has become one of the best and most beloved comedians in the country by mastering one specific thing. He's not much of a storyteller, and he moves so little that he can get through an entire show without unbuttoning his jacket. But he is a brilliant curmudgeon, railing against the petty (and not-so-petty) fraudulence of everyday life. At the Theater at Madison Square Garden on Wednesday night, he delivered a series of mostly pitch-perfect rants, glazing his irritability with a fine layer of glee.
Like many comedians before him, Mr. Rock presents himself as a courageous truth-teller, which requires some sleight of hand. That back-of-the-throat voice, those flashing eyes, that wrinkled nose, those rhetorical peaks and pauses, those meaningless intensifiers all make familiar monologues feel like hard-hitting exposés.
''All good relationships are boring,'' he brayed, explaining that married people have ''sexual intercourse,'' while single people get to do something that sounds more exciting. The insight was old, but the pleasure he took in relating it was infectious. He seems capable of feigning mild outrage about pretty much anything; at one point, he complained that Krispy Kreme doughnuts were too delicious. (That particular rant might make a good television commercial, although he'd probably have to remove the part where he reveals the secret ingredient: crack cocaine.) He even managed to be mildly outraged about all the people who were mildly outraged by the tiger that attacked Roy Horn. ''That tiger didn't go crazy,'' he said. ''That tiger went tiger.''
Part of Mr. Rock's appeal is that he is a black comedian who is willing to criticize black culture. And since he routinely performs for largely white audiences, as he did on Wednesday, that puts him in a tricky position. He seems keen to keep his audience from getting too comfortable, but he seems unwilling to do it directly: he never singles people out, and he never steps out of character to acknowledge the relationship between comedian and fan.
Instead, he kept everyone off-balance by interrupting the laughs with a tendentious middle section devoted to politics and race. There was a startling riff on abortion, in which he compared murder rates in the ghetto to murder rates in the womb. He contended that African-Americans dominated sports because of the way slaves were bred. Then he added: ''You know what they did to smart slaves? They killed 'em.'' He wisely declined to follow this line of thought to its logical conclusion.
Mainly, though, his performance was a marvel of balance and precision: he ranted but rarely scolded, and his indignation was generally unsullied by righteousness. After congratulating himself on the birth of his daughter, he suddenly switched direction to note that ''even cockroaches have babies.''
All comedians hedge their bets this way, but Mr. Rock can turn bet-hedging into something more complicated. His best lines evoked both the sudden excitement of uncovering a lie, and the slow, sick feeling of learning to live with it. ''If you're black, America is like the uncle that paid your way through college,'' he said, and he sounded somehow triumphant as he delivered the punch line, ''but molested you.''
COMEDY REVIEW
