USA Today said yesterday that it had appointed a panel of three outside journalists to review every article written since 1982 by Jack Kelley, the longtime foreign correspondent who resigned this month after the newspaper found he had misled editors conducting an internal investigation of his work.
The outside panel will be led by John Seigenthaler, a former editor and publisher of The Tennessean, who also oversaw USA Today's editorial and op-ed pages from its founding in 1982 until 1991. Both newspapers are owned by Gannett. The other panelists are William Hilliard, a former editor of The Oregonian, and Bill Kovach, the chairman of the Committee of Concerned Journalists, who is a former Washington bureau chief of The New York Times and former curator of the Nieman Foundation at Harvard University.
Craig Moon, publisher of USA Today, said in an e-mail message to the paper's staff that the panel would be assisted by a team of reporters led by John Hillkirk, managing editor of the Money section.
''The panel will examine all stories written by Kelley and any related matters it chooses to explore,'' Mr. Moon wrote. ''It also will examine, and investigate if necessary, any questions or complaints that have arisen since Kelley left the paper in early January.''
In some respects, yesterday's actions by USA Today resembled those taken by The New York Times last May after an article was found to contain passages similar to some that appeared earlier in The San Antonio Express-News. An investigation by a team of Times journalists into the work of the reporter, Jayson Blair, found that he had fabricated or plagiarized portions of more than three dozen articles. The Times convened a committee consisting of 25 staff members and 3 veteran journalists from outside the paper to examine the culture of the newsroom that allowed such faulty work. The three people chosen from outside were asked to focus on Mr. Blair's career.
USA Today was not able to say yesterday how many articles would be reviewed in the Kelley case because some preceded the creation of its electronic archives. But a search of an online database found more than 1,500 articles written by Mr. Kelley since 1987.
A spokesman, Steven Anderson, said the panel would report to the publisher and its findings would be made public.
The newspaper announced on Jan. 13 that Mr. Kelley, who was a finalist for a Pulitzer Prize in 2002, had resigned. It said it had been unable to determine the veracity of several articles, including one Mr. Kelley filed from Belgrade in 1999 in which he said he had examined a notebook containing a direct order to a Yugoslav military officer to ''cleanse'' a village in Kosovo.
In announcing Mr. Kelley's resignation, USA Today said a woman he identified as a translator on the article from Belgrade had not, in fact, been involved in the reporting.
Lisa Banks, a lawyer for Mr. Kelley, said, ''Jack welcomes an investigation that is truly fair and independent, and is fully confident that his reporting will withstand scrutiny by the panel.''
Two weeks ago, Mr. Kelley declared: ''I'm proud of my work and know that my reporting will hold up under scrutiny. I hope that this investigation is both full and fair.''
