Nassau County's plan to rescue the agency that runs a deficit-ridden hospital, nursing home and health clinics by revamping them is drawing a generally favorable response. But some experts said getting major changes enacted would not be simple, and union leaders objected to further staff reductions.
''The concept is excellent, a blueprint for success,'' said the County Legislature's presiding officer, Judith A. Jacobs.
Experts agreed there are hurdles to carrying out the plan.
''It's so dependent on so many people and agencies and levels of governments,'' said Dr. Rosemarie C. Guercia, a former deputy health commissioner for the county. Ms. Jacobs, a Democrat, agreed by saying, ''Obviously, it's not going to be easy.''
The plan, which was unveiled Thursday by Thomas R. Suozzi, the county executive, would shed hundreds of jobs, cut little-used hospital specialties, expand the local clinics, sell the nursing-home property, refinance the debt and give county officials more control of the agency, the Nassau Health Care Corporation.
Trying to build support in advance, the consultant who drafted the plan, George Kalkines, quietly briefed various officials and groups on the proposals.
''How they went about it is a good public policy-making process,'' said State Senator Kemp Hannon, a Republican. He is a crucial legislator as chairman of the Senate's health committee and because his district includes both the county medical center in East Meadow and the nursing home in Uniondale.
Not everyone was pleased with the process. The County Legislature's Republican minority leader, Peter Schmitt, said that his delegation felt shut out because it did not get enough advance notice for a briefing.
Some officials expressed doubts about parts of the report. ''The analysis is quite insightful and useful,'' Mr. Hannon said, ''but the part where it then goes and tries to draw conclusions is on less solid ground.''
As expected, the call for more staff reductions drew immediate opposition from the union, the Civil Service Employees Association. ''Members and working people have borne the brunt of Nassau Health Care Corporation's fiscal mismanagement for far too long,'' the union said in a statement. ''We are putting N.H.C.C. on notice: no more layoffs!'' The union plans a rally on Feb. 11 at the hospital. Mr. Suozzi urged other approaches like attrition and voluntary early retirements instead of layoffs.
Although some recommendations would require local or state legislation, other changes could be made by the agency's existing board.
The agency has already embarked on changes, like reducing the staff and raising productivity by doctors, but ''we've got a long way to go,'' said the board chairman, Lawrence C. Gottlieb. ''I personally think it's a very good report,'' he said, but added, ''It's going to be painful to do what has to be done.''
Another player is the state. The State Legislature created the agency in 1999, and the governor appoints its board.
In the State Assembly, Richard L. Brodsky, chairman of the committee on public authorities, said, ''The views of the Nassau delegation will weigh very heavily.'' That could be troublesome, since Mr. Suozzi has squabbled with his fellow Democrats in the Assembly. He said that he would stay away from Albany and let others make the overtures.
The biggest pressure for change is that the Nassau agency is running out of money. Howard S. Weitzman, the county comptroller, predicted that it could be broke by a year from now.
''It's a tough row to hoe,'' said Jack O'Connell, executive director of the Long Island Health and Welfare Council. ''The plan makes sense. Not everybody may be thrilled, but if we don't seize the moment, it's going to go under.''
