Israel and the Lebanese guerrilla group Hezbollah carried through with their deal to exchange prisoners and war dead on Thursday, in a trade greeted in Israel by a spare ceremony for three fallen soldiers and in Lebanon by a day of national celebration.
Thousands of Lebanese jammed the streets here to hail as heroes the 23 Lebanese long held in Israeli jails, praising Hezbollah as the winners in this piece of unsettled business from Israel's 22-year occupation of southern Lebanon, which ended in 2000.
''I am flying!'' Anwar Yassin, one of the released Lebanese prisoners, held since 1987, said as he flashed victory signs after a day in which he traveled from his jail cell in Israel to Cologne, Germany, where the exchange took place, and then to freedom in Beirut.
In Israel, the mood was somber, with much mixed emotion at dealing with what it considers a terrorist group and on a day when a Palestinian suicide bomber killed 10 Israelis in Jerusalem. Despite the bombing, Israel went ahead with the release, sealed last week after three years of on-again, off-again negotiations with German mediators led by Ernst Uhrlau, Germany's coordinator of intelligence services.
Earlier this week, Hezbollah's leaders had held out the possibility that not all of the three soldiers were dead, as Israeli officials had presumed. But three coffins were flown from Beirut to Germany and, draped Israeli flags, were honored by family and top officials at a solemn airport ceremony after they reached Israel Thursday evening.
Israeli medical experts in Germany verified that all three had been killed in an explosion while they were being captured along the Lebanese border in October 2000.
''This is not a time of happiness; this is a time of relief and composure,'' the Israeli prime minister, Ariel Sharon, said at the ceremony. ''There is relief because the three dear families, whose souls knew no rest for the past 40 months, will now be able to unite with their sorrow over a modest grave, and composure as a promise was kept, and a right and moral decision was made despite its heavy price.''
In the face of some criticism, Mr. Sharon has said the deal was justified to bring home Israeli war dead.
Besides the soldiers -- Adi Avitan, Benny Avraham and Omar Sawayed -- Hezbollah also freed an Israeli businessman, Elhanan Tannenbaum, kidnapped by Hezbollah in October 2000. Unlike the returning Lebanese, Mr. Tannenbaum, who said he had been treated well in captivity, did not receive a hero's welcome.
He was permitted a brief reunion with his family at the airport, and was then taken away for a medical check and questioning by the Israeli authorities about possible illegal activities, Israeli officials said.
In exchange for Mr. Tannenbaum and the remains of the three soldiers, Israel released a total of 429 prisoners, including 400 Palestinians, 23 Lebanese, 5 other Arabs and one German, who was accused of spying for Hezbollah in Israel. The Palestinians were the first to be freed Thursday, released at five checkpoints in the West Bank and Gaza. Israel also returned the remains of 59 Lebanese fighters killed during their occupation of southern Lebanon.
Israel said some of the Lebanese prisoners being freed had killed Israeli soldiers in Lebanon, but emphasized that the Palestinians released did not have ''blood on their hands.''
While the Palestinian Authority welcomed the release, it appeared to play down the deal since it had been achieved not by its leaders but by Hezbollah, and no formal events were planned for the former prisoners. But Yasir Arafat, the Palestinian leader, and his guest, the archbishop of Canterbury, Rowan Williams, made a brief appearance in a meeting hall where some of the prisoners had gathered.
The final exchange on Thursday seemed nearly as complicated as the long negotiations that preceded it. Early Thursday morning, planes took off from Tel Aviv and Beirut bound for Cologne. After the Israeli experts confirmed the identities of the soldiers' bodies, the Palestinians were set free, Israel handed over its prisoners, and two planes headed on a four-hour flight back to the Middle East, one toward Israel, the other Lebanon. They landed at nearly the same time, about 7 p.m.
In Beirut, 20 of the Lebanese prisoners stepped off the German military plane -- the Arabs and other three Lebanese wanted for questioning by Lebanon were kept inside -- and onto a red carpet lined with 150 Lebanese political and religious leaders, including President Emil Lahoud and Sheik Hassan Nasrallah, the general secretary of Hezbollah.
Inside the airport terminal, they met with family members, among them Fadila Wehbe, 41, who had not seen her husband, Jawad Asfi, a Hezbollah fighter, since he was captured by Israeli soldiers in southern Lebanon in 1988. When he was captured, she said, she was five months pregnant. Their daughter, Jamila, died a year ago of kidney problems.
''She died with the dream of seeing her father,'' Ms. Wehbe said.
Hanging unresolved over the prisoner exchange was the fate of Capt. Ron Arad, an Israeli Air Force navigator shot down in 1986 over southern Lebanon and captured by Lebanese guerrillas. A second stage of the negotiations calls for Hezbollah to provide information on his fate, something Mr. Nasrallah said Thursday that he hoped to do.
In exchange, Israel says it will consider releasing the longest held Lebanese prisoner, Samir Qantar, sentenced to life in prison for an attack in 1979 that killed an Israeli man and his 4-year-old daughter.
In an effort to obtain information about Captain Arad, Israeli commandos kidnapped the two Lebanese guerrilla leaders from their homes in southern Lebanon: Abdel Karim Obeid, a cleric who was seized in 1989, and Mustafa Dirani, captured in 1994. The two men were the first off the plane tonight.
''I am a reborn man,'' Mr. Obeid, 47, told CNN.
