In another step to return to full health, the Mars rover Spirit performed limited scientific work on Thursday, photographing nearby rocks, and it could resume full operations as early as Sunday, mission controllers said.
Mission managers for Spirit's twin, Opportunity, have also pushed up their schedule, to have it drive off its lander early Sunday Eastern time, a day earlier than was planned.
Spirit's controllers here at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory also told the rover on Thursday to send back scientific data that had been stranded since it suffered a serious malfunction last week. Engineers identified a flaw in the programming that handles the storage of data in the rover's memory, causing the computer to crash. Controllers plan to erase and restart that part of the memory, known as flash memory, on Friday. There is no sign that Spirit suffered any hardware failure, as the managers had first feared.
''We'll wipe the files clean, and it'll be just like new,'' said Jennifer Trosper, a mission manager.
When its software began to misbehave, Spirit was taking measurements on a rock nicknamed Adirondack, pressing a suite of instruments at the end of a mechanical arm against the rock. On Thursday, it continued work originally planned for the morning of the malfunction, taking photographs of nearby rocks nicknamed Blanco and Cake.
Spirit landed Jan. 3 in Gusev Crater, a 95-mile-wide depression that may have once been a lake bed. Opportunity landed early last Sunday Eastern time on the opposite side of Mars, in a flat region known as Meridiani Planum. By luck, it ended up in a shallow, 20-yard-wide crater that offers exposed bedrock for close examination.
But which crater Opportunity is in is not known. ''Our confidence in where Opportunity is has been shaken somewhat,'' said Rob Manning, the manager for entry, descent and landing. He had thought he had narrowed it to one of two craters, but data from the rover indicated that it had bounced in a different direction during landing. ''We don't know exactly where we are,'' Mr. Manning said. ''We'll figure it out. We'd like to figure it out before we drive out of the hole.''
Ms. Trosper said that while the Spirit software flaw had not been fully diagnosed, mission managers were confident they knew enough to avoid the problem in the future.
Opportunity's software has the same flaw, and controllers have been careful to prevent it from crashing.
Spirit and Opportunity, which together cost $820 million, were intended to last three months, although it now appears they will be able to operate considerably longer.
