Paula Cooper Gallery  521 West 21st Street, Chelsea  Through Feb. 7
Arnie Zane (1948-1988), co-founder of the Bill T. Jones/Arnie Zane Dance Company, was a photographer before he was a dancer. And this small, intensely moving show offers a sampling of the pictures he left after his death as a result of complications from AIDS.
Zane studied photography at the State University of New York at Binghamton in the late 1960's and met Mr. Jones there in 1971. Among the earliest pictures at Cooper is a series from 1972 of the two men clowning, vamping and dancing together in an open field with a picnic basket, a chair and gender-blurring clothes for props: it's an off-the-cuff enactment of a personal and a professional partnership.
For much of his work Zane used rudimentary cameras, including a Kodak Brownie, and he sought an antique look in his prints. His influences initially seem to have been largely from the past: F. Holland Day, August Sanders and Edward Steichen's Hollywood portraits all come to mind. A theatrical spirit prevails, in exotically costumed portraits, tableaus with narrative implications or in the relative realism of the ''Torso'' series, which includes self-portraits and startling nude studies of Pearl Pease, a time-ravaged Binghamton eccentric who wore party dresses and angel wings on the street.
Zane's romantic, glamourenthralled aesthetic was out of synch with much photography in the 1970's -- Peter Hujar being an exception -- but looks at home now. His magic lantern slide images, in particular, link up with the films of young artists like T. J. Wilcox and Glen Fogel. The autobiographical content, both as it relates to his choreography and to a gay sensibility at a post-liberation, pre-AIDS moment, is gripping in ways that it could not have been at the time.
Anthony Allen, from the Cooper staff, has done a superb job selecting and installing the show, much of which appeared in a comprehensive exhibition organized in 1999 by Jonathan Green, director of the California Museum of Photography at the University of California at Riverside. All are to be congratulated; most of all, of course, Zane himself, for whom this is a fitting tribute in the 20th season of the dance troupe.
HOLLAND COTTER
ART IN REVIEW
