A cover, a title, binding and paper: these are things to take for granted about any book. But the words themselves are a different story, sometimes so irrelevant to the book's fate that they seem downright optional. The world of best sellerdom is full of books that might be wildly popular even if their pages were blank.
John Grisham's latest novel is one. His books have a way of hitting best-seller lists (with advance orders online) long before anyone even knows what they are. By happy coincidence, ''The Last Juror'' turns out to be one of his best: a thoughtful and atmospheric thriller that for the first time brings the author back to the fictionalized town of Clanton, Miss. This is the setting for another of his best efforts, ''A Time to Kill.''
The Grisham brand name renders these assets superfluous. Whether they're forceful or meandering, quick or pokey, his books have a track record that proves them Pavlovian stimuli to loyal readers. He writes it; you buy it, even if it's blank or ''Bleachers.'' That's a formula as simple as ''Who Moved My Cheese?''
That self-help blockbuster by Spencer Johnson set a new standard for the all-but-empty page. Written for readers who would find a ''Fun With Dick and Jane'' primer too demanding, ''Who Moved My Cheese?'' featured a parable involving employee-like mice and their notion of happiness (cheese). It suggested that a foolish mouse might complain if, say, his job was downsized (cheese taken away). But the wise mouse would adapt to new conditions without complaint. In a marketing tour-de-force, this book actually included instructions for how it could be ordered in bulk. It made a popular gift proffered by large corporations to their cheese-challenged workers.
In the wake of that land-office success, Mr. Johnson would barely have had to write anything to market more advice. So he hasn't quite written anything in cooking up ''The Present.'' That title is a pun about how the ability to live in the moment is a gift. Present-related wisdom is such that the book's advice can be summed up on a one-page card. This is conveniently included.
Although Mr. Johnson's new book does not particularly acknowledge it, he published something very similar back in the early 1980's, his prepopular days. But that book was called ''The Precious Present.'' Both begin with a sage old man telling a boy that the Present -- capital P -- is the best thing he can ever receive.
From ''The Precious Present'':
'' 'Wow!' the little boy exclaimed. 'I hope someone gives me the precious present. Maybe I'll get it for Christmas.' ''
From the labor-intensive rewrite:
'' 'Wow!' the little boy exclaimed, although not fully understanding. 'I hope someone gives me The Present someday. Maybe I'll get it for my birthday.' ''
Although ''The Present'' hasn't yet hit the ''Cheese'' jackpot, it plays to an apparently insatiable self-help market. So do the snappily titled ''The Automatic Millionaire'' by David Bach and ''The Proper Care and Feeding of Husbands'' by Dr. Laura Schlessinger.
There are undoubtedly more people attracted by the ''millionaire'' in Mr. Bach's title than by his chart on mortgages. Incidentally, if you had had the foresight to create a retirement account 35 years ago and had contributed $14 every day since, you would now have $1,678,293.78 salted away, by the author's generous tax-savvy calculations.
In these cases, the title itself is the book's greatest asset. And as Dr. Schlessinger addresses questions like ''How can I get him to stop walking around angry and pouting?,'' she makes it clear that ''proper'' is her title's most indicative word. This contentious book includes scrappy transcripts from the author's radio show and e-mail feedback (one woman promises to chart her menstrual cycle and not be disagreeable to her family when experiencing PMS).
It also features many a scolding. About a woman who protests that her husband wants her to quit her job: ''This mentality is the ugly part of the feminist movement, which supports personal success, acquisition, accomplishment, power and the feminist political agenda over love, marriage and family.''
Female readers can expect a considerably gentler experience from Barbara Taylor Bradford. She tends to focus less on strife and more on palatial homes and evening gowns. Not surprisingly, this has won her a following, and her devotees will find it hard to avoid ''Emma's Secret,'' her latest.
Twenty-five years after Emma Harte first appeared in ''A Woman of Substance,'' the author's biggest popular success, Emma is back. This happens in spite of the fact that Emma is dead.
How? Ms. Bradford simply sends Emma's look-alike great-granddaughter up to the immense clothing archives in Emma's attic. There, a set of diaries tumbles out of a closet. And Emma returns to roam the pages quicker than you can say flashback.
Since Ms. Bradford is capable of writing a whole paragraph that reads ''It was a blustery morning,'' another book-length celebration of Emma is a mixed blessing. ''As a young woman she had gone from success to success, reaching even higher, always attaining the seemingly impossible, becoming a true woman of substance in every way,'' Ms. Bradford writes, with the unwavering earnestness that makes this a wordy and wit-free slog.
''Dearest, dearest Richard,'' one of Emma's many descendants says about her spouse. ''The truest husband a woman could ever want. Such a good man. The best man I ever knew, the right man to spend a lifetime with after all.''
Husband-wise, this is far friendlier than Dr. Schlessinger deigns to be. But it's not as friendly as Cecelia Ahern's ''PS, I Love You,'' which lionizes a husband -- after it kills him off.
The selling points for this first novel are a) cute title b) candy-colored cover c) the fact that the author is 22 and d) the fact that her father is prime minister of Ireland (a talking point at the very least).
There is also a high-concept, Hollywood-ready premise: the husband leaves behind 10 messages for his wife, to be opened on 10 successive months. There would seem to be a foolproof mixture of pathos and life-affirmation packed into this. But it's the kind of book in which the husband's recommendations include visiting a karaoke bar and buying a new dress.
Ms. Bradford is a sizable figure among romance writers. She has sold 70 million books to prove it. But that is small potatoes by the lights of the 200-million-novel-selling Nora Roberts, who turns out books almost as fast as you can read them. Ms. Roberts resorts to her nom de plume J. D. Robb when she wishes, as in her new ''Divided in Death,'' to talk tough, indulge in techno-speak and visit the year 2059.
Say what you will about Ms. Roberts, but she writes page-turners that move. They may not be elegant (''You pair of slime,'' one of this book's characters calls her philandering husband and her ex-friend) but their pulp vitality is clear. And even if it unfolds in the midst of household droids and futuristic technology, ''Divided in Death'' isn't really science fiction. It's just Ms. Roberts's chance to take a whack at the thriller genre without leaving romance behind.
Flash forward futuristically and you come to the era of a long-lost first novel, ''For Us, the Living,'' by an author whose cult following is fervent: Robert A. Heinlein, the science fiction legend. Long before he wrote ''Stranger in a Strange Land,'' ''Starship Troopers'' and ''Red Planet,'' Mr. Heinlein came up with this newly discovered, never-before-published parable -- a book linked thematically to much of his subsequent imaginings. It will be of automatic interest to anyone in the Heinlein fold.
One of Mr. Heinlein's friends, colleagues and admirers is the science fiction writer Spider Robinson. He paves the way for this curious artifact in an introduction. ''At age 32, Robert was already trying to save the world,'' Mr. Robinson writes, alluding to some of the utopian speechifying that appears here.
''For Us, the Living'' is a novel in name (title by Abraham Lincoln, from the Gettysburg Address), but it's an odd one. Its hero, Perry Nelson, catapults about a century and a half forward in time from 1939, the year this was written.
Among the many things he learns in 2086 is that Edward, Duke of Windsor effected the unification of a United Europe. No wonder this is science fiction.
When it comes to writers with a die-hard readership, Elmore Leonard qualifies unmistakably: there are those of us who wouldn't dream of missing anything he cares to write. As one reader puts it on Amazon.com, ''Leonard on cruise still beats others by a country mile.''
The cruise-control in question can be found in ''Mr. Paradise,'' his latest, which begins with typical Leonard élan. The book's setup involves the octogenarian lawyer of the title and the two women he hires to dress (or undress) as University of Michigan cheerleaders. It doesn't take long for two-thirds of this fun trio to wind up dead.
What happens next? Not a whole lot, by the standard of better recent Leonard books like ''Tishomingo Blues.'' And the trademark dialogue is less sharply honed than usual, although it remains crisp. As in: ''You don't get it straight who you are, girl, I'm gonna put you facedown on the floor and stomp on your head. Goodbye nose. Goodbye teeth.''
But Mr. Leonard still sets the gold standard for crime-related patter. His name on a book jacket is money in the bank -- which brings us to one of the most sure-shot subjects, money itself.
''The Secret Symbols of the Dollar Bill'' by David Ovason is predicated on our enduring interest in the greenback. Look at the back of one. Look at the eagle. Look at his feet. You can no longer ignore the fact that he holds 13 leaves and 13 arrows, and that the 13-colony motif is echoed all over the dollar's design.
Mr. Ovason corrects the bill's Latin, explores its numerology and suggests that the $ sign is part snake. He also has an explanation for the puffy look of George Washington's Mona Lisa smile. Here, he says, is evidence of the first president's ill-fitting false teeth. Now there's a subject that doesn't sell itself.
Brand Names
The books reviewed in Janet Maslin's Critic's Notebook article:
''THE LAST JUROR,'' by John Grisham. Doubleday. $27.95.
''THE PRESENT,'' by Spencer Johnson. Doubleday. $19.95.
''THE AUTOMATIC MILLIONAIRE,'' by David Bach. Broadway Books. $19.95.
''THE PROPER CARE AND FEEDING OF HUSBANDS,'' by Dr. Laura Schlessinger. HarperCollins. $24.95.
''EMMA'S SECRET,'' by Barbara Taylor Bradford. St. Martin's. $24.95.
''PS, I LOVE YOU,'' by Cecelia Ahern. Hyperion Press. $21.95.
''DIVIDED IN DEATH, by J. D Robb. G.P. Putnam's Sons. $21.95.
''FOR US, THE LIVING,'' by Robert A. Heinlein. Scribner. $25.
''MR. PARADISE,'' by Elmore Leonard. William Morrow. $25.95.
''THE SECRET SYMBOLS OF THE DOLLAR BILL,'' by David Ovason. HarperCollins. $18.95.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
