Apex Art  291 Church Street, near Walker Street, TriBeCa  Through Feb. 7
With the much-contested subject of a permanent 9/11 monument in the air, this knotty little essay of a show on improvised, often collective responses to urban crises is welcome. The projects in the show -- organized by Craig Buckley, an independent curator -- approach problems not by introducing elaborate, made-from-scratch solutions, but by using elements already there, with the idea that the results, however useful, are also organic and provisional.
A few of the projects are by individual artists. Michael Rakowitz, for example, has designed inflatable plastic shelters for the homeless by taking advantage of the city's many street-level hot air ducts, while Oscar Tuazon, working with Richard Fischbeck, has produced shelters in the form of portable geodesic domes. Kim Adams, the show's only semi-conventional monument builder, recycles wrecked cars, old trucks and abandoned houses as public sculptures.
Most of the contributions, though, are by artist collectives, which have an increasing presence internationally. The Stealth group (Ana Dzokic, Milica Topalovic, Marc Neelen and Ivan Kucina) charts the growth of new architectural structures that have spring up to accommodate black market trade in Belgrade, Serbia. Raqs Media Collective (Jeebesh Bagchi, Monica Narula and Shuddhabrata Sengupta), an important presence in Delhi, paper the city with stickers in which official commands and warnings found in public places are mixed with advertising phrases to suggest the political, social and economic dimensions of civic control.
The Arnait Video Collective (Marie-Hélène Cousineau, Mary Kunuk, Madeleine Ivalu, Susan Avingaq, Rachel Uruyasuk and Katrina Soukup) from northern Canada are represented by a video documenting the history of a Canadian Indian family struggling with settlement life.
Finally, there is work by the New York-based Ocean Earth Development Corporation. Its members -- George Chaikin, Sarah Peschel, Eve Vaterlaus, and Peter Fend, who also has a solo show at American Fine Arts in Chelsea -- address the calamitous state of Jamaica Bay since runways were constructed for the now-defunct Concorde. They propose a reclaimation project that would not only restore the original habitat, but also provide a source of algae-harvesting for the production of clean energy. It's hard to imagine a more monumentally life-enhancing urban project than that.
HOLLAND COTTER
ART IN REVIEW
