President Bush blew into New Hampshire on Thursday, less than 48 hours after the Democrat competitors left, to try to dig out from the piles of invective that those candidates had heaped on him in a presidential primary that White House officials said Mr. Bush was too busy to notice.
Officially, Mr. Bush is not yet politicking, but his remarks here, at an office of Fidelity Investments in this snowy, pine-covered stretch of southern New Hampshire, touched on the major themes of his re-election campaign: national security, tax cuts, jobs. Although the president did not utter the names of any of the Democrats, he did allude to the spectacle that had moved on.
''I understand there's been some activity in the state of New Hampshire recently,'' Mr. Bush said, to laughter from a friendly, White House-invited crowd of Fidelity employees and local business people.
Later, Mr. Bush made a campaignlike stop, unannounced to journalists, at Swan Chocolates, a husband-and-wife purveyor of truffles that opened in 2003 and underscored Mr. Bush's regular theme that the United States' strength is in its small-business entrepreneurs.
''They started their business last year, had a dream, living their dream, and they're making good product,'' Mr. Bush said in his usual staccato of the shop's owners, Michael and Theresa Anderson. ''And I expect people in the national press corps to leave some cash behind.''
Mr. Bush was not as talkative about testimony on Wednesday from David A. Kay, who said that the prewar intelligence about Saddam Hussein's weapons programs was wrong, or about Senator John Kerry, who has won the first two states to vote on a Democratic nominee. Mr. Bush ignored questions on both subjects.
In the evening, at a lucrative drop-by in Old Greenwich, Conn., the state of his birth, Mr. Bush raised $1.1 million for his re-election campaign. The checks brought his fund-raising total to more than $130 million, an amount that dwarfs the $40 million raised and mostly spent by the next-biggest fund-raiser of the 2004 campaign, Howard Dean.
The major no-show at the event was Gov. John G. Rowland, a Republican who is enmeshed in a corruption scandal over free renovations to his lakeside cottage. Bush campaign officials did not say whether they had asked Mr. Rowland to stay away.
Lt. Gov. M. Jodi Rell, a Republican, said the decision to stay home had been Mr. Rowland's.
''He just wanted to let the president have this evening for himself,'' Ms. Rell told reporters at the fund-raiser.
In Merrimack, Mr. Bush's event consisted of seven people sitting with him on a stage saying cheerful things about how his tax cuts or his stewardship of the economy had improved their lives. The White House said one of the seven, Louise Hickey, a senior executive secretary at Fidelity, had saved $1,100 from Mr. Bush's tax cuts.
''Now, that may not sound like a lot to some of the people who are rolling in cash,'' Mr. Bush said, to laughter, but adding: ''That's a lot. It made a difference.''
In Old Greenwich, Mr. Bush was introduced by his cousin Debbie Stapleton, the Connecticut finance chairwoman of his campaign, who happily described the president as a Northeasterner with Ivy League roots.
''You may associate him with the Lone Star State, boots and spurs,'' Ms. Stapleton said, ''but I knew him in his earlier Connecticut days of family gatherings, Yale Bulldogs and Old Blue.''
Mr. Bush recalled his years at Yale as well as members from his class of 1968 who had turned up to see him.
''They were the ones who invented shock and awe when they heard I was president,'' Mr. Bush said, alluding to his average grades. ''They're all fine lads. They themselves were C students.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRESIDENT
