An hour or so before the biggest game of his life, Kevin Donnalley will take a moment in the Carolina Panthers' locker room on Sunday to write a name on his wrist tape: Hope Stout.
Donnalley, the Panthers' right guard, has fought in the trenches of the N.F.L. for 13 seasons. He has watched teammates play through an assortment of bone-jarring injuries. But Donnalley said he has never seen a greater example of courage than that of the freckle-faced, 12-year-old Hope Stout from Weddington, N.C.
Donnalley met Hope on the sideline before the Panthers' game against the Tennessee Titans on Oct. 19. Donnalley, whose soft-spokenness belies his 6-foot-5-inch, 310-pound frame, was asked by a friend if he would have his picture taken with her.
Afterward, Donnalley learned she was battling osteosarcoma, a form of bone cancer.
''That day would change my life,'' said Donnalley, who wears a gold pin with the name Hope.
After Hope learned she had cancer last June, the Make-A-Wish foundation, a group that grants wishes to terminally ill children, visited and asked what her wish would be.
Donnalley said that when Hope learned there were 155 other children on the organization's list, she told the organization, ''That's my wish, that their wishes come true.''
The Charlotte area Make-A-Wish chapter said it would cost about $1 million for the 155 wishes to come true. Residents of the Charlotte area responded. The Panthers held fund raisers -- a ball autographed by the team was sold for $30,000 and the offensive line sold T-shirts of themselves called the ''Fat Cats.'' Elementary children sent in their allowances.
Over $1.2 million has been raised, Donnalley said. Contributions also include $15,000 from the Nascar driver Tony Stewart and $10,000 from the Charlotte Bobcats, an N.B.A. expansion team, according to The Charlotte Observer.
Donnalley visited Hope a few times on his own, and on one such trip, he said Hope told him: ''I appreciate you coming to visit, but if you can find the time or maybe during the off-season go see the kids in the hospital instead of me because I've got family. I've got two sisters who love me and support me. I have parents who are there for me. A lot of those kids don't. Their parents are working or can't get there to see them all the time.''
On Jan. 3, the Panthers defeated the Dallas Cowboys, 29-10, in the first round of the playoffs.
Hope died the next night.
''She's going to live forever because of her generosity,'' Donnalley said.
''No matter what guys I've been with -- 350-pound guys -- and the courage they showed doesn't even compare to the courage that tiny, little 12-year-old girl showed,'' he said.
The national Make-A-Wish foundation plans to make Hope a national inspiration. A book is being written by children with cancer for children with cancer, including some of Hope's writings.
''Just like her name,'' Donnalley said, ''she gives hope.''
