American Express said yesterday that it had reached a deal to have its cards issued by MBNA, the country's second-largest credit card issuer, making its first foray into the Visa and MasterCard networks in the United States.
But the agreement hinges on a two-year-old court decision that Visa and MasterCard are appealing. For now, the card networks' bylaws prevent their members from issuing cards by rivals, including American Express and Discover Financial Services, a unit of Morgan Stanley.
American Express, which has been pursuing such partnerships since 1996, asserted yesterday that Visa and MasterCard were simply stalling and that its ability to reach an agreement with MBNA signaled that change was coming.
''From our standpoint, this is a milestone agreement for the entire credit card industry,'' Kenneth I. Chenault, American Express's chairman and chief executive, said in an interview. ''It's going to unleash, I think, a level of competition that we look forward to.''
Mr. Chenault predicted that consumers would be carrying the cards, which will bear the American Express logo, this year.
Bruce L. Hammonds, MBNA's chairman and chief executive, said, ''Research we've performed over the years tells us that our customers,'' individuals and groups, ''will be very receptive to an MBNA product with an American Express brand.''
Purchases on the cards would be routed through American Express, while MBNA would market and manage the cards and own any balances. MBNA said it planned to market the cards to potential customers and to its cardholders. The cardholders would not have access to American Express's full rewards program.The companies did not disclose the financial terms of their deal, but analysts have said for years that dividing the revenue in such a partnership could prove tricky. The companies have been competitors and in many ways remain so. Each is used to receiving almost all of the transaction fees that merchants must pay to accept their cards.
But American Express's main challenge in working with banks is to broaden its reach without weakening its brand, analysts said. American Express has 36.4 million cards in circulation in the United States compared with MBNA's 40 million, which is second only to Citigroup.
Analysts say that it helps that MBNA and American Express seek high spenders. ''The demographics that MBNA goes after fits very well with American Express,'' said Robert P. Napoli, an analyst at Piper Jaffray. ''So I think, if anything, this really helps the brand.'' Mr. Napoli raised his rating of American Express yesterday to ''outperform'' the market from ''market perform.'' Shares of American Express rose $1.20, to close at $50.95, while shares of MBNA gained 40 cents, to $26.90.
Robert McKinley, chief executive of CardWeb.com, a research company, suggested that American Express's best approach would be to persuade banks to switch cards to the company, because most consumers already had a credit card. Corporate cards and rewards cards would be among the most natural fits, he said, because American Express is a leader in both types of cards.
Visa and MasterCard said that American Express's partnership with MBNA was presumptuous and premature. They reiterated that they believed the Supreme Court would hear their case, which the Justice Department filed in 1998. In 2001, a Federal District Court judge in Manhattan ruled that the two networks must end their practice of barring member banks from distributing rivals' credit cards. This month, the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit declined to reconsider the appeal, making the Supreme Court the last resort.Whatever the outcome, Visa and MasterCard each said it already offered consumers ubiquitous networks of merchants that accept its cards and a wide choice of cards.
''Any consumer who wants one is well aware of how to get an American Express card,'' a MasterCard spokeswoman said. ''Today's announcement has no additional benefit for consumers.''
The card networks said banks are best served by working with them because they are bank associations, which, as Visa put it, means the ''focus is on delivering member and cardholder value, not shareholder value.''
Noah Hanft, MasterCard's general counsel, said, ''I don't see how American Express's interests would be aligned with other card companies whom they're competing against.''
American Express disputed that characterization. It said that it had 80 card-issuing partnerships in nearly 90 other countries and that those arrangements had worked well. It said, many United States financial institutions work with American Express to sell the company's travelers' checks.
