New England quarterback Tom Brady offered a potential candidate Thursday for the most valuable player in Super Bowl XXXVIII. The player he picked is running back Antowain Smith.
Perhaps Brady will be proved right. But in the Patriots' offense this season, Brady has been almost as valuable to the running game as Smith.
Last summer, long before the Patriots began the 14-game winning streak that propelled them into Sunday's Super Bowl, the team's offensive coaches looked at the statistics from 2002 and saw something startling. The ratio of passes to runs in the offense was 605 to 395, the second-highest passing ratio in the league, behind only St. Louis, whose ratio was 635 to 343. While the Rams embraced their inner gunslinger, the Patriots abhorred it, particularly because after winning the Super Bowl after the 2001 season with a supremely balanced offense, they finished 9-7 in 2002 and missed the playoffs. And so came the focus by the Patriots to find equilibrium between the running and the passing game this season.
''It was a real commitment,'' running back Kevin Faulk said. ''That's something we emphasized a whole lot in training camp. We've done a pretty good job in the course of the year. At times, it could have been better.''
The ratio of passes to runs in the 2003 regular season was 537 to 473, far closer to the 482-to-473 balance in 2001. Still, the Patriots' running game remains an enigma, overshadowed by Brady and viewed with some derisiveness by observers as running back by committee. New England's running game ranked 27th this season, averaging just 100.4 yards a game. Of the five teams with worse rushing games than the Patriots, four did not make the playoffs. The one that did was -- guess who? -- the Rams.
But for the Patriots, perception is bleaker than reality. The Patriots do not have a featured back, but Faulk and Smith combined for 360 carries for 1,280 yards this season. Smith carried four more times than Faulk, and had 4 more yards. If they were one player, he would have ranked ninth in the American Football Conference.
During one stretch, the Patriots did not rush for 100 yards in seven of eight games, and in six of those games, their average yardage per rush was less than 3 yards, a dismal number in a league in which most runs are expected to gain 3 1/2 to 4 yards. Still, they won every one of those games because, like the Oakland Raiders of 2002, the Patriots basically used short outside passes as runs. Faulk, who is a jitterbug-style runner, was the team's second-leading receiver, with 48 receptions for 440 yards.
''Our quick passes outside we perceive as outside runs,'' the Patriots' offensive coordinator, Charlie Weis, said. ''We think you should complete at least 80 percent of those passes. We look at that as just a way of getting to the corner right now without having to deal with all the problems inside. If you throw it out there, now you're only dealing with one or two force guys rather than dealing with the front four and three linebackers you have to contend with just to get to the outside. Some people say, 'I'm tired of seeing all those wide-receiver screens,' but if you get 4 yards, that's what you're trying to get when you run the ball. You have to find out what you have and what you can do.''
''No. 12 can make that system work,'' he said of Brady.
The Panthers' defense ranked 11th in the N.F.L. against the run this season, which would seem to put greater emphasis on those short passes to the outside on Sunday. But the Panthers' defensive line is also capable of generating pressure on Brady with only a four-man rush, so keeping it back by establishing the run will be critical for the Patriots' rhythm-style offense. Balance may be more important than ever to keep the Panthers from teeing off on Brady.
Of more importance to Weis than balance is the total number of rushing attempts and completed passes in a game. One study Weis relies on shows that when that number is 48 or greater, the team wins 80 percent of the time. This season the Patriots went over 48 on 12 occasions. They won 11.
That is why Weis is more concerned with the mix of plays. When the passing game stops working, Weis will switch to runs by Smith, who can pound the ball up the middle. A defensive line that was running sideline to sideline chasing the short passes will now be getting a running back barreling toward them.
That change-up has been especially effective in the last month of the season, as the weather has deteriorated and Smith has found his groove. Faulk started eight regular- season games and Smith six -- they have a close relationship and view each other as the perfect complement, rather than competition -- but Smith started both playoff games and he has benefited from the melding of an inexperienced offensive line. Smith had surprising success against the Tennessee Titans, which had the N.F.L.'s top rushing defense, rushing 16 times for 69 yards. Against the Indianapolis Colts, he had 22 rushes for 100 yards.
Earlier in the regular season, Smith had struggled so much that that his brother, General, called to reprimand him for not hitting the holes in the defense properly. But this week, Brady called the emergence of the running game a security blanket. In three of the last four games, the Patriots have rushed for more than 100 yards, and Smith will almost certainly get more turns against the Panthers because he is the more physical runner who can take on Carolina's impressive defense.
''I wasn't running the ball like Antowain Smith,'' Smith said. ''I'm not a dancer. Early in the year, I was trying to do too much, look for holes instead of just hitting holes. If I see that crease, I'm hitting it as hard as I can. I'm strong enough to fall forward for at least 2 yards.''
PRO FOOTBALL
