The gay romantic melodrama ''Latter Days'' draws on an unconscionable number of conventions, but works in the end because of its commitment to its characters and a handful of fine performances.
Christian, played by the former soap opera star Wes Ramsey, is that stock figure of gay drama, the hopelessly handsome party boy whose life is devoted to casual sex. A waiter in a Los Angeles restaurant owned and operated by the radiantly maternal Lila (the always welcome Jacqueline Bisset), Christian accepts a $50 wager from his co-workers that he will be able to seduce Aaron (Steve Sandvoss), an apparently straight Mormon missionary who has moved into the apartment opposite his.
Following one of Hollywood's favorite clichés, what begins as a cynical bet develops into a deep romance. After some initial resistance, Aaron surrenders to Christian's charms, discovering his homosexuality in the process. At the same time Christian discovers, in Aaron's sincerity and innocence, the deeper values that have been missing from his own life.
''Latter Days'' was written and directed by C. Jay Cox, who wrote the screenplay for the 2002 Reese Witherspoon vehicle ''Sweet Home Alabama.'' Mr. Cox knows his formulas a bit too well for his own good, and the reliance of ''Latter Days'' on coincidence and contrivance, particularly in its forced final third, gets in the way of his low-key, naturalistic direction. He draws a particularly subtle, convincing performance from Mr. Sandvoss, who, in his film debut, gives Aaron a dignity, sweetness and humor that do a great deal to redeem the clichés built into his character.
When Aaron's missionary roommates walk in on his first, tentative embrace with Christian, the resulting scandal sends Aaron back to his extremely conservative hometown, Pocatello, Idaho.
Aaron is excommunicated from the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and pitched, by his uncomprehending mother (Mary Kay Place, excellent and uncondescending as usual in a role that cries out for caricature), into a psychiatric hospital to be ''straightened out'' by electroshock therapy and ice baths. This gets to be a bit too much, and the picture, which opens today in Manhattan, Salt Lake City, Los Angeles and in Irvine and Pasadena, Calif., loses a good bit of its credibility just as it is cruising into its grandly romantic finale.
Whereas the bulk of gay films from the 1980's and 90's were concerned with the issues of coming out -- and then consumed by the issues surrounding AIDS -- a new generation of gay drama seems to be emerging with movies like ''Latter Days.'' The issue now is not the discovery of your sexual orientation but what you are going to do with that knowledge: Mr. Cox clearly endorses moving from the first liberating rush of promiscuity into more responsible, more mature, more stable relationships. He has some substantial things to say on this point, but he will need to shed some of his Hollywood baggage to develop his work further.
LATTER DAYS
Written and directed by C. Jay Cox; director of photography, Carl Bartels; edited by John Keitel; music by Eric Allaman; production designer, Chris Anthony Miller; produced by Kirkland Tibbels and Jennifer Schafer; released by TLA Releasing. At the Quad Cinema, 34 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village. Running time: 93 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Steve Sandvoss (Elder Aaron Davis), Wes Ramsey (Christian), Jacqueline Bisset (Lila), Mary Kay Place (Sister Davis), Rebekah Jordan (Julie), Amber Benson (Traci), Khary Payton (Andrew), Joseph Gordon-Levitt (Ryder), Rob McElhenney (Harmon), David Poser (Gilford), Erik Palladino (Keith) and Jim Ortlieb (Farron Davis).
FILM REVIEW
