Joyful Actions And Reactions
You almost expect to hear a carnival barker on the third floor of the American Museum of Natural History: ''Stop a tornado with your bare hands!'' ''See yourself suspended in air!'' And perhaps best of all, ''Trade noses with your friend!''
All this is possible, at least temporarily, and none of it involves magic. Quite the opposite: what the museum will offer, starting tomorrow, is a series of startling demonstrations of natural laws. Its new show, ''Exploratorium/A.M.N.H.,'' drawn from the Exploratorium museum in San Francisco, illustrates principles like angular momentum, continental drift and conservation of energy through hands-on (and climb-on) experiments. The exhibition does have a lot of smoke and mirrors (it's actually water vapor and mirrors), but the effects are all pure science.
The tornado, for instance, is a vortex of vapor and air currents. The image of your suspended self is created by mirrors. As for the nose trading, it's cheaper than plastic surgery: two people sit on opposite sides of a glass panel made of alternating clear and reflective horizontal strips.
''You can have a great time just exploring the phenomena and playing,'' said Myles Gordon, the museum's vice president for education. ''But if you have an interest in the physical science, you can even get into the formulas.''
The exhibition has four sections. In ''Earth Processes,'' the fun ranges from playing with a sea of clouds (it looks like steam in a witch's cauldron) to creating small earthquakes in a globe filled with sand. ''Mirrors and Illusion'' has a walk-in kaleidoscope. ''Pendulums'' includes two that are attached to a pencil so that their movements produce a drawing. And ''Rotation'' beckons children to step on a ''momentum machine'' to make themselves -- and their parents' heads -- spin.
''Exploratorium/A.M.N.H.'' includes more than 30 displays, so allow time for repetition and rapture. Otherwise you may have a few stress-related experiments that aren't part of the show.
''Exploratorium/A.M.N.H.,'' tomorrow through Aug. 15 at the American Museum of Natural History, Central Park West and 79th Street, (212) 769-5100. Timed entry daily, every half-hour from 10 a.m. to 5 p.m. Tickets (includes museum admission): $19; students and 65+, $14; 2 to 12, $11; members, $9.50; child members, $5.50.
From Adiós to Hello
Moving from the country to the city is enough to turn any child's world topsy-turvy. But for Juan Felipe, it is especially hard. The 10-year-old son of Mexican immigrants, Juan Felipe, called Juanito, has spent his life in migrant workers' camps in California. For him English is a foreign language.
Juanito, the hero of ''The Upside Down Boy'' (''El Niño de Cabeza''), is the stage alter ego of Juan Felipe Herrera, whose bilingual book of the same title (Children's Book Press, 1999) chronicles his boyhood immersion in English, school and the bustle of an unnamed metropolis.
Staged by the organization Making Books Sing, ''The Upside Down Boy'' includes Mr. Herrera's poignant and colorful poetry in his lyrics for Cristian Amigo's lively, Latin-flavored score. Barbara Zinn Krieger, who wrote the book and additional lyrics, has made Queens Juanito's new home. She has also added dramatic tension in the form of Calvin, a school bully. While Juanito (Edward Duepner) feels that ''my tongue has turned into a rock,'' Calvin (Joel Bermudez) uses his as a weapon.
Directed by David Schechter, the ensemble cast brings the story vividly to life, with Ric Oquita and Celina Polanco as Juanito's loving parents, Siho Ellsmore and Maria-Christina Oliveras as helpful classmates, and Victoria Lauture as Mrs. Sampson, the teacher who shows him that all languages have poetry.
Juanito also realizes that Calvin, dyslexic and in a foster home, is just as frightened as he. In this touching musical, only when one upside down boy reaches out to the other does the world finally begin to make sense.
''The Upside Down Boy'' (''El Niño de Cabeza''), tomorrow at 11 a.m. and 2 p.m. at Queens Theater in the Park, Flushing Meadows-Corona Park, (718) 760-0064. Tickets: $16; children, $14. Also Feb. 7 at 2 p.m. at Kingsborough Community College, 2001 Oriental Boulevard, Manhattan Beach, Brooklyn, (718) 368-5596. Tickets: $16.
Fairies Unfair
Once upon a time, long before Disney, fairies weren't always benevolent creatures. They were conniving, manipulative tricksters who would just as soon turn you into a donkey as grant your dearest wish.
''The Changeling,'' from Vital Children's Theater, revives this tradition with a midsummer night's adventure involving fairies even naughtier than Puck.
Alfred (Eve Reinhardt), a misfit elf, is ''meek and gangly,'' but uncommonly sweet. The mean fairy queen, Maeve (Breanna Pine), makes him a changeling, leaving him in the place of a human boy, John (Lori McNally), whom she wants to make a fairy prince. Poor Alfred, stuck with John's worried mother (Dianna DiPalma), seems destined never to be wanted.
''The Changeling,'' with a book by Mark Loewenstern and music by John Gregor (both wrote the lyrics), is for children who prefer their fairies with more spice than gossamer. Directed by Carrie Libling, the show does have a fairy-tale ending, but not everyone lives happily ever after -- just those who deserve to.
''The Changeling,'' through Feb. 15 at Vital Theater Company, 432 West 42nd Street, Clinton, (212) 268-2040. Saturdays and Sundays at 1 and 3 p.m. Tickets: $14.
Family Fare
