In an election year, voters shake their heads and wonder whether these really are the best politicians the country can muster. And now that so many comedians have their own political talk shows, a similar bewilderment arises.
Is Dennis Miller really the wittiest, most astute comedian that CNBC could recruit? (Was Bill Maher the most insightful, clever talk show host HBO could find?)
For comedians and candidates alike, the answer is the same: of course not. Just as many of the country's most admirable leaders eschew the paltriness of modern politics, the most brilliant, captivating entertainers aspire to something other than a night-time cable talk show. (Jon Stewart, host of ''The Daily Show'' on Comedy Central, is the exception -- for now.)
In that sense at least, Mr. Miller, whose hourlong talk show, ''Dennis Miller,'' is shown Monday though Friday and on Sunday, is a little like the Democratic field he mocks so fiercely. He is not terrible, but his performance does make one wonder, somewhat wistfully, who else might be out there.
It is of course unfortunate for any talk-show host to make a debut the week Jack Paar died. The black-and-white clips of that urbane, witty, if jittery ''Tonight'' show host that have been flooding television, especially NBC, could only work to the disadvantage of a comedian who opened his first show with a chimp in diapers crawling across his lap. (Mr. Miller said that the pet prop was a nod to J. Fred Muggs, Dave Garroway's furry alter ego on the old ''Today'' show, proving, if nothing else, that Mr. Miller is not pandering to youth.)
Politicians left or right, too, face the hurdle of daunting comparisons when they declare their candidacies in the shadow of their parties' most beloved figures -- John F. Kennedy or Ronald Reagan.
The analogy ends there, because politicians today are mostly attacked for lacking all conviction, while political talk-show hosts, particularly those with a background in stand-up comedy, are bursting with passionate intensity.
Mr. Miller, a Sept. 11 convert to conservatism, evidently decided to contribute his comic talent to his latest cause. His main goal is not to amuse, and evidently, neither is it CNBC's. Like its sister cable news network, MSNBC, the business-oriented CNBC seems obsessed with outfoxing the Fox network, boosting its ratings by catering to conservative viewers who seek an alternative to what they regard as a widespread liberal conspiracy on television. Not surprisingly, Mr. Miller's highlights this week included a commentary by Bernard Goldberg, a disenchanted CBS producer, whose latest book, ''Arrogance'' (Warner, $26.95.), rails against the ''liberal media elite,'' and David Horowitz, the editor of FrontPage magazine and a Los Angeles-based advocate for conservative causes. (Conservatives in Hollywood and New York always complain about stigma and persecution in the media and entertainment worlds, which makes one wonder why they don't get out more.)
Mr. Miller campaigned for Arnold Schwarzenegger last fall, and was rewarded with an interview with the California governor on his maiden show on Monday.
He turned their give-and-take into a gauzy infomercial for Mr. Schwarzenegger's new administration. When the governor praised his wife Maria Shriver's work as first lady, Mr. Miller replied, ''I think that statements like that, your sincerity about, like, being a citizen -- a California citizen of the United States -- superseded your star quality.''
Mr. Miller, who is perhaps best known for his sneering asides as anchor of ''Weekend Update'' on NBC's ''Saturday Night Live'' in the mid-1980's, was being sincere, but viewers cannot be entirely blamed for thinking he was joking.
The same was true the following night, when Mr. Miller interviewed another of his Republican heroes, Senator John McCain of Arizona, and asked him to address the wrongs done to Adm. James Stockdale, a former POW, who was mocked after floundering in a vice presidential debate in 1992. The uninitiated could be forgiven for thinking that Mr. Miller was joking when he called Stockdale jokes ''one of the great injustices in contemporary American history.'' Mr. Miller, after all, spent much of Wednesday night gleefully squeezing a box on his desk, his Howard Dean ''scream button.''
His goals for a show that zigzags from pious political preaching to one-liners and pranks were hard to decipher. And that may be why he laid out a mission statement in his opening monologue on Monday. ''Your DTV dish runneth over,'' he told viewers. ''In an increasingly polarized world, I believe you want someone to get incensed for you. As fringe groups on both sides tack further and further away from the mainstream, right versus left begins to look trivial. It's a far more dangerous world than ever before, and the focus is fast becoming right versus wrong. Simply put, we will do the news as catharsis.''
The catharsis he provides seems mainly tailored to his own demons as a recovering liberal. Mr. Miller has not been that liberal of late, however. In the 1990's, like the libertarian Mr. Maher, he became a champion of the endangered white male. (It was not affirmative action, however, that cost him his job as a commentator on ABC's ''Monday Night Football'' in 2002: the network dropped him to hire John Madden.) Sept. 11, he said, changed everything.
Mr. Miller's guest on Wednesday was New York's former mayor, Rudolph W. Giuliani, and the two men chatted cozily about how well the administration is handling the war on terrorism.
These somewhat bland, deferential interviews clash with Mr. Miller's impish sense of humor, which has a more snide, frat-boy flavor. (He drew a chuckle from Governor Schwarzenegger by saying that looking at illegal aliens trying to cross the California-Mexico border on any given night with a pair of night-vision goggles is ''like the start of the Boston Marathon in ponchos.''
Mr. Miller makes less obvious cultural references as well. Mocking Gen. Wesley K. Clark's presidential aspirations, the comedian said the general was delusional and should go to ''the inn with Bing Crosby and Danny Kaye,'' and sang, under his breath, ''We'll follow the old man.'' Some viewers might not have caught right away that he was referring to a song about a retired general in the 1954 musical ''White Christmas.''
Toward the end of each show, Mr. Miller moves to a table of panelists who debate hot issues of the day. Here, he is a more considerate host than Mr. Maher, who mostly uses his argumentative panelists as a backboard for his own one-liners. Mr. Miller was generous in letting Mr. Horowitz skirmish with ideological opponents like Naomi Wolf, the feminist and social critic, and Henry Louis Gates Jr., chairman of the African-American studies department at Harvard.
Mostly, these exchanges are less like political debate than bar talk, and since people do not talk much in bars anymore but watch TV, even the thinnest arguments can be enlightening. Pooh-poohing Democratic accusations about the health risks of uninsured Americans, Mr. Miller, in Tuesday night's discussion, offered a rather startling ''Let them eat cake'' defense of the status quo. Referring to hospital emergency rooms, he assured Ms. Wolf that the uninsured actually do have a form of coverage. ''Well, believe me, I've gone in without insurance,'' he said, ''and they kind of take care of you.''
DENNIS MILLER  CNBC, Mondays through Fridays and Sundays at 9 p.m., Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time.
Dennis Miller, host and executive producer; Eddie Feldmann, senior producer and head writer. Produced by NBC Studios.
TV WEEKEND  Correction:  January 31, 2004, Saturday  The TV Weekend column yesterday about the political comedian Dennis Miller and his new talk show referred incorrectly in some copies to the background of Adm. James Stockdale, whose performance as a vice-presidential candidate was a discussion topic. The admiral ran as an independent in 1992 with Ross Perot, not as a Republican in 1996 with John McCain, who was not a nominee.
