It will be impossible for you to walk past a shuttered restaurant and not feel a chill after seeing the documentary ''Eat This New York,'' which opens today in Manhattan. The directors Andrew Rossi and Kate Novack may not be great filmmakers -- it's hard to tell, based on this bare-bones picture -- but they know a great story, and more important, how to tell it. The movie will grip those fascinated by the restaurant business, like myself, and those who merely drift by the Food Network on the way to MoreMax or Speedvision on the cable dial.
The directors demonstrate an eye for intriguing real-life drama. They get it from the film's subjects, John McCormick and Billy Phelps. The guys are a pair of starry-eyed would-be restaurateurs from Minneapolis -- ''Well, St. Paul, actually,'' Mr. McCormick clarifies -- opening a new spot, Moto, in Williamsburg, Brooklyn. As they discuss their thoughts for their slice-shaped eatery, they're like the young sisters in Jim Sheridan's ''In America,'' their eyes gleaming with joy at a first glimpse of the Manhattan skyline.
They plant their flag far from the madding crowd, not in an area with heavy street traffic but in a section of town that serves as a kind of no man's land. ''I have no food experience, no restaurant experience,'' Mr. Phelps admits, and then adds, ''I don't know how many local customers we'll get there.''
But their goal to cobble a big-deal dining nexus in an uncharted zone isn't nearly as nutty as it may seem; remember, the meatpacking district in Manhattan is now as hot as an Emeril entree. Keith McNally, whose Pastis rules that part of town, speaks about getting started in the restaurant business. (Mr. McCormick and Mr. Phelps use his carpenter to help build their place.) The other gourmet luminaries in ''Eat'' include the downtown dining lord Drew Nieporent, as well as the Continental chef/superstar Daniel Boulud and the editor in chief of Gourmet magazine, Ruth Reichl.
''Eat'' begins with a black screen and graphics that offer truly daunting New York statistics: ''Every year, more than 1,000 new restaurants open'' and ''four out of five restaurants go out of business within five years.'' For anyone who walks the streets of the Lower East Side and observes the number of thriving shops that sell used restaurant equipment, those facts seem borne out.
''Eat'' works as a fascinating response to the chef-worship culture that is, for example, celebrated on an hourly basis on the Food Network: the concept that opening an eatery is synonymous with success. The movie creates an understandable context for the aspirants' dreams; they're mesmerized by the Parisian diner culture of the 1920's -- a fantasy that has obviously already overtaken Chelsea -- and are looking to take their version of that era to Brooklyn.
It's fascinating to hear Mr. Phelps drop the word ''cafe'' as if it were going to transform him into Captain Marvel, and then have ''Eat'' cut to Mr. Nieporent as he tells his story of building Montrachet out of nothing, taking a big gamble doing so. He does this on his way to accepting yet another lifetime achievement award, and the glamour sparkles around him like a force field. (Someone could probably do a film on the number of lifetime achievement awards that major restaurant figures receive in a calendar year.)
''Eat This New York'' lets its on-camera figures, like Ms. Reichl, explain the sociological phenomena that make New York a singular restaurant town. And it makes a case for the battalions of idealists who hit the city determined to carve a place for themselves; the movie's subtle subtext is that restaurants are as big a reason for coming to New York as starting a band or writing a novel, only the restaurant path is far more treacherous.
EAT THIS NEW YORK
Produced and directed by Andrew Rossi and Kate Novack; written by Ms. Novack; director of photography, Mr. Rossi; edited by Mr. Rossi; music by Steve O'Reilly and Matt Anthony of Tammany Hall NYC. At Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village. Running time: 85 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Daniel Boulud, Sirio Maccioni, John McCormick, Keith McNally, Danny Meyer, Drew Nieporent, Billy Phelps, Ruth Reichl, Jean-Georges Vongerichten and Tim Zagat.
FILM REVIEW
