Earlier this week, after a practice, Carl Krauser wore a black shirt with the word Throwbacks above color pictures of retired basketball stars like Michael Jordan, Larry Bird and Julius Erving. But the one Krauser pointed to was in the lower left corner: Isiah Thomas.
''My favorite player in the world, right here,'' said Krauser, the point guard of the seventh-ranked Pittsburgh Panthers. ''I love Isiah Thomas because he's such a competitive person. He steps on a court, he wants to win. If he's in a business suit, he wants to win. I want to meet him and get his autograph.''
Krauser, who has a few things in common with Thomas, the Knicks' president of basketball operations, may have that opportunity in March at the Big East tournament in Madison Square Garden. Krauser's Panthers will stop at the Garden to defend their conference tournament championship on the way to the N.C.A.A. tournament.
The Panthers improved their record to 20-1 (6-1 in the Big East) with a 68-58 victory over Boston College on Wednesday night in the Petersen Events Center. The key moments involved some Thomas-like plays by Krauser, who learned basketball on the playgrounds of the Bronx.
With the Panthers trailing by 55-54 and 3 minutes 26 seconds left, Krauser was on the bench, having been limited in his playing time and his production by three early fouls. When he re-entered the game, he scored 8 of Pitt's final 14 points, including 2 on a drive to regain the lead and a 3-point play off another drive to increase the margin to 4 points.
''My role is just to make sure we win,'' he said. ''I just wanted to basically put the ball in the hole. I don't like losing. At crunch time, I always tend to go back and think about games like Isiah Thomas against the Lakers when he had a swollen ankle. He always hit the big shot.''
Krauser was referring to the N.B.A. finals in 1988, when Krauser was 7 years old. As he spoke, he wore a different shirt that also evoked Thomas: a retro jersey of the Indiana Hoosiers, white with red trim, the kind Thomas wore in college before Krauser was born.
At 6 feet 2 inches and 200 pounds, his size is similar to Thomas's. Like Thomas, Krauser wears No. 11.
Krauser is a sophomore who played backup last season to Brandin Knight, an all-American. Some Pittsburgh fans believe that Krauser is a better player now than Knight was then and that this season's team is better than the one that went 28-5 last season and reached the Round of 16 in the N.C.A.A. tournament for the second consecutive year.
Krauser agrees with those fans. ''I talked to Brandin about that and he agreed with me,'' Krauser added. ''We're so much deeper with talent.''
Pittsburgh's roster includes the senior guard Julius Page, the junior forwards Chevon Troutman and Jaron Brown and the freshman center Chris Taft.
Krauser finished Wednesday's game with 12 points; his season average of 14.9 is highest on the team, and he leads Pitt in assists with 82.
Krauser said he talked by phone frequently with Knight, with his father, Mario Krauser, and with a previous coach, Paul Nicelli. ''Brandin said I was playing well,'' Krauser said. ''That was good to hear. I like talking to him before the games to get his insight on different guys. I still learn from Brandin.''
Jamie Dixon, the first-year Pitt coach, who replaced Ben Howland, said: ''I wouldn't ever dare to compare the two. They're completely different.''
He said that Krauser was learning patience and that ''he's very coachable and he's very smart and he's got that toughness thing, too.''
Krauser's father said he always thought his son would be a baseball player, like his dad, who came to the United States from St. Croix when he was 13 and worked as a subway conductor.
Krauser attended three high schools, beginning at Adlai E. Stevenson in the Bronx, moving to St. Thomas More Preparatory in Connecticut and finishing at Notre Dame Academy in Massachusetts. Along the way, he struggled with grades, boxed a bit and played for Nicelli, who runs an amateur team based in Queens called the Student Athletes Inc. Broncos.
In a telephone interview, Nicelli called Krauser a ''reclamation project'' and added: ''I'm happy to this point. I keep my fingers crossed.''
Nicelli added, ''Every once in a while, kids have a tendency to go back to the environment situation,'' referring to the Bronx housing project in which Krauser grew up. ''I have to keep his head straight and tell him, 'That's not acceptable.' '' Nicelli said that on the court Krauser was ''just a bulldog'' who had to tone down some of his demonstrative aspects.
''He would make a 3-point shot and twirl imaginary guns in his hands and put them back in the holster,'' Nicelli said. ''We told him street ball was not the way. Carl would not back off from anybody. I had to talk to him, get him to calm down.''
Krauser sometimes celebrates a long shot by crossing his forearms in an X, for the Bronx.
''We have this tremendous heart,'' Krauser said of New York basketball players. ''We don't like to lose. When you play against a New York City point guard, you know you're in a war.'' Krauser has local company on the team: Taft is from Brooklyn and Mark McCarroll is from Queens.
They blend into a team that is more rough than it is fast. In a 66-45 victory at Syracuse last Saturday, the Panthers ground down the Orangemen, the defending national champions. ''When you play physical, you keep beating on a team, they're going to wear down and get tired,'' Krauser said. ''We just go out there and try to beat on teams and try to make them quit.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
