The beveled glass windows and door with fanciful wood strips are so unusual that the casual passer-by wants to know what is behind them. The banner flying above the door, emblazoned with ''Terra 47,'' gives no hint.
A peek inside shows a charming mishmash of chairs, mosaic-tile floors and wall, a stained glass cupola and a friendly glow.
Like the décor the menu is also a little bit of everything. It is organic wherever possible, and dishes of baked tempeh and spelt pizza sit side by side with rack of lamb and roasted chicken. Sprouts? Vegan desserts? There is also filet mignon.
There are two ways to look at this tiny restaurant, just down the block from the Strand Bookstore. Either it is someone's idea of how to cater to everyone and please no one, or it is a happy marriage of the culinary currents that run on parallel tracks across the country. I think the latter. Terra 47 seems to be doing an admirable job of pleasing everyone.
Unreconstructed meat eaters will love the grilled panini of slow cooked lamb, the meat suffused with flavors of long cooking. The dedicated vegetarian (and interested nonvegetarian) will be equally happy eating the spelt pizza with its crackling crisp crust topped with richly flavored tomato sauce, peppers, onions and mozzarella.
Soba noodle salad with vegetables and Japanese seaweed is the perfect balance of sesame paste, sesame oil and vinegar, with the acidity of the vinegar providing the counterpoint to the richness of the sesame. A large marinated beet salad has bright, sparkling greens with perfectly cooked and marinated beets, creamy goat cheese and toasted walnuts, bound together with a honey balsamic vinaigrette.
I have no idea why a restaurant that serves meat thinks all the desserts should be vegan. They are pretty good, but how much better they would be if the almond cream was actually whipped cream and the cakes were made with butter.
Terra 47, 47 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 358-0103. Dinner entrees: $11 to $28.
Diner's Journal
