The New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, has convened a grand jury to consider evidence against Richard S. Strong, founder of Strong Capital Management, according to people briefed on the proceedings.
The grand jury has been hearing evidence for several weeks about short-term trades made by Mr. Strong in mutual funds managed by his company, these people said. The investigation has cast a cloud over Mr. Strong's attempts to sell his majority stake in the company.
Last October, Mr. Spitzer said that Mr. Strong engaged in such trading on behalf of his own account and accounts for family and friends even though fund documents indicated that the company discouraged the practice.
''There will be charges brought, the nature of which have yet to be defined,'' Mr. Spitzer said at the time. ''If you ever wanted proof that there were two sets of rules -- one for insiders and one for individual investors -- this is it.''
Mr. Strong, whose worth has been estimated at $800 million by Forbes magazine, made about $600,000 on the trades, people briefed on the investigation have said. The trading occurred from 1998 until at least 2001, these people said.
Mr. Strong's lawyer, Stanley Arkin, said his client had done nothing wrong and questioned Mr. Spitzer's right to pursue a case against him.
''Our position has been and continues to be that there's no way there was any crime committed,'' Mr. Arkin said. ''There is no way he has any jurisdiction over Mr. Strong.''
Mr. Strong's company is based in Menomonee Falls, Wis., but Mr. Spitzer is pursuing the case -- along with other suits involving mutual fund companies nationwide -- based on the Martin Act, a New York securities law dating to 1921 that he used in his previous pursuit of conflicts among stock analysts.
Mr. Arkin said that the rapid trading said to have been done by Mr. Strong was not illegal. ''You don't charge people for gray areas where nobody got hurt,'' he said.
Regulators, including the S.E.C. and the New York attorney general, have argued that fund managers violated their fiduciary duty to investors by permitting such trading by a select few even as they indicated in their prospectuses that they discouraged the practice.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Spitzer declined to comment yesterday on the status of the investigation. A spokeswoman for Strong Capital referred calls to Mr. Arkin.
Mr. Strong resigned in December as chairman of the company that manages the Strong funds and hired Goldman Sachs to solicit bids for the business. Early this month, about a dozen suitors signaled their interest in Strong Capital, which had $37.6 billion under management at the end of last year.
