As Pakistan and Saudi Arabia battle internal Islamic extremists, their struggle presents America with ''broader strategic problems'' as significant as Iraq or Afghanistan, the commander of American forces in the region said on Thursday.
The officer, Gen. John P. Abizaid, also said the ranks of insurgent forces in Iraq were not being swelled by large numbers of foreigners, although he said some had formal ties to Al Qaeda and some had ideological sympathies with the terrorist network.
And while the American occupation authority in Iraq has set July 1 as the deadline for handing sovereignty to a new government in Baghdad, it appears unlikely that a formal agreement on the status of American military forces in the country will be ready by that deadline, he said.
General Abizaid, chief of the military's Central Command, said that the fight by Pakistan and Saudi Arabia against their own Islamic radicals was critically important to America's global campaign against terrorism, but that their problems could not be solved by American military power.
Both Pakistan and Saudi Arabia ''are involved in their own fight against extremists that is crucial to the ability of their nations to maintain control over the internal situation,'' he said at a meeting with military affairs correspondents.
''It's a battle of ideas as much as it is a military battle,'' he said of Pakistan, where President Pervez Musharraf has survived two assassination attempts.
Of recent terrorist strikes in Saudi Arabia, he said that this is ''not the type of the fight that you're going to send the 82d Airborne Division to go fight,'' a reference to the first American troops sent into Saudi Arabia after Iraq's invasion of Kuwait in 1990. ''It's the type of fight that you need to send the full support and weight of diplomatic, political and social help.''
General Abizaid said the antiterrorist struggle in the region would be a lengthy one, and he warned: ''Culturally speaking, our patience quotient is not high. Culturally speaking, the patience quotient of our enemies is very high.''
Discussing opposition to the stabilization mission in Iraq, General Abizaid discounted reports that the insurgency was heavily manned by foreigners.
''I am confident that there is no flood of foreign fighters coming in,'' he said, putting their number as ''low'' and in ''the hundreds.'' He declined to assess the overall number of insurgent fighters.
While the American-led Coalition Provisional Authority is negotiating the path to sovereignty with the Iraqi Governing Council, the United States has not yet presented a formal proposal governing the status of American military forces after the hand-over, he said.
He predicted that until such an agreement was in place, the United States military presence would continue on ''an evolution of the current track that we're on.''
''People understand there will be a need for a coalition force of some sort,'' he said. The American military currently is rotating in about 110,000 troops to replace the contingent of just under 130,000 there now.
''Iraqi security institutions will not be mature enough by July to be able to control the situation throughout the nation without the help of coalition forces,'' he added. ''It remains to be seen what type of entity will emerge. Clearly we hope that we can quickly build a Ministry of National Defense.''
A number of domestic security functions, as well as responsibilities for patrolling a growing number of locations, already have been turned over to Iraqi police or civil defense forces, General Abizaid said.
He said that as Iraq moved through an uncertain period of gaining sovereignty and holding elections, civil war might be possible, but he said that in his view it remained unlikely.
''There will be more people fighting to hold Iraq together than breaking it apart,'' he said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: MILITARY
