A 1-year-old Bronx boy drowned yesterday when his head became trapped in a bucket that his family had put out to catch incessant leaks from their kitchen ceiling, the police said.
The boy, Malik Uceta, was discovered in the bucket by his grandmother at 4:35 p.m. in the apartment at 1201 University Heights. The building has been the subject of repeated complaints to the city, including 17 made in 2003 involving leaky ceilings. Just last week, a judge ordered the owners to address the complaints.While the apartment where the child died was not the subject of any of the complaints, the home appeared in disrepair yesterday, and the family was boiling water on the stove for warmth. The family's $583 monthly rent is subsidized by the city, the boy's father said.
It was unclear how long the boy was in the bucket, which was about half-full of water, or how long he had been alone in the kitchen, family members said. After the grandmother found the boy, his father attempted CPR, and the child was taken to Bronx-Lebanon Hospital Center, where he was pronounced dead at 6:03 p.m., the police and the family said. The police said the death was accidental, and there are no charges pending.
The family moved into the first-floor apartment in 1999, said the father, Juan Uceta, 26. Mr. Uceta, a day laborer, and the boy's mother, Rhodesia Jones, 24, have two other children, Deannie, 6, and Natasha, 3, and share the apartment with Sandra Uceta, the children's grandmother.
Last week, workers removed a chunk of the kitchen ceiling to make repairs to the plumbing between the first and second floors. That hole began leaking soon after, Mr. Uceta said.
''It's been leaking since Thursday. It started on the right side of the kitchen, and then Friday, it started on the left side of the kitchen,'' he said. ''The bucket has been there ever since. I woke up Wednesday at 7 a.m. and heard leaking water in the kitchen, and at 8 or 9 it stopped, and I emptied it out.''
A few hours later, around noon, ''I put the bucket back, and I let the super know it's leaking major, not just drops,'' Mr. Uceta said.
The boy was home with his sisters and grandmother on Wednesday afternoon. ''I went out to get my hair styled,'' said his mother, Ms. Jones. ''When I got home, I found my son on the kitchen table turning blue.''
When his grandmother found Malik, he was leaning headfirst into the bucket in a corner of the kitchen, Mr. Uceta said. With coaching from a 911 dispatcher, Mr. Uceta performed CPR until someone ran to a fire stationhouse a block away, and an ambulance arrived, he said.
While the building had a history of plumbing problems, Mr. Uceta said he was told by the superintendent that the water was coming from an upstairs neighbor's shower, because the neighbor did not use a shower curtain and water was collecting on the bathroom floor. The superintendent was not identified yesterday. Mr. Uceta said that he knew the superintendent only by his first name, and that he had not been seen at the building yesterday.
Yesterday, the boy's parents made a formal complaint to the city about the leak, said Carol Abrams, a spokeswoman for the Department of Housing Development and Preservation.
Since 1974, the building has been cited for 319 housing maintenance code violations, from mold to vermin and sagging floors, according to the department's records.
None of the violations have been rectified, which prompted the city to obtain a court order on Jan. 22 forcing the building's owners to correct the violations, Ms. Abrams said.
One of the owners listed with the building in the department's records, Aaron Rivlin, said yesterday that he had not been involved with the building for a few years, and then only briefly, to help the management. He said he did not know the Uceta family or their apartment, and was unaware of troubles with the building.
''The building was kept up,'' Mr. Rivlin said from his home in Brooklyn. ''When I was there, and prior to me, whenever there was a complaint, leaks were dealt with.''
