Chinese scientists analyzing the genome of the SARS virus have documented the immense rapidity with which it evolved from an animal pathogen into one capable of infecting human cells.
Their analysis, reported in Friday's issue of Science, shows that as the virus perfected its human attack mechanism, its potency soared from being able to infect only 3 percent of the people who came in contact with a patient to an infectivity rate of 70 percent a few months later.
The speed of the SARS virus's transformation suggests that to prevent new viral epidemics, like the one that experts fear could emerge from the current cases of bird flu, which has spread through Asia, it would help to identify and isolate patients at the earliest possible stages before a virus can attain its peak infectivity.
The new analysis, based on samples of the virus taken from Chinese patients in the early, middle and late stages of the epidemic, affords a rare glimpse of evolution at work at the molecular level.
The Chinese researchers gave special attention to one of the SARS virus's tools for entering a cell, known as the spike protein. They found that the gene that specifies the design of the spike protein changed the units of its genetic material rapidly in the early stages of the epidemic, producing many new versions of the spike protein. The new versions were maintained, an instance of positive selective pressure.
But in the later stages the sequence of units in the gene stabilized, as if the spike protein was then just right for attacking human cells. The gene was now under ''purifying'' or negative selective pressure, meaning that any virus with a different version was discarded.
The evolution of the spike protein from its animal to human attack mode began in mid-November and was complete by the end of February, a mere 15 weeks later.
Another gene, which the virus needs for the delicate task of making more copies of itself, stayed stable throughout the period that the virus was switching from its animal to human host.
The analysis was performed by a consortium of researchers in Guandong, Shanghai and Hong Kong. Dr. Guoping Zhao of the Chinese National Human Genome Center in Shanghai was a lead author of the report.
Dr. Hua Tang, an evolutionary biologist at the University of Chicago, who helped with the analysis, said the increasing infectivity of the virus during its transition to humans showed that it is ''better to control it at a very early stage when the infection rate is lower.''
Dr. Kathryn Holmes, an expert on SARS-type viruses at the University of Colorado, said the study was ''wonderfully done,'' because of its speed, the foresight in saving specimens from the critical early stages of the outbreak, and its analysis of epidemiology at the molecular level.
The alacrity with which the virus adapted to human hosts underlines the importance of having a public health surveillance system to recognize and isolate patients at an early stage before a new virus has honed its attack skills. ''These things are going to keep happening,'' Dr. Holmes said, referring to other viral switches from animal to human hosts. ''If we could catch the virus before it had a chance to make these mutations you could abort an epidemic.''
Though most organisms have DNA as their genetic material, several classes of viruses use RNA instead. These RNA viruses, which include influenza and H.I.V. as well as SARS, have a high rate of mutation.
