The director general of the British Broadcasting Corporation resigned Thursday in the wake of a devastating report attacking the BBC's journalistic practices, saying he hoped his departure would help save it from further damage.
The departure of Greg Dyke as director general, a day after the chairman of the BBC's board of governors also resigned, leaves Britain's most respected broadcaster without its top two officials at one of the most vulnerable times in its history. It also marks a low point for the British news media during a period of unusually hostile relations between the press and Prime Minister Tony Blair's Labor Government.
After Mr. Dyke's announcement, on the steps of Broadcasting House here, hundreds of BBC employees in London, Glasgow and Cardiff walked off their jobs and into the streets in spontaneous protests at the battering taken by the BBC in the last two days, and calling for Mr. Dyke to return. In Taunton, in southwest England, BBC Somerset Sound, a local radio station, went silent for a minute to signal the staff's anger.
On Wednesday, Lord Hutton, a senior judge, said in a 740-page report that the BBC had been guilty of careless reporting and poor editorial oversight in a radio broadcast last May 29. He said the BBC then compounded those errors by rushing to defend itself without checking its facts.
In the broadcast, Andrew Gilligan, a BBC military affairs reporter, said that the government used an intelligence dossier it ''probably knew'' was wrong in September 2002 to bolster its case for war with Iraq.
At the same time, Lord Hutton's report exonerated Mr. Blair's government of wrongdoing, both in the preparation of the intelligence report and in the death of David Kelly, a government weapons expert who killed himself after being exposed as the source of Mr. Gilligan's report.
The Hutton report was a political triumph for the prime minister, who this week has managed to escape from two potentially damaging episodes -- the findings of the report and a close vote in Parliament on his proposal to authorize universities to increase their tuition fees -- with Houdini-like nimbleness. But a backlash was developing later Thursday, particularly from supporters of the BBC enraged at what they regarded as Lord Hutton's blanket bias in favor of the government.
Even right-leaning newspapers that traditionally attack the BBC as much as they attack the government came to the broadcaster's defense.
''For all its limitations, failings, weaknesses, follies, the Beeb remains one of the world's great beacons of public service and global information,'' Max Hastings wrote in The Daily Mail, using the BBC's nickname. ''Who seriously doubts that the BBC, for all its faults, is a great force in the struggle for truth?''
Mr. Dyke, who as director general was also the BBC's editor in chief, said he hoped his departure would help the company move on. Referring to Gavyn Davies, the board chairman who resigned Wednesday, Mr. Dyke said, ''with the departure of Gavyn and myself, and the apology I issued on behalf of the BBC yesterday, I hope that a line can be drawn under this whole episode.''
The board immediately appointed Mark Byford, a top BBC executive, as the acting director general.
But even as the BBC's employees digested the unpleasant news of Mr. Dyke's departure after four years in the job, the newly appointed acting chairman, Lord Ryder, compounded their sense of righteous indignation by issuing a further apology after an emergency meeting of the broadcaster's chastened board of directors. The board came under special attack in Lord Hutton's report for its decision to mount a robust defense of Mr. Gilligan's broadcast without examining its merits.
Lord Ryder said the report ''highlighted serious defects'' in the BBC's practices. But, he said, the company had already begun making ''major reforms,'' including changes in the way it addresses complaints and the way it trains new recruits.
''On behalf of the BBC, I have no hesitation in apologizing unreservedly for our errors and to the individuals whose reputations were affected by them,'' Lord Ryder said.
BBC officials have apologized over their treatment of Mr. Gilligan's reporting before, but never in such sweeping language. In a statement on Wednesday, for instance, Mr. Dyke acknowledged that there had been problems in the original broadcast, but said that the thrust of it -- that the government had exaggerated the weapons threat from Iraq -- was broadly true and that the public had a right to know it.
Lord Ryder's remarks appeared to delight Mr. Blair, whose official spokesman had issued a stern call on Thursday morning for just such an admission by the BBC.
Speaking in Hertfordshire, Mr. Blair said that an apology was all he ever wanted.
''This for me has always been a very simple matter,'' the prime minister told reporters, saying that a ''very serious accusation'' had been made by the BBC, had been proved false by Lord Hutton and ''it's now been withdrawn.''
But Lord Ryder's statement, particularly when taken with the resignations of Mr. Dyke and Mr. Davies, infuriated the BBC's supporters, who accused the corporation of caving in when it should have defended itself.
''I think Lord Ryder is a very, very dangerous thing for the BBC,'' said Rod Liddle, a former editor of the Today radio program and the man who hired Mr. Gilligan. ''He has not a clue about journalism, and he has been a constant voice opposed to the BBC's best journalistic instincts.''
Jonathan Aitken, a former Tory member of Parliament, said that Mr. Dyke's departure was a ''resignation too far.''
''It is getting like a Japanese suicide movie when the governors of the BBC become so panic-stricken that they make both the chairman and the director general fall on their swords in two consecutive days,'' Mr. Aitken told ITV News.
Michael Fabricant, a Conservative member of Parliament who serves on the culture and media committee in the House of Commons, said that Mr. Dyke's resignation was ''bad news for broadcasting.''
''I believe that a climate of fear may now exist within the BBC,'' Mr. Fabricant told The Press Association. ''If journalists feel themselves to be intimidated, this will not only damage the integrity of the BBC, but also set back freedom of speech in our country.''
