Co-op City, the sprawling apartment complex in the Bronx, has reached a $475 million agreement with the state to refinance its crushing debt and to receive new loans to fix its crumbling facades, broken windows and collapsing parking garages.
At a news conference yesterday, local officials said that the state's Housing Finance Agency and the Division of Housing and Community Renewal had agreed to refinance Co-op City's $192 million mortgage and to lend its struggling management company about $275 million for capital repairs.
The agreement, which has not yet been formally approved by the state, is the biggest step in years toward calming the often bitter wrangling between Co-op City's 50,000 residents and state officials who oversaw its construction in the 1960's under the Mitchell-Lama housing program. The agreement also comes at a crucial moment for the mainly working-class complex, which is so big it would form the 12th-largest city in the state if it seceded from the Bronx.
In short, Co-op City is a wreck. Its balconies are falling apart. Many of its 80,000 windows are broken. Its power plant is crippled. Its elevators shudder. Its roofs leak.
The huge collection of apartment towers, which sits on more than 300 acres between Interstate 95 and the Hutchinson River Parkway, suffered perhaps its worst blow last July when six of its eight parking garages were deemed unsafe and were closed. The closings set off a parking emergency as nearly 7,000 people were left with nowhere to put their cars. To accommodate them, Co-op City's board of directors agreed to turn their largest park into a parking lot.
Officials of the Riverbay Corporation, Co-op City's residents association, said that Assemblyman Stephen B. Kaufman, who represents their district, and Adolfo Carrión Jr., the Bronx borough president, were instrumental in working with the state in a time of financial hardship.
''This is a very, very, very remarkable day for me,'' said Al Shapiro, a plumber who is the corporation's president. ''I am grateful to these officials for their help.''
Mr. Kaufman noted that the state had also agreed to reduce by nearly a third the money it claimed Co-op City's residents owed in arrears. Whereas the state once claimed that residents owed some $154 million, it will now accept $57 million, which is repayable starting in 2014, he said.
Tracy Oats, a spokeswoman for the Housing Finance Agency, refused to comment on the agreement, saying the agency's board had yet to formally approve it.
The state loan would allow Co-op City not only to rebuild its garages and fix its crumbling balconies, which have forced residents to set up wooden fences in front of every building, lest chunks of concrete fall on someone's head. It would also allow them to buy new boilers and turbines to generate their own electricity.
Mr. Kaufman said it was possible that the equipment might someday allow Co-op City to sell surplus power to the surrounding neighborhood.
