THERE'S a synagogue directly across the street from Pierre Schoenheimer's apartment building on the Upper East Side of Manhattan. Come to think of it, there's a synagogue directly behind it as well. But for the last 20 years or so, Mr. Schoenheimer, an investment banker, has confined his worship to the Jewish Center of the Hamptons, near his weekend home in East Hampton. ''I like sitting in the sanctuary and looking out on nature,'' he said. ''It seems more spiritual, closer to nature and closer to God.''
For many second-home owners, weekends generally center on earthly pursuits like golf, tennis, skiing, boating or swimming (not to mention a nap or two). But for a chosen few, the weekend is time for playing and praying, whether it means finding a shul by the beach or hitting morning Mass before hitting the slopes. Indeed, at some vacation-spot houses of worship, second-home owners are as much as a third of the congregation. ''The church in the country is smaller and more intimate,'' said Alan McFarland, a Manhattan investment banker whose spiritual home in the country is St. John's Episcopal Church in Southampton. ''It makes it easier to be more connected.''
Many people think ''going away on the weekend means a time to veg out,'' said Marilise Flusser, a Manhattan fashion consultant who practices Nichiren Buddhism, including on her weekends out of town. But ''if a practice works for you during the week, why give up it up when you're relaxing?'' she asked. ''It may relax you even more, and make life bright and shining and vigorous.''
Indeed, spiritual leaders say that marking the Sabbath in inspiring surroundings can add depth to religious experience. In Squaw Valley, Calif., at the Squaw Valley Chapel, a United Church of Christ congregation at the bottom of the slopes, congregants show up in hiking clothes during the summer months, and the pastor, the Rev. Stephen Hamilton, leads groups up the mountain to see the wildflowers after services. ''We embrace the sacred of the environment,'' he said.
The Chapel at Beaver Creek, in Beaver Creek, Colo., gives new meaning to the term ski-in, ski-out: it's just a few yards from the Centennial lift. ''It isn't uncommon for people to ski here, leave their equipment outside and come in for the service in their ski boots,'' said the Lutheran pastor, Carl Walker. ''Services last an hour and then people just go back up the mountain.''
A major appeal of worshiping in the country, say many weekenders, is the informality of the proceedings; forget that imperative about wearing your Sunday best. ''People are coming off the mountain in their ski garb, which makes it more relaxed,' said Julie FitzPatrick of Greenwich, Conn., who during the winter is a regular at the Roman Catholic Church of the Annunciation in Ludlow, Vt., near her ski house at Okemo. ''At our church in Greenwich, the flowers and music are outstanding,'' added Ms. FitzPatrick, a private-school administrative assistant. ''It's not as perfect at Annunciation -- and that's not a bad thing.''
Some people take the informality even further, setting up their own ad hoc weekend congregations. That's what Len Sharzer, a doctor turned rabbi, did with a group of friends in his second-home town of Great Barrington, Mass. Now, their so-called traditional egalitarian minyan, a group of at least 10 adults, meets each Saturday morning at the home of a local journalist. And though the Southern Berkshires town has its share of secular temptations, from summer concerts to skiing in the winter, ''we pretty much always have the 10 people we need,'' Rabbi Sharzer said. ''And afterward, there's a potluck lunch.''
F OR weekenders new to town, a place of worship can be a place to make connections, spiritual and otherwise. House hunters in the Hamptons will often ask whether there's a church or a synagogue nearby and what kind of events are offered, said Diane Saatchi, president of Dayton-Halstead Real Estate in East Hampton. Gloria Hassman, a clothing-sales representative whose first home is in suburban Pennsylvania and who vacations in Vail, Colo., started attending Lutheran services at the Vail Interfaith Chapel, which is shared by five Christian denominations and a Jewish congregation, B'Nai Vail. ''The pastor asks visitors to identify themselves and to tell where they're from,'' she said. ''We've met other part-time residents, which is a real plus.'' Now, she has a whole set of companions for skiing, snowshoeing and après-ski aquavit parties.
Bill Grant, chairman of a Manhattan venture capital firm, builds his weekend tennis and golf games around going to Mass. ''I think it's a darn good discipline,'' said Mr. Grant, a congregant at St. John the Evangelist in Manhattan and Most Holy Trinity in East Hampton. ''It forces you to sit down and take a look at yourself.''
Faith often has its rewards. ''Father Desmond at Holy Trinity is well known for giving a blessedly direct sermon and message in 10 minutes,'' Mr. Grant noted.
With almost 80 percent of Americans seeing religion as ''very important'' in their lives, according to a Gallup poll, perhaps it isn't surprising that weekenders are taking time out to pray. Indeed, Peter Gardella, a professor of world religions at Manhattanville College in Purchase, N.Y., cited a long history of people worshiping on vacation, including in medieval Europe (not all pilgrims were grim penitents) and Asia, where both the Chinese and Japanese for millennia have traveled to sacred sites in the countryside. ''People may actually feel more like practicing religion when they're away from work, or even as a vacation from work,'' he said. ''Healthy religion will often combine with recreation.''
Of course, just because weekenders belong to a country congregation doesn't mean they warm the benches on a regular basis. Consider Marjorie Liebowitz, who with her husband, Sidney, a semiretired lawyer, spends part of the week in Manhattan, part of it in Stanfordville, N.Y. Not long after buying their upstate home they joined Congregation Beth David in nearby Amenia. ''It's an easy temple to belong to,'' Mrs. Liebowitz said. ''It's very low key and simple.''
In fact, their three appearances a year at Beth David are a huge improvement on their attendance record at the Lake Placid Synagogue in Lake Placid, N.Y., near their summer home in that Adirondacks resort.
''We never attend those services,'' Mr. Liebowitz said. ''But I wouldn't mind being buried there.''
For some, however, location is inconsequential. Cathy McCarthy, who spends weekends on the eastern end of Long Island with her family, sees little difference between her country Catholic church and the one down the street from her Manhattan apartment.
''It's the same package,'' she said, with one exception. ''The choir in the city sounds better. The choir in the country -- well, I don't want to say anything un-Christian -- they try harder.''
HAVENS
