Federal Medicare officials are close to deciding whether to refuse for the first time to pay for unapproved uses of expensive cancer drugs, a decision they said could represent the first step in a broad overhaul of the program's drug reimbursement policies.
Only four drugs, for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma or colorectal cancer, are part of the initial Medicare review, but officials said the decision on those drugs could set a precedent for payment decisions on other costly medications as the government prepares to add a far-reaching prescription drug benefit to the Medicare program.
Federal law allows doctors to prescribe drugs for any purpose once they have been cleared for sale by the Food and Drug Administration, and doctors routinely use many cancer drugs for conditions beyond those approved by the F.D.A. or recognized by medical texts.
Medicare officials, concerned about both the cost of these off-label treatments and, in some cases, their medical effectiveness, say they believe that reimbursement limits would discourage such use. To live within its budget, Medicare must cut payments for one kind of treatment when the cost of another rises, so the program finds itself effectively rationing care with its payment policies.
If Medicare were to stop paying for unapproved treatments, the cost savings could run into the billions. But elderly cancer patients now reimbursed for unapproved treatments would have to pay for the drugs out of their own pockets, or doctors would have to alter treatment plans.
A policy change could also hurt sales of many cancer drugs, or pressure the drug makers to make them available at lower prices. Patients could appeal decisions to withhold payment, but the process is so arduous that appeals are rarely pursued. ''I think this could potentially be a seismic shift, and I would say it would be a significant departure from how we've approached this in the past,'' said Dr. Sean Tunis, chief medical officer at the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services.
Medicare officials were scheduled to announce a decision on the payment policy today but have postponed the announcement. ''Given that this is a decision that has ramifications for many other drugs over a long period of time, we want to make sure we have consulted everyone needed,'' Dr. Tunis said.
Cancer doctors and patient groups expressed concern at the prospect of the government's using payment decisions to limit access to drugs that, while experimental, often represent a patient's only hope for treatment.
''As long as there's any indication that a drug is useful for a given disease, then the patients with that disease should have access to the drug,'' said Dr. Margaret Tempero, president of the American Society of Clinical Oncology, a leading group of cancer doctors.
Advocates for cancer patients said that they were gearing up for a fight. ''This sounds like a very disturbing precedent for people with cancer, especially for those who need expensive drugs,'' said Amy Langer, executive director of the National Alliance of Breast Cancer Organizations.
Currently, Medicare pays only for drugs that are administered in hospitals or doctors' offices, usually medicines that must be given intravenously. But beginning in 2006, the program will pay for all drugs under legislation signed by President Bush last year, and if a ban on payments for unapproved drug use were extended widely, the implications would be profound.
Critics of the drug industry say that manufacturers routinely promote drugs for unapproved, or off-label, uses, though the F.D.A. discourages such conduct. Many drugs -- including Neurontin, an anti-seizure medicine from Pfizer, and Risperdol, an anti-psychotic medication from Johnson &amp; Johnson -- reap the majority of their sales from off-label uses.
Medicare officials said cost was the program's primary concern in reviewing its reimbursement policy for two of the drugs being studied -- Bexxar from GlaxoSmithKline and Zevalin from Biogen Idec. The drugs are approved as a third-line treatment for non-Hodgkin's lymphoma, a form of cancer that begins in the lymph system, after other treatments have failed. But they are sometimes administered as a first line of attack, a use that is not approved. The medications cost $22,210 for a single dose, which constitutes a full course of treatment, according to spokeswomen for both companies.
Severe side effects prompted Medicare's second thoughts on the other two drugs under review, Camptosar from Pfizer and Eloxatin from Sanofi-Synthélabo, according to Dr. Tunis.
The drugs are widely used to treat patients with colorectal cancer, but are approved only as presurgical treatments. There is no proof that either drug is beneficial after surgery, Dr. Tunis said, and officials are concerned that the drugs may cause more harm than good in such patients.
''We're contemplating some limits on reimbursements so as not to create an artificial incentive to treat those people when they might be harmed by the treatment,'' Dr. Tunis said.
Camptosar costs $122 for a single dose, and Eloxatin costs $8, a Medicare spokeswoman said, and both must be taken repeatedly. Medicare spent $146 million on Camptosar last year, according to the spokeswoman, who did not have information on total outlays for the other drugs under review.
Medicare routinely struggles with decisions about what surgical procedures and medical devices it should pay for. In June, for instance, officials decided that Medicare would pay to implant pager-size defibrillators in only about a third of the patients who might need them. The devices can cost as much as $40,000 each to implant.
But the current review is the first instance of the agency's considering limits on common, albeit unapproved, uses of cancer drugs.
A Pfizer spokeswoman said that ''physicians should be able to express their professional discretion in making individual treatment decisions.'' A Biogen Idec spokeswoman said she could not comment because the matter was still under review.
A Sanofi-Synthélabo spokeswoman said she did not know about the possible policy change, and a GlaxoSmithKline spokeswoman said that Bexxar has been on the market for only six months and is rarely used in unapproved treatments.
