The number of countries reporting avian influenza in their bird flocks has grown at an alarming rate in recent weeks, increasing the risk that sooner or later a mutant strain of bird flu may set off a human pandemic. So far 11 people in Vietnam and Thailand have caught bird flu from exposure to chickens, and 8 of those have died. The good news is that no case spread from one human to another has yet been documented. But if the virus spreads widely among poultry, exposing more people to infection from contact with the birds, the odds will go up that it may mutate to become more transmissible among humans. An immediate infusion of Western expertise and money is needed to head off that potential calamity.
At the moment, the threat to Americans is virtually nonexistent. No cases of avian flu have been found in birds or humans in this country, and the migratory birds that may help spread the disease are not thought to fly here. Even in countries with poultry flocks that have been infected, the danger is deemed too slight to warrant an advisory against travel by Americans, provided the traveler stays away from poultry farms, live-animal markets and any other places apt to be contaminated with the droppings or saliva of infected birds.
The real danger is more distant: the possibility that sooner or later someone will be simultaneously infected with an avian flu virus and a human flu virus, allowing the viruses to swap genes in a way that makes the bird virus highly transmissible among humans, who would have no natural immunity. The odds of that happening will clearly go up as the avian virus spreads more widely among domestic poultry. Avian flu has been reported in birds in at least 10 Asian countries so far, several of which were slow to acknowledge the problem and mount vigorous control efforts. That repeats the foolish mistake made by China when it compromised efforts to control the SARS virus last year by hiding the initial SARS outbreak.
The most prevalent avian virus now circulating in birds, known as H5N1, has characteristics that could make it troublesome if it invaded human populations. Although scientists lack enough data to know how virulent it may be, it has caused serious disease and deaths in a high percentage of those known to be infected, and it is resistant to two of the antiviral drugs commonly used against influenza, leaving only the most costly drug as a potential weapon. Health officials are rushing to prepare a seed virus for vaccine production, but full-scale production could take months.
The most urgent task is to destroy all infected birds to halt further spread of the virus. That must be done carefully, lest the soldiers and peasants who wade into the chicken flocks become infected in the process, worsening the problem they are meant to control. Such precautions are almost certainly not being taken in current culling efforts. Farmers must also be persuaded to kill chickens that could yield a profit if shipped and sold. Three international agencies called on Tuesday for wealthy nations to help compensate farmers in poor nations for slaughtering millions of chickens. The cost, though high, would seem a wise public health investment.
Today's Editorials
