Yukos, Russia's biggest oil company, dug in its heels on Thursday in its long, bitter dispute with a smaller rival, Sibneft. The Yukos board said Thursday that it would recommend that the company's management resume merger talks. The board also said that it had hired Squire, Sanders &amp; Dempsey as a legal adviser and J.P. Morgan, the investment banking unit of J.P. Morgan Chase, as bankers and financial consultants.
Yukos sealed a $13 billion deal to acquire Sibneft last year, but after Yukos' chief executive, Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, was jailed Oct. 25, Sibneft called off the merger in November. The two sides have been fighting over a resolution since.
The announcement Thursday signals that Yukos is preparing to fight back even as it is boxed into a corner by President Vladimir V. Putin's government, as well as by Sibneft. Platon Lebedev, a top executive of Mr. Khodorkovsky's holding company, the Menatep Group, is also in jail, and other core shareholders have left Russia or face international arrest warrants. And Russian tax authorities are seeking billions of dollars in what they say are unpaid taxes.
''It's hard to believe they're going to complete the merger with Sibneft against everyone's wishes,'' said Harvey Sawikin, a money manager with Firebird Management, which invests in Russian equities. ''They're playing the card that they still have some legal rights in Sibneft, in an attempt to improve their bargaining position. The message is, if Yukos gets dragged down, they're going to drag Sibneft down with them.''
After meeting Thursday in London, the Yukos board said the company would publish 2003 results before Feb. 12, and its business plan and investment program for 2004 would be submitted for approval at the Feb. 26 board meeting.
Sarah Carey, a Washington lawyer and nonexecutive Yukos director, told Reuters that the company was in talks with Russian tax authorities over claims that Yukos underpaid its 2000 taxes by roughly $3.3 billion. Ms. Carey's law firm was the one the Yukos board hired.
''There are constructive and collaborative negotiations going on, and we are optimistic there will be a less draconian solution,'' she said.
Mr. Khodorkovsky remains in jail awaiting trial on what many political analysts say are Kremlin-inspired charges, including tax evasion. He raised Mr. Putin's ire by financing opposition parties and pursuing independent oil pipelines to increase Russian oil exports.
