IF the Carolina Panthers' jerseys get sweaty enough during Super Bowl XXXVIII, you may be able to see the black numbers, 51 and 58, on the white T-shirts the players wear underneath their shoulder pads as a tribute to two of their own: 51 for the linebackers coach Sam Mills, who has intestinal cancer, 58 for linebacker Mark Fields, who has Hodgkin's disease.
Mills, 44, an All-Pro linebacker with the Panthers and the Saints, arrived here Wednesday evening after being unplugged, as he said, from chemotherapy in Charlotte, N.C., that afternoon. He will work the sideline Sunday, as he has throughout the season and the playoffs, exhorting his linebackers to ''keep pounding'' the New England Patriots.
Fields, 31, who has completed the chemotherapy treatments that caused him to miss the season, will be a sideline cheerleader Sunday, but he said he was on schedule to return to the Panthers at their training camp in July.
Mills, recognized by the Panthers in 1998 with a bronze statue outside Ericsson Stadium in Charlotte as the first player inducted into the nine-year-old expansion franchise's Hall of Honor, is not sure of his long-term prognosis.
''We're taking it two weeks at a time,'' Mills was saying yesterday, alluding to his chemo treatments. ''Periodically, I get CAT scans done. There is improvement going on right now, and we just hope to continue to improve. As far as long term, we really don't know.''
In a profoundly personal interview session that put the usual Super Bowl hype to shame, Mills and Fields stood together in a ballroom of the Panthers' hotel.
''The shirts they wear,'' Fields was saying, meaning his teammates' T-shirts with 51 and 58, ''it's such an inspiration right now. It's a lot of motivation and it's helping all of us.''
Mills added: ''It didn't just stop with our team. It was throughout the league. Phone calls from people, e-mails, messages of concern. It has just really been great.''
Both agreed that the Panthers' success has been positive therapy for them, just as they have inspired the other coaches and players.
''Sam Mills and Mark Fields lifted us up and brought us together so much,'' safety Mike Minter said Monday. ''If these guys can battle for their lives, then we can go out there and battle for 60 minutes. Every win that we get is going to make them that much happier.''
Mills, at 5 feet 9 inches and 225 pounds, was, by N.F.L. standards, an undersized linebacker who depended on toughness and smarts.
''Me being an undersized guy,'' said linebacker Will Witherspoon, who is 6-1 and 231 pounds, ''Sam Mills has been the perfect coach. He's said, 'This guy,' meaning me, 'may not be the biggest guy, but look at the way he plays.' He's calm, he's sincere. He says: 'Have a mind-set. Know what you want to do.' ''
Fields, listed at 6-2 and 240, received the Hodgkin's diagnosis in August. About a week later, Mills, once a Division III all-American at Montclair State in New Jersey, learned of his cancer.
''You have a player who's a linebacker,'' Fields said, meaning himself, ''and all of a sudden his position coach gets hit. That is like one in a million. Sam has been an inspiration to me because we've been going through this together. He'll call me, I'll call him. We can relate to each other exactly what is going on, so we've been getting ourselves through this.''
In his gray T-shirt, the muscular Mills appeared strong and healthy, but mentally, he acknowledged having struggled occasionally.
''You have to stay positive,'' he said, ''but there are going to be times when you are just feeling bad. You just look in that mirror and say, 'Hey, God, I know you are with me and I'm just going to keep on working.' That is just part of the deal. Life is just not great every day, all day. Nobody wants to have this disease, but somebody does. We just happen to be those guys, and we just have to keep on fighting.''
Whenever Mills could not be at practice or in the meeting rooms, the defensive assistant coach Ken Flajole worked with the linebackers on what Mills wanted done.
''The club basically gave me an option as to how much I wanted to be around,'' Mills said. ''Hey, I'm a football coach. That is what I am. As long as I have the power in me to coach, I'd like to continue to coach. On my chemo weeks, I would miss a couple of days of work, just like I have done basically this week.''
He added: ''You have your good days and your bad days. I'm just glad I'm having days -- whether they are good or bad.''
In his 12 seasons as an N.F.L. linebacker, Mills was a five-time Pro Bowl selection, but he never got to the Super Bowl until now, his sixth season as an assistant coach.
''Probably the most emotional game for me was the Philly game,'' Mills said, referring to the Panthers' 14-3 victory over the Eagles for the National Football Conference championship. ''Eighteen years of trying to get to this weekend and to finally do it and see these young guys go out and make the necessary plays to finally get it done. As a coach, I am finally able to get it done.''
Fields, who was a Pro Bowl selection with the Saints in 2000 before joining the Panthers as a free agent, is looking beyond the Super Bowl.
''You can't imagine how I feel about next year,'' he said, smiling. ''Training camp can't be long enough for me. Guys might get mad at me because, as far as I'm concerned, we can stay in training camp all year long, but that's how I feel about it.''
Sam Mills, meanwhile, just hopes to get to training camp.
Sports of The Times
