New Sondheim, Of a Sort
''Bounce'' may not have moved to Broadway, but that doesn't mean there won't be a new musical by Stephen Sondheim in New York this year -- at least in his opinion.
In a telephone interview on Tuesday, Mr. Sondheim said that his 1974 musical adaptation of ''The Frogs'' by Aristophanes, which begins performances at the Vivian Beaumont Theater at Lincoln Center on June 17, had been so significantly reworked that it should qualify as a new show.
The original ''Frogs'' was mounted in a swimming pool at Yale University and featured Meryl Streep and Christopher Durang in the chorus.
In the current version, ''six or seven'' songs will be added, Mr. Sondheim said, and Burt Shevelove's book has been updated by Nathan Lane, who also stars.
''It's not a revival,'' Mr. Sondheim said. ''The old one was only about 40 minutes long. Nathan has really expanded it, and four-fifths is his now.'' Still, the basic story remains the same: Dionysos (played by Mr. Lane) heads to Hades along with his cynical slave -- who it was recently confirmed will be played by the ''Saturday Night Live'' alumnus Chris Kattan -- to find an extraordinary writer to help save mankind.
''Nathan and I act sort of like an old married couple,'' Mr. Kattan said.
Mr. Sondheim, who turns 74 in March, admits that writing songs is more difficult than it was when he was young. ''It takes more time,'' he said. ''The more you know, the less you know.''
Along with working on ''The Frogs,'' Mr. Sondheim had been editing the recording of ''Bounce,'' his most recent show, which received lukewarm reviews in Chicago and Washington. He said there had been talk about reviving the show again but preferred not to discuss it. Instead he concentrated on the flock of Sondheim musicals heading to New York stages this year.
The Roundabout Theater will produce two revivals, ''Assassins,'' which begins performances on March 26 at Studio 54, and ''Pacific Overtures,'' opening in the fall at a theater to be announced. A revival of ''Sweeney Todd,'' featuring the English musical-theater star Elaine Paige, begins performances at the New York City Opera on March 5.
''Many of these shows weren't originally well received, so it's nice to see them getting a second chance,'' Mr. Sondheim said. He wasn't referring to ''Sweeney Todd,'' which was a hit when it opened on Broadway in 1979 and has been revived all around the world. ''I haven't seen many,'' he said of those productions. ''What's the point? I know how it ends.''
Much of the inspiration for ''Sweeney Todd,'' Mr. Sondheim said, comes from a somewhat unlikely source: ''Hangover Square,'' a suspense film from the 1940's about a murderous composer, which was scored by the legendary Bernard Herrmann. ''Harmonically, it uses a lot of similar chords,'' Mr. Sondheim said.
After seeing the film as a 15-year-old, he wrote a fan letter to Mr. Herrmann. ''I sent it to 20th Century Fox,'' he said, ''so it took him about two months to reply, but it turned out that he lived on my block.''
Tales of Jobs Gone Bad
On Jan. 12 audience members at the Second Stage Theater cheered when Tonya Pinkins described getting canned from ''Jelly's Last Jam.'' They laughed loudly at Ron Orbach's heartbreaking story of being dismissed from ''The Producers'' out of town after an injury. And they whooped it up when Craig Bierko confessed to his boneheaded career move of turning down a part on the pilot of ''Friends'' in favor of one on the now-forgotten sitcom ''Best Friends.'' His explanation: ''I'm no dummy. If there had been a show called 'Super-Mega Friends,' I would have chosen that one.''
''Fired!,'' a collection of first-person sad-sack monologues, most of which are about losing jobs, was such a success in its one-time showing that Second Stage plans to bring it back. ''Fired!'' returns on March 7 and 8, as well as on March 14 and 15. Mr. Orbach will reprise his performance, joining several new monologists, including the comedian Judy Gold, the journalist David Rakoff and the actress Charlayne Woodard, who tells of being fired some years ago from ''Henry IV, Part 1'' at the Public Theater, which involved her bravely (that's the nice way of putting it) telling the theater's producer, ''You are not God, Joe Papp!''
Spring Update
The finishing touches are being applied to the Off Broadway spring schedules. James Sherman, whose last New York production was the hit ''Beau Jest,'' mines fertile and well-trod comic ground in his new play, ''From Door to Door,'' about three generations of Jewish mothers. It starts March 16 at the Westside Arts Theater/Downstairs. Two months later comes ''Fascinating Aida: Absolutely Fascinating,'' a comic cabaret act by the all-female English comedy trio Fascinating Aida, which describes itself as ''Absolutely Fabulous meets Noël Coward, as sung by the Andrews Sisters.'' Performances begin at the 59 E 59 Theater on May 18.
Show of Support
The Actors' Equity Association has received a helping hand from its sister union, the Society of Stage Directors and Choreographers, in its campaign against non-Equity road tours and in particular Big League Theatricals, which has produced more than two dozen national tours, none using Equity members. Yesterday the 1,800-member society announced that it would not work with Big League on any tours unless Big League signs a contract with Actors' Equity. In turn, Equity agreed that its members would not take jobs from directors and choreographers in non-Equity tours.
''It's very sad,'' said Daniel Sher, executive producer of Big League. ''I guess we're going to have to figure out another way to put on shows.''
Barbara Hauptman, the society's executive director, said the group had always had a good relationship with Big League. ''We picked a fight with someone we're not mad at,'' she said. ''But solidarity is important.''
On Stage and Off
