In an effort to reach young people who dropped out of high school or were pushed out because they had fallen behind, the New York City Department of Education published ads yesterday in 27 newspapers inviting them to re-enroll.
''If you are under the age of 21 and do not have a high school diploma, you may have the right to be in school, even if you dropped out or feel you were urged to leave school,'' the ad said. ''If you would like help reconnecting with school, the N.Y.C. Department of Education invites you to take advantage of a program it is running at least through February 6, 2004.''
The ad ran in a variety of languages, in such papers as Hoy, El Diario, Korea Times, Aramica, The Daily News, The Amsterdam News, The Riverdale Press, Haiti Observateur, and Newsday's Queens edition.
Last summer, when The New York Times reported that thousands of students who were not on track to graduate in four years were being pushed out of the city's high schools, both the chancellor and the mayor's office said it was a problem that they would fix.
In December, the department said it had made progress in reducing both the number of dropouts and the number of students discharged.
Michelle McManus, a spokeswoman for the department, said yesterday that after Chancellor Joel I. Klein committed himself to ensuring that no students would be discharged improperly, the department took steps to make sure the practice ceased, and has now turned to advertising to ''reach out to children who may have been discharged'' to let them know of their right to return to school. Earlier this month, the department settled a federal class-action lawsuit charging that it had illegally excluded students from Franklin K. Lane High School. The school, which is in Brooklyn, had discharged half its student population over a three-year period.
Under the settlement, which did not include any admission of liability, the department agreed to send the discharged students a letter informing them of their rights, and to take back students discharged from the school since Jan. 1, 2000, whether they chose to attend Lane or another school. In addition, the department agreed to start a Young Adult Success Center, at a neighborhood social service center, offering at least 12 hours a week of academic and other support services for Lane students, current and past.
In settlement talks, Advocates for Children, the group that brought the Lane suit, had asked the department to send letters to discharged students citywide, but the department refused.
''The ads are a good first step,'' said Jill Chaifetz, the group's executive director, adding that she still hoped the department would send letters to all the discharged students, many of whom do not read newspapers.
