Returning to the road with an emboldened attack on Washington politicians, including his opponents in the Democratic presidential contest, Howard Dean on Thursday rebuffed the notion that he must win in one of the states voting on Tuesday, saying he is concentrating instead on collecting delegates, perhaps with an eye toward a convention challenge.
At the same time, Dr. Dean and his new campaign chief, Roy Neel, tried to reassure 100 of the campaign's largest donors, in a 40-minute conference call, that they planned to quickly reduce heavy spending by cutting staff members, among other things.
In his first day on the job at Dr. Dean's headquarters in Burlington, Vt., Mr. Neel, a former lobbyist and White House aide, began to grapple with the campaign's bank account. He said the campaign had at least $3 million, with some bills to pay but money still rolling in through the Internet.
After months of running the most expansive television advertising campaign in the Democratic field, Dr. Dean, still reeling from defeats in Iowa and New Hampshire, now has no commercials running and no plans to start before the weekend.
''We're reassessing everything,'' Mr. Neel said in a telephone interview. ''I know this is right around the corner, but we're not making any decisions today that we can't pull back from.''
He added, ''Everything's on the table. There are no sacred cows in this campaign.''
After a tumultuous day of retooling on Wednesday that ended with the departure of Dr. Dean's campaign manager, Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean came here, to a state where 128 delegates are at stake in its Feb. 7 caucus and where the use of Internet voting could be a boon for his tech-savvy campaign. At Michigan State University, he defined the nomination battle as a choice between ''somebody who's consistently and firmly stood for change even before it got to be politically popular'' and ''a Washington insider who shifts back and forth with every poll.''
He harked back to the speech at a meeting of the Democratic National Committee last February that began his campaign's surge, when he asked why so many Democrats had voted with President Bush on the war in Iraq, the No Child Left Behind education law and the tax cuts.
''I'm still waiting for those answers,'' Dr. Dean said. ''The American people deserve those answers, and the Democratic Party deserves those answers.
He added, ''What this campaign is about is who has the courage to ask those questions when they're not popular to be asked, not now that they are popular, and who has the judgment to find solutions, and the toughness to fight for real change.''
Dr. Dean's Michigan trip is a sign of his new strategy, to concentrate on states with large numbers of delegates to mount a late challenge, rather than to try to regain momentum with quick victories. Last week he moved 55 Iowa organizers here, bringing his staff in the state to 70.
Dr. Dean's second-place showing in New Hampshire left him with 9 delegates to Senator John Kerry's 13, but he leads the delegate race because of pledges from elected officials and others known as superdelegates.
On Thursday in the conference call, Dr. Dean and Mr. Neel explained their strategy. Among other things, Mr. Neel addressed the campaign's spending, explaining that a reduction in staff members would reduce operating costs, according to people who participated in the call.
Though the mood was described as mostly positive, concerns were expressed about the campaign's spending record. ''Some are frustrated by it,'' said Don Beyer, who participated in the call and is Dr. Dean's campaign treasurer.
Though the campaign continues to raise money over the Internet, several members of Dr. Dean's financial team say that he will have to start winning primaries in order to draw larger donors.
Fund-raising events are tentatively scheduled in Florida and New Jersey in coming days, but Mr. Beyer said the spending issue could affect high-dollar solicitation in the short term. ''Some of that is inevitable,'' he said. ''We'll see some givers saying 'you went through $45 million, how do I know you will spend my $2,000 wisely?' ''
Steven Grossman, Dean's national campaign chairman, who also participated in the call, said the staffing changes this week would go a long way toward shoring up belief in the campaign among fund-raisers. ''They believe the change was important and significant and it gave them confidence,'' Mr. Grossman said.
The campaign's strategy was to raise millions in the fourth quarter, then use the money in the early months of 2004 to secure the nomination with momentum from victories in Iowa and New Hampshire, campaign officials said.
There is no way to know precisely how much the Dean campaign raised and spent in January because reports detailing its activity will not be released until late next month. However, campaign officials said Dr. Dean raised at least $40 million last year and that he entered the new year with roughly $10 million on hand. The campaign has raised roughly $5 million more this month.
But the campaign spent heavily too, and this week had just a few million on hand, officials said.
Roughly $3.4 million was spent on television advertising in January, according to numbers from a rival campaign that were confirmed by the Campaign Media Analysis Group, which tracks campaign advertising. Millions more went toward a blizzard of direct mail, radio advertising, and armies of workers on the ground in Iowa and New Hampshire, to say nothing of keeping Dr. Dean and his staff members traveling.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
