The undying appeal of ancient Egyptian art for modern audiences may be a mystery to some of us. But there's no mystery at all as to why the Metropolitan Museum has engineered a minor hullabaloo around the opening of a revamped section of its Egyptian collection.
The collection, spread out over 32 galleries, is one of the museum's most popular draws. Generations of New Yorkers claim fond childhood memories of being creeped-out by its mummies and walk-in tomb; school groups still make a beeline for it. So the galleries are a tradition, and updates to tradition are always an excuse for a fuss. Also, the redesigned section, though small, is conspicuous: it's the introductory area just off the Great Hall, where the museum's looping cavalcade of Egyptian art history begins and ends.
As to specific changes, made under the supervision of the architect Kevin Roche and Jeffrey L. Daly, the Met's chief designer, a row of windows on the building's Fifth Avenue side have been uncovered, letting natural light into an area memorable for its granitic gloom. And in a gesture of contemporary archaeological disclosure, the ceiling beams of Richard Morris Hunt's 1902 building have been exposed, an attractive idea.
The placement of objects by period is pretty much as it was. Pre-dynastic and early dynastic material is on the right, where the U-shaped chronological route of the galleries begins. On the left, where it ends, are items from the Roman and early Christian era, when Egypt's pharaonic glory was long past.
The biggest adjustments are in the center of the introductory area. A cutaway wall of pale limestone has been erected in front of the entrance to the Old Kingdom tomb of Perneb (circa 2380-2323), a Met fixture. The wall is meant to give a sense of the tomb's original placement smack up against an adjoining tomb in the royal cemetery at Saqqara, near Memphis. It also creates a passageway that allows access to the tomb from the side, as its builders intended.
In addition, the slightly earlier tomb of Raemkai (circa 2450 B.C.), formerly displayed flattened out as a series of panels, has been reassembled three-dimensionally and placed behind the Perneb tomb. The fine low-relief carvings on the interior walls of both have been sealed for decades behind thick glass, tinted subaqueous green in the Perneb tomb, making it feel like a fish tank. But as a limited-time-only bonus of the reinstallation, for the next six weeks visitors will be permitted, one small group at a time, to enter the tombs and examine the reliefs before new glass is put in place.
For anyone craving a sense of up-close Egyptian realness, this is the chance to get it. And much as it may sound like a press-office gimmick, the no-glass experience is pretty cool. Just as painting has more immediacy when seen with nothing between you and it, so do the tomb carvings.
Of the two funerary chapels, Perneb's is the larger, and its reliefs correspondingly grander. They include a traditional incised gridlike checklist of offerings, from fabrics and incense to onions and beer, on standing order for eternity. And there is a symbolic portrait of the deceased himself -- a courtier who served as ''overseer of the king's ornaments'' -- seated at a table with 20 thin loaves of bread propped upright in front of him, like file folders in a rack.
This account-book vision of perpetual bounty is augmented by reliefs on the other walls, where priests pour libations and butchers slaughter cattle, muttering among themselves, in hieroglyphics, as they work. Although all these scenes were once painted in bright, even garish colors, for the most part only brick-red skin tones remain; a tiny patch of indigo blue and chicory green high up on the wall gives a hint of what's been lost.
Raemkai's chapel is a more modest affair, and its history less certain. Built for a man named Neferiretnes, it was for some reason appropriated by, or for, Raemkai, a priest, scribe and the ''bodily son of a king,'' at which point some old inscriptions were haphazardly erased and new ones added. The most notable change, though, was pictorial. Two existing relief portraits of the portly Neferiretnes were subtly recut to create a buff, slenderized figure for the new proprietor.
Historical details, like this sculptural exercise in cosmetic surgery, are what make Egyptian art entertaining, and maybe it is entertainment value that explains its modern appeal. For all their extraterrestrial exoticism -- someone I know thinks of them as the inhabitants of Superman's Krypton -- the Egyptians were a lot like us.
They could be vain and kooky and gross; they were into makeup, astrology and music with a beat. Because they demonstrably shared our appetites, we're inclined to go easy on them, treat them like family. They were autocratic elitists? Well, things were just like that then. They were obsessed with death? The truth is we are, too, but if we said so we'd be pegged as weirdos. So we let them do our obsessing for us as we watch from a safe distance in spooked fascination.
In reality they didn't think all that relentlessly about dying. They had lives. It's just that their funerary art is what lasted, so it is what speaks for them now. And that art, once you look at it, is notably life-affirming, as is apparent everywhere in the reinstalled display, organized by Dorothea Arnold, curator in charge of the department of Egyptian art; Marsha Hill, curator; and Diana Craig Patch, assistant curator.
The pre- and early-dynastic items include delicate ivory combs with giraffe- and hippo-shaped handles, and prettily worked stone palettes for mixing cosmetics. From Roman Egypt 3,000 years later comes a bust-length mask of a young woman with crimped hair, feathered eyebrows and kohl-lined eyes. The mask was made to cover the head of a mummy, but with its welcoming expression it might be a portrait of a hostess greeting swell friends at a fancy-dress fete.
No less vivacious are the astonishing little white-skinned fertility goddesses, one very early (with tattoos), one very late (with a bucket-size crown), that flank the entrance to the galleries. And then there are the figures spilling across the walls of Raemkai's tomb: ducks, rabbits and ibexes; ladies hoisting baskets, farmers harvesting grain; men of leisure taking cruises down the Nile and into the Beyond.
''Sailing in the beautiful west'' is how one such boat trip is labeled in hieroglyphics, the west being the realm of the dead. Other inscriptions report snatches of on-deck conversation: ''Make for starboard!'' says one; ''land well!'' says another. And if there is one totally unmysterious fact about Egyptian art it is that after thousands of years of traveling, it has indeed landed well.
The reopened Old Kingdom Tombs of Perneb and Raemkai at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, Fifth Avenue at 82nd Street, (212) 535-7710, will be open for special viewing through March 14. The two tombs will then be closed for installation of glass panels and will reopen permanently on May 4.
ART REVIEW
