In his ''Lives,'' Vasari tells the story that during the sack of Rome in 1527, Girolamo Francesco Maria Mazzola, the painter known as Parmigianino, being preoccupied as usual with his work, didn't notice the turmoil until the Germans were already in his house. Finding him painting, they were then so stunned by his genius that instead of pillaging and murdering, they requested a few drawings.
Those were sophisticated sackers. The Parmigianino show now at the Frick, mostly drawings, gives you a hint of what they saw. The short-lived Parmigianino (1503-1540), a prodigy of mercurial talent, was as good as almost anyone, ever, as a draftsman. His art was erudite, the epitome of glossy, luxuriant Mannerist finesse, both tender and fetishistic. Vasari partly got it right by calling him ''bountifully endowed by Heaven'' with ''nobility, sweetness and grace.''
That's what you find in an early work like ''Female Martyr,'' one of a few paintings at the Frick. Delicate lines trace rhythmic patterns; milky light laps over liquid drapery. Pure charm. A youthful drawing of the ''Adoration of the Shepherds,'' crowded with doughy putti, is, similarly, all sweetness and light.
In the show it is paired with the painting for which it was a preparatory sketch, stiffer but jewel-like, not as fluent as his later work, with hatched lines mimicking the nervous effect of rapid drawing. Typical of Parmigianino that even in a later sketch of a sleeping man the implicit tension remains curiously high. Light flickers busily. Exaggerated musculature sends the obvious erotic message.
Parmigianino succumbed, according to Vasari, to earthly temptations and ungodly beliefs: ''Would to God that he had always pursued the studies of painting, and had not sought to pry into the secrets of congealing mercury in order to become richer than Nature and Heaven had made him, for then he would have been without an equal and truly unique in the art of painting, whereas, by searching for that which he could never find, he wasted his time, wronged his art and did harm to his own life and fame.''
We're meant to extract lessons from this: that a great artist can produce, like magic, priceless pictures by scratching lead and ink into paper or rubbing colored dirt on canvas but that mercury won't turn into gold. About the sacking of Rome, we're taught that the pen is mightier than the sword but also that genius is close to godliness and that the art of genius transcends life and death. This was how Parmigianino sold himself, as a genius, the reincarnation of Raphael. His incessant drawing was proof of his fevered brilliance.
Vasari implies another point, as well: that Parmigianino, becoming increasingly idiosyncratic as a painter, was driven over the brink. Genius is also close to madness. The sack of Rome was divine retribution for society's moral decline; Parmigianino's downfall was a result of his own artistic excess. Or so Vasari suggests.
But no one knows whether Parmigianino became an alchemist. In his last years he worked on a commission to paint in the church of Santa Maria della Steccata in his native Parma; he was so slow on the project that the authorities jailed him for breach of contract. His late work is nevertheless gorgeous, not enfeebled or diminished. There is no sign of madness, only evidence of an eccentric artist crippled perhaps by his perfectionism, immersed in arcane literary themes that may account for the obscurity and elitist mystery of his art. To the end he poured himself into drawings, leaving behind 1,000 of them, as if whatever came into his mind went directly, compulsively onto paper.
For the Steccata he drew Moses, testing various elastic poses. He also drew a self-portrait with balletic studies for decorations in the church: the artist, ethereal and passive, beside the evidence of his restless mind, a rather spectacular conceit.
The Frick show, by way of the National Gallery of Canada, is not spectacular, exactly, although beautiful art is beautiful art and always a privilege to see. New Yorkers may be spoiled. The Met had a Correggio and Parmigianino show just recently. This one, which includes his groundbreaking prints, is medium-sized, serious and a little dry. But it picks up momentum.
Parmigianino was orphaned at 2 and raised by uncles, journeymen artists, men ''of no great fame,'' as Vasari put it, but ''of good judgment in matters of art.'' Their nephew soaked up what he could from them. Then Correggio settled in Parma. Parmigianino worked beside him painting the new basilica of San Giovanni Evangelista. Correggio was an innovative illusionist and sensuous artist; it has been said that Parmigianino's envy and admiration of Correggio came to dominate his fragile emotional life.
But that underestimates his mercenary talent. With the election of Clement VII, Parmigianino moved to Rome, bearing gifts as calling cards. He was 20. He gave the pope a self-portrait in a convex mirror, a famous tour de force, and also, probably, ''Circumcision,'' a crowded little showpiece, which at the Frick we see with a drawing for it. Clement didn't commission much from Parmigianino, however. He was still an outsider in Rome. Raphael's pupils got the good jobs.
Then after the sack, Parmigianino headed via Bologna back home. Representative of the accomplished drawings from these years are variations for a composition of the sea nymph Philyra with her lover Saturn, alongside Parmigianino's painting of that same subject. Saturn is in the guise of a horse. It's a rare and peculiar theme. We see Parmigianino trying different arrangements for the figures in the drawings: they nuzzle and caress. In one ecstatic drawing Saturn twists as if orgasmically around Philyra, a pillar of delicate calm in billowing drapery and balancing lightly on one foot.
The painted version of this is also a curiosity. It turned up at auction not long ago, attributed to Bronzino, having been in the collection of the British painter Joshua Reynolds, who may have even repainted it. Reynolds the classicist, Parmigianino the anti-classicist, with not much in common except for extreme polish and high culture. Reynolds wasn't the only artist to admire Parmigianino. El Greco, notably, was another, a similarly febrile eccentric.
Parmigianino was among the first practicing Renaissance painters to make his own prints. In Rome, he made etchings. He gave designs to Jacopo Caraglio to engrave. In Bologna, Antonio da Trento turned Parmigianino's drawings into chiaroscuro woodcuts. The Frick gives a room to prints. Parmigianino's ''Resurrection of Christ,'' a corkscrew composition of effeminate grace and arch lighting, like all the best prints, has the same virtuosity and urgency as the drawings, with their evolving ideal of physical beauty.
This notion of bodily grace becomes increasingly brittle, aristocratic and abstract. By the end Parmigianino invents his own universe of autonomous form, a hothouse art of long-necked women and frigid perfection. His drawings record how his life turned inward and his career incubated ideas from its own past.
He is another case of what if. Forfeiting bail, he fled Parma north for Casalmaggiore, where he painted a few works, as skillfully as ever. But, writes David Franklin, the show's curator, in the catalog, jail ''seems to have led directly to his death.'' He died at 37, ''in exile and disgrace.''
''A Beautiful and Gracious Manner: The Art of Parmigianino,'' is at the Frick Collection, 1 East 70th Street, Manhattan, (212) 288-0700, through April 18. Denise Allen, an associate curator at the Frick, installed the exhibition.
ART REVIEW
