He calls it the ''Bringing It Home'' tour, and makes sure his audiences know what he means from the start, the Carolina drawl just a bit more pronounced.
''What an honor and privilege to be here with you, to be back in the state of my birth not far from where I was born,'' Senator John Edwards told the audience at a candidates' forum at a black church here Thursday. ''I feel very much at home here, still have lots of family here.''
And Mr. Edwards, now a senator from North Carolina, did not go much deeper than that in explaining at a news conference afterward how he plans to win this state's primary on Tuesday.
''I come from them and I know what their lives are like,'' he said when asked why voters would choose him over his remaining rivals.
After surging to a surprise second-place finish in Iowa with his optimistic message, and being edged out for third place in New Hampshire, Mr. Edwards now has to show he is a genuine national contender. He cannot do it, his aides say, without winning the first Southern primary, in South Carolina, where he has a modest lead in the polls.
''This is a place where I believe I can and should win,'' he said Thursday evening in a debate here.
If he does not win, ''he's gone,'' said State Senator Robert Ford, an important supporter and organizer.
Underscoring his inability to take the state for granted, Mr. Edwards suffered a setback Thursday when Representative James E. Clyburn, perhaps the most influential black leader in the state, endorsed Senator John Kerry. Mr. Clyburn backed Mr. Kerry, even though his cousin, Bill Clyburn, a state legislator, and Ike Williams, James Clyburn's chief of staff and a veteran political operative, have endorsed Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Edwards's strategists are watching how aggressively Gen. Wesley K. Clark campaigns here, but see Mr. Kerry as the man to beat. They say they believe Mr. Edwards's roots and, more important, Mr. Kerry's as a Northeasterner, will turn voters their way.
''I'm not for this bandwagon thing,'' Mr. Williams told reporters this week in response to Mr. Kerry's lining up backers here. ''There was a bandwagon behind Dukakis, and we went through a train wreck.''
Still, Mr. Edwards now finds himself having to campaign fiercely to lock up a state he began courting 18 months ago. He will tour the state by bus on Friday, ending at a rock concert by the local favorites Hootie and the Blowfish. He will make side trips to Oklahoma and New Mexico over the weekend and then plans to campaign in South Carolina through Tuesday. His campaign is even contemplating skipping a debate tentatively being organized in Missouri for Monday in favor of a campaign event in Seneca, where he was born.
Mr. Edwards's campaign advisers say that since his second-place showing in the Iowa caucuses on Jan. 19, he has raised $1 million, including $700,000 from new contributors on the Internet. That will allow him to compete ''well beyond'' Tuesday, said Jennifer Palmieri, his press secretary.
Ms. Palmieri declined to say how much money the campaign had on hand, but said it was enough to hire staffs in several states and to keep broadcasting advertisements. Mr. Edwards is advertising here and in Oklahoma, Missouri and New Mexico, and plans to broadcast soon in Tennessee and Virginia, she said.
In South Carolina, Mr. Edwards has been courting African-American voters, who are expected to make up 40 percent or more of the turnout. His first event Wednesday after the New Hampshire primary was at a predominantly black college in Orangeburg, considered the black capital of the state, and on Thursday he was the only upper tier candidate to attend a candidates' forum at the Allen Temple A.M.E. Church here.
His promises to increase affordable housing and fight poverty brought him rousing cheers. Afterward, in response to a question about slavery, he said: ''I'm not for reparations. What I'm for is dealing with the root causes of the disparity.''
Some people who heard him speak seemed receptive to the local-boy pitches.
''I'm taking a big gaze at Edwards,'' Lela B. McKnight, a school administrator here, said. ''A lot of it has to do with him being a South Carolina boy, but also what he is saying and stands for. He wants education for all and equality for all and bringing people together. But I'm listening to the others, too.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
