The day a major employer in this economically beleaguered city began handing out pink slips, Senator Charles E. Schumer traveled around reassuring residents that he was working hard to turn around the region's economy.
A day later, it was Hillary Rodham Clinton's turn. Though bad weather grounded her flight to Syracuse, Senator Clinton, in telephone calls from her home in Chappaqua, made her presence felt, offering her support.
Coincidence? Perhaps. But the back-to-back efforts by these two prominent New York politicians this month also reflect what has become one of the most significant developments in state politics: the continuing battle for votes in the upstate region.
Hardly a week goes by without a major statewide figure from either party touring the villages, towns and cities scattered in between the vast stretches of farmland and mountains that dominate the landscape upstate.
The region is desperately in need of help, with manufacturing jobs in steep decline, unemployment of more than 5 percent and, in many places, decreases in population as young people move to find jobs that pay well.
In part because of those economic issues, upstate is no longer a bastion of conservatism that Republicans could take for granted and Democrats could dismiss as enemy terrain. The region is in play as it has never been before, politicians and strategists in both parties say, at a time when it still accounts for a large bloc of votes: about 40 percent of the statewide electorate in 2002, compared with about 33 percent in New York City and 27 percent in New York City's suburbs (Westchester, Rockland, Nassau and Suffolk Counties).
''There's a reason that politicians go upstate all the time: That is where the votes are,'' said Lee M. Miringoff, the director of the Marist College Institute for Public Opinion. ''Neither party can afford to take the region for granted anymore. It's up for grabs.''
The first signs that the battleground was shifting in New York came in 1998, when Mr. Schumer, a Democrat, defied conventional wisdom and devoted a great deal of attention to upstate in a successful effort to topple Senator Alfonse M. D'Amato, a Republican. Though Mr. D'Amato took upstate 53 percent to 45 percent, Mr. Schumer managed to win several counties that have considerable sway in statewide elections, most notably Monroe, which includes Rochester, and Erie, which includes Buffalo.
Then, in 2000, there was more evidence of a breakdown in the usual geopolitical patterns that had long governed statewide campaigns. Mrs. Clinton soundly defeated Rick A. Lazio, a Republican congressman from Long Island, in part by drawing big support from upstate voters. Mrs. Clinton was only three points behind Mr. Lazio upstate, validating her strategy of making constant trips to the region during the campaign.
''The single biggest change in New York politics in the last six years has been the fact that upstate New York has shifted from a Republican stronghold to an up-for-grabs battleground,'' said Howard Wolfson, one of Mrs. Clinton's advisers.
Even Republicans concede that the area requires some hard work on their part. ''Upstate has taken on a completely new role in New York politics,'' said one senior Republican strategist. ''It really has become a major swing region.''
Political analysts say one related consequence is that Republicans have been forced to look to New York City, a Democratic bastion, as a source of new votes to offset the ground they have lost upstate.
A prime example has been the strategy of Gov. George E. Pataki, a Republican, who has shrewdly courted Democratic constituencies in the city, chiefly Hispanic voters and labor unions. In his three elections for governor, the share of the New York City votes that he won grew from 28 percent to 33 percent to 39 percent, the last being the best number a Republican candidate for governor has posted in the city in five decades.
It is a matter of debate which politician is delivering the most for the upstate region. But if polls are any measure, Mr. Schumer is doing the best job of wooing voters there. A Marist poll showed that 55 percent of upstate voters surveyed gave Mr. Schumer a favorable rating, compared with 49 percent for Mr. Pataki and 46 percent for Mrs. Clinton.
Mr. Schumer's standing upstate is worth noting for another reason. In the 1998 Senate race, when Mr. Schumer was a congressman from Brooklyn, Mr. D'Amato ran advertisements against him that sought to play to the enmity upstate voters felt toward the city. ''Liberal Brooklyn Congressman Chuck Schumer doesn't think upstate New York matters,'' the narrator in one ad said. ''On Election Day, send Chuck Schumer a message: There's more to New York State than just Brooklyn.''
In an interview, Mr. Schumer joked that he has clearly proved Mr. D'Amato wrong since taking office and suggested that his travels upstate had played a big role in his victory. ''Upstate is no longer in the pocket of either party and has become a new battleground,'' he said. ''That's good for upstate because politicians from both parties are paying attention to it.''
To get an idea of how coveted the upstate vote has become, it is worth considering the travel schedule and policies of Mr. Pataki, Mr. Schumer and Mrs. Clinton.
By the count of Mr. Pataki's office, for example, he visited 75 upstate communities in 2003, the year after his election to a third term. The pace required him to fly around the state at least once a week, his advisers said. That year, Mr. Pataki's press office issued 165 releases on issues that are popular among upstate voters: creating jobs in the region and enticing companies to move here.
The governor has also taken credit for creating a kind of Silicon Valley upstate, something he calls the Empire State High-Tech Corridor. This corridor, his aides say, boasts four hubs for technological innovation: the Center of Excellence in Bioinformatics in Buffalo, the Center of Excellence in Photonics and Optoelectronics in Rochester, the Center of Excellence in Environmental Quality Systems and Clean Energy Technologies in Syracuse and the Center of Excellence in Nanoelectronics in Albany. It is an accomplishment that Mr. Pataki and his aides routinely promote, though some Democrats deride it as pie in the sky.
Mrs. Clinton's schedule upstate is busy too, and has been ever since her so-called listening tour and her Senate campaign took her to the remotest corners of the upstate region again and again. She has made at least 18 trips upstate since the beginning of September, including one to Syracuse the day after the Carrier Corporation, the city's best-known company, announced that it would close its plants and no longer make air-conditioners here. The senator sought to console distraught workers, saying she, too, felt betrayed.
In that period, Mrs. Clinton also delivered what her staff billed as a major policy speech, announcing that she was joining forces with one of the leading members of her husband's White House economics team to try to address upstate New York's economic problems. The speech got widespread coverage. Her advisers say she continues to push a package of legislation in Washington that she unveiled in her freshman year to bolster the upstate economy.
As for Mr. Schumer, it might appear as if there are the makings of a new sitcom in the very idea of the senator making the rural rounds, the deep strains of Brooklyn in his voice. But, in fact, he has become a comfortable fit at county fairs, town hall meetings, parades, tulip festivals and the like. (He also takes nothing for granted as he campaigns for re-election this year, even though he has an enormous war chest and no Republican challenger yet.)
Mr. Schumer's advisers say he plans to visit each of the state's 62 counties at least once this year, as he did in his first five years in office. In the first three weeks of this year, he took advantage of the long Congressional recess to visit nearly 30 counties, most of them upstate.
On his visits, Mr. Schumer displays the qualities of a town manager and a cheerleader, addressing myriad issues raised by local leaders, no matter how small. On the senator's trip here in central New York, for example, a local mayor approached him after a meeting with business leaders to seek help in getting money for a new fire truck. Thirty minutes later, Mr. Schumer was standing alongside local officials inside City Hall in Syracuse, where he introduced federal legislation to deal with the city's gang problem.
''Everywhere you turn, there's Senator Schumer,'' said William J. Fitzpatrick, the Republican district attorney in Syracuse, who is one of the pillars of the upstate political establishment. ''It's unbelievable.''
