An array of Somali warlords and clan leaders struck a deal here on Thursday that could lay the groundwork for the country's first national government since 1991.
Previous peace deals -- there have been more than a dozen rounds of talks since 1991 -- have quickly collapsed, and Western diplomats cautioned that continued clan violence could doom this accord as well.
But the current pact, signed by leaders of all the major warring parties, is widely regarded as more credible than earlier efforts.
The agreement calls for a 275-member parliament, based in Mogadishu. That body will select an interim Somali president who, in turn, will appoint a prime minister who will put together a coalition government.
Each of Somalia's four major clans will select 61 members of the parliament, while a coalition of smaller clans will fill the other 31 slots. But the selection process is expected to be very divisive, as each of Somalia's clans is divided into subclans that are eager for their own political voice.
The negotiations that led to the new agreement have stretched on since November 2002 and have been marked by fistfights, shouting matches and, until now, few achievements. There were varying opinions on Thursday on whether the deal would hold together, ultimately uniting a country that has spent more than a decade as a collection of warring fiefs.
Somalia fell into chaos after the overthrow of the dictatorship of Mohammed Siad Barre in 1991. Two years later, an American intervention ended after 19 American soldiers were killed in a street battle in Mogadishu. Although the military action began as a part of a relief effort to aid starving Somalis, it quickly turned into an attempt to hunt down factional leaders and bring order to the country.
Ever since that failed effort, American officials have avoided any involvement in Somalia's affairs. The peace negotiations, Somali leaders have long complained, have received far more encouragement and support from European leaders than from the Bush administration.
The deal is still threatened by continued violence in Somalia, despite pledges of a truce by the warlords.
Recently, two breakaway regions in the north that had been known for their relative stability, Puntland and Somaliland, have begun clashing along their joint border. And even as leaders were heralding a step toward peace on Thursday, the United Nations announced that one of its international staff members was kidnapped north of Kismayo, a coastal town in the remote south.
The pact would unite Puntland, which has operated as a semiautonomous region for the last 13 years, with the rest of Somalia. Still left out, however, will be Somaliland, which considers itself independent and did not take part in the talks.
The last peace deal in Somalia, in 2000, created a putative national government that managed to control little more than a section of Mogadishu. Led by Abdikassim Salad Hassan, that transitional government set up an array of ministries and secured some financing, mostly from Arab nations. But many armed factions in Somalia never acknowledged the legitimacy the Mr. Salad's government, dooming it to failure.
This time, all the major players in Mogadishu have come aboard, along with other major politicians, traditional leaders and militia heads from other parts of the country.
''We honestly hope that with this positive spirit we will be able to bury the longstanding differences that prevailed among the various sections of our society,'' Mr. Salad said at the signing ceremony Thursday. He had walked out of the peace talks last November but was persuaded to return by President Yoweri Museveni of Uganda, who condemned all the warring parties for creating what he termed ''a slow genocide.''
