Democratic state senators unveiled their agenda Thursday for the legislative session that begins next week, starting off with a list of ethics reforms aimed squarely at the administration of Gov. John G. Rowland, who is facing the first impeachment inquiry of a sitting governor in state history.
The senators released a long list of proposals, on subjects ranging from education to prisons to a renewed effort to pass the so-called millionaire tax.
But the first category, titled ''Restoring Trust in Government,'' included steeper fines and penalties for state officials who accept expensive gifts from state employees and contractors. That was a clear reference to Mr. Rowland, who admitted last month that he had lied about receiving free work and gifts at his private cottage in Litchfield from aides and contractors.
Other state legislators will release their agendas starting early next week, and Mr. Rowland will offer his own vision on Wednesday, the first day of the session, in his annual State of the State address.
Mr. Rowland, a Republican who was elected to a third term in 2002, had invited all 71 Republican legislators to a meeting at his residence on the evening before the address. But on Thursday, after some Republicans said the invitation was inappropriate in light of the current House impeachment inquiry, the governor said the meeting would probably take place at the Statehouse instead.
Speaking at a conference of town officials, the governor also said on Thursday that the state budget deficit for the coming year will be about $100 million, and between $200 million and $300 million in the following year. He offered few details about his own spending priorities, though he did say there would be no reduction in state aid to cities and towns for education and road-building.
The governor has said that his annual address will focus on governing issues and will not mention the impeachment committee, which was officially created on Monday.
But the Senate Democrats made clear on Thursday that the governor's ethical lapses will be featured prominently in their own plans for the coming session, which ends May 5. Their proposals included reforms to the state bidding process, which is now under scrutiny by federal investigators, and a reorganization of the State Ethics Commission.
Both the governor and the Democrats issued warnings about the need to pay for new federal programs like the No Child Left Behind Act. But the Democratic document also emphasized providing more assistance to the poor, controlling the cost of prescriptions and revising medical malpractice laws.
The Democrats will also renew an effort to increase the marginal state income tax rate on those with annual incomes over $1 million. That effort has failed in the past, and its prospects for passage this session are ''not good,'' said Kevin B. Sullivan, the Democratic Senate president pro tem.
Some legislators and observers have speculated that the governor's current predicament could make it easier for Democrats to win passage of their own bills. But Mr. Sullivan seemed to suggest that was unlikely.
''There's no notion that somehow a wounded governor is going to roll over on these issues,'' he said.
