Brenda Mendez said it was the consensus among teachers at Fashion Industries High School that her daughter, Norma Delila Mendez, was the most beautiful girl at her senior prom last spring. And it was more than looks, it was talent: she had designed the backless bone-colored dress with a rust chantilly lace overlay that she wore to the dance, complete with tiara.
But high school was certainly not a fairy tale for Delila, 18, who prefers to go by her middle name and wears a necklace that says so. After her parents separated, she and her mother moved into the two-bedroom apartment where her grandparents and cousin live. Ms. Mendez said her appearances in family and criminal court resulted in orders of protection to spare her and Delila from her father's physical abuse. Delila also no longer got along with her 14-year-old brother, who had chosen to stay with their father.
Delila's prom dress now hangs in one of the many closets at the apartment she and Ms. Mendez, 39, moved into in November in the Bronx, not far from Yankee Stadium.
And Ms. Mendez, who has worked as an office manager at a chiropractor's office in Manhattan for five years, says she feels the same way about the apartment that Delila does about her dress: ''It's all mine.''
In May of 2001, after 13 years of marriage, Ms. Mendez said, her husband went too far when he slapped her face on the stairwell of their apartment building in Upper Manhattan. Ms. Mendez said that after an argument with him, she slammed the door on her way out to go shopping with her son. ''I was still going down the stairs and my son said, 'Mom, be careful, he's right behind you.' When I turned around he was right there, smacking me and undoing my hair.''
Efforts to reach her husband were unsuccessful. But she said it was not the first such incident. She recalled other occasions, other fights, and instances when she would be locked out of the apartment for an hour or two.
Ms. Mendez, who has filed for divorce, said, ''There's no doubt that he loved me, but it was not the kind of love where you respect and you trust.'' At that moment on the stairwell, she decided to leave. But Delila was still in the apartment and she was not going to leave without her.
Ms. Mendez said she banged on the door telling her husband she had to fix her hair. ''I walked into the kitchen and I started dialing 911. And told Delila to get out.''
Ms. Mendez's husband interrupted the call, she said, so she took Delila and her son directly to the police stationhouse. The police told her not to go home, so that night Ms. Mendez and her children stayed with her parents in Washington Heights, where she and Delila continued to live for almost two and a half years. The husband was arrested for violating an order of protection in 2002. A week after the incident, her son returned to his father, who now has custody.
Even though Ms. Mendez was going through her own difficulties, she was concerned about her daughter. ''She hated him and that scared me,'' Ms. Mendez said.
Delila explained: ''I felt angry, hurt, alone and like nobody out there could help. I didn't want to be around other people. I pushed people away a lot.'' ''
Ms. Mendez added, ''I wanted her to be in a place where there were other people in her situation where she could learn that she could forgive.''
Through Safe Horizon, an organization that helps victims of domestic violence, Ms. Mendez was referred to the Children's Aid Society, one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. In 2001, Reina Ramos, the family's case manager there, helped Ms. Mendez with her application for Section 8 housing, which, among other things, provides rent subsidies to domestic violence victims.
Last fall, Ms. Mendez received Section 8 status and, with Delila, moved into her new apartment, where she pays $563 of their $1,058-a-month rent. The subsidy pays the rest. To help Ms. Mendez stay current on her rent, Ms. Ramos drew upon Neediest Cases money to cover the $1,058.77 for the broker's fee.
Ms. Ramos is also a leader of Teens Against Relationship Abuse, an eight-week program held in the summer, and she suggested in 2001 that Delila attend.
Delila was skeptical at first, but quickly changed her mind. ''T.A.R.A. was amazing,'' she said. ''I met a lot of people there. They had gone through a lot of other things.''
She has attended each summer since and is interested in helping with workshops in middle schools.
That is, if she has time. Next month she will begin her freshman year at the Fashion Institute of Technology, where she will study fashion design. After attending the T.A.R.A. program, Delila is savvy to the difficulties of adult relationships. ''I know the cycle, how it starts, how it ends, how it could end. I don't want to get into a relationship like that. I have seen what people go through.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,586,205.03  Recorded Wednesday: 194,452.36  Total: $7,780,657.39
Last year to date: $8,254,842.04
