Just as the news was coming out of Vermont that the architect of Howard Dean's campaign had been replaced by a Washington lobbyist and that the campaign was nearly out of money, Dr. Dean's New Hampshire state director assembled her staff on Wednesday night and tried to stem the damage.
There was the young law student from New York City who had taken a leave last summer, over the objections of his parents, to organize voters. There was the computer whiz nicknamed Data, who all but slept in the office as he put together a voter list that became the envy of every other campaign in town.
And there was the energetic state director, Karen Hicks, who had in a year of 16-hour days argued that the campaign that sprung up on the banks of the Merrimack River here was about more than Dr. Dean. It was, she said, a profoundly significant burst of interest in politics by a generation that had seemed profoundly disinterested.
But after the turmoil that gripped the Dean campaign following the former Vermont governor's loss here on Tuesday, Ms. Hicks was not alone in worrying what it would mean, not only for her candidate but also for a generation that had come together behind the Dean candidacy.
There was talk of soldiering on, here and in other Dean strongholds, but there were also glimpses of disillusionment and anger at the system Dr. Dean's young supporters had once wanted to embrace.
There were also questions about whether the rush of people Dr. Dean brought into the system might have been frightened off. ''Some people did walk away with a totally broken heart,'' Ms. Hicks said, a note of discouragement in her voice.
David Steinberg, 25, who took a leave from law school to organize house meetings in Des Moines and New Hampshire, said he still wanted to run for office one day and was waiting to be told what state to head for next. But he said that he could not hide the disappointment he was feeling, and that he was not sure his friends shared his resilience.
''The system was frustrating at times because of the treatment we got from other campaigns and the media,'' he said. But, he added, ''Even if we don't succeed, ultimately we put a huge stamp on this race and define what it is about.''
That sentiment was shared in many corners of the Dean campaign, as supporters tried to adjust to what for many of them was their first experience with politics.
There was talk of opponents who, some of Dr. Dean's supporters said, used dirty tricks against him. There was anger at the news media, which in the space of three months seemed to them to go from celebrating his candidacy to seeking to destroy it.
''It's kind of heartbreaking, and you know you are a little wiser for having realized what you know,'' said Pete Kane, 22, a New York University student, who went to Iowa to canvass for Dr. Dean last week. ''It's just sad to realize that what you believe in might not come to pass.''
In Austin, Tex., a hotbed of Dean support, Skip Baney, 29, and his wife, Melissa Sternberg, 35, seemed downcast at what has happened to Dr. Dean. Ms. Sternberg said, ''It's a bit like leaving adolescence, when you are a really idealistic teenager and you realize ----''
Mr. Baney completed his wife's sentence: '' ---- that the world's not black and white.''
''I know that I'm a little bitter, not at the candidate but just at the process,'' Mr. Baney continued. ''I'm a realist on one hand. I know how it's going to work for centuries. It's still a little disappointing.''
Many a night, Ms. Hicks said, as she walked out of an office teeming with activity, she would compare what was taking place in New Hampshire to the electric idealism that surrounded Eugene McCarthy's campaign 36 years ago. It was a phenomenon officials in Dr. Dean's campaigns cited again and again, as they debated the consequences of the past few days' events.
''Look, I've worked in presidential campaigns since 1968, and I worked as a junior person for Bobby Kennedy in 1968,'' said Ethan Geto, the New York State director for the Dean campaign. ''And I have never, ever, ever seen anything like this phenomenon, this amazing turnout.''
''There is no question that some people have become bitter -- especially the people who have gotten in for the first time,'' Mr. Geto said. ''But I think the preponderance of Dean troops, while they will have a period of bitterness and disillusionment, I think a lot of them are going to stay in.''
Susan MacManus, a political science professor at the University of South Florida who has studied youth voting, said the attacks on Dr. Dean might have been particularly discouraging to his young supporters. ''One of the things that really does make people mad is what they perceive as beating up a candidate by the press,'' she said.
In Burlington, Vt., Douglas Campbell, the president of College Democrats at the University of Vermont and a Dean supporter, said he would vote for whomever the Democrats put up. But he made clear that no other candidate would command his excitement the way Dr. Dean has.
''It's not like I'm going to feel that I'm going to drop everything,'' Mr. Campbell said.
But in Austin, Ms. Sternberg and Mr. Baney said that no matter what happened with Dr. Dean, their exposure to politics had permanently changed the direction of their lives.
''I don't want people to think we're this bitter, disillusioned Gen-X thing,'' Mr. Baney said. ''I'm tired of that. I'm sad. I have hope. I want to get people active.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: CHANGING STRATEGY
