MAJOR League Baseball has held the Montreal Expos hostage long enough. It's well past time to liberate them and let an independent owner determine their future.
It's too late for a new owner to salvage Vladimir Guerrero, the Expos' best hitter, and Javier Vazquez, their best pitcher, for which other National League East teams are grateful. But before the Expos completely disappear down the baseball drain, M.L.B. needs to set them free.
Baseball officials, interestingly, do not disagree that the time has come or has passed to sell the Expos to an independent owner. They just can't seem to decide where they want that owner to operate the team.
Major League Baseball, in effect the other 29 clubs, bought the Expos for $120 million before the 2002 season. The deal was part of an unprecedented three-way franchise swap that was engineered to enable a group friendly to the baseball hierarchy to buy the Boston Red Sox. For John Henry, the principal owner of the Florida Marlins, to be free to buy the Red Sox, he had to sell the Florida Marlins. The buyer, conveniently, was Jeffrey Loria, who owned the Expos.
Baseball officials were so eager to pull off the complex deal that they lent Loria $38 million, much or all of it designed to be interest free, to add to the $120 million Loria received for the Expos. That enabled Loria to pay Henry the $158 million he paid for the Marlins.
Meanwhile, Major League Baseball wound up as the Expos' proprietor, and not much about the arrangement has smelled right since.
Have baseball officials interfered with the operation of the club, telling its executives what they could and could not do? No, not in such a direct, blatant way. But the Expos' payroll has been held hostage to a group of owners who have not been about to subsidize a team that could beat their team in the standings.
Why would the Mets or the Phillies, for example, want to enable the Expos to retain their best players -- Guerrero, Vazquez and others?
No one has ordered the Expos to shed those players, but they have been told what their payroll can be, and the designated payroll has not had room for such high-priced players, unless the Expos want to play with 15 to 18 players on their 25-man roster.
To their credit, General Manager Omar Minaya and Manager Frank Robinson have done a remarkable job in generating winning records in their two seasons running the Expos. Their ability to maintain that streak, however, decreases with each player they lose.
Baseball officials argue that other teams in economically dire circumstances face the same problems the Expos have confronted. Many teams, they say, have had to make difficult decisions and shed good players.
Look at the players the Minnesota Twins have given up this off-season: Eddie Guardado, LaTroy Hawkins, Eric Milton, A. J. Pierzynski. The Marlins have shed Ivan Rodriguez, Ugueth Urbina, Braden Looper, Derrek Lee and Juan Encarnacion.
But those teams made those decisions on their own; they weren't forced to make them by officials and owners who were acting in their own selfish interests, not those of the team in question. One of the game's new owners, Arturo Moreno of Anaheim, on the other hand, has opted to spend money, signing Guerrero and Bartolo Colón, among others.
Another ramification of the Expos' economic and ownership limitations: Tommy John, until last week a pitching coach in the Montreal organization, told the Expos last year about a good college prospect in the Southeast, but because they are underfinanced, the Expos had no scouts in the area to follow the pitcher. Toronto drafted him instead, and Tom Mastny compiled a first-year 8-0 record with a 2.26 earned run average for Auburn of the New York-Penn League.
The Expos for years have developed good young players through their minor league system; it has been their lifeline. If major league ownership aborts that, the Expos will deteriorate quickly and irretrievably.
So, what should Major League Baseball do? Move quickly to select a new site for the Expos and sell them. Why hasn't it happened long before this? The economy, for one reason.
At one point officials believed they would reap a windfall for the Expos, going so far, an official said, as to tell the owners they would each earn a $10 million profit on their initial investment. But that would mean selling the Expos for about $400 million, which was probably never realistic but certainly wasn't once the economy turned bad.
Whatever the price, baseball has exceeded the deadline that should have been placed on the sale and relocation of the Expos.
Baseball continues to investigate a whole roster of cities and areas -- Washington; Portland, Ore.; northern Virginia; southeastern Virginia (Norfolk); Las Vegas; San Antonio; and Monterrey, Mexico. But each site has drawbacks.
Some baseball officials acknowledge that northern New Jersey might have been the best possible site demographically, but the area's officials have demonstrated no interest in building a park and pursuing the team.
Washington officials have long believed they were the front-runner for the Expos and don't understand baseball's hesitancy in placing the team there. Peter Angelos, the Baltimore Orioles' owner, is reason No. 1.
Baseball officials most recently have said they will have a decision by the All-Star Game in July. The Expos and their suitors have heard similar claims before. It would not be in the best interests of baseball or the Expos to let this latest deadline slip past.
On Baseball
