The city filed a lawsuit yesterday against New York State demanding that it pay for and build more places to house severely mentally retarded and developmentally disabled children in foster care, or at least pay private agencies to care for such children.
City officials have spent years battling the state's Office of Mental Retardation and Developmental Disabilities to make it fulfill its legal obligation to find placement for the children in specialized facilities.
Officials said they had finally been convinced to take court action because the list of profoundly retarded and disabled children waiting for state funds or placement was already ''egregiously'' long and growing longer. About 200 children in the city are awaiting placement by the state, and 31 of them have been waiting more than four years.
''Regrettably, our very extensive efforts to make sure the law was followed without the need for court intervention -- including months of meetings with state officials -- left too many children behind,'' said Michael A. Cardozo, the city's corporation counsel.
Deborah Sturm Rausch, director of public affairs for the state agency, said a lawsuit was unnecessary. ''O.M.R.D.D. has worked very hard to assure that children with development disabilities are getting high-quality care and receiving appropriate placements and has made remarkable progress working collaboratively with the city,'' she said. Ms. Rausch said, however, that she could not offer examples of this remarkable progress yesterday evening. ''We still remain hopeful that our differences can be resolved,'' she said.
By law, the state has the sole authority to license or run operations for mentally retarded children. The law, however, does not say specifically that the state must place each child that meets the eligibility criteria.
The city sued the state in 1986 to establish that the state did in fact have an obligation to serve all those who met the criteria. Although the obligation was never established decisively, the city won a court order in which the state agreed to add 200 places in such specialized settings over the next four years.
But according to the lawsuit filed yesterday in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, the state has failed to expand the number of beds adequately or even to plan for the needs of such children, resulting in great harm to the city's most vulnerable children.
The lawsuit cites, for example, a 15-year-old girl identified only by the initials S.V. Born addicted to cocaine and abandoned by her mother, S.V. is so profoundly retarded that she cannot eat or brush her teeth by herself. The state found her eligible for a residential facility in 1999, but still has not placed her.
Because the city cannot legally provide the highly specialized treatment these children require, said William C. Bell, the commissioner of the city's Administration for Children's Services, it is often forced to pay for placing such children in more expensive private facilities or in hospitals.
In some cases, the city serves these children in regular foster care, like private or group homes, with extensive supportive medical and other services, but the state does not reimburse for these costs, the city said.
''Foster care is intended to provide short-term services for children,'' Mr. Bell said. ''Mentally retarded and developmentally delayed children really need specialized residential and treatment services, which foster care is not designed to provide.''
