Raghu Shenoy, 36, is a tad worried about financial matters.
Though business is booming at the software company he founded here, Bit by Bit Computer Services, expenses for his traditional Indian wedding, planned for the end of February, are slowly spiraling beyond his budget.
First, he has to entertain his guests lavishly at a riverside resort two hours' drive from the city. He has booked it for three days of celebrations. Among the guests will be a handful of his overseas clients, mostly from Britain. The hotel stay for them and some other guests, along with the wedding feast expenses, will add to the bill, which is nearing $25,000. And that does not include the outlay for the honeymoon in New Zealand with his bride, Usha Kempegowda.
''The upbeat Indian economy is not helping me,'' Mr. Shenoy lamented half seriously. ''I find people's expectations have shot up and I'm spending 10 times more than I would have spent some years ago.''
The economy is indeed buoyant. Gross domestic product grew 5.7 percent in the country's first quarter, which ended in June, then jumped 8.4 percent in the next quarter, compared with levels the previous year. And the bounce is being felt across nearly all business sectors.
The government is expected to take advantage of the positive mood by moving up elections, originally scheduled for the end of the year. Instead, they may be held as early as April, just after the country completes a fiscal year in which growth is forecast to exceed 7 percent -- perhaps even 8 percent.
The country is experiencing a rare trifecta, said Amit Chandra, an executive vice president at DSP Merrill Lynch in Bombay. ''For the first time in the last several decades, agriculture, manufacturing and services are showing a simultaneous revival.''
Good rainfall, the best in more than half a dozen years, has bolstered the agricultural sector, and that, in turn, has increased consumer demand and manufacturing. High-technology businesses continue to grow spectacularly. A gradual upturn in the global economy is expected to bring in an even greater bounty of outsourced jobs to India.
In addition, despite political and labor opposition, India's government is slowly loosening its stranglehold on various industries through privatization of state-owned companies.
Of course, huge pockets of poverty remain. And experts warn of a subtler economic soft spot.
''The outlook for India's mammoth, and growing, fiscal deficit is poor,'' said Jyoti Narasimhan, a principal economist with Global Insight, a research and forecasting firm based in Waltham, Mass.
Still, she said, at least for a while, ''consistent, high economic growth rates, as well as judicious policies implemented by politicians and technocrats, will continue to boost personal wealth of all Indians, including the buoyant middle class and the very poor.''
Vivek Kulkarni, a career bureaucrat turned high-technology entrepreneur, said, ''The euphoric mood in the economy is backed by solid signs.''
''Take a one-mile stretch on Bannerghatta Road in southern Bangalore and the construction points to 45,000 new software and services jobs right there,'' he added. It is a stretch that includes offices of multinationals like Oracle, I.B.M., Accenture, Hewlett-Packard, PeopleSoft, Honeywell and HSBC Bank.
Before becoming chief executive of B2K, a Bangalore-based technology support company, in November, Mr. Kulkarni led the local government's software services department and was responsible for attracting high-technology investment. The ripple effects of India's economic boom, he said, are being felt in cities across the country.
''It is hard to get a hotel booking'' in Bangalore, Delhi or Bombay these days, he said, adding: ''Can you believe that I went to a restaurant for dinner last week to find all the tables were reserved for the evening? This used to be unheard-of in Bangalore.''
Mr. Kulkarni said that his company, which offers technical support, medical billing and customer behavior and satisfaction analysis services to companies in the United States, had grown to nearly 200 employees from 118 in November. His marketing team, a half-dozen Americans based in Flint, Mich., and Denver, is busy, he said. ''Providing the marketing leads and even fixing up appointments for the team is done out of Bangalore,'' he added, indicating the extent of back-office work being carried out in India.
Other industries, including automobiles and pharmaceuticals, have gained from an increased demand for high-quality products made in the country's low-cost manufacturing plants.
Adding to the cyclical upturn, India's foreign exchange reserves have grown to more than $100 billion. Its stock markets increased 73 percent in valuation, to $278 billion, with foreign concerns investing close to $7 billion.
Mr. Chandra of DSP Merrill Lynch said that the economic restructuring of the last decade had finally taken root and helped Indian industry become globally competitive.
''In the last six months, confidence levels of companies have gone to historic highs,'' he said. Continued growth, healthy balance sheets and steady cash inflows helped Indian software concerns make bold cross-border acquisitions of software, auto components, drugs, telecommunications and other businesses.
Recent public offerings of companies have met with overwhelming response. Last month, for instance, investors applied for 36 times more shares than were offered for TV Today Network, an Indian television news company whose parent is Living Media India, one of the country's largest magazine publishing groups. And according to Prime Database, a capital market research firm based in New Delhi, about $13 billion worth of public offerings are expected during 2004. Among those lining up are several state-owned companies.
The bounty has been trickling down. ''The spread of roads and cellular phones in rural areas has made development tangible even for India's rural population,'' Mr. Chandra said, ''and it has become abundantly clear that the economy will play a large factor in the election.''
Skeptics, however, say that not even 2 percent of India's population has been directly affected by the boom, and point to the abysmal state of infrastructure in urban centers and the stark poverty in India's villages. They are critical of the government's boast in large, countrywide advertisements that India is shining.
''For the thousands who have lost government jobs in the privatization process and for those involved in traditional occupations such as silk farming, there is hardly any good news,'' said Narendar Pani, an economist and senior editor at the country's leading financial newspaper, The Economic Times.
Yet, the fact that political parties are taking economic development seriously is an indication that economic growth can now be sustainable, Mr. Chandra said. ''This is the healthiest thing to happen to India.''
Even smaller slices of industry are benefiting from -- and echoing -- the widespread jauntiness.
The entertainment industry, for instance, is expected to grow 8 to 12 percent, on top of its 7 percent growth rate in 2003.
''Entertainment content will reflect the positive mood, with heavy family melodramas on television giving way to frothier, lighter forms,'' said Sunil Lulla, the Bombay-based executive vice president of Sony Entertainment Television.
There is, for example, Sony's new series ''Jassi Jaisi Koi Nahin'' (''There's Nobody Quite Like Jassi''), he said, a show that follows the comic life of an underdog employed as an assistant in a fashion house.
