''May the dopest crew win!'' proclaims the hip-hop star Lil' Kim somewhere near the welcome end of ''You Got Served,'' which opens today nationwide. She is not referring to sailors on steroids, but to dueling hip-hop dance teams, one led by African-American teenagers from an unspecified Los Angeles neighborhood and the other by sinister-looking white boys from Orange County, who face off in an MTV dance contest at the climax of this modest programmer directed by Christopher B. Stokes.
The natural heir of 1960's dance-craze films like ''Twist Around the Clock'' (memorably parodied by John Waters in ''Hairspray''), ''You Got Served'' showcases the latest development in street dance, which, much like rap music itself, seems to be a predominantly masculine affair.
With neighborhood crews battling one another for audience approval (and a hat full of money) in a hall that looks more like a boxing ring than a ballroom, ''You Got Served'' frequently recalls the muscular ballet style pioneered by Gene Kelly and Jerome Robbins -- except that the pirouettes in this film are more likely to be performed by dancers spinning on their heads than on their toes.
Apart from a few token women in the chorus, the boys dominate the performances with cutting, slashing, robotic moves that evoke both Chinese martial arts films and Michael Jackson's undying moonwalk. The presentation is aggressive and confrontational, and the dancers perform without ever breaking their scowling, angry street faces.
The thin plot revolves around the falling out between best friends: Elgin (Marques Houston of the hip-hop group IMx) and David (Omari Grandberry of B2K). This is prompted by David's determination to date Elgin's dazzling kid sister Liyah (Jennifer Freeman). Will they get back together in time to lead their crew to victory in the MTV showdown? You do not need to be the Amazing Kreskin to predict the outcome.
''You Got Served'' (the title is street talk for ''you have been defeated and thoroughly humiliated'') will probably keep its core audience of suburban teenagers mildly entertained for the course of its 93 minutes. Urban grumps, however, may be distracted by Mr. Stokes's annoyingly overedited execution of the dance sequences.
Rather than showcasing the dancers' considerable skills in long takes, Mr. Stokes insists on cutting on the beat, which reduces the performances to disconnected fragments. Instead of enhancing his dancers, Mr. Stokes succeeds only in calling attention to his own technique.
''You Got Served'' has been rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It includes some mild sexual innuendo.
YOU GOT SERVED
Written and directed by Christopher B. Stokes; director of photography, David Hennings; edited by Earl Watson; music by Tyler Bates; choreography by Dave Scott and Shane Sparks; production designer, Maxine Shepard; produced by Marcus Morton, Cassius Vernon Westhersby and Billy Pollina; released by Screen Gems. Running time: 93 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Marques Houston (Elgin), Omari Grandberry (David), Jennifer Freeman (Liyah) and Lil' Kim (Herself).
FILM REVIEW
