A COUPLE of years ago, I was checking into the Fairmont Scottsdale Princess hotel in Arizona for a tennis-immersion vacation -- I'd play a few sets each morning, then watch the pros play in the Franklin Templeton Classic tournament being held in the 5,000-seat stadium on the hotel grounds. All the big names were scheduled to be there -- Pete Sampras, Andre Agassi, Lleyton Hewitt -- and I figured it was a good chance to see them up close rather than from my usual vantage, the upper-reaches of the balcony at the United States Open.
Then the front desk clerk spotted a tennis racket among my luggage. ''Are you here for the tournament?'' she asked pleasantly.
''Yes,'' I said.
''Oh,'' she replied, ''then we should upgrade you to a casita.
''Mmmm,'' I thought, ''she must think I'm a coach or something.'' I decided to keep my mouth shut.
A few minutes later, I was checking into the casita -- one of cluster of well-appointed suites set off from the main hotel, with separate bedroom and living room areas and a working fireplace.
Not bad, I thought. And then it got even better: As I went back outside, the door to the casita right next to mine opened, and out walked Tim Henman, the British No. 1, and one of my favorite players. I blinked furiously, mumbled a quick hello, and then walked a bit dazed into the courtyard -- and ran into Agassi and his trainer.
A little later, I spotted Magnus Norman, the Swedish player, heading off to a practice court and Pam Shriver (there as an ESPN commentator) jogging around the man-made lake on the hotel grounds.
I had evidently gained admittance to tennis nirvana.
Over the next few days, I worked out on the gym treadmill next to Steffi Graf, watched Henman and Sampras as they played on one of the hotel's practice courts, saw the up-and-coming American Mardy Fish play in one of his first professional tournaments, lounged around the pool with a couple of South American players, and had breakfast with Hewitt and his girlfriend (now fiancée) Kim Clijsters. (Well, they were at the table next to me.)
It was the perfect vacation for the tennis fan, and now one I try to take at least once a year. The upgrade experience has never been repeated, unfortunately, but there is still something great about being able to watch your favorite players up close, and to bump into them casually in the gym or in the restaurant. This year's tournament, scheduled for March 1-7, has been renamed the Arizona Men's Tennis Championships, and among the players committed so far are Agassi and Andy Roddick, the latter making his first appearance in Scottsdale.
SCOTTSDALE isn't the only place to hang out with the top players, however. There are at least two other opportunities a year to combine a warm-weather vacation with a bit of up-close-and-personal tennis watching: The Nasdaq-100 Open in Key Biscayne, Fla., from March 24 to April 4 (www.nasdaq-100open.com), which features 192 of the top male and female players and which has begun to rival the Grand Slams in importance, and the Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships on Amelia Island, Fla., from April 5-11 (www.blchamps.com), one of the key events on the women's tour.
The Key Biscayne tournament, played at cozy Crandon Park, is just a short walk from the Ritz-Carlton, Key Biscayne, (305-365-4500, $409 to $3,500), a place where many of the players stay and practice. It's also a good hotel for guests looking to sharpen their serves or improve their backhands. The hotel has one hard court and 10 soft-clay Hydrocourts, as well as tennis instructors available for $50 for a half-hour. (You can also get a private session with retired player Cliff Drysdale for $250 an hour.) Daily clinics are $35 a person.
The Bausch &amp; Lomb Championships are held on the grounds of the Amelia Island Plantation (www.aipfl.com, 888-261-6161, $181 to $957). Your options include staying at the 670-room resort or at the nearby Ritz-Carlton (904-277-1100, $319 to $499), where several players go to practice between matches. The Amelia Island Plantation has 23 clay courts (three lighted for night play), and the Ritz-Carlton has 10 courts, including a stadium court and five that are lighted.
Of course, you can certainly take a tennis vacation where the focus is on your own game, and not the pros'. For that, Scottsdale is particularly well-suited for a weekend break. (Particularly this winter: Two weeks ago, when the Northeast was suffering through a bitter cold spell, temperatures in Scottsdale were in the low 70's.)
The Fairmont Scottsdale Princess has seven courts, six of which are lighted. You can get private lessons for $75 an hour, and there are also clinics on Wednesday and Saturday mornings for $30 a person. (The hotel provides tennis rackets for those who have left theirs at home.)
Moreover, last year the hotel opened the Willow Stream spa, a luxurious 44,000 square foot space in which, after a few sets of hard-fought tennis, you can unwind with an aromatherapy massage ($129 for 60 minutes) or the Havasupai Body Oasis Experience, a two-hour session that includes immersion under a waterfall, a chamomile exfoliation, a eucalyptus herbal bath and a face-and-scalp acupressure treatment ($279).
Also in the Scottsdale area is the Boulders Resort, in Carefree, Ariz., which in addition to opening a branch of the Golden Door spa on its premises recently, has eight courts and has been named one of the ''50 Greatest U.S. Tennis Resorts'' by Tennis magazine. Court time is $24 an hour, and instruction is available for $85 an hour.
One more option in Scottsdale is the Sanctuary on Camelback Mountain, a 53-acre, Zen-like resort (rooms come with Japanese robes and slippers and the turn-down service at night doesn't include a chocolate mint on your pillow but instead an aromatherapy spray for your bed linens) where you can follow a set of tennis with a bamboo-lemongrass scrub or a wild lime blossom full-body massage in the 12,000-square-foot spa or a swim in what the hotel calls the largest infinity pool in Arizona. The hotel has an interesting tennis pedigree -- it is the site of the former John Gardiner tennis ranch -- and has five hard courts, with instructors available at $70 an hour. There are also daily hour-long clinics for $40 a person.
And while there are no tournaments played on the premises of the Sanctuary, it does feature one intriguing option for the hard-core (and well-heeled) tennis fan. For $1,100 to $2,400 a night (depending on season), you can rent the four-bedroom home once owned by Ken Rosewall, complete with a private tennis court on the roof.
There are at least a dozen nonstop flights a day between New York and the Phoenix airport, the closest one to Scottsdale, with several options from America West, Delta and American. Advance-purchase, round-trip fares for the weekend of March 5, to coincide with the final rounds of the Arizona Men's Tennis Championships, range from $181 to $281, according to Expedia. Rates for the Fairmont Scottsdale Princess (800-344-4758): $399 to $3,558, Rates for Sanctuary at Cambelback Mountain (480-948-2100) $445 to $595. The rate for Boulders Resort &amp; Golden Door Spa (877-999-3223) is $625 a night. Tickets for the tournament range from $14 (general admission to early-round sessions) to $72 (box seats for the Sunday finals). More information is at www.scottsdaletennis.com or (480) 784-4444.
JOURNEYS
