The new chief executive of the New York Stock Exchange is preparing a plan that would encourage far more trading on its electronic system and perhaps blunt criticism from institutions of the trading now done on its floor, according to executives who have been briefed on the measure.
The proposals, which remain subject to change, cut to the core of the exchange's 211-year-old model, which is based on the idea that people, not machines, provide the ideal means for investors to find the best possible price for a stock.
John A. Thain, an advocate of more technology who became leader of the exchange two weeks ago, is expected to make the proposals to the rules committee of the board on Thursday.
The measures show how quickly Mr. Thain is moving amid broad criticism that the Big Board's auction-based trading system is too cumbersome as well as vulnerable to human error and perhaps even human mischief. Much as John S. Reed, the interim chairman, moved quickly to address the exchange's pressing governance issues, Mr. Thain, his hand-picked successor, seems eager to put his own personal stamp on the exchange's trading operations.
Electronic trades now account for only 6 percent of the overall volume on the stock exchange, with the remainder conducted by the stock exchange's specialist traders -- a swarming, shouting mass of men and women on its cavernous floor who seek to bring buyers and sellers together.
The proposal, which may meet with some opposition and certainly needs broad support for approval, would probably lead to a sharp increase in the portion of trades handled electronically, executives said yesterday. Some of the trades would shift from other competing marketplaces and some from the exchange's own trading floor.
The main component of the plan is a proposed rule change to waive or reduce a 30-second waiting period now imposed on electronic trades and to remove restrictions on the size of transactions.
Mr. Thain has spent the last week meeting with stock exchange members, in an attempt to convince them of the plan's merits, according to these executives.
He has contended that lifting such impediments will encourage institutions that now send much trading through the Big Board's electronic rivals -- namely, Nasdaq and Archipelago -- to move that business to the stock exchange.
''The N.Y.S.E. has to meet the challenges of the marketplace,'' said Leo Guzman, the chief executive of Guzman &amp; Company, a member firm. ''The best way to maintain market share is to make sure that you face the threat from electronic markets. If Thain has to use his power to make sure that specialists go along with it, so be it. That's what he is paid to do.''
With board approval, the rule change would need the support of the exchange's members and would then be sent to the Securities and Exchange Commission, the Big Board's regulator.
The rule's adoption would be a sharp blow to the exchange's electronic competitors, which have pointed to the twin scandals over Richard A. Grasso's pay and trading abuses by specialists as examples of how flawed the Big Board's trading and governance structure had become.
Those competitors are now aggressively urging the S.E.C. to amend what is known as the trade- through rule, which holds that orders for stocks listed on the New York exchange be executed at the best possible displayed price.
Electronic competitors, commonly known as E.C.N.'s for electronic communications networks, argue that many institutional investors prefer the speed and anonymity of trading electronically to the theoretical ''best price'' they would get by trading through the specialists on the exchange.
Abolishing the rule, they say, would allow them to capture a bigger share of the market. Combined, the electronic networks' share of trading in stocks listed on the New York exchange is about 4 percent. The exchange itself maintains a commanding 80 percent of the market. A spokesman for the exchange declined to comment yesterday.
By opening the door far wider to electronic investors, Mr. Thain is attacking the main plank of the electronic networks' thesis -- that they should be seen as a viable competitor to the exchange and thus deserve a leg up from Washington.
Mr. Thain, a former president of Goldman Sachs, presided over that firm's many investments in electronic trading platforms, including an initial stake in Archipelago. That background will help his credibility as he tries to persuade the stock exchange's members, many of whom see an increase in electronic trading as a threat to their livelihood as well as to the Big Board's overall mission to bring buyers and sellers together at the market's best price.
Despite the New York Stock Exchange's dominance, electronic competitors have made inroads in recent years. Big institutions find the electronic alternatives better in some cases, and Fidelity Investments, the mutual fund giant, has become one of the exchange's most vocal critics.
At Goldman, Mr. Thain was known more for embracing technology than for twisting the elbows of chief executives for the next big deal.
Since starting his job on Jan. 15, though, he has spent hours in meetings with stock exchange members, arguing that more electronic trades could allow the exchange to head off its vociferous critics and reach out to disaffected clients like Fidelity.
In his pitch, Mr. Thain has taken a different approach from his predecessor. He has a starched, reserved manner in his jaunts across the exchange floor. Though Mr. Grasso, who spent 35 years at the exchange, forged an earthy, backslapping bond with the members, Mr. Thain has a more inquisitive, if not academic, rapport as he peppers traders with questions about their work at their stations.
And though he is a stranger to many at the exchange, his argument that it needs to take the fight to its enemy's territory has stoked the competitive fires of the membership.
Electronic trades on the Big Board are carried out on its Direct Plus network, a system that was put in place in 2000. Mr. Grasso deployed the system in response to the competitive strides made by the E.C.N.'s.
But Mr. Grasso, very much a creature of the exchange's people-based model, was never a true believer in the system, and the restraints that he imposed hindered its growth.
For example, a trade conducted over Direct Plus could not exceed 1,099 shares, and clients were limited to one trade every 30 seconds.
With such limitations, institutions that put a premium on being able to trade a large amount of shares as fast as possible found Direct Plus less than attractive.
By lifting the restrictions, Mr. Thain hopes that the combination of an enhanced electronic trading platform, combined with the expertise of the exchange's specialists, will fend off further encroachments from electronic competitors.
