The Oakland and Kansas City defenses of the 1970's perfected it and called it the jam. The fierce Philadelphia defenses of the early 1990's called it No Free Access. Both Super Bowl XXXVIII defenses on Sunday will showcase it and call it rerouting.
It is the art of pass defenders who bump, push and sometimes manhandle receivers near the line of scrimmage, knocking receivers off their routes and ruining their timing with quarterbacks. Both New England and Carolina excel at the tactic, and both believe they can successfully use it to win the championship.
''Basically, rerouting receivers means trying to prevent them from running in a straight line to where they want to run,'' Eric Mangini, New England's secondary coach, said. ''Most offenses are based on timing and with receivers reaching certain landmarks on the field. Rerouting them makes them find another landmark.''
Effectively controlling a passing offense always requires combining a harassing pass rush with gluelike pass coverage. The way the Patriots and the Panthers reroute receivers, both pass defenders and pass rushers negate pass offenses.
''A few years ago when you could nail receivers all over the field before the ball was thrown, pass defenses had a big edge,'' said Rod Perry, Carolina's secondary coach and former Pro Bowl cornerback who played 10 N.F.L. seasons, most of them with the Rams. ''Mel Blount in Pittsburgh was 6-3, and he just planted and killed guys all over the field on the way to the Hall of Fame. But when the rules were changed 15 or so years ago to allow you to contact receivers no more than 5 yards after the line of scrimmage, it made it tougher.''
''But that is still enough space to have an impact,'' Perry added. ''And you couple that with hard hits after catches, and receivers sometimes start to get chicken arms and start dropping balls. Every defensive back wants that, for receivers to concentrate more on you than catching the football.''
Rerouting receivers is not limited to cornerbacks versus receivers. Tight ends are rerouted most often by linebackers or safeties. Running backs are rerouted by linemen as they leave the backfield on pass patterns.
Both the Patriots and the Panthers excelled at the rerouting tactic in their conference championship games.
''We did it some in college,'' said cornerback Asante Samuel, a Patriots rookie from Central Florida. ''It's much more important to do it in the N.F.L. and especially in our defense. It's just one more way to force the action and stay aggressive.''
Patriots linebacker Tedy Bruschi said: ''You try to put your hands on any player coming out for a pass any way you can. You push them, yank them, even trip them if you can get away with it. And if you can do it beyond the 5-yard limit from the line of scrimmage and get away with, that's even better.''
Receivers, especially, do not like being touched. Getting two hands on them is difficult because many of them are too shifty. Defensive backs learn that bigger receivers often require a different approach because they can knock cornerbacks off balance and out of coverage. Shifty receivers pose special problems.
''You have to watch your hand placement with wigglers because you can overextend and blow the coverage,'' Patriots safety Chris Akins said. ''Pass defense is all about footwork. If you are not moving your feet and mirroring the receiver as much as you concentrate on rerouting them, you're going to blow the coverage.''
A lost step from a faulty rerouting attempt, even an inch or two, can result in a big play, especially against elusive receivers, including Carolina's Steve Smith and New England's Troy Brown.
''You can't play this game and be successful as a defensive back if you don't get your hands on receivers and be physical,'' Carolina cornerback William Hampton said. ''But if you jump and you miss, you are going to be hearing the marching band because somebody scored. We're good, and so is New England at the trail technique, which is another way of rerouting. On that one, you wait the 5 yards for the receiver to come to you and then get physical with them. But there are certain times and certain spots where you have to back off this technique. Especially with an experienced receiver.''
That is because crafty receivers use rerouting to their advantage. Occasionally when rerouted, the best receivers use the bump or push to their advantage to gain extra separation, simply allowing themselves to be pushed into an area they intend to reach all along.
''These guys want to work you, and you have to find a way to work them,'' Carolina receiver Karl Hankton said. ''Sometimes you have to cut your pattern short when you've been rerouted and work in concert with your quarterback; he reads that and changes the play to a shorter pass to take advantage of your new position. As far as rerouting in this Super Bowl, both teams' receivers know it and expect it. We like the physical challenge.''
Hankton added: ''We won't be like the Colts were against the Patriots when their receivers just kind of ran into the reroutes and let the defensive backs stick to them like Velcro. When you think of the rerouting game between receivers and defensive backs, it's almost like karate or martial arts, where you swim and move. It's all about getting the right angles for both the defenders and the receivers.''
PRO FOOTBALL
