Not Just for Sleeping, But for Showing Status
Mallett, the renowned English dealer in 18th- and 19th-century furniture, has long been known for its drop-dead antiques, but this weekend it is upping the ante. It is showing a 10-foot-tall four-poster 18th-century bed swathed in rose-colored silk damask hangings, complete with handmade fringe and a cream silk lining.
''This was a bed designed to impress,'' said Giles Hutchinson Smith, the managing director of Mallett's Bond Street gallery in London. It is sure to be a highlight at the 88-dealer Palm Beach Classic International Fine Art &amp; Antique Fair, which opens to the public tomorrow and runs through Feb. 8 at the Palm Beach County Convention Center in West Palm Beach, Fla.
The grand mahogany bed retains its original structure, with finely carved columns depicting a running flower-and-ribbon motif. The cresting is pierced and punctuated with stylized foliage.
''The mahogany posts are the finest I've ever seen,'' said Lanto Synge, the executive director of Mallett. ''And the carving of the foliate cartouches on the corners of the cornice is light and whimsical, perfectly rococo. A bed like this was your Rolls-Royce, the ultimate show-off object.''
It's a bit hard to grasp just how large the bed is. When it was being restored, it required just over 167 feet of imported silk damask copied from a fragment of the original that Mr. Synge found on it.
''Some period beds are considered, by today's standards, to be rather small, but this bed has grand proportions in every dimension and, at over six feet square, is truly king size,'' Mr. Hutchinson Smith said.
The bed was made about 1760 for Tabley House in Cheshire in northern England. Sir Peter Leicester, whose family had lived on the property for centuries, commissioned the architect John Carr of York to build a new country house there in the fashionable Palladian style. The floor plan shows five contiguous rooms in the main bedroom suite, as published in Christopher Hussey's book ''English Country Houses, Mid-Georgian, 1760-1800'' (Antique Collectors Club, 1984). Such suites normally had an antechamber, a bedroom, powdering closets (for powdering hair in that era), dressing rooms and servants' rooms.
Mallett suggests that Thomas Chippendale, the great 18th-century cabinetmaker, designed this bed. ''We know Chippendale supplied two beds to Tabley House,'' Mr. Hutchinson Smith said. ''It is not possible to prove, for lack of documentation, that this bed formed part of the original furnishings, but it is very likely. Our bed dates from exactly that period, and Tabley was finely furnished, with rooms enriched by splendid stucco work and fireplaces.''
For nearly 60 years, Chippendale's workshop on St. Martin's Lane in London supplied clients with wallpapers, carpets, chimney pieces, fire grates and ormolu in addition to case pieces.
Mallett restored the Tabley bed, which required new fabrics. ''We made the hangings ourselves in as correct a manner as possible,'' Mr. Hutchinson Smith said. ''We had French silk damask woven to an 18th-century design. To cover the cresting, we had to glue linen on the carved pine. Then we put the damask on the linen, making sure the pattern of the damask and the cresting didn't interfere with one another.''
Mallett is asking $450,000 for the bed, which can be seen at www.mallettantiques.com. ''This state bed is by far the finest bed we have handled in at least a decade,'' Mr. Hutchinson Smith said. ''Its size and the quality of the execution, with its abundance of fine carving, are to the highest level. It is without equal in the current market.''
There seems to be no book on the history of beds, but there should be. ''Beds were considered extremely important from the Middle Ages on,'' said Annabel Westman, a textile historian in London. ''From the 1630's to the 1750's, the bed was often the most important article in the house. If a bed was carved, it could be quite expensive, but its cost was negligible compared to the cost of the fabric and trimmings, which usually came from Italy and were extremely expensive.''
It was also a status symbol. ''It is commonly acknowledged that from the Renaissance onward, important business was conducted largely from the bedchamber,'' Mr. Hutchinson Smith said. ''The bed itself was therefore constructed not only as a piece of practical furniture but in a grand and imposing manner. The quality of the bed mirrored the eminence of its owner; the more sumptuously it was dressed in fine silk damask, the richer he appeared.''
Working with a team of carvers and gilders, Mrs. Westman recently completed the restoration of Chippendale's 1773 state bed for Harewood House near Leeds, England. Edwin Lascelles, the first Lord Harewood, commissioned Carr, the Tabley architect, to build the house. Robert Adam designed the interiors, commissioning Chippendale furniture for certain rooms.
''We had some of the original silk damask from the bed, so we were able to copy it,'' Mrs. Westman said. The carving was restored, and the bed was regilded and supplied with new mattresses, bolsters and linens.
Today Harewood House is one of England's treasure houses. You can see the bed at www.harewood.org/chippendale.
A Forgotten Sculptor
The Maison Gerard gallery, at 53 East 10th Street in Greenwich Village, has organized a retrospective (through Feb. 6) of the work of Alfred Auguste Janniot, the French Art Deco sculptor.
Janniot (1889-1969) studied at the École des Beaux Arts in Paris before winning the Prix de Rome and moving to Italy in 1919. He was friendly with Jacques-Émile Ruhlmann, the furniture and interior designer, and collaborated with him on a project at the 1925 Art Deco Exposition in Paris as well as on the luxurious interiors of early ocean liners like the Île de France and the Normandy.
In Paris he is perhaps best known for his exotic bas reliefs (he called them stone tapestries), depicting Tahitians, Africans and Asians at work and at play, on the walls of the Musée des Colonies at the Trocadero. The building was designed for the 1931 Colonial Exposition and until recently housed the Museum of African Art.
In New York, Janniot designed and executed reliefs for the facade of the Pavillon Français at Rockefeller Center. Gerard is showing the plaster models of the figures of Beauty, Elegance and Marianne, the symbol of France, from various entrances. Some came from the estate of Wallace Harrison, one of the center's architects.
The gallery has a few sculptures from the 1920's, including a terra cotta of Atalanta, the virgin huntress of Greek mythology; two small plaster sculptures of Europa on the bull (pre-rape); and a sculpture of Eros on a dolphin. The large models are $100,000; smaller ones range from $35,000 to $55,000 apiece. The loan works are not for sale.
Antiques
