The bitter winds on Sunday afternoon didn't deter a dozen or so music-lovers from milling outside Alice Tully Hall to try to get last-minute tickets for the sold-out recital by the Peruvian tenor Juan Diego Flórez. He has become a genuine operatic superstar, the new prince of the Bel Canto repertory, a dashing, though small-framed, stage presence and a wonderfully appealing artist.
To no one's surprise his program consisted mostly of opera arias by his calling card composers -- Bellini, Rossini, Gluck and Donizetti -- with some Peruvian songs mixed in. The ovations were so ardent that Mr. Flórez sang six encores.
Though I'm as excited as any opera buff that Mr. Flórez, who is only 31, has arrived on the scene, I must offer some cautionary comments about his singing on Sunday. The good news is that he understands his own voice type. He is a classic tenore di grazia, a light lyric tenor with bright sound and the technical agility to toss off coloratura roulades comfortably, making him ideally suited to roles like Rossini's Count Almaviva and Prince Ramiro. Don't expect him to be singing even slightly heavier repertory, like Verdi's Duke of Mantua.
But a hallmark of tenore di grazia singing should be a smooth flow in midrange legato phrases. There were signs of vocal strain and patches of dryness in Mr. Flórez's legato singing: for example, during the long-spun lines of Mozart's ''Misero! o Sogno.'' Interestingly, he had no trouble at all tossing off the big top notes.
He ended the program with an assured performance of Donizetti's stirring ''Ah! Mes Amis,'' from ''La Fille du Regiment,'' in which the tenor must leap up to a series of nine high C's. Still, it was somewhat worrisome that Mr. Flórez seemed almost relieved when those notes arrived. He needs to even out his voice and think about how to support and lift his softer lyrical singing as well.
Reservations aside, Mr. Flórez, accompanied by the pianist Vincenzo Scalera, sang with his customary expressivity, generosity and exuberance.
More at home in the opera house than on the recital stage, he looked endearingly awkward as he kept yanking at the collar of his tuxedo shirt and clinging to the lid of the piano as if it were a surrogate soprano in a love duet.
Mr. Flórez, who made his Metropolitan Opera debut two years ago, probably can't wait to return to the Met stage next month when he sings in Rossini's ''Italiana in Algeri.''
MUSIC REVIEW
