The public probably will never know whether Jason Kidd had any influence in the firing of Byron Scott. But his role in the future of Lawrence Frank is obvious to everyone.
If Frank has Kidd on his side, he might not need much else.
Frank, the Nets' new coach, took his coaching honeymoon to Florida and improved to 2-0 with an 89-79 victory over the Orlando Magic. After the previous game, a blowout in Philadelphia, Kidd presented Frank with the game ball. On Thursday night at TD Waterhouse Center, Frank probably should have returned the favor.
A national television audience was introduced to Frank and saw the same old Kidd. Appearing wholly invested in the new regime and more energetic than he had been in more than two weeks, Kidd tallied 33 points, 10 rebounds and 8 assists.
''He's our Tom Brady,'' said Frank, whose team heads to Houston, site of this year's Super Bowl, on Friday. ''When he wants to throw the long bomb, he throws it. When he wants to throw the screen, he throws that.''
Before the game, Kidd listened to the crowd cheer as Tracy McGrady was announced as a starter on the All-Star team. Kidd finished third in the voting among Eastern Conference guards, behind McGrady and Allen Iverson, but he might have made some of the fans in the arena reconsider.
''Well, Jason Kidd is an All-Star player,'' Orlando Coach Johnny Davis said. Although McGrady scored 22 points, he was only 6 of 20 from the field. Richard Jefferson, known more for his scoring than his defense, pushed McGrady away from the basket and forced him to go 1 of 6 from 3-point range.
When Frank got the job this week, he held a private meeting with every player. His message for Jefferson was blunt: If Jefferson, a third-year forward, wanted to become an All-Star, he was going to have to become a better defender. In consecutive games, Jefferson shut down Glenn Robinson and did an effective job on McGrady.
''I've taken the challenge,'' Jefferson said. ''You have to make sacrifices. The coaches told me that in order to take my game to the next level, you have to stop people. You have to work on your defense the way you work on your jumper.''
If Frank had three objectives when he took over, they might have been to gain Kidd's respect, improve Jefferson's defense and invigorate an underachieving pool of reserves. In Philadelphia, Frank received double-figures scoring from Rodney Rogers and Aaron Williams. In Orlando, he turned to Lucious Harris.
Even though Harris missed his first four shots, Frank sent him back for the fourth quarter and started calling plays for him. Harris responded with five jumpers in a row during arguably his best stretch of this season. Every time the Magic cut the deficit to single digits, Harris knocked the lead back again.
''I'm just glad he had confidence in me,'' Harris said. ''We ran some plays to get shots. That was a big lift. When you're shooting the ball well and the coach is calling plays for you, it's a good feeling.''
Frank has tried to redefine the role of each player, and the Nets seem to be getting the idea. Playing with a sore wrist, Kenyon Martin cut down on his jumpers and bulled his way to the basket. He did not miss a shot in the last three quarters and finished with 18 points, 8 of 10 from the field.
For all the changes this week, there is one constant, no matter who coaches this team. The Nets are still at their best in the open court, with a scattered floor and Kidd in command. While most players stumbled early, Kidd hunted for shots and went 15 of 27.
''That's not my game, but Coach Frank encouraged me to shoot and knock it down,'' Kidd said. ''My job is to make some shots once in a while.''
His job is also to be the coach on the court, a conduit for the one on the sideline. Frank and Kidd are only in their first week together, but so far, the connection between the new coach and the old point guard seems clear.
REBOUNDS
Nets Coach LAWRENCE FRANK has extended an invitation for ALONZO MOURNING to return to the team, at least to sit on the bench.
Mourning, who announced his retirement in November to undergo a kidney transplant, called Frank this week to offer his support. Frank is writing Mourning's number on the grease board before every game to serve as motivation.
''I hope he's back with us in one capacity or another,'' Frank said. ''If everything looks great, we'd love to have him around.'' ED STEFANSKI, the Nets' senior vice president of basketball operations, said he doubted that Mourning could rejoin the team in any role this season.
PRO BASKETBALL
