The head of the board that investigated the Columbia space shuttle disaster has agreed to examine NASA's decision to cancel any missions to extend the life of the Hubble Space Telescope, agency officials said on Thursday.
The chairman of the Columbia Accident Investigation Board, Adm. Harold W. Gehman Jr., is to review the safety of having shuttle astronauts refurbish the orbiting observatory.
The administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, Sean O'Keefe, asked Admiral Gehman to step in after Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland, took issue with Mr. O'Keefe's decision to cancel a servicing mission to the telescope.
''My view is when someone is told they need major surgery, any prudent person would get a second opinion,'' Ms. Mikulski said in a statement. ''That's what I told Administrator O'Keefe, and that's what he has agreed to do.''
The Hubble scientific operations are based at the Space Telescope Scientist Institute at the Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The telescope is operated and managed by the Goddard Space Flight Center in nearby Greenbelt, Md.
Just days before, in a letter on Monday to Ms. Mikulski, Mr. O'Keefe said he would stand by his decision because a Hubble mission posed extra risks to astronauts. But after a discussion with the senator, Mr. O'Keefe agreed to ask Admiral Gehman for an opinion.
In a letter on Wednesday to Ms. Mikulski that she released, the administrator said his decision was based on following recommendations for safety and risk factors posed by the Columbia board. Therefore, he said, he asked Admiral Gehman ''to review the matter and offer his unique perspective.''
A spokesman, for the agency, Glenn Mahone, said that no timetable had been set for Admiral Gehman's opinion, but that he had agreed to conduct the review ''in an expeditious manner.''
Also on Thursday, Mr. O'Keefe led an agencywide commemoration of the lives that have been lost since the beginning of the space program. Speaking to employees at all agency centers through a television hookup, he declared that the last Thursday in every January be set aside as a Day of Remembrance for the agency to honor the crews of the shuttles Columbia and Challenger, as well as Apollo 1.
There was a moment of silence at each center, and flags were flown at half-staff.
The anniversaries of each tragedy fall with in a week and will be commemorated together in the future. The Apollo 1 fire on the launching pad on Jan. 27, 1967, resulted in three dead astronauts. The Challenger explosion and loss of its seven-member crew was on Jan. 28, 1986. The Columbia disintegrated on re-entry on Feb. 1, 2003, killing all seven astronauts.
