A Bernini Bound For Fort Worth
All during last year's European Fine Art Fair in Maastricht, in the Netherlands, crowds gathered behind red ropes to glimpse Bernini's model for the Fountain of the Moor, at the southern end of the Piazza Navona in Rome. The combination of the sculpture's rarity, beauty and history -- and its $15 million asking price -- made it the talk of the fair.
This week the Kimbell Art Museum in Fort Worth announced that it had bought the Bernini, though its director, Timothy Potts, was quick to say it didn't pay $15 million. (He declined to say exactly what the museum spent.)
The institution also recently bought another important sculpture, a Renaissance bust, probably of Isabella d'Este, the Marchioness of Mantua, which is attributed to Gian Cristoforo Romano.
''We'd been looking at the Bernini long before it was at Maastricht,'' Mr. Potts said. ''It took time and scholarship to decide.''
The sculpture depicts a river god with Moorish features struggling to hold a carplike fish as the fish's head emerges between his legs spouting water. Experts consider it to be the finest surviving terra cotta by Bernini, making the Kimbell an important place for scholars of Baroque art.
Standing 32 inches high, the model is believed to be the artist's largest terra cotta. Records show that it was made as a presentation model for Pope Innocent X, who commissioned Bernini to design a new centerpiece for the Piazza Navona fountain in 1651. The sculptor had designed the Fountain of the Four Rivers a few years earlier as a focal point for the refurbished plaza.
The Fountain of the Moor model was offered at Sotheby's in London in July 2002, and was bought by the Salander-O'Reilly Galleries in Manhattan for $3.2 million. Because it was not signed, the auction house at that time only attributed it to Bernini. But months of scholarship and technical examinations confirmed that it is from the master's hand.
''There has been nothing as remotely important as this Bernini to come on the market for years,'' Mr. Potts said. ''It is exceptionally finely finished and detailed, in a way that was only required for a presentation model. In fact it is so precise in its rendering that many of the details were simplified on the finished model.''
The other sculpture the Kimbell acquired has been on loan to the museum for the last nine months from Daniel Katz, the London dealer, who sold it to the Kimbell. Attributed to Romano, one of the leading sculptors of Renaissance Italy, the bust had been in the private Thyssen-Bornemisza collection in Madrid, which sold it to Mr. Katz.
Mr. Katz said that knowing Mr. Potts's tastes and interest in sculpture, he offered it to the Kimbell first.
That it is a bust of a woman makes it particularly rare. So does the distinctive dress, with its sleeves and puffs on the shoulder that are held together with large ribbons.
The marchioness's flowing hair, bound by a ribbon, epitomizes the fashions of northern Italian women in the late 1490's.
That the subject was Isabella d'Este, one of the great art patrons of her day, also adds to its importance, as does its pristine condition.
''Nothing would have pleased me more than to find the equivalent paintings, but nothing as remotely important came along,'' Mr. Potts said. ''We are buying sculpture of the quality and importance as paintings that the Kimbell bought a quarter of a century ago.''
Fitting for a King
A suit of Renaissance armor that has been on display in the permanent collection of the Metropolitan Museum of Art since 1932 turns out to have been made for King Henry VIII and worn during his last battle, the siege of Boulogne, in 1544. For more than seven decades the Met had thought the armor, which has richly etched and gilded decorations, had belonged to Anne de Montmorency, the constable of France during the 16th century,
This latest discovery didn't happen overnight. It has been brewing for 40 years. In a 1964 issue of Connoisseur magazine, the English scholar John Hayward published a 1558 inventory of the armory of the earls of Pembroke, who had owned it. The inventory listed nothing from the constable of France, but it did list one piece belonging to Henry VIII.
''That got a lot of people interested in questioning whether our armor was indeed the king's,'' said Stuart W. Pyhrr, the curator of arms and armor at the Met. ''Because of lack of evidence, however, the museum did not change its attribution.''
But more recently, Claude Blair, another English scholar and a retired curator of metalwork at the Victoria and Albert Museum in London, analyzed the English royal inventories. He realized, Mr. Phyrr said, that they included armor belonging to Henry VIII that sounded a lot like the one at the Met. Mr. Blair was also able to unearth a royal inventory that showed the transfer of one of Henry VIII's suits of armor from the royal collection to the Earl of Pembroke's.
Five years ago Mr. Blair teamed up with Mr. Pyhrr for further research. In addition to the inventories, there were physical likenesses that substantiated the evidence. The armor had Tudor roses as decorative studs on its shoulders; it also matched the description of a piece of three-quarter armor. And experts say its form, construction and decoration are obviously Italian, confirming the Italian attribution in one of the king's inventories. Size gave the curators another clue: it had been altered to adapt to the king's unusually large frame.
The earls of Pembroke owned the armor from the 1550's until 1929, when it was sold to Clarence H. Mackay, a trustee of the Met, who sold it to the museum in 1932. ''When it came to the Met we were proud to acquire it because of its notable and splendid provenance,'' Mr. Pyhrr said. ''Now the museum can boast the only armor of Henry VIII in the United States and one of a half-dozen royal armors.''
Inside Art
