The Islanders' Jason Blake was controlling the puck in the middle of overtime against the Boston Bruins on Thursday night. Ahead of him his teammates were surging out of the defensive zone, and he circled back to give himself room.
The extra flourish cost him and the Islanders.
Glenn Murray crept in on Blake's blindside to steal the puck and lunged forward to scoot a shot that went between the legs of goalie Rick DiPietro 2 minutes 25 seconds into overtime for a 2-1 Boston victory at the Fleet Center. Murray scored both Bruins goals.
''It wasn't my first bad decision and probably won't be my last one,'' Blake said.
Closely contested games between the Bruins and the Islanders have become as regular as frigid temperatures this season. The teams had tied twice before.
But the Bruins have stung the Islanders two straight times late in games. P. J. Axelsson's goal with less than two minutes left on Tuesday allowed the Bruins to escape with a 2-2 tie at Nassau Coliseum.
Points are becoming significant as the borderline playoff contenders jostle for position, and the Islanders (24-20-5-2) have lost the chance for 2 points in jarring fashion. They have talked about establishing more consistency on the road. Although they are 5-3-2-1 in their last 11 games away from home, they are 7-12-4-2 over all. ''We have to start doing the little things better,'' defenseman Roman Hamrlik said. ''Too many turnovers. It's been frustrating. We can still play better.''
The Islanders had a blip of luck. They were down a man and a goal midway in the second period. Forward Oleg Kvasha skidded to a patch of open ice and ripped a desperate slap shot. The puck somehow bounced out of Boston goalie Andrew Raycroft's glove and into the net.
Outplayed and outhustled at that point, the Islanders had set themselves up to possibly steal a game against a team it might be battling for the postseason come March.
The game ended in regulation at 1-1 as the teams logged 34 minutes in penalties after combining for two minutes in their previous encounter.
Meanwhile, a bit of off-ice intrigue emerged because of the on-ice performance of Islanders forward Mariusz Czerkawski. In a miserable first shift, Czerkawski failed to clear the puck twice and was penalized for tripping. He was not on the team bench in the second and third periods. But Coach Steve Stirling and Czerkawski attributed it to back spasms, and Czerkawski said it would not have been fair to his teammates for him to continue playing.
DiPietro made two spectacular stops in the final 11 seconds of regulation to preserve the tie. He made 36 saves as his five-game unbeaten streak ended.
The Islanders' passion finally surfaced when Arron Asham pumped a series of right fists on the head of the Bruins' Jiri Slegr late in the second.
The long-term absences of Aleksei Yashin and Mark Parrish and the short-term absence of Michael Peca, out for his third game with a torn chest muscle, did not make for an ideal visit to Boston.
Stirling was not thrilled but he was not angry either. ''We got a point on the road,'' he said.
HOCKEY
