That Police Officer Richard S. Neri Jr. shot and killed an unarmed teenager last week is not in dispute. But there are a swirl of questions to be considered by a grand jury, which could meet as early as today to hear evidence in a case that some have called an accident and others have called murder.
The shooting took place on a Brooklyn housing project roof where Officer Neri and the 19-year-old victim, Timothy Stansbury Jr., were on either side of a rooftop door as it opened. Mr. Stansbury, with two friends behind him, was using the roof as a shortcut to a birthday party around 1 a.m. on Saturday morning. Officer Neri and his partner, Jason Hallik, were patrolling the roof, about to check the stairwell for suspicious activity. Immediately after the shooting, officials have said, Officer Neri, who has not yet been formally interviewed by investigators, made statements suggesting he had been startled by Mr. Stansbury and that his gun had gone off, perhaps in a reflex action that police academies try to guard against during training.
One central question is whether the officer perceived a threat -- whether Mr. Stansbury was moving quickly toward the officers, for example. While Mr. Stansbury's family might not view that as a mitigating factor, the police have pointed out that housing project roofs, especially at night, are favored places for drug dealers and rapists. Still, the two witnesses who were with Mr. Stansbury on the landing say that they had not touched the door when it opened and a shot was fired. But the officers both say that the door swung toward them just as they were opening it, according to law enforcement officials and a person who has been briefed on Officer Neri's account. Officer Hallik has said that after the door opened, he stumbled and Officer Neri fired.
Another person who has been interviewed by investigators, a 14-year-old who did not see the shooting, is said to have heard one of the two eyewitnesses, Terrence Fisher, 19, and Shawn Rhames, 23, saying afterward that Mr. Stansbury had pushed open the door, which jibes with the officers' accounts.
A second question is how far apart the officer and the victim were when the shot was fired. Could Mr. Stansbury have been close enough to grab the officer's gun? Or close enough to make a full assessment of the situation difficult?
Physical evidence may not be much help. Dr. Lawrence Kobilinsky, a forensics expert at the John Jay College of Criminal Justice, said that it was possible to determine the precise distance between a handgun muzzle and a victim only up to about 18 inches. Any farther, he said, and it becomes virtually impossible to tell.
Another question is the degree of visibility. The roof was dark, and the stairwell, at least on a visit the night after the shooting, was lighted. Mr. Stansbury's companions have told investigators that they were standing single file, with Mr. Stansbury in front, and did not see the officers when the door opened.
Officer Neri has said that he saw only Mr. Stansbury, said the person who has been briefed on his account.
Another central question is whether Officer Neri, whose gun was drawn, had it raised and pointed, and if so, whether his finger was on the trigger or held parallel to the barrel. Police officers are taught to use their judgment when deciding whether to have their hand on their gun, the gun drawn and pointed down, or raised, but they are usually cautioned to keep their finger off the trigger.
Police guns have a double-action trigger, which means they do not have to be cocked before they are fired, but it is more difficult to squeeze the trigger. In New York, officers are required to keep a bullet in the chamber. Dr. Geoffrey P. Alpert, an expert on police use of force at the University of South Carolina, said that a well-trained officer would have had his finger parallel to the barrel if he were holding his gun. But even then, he said, a shot could be the result of a reflex action. The trigger requires five to eight pounds of pressure, depending on the gun.
''When you're out in the field and your blood pressure's up and your nerves are racked, that's not a lot of pressure,'' Dr. Alpert said.
In the end, the question of whether or not Officer Neri perceived a threat may not sway a jury. Part of a police officer's job requires the assumption of risk, even if that means getting shot, said one former chief who spoke on the condition that his name not be used. ''That's the nature of the job,'' he said. ''It's not a tactical error. And those people who can't accept that shouldn't be policemen.''
