The Democratic presidential contenders attacked President Bush on Thursday for his handling of Iraq and terrorism and for his stance on trade and the economy and insisted that their party would be able to compete against him in the South.
Their exchanges, at a debate in one of the seven states with nominating contests Tuesday, reflected the changed dynamics of the presidential race since Senator John Kerry won the first two contests, in Iowa and New Hampshire.
Howard Dean, shifting easily to dart thrower from the target he played in earlier debates, questioned Senator Kerry's record and effectiveness. Dr. Dean's challenge came more than midway through a debate that up until then had been largely civil, with the seven candidates focusing their fire on Mr. Bush instead of on one another.
''Just to make this a little less mellow,'' Dr. Dean began, setting up a suggestion that Mr. Kerry had little to show for his 19 years in Washington. ''When I was governor, I got everybody in my state who is under 18 health insurance.
''Now, Senator Kerry is the front-runner, and I mean him no insult, but in 19 years in the Senate, Senator Kerry sponsored nine, 11 bills that had anything to do with health care, and not one of them passed. If you want a president who is going to get results, I suggest that you look at somebody who did get results in my state.''
Dr. Dean, subdued but seeming a bit prickly over his campaign's sinking fortunes, also suggested that the other candidates had appropriated his themes.
''Everybody on this stage, or a lot of people on this stage have now embraced my message,'' he said. ''They all talk about change. They all talk about bringing people into the party. The truth is, I stood up for that message when nobody else would.''
Still the candidates generally focused on what they described as President Bush's failures, faulting him for his conduct on national security and on the economy.
''A president has to be able to walk and chew chewing gum at the same time,'' said Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, arguing that Mr. Bush had focused on the war on terrorism at the expense of other domestic needs.
Senator Kerry said Mr. Bush had exaggerated the threat from Iraq, and he mentioned the failure to find unconventional weapons in Iraq and the failure to link Al Qaeda with Saddam Hussein.
''I could run a long list of clear misleading, clear exaggeration,'' he said. ''They are really misleading all of America, Tom, in a profound way.'' He was responding to a question from the moderator, Tom Brokaw of NBC.
Asked about a call by David A. Kay, the former chief American weapons inspector in Iraq, for an independent investigation of what Mr. Kay said were broad failures in intelligence, Dr. Dean said he had opposed the war in Iraq because ''I simply didn't believe what the president was saying.''
''What we now find out,'' he said, ''is that the vice president, Dick Cheney, went to the C.I.A. on at least one occasion, and maybe more, sat with middle-level C.I.A. operatives and berated them because he didn't like their intelligence reports.
''It seems to me that the vice president of the United States therefore influenced the very reports that the president then used to decide to go to war and to ask Congress for permission to go to war.''
And Gen. Wesley K. Clark said: ''When the Bush administration came to office, the Bush administration was told the greatest threat to America is Osama bin Laden. And yet almost nine months later, when the United States was struck, there was still no plan as to what to do with Osama bin Laden.''
''This administration did not have its priorities right,'' Mr. Clark said, ''and the president -- not the intelligence community and not the previous administration -- President George W. Bush must be held accountable for that.''
Senators Edwards and Kerry and Dr. Dean all called for an independent commission to investigate the intelligence on which Mr. Bush relied to argue that Saddam Hussein had unconventional weapons.
The candidates also seemed to want to impress Southern voters here in the state seen as the gateway to the Southern primaries.
Dr. Dean emphasized his good relations with the National Rifle Association, saying he had worked with the gun lobby to set aside thousands of acres for conservation and hunting.
Senator Kerry reassured the audience that he was not giving up on the South, despite at least three statements he made in New Hampshire suggesting that Democrats could win without carrying any states in the region. He said those statements had been in response to mathematical questions about the Electoral College and whether it was possible for a Democrat to prevail without carrying any Southern states.
''I've always said I will compete in the South,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I've always said I think I can win the South.''
He said he would do so by talking ''mainstream American values.''
The candidates also discussed the economy in a state that has lost more jobs than at any time since the Great Depression, seen its manufacturing base steadily disappear overseas and watched 65,000 jobs in the textile industry alone vanish in the last 10 years.
Dr. Dean said that the North American Free Trade Agreement ought to be changed to extend labor and environmental protections to America's trading partners.
''You've got to put the emphasis on fair trade, not free trade,'' he said. ''And what the problem has been that when the Clinton administration and the Bush administration continued to push this, only half the job was done. We forgot about the workers.''
But Mr. Lieberman said Democrats should ''rightfully brag about the Clinton economic record,'' which he said created 22 million jobs. ''Trade was a key part of that, and Nafta, though it's cost some jobs, has actually netted out 900,000 new jobs that were created by Nafta,'' he said.
''Now, the jobs that are leaving South Carolina, very few of them are going to Mexico and Canada,'' Mr. Lieberman said. ''They're going to Asia. And there the Bush administration hasn't had the guts to stand up to China, and other countries there, who are ripping off patents and copyrights of ours, who are fixing their currency in a way that gives them a price advantage and causes jobs here to be bled out of the country.'
Mr. Kerry, who vowed to give American workers a ''fair playing field,'' said the president was ''selling their jobs out to large corporations,'' and he vowed to close tax loopholes that reward companies for moving offshore. He also attacked Mr. Bush for promising $120 million for technical training for workers in his State of the Union address, ''when they cut a billion dollars over the course of the last few years.
''That's like kicking down the barn door and saying, 'Here are some twigs. Rebuild it,' '' Mr. Kerry said.
Representative Dennis J. Kucinich, who calls for repealing Nafta, demurred when Mr. Brokaw suggested that Americans were used to paying less for clothing made overseas, even if it cost South Carolinians jobs.
''That presumes that people of this country do not have a social consciousness,'' Mr. Kucinich said. ''I believe they do.''
It was Mr. Edwards who sought to connect most with voters here.
''This is personal to me,'' he said, noting that he was born in a textile-mill village 40 miles from Greenville.
''I've seen mills close, I've seen what it does to communities, I've seen what it does to families.
''And all this talk among politicians in Washington about, 'We're going to get you job a retraining program, we're going to make sure that we give you the transportation to get to a new job' -- say that to a 50- or 55-year-old man who's been supporting his family his entire life working in a mill.''
The chairman of the Democratic National Committee, Terry McAuliffe, has said that any candidate who does not win a state on Tuesday should drop out of the race. But all of them suggested on Thursday that they would win states and would carry on.
Mr. Edwards said, ''This is a place where I believe I can and should win.''
The Rev. Al Sharpton spurned the idea of getting out.
''There are people that I can bring into the process that won't come in if someone like me is not in the process,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''I've been inspired in this campaign hearing John Edwards talk about he's a son of a mill worker. Well, I'm the son of a man who couldn't be a mill worker because of the color of his skin. But his son can be the president of the United States.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEBATE
