Consolidated Edison said yesterday that improperly insulated wire beneath a metal plate had contributed to the death of an East Village woman who was electrocuted while walking her dogs this month.
The company also said that as a result of the accident, it would finish checking within a month its 250,000 manholes and service boxes for stray voltage, and that it would begin conducting yearly inspections of all underground structures to check for similar problems. The utility, which released a report on its accident investigation yesterday, said an exposed wire underneath the plate was supposed to have had two layers of insulation on it, but when workers performed routine maintenance on it last year, they put on only one layer.
The report details what happened on Jan. 16, when the woman, Jodie S. Lane, was killed after she stepped on an electrified metal plate in front of 342 East 11th Street. According to the report, a repair crew arrived to find 57 volts of electricity running up the side of the underground service box to the plate above.
When the workers went into the opening beneath the plate, they discovered an insulated wire with a partly exposed end inside the service box. The utility's inquiry concluded that the wire had been wrapped in electrical tape in January 2003 during a routine service call.
Since then, the tape had degraded to the point that the copper wire was partly exposed and was making contact with the frame of the service box, thus electrifying the metal plate above.
''In a normal insulation job, you are supposed to do a combination of rubber and plastic taping,'' Michael S. Clendenin, a Con Ed spokesman said. ''In this case, only plastic tape had been used.'' Corrosion would have been far less likely in such a short time had there been two layers of tape, he said.
The Public Service Commission, the state regulatory body that oversees Con Ed, is also conducting an investigation.
''What the company announced this afternoon will be considered,'' said Edward S. Collins, spokesman for the commission. ''But our office still has its own questions it wants answered, and we will be doing a thorough investigation to get those answers.'' Mr. Collins said the commission needed to review the accident and the National Electric Safety Code to ensure that Con Ed had been in full compliance. He would not say when that report would be released.
In a written statement, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg commended Con Ed for its ''straightforward and responsible assessment of the tragic events.'' He also said the city's Department of Transportation would ''continue to work with Con Edison so that they can provide electricity safely to all New Yorkers.'' He again conveyed his condolences to Ms. Lane's family and friends.
Ms. Lane, 30, a doctoral student in clinical psychology at Columbia University Teachers College, was killed while walking her two dogs on a slush-covered street near her home. Her father, Roger M. Lane, reached by phone at his home in Austin, Texas, said the family had no comment about Con Ed's investigation and would not say whether they had hired a lawyer.
Professor Barry A. Farber, Ms. Lane's friend and faculty mentor at Columbia University Teachers College, said: ''It makes me feel better that the company is finally admitting culpability. At the same time, it makes Jodie's death all the more tragic since it was avoidable.''
Absent in Con Ed's report was any mention of the effect that corrosion from rock salt might have had on the wire. Soon after the accident, Con Ed said the city's use of rock salt to melt snow and ice regularly contributed to the corrosion of underground electrical wires. ''We were not sure at the time, nor are we now, what caused those wires to erode,'' Mr. Clendenin said. ''Salt or any other factor could have been involved. We just don't know.''
Manny Hellen, president of Local 1-2 of the Utility Workers Union of America, said he remained skeptical of the investigation's findings. ''They still have a hit-and-run approach,'' he said. ''The real problem here is that the company is using outside contractors with no experience to do dangerous work, and they are rushing workers to finish jobs rather than do it right.''
Mr. Clendenin said Con Ed had records of who did the taping work on the wire, but he would not comment on disciplinary actions or other personnel matters.
