Secretary of State Colin L. Powell assured Turkish leaders Thursday that in a newly sovereign Iraq the Kurds would have to relinquish their control of oil resources in the north.
But on the second day of a visit to Washington by Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkish officials said they remained concerned that the United States might still yield to Kurdish demands for an autonomous state, which the Turks strongly oppose.
Turkey and other neighbors fear that an Iraq split up into ethnic or religious enclaves could stir up their own restive minorities. Asked if he still feared that Iraq could end up broken up into Kurdish, Sunni and Shiite regions, Mr. Erdogan demurred.
''We could say that the waters are murky at the moment,'' Mr. Erdogan said. ''And we need to clear the water, clear the air, if you will.''
A Turkish official traveling with the prime minister said the Turks remained ''very worried'' about the Bush administration's plans for the future of Iraq.
These concerns, Turkish officials said, were not dispelled by what they called a generally successful visit to repair relations that American and Turkish officials say have been battered over the last year.
An initial blow occurred on the eve of the Iraq war a year ago, when Mr. Erdogan's newly installed government in Ankara rebuffed an American request to let the Fourth Infantry Division use Turkey as a base to open a northern front in the military campaign to oust Saddam Hussein.
After the war, the United States made a strong effort to get Turkish forces to help secure parts of Iraq. Turkey reluctantly agreed, but the Iraqi Governing Council, handpicked by the United States, rejected the idea, embarrassing the United States.
Mr. Erdogan's visit was hailed by American officials as a sign that relations were on the mend.
President Bush said on Wednesday that he appreciated Mr. Erdogan's ''steadfast determination to fight terror,'' alluding to bombings that have killed civilians in Istanbul.
Mr. Bush also told Mr. Erdogan that United States wants Iraq to be ''a peaceful country, a democratic Iraq that is territorially intact.''
Administration officials said the status of the Kurdish area remains to be worked out in negotiations between the Governing Council and Kurdish leaders, five of whom sit on the Council.
Some have described these discussions as among the most nettlesome before Iraq regains sovereignty. Lately, however, the discussions on future governance have become snagged on how a future legislature and prime minister will be selected.
Envoys from the United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, are expected to determine whether the American plan for an elaborate system of caucuses to choose a legislature will be acceptable to a leading Shiite cleric, Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, or whether it has to be revised.
Administration officials say that whatever happens, the Kurdish area is unlikely to continue to enjoy the full autonomy that it has had since 1991, when the United States imposed a ''no-flight zone,'' barring Mr. Hussein's forces from attcking the region by air and effectively granting the Kurdish area independence. Once the Iraq war began last year, Kurdish forces moved into some oil-rich areas of the north, including Kirkuk.
American officials said that, on this visit, Mr. Erdogan and his aides pressed to make sure that revenues from Kirkuk and other oil sites would go to the central Iraqi government in Baghdad, and Mr. Powell agreed.
Mr. Powell said there was a full understanding that ''all the major resources will belong to all the Iraqi people.''
Mr. Powell also pledged American support for Turkey's efforts with Greece to resolve their dispute over Cyprus. That dispute has been an impediment to Turkey's desire to join the European Union this year.
Membership in the union would mean tremendous economic advantages for Turkey.
In a speech at the American Enterprise Institute, Mr. Erdogan said Turkish membership would prove that a Muslim country was welcome in the Western world.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: NEIGHBORS
