Coming at the end of a dismal and frigid January, ''The Big Bounce,'' directed by George Armitage from a script by Sebastian Gutierrez, is like a paid Hawaiian vacation -- somebody else's. Everyone involved with this picture, the second screen adaptation of Elmore Leonard's first foray into crime fiction, seems to have had a good time making it, which was nice for them, but it may not do you much good. There are a few vicarious pleasures to be gleaned --a pungent, off-kilter one-liner here, a sly sight gag there, enough smooth, uncovered flesh to titillate all tastes and persuasions -- but the movie itself seems to have been misplaced amid all the sun and surf, the pineapples and bikinis.
What remains is a loose and lazy caper, held together by the decidedly unstrenuous performances of a gaggle of charming and attractive actors, many of them apparently flown in for a handful of scenes and a round of tropical drinks. Gary Sinise, as a ruthless hotel developer with vague underworld ties, sneers and grimaces a few times and then tumbles headlong down a flight of stairs. Willie Nelson and Harry Dean Stanton play dominoes. Charlie Sheen, adorned with thankless facial hair, takes off his shoes and receives a punch in the nose (though not in that order). Bebe Neuwirth, whose pallor suggests that all her scenes were filmed right after her plane landed, opens a parasol, crashes a grocery cart, pours herself a few drinks, and fires a gun (more or less in that order).
The bulk of the work -- if you can call it that -- is handled by Owen Wilson, Morgan Freeman and Sara Foster, a fetching former magazine model who slips comfortably into the movie's easygoing ambience (and out of various flimsy garments). Mr. Wilson, with his usual relaxed demeanor, plays Jack Ryan, one of the genial small-time crooks dear to Mr. Leonard's heart. Jack, a onetime legitimate employee of Mr. Sinise's character, finds himself mixed up with Walter Crewes (Mr. Freeman), a local judge with a side interest in vacation real estate, and also with Nancy Hayes (Ms. Foster), the mogul's mistress. He teaches her how to break into beach houses in broad daylight, and she recruits him for a big score.
The usual double-crosses and convolutions ensue, but the narrative is so haphazard that the whole thing -- both the caper and the movie that contains it -- seems to have been hastily improvised. In Mr. Leonard's fiction the plot is often a swift, functional vehicle for comic observation and piquant characterization, and Mr. Armitage, who directed ''Miami Blues'' and ''Grosse Pointe Blank,'' has previously shown a knack for this kind of offhand, comic-noir storytelling.
Mr. Wilson, with his drawling, self-interrupting delivery and a demeanor that simultaneously suggests great intelligence and a commensurate reluctance to apply it, is always fun to watch. But with its feel-no-pain Jimmy Buffett vibe, ''The Big Bounce,'' which opens nationwide today, might have been made by one of Mr. Buffett's more dissolute beach-bum characters.
''We need a new plan,'' Walter remarks toward the end, at which point you may still not be too clear on what the old plan was. But nobody else seems to be, either, and if it doesn't bother them, I guess I'm in no position to complain. ''Sometimes,'' Walter says earlier, offering a bit of inexplicable wisdom to Jack, ''things are exactly as they appear.'' True enough. And sometimes, a movie can be even less than meets the eye.
''The Big Bounce'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has brief nudity, less brief seminudity, some profanity and a bit of casual violence.
THE BIG BOUNCE
Directed by George Armitage; written by Sebastian Gutierrez, based on the novel by Elmore Leonard; director of photography, Jeffrey L. Kimball; edited by Brian Berdan and Barry Malkin; music by George S. Clinton; production designer, Stephen Altman; produced by Steve Bing and Jorge Saralegui; released by Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time: 107 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Owen Wilson (Jack Ryan), Morgan Freeman (Walter Crewes), Gary Sinise (Ray Ritchie), Sara Foster (Nancy Hayes), Willie Nelson (Joe Lurie), Vinnie Jones (Lou Harris), Bebe Neuwirth (Alison Ritchie), Willie Nelson (Joe Lurie), Harry Dean Stanton (Bob Rogers Sr.) and Charlie Sheen (Bob Rogers Jr.).
FILM REVIEW
