A senior House Republican warned on Thursday that President Bush was on a collision course with Congress over his plans to reduce the deficit by almost freezing the growth of discretionary programs aside from military and domestic security items.
A briefing paper distributed to Republican lawmakers by the chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, Representative C. W. Bill Young of Florida, estimated that a complete freeze on the discretionary programs -- excluding military and domestic security proposals -- would save only $3 billion next year.
By contrast, White House budget officials are trying to reduce a budget deficit that they say could reach $500 billion or more this year.
To cut that deficit by half in the next five years while continuing to increase military and domestic security spending, President Bush is expected to call for limiting the growth of all nonmilitary programs from housing vouchers to education to only 1 percent.
Mr. Young, in a paper prepared for Republican lawmakers attending a two-day retreat in Philadelphia, noted that the discretionary domestic programs Mr. Bush seeks to restrain account for only 17 percent of the total federal budget.
Two-thirds of the $2.3 trillion federal budget is consumed by mandatory spending -- entitlement programs like Social Security, Medicare and Medicaid, as well as interest payments on the rising federal debt. Military and domestic security budgets consume another big chunk, which Mr. Bush wants to raise by 7 percent, to $401 billion. That leaves only about $445 billion for all other domestic programs that Mr. Bush would limit to increases of 1 percent a year.
''Solely targeting nondefense discretionary spending will not have a significant impact on the deficit,'' according to Mr. Young's memorandum.
''The biggest challenge for appropriators will be balancing the presidential budget promises with traditional Congressional priorities,'' the memorandum continued.
Echoing worries of other Republican leaders, Mr. Young predicted that the first big clash would come as early as next week over Congressional proposals for a sharp increase in spending for highways and mass transit projects.
The House Transportation Committee has proposed spending $375 billion over the next six years, almost $145 billion more than Congressional analysts predict would come in from gasoline taxes.
If enacted, the House bill would amount to a 72 percent increase over the last major transportation law. Financing all those demands would require increasing gasoline taxes, tapping into the government's general revenues or borrowing more money.
In the Senate, lawmakers have proposed a transportation bill that would cost about $311 billion over six years. On Thursday, members of the Senate Finance Committee tentatively agreed to make up for part of the missing gas-tax revenue by dipping into the government's general revenues, then replacing part of that money by eliminating some corporate tax shelters.
But the financing gap is big enough that lawmakers in both parties have floated the idea of simply borrowing money by selling new highway bonds.
''This will be the first big test for spending discipline,'' said Representative Jim Nussle, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the House Budget Committee.
Many budget analysts are skeptical that Mr. Bush can persuade Congress to limit the growth of nonmilitary discretionary spending to 1 percent. The costs of many government programs are rising faster than that rate, and President Bush just signed an omnibus spending bill that will increase federal salaries by about 4 percent.
Making matters more difficult, Mr. Bush is proposing increases in some favored programs, like $1 billion more for NASA, increases in education and an expansion of certain job-training programs.
Republican lawmakers attending the Philadelphia retreat began to receive briefings on Thursday from administration officials about the coming budget and the White House's agenda for the year.
But a growing contingent of conservative Republican lawmakers has begun to complain about the overall lack of spending restraint.
Representative John Shadegg, Republican of Arizona, said Mr. Bush's plans to restrain nonmilitary spending were likely to be ''insufficient.''
''I am concerned we are not going to hear what needs to be said,'' Mr. Shadegg said shortly before the retreat began. ''If you look at the growth in discretionary spending, not mandatory spending, it has averaged a little over 9 percent a year. We are growing the federal budget two or three times as fast as the average family budget.''
