''The Perfect Score,'' which opens nationwide today, is a thin, pleasant teenage heist comedy with a chewy nugget of social criticism buried inside it. Actually, it isn't buried very deep at all. The movie, directed by Brian Robbins from a script by Mark Schwahn, Marc Hyman and Jon Zack, begins with an indictment of the Scholastic Aptitude Test, and pauses several times in the course of its desultory action to complain about the regime of standardized testing that turns America's young people from vibrant, complicated individuals into calculable quantities, pigeonholing them before they have figured out who they are.
One of the problems with timed standardized testing, according to Anna (Erika Christensen), an academic superachiever whose parents are pushing her to go to Brown, is ''stereotype vulnerability,'' the tendency of members of certain groups to perform not according to their abilities but according to societal expectations. I'm in no position to judge the merits of this theory with respect to the SAT, but stereotype vulnerability afflicts just about every movie set in an American high school.
A semi-snide allusion is made to ''The Breakfast Club,'' John Hughes's melodrama of suburban detention-hall bonding, and ''The Perfect Score'' similarly assembles a collection of familiar types. In addition to uptight Anna, there is pouty, punky Francesca (Scarlett Johansson, in what is probably the last of her schoolgirl sidekick roles); Roy, the stoner (Leonardo Nam, a newcomer and natural scene-stealer); and Desmond (Darius Miles of the Portland Trail Blazers), a star athlete.
What brings them together is a plan hatched by Kyle (Chris Evans) and Matty (Bryan Greenberg), best pals who are too bland to be stereotypes, to redress the injustice of the SAT by breaking into Educational Testing Service headquarters and stealing the answers. Kyle, who dreams of being an architect, does not have the scores for Cornell, and Matty's are too low for the University of Maryland, where he wants to go to be reunited with his girlfriend.
The other four have their own reasons for going along with the scheme, which proceeds in spite of the usual security cameras and night watchmen. The heist plot, in any case, is really meant to provide the characters with a chance to challenge one another's prejudices (and those of the audience) and to learn the kind of valuable lessons that show up only on exams at screenwriting school.
''Perfect Score'' addresses matters of race, sex and class in a whisper and is perhaps too quick to assert the essential niceness of its characters. But they are likable enough, and the movie's combination of earnestness and cheek is likely to appeal to young people in need of relief from their post-holiday academic stress.
It is hardly surprising that in the end the filmmakers sell out the radicalism of their premise, and slink away from the anti-testing barricades, but it also feels like a bit of a cheat.
''The Perfect Score'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It has some profanity and drug use.
THE PERFECT SCORE
Directed by Brian Robbins; written by Mark Schwahn, Marc Hyman and Jon Zack, based on a story by Mr. Hyman and Mr. Zack; director of photography, Clark Mathis; edited by Ned Bastille; music by John Murphy; production designer, Jaymes Hinkle; produced by Roger Birnbaum, Jonathan Glickman, Mr. Robbins and Mike Tollin; released by Paramount Pictures. Running time: 110 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Erika Christensen (Anna), Chris Evans (Kyle), Bryan Greenberg (Matty), Scarlett Johansson (Francesca), Darius Miles (Desmond) and Leonardo Nam (Roy).
FILM REVIEW
