Following are excerpts from statements by the Democratic presidential candidates last night at a debate in Greenville, S.C., as recorded by The New York Times:
GEN. WESLEY K. CLARK  On Washington
I want to make very clear that I'm not a career politician. I'm not a Washington insider. I am an outsider. And I'm running this race as someone who's spent his life in leadership and public service in this country. Not someone who's part of the problem, I'll be the solution to the problem. If the American people like what's going in Washington, then they should vote for people who've been there and been part of the Washington scene -- No Child Left Behind and all the rest. I haven't been. I've had the courage to stand up for what I believe. I'm standing up now.
HOWARD DEAN  On Personal Liberty
I think none of us mind being searched and have our shaving kits rummaged through in the airlines and all that. But if we start giving up our fundamental liberties as Americans because terrorists attacked us, then we have a big problem. . . . We have a right to protection of our liberties. A lot of people died for that in the Revolutionary War. And I am not going to let the right wing of the Republican Party take those liberties away from us.
SENATOR JOHN EDWARDS  On President Bush
I think the problem here is the administration is not doing the things, No. 1, that need to be done to keep this country safe, both here and abroad. And No. 2, the president actually has to be able to do two things at once. This president thinks his presidency is only about the war on terrorism, only about national security. Those things are critical for a commander in chief. But as we're going to talk about, I'm sure, going forward, there's a lot the president's not doing, about jobs lost, about a health-care crisis in this country. The president of the United States has to actually be able to walk and chew gum at the same time, has to be able to do two things at the same time.
SENATOR JOHN KERRY  On the South
I've always said I think I can win the South. I think the person who has to worry about coming down to the South and campaigning is President George Bush, who's had 36 months of sustained loss of manufacturing jobs, who has ignored health care, who's turned his back on the schools in the South and who is fundamentally the worst administration in modern history with respect to the environment.
REPRESENTATIVE DENNIS J. KUCINICH  On Trade
We are losing our manufacturing base. Some of these trade laws, you can't even buy America the way they're set up. And so, you know, my position: Buy America, or bye-bye America.
SENATOR JOSEPH I. LIEBERMAN  On the Iraq War
The statements that this administration made before the war, the questions we now have about the intelligence about weapons of mass destruction, the failure of the Bush administration to be prepared for what to do after we overthrew Saddam have all unfortunately given a bad name to a just war. But the fact is, Saddam Hussein himself was a weapon of mass destruction. He mass-murdered hundreds of thousands of people, did support terrorists, did hate the United States, did attempt to assassinate former President Bush. So I will never waiver in my conclusion that the world and America are safer with Saddam Hussein in prison and not in power.
THE REV. AL SHARPTON  On His Candidacy
I'm going to win because I'm speaking the issues and interests of people that have been ignored. It's almost contradictory to say, 'If you don't win, get out.' Did you come in to win, or did you come in to stand up for something -- and make that win? And I think that that's what's wrong. We have become too cheap. We act like we're at a racetrack betting on horses, rather than dealing with the fact that 75,000 lost their jobs in South Carolina. And there are people that I can bring into the process that won't come in if someone like me is not in the process.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
