In a reversal in both tone and tactic, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg assailed the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday for voting to expand its capital budget by $231 million to buy new rail cars for the Metro-North line, which has been hobbled with service problems this winter.
Mr. Bloomberg, who wants the M.T.A. to help pay for an expansion of the No. 7 subway line and take over city-run private bus lines, suggested yesterday that the authority was shortchanging the city with the purchase of the 120 new cars.
''I think the M.T.A. has sort of forgotten that they were created to be a regional transportation system,'' Mr. Bloomberg said at a news conference in Washington Heights. ''And the center of the region is right here in the city. We have people in Co-Op City, we have people in Queens who don't have the kind of mass transit that they deserve, and the M.T.A. should focus on first providing that before they go and enhance the transportation they already provide elsewhere.''
Mr. Bloomberg added, ''They've had a fare increase, they get a lot of money from the city, they get a lot of money from the state and they should provide the services that the public needs and the public deserves.''
The mayor's comments represent a change in both his public speech and his negotiating style. In the past, the mayor has been loath to criticize other government agencies, officials or authorities, preferring instead to assert blandly that everyone will always do right by the city. In 2002, Mr. Bloomberg was the first official to foreshadow a subway fare increase, and indeed to defend it. ''I'm sympathetic to any agency,'' he said at the time. ''The fact of the matter is we have services, they cost money and somebody's got to pay for them.''
But his remarks yesterday appeared to be the most telling example so far of the mayor's intention, as articulated in his recent address on the state of the city, to ''never back away from fighting any opponent -- or confronting any obstacle -- that would prevent our people from achieving all of their dreams in our New York.''
But what particularly angered Mr. Bloomberg, according to officials involved in the discussions with the transit agency, was that the authority has consistently cited its own ill fiscal health to resist buying the city-subsidized bus lines that serve New Yorkers in corners of the city that are not served by subways; such a takeover would require new buses, as the current fleet is aged and in poor condition.
The M.T.A., however, will now issue new debt to add 120 M7 electric cars to an existing train car order for Metro-North's use. Metro-North has experienced persistent service problems in the cold weather. ''They raise fiscal issues on buses,'' one administration official said, ''but for something like this they find a way to resolve the issue. That was a little too in-your-face for the mayor.''
Further, the Bloomberg administration is worried that the purchase will alter the funding formula Albany uses to divide up money for the transportation authority's capital program. The program, which pays for system restoration and expansion, currently splits the money 75-to-25 in favor of New York City Transit over the commuter railroads, but the outlay for the new trains will change the balance to 72-28, a difference that could mean hundreds of millions of dollars if it carried over to the next capital program.
Yesterday, Peter S. Kalikow, the chairman of the authority, tried to mollify the city's representatives to the board -- who all voted against the release of funds to buy the new cars -- by assuring them that the city would essentially be made whole in the authority's next capital budget. Mr. Kalikow reassured city officials ''that this was not a precedent-breaking formula,'' said Tom Kelly, a spokesman for the authority. ''Metro-North is under the gun because their fleet is the oldest in the M.T.A.''
But city officials were nonplused, because the transit authority board that would vote on the next capital budget will be made up of new members.
Yesterday, Mr. Kelly read a statement from Mr. Kalikow: ''While we always strive to address the parochial interest of local officials, such as CityTicket for New York residents, it is the mandate of the M.T.A. board to provide safe services for all our 8 million daily customers throughout the metropolitan region.'' (CityTicket allows weekend travel at discount rates on commuter trains within New York City.)
Yesterday's change to the capital budget requires the unanimous approval of an obscure board that includes powerful members of the State Legislature; city officials are hoping that that board will kill the changes.
