New York City has agreed to pay a deputy warden at Rikers Island $325,000 to settle a lawsuit in which he claimed he was punished and harassed by senior correction officials for supporting Mark Green, the Democratic candidate in the 2001 mayoral election.
The deputy warden, Lionel Lorquet, said he was passed up for promotions, transferred to less desirable commands in the Department of Correction and told by superiors who supported the Republican candidate, Michael R. Bloomberg, that ''your life will be miserable'' if Mr. Green lost the election.
The threats culminated in August 2001, Mr. Lorquet's lawyers said, when correction officials, with the knowledge of William J. Fraser, the department's commissioner at the time, secretly videotaped a fund-raiser held at Mr. Lorquet's home for Mr. Green's campaign. The videotape, which the lawyers showed to reporters yesterday, shows that two correction employees, a captain and an investigator, taped Mr. Lorquet, his vehicles and license plates and the guests who attended the fund-raiser.
''Mayor Bloomberg should condemn what's on this tape,'' said Norman Siegel, one of Mr. Lorquet's lawyers, who also urged the mayor's office to investigate other employees involved in the surveillance. ''If he doesn't comment on it, he's condoning it.''
A spokesman for the mayor did not return calls for comment yesterday. But Kate O'Brien Ahlers, a spokeswoman for the city's Law Department, which negotiated the settlement, said the surveillance videotape was part of a departmental investigation into allegations that Mr. Lorquet had pressured subordinates to contribute to Mr. Green's campaign. ''The city strongly believes that the D.O.C. acted appropriately,'' she said, ''and does not admit any fault by the D.O.C. or any liability.''
In a deposition to Mr. Lorquet's lawyers, Mr. Fraser, who was appointed by Mayor Rudolph W. Giuliani in November 2000, testified that he knew of the videotaping plan but did not object to it. Another correction official, Eric Perry, the director of the department's investigative division at the time, said in a sworn statement that the videotaping of Mr. Lorquet's fund-raiser had been ordered by Elmer Toro, who was then a deputy commissioner in the department, above Mr. Lorquet's rank.
Mr. Toro has since retired and did not testify in the suit, brought in Federal District Court in Manhattan.
Mr. Siegel said the settlement required the department to treat Mr. Lorquet's future applications for promotion fairly and allowed Judge Jed S. Rakoff of Federal District Court to monitor that treatment.
Steven J. Hyman, another of Mr. Lorquet's lawyers, said he would urge the Bronx district attorney, Robert T. Johnson, whose jurisdiction covers Rikers Island, to investigate the videotaping episode and Mr. Lorquet's allegations.
''Nobody is investigating what they did to Lionel,'' Mr. Hyman said.
Thomas Antenen, the spokesman for the current correction commissioner, Martin F. Horn, declined to comment on the settlement. Asked if Rose Gill Hearn, the commissioner of the city's Department of Investigation, would look into Mr. Lorquet's complaint, a spokeswoman, Emily Gest, said only that the matter was under review.
