He bellows in outrage at what has become of his country in three short years, at the upside-down ethos of cronyism and unfairness that he says has taken hold in the White House.
He vows to rescue the economy, education, health care and the environment. He says he will take back the flag for Democrats and take the fight to the Republicans as only a decorated war veteran and seasoned foreign policy hand could.
And yet, in the climax of his forceful, upbeat stump speech these days, after the stentorian rebukes of President Bush and the scornful derision of Howard Dean, there remains a plaintive note in Senator John Kerry's appeal to voters.
In increasingly crowded gymnasiums, meeting halls and diners, Mr. Kerry all but pleads with Democrats to see past the more electric appeal of Dr. Dean, his chief rival, to heed their brains and not their hearts, to avoid what Mr. Kerry warns would be a catastrophic mistake for the party and the country: making Dr. Dean the Democratic standard-bearer in November:
''When you go to those caucuses on the 19th, don't go and just send America a message,'' Senator Kerry urges. ''Go and send America a president of the United States.''
The line captures so much of Mr. Kerry's outlook: the certainty that he, more than any Democrat, is ready to be president, that he has the greatest ''breadth, and depth, and length of experience'' in international and domestic affairs.
It conveys his conviction that Dr. Dean would be ''eviscerated'' in a general election, giving Democrats who support him in the primary the short-lived satisfaction of a primal scream followed by four more years of Republican-inflicted misery.
The line deliberately plays, as well, to the many supporters who see in Mr. Kerry's height, silver mane and long, craggy face a candidate for Mount Rushmore. ''Put a beard on him and he's Abraham Lincoln,'' a woman in Cedar Rapids, Iowa, said after meeting him.
For all the optimism that is fueling Mr. Kerry's late drive, though, the send-America-a-president line also holds a hint of wistfulness. Not so many months ago, after all, he had little reason to fear that voters might see a message, or a messenger, in Dr. Dean.
Mr. Kerry does not easily arouse passions the way Dr. Dean can with his staccato sentences and pugnacious one-liners. If Dr. Dean is a candidate for the millisecond-attention-span generation, Mr. Kerry seems most comfortable when he sounds like a 19th-century orator.
Sniping among the campaigns is ''the hurly-burly.'' Republicans will exploit the gaps in Dr. Dean's experience ''to a fare-thee-well.'' He extemporizes in fully formed paragraphs. His answers to questions typically take six to eight minutes. Working with a prepared text, Dr. Dean drops whole sections, and Mr. Kerry adds them.
When he tries to connect with listeners, Mr. Kerry often sounds like an old-time traveling salesman. ''I say to you,'' he begins when he wishes to emphasize. ''My friends,'' he will say, to reassure. ''I tell you what I'm gonna do,'' he promises, before sketching out his ideas.
He has ideas galore.
''We're going to go to the Moon right here on Earth,'' he says, outlining his 10-year plan to liberate the country from its reliance on fossil fuels and create 500,000 jobs in the process: ''Because never should young Americans in uniform be held hostage to America's dependence on oil from the Mideast.''
He pledges to deliver health insurance once and for all, by taking catastrophic cases out of private insurance risk pools, lowering premiums for workers and employers, covering all children through Medicaid, letting adults 55 and over buy into Medicare early and letting anyone buy into the health care plan for federal employees.
''This is personal to me,'' he says, telling audiences of his prostate cancer surgery last year. ''I'm cured because I had great health care, for two reasons: I had money and could afford it, and I'm a United States senator, and senators and congressmen give themselves, thanks to you, a pretty good health care plan.''
He promises a ''0-to-8'' program of health care and education for young children, ''because it's time in America that instead of spending $50,000 a year to lock young people up for the rest of their lives, that we spend $10,000 a year for Early Start, Smart Start, Head Start, early childhood education,'' he says. ''We're going to hold George Bush accountable for making a mockery of the words 'leave no child behind.' ''
Mr. Kerry says he will pay back young people for two years of community service with four years of free college tuition. That he will pay for his program by rolling back tax cuts for the rich. He talks of incentives for job creation, of crackdowns on companies moving jobs overseas, of cutting the budget deficit in half in four years.
And he vows to go to the United Nations soon after taking office and ''turn over a proud new chapter in America's relationship with the world.''
To hear Mr. Kerry tell it, the world's most complex problems are simple, or at least easily manageable. Their solutions require little more than common sense, effort, engagement and the kind of Rolodex of international leaders he has been amassing for decades.
''It's Foreign Policy 101, folks,'' Senator Kerry says of the wrong-headedness of the United States occupying any Middle-Eastern country. It's no wonder, he says, that North Korea is pursuing its nuclear program, because America declared a doctrine of preemptive war, invaded Iraq and began developing bunker-busting nuclear weapons, all while refusing to negotiate. ''What a wasteful, stupid way to conduct foreign policy,'' he said in Jefferson, Iowa.
For Mr. Kerry, ideas are important, but the record makes the man. Want someone to stand up to the special interests, to the powerful, to the Republicans in Congress? He has done it, he says.
''I've led the fights to stop Newt Gingrich from destroying the Clean Air Act, and Clean Water Act,'' he said in Algona, Iowa. ''I led the fight, which I'm proud to say we won, to stop them from drilling in the Arctic Wildlife Refuge.'' Just as he says he ''led the fight'' for Democrats against Oliver North, Manuel Noriega and Ferdinand Marcos.
None too implicit in Mr. Kerry's emphasis on his experience is that Dr. Dean lacks foreign policy and military experience, while Wesley K. Clark, who is challenging Mr. Kerry for second place in some New Hampshire polls, lacks domestic experience.
His own experience, Mr. Kerry says, is precisely why he would be best prepared to face President Bush in November.
''George Bush announced that he wants national security to be the central issue of this campaign,'' Mr. Kerry said Wednesday night in Merrimack, N.H., lampooning the president's ''mission accomplished'' moment last year: ''Well, I know something about aircraft carriers for real. And if he wants it to be the central issue of this campaign, I've got three words for him that I know he understands.''
The Kerry fans in the audience of nearly 300 people were already shouting the words:
''Bring it on!''
This is the second article of a series looking at the basic campaign speeches of the presidential candidates.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
