It was the spring of 2001 when an employee of the Boys Choir of Harlem went to Walter J. Turnbull, the founder and director of the world-renowned group, with shocking news: a 14-year-old student in the choir's academy had just accused the school's chief counselor of having molested him repeatedly for years.
The police were not called. Afraid for his beloved institution, Dr. Turnbull chose instead to meet with the boy, investigators for the city say. The boy asked that the counselor be dismissed. ''You don't make that decision,'' investigators say Dr. Turnbull replied. The counselor remained, and the school did not investigate, investigators say.
That silence was eventually broken when the student's mother went to the authorities that fall. The counselor was arrested, tried, convicted and sent to prison on a two-year term for sexual abuse.
Now, the behind-the-scenes activity at the choir has been revealed in a startling memorandum on the case that was sent last month to the choir's board of directors by investigators for the New York City schools. The existence of the memo, which urged the choir's board to dismiss Dr. Turnbull, was first reported yesterday in The New York Post and The Daily News.
The board has asked for the resignation of Dr. Turnbull and his brother, Horace, the choir's executive vice president.
At a news conference yesterday where they released the memo, investigators said the two men had let the counselor, Frank Jones Jr., stay in contact with students even after city officials explicitly banned him from the 650-student academy, a public school that is overseen and financed in part by the Department of Education.
Later, talking to reporters outside the academy on Madison Avenue in Harlem, Dr. Turnbull, 59, defended himself against the accusations and begged the board to keep him on.
''The board of directors has asked for my resignation,'' he said, even as the outraged parents of several choir members gathered around. ''I'm saying it's unfair. I have asked the board to reconsider.''
Horace H. Turnbull, 54, also speaking outside the school, said he and his brother had 35 years of experience with students and had never before had problems. ''I accept responsibility for the mistake,'' he said, ''but is the punishment warranted?''
Also yesterday, the abuse victim filed a $20 million lawsuit in State Supreme Court in Manhattan against the city, the school, the Department of Education, his abuser and several choir officials, including the Turnbulls, The Associated Press reported.
''We have not seen the lawsuit yet, but plan to evaluate it thoroughly,'' said Kate Ahlers, a spokeswoman in the city corporation counsel's office.
The accusations against the Turnbulls have dealt the choir and its academy a painful blow at a time when both are struggling with their finances, as they have on and off for many years. The crisis could signify the end of an era for the group, which has performed from Yankee Stadium to Tokyo, and the beginning of a decidedly shaky future.
Two days before Christmas -- as the choir was preparing for its traditional holiday engagement at Avery Fisher Hall -- investigators sent the memo and a letter from the Manhattan District Attorney's office to the choir's board. The memo detailed an escalating pattern of abuse, from 1998 to 2000, that Mr. Jones, the academy's director of counseling, inflicted on a boy referred to as Student A. The abuse began as kissing, the memo said, and eventually involved massages and fondling.
The memo also charged that the Turnbull brothers had failed to report the complaints of abuse to the authorities. Even after city officials tried to bar Mr. Jones from the school in September 2001, he was allowed to remain so close to students that he was called upon to chaperone at least eight choir trips, the memo said.
''I find it extremely troubling that no action was taken against Frank Jones Jr. after the abuse was brought to the attention of Horace Turnbull and Dr. Walter Turnbull,'' Lisa M. Friel, the chief sex crimes investigator for the district attorney's office, wrote to the board. ''Frank Jones was not fired, he was not suspended, there is not even any evidence that any investigation was conducted into these allegations.''
The choir has long been a staple of New York's cultural scene, performing classical, contemporary and gospel music at prominent places like Lincoln Center, Carnegie Hall, Radio City Music Hall and Gracie Mansion, in addition to touring the world. Dr. Turnbull, who founded the group in 1968, has been its conductor, trainer and guiding force.
As a result, arts professionals expressed dismay at the news of the investigators' memo.
''My reaction is sad,'' said Schuyler Chapin, the former Department of Cultural Affairs commissioner. ''Walter Turnbull is an enormously gifted man, and the work he has done with the Boys Choir has been first rate. This is just a shame.''
Some worried that the news could jeopardize the group's future. ''You have to hope this doesn't affect the important work of the choir,'' said Anthony P. Coles, who served as deputy mayor for planning, education and cultural affairs under Rudolph W. Giuliani.
''The choir is an international landmark,'' Mr. Coles added, ''and has been a wonderful program for years, adored all around the world.''
Arts executives describe Dr. Turnbull as a tough taskmaster who produces young singers with talent as well as poise.
''They are the most well-behaved, courteous kids,'' said David Rodriguez, executive director of the Apollo Theater, which has presented the choir on several occasions. ''If these were your grandchildren, you'd be a proud grandparent.''
Dr. Turnbull also established the Harlem Girls Choir, which made its concert debut in 1997 at Alice Tully Hall in Lincoln Center.
His school, formally known as the Choir Academy of Harlem, educates students in fourth through 12th grade. The city pays for teachers, equipment and standard academics, but the choir pays for counselors and musical instruction.
Like many New York cultural institutions, the Boys Choir has been struggling financially since the 2001 terrorist attacks, which hurt ticket sales and fund-raising. But the choir has been economically precarious for considerably longer, people familiar with the organization said. While Dr. Turnbull is widely credited with making the choir an artistic success, he is also generally known as a poor fiscal manager.
According to the investigators' memo, the Turnbulls were first told of the student's complaint against Mr. Jones in the spring of 2001 by George Reyes, who runs a smaller group within the choir. Horace Turnbull was ''outraged and concerned'' by the accusations and told Mr. Reyes, ''This could hurt the choir,'' the memo said.
In September 2001, the student's mother went to the police, the memo said. Hoping to enroll her son in another public school, the Frederick Douglass Academy, she went to that school's principal and told him about the abuse. The principal then told city education officials, who swiftly but unsuccessfully moved to bar Mr. Jones from the choir academy.
The order was never followed, investigators said. According to the academy's own log book, the memo says, Mr. Jones was visited at the school about 14 times after he was barred. The abused student even wore a recording device and visited Mr. Jones twice at his office in the school, the memo says.
The memo said that Margaret Bing-Wade, a city school official, told investigators that Horace Turnbull had complained to her that barring Mr. Jones was ''a hardship,'' because he was ''an integral part'' of the program.
''Even more disturbing than Jones's presence at the Choir Academy was his continued assignment as a chaperone of Choir Academy students on overnight performance tours,'' the memo said. ''Horace and Walter Turnbull, aware of allegations of sexual abuse by Student A, allowed Jones to chaperone 42 students on a nine-day tour of Japan in September 2001.''
Beyond its renowned performances, the choir has served as something of a neighborhood organization to Harlem youngsters, and some arts executives expressed concern that its work in the community might suffer.
Mr. Rodriguez, for one, praised the sense of self-discipline that is instilled in the young people who are part of it.
''Its continuation is critical,'' he said.
Correction:  January 15, 2004, Thursday  A front-page article on Friday about the investigation of an abuse complaint against a counselor at the academy of the Boys Choir of Harlem referred imprecisely to the routing of a letter about the case by Lisa M. Friel, chief sex crimes investigator for the Manhattan district attorney's office. It was addressed to Richard Condon, special commissioner of investigations for the New York City School District, who forwarded it to the choir's board with his memorandum about the case. Ms. Friel did not send it directly to the board.
