After a four-year absence from the Mercedes Championships, Stuart Appleby is making the most of his return.
Opening the PGA Tour season with a seven-under-par 66, Appleby held a one-stroke lead heading into Friday's second round of the Mercedes Championships. Darren Clarke was one stroke off the pace after an opening-round 67, while Justin Leonard (68), Vijay Singh (68), Scott Hoch (68) and Kirk Triplett (68) were tied for third place, leaving an inconsistent Tiger Woods (71) and the struggling defending champion Ernie Els (73) with ground to make up.
Only players who won a Tour event in 2003 qualified for the Mercedes, and Appleby gained entry with his victory at the Las Vegas Invitational in October. It was the fourth victory of Appleby's career, and more evidence that his life is headed in a positive direction.
In 1998, Appleby experienced an unthinkable tragedy, when his wife, Renay, was struck by a car and killed outside a train station in London after the British Open.
For months, it was difficult for Appleby to focus on golf, or on anything else. But with time, Appleby has settled into a new life. He has been married for just over a year to Ashley, and her influence, coupled with his talent, has allowed his game to blossom.
''I guess I did go through a lot of personal issues that somehow I managed to separate from my golf,'' said Appleby, a 32-year-old native of Australia. ''I look back and go, 'How did I do that?' In the middle of a golf shot, that was the only thing in my mind. Everything else apart from that golf shot felt like a mess. Now with the stability that I have and feel with Ashley, I have much more continuity and balance in my life now.''
Making the turn at one under par, Appleby started his run with a 14-foot birdie putt at No. 10. Then at the par-3, 164-yard No. 11, Appleby hit a superb 9-iron tee shot that made his heart skip a beat.
''You get a hole in one there, you get a Mercedes,'' Appleby said.
He came close, but the ball stopped six feet from the cup, and Appleby made the putt for his second birdie, followed by an eight-foot birdie putt at No. 12.
Now Appleby had momentum, and after settling for par at No. 13, he made another move. He birdied the par-4, 305-yard No. 14, hitting a superb drive that stopped just short and right of the green.
Appleby got up and down for the birdie, then at the par-5, 555-yard No. 15, he reached the green in two shots, leading to another birdie. His last birdie came at the par-5 finishing hole, when he made a tricky 10-footer. ''I thought I missed,'' Appleby said of his final putt. ''I guess I missed it in the hole.''
The only bogey Appleby made came at No. 1, when he pulled his drive into trouble, forcing him to take a drop and a penalty stroke. He actually did well to get up and down to save bogey, but from there his day took off.
Woods was not as fortunate, but he ended the day with a huge lift, making a 25-foot birdie putt at No. 18. Although Woods made birdies at Nos. 6, 8 and 10, he wasn't sharp, particularly early. He started with a bogey at No. 1 and followed that with a double bogey at the par-5 No. 5.
''It was one of those rounds where either I hit a great shot or I hit a terrible one,'' Woods said. ''There was really nothing in between. I just kept making mistake after mistake. It felt like all day I was trying to fight back.''
After his final putt disappeared into the hole at No. 18, the crowd that had been waiting all day for Woods to do something special finally roared, and Woods was relieved.
''I was glad to run out of holes,'' Woods said. ''I probably would have messed up on the next one.''
Meanwhile, Appleby took the first step to what he hopes will be another strong season, after finishing a career-high 12th on the money list last year. Appleby has never been more confident or content with his game. And he has begun to see the results on the course.
''It's an honor to play here,'' he said. ''It's a privilege to play here, playing with the best players of the year previous. Mentally I feel fine. I don't think any player can deny that.
GOLF
