With Humor In High Gear
No one really expects to see or hear a Rube Goldberg invention in motion. But tomorrow night a dozen of his zany machines will come to life entertainingly -- if not efficiently -- at the Jewish Community Center in Manhattan.
Andy Biskin, a composer and filmmaker, has not actually built Goldberg's whimsical contraptions, but animated them and set them to music. For instance, families will be able to see how Goldberg (1883-1970), a Pulitzer Prize-winning cartoonist, imagined a ''self-operating napkin.''
''It's basically attached to the pendulum of a clock,'' Mr. Biskin said, ''so the napkin swings back and forth.'' He used Goldberg's original drawings to make his film, titled ''Goldberg's Variations.'' At first he intended only to write music for the artwork, but he decided the images needed to move. ''It was kind of fun to get into the physics of it,'' Mr. Biskin said, noting that he sometimes had to reposition figures like a drunk bird or a cat that had had too much caffeine. He has also featured Goldberg's convoluted texts onscreen.
Mr. Biskin's jazz score, which he will play live with his sextet, seems to emanate from the inventions. ''Some have obvious sounds, like horns blowing and apples dropping on kettle drums,'' he said. (The apples appear in ''A Sure Way to Keep Your Head Down During a Golf Shot.'') But he has also written themes and interludes that capture the wheels turning in Goldberg's mind as well as in his devices.
Mr. Biskin's program complements ''The People of the (Comic) Book: Superheroes and Jewish Culture,'' a tribute to Jews in the comic-book industry, on view at the center through March 11. The exhibition's activities for children include a Create a Comic workshop for ages 10 to 13 tomorrow at 7 p.m. ($25; members, $20) and a Comic Book Extravaganza on Sunday from 1 to 4 p.m. ($10 and $7). The 75-minute ''Goldberg's Variations'' is for all ages. But, Mr. Biskin added, ''a certain type of 8- or 9-year-old boy really gets this stuff in ways that we probably don't.''
''Goldberg's Variations,'' tomorrow night at 8 at the Jewish Community Center in Manhattan, 334 Amsterdam Avenue, at 76th Street, (646) 505-5708. Tickets: $20; members, $15.
You'll Laugh, You'll Cry
Plants aren't known for their vibrant personalities. But Kimberly Foster is an old hand at making the vegetable kingdom seem exciting (and to children, at that). Her last show, ''The Big Stew,'' starred carrots, broccoli and the like; her latest musical, ''Happy Flower and the Weeping Willow,'' is rooted, you might say, in the differences between sunny and somber outlooks.
Happy, a cheerful little flower, inhabits the light-filled Land of the Sillies, where there's nonstop joy. Weepy, a young willow, lives in the dark Land of the Wept, home to the ''sad and serious.'' And never the twain shall meet, since Grandfather Willow broke the magic bridge between the kingdoms 400 years ago and a disgusted Grandmother Willow went to live with the sunny folk.
Happy faces a crisis when Grandfather plantnaps her pet (not a Chia, but a blossom, Fluffy) and puts him in darkness. She meets Weepy after she swims over -- yes, these plants swim -- to look for Fluffy. Each learns from the other, and they help rebuild the bridge, not to mention their elders' marriage.
The results, presented by the Magic Bridge Theater Company and directed by Paul Urcioli, are delightful for 3- to 8-year-olds, for whom this 40-minute tale is ideal. The children are called on to do things they're experts at: laughing and crying. The show also has wry humor for adults, including a rude French tree and a hilarious moment when Grandmother echoes a line from ''Jerry Maguire.''
Joshua Sitron wrote the amusing score, and Molly Jade, Jeremy Alan Sykes, Ross Mihalko and Sarah Gliko make appealing vegetation. (In this case, that's high praise.)
''Happy Flower'' plays in tandem with ''Dolphin Up a Tree,'' another Foster show about making the inanimate animate: stuffed animals.
''Happy Flower and the Weeping Willow,'' Sundays at 1 p.m., and ''Dolphin Up a Tree,'' Sundays at 11 a.m., at the 78th Street Theater Lab, 236 West 78th Street, Manhattan, (212) 868-4444. Tickets for each, $12.95. Reservations advised.
A Degas Pas de Deux
Sometimes children aren't inclined to take a long stroll through a museum. So this weekend the Metropolitan will offer them an alternative: a brief dance.
As part of a new monthly program on making art, the Met will present ''The Little Dancer -- How Did They Do That?'' Youngsters will explore some of the tools and materials Degas used in his sculptures, then tour his small bronzes of dancers. Finally they will see his masterpiece ''Little Dancer.'' Total time: 20 minutes.
''We wanted to somehow introduce families to the tools and techniques of making art, and also give them a shorter format,'' said Mike Norris, an associate museum educator. Tomorrow only, Shannon Lazzarini, a former ballerina, will participate, perhaps by demonstrating dance poses or answering questions.
The ''Little Dancer'' event, to be repeated all afternoon both days, will complement the Met's 90-minute ''Look Again!'' programs for 5- to 12-year-olds (11 a.m. tomorrow and Sunday). But for families in a hurry, ''The Little Dancer'' will stand, or rather dance, on its own.
''The Little Dancer -- How Did They Do That?'' tomorrow and Sunday from 1 to 4 p.m. at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, (212) 570-3961. Free with suggested admission: $12; students and 65+, $7; under 12, free.
Family Fare
