After an assault at a Staten Island firehouse on New Year's Eve, in which one firefighter is accused of striking another in the head with a metal chair, putting him in critical condition, there has been much condemnation of ''firehouse culture.'' We have even heard calls for more rigid hierarchies in firehouses and stricter top-to-bottom oversight in the New York Fire Department.
But from what I've seen over the past four years of filming a documentary and writing a book about a firehouse in the Bedford Stuyvesant section of Brooklyn, I think the Staten Island case is an extreme aberration. And I fear that taking well-intentioned steps to moderate the atmosphere of the city's firehouses could be a deadly mistake.
What happened on Staten Island is of course inexcusable, but it has little to do with the firehouse culture I have come to know, which demands a baseline respect for fellow firefighters and fellow human beings. Unless such respect was at the center of a firefighter's outlook, why would he risk his own life to help others?
The group I have been following, Rescue Company No. 2, is an elite unit within the Fire Department, and its old-school, tough-guy attitudes are even more pronounced than those in most other city firehouses. New recruits have to earn the respect of veterans by enduring the silent treatment, tolerating jeers about their masculinity and bravery, and performing menial tasks like taking out the garbage and cleaning bathrooms. But this ''hazing'' is not an expression of gratuitous cruelty; it is a rite of passage that earns young men the respect their elders had to earn in the past.
One new Rescue 2 firefighter had a cake he brought to the company tossed into the trash can on his first day at work. Some of the older men wouldn't even speak to him at first. But he responded in a way that has worked for every firefighter I know: he manned a nozzle and pushed into an apartment roaring with flames. After that, he was accepted in the firehouse kitchen.
This process of joining a brotherhood is critical because firefighters are more like soldiers than civil servants. They work, live and bond like military combat units. Such bonding is a value that society appreciates in the armed forces, where even in today's reformed boot camp, harassment remains part of the making of good soldiers.
Like soldiers, firefighters see things that nobody else wants to: bodies burned to cinders, people in pain at the end of their lives, best friends dead at an early age. But soldiers typically see these things in foreign lands, which can allow them to more easily separate this extreme experience from their everyday lives. A fireman, however, must pull a screaming burn victim out of a fire, then drive home to dinner with his wife and children. Make no mistake about it: this is a job that exacts a tremendous psychological toll. And, since Sept. 11, 2001, that toll has increased immeasurably.
The physical toll is also remarkable: smoke headaches, sore joints, a perpetually runny nose, deep cuts and bruises from crawling in the dark, lungs and throat filled with black mucus, and a powerful nausea that can make a guy bend over and retch. One Rescue 2 veteran, Jack Pritchard, dragged a crib out of a room so hot that the plastic bars of the crib melted in his hands. My uncle Ray Downey, a former captain of Rescue 2, badly scorched his lungs when he ran without an air tank into a fire to save a young man. (He rose to deputy chief before he was killed on 9/11.)
Firehouses need to create men like these, men who are willing to risk their lives or get badly injured in order to save others. Amid all the hazing, firefighters are really seeking an answer to a simple question: is this the guy I want coming down the hallway for me if I get trapped in a burning building?
No question, the banter that flies across the kitchen table at Rescue 2 can be crude. Still, the taunts strengthen men and prepare them for a situation of absolutes. A firefighter who can keep cool in the kitchen is more likely to remain level-headed when things go horribly wrong at a fire. And respect for senior men is enforced because when all hell breaks loose in a fire, you need the junior men to follow their lead.
The ridicule firefighters often direct against one another's weaknesses is also important. When pride is at stake, a man is often able to push himself beyond pain and exhaustion. Peer pressure is a remarkable motivator. If a fireman flinches, he'll be eaten alive in the kitchen. A man can't ever back down from the flames -- not with the brothers watching his every move.
However, there are clear limits on how far one firefighter can go in harassing another, and physical violence is going too far. Partly, these limits are imposed by the firehouse captain; partly they are enforced by the men themselves. One reason the Staten Island case is so upsetting to firefighters is that is violates their most sacred duty: to protect other firefighters.
I believe that top-down oversight and a heavier hand by chiefs would threaten the bonds that connect firefighters, destroying the informal attitude that makes them teammates, regardless of rank or time on the job. Capt. Phil Ruvolo, the commander of Rescue 2, explained it to me this way: ''Everything's equal when you sit down in the kitchen. You're up for grabs. It doesn't matter if you're the new kid or the senior man, the lieutenant, the captain or the visiting chief. It's a great equalizer.''
Yes, some firefighters can can get out of hand -- and perhaps the most worrisome thing about the Staten Island assault was how eager the other members of the company apparently were to cover it up. But we must accept the risk of rare excesses -- punishing them severely when they do happen -- because, overwhelmingly, New York's firehouse culture creates good firefighters who are also very decent people.
Op-Ed Contributor Tom Downey is a filmmaker and author of the forthcoming ''The Last Men Out.''
