Just days after the estate of the former Beatle George Harrison filed a multimillion lawsuit against Dr. Gilbert Lederman, who treated him at Staten Island University Hospital, the hospital said that it would replace Dr. Lederman as chairman of the radiation oncology department.
Christian Preston, a hospital spokesman, said the change had been planned. He said it was part of a plan to move the department, which Dr. Lederman founded, in a more academic direction.
''It's becoming more of a residency and a fellowship program as opposed to just being a care facility,'' Mr. Preston said, adding that Dr. Lederman would stay on as director of the unit until his contract expired at the end of 2004, and could continue to work at the hospital as an attending physician. As reported yesterday in The Staten Island Advance, Dr. Jonathan Beitler of Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx will replace Dr. Lederman as chairman this month.
Mr. Preston said he did not know why the announcement was made this week, but added that it had nothing to do with the lawsuit.
On Wednesday, Dr. Lederman and his lawyer, Wayne Roth, hired the public relations firm Rubenstein Communications to handle the barrage of inquiries by the news media about the lawsuit, which accused the doctor of coercing the dying Mr. Harrison to autograph a guitar. In a statement released yesterday by the firm, Mr. Roth said the move had ''absolutely nothing to do with George Harrison or any issues concerning patient care.''
When asked to comment, a lawyer for Mr. Harrison's estate, Paul V. LiCalsi, said, ''We have no information from the hospital, but we find the timing curious.''
In November, Dr. Lederman agreed to a censure and a fine of $5,000 after the New York State Health Department investigated allegations of professional misconduct. The agency had claimed he revealed information about an unidentified patient to news agencies without the patient's consent. That patient died on Nov. 29, 2001, the day Mr. Harrison died at age 58.
The suit, which was filed on Tuesday in Federal District Court in Brooklyn, alleged that Dr. Lederman revealed confidential information about the musician and coerced him into signing autographs.
