Nokia, the world's biggest maker of cellphones, unexpectedly raised its earnings and revenue estimates for the fourth quarter on Thursday, citing significantly better business at its telecommunications network unit as well as improved handset sales.
''The strong seasonal development in both Nokia Mobile Phones and Nokia Networks exceeded even our own expectations,'' the company's chief executive, Jorma Ollila, said in a statement.
The announcement was a surprise, given that the company, which is based in Espoo, Finland, had earlier said that total sales for the quarter would be down from the period a year ago. Nokia is scheduled to report full results on Jan. 22.
The bullish estimates were the latest sign that the global telecommunications industry may be on the upswing after three troubled years.
Another sign also came on Thursday as Verizon Wireless, the largest wireless provider in the United States, said that it would spend $1 billion to deploy an advanced data network over the next two years.
Together, the evidence that consumers were buying more mobile phones and that phone companies were planning to spend more to build up their networks heartened investors on Thursday.  And while no one was predicting the kind of double-digit growth seen before the telecommunications bubble burst in 2000, some analysts said they saw signs of a real turnaround.
''December has been a blowout month for both handsets and networks,'' Marko Alaraatikka, a money manager in Helsinki, told Bloomberg News. ''Nokia is selling more high-end handsets now,'' said Mr. Alaraatikka, who helps manage $3 billion at Evli Investment Management and holds Nokia stock.
Shares of Nokia and some of its competitors surged , and shares of makers of network and phone equipment also closed sharply higher. Shares of Ericsson rose 14 percent in Stockholm trading, while Alcatel shares rose 10 percent on the Paris bourse.
American depository receipts of Nokia -- each representing one share of the Finnish company -- closed up 14 percent, at $20.47, in trading on the New York Stock Exchange. That was the biggest one-day gain for the stock since July 2001.
The network business has been the hardest hit by the slump in telecommunications spending. But Nokia estimated that quarterly sales at its network division reached 1.7 billion euros, or $2.17 billion, exceeding its earlier forecast of 1.4 billion euros.  Nokia also projected its total sales for the quarter at 8.8 billion euros, little changed from the a year earlier but stronger than the decrease it expected earlier.
And handset sales -- where Nokia derives the bulk of its total revenue -- were stronger than anticipated. Revenue was forecast to rise 4 percent, to 7 billion euros, up from an estimate of flat to slightly up. Nokia said it sold 55.3 million phones in the quarter.
Nokia also said per-share earnings would probably be 28 cents to 29 cents a share, up from an earlier forecast of 21 cents to 23 cents a share.
European mobile phone operators have sharply cut spending on their networks in recent years as they struggled to shrink huge debt loads. As traffic increases because of new ways to send data over cellphones, the networks have been strained. Operators are now ordering more equipment from Nokia than anticipated, analysts said.
''This shows operators are slowly opening up their wallets again, now that their cash flow has improved a lot,'' Rob van Oostveen, an analyst at ABN Amro Asset Management, told Reuters.
