Following are excerpts from a campaign speech by Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts in Algona, Iowa, on Dec. 30, as recorded by The New York Times:
This is the most important race that I can remember in my lifetime, and it's not because I'm running, it's because of what's at stake. It's because George Bush is leading the United States of America in a radically wrong direction, and I intend to turn it around. So I'm here today to ask you to join in this effort, not because this is one more day as we're going along towards the caucuses, but because we're here to mark the beginning of the end of the Bush presidency. Priority number one in this country.
Now, why? Well, in a famous moment that all of you remember, George Bush thought he could play dress-up on an aircraft carrier, and he thought he could stand up in front of a big sign that said ''Mission Accomplished.'' Well, what mission? Certainly not Iraq. But look at that ''Mission Accomplished'' measured against what's happening here in America.
He thought you wouldn't notice that all across the country, every minute two jobs are being lost. Every day we add $1 billion to the deficit of our nation. Well, the fact is we have noticed it, haven't we? And we understand, all of us, that the consequences are severe: 3.1 million people have been laid off. You go around Iowa, you go all around other states, you can meet the families that are feeling the consequences of that. I talked to a man in Waterloo, Bob Anderson. I remember he's about 46 years old, lost his job about a year ago, can't pay for health insurance, his wife has been diagnosed with cancer, he has nowhere to turn. Think George Bush worried about him? . . .
You know, when it comes to the lobbyists who earned $139 million over the last months, by turning that prescription drug bill into a prescription drug benefit for drug companies, and gave them $139 billion -- billion -- windfall profit; when it comes to the polluters, who are walking into the White House, writing the legislation, taking the Clean Air and Clean Water Act backwards, so that children and adults alike in America are breathing dirtier air, drinking dirtier water. In 28 states in America, parents can't take their kids fishing and hope to eat the fish. Not allowed to.
When it comes to the richest people in America getting another tax cut, at the expense of everybody in this room, George Bush can beat himself on the chest and look at America and say, ''Mission Accomplished.''
But when it comes to jobs, when it comes to health care for all Americans, when it comes to those prescription drugs, when it comes to children being left behind at schools with no after-school programs, when it comes to the environment and our responsibility to clean it up and leave it better than we were given it, when it comes to protecting Social Security and Medicare, it's not only not mission accomplished, ladies and gentlemen, it's not mission attempted. It's mission abandoned. And that's exactly why, when you add up the real deficit of this nation, it's not just measured in money, it's measured in the things we're not doing for the future, it's measured in the people abandoned, it's measured in the breach of faith, with the whole ethic on which this country is founded: fairness, fundamental fairness.
When you measure it all, and I will, every day across Iowa, across New Hampshire, across this country, it's going to be clear to everyone in America that the one person in the United States who deserves to be laid off is George W. Bush.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
