IN the photograph, the 11-year-old girl stands stiffly before a plain wall in her sleeveless, white crocheted dress, arms leaden, mouth shut. Her grave face is tightly framed by long hair and bangs, which almost conceal her eyes. She stares back at us from the shadow cast by the bangs, with a look that I might register as fear, although who is to say for sure? The heavy formality of the transaction between photographer and subject announces itself. The girl is clearly responding to the person making this portrait, whose presence we sense. By its nature the picture tells us who this photographer is. She makes sure that we know.
Diane Arbus once compared movies to photographs. ''When you go to the movies and you see two people in bed,'' she said, ''you're willing to put aside the fact that you perfectly well know that there was a director and a cameraman and assorted lighting people all in that same room, and the two people in bed weren't really alone. But when you look at a photograph, you can never put that aside.''
Two traveling Arbus shows have occasioned a fresh blizzard of tributes and invective. A full-dress survey, sanctioned by the Arbus estate, at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art, the first major retrospective since the landmark posthumous one in 1972, will get to the Metropolitan Museum next year, when I'll make my way toward a fuller verdict on Arbus's whole career.
Meanwhile, another show, the appetizer to that event, you might say, opens on Monday at the Grey Art Gallery at New York University. It has been organized by the Mount Holyoke College Art Museum and the Spencer Museum of Art at the University of Kansas.
The exemplary polarizing artist, Arbus, who was 48 when she committed suicide in 1971, was either a compassionate renegade who dignified and threw herself into the lives of the marginal subjects to whom she gravitated, or she was an exploitative narcissist of morbid eloquence for whom, as Susan Sontag acidly wrote 30 years ago, America was ''just a freak show, a wasteland.'' Ms. Sontag memorably elaborated: ''The subjects of Arbus's photographs are all members of the same family, inhabitants of a single village. Only, as it happens, the idiot village is America. Instead of showing identity between things which are different (Whitman's democratic vista), everybody is shown to look the same.''
This is not quite true, by the way -- some family members look more freakish than others in Arbus's photographs. But toward the end of her life, Arbus did say in passing that she imagined a kind of family album of her work. From this remark, the show arriving at the Grey, ''Diane Arbus: Family Albums,'' has devised its slender thesis.
The core of the exhibition is a cache of more than 200 previously unseen photographs, both contact sheets and finished prints, which Arbus made for a private commission at the end of December 1969. She was hired by a rich and prominent actor and theater owner, Konrad Matthaei, and his wife, Gay (a Mount Holyoke alumna), to shoot a family Christmas gathering at their Upper East Side town house. Their elder daughter, Marcella, was the 11-year-old. There were also a toddler son, Konrad Jr., and a younger daughter, Leslie, who, as the exhibition was being put together, decided she did not want any of the photographs of herself published; so at the last minute they were excised from the show's catalog.
Arbus started out as a commercial photographer working with her husband, then became an artist on her own. To support yourself as an art photographer during the 1960's, even if you were Arbus and your work had been shown in the Museum of Modern Art, was not easy. Divorced, Arbus continued to take commercial jobs to augment her income. The Matthaeis, being fashionable people who collected art, hired Arbus, a fashionable artist. She spent two days photographing them -- unobtrusively, according to their accounts, while they went about their business -- occasionally posing them on a sofa below their Monet, or shooting them singly, as with the photograph of Marcella and another one of Konrad Jr., a generic cutie on his rocking horse.
Because of the tight grip the Arbus estate has kept on the use of her photographs and private material, these family pictures have been received gladly by information-starved Arbus scholars, notwithstanding that this was clearly a minor gig for her. They provide some kind of window onto Arbus's working method while on commission, but with the exception of Marcella's portrait and one or two other pictures -- not a bad percentage, considering -- the photographs are uniformly routine and banal.
Beefing up the show to satisfy the publishers of the catalog, the organizers have thrown in whatever else they could that seemed relevant. This means more commissions: the Spencer Museum owns prints of photographs Arbus shot for Esquire magazine, along with some of their contact sheets; as with the Matthaei contact sheets, these suggest how Arbus operated on assignment and reveal which pictures she or her editors liked best.
She photographed Mae West, Ozzie and Harriet Nelson, Bennett Cerf, the famous atheist Madalyn Murray and Marguerite Oswald, Lee Harvey Oswald's mother. You see them negotiating their images in the contact sheets. Oswald smiles sweetly. Arbus manages a single full-length shot in which her expression hardens slightly. That's the one Esquire published.
Cerf wouldn't allow his corporate face to fall while Arbus tried posing him at the breakfast table, on the street, on his couch. A cropped, garish close-up, in which he laughs into a flash, makes him seem slightly maniacal. Bingo.
These works are mixed up at the Grey with a few others, including Arbus's famous photograph of a boy holding a toy grenade; the picture of Andrew Ratoucheff, the dwarf actor, in his rooming house; and the iconic one of twins. John Pultz, an associate professor of art history at the University of Kansas, and Anthony W. Lee, an associate professor of art history at Mount Holyoke, the show's curators, have latched onto the family album theme to tie all these disparate works together, a clever but vain gambit that is sometimes unintentionally hilarious. Oswald, Tokyo Rose and the stripper Blaze Starr are grouped under the heading ''mothers''; Norman Mailer, Cerf and Ratoucheff are ''fathers.''
This hopeful rubric says more about the practical difficulty of cobbling together an Arbus show than it does about the thematic weight of Arbus's remark about a ''family album.'' She also once likened her work to a butterfly collection. Arbus was the classic hunter-photographer shooting her fragile prey; her targets were rarefied specimens, exceptional cases; her mission was a clinical typology of difference. An element of violence was implicit.
Families are groups. Arbus, who called all families ''creepy,'' used her camera to measure individuals against society; she thought of herself as set apart, too, by talent. Although we erect facades, our true selves, which are evasive, can be captured by those with talent and the right butterfly net, she believed.
''Everybody has this thing where they need to look one way, but they come out looking another way, and that's what people observe,'' she said, adding, ''You see someone on the street, and essentially what you notice about them is the flaw.'' That is what she noticed, at least.
I recommend the catalog essays by Mr. Pultz and Mr. Lee, who range intelligently across familiar topics like the rise of art photography, the postwar American Jewish family and social upheaval during the 1960's, and who recount the influences of Walker Evans, Weegee and August Sander on Arbus.
In fact, her differences from them are equally instructive. They all kept their distance. Arbus trafficked in a kind of hothouse intimacy, which can easily be confused (as she occasionally wished) with sympathy, a moral pose. But she was not a ''concerned photographer.'' Her work, like all allegorical art, comes down to formal manipulation. The cliché of her as the Sylvia Plath of photographers, combined with the way her photographs direct your attention to her presence, can obscure the difference between what is in the pictures and what we might like to read into them.
Arbus exploited the ready vocabulary of documentary photography for newly subjective ends. This was her radical achievement. Frankness became her fictive tool, as it is for realist painters to whom the formal properties of their medium are as much at issue as sharpness of focus, flash, framing and frontal gaze were with Arbus.
Arbus did not celebrate things as they are, as her fans like to say, but as she willfully conceived them. The frontal gaze she favored only implied, as it always does, honesty, directness and cooperation. We stare at Ratoucheff or at Marcella, and the usual photographic process of transference takes place. We imagine them imagining us imagining them, as we also imagine ourselves as them. Arbus pressed the rhetorical intimacy further, strewing clues. We read additional traces of identity in the detritus of bedrooms or backyards.
But all photographs are just fragments, atomizing time. The dichotomy between truthfulness and artfulness in Arbus's case is false. Whether you admire or disdain her blatant sensationalism -- because that's what it is -- the quality of your reaction is a measure of her obvious graphic novelty.
You can sense her possible sympathy in the portrait of Madalyn Murray, whom she posed in the kitchen with the children, and in front of the house, then shot in the bedroom, where Murray looks humane and alert. The clocks on the bureau and the makeup on the dresser and the eerie reflection of light on a family portrait on the wall behind her, like an apparition, add up to suggest humility and a kind of mystical elevation.
With Ozzie and Harriet, the sympathy is gone. The backyard, where she poses them, becomes a subtle parody of the famous Arbus image of nudists in a forest, a joke suburban Garden of Eden without whimsy. This was clearly a commission, and her subjects were pros before a camera.
It's useful to examine the shots of Leslie Matthaei, deleted from the catalog but still in the Grey show. Arbus identified the children as more easily manipulated than their parents, her patrons. Leslie plays along, up to a point; she smiles occasionally. She is not entirely disobliging. But her affect of blankness, which Arbus no doubt desired, if not directly ordered, seems not quite strange and portentous enough, as it does with Marcella. It is more like a sulk, and therefore maybe more genuine. Perhaps Leslie grasped better than Marcella that Arbus was not after flattery.
Or perhaps Marcella grasped better than Leslie that Arbus was after something much more complicated.
PHOTOGRAPHY REVIEW
