The Mets have made a three-year offer to the free-agent outfielder Vladimir Guerrero, hoping that the mysteriously shrinking market for Guerrero may lead him to New York, a baseball official who spoke with Mets officials said yesterday.
The official would not give details of the value of the offer, but it is presumed to be for no more than the $13 million annual average Guerrero, the former Expo, has received for a five-year deal from the Baltimore Orioles.
After spending much of this off-season preaching austerity and waiting cautiously for the price of talent to drop, the Mets are hoping their patience will result in one final great pickup in the free-agent market.
The Mets signed the Japanese free-agent shortstop Kazuo Matsui, center fielder Mike Cameron and closer Braden Looper by waiting out the market, and they are using a similar tactic on Guerrero, who turns 28 next month. He hit .330 with 25 home runs and 79 runs batted in over 394 at-bats last season despite missing nearly seven weeks with a back injury. He also possesses one of the strongest and most accurate arms of anybody who plays right field, a position the Mets now plan to fill modestly with Roger Cedeño, Timo Perez and Raul Gonzalez.
Without mentioning Guerrero by name, Mets' Owner Fred Wilpon said during an Oct. 28 news conference that introduced Jim Duquette as the team's general manager that the Mets would not pursue a certain outfielder with a history of back problems because of the difficulty in securing insurance for him. Teams can insure only the first three years of a player's contract -- the Mets now have a policy against offering contracts longer than that -- and pre-existing injuries are not covered.
The official who spoke to the Mets yesterday said last night that team officials were ''not very hopeful, but who knows?'' The team decided against overwhelming Guerrero with a hefty one-year contract because it did not want to put itself in the same position as the Florida Marlins, who signed catcher Ivan Rodriguez to a one-year contract worth $10 million last winter but were unable to re-sign him this off-season.
Widely regarded as the best player on the free-agent market, Guerrero has received little interest. The Expos tried to retain him but lost negotiating rights when they did not offer him arbitration a month ago. Guerrero turned down a five-year offer from Montreal worth up to $75 million, still believed to be the best offer he has received.
The Orioles made a five-year offer worth $65 million last month and Guerrero countered by asking for seven years and $105 million. The sides have not been able to bridge the gap, and the Mets are banking that if Guerrero, a native of the Dominican Republic, is truly reluctant to play in Baltimore, he may take less to remain in the National League and play in a city with a stronger Dominican population.
Marlins General Manager Larry Beinfest, who had considered using his savings from Rodriguez on Guerrero, said in The Miami Herald yesterday that he had not been authorized to spend on ''a big-ticket item.''
Duquette refused to comment on the Mets' interest in Guerrero during a conference call yesterday to announce Mo Vaughn would not play this season. Duquette has said repeatedly that he could not envision making a pitch to ownership to expand payroll for Guerrero when the Mets were more than one player away from being a force in the National League East. But the sum of modest but strategic moves this off-season may have convinced Wilpon that the Mets could contend.
BASEBALL
