Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg promoted his accomplishments yesterday and provided a peek into his agenda for the coming year. His plans include a campaign against gun crimes, a tax rebate for homeowners and an end to the practice of social promotion for third graders in the public schools.
He spoke at length about overdevelopment on Staten Island and about hopeful signs in the economy. He also made sure to mention each borough at least once, citing its businesses, schools or other attributes.
In delivering his annual address on the state of New York City yesterday, Mr. Bloomberg at times appeared to be a man transformed, his jokes funnier, his message urgent, his tongue largely untied. And in that, the nearly hourlong address had the feel of a politician's speech, not a businessman's, with tax cuts and promises for major constituents, and a more studied passion for the city's far-flung corners.
''It was a five-borough speech,'' said Comptroller William C. Thompson Jr., who once accused the mayor of ''borough warfare'' for policies that he said would have benefited Manhattan alone.
Mr. Bloomberg's biggest promise -- to essentially rebate the proceeds homeowners paid in an 18.5 percent property tax increase passed in 2002 -- had already been leaked with the mayor's consent to much of the press by his aides on Wednesday night. But he did lay out several other proposals for the coming year.
On the education front, where Mr. Bloomberg has long hoped to make his biggest impact as mayor, he said yesterday that his administration would put ''an end to the discredited practice of social promotion,'' beginning with the third grade, and that the city planned to increase art and music education in the schools.
Mr. Bloomberg also said he would continue to try to reduce crime in the city. He said the Police Department would hire a new class of 730 recruits this month and from now on hire two classes every year, rather than one. While the new regimen will not increase the department's overall head count, it will help hold the line against attrition, officials said. And the new class will put a fresh flood of recruits on the street this summer, right before the Republican National Convention.
Throughout, although the mayor's rhetoric could not exactly be described as fiery, it was pointed and sharp, especially when he described the things he will not tolerate, like gun toters, preservers of the status quo in education and those who question the economic viability or safety of the city.
''Let me tell you, no one was going to tell us to stay home on New Year's Eve,'' Mr. Bloomberg said, making the point that the city is safer than ever, with its lowest crime levels in decades, and vibrant, despite orange security codes and worrying by out-of-state politicians.
Further, Mr. Bloomberg, who always contended that he did not like to spar in public with rivals or to challenge others, ended his remarks with an uncharacteristic promise to ''never back away from fighting any opponent, or confronting any obstacle, that would prevent our people from achieving all of their dreams in our New York.''
On public safety, the mayor said the police would begin a coordinated campaign against gun violence, zeroing in on offenders with more than one gun-possession arrest and focusing more closely on gun cases in housing projects.
''We're also going after big-time gun traffickers,'' he said, adding that the city would demand that Albany close a loophole that he said lets illegal gun dealers dodge stiffer sentences because it treats multiple sales as piecemeal gun deals, rather than as bulk ones.
Mr. Bloomberg also said his administration was actively pursuing his five-year plan to create or restore 65,000 units of housing. Over the next weeks, he said, he will begin a private-public partnership to build housing on cleaned-up brownfields throughout the city.
But the centerpiece of Mr. Bloomberg's speech was his bullish take on the local economy, underscored by a litany of employment and hotel occupancy statistics, among others.
Because of the improving state of the city's finances, Mr. Bloomberg said, he will be able to offer the property tax rebate to homeowners. The same taxpayers he admonished last year to stop whining and to help the city out of a fiscal crisis would now be ''recognized for doing so,'' he said yesterday.
The speech, given at Silvercup Studios in Long Island City, Queens, was attended by about 800 state officials, social policy advocates, business men and women, City Council members and others who were abuzz about Mr. Bloomberg's improved speaking style. Still, some made sure to take swipes at the substance of his remarks.
''I am glad that the mayor is beginning to take to the Council's approach of conducting the city's business, primarily in recognizing that revenues will exceed expectations,'' said the Council speaker, Gifford Miller, in a statement. Mr. Miller, who is a likely challenger to Mr. Bloomberg in 2005, also referred to the 2002 property tax increase, which the City Council had approved, as Mr. Bloomberg's.
Mr. Bloomberg's transition into a somewhat more traditional politician has come after a year of bruising attacks from labor unions, poor showings in the polls and a tough fiscal crisis that forced him to choose between deep cuts in city services and tax increases.
All the while, Mr. Bloomberg's critics have contended that he is not in touch with regular New Yorkers and did little to curry favor with voters. But yesterday's speech was a bit of a curry sandwich: Throgs Neck, the Bronx; Bay Ridge, Brooklyn; and Bayside, Queens, will get the same study on growth management that Staten Island received; 49 acres of parks will be created around Greenpoint and Williamsburg in Brooklyn; a program will aim to improve traffic safety on Queens Boulevard; and all centers for elderly constituents will remain open, a departure for the mayor, who did not view them as such sacred cows in Bloomberg Year 1.
''You can write it down,'' he said. ''We're going to take care of those who took care of us.''
