Fewer New York City schools are at risk of being closed for poor academic performance than at any time since the state began identifying such schools in 1989.
The number of city schools on the state list, known as schools under registration review, fell to 46, from 55 last year, state officials said yesterday.
Seventeen city schools were removed from the list, while eight others were added. One of the newly listed failing schools is Thomas Jefferson High School in Brooklyn, which was first designated as failing in 1991 but was removed from the list in 1997 after showing improvement.
Thomas Jefferson was also on a list of 12 schools named by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg on Monday as among the city's most dangerous.
Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein applauded the state announcement but stressed that more work had to be done. ''We are very proud to have reduced the number of SURR schools in our city to this historic low,'' Mr. Klein said in a statement. ''Nonetheless, one school on the SURR list is one too many, and we will work hard to turn around the eight schools placed on the list. Our goal is to create a system of 1,200 great public schools.''
Elsewhere in the state, two schools in Yonkers were removed from the list of failing schools, and one school each in Buffalo and Syracuse. Wyandanch Memorial High School, on Long Island, was also removed from the list. Three schools were also added to the list in Buffalo.
In New York City, the decline in the number of schools on the state list was in contrast to another list of failing schools released by the state in September.
The September list designated more than 40 percent of the city's schools as failing to meet federal standards under the No Child Left Behind Act. The federal law requires that states measure schools not simply on their overall scores but on their yearly progress, graduation rates and the performance of various demographic groups.
Randi Weingarten, president of the United Federation of Teachers, noted that several schools that improved enough this year to be taken off the list had been part of the chancellor's district, a grouping that focused extra attention and resources on troubled schools but that was dismantled as part of Mr. Bloomberg's plan to overhaul city schools.
''I believe it shows that they threw out the baby with the bath water,'' Ms. Weingarten said. ''I don't think there's another district in the United States of America that can compare with the success in turning around low-performing schools of the chancellor's district.''
Karen Melendez-Hutt, the principal of Public School 30 in Harlem, which was removed from the list this year, credits that progress, in part, to the support from the chancellor's district and to the reading program Success for All, which has now been replaced by a citywide curriculum that is less structured.
But turning a school around, Ms. Melendez-Hutt said, is not just about choosing one curriculum over another. ''I think that any really good balanced literacy program with a good leader at the helm can work,'' she said.
Laura B. Galloway, the principal of P.S. 49 in the Bronx, credited the chancellor's district and Success for All but mostly more subtle, attitudinal changes, like the ''affirmation'' students recite each morning, which starts with the words: ''I shall set a good example for others, always try to be courteous, be satisfied with my fair share.''
''It's not so much the program,'' Mrs. Galloway said. ''It's the implementation of the program and the belief system.''
No schools were newly identified as failing based on low scores in their elementary-grade parts, the state education commissioner, Richard P. Mills, said in reflecting on the improving performance of the state's elementary schools.
''The school accountability that has come about through the SURR process has been successful in improving or, where necessary, closing and reorganizing many schools,'' Mr. Mills said in a statement.
Once a school is listed as under registration review, its leaders must come up with a plan for improvement. If the school fails to improve after three years, it can be redesigned, a designation that allows for reconfiguring the grade levels and for more flexibility in the teachers' contract.
Two of the New York City schools that were deemed no longer failing, P.S. 66 and P.S. 306, both in the Bronx, were kindergarten-through-eighth-grade schools that showed significant improvement among fourth graders but not among eighth graders. As a result, they will stop at the fifth grade next year.
Other New York City schools removed from the list are M.S. 258 in Manhattan; P.S. 6, P.S. 57, P.S. 67 and Intermediate School 98 in the Bronx; I.S. 49, M.S. 246, I.S. 252, P.S. 13 and the Automotive High School in Brooklyn; P.S. 43 and P.S. 45 in Queens; and P.S. 31 on Staten Island.
