THERE is much curiosity about what to expect from Ute Lemper, the German-born chanteuse with blond ice-maiden looks, the cabaret maven who is perhaps best known for her performances of songs from the Weimar era and her interpretations of the works of the composer Kurt Weill.
As the elevator ascends in a modest prewar building on the Upper West Side, where she lives with her two children and drummer-producer boyfriend, a visitor wonders what to ask this enigmatic singer and actress.
Ms. Lemper is anything but mainstream, one might even say an acquired taste, but she certainly gets around. She has appeared on London's West End and Broadway as the murderous Velma Kelly in ''Chicago,'' as Sally Bowles in a Paris production of ''Cabaret,'' and in films like Robert Altman's ''Prêt-à-Porter'' and sung in opera houses like La Scala and in funky downtown clubs.
Tonight, at age 40, the striking Ms. Lemper is to make her debut at the Cafe Carlyle. And we have read about some of her shows. Will she make the audience uneasy with racy words, even racier gender-bending moves? Where will she drape those impossibly long legs? Will she do the 1920's Weimar vamp, swooping down onto some unsuspecting patron?
Love to see that at the Cafe Carlyle!
A recent afternoon finds Ms. Lemper still pondering the Carlyle program, called Voyage, which will run for a month. She promises something theatrical, on the edge. Her red-painted lips widen into a mischievous grin.
''I don't think you can take the edge out of me,'' she says, squeezing her angled cheekbones. Her lean frame is clad in a black leather skirt, boots and a spidery-looking tight black top.
Of course, there will be some Weill. ''I'm very proud to be this kind of ambassador to this music and the representative who carries this music into the new millennium,'' she says. ''I treasure that and honor that.''
But with 15 albums, including last year's ''But One Day,'' she says patrons may have a hankering to hear other works, too. ''At the same time, I have this ethnic evolution: Arabic, Hebrew, Yiddish. You can't please everyone. I'm trying to take this journey and people have to come with me.''
Ms. Lemper is a bit of a surprise, so warm and bubbly. A booted leg is tucked beneath her on a leather sofa. She says she is not really glamorous, typically wearing jogging pants at home.
So, is she fed up with the endless comparisons to Marlene Dietrich? ''I feel very easy about it,'' she says, smiling, her German accent soft.
SHE is not known for mincing words, especially on how her native country dealt with its dark past. She can be caustic. But she is mellow on this day. Ms. Lemper has made her home in New York since 1998, after living in Berlin, Paris and London.
''I love Germany, especially Berlin,'' she says. ''It's a very vibey place. Now, it's multicultural, finally. It took them a long time.''
Her musical identity began to take shape when she discovered Weill and the playwright Bertolt Brecht as a teenager. In her early 20's, she became hooked on Weill's work when she took part in a Berlin revue.
''I was going to tell Weill's story as a German from a different generation, saying it in my T-shirt and jeans,'' she says. ''I started with the bands of the Weimar Republic, this whole political vibe and this dangerous time for democracy. It was also important to travel in the German past, the Holocaust and him being a Jewish composer and being treated terribly by the Germans.
''I felt like my German identity was not evolved enough. It hadn't dealt deeply enough with the issues of the past. It was a very closed past. You can't talk about Hitler like you did Napoleon.''
Her own journey is reflected in her two-story apartment, which is lighted with Art Deco lamps and cluttered with toys, musical instruments and her own expressionist oil paintings. There's a snapshot of her in lederhosen in Münster, Germany, where, as the daughter of a banker and an amateur opera singer, she studied music and dance before attending drama school in Vienna. There are photographs of her children, Stella, 7, and Max, 9, from her marriage to David Tabatsky, an actor and comedian. Divorced, she lives with Todd Turkisher, who is 43.
When asked about the type of men she is drawn to, Ms. Lemper demurs. She says she is a humanist. ''I probably would not necessarily fall in love with a tall, blond, blue-eyed German who goes into the military. I probably look for exotic people, and that could be anything. It could be anybody who is not normal, who is interesting, who has a mystery to be discovered by me.''
As she speaks, Mr. Turkisher walks through the front door. They hug and kiss. He busies himself making a tuna fish bagel.
More musicians will arrive soon for rehearsal. One last question.
Does it bother her that she is not a big commercial success?
No, she says. ''I still feel I have this precious career, a supersophisticated audience, and they respect me for what I do,'' she says. ''For that, I don't do the compromise for the commercial world. I present it with a strong grip of anarchy and truthfulness and I don't get sucked into the commercial thing. I'm very free. I'm as free as I've ever been.''
PUBLIC LIVES
