After years of renewal efforts in the downtown business district here that have produced mostly rental apartment buildings, construction is to begin this month on a 25-story condominium tower that will be this city's tallest structure.
The new building is to have 120 one- to three-bedroom apartments, with sales prices of $250,000 to $500,000. It will also have 6,500 square feet of stores and 35,000 square feet of office space. An adjacent seven-story, 425-car garage will also be on the site, which is nearly one-acre and is now used for parking.
The development is at Spring and Paterson Streets, one block from a New Jersey Transit train station and two blocks from the headquarters of Johnson &amp; Johnson.
Construction of the tower, which will cost nearly $50 million and will be named Spring Street Plaza, follows years of residential construction downtown that generated about 1,000 new and renovated mixed-income rentals. ''Condominiums are the next step,'' said Omar Boraie, Spring Street Plaza's developer, ''because the downtown needs housing for people to stay in town, spend money and energize the city.''
Glenn Patterson, director of the Department of Planning, Community and Economic Development for New Brunswick, noted that 75 percent of the city's residents are renters. ''The city certainly would like to increase its percentage of homeowners and establish a less transient population,'' he said.
Among the latest rental projects downtown has been the conversion of the 14-story former Middlesex County administration building into 70 mixed-income rentals that Pennrose Properties of Philadelphia developed with the nonprofit New Brunswick Development Corporation.
Nearby, a building with 417 market-rate rental apartments is nearing completion on one of two former parking lots across Neilson Street from each other. The second lot was to house up to 360 more rentals, but it may now include a ''for-sale component to respond to New Brunswick's maturing residential market,'' said Richard F.X. Johnson, a senior vice president at the Matrix Development Group of Cranbury, which is developing the buildings with several partners.
There was one earlier for-sale housing development downtown, 33 town houses built in the 1990's, that initially ''was a tough sell,'' Mr. Patterson said. But resales at the enclave are healthy, with homes selling recently for $291,000 to $425,000, said Ruth Gebhardt, manager of Golden Key Realty.
Mr. Boraie said the market would support Spring Street Plaza because the downtown -- which a decade ago had turned desolate after businesses closed at 6:00 p.m. -- has, with the increasing number of residences, restaurants and entertainment centers, become more of a round-the-clock environment. ''People will be willing to buy an apartment,'' he said, ''since they feel more comfortable living in New Brunswick and feel it is safe.'' Also favoring the project are low mortgage rates and a 30-year tax abatement from the city, he said.
Costas Kondylis and Partners of Manhattan has designed the tower, which is to be built by Tishman Construction over the next 18 months.
Mr. Boraie's company, Boraie Development, which he runs with his two sons, Wasseem and Samer, was among the early developers active in New Brunswick's revival. Boraie Development bought the site last year from the city's parking authority.
The site is in a redevelopment area where buildings generally are up to 150 feet tall. The city amended the zoning to 265 feet for the Spring Street project, however, enabling it to rise to its proposed height.
The city, Mr. Patterson said, ''wanted a substantial enough project to make a positive impact downtown and attract buyers.''
Mr. Patterson said he expected future development to include more for-sale housing. Five blocks from Spring Street Plaza, 33 condominiums, to sell for $300,000 to $500,000, are part of a mixed-use building that, when completed in 2005, will also have 250 hotel rooms, as well as retail, conference and academic space.
Mr. Kondylis said the apartments at Spring Street Plaza, which will be 800 to 1,700 square feet and all with balconies, would have features associated with the Manhattan condominiums he designs, like floor-to-ceiling glass window walls at the corners of the building and marble baths.
Among the planned amenities are a gym and swimming pool. There will also be a 20,000-square-foot landscaped area atop the garage that will include a barbecue area, dog run and putting green.
