As Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg unveiled his proposal yesterday to send $400 property tax rebate checks to city homeowners, taxpayers exulted but some fiscal experts questioned whether the move was good policy.
Some worried about the affordability of a proposal that would cost the city $250 million, when its deficit is already projected at nearly $2 billion for the next fiscal year. Others worried that the tax rebate could weaken the city's bargaining hand as it tries to wrest more school aid and Medicaid relief from Albany and concessions from unions.
And some noted that by singling out the owners of homes, co-ops and condos for tax relief, the mayor's proposal would widen the inequities of a tax structure that already vastly favors small homeowners over the owners of commercial buildings.
As Mayor Bloomberg outlined the tax rebate proposal yesterday in his third State of the City Address, he acknowledged that the city was not yet out of the fiscal woods. But he said that ''we're close enough to the edge of the forest that we can begin to reduce the tax burden on the New Yorkers who have sacrificed the most.''
''It's the right thing to do,'' Mr. Bloomberg said at Silvercup Studios, a television and film studio in Long Island City, Queens, where he spoke to an audience of 800.
For homeowners, the rebate would essentially erase the effects of the 18.5 percent property tax increase that Mayor Bloomberg and the City Council enacted in 2002. The tax increase helped the city close multibillion-dollar budget gaps without severe service cuts and helped the city preserve its bond ratings in the midst of a fiscal crisis. But after raising the tax Mayor Bloomberg saw his popularity plummet to record lows.
While the mayor's call to send out rebate checks pleased taxpayers and befuddled political opponents, who were left praising the move with varying degrees of enthusiasm, some fiscal analysts questioned how the city will be able to afford it.
''Our concern is, is this affordable in the context of the city's still-stressed budget position,'' said Robert A. Kurtter, a senior vice president at Moody's Investors Service, a bond rating agency.
While the city's economy is improving, and tax revenues are beginning to pour into the city's coffers at a higher rate than city officials originally predicted, experts noted in interviews that the city still had serious fiscal concerns. It has $44 billion in outstanding debt that costs it more each year to pay off, and its pension and health care costs are sharply rising.
On top of that, several risk factors could worsen its deficit. The city and the state are battling in court over a plan to have the state pay back the city's remaining debt from the 1970's; a loss in court could cost the city half a billion dollars a year. The city has not included money in its budget to pay for raises for its work force, arguing that they should be paid for by productivity increases. Analysts question whether that is likely.
Edward Skyler, the mayor's press secretary, said that the mayor would explain next week how he plans to pay for the rebate when he presents his preliminary budget plan for the fiscal year that will begin in July.
''Obviously the mayor will propose a balanced budget,'' he said yesterday.
City Comptroller William C. Thompson Jr., a Democrat who has expressed interest in running against the mayor in 2005, said that he was in favor of the rebate plan even though the city's expenses are still outpacing its revenues.
''We all acknowledge that there is a structural imbalance in the city's budget,'' he said. ''There are still certain costs that continue to escalate, outside of the city's control, in spite of the fact that you continue to reduce costs in other areas.''
Several officials worried that the proposal would only widen the inequities in the city's property tax structure.
''It throws the inequities in the property tax system more out of whack,'' said Diana Fortuna, the president of the Citizens Budget Commission, a business-backed fiscal watchdog group.
The median effective tax rate for one- to-three-family homes, for example, is 73 cents per $100 in assessed valuation, according to the city's Independent Budget Office. For commercial properties -- factories, office buildings and stores -- it is $4.87 per $100.
So while one- to-three-family homes make up nearly half the market value of real estate in the city, they account for only 13.4 percent of the city's property taxes. And while commercial properties make up just over a quarter of the value of real estate in the city, their owners pay nearly 44 percent of the property taxes, the budget office said.
The rebate will only widen that disparity. Ms. Fortuna said that the fact that commercial buildings pay a large share of the property taxes can make the city less competitive for businesses.
Owners of one-family homes, who paid an average of $366 more in property taxes because of the 18.5 percent increase, will come out ahead after the $400 rebate checks, according to the Independent Budget Office. But the $400 rebate will not necessarily wipe out the increase for condo owners, who paid an average increase of $741, or for co-op owners, who paid an average increase of $585, the budget office said.
