January in New York is all about fine American furniture and the antique ceramics, textiles and silver that go with it.
Serious collectors will start congregating in Manhattan on Tuesday for the New York Ceramics Fair at the National Academy of Design and for an exhibition at Bernard and S. Dean Levy Inc., an Americana gallery at 24 East 84th Street. Levy is selling the estate of Vincent Dyckman Andrus, a curator at the American Wing of the Metropolitan Museum of Art from 1949 to 1960.
Mr. Andrus died in 1962; his wife, Dorelle, died in 2002. Levy is selling their American antiques, including several in the style of Thomas Chippendale: a fine mahogany serpentine-front card table made in New York about 1770; a tripod-base walnut candle stand made in Philadelphia about 1760; and a Samuel Verplanck walnut side chair made in New York about 1760. (The Met has six matching Verplanck chairs, in a suite that includes a settee and card table.)
There are also auctions at Christie's and Sotheby's from Thursday through next Sunday.
John Hays, deputy chairman of Christie's, said two of the most important pieces in its sale next Friday were from homes in Bristol, R.I., that are only a mile and a half apart. Lot 435 is a mahogany bombé chest of drawers in pristine condition, made in Boston or Salem, Mass., between 1760 and 1780. It descended through the family of a Salem privateer, Capt. Jonathan Haraden (1744-1803), an intrepid patriot during the American Revolution, after the British occupied Newport.
''Jonathan Haraden was a sea dog of the approved pattern,'' D. Hamilton Hurd writes in his 1988 book, ''History of Essex County, Massachusetts.'' ''Bold, persevering and indomitable, he made himself a terror to the enemy and, with others of like temper, soon made Salem a magazine of supplies of every kind, taken from the merchantmen of Great Britain.''
The chest is nearly identical to one sold at Christie's in January 1998 for $827,000. The estimate for this one is $600,000 to $900,000.
''This chest has never been out of the family,'' Mr. Hays said. ''And that family was an extremely prominent one. The second owner was a founder of the Peabody Essex Museum.''
Also in Bristol, Christie's discovered Lot 546, a Chippendale mahogany block-and-shell bureau table, circa 1790, by the Newport cabinetmaker John Townsend (1732-1809). ''Obviously, the form is great, but its provenance is the icing on the cake,'' Mr. Hays said. ''He made this for his niece; it's one of the few surviving pieces of furniture that descended in his family.'' Estimated at $600,000 to $900,000, it is also very like one in the Winterthur Museum in Delaware.
John Townsend, son of Christopher Townsend (1701-73), created his own signature block-and-shell style. ''You can identify his work by the shell, which always has a self-contained C-scroll on the inside,'' Mr. Hays said. ''Every other shell by a Goddard-Townsend maker has the lowermost lobe of the shell continuing into the C-scroll, so it becomes the terminus.''
At Sotheby's, the showstopper next week is probably Lot 666, a mahogany Chippendale grandfather clock, 9 feet 3 inches tall, with musical works and a dial by Paul Rimbault of London, and a case attributed to Nicholas Bernard and Martin Jugiez of Philadelphia, circa 1775. The musical movement plays ''God Save the King'' and seven other melodies.
''It plays tunes on demand, like an 18th-century version of a jukebox,'' said the Sotheby's Americana specialist, Leslie Keno. ''This is the most expensive clock you could ever have. Having a clock this tall is such an American idea. There is no mechanical reason for it. They are shorter in England. This is like a stretch limo.''
He said the clock's carving was nearly identical to that on a tall case clock by Bernard and Jugiez at the Chipstone Foundation in Milwaukee. ''The two men represent the apex in American design and carving,'' Mr. Keno said. The clock's estimate is $400,000 to $600,000.
On Jan. 17 Sotheby's is selling the estate of Alice and Murray Braunfeld, Los Angeles collectors of American, English and Continental decorative arts. They evidently valued the idiosyncratic qualities of furniture made in the Connecticut River Valley. Lot 1190 is a serpentine-front cherry chest of drawers with an overhanging top, circa 1800. Its pilasters are decorated with a wavy snake whose head is an outline of wooden pearls.
The chest is thought to be by the same craftsman who made Lot 1258, another serpentine-front cherry chest of drawers, but with fluted pilasters that terminate in pinwheels. The estimate for the first is $80,000 to $120,000; for the second, $50,000 to $80,000.
Other fine American antiques will be at the American Antiques Show, Wednesday night through Jan. 18 at the Metropolitan Pavilion, and the Winter Antiques Show, Thursday night through Jan. 25 at the Seventh Regiment Armory.
American silver is the other big draw in January. The Sotheby's Americana sale on Thursday includes Lot 261, a rare rococo sugar bowl and cover by Paul Revere Jr., circa 1762, descended from the family of its first owner, John Amory. It has a central cartouche flanked by swags of fruit and flowers.
''The decoration is unusual; normally there are only flowers,'' said Kevin Tierney, a Sotheby's silver specialist. ''This even has two birds roosting on top.'' It was probably a gift from Amory, a prominent Boston shipper, to his sister-in-law, Mary Greene Taylor, who died in 1771.
In 1776 Nathaniel Taylor, presumed to be a relative, took the silver sugar bowl to Canada when he and his wife were evacuated by ship to Nova Scotia with other British loyalists. He later gave it to his daughter, who passed it down in the family, which remained in Canada.
''It has survived in its original condition,'' Mr. Tierney said. ''It's the best Revere sugar bowl you could ever have.'' Its estimate is $80,000 to $120,000.
A Christie's sale on Thursday features a small silver cream jug with the mark of Jacob Hurd, from Boston, circa 1745. Hurd was one of the most prolific early American silversmiths. Three scenes are embossed on it in cartouches: a New England-style church with tall leaded windows, a pond with swimming ducks, and a coat of arms, which has not yet been identified. The estimate for the jug, Lot 179, is $30,000 to $50,000.
Jeanne Sloane, the head of Christie's silver department, said there were only six known examples of American silver with scenic engravings, all thought to be by Hurd. They are in the Yale University Art Gallery, the Cleveland Museum of Art, Bayou Bend (the former Ima Hogg residence that serves as the American decorative arts wing of the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston) and in private hands.
''American silver collectors love regional forms,'' Ms. Sloane said. ''This is a must-have.''
ANTIQUES
