The Food and Drug Administration said yesterday that it had decided to defer its decision on whether to allow silicone breast implants back onto the market, citing the need for more information about the implants' safety and rate of failure.
In what it termed a ''not approvable letter,'' the agency notified Inamed of Santa Barbara, Calif., a maker of silicone implants that had an application pending, that it needed to do more studies and provide more information. The surprise move occurred less than three months after the agency's expert panel conducted hearings, attended by vocal opponents and proponents, and then voted 9 to 6 to recommend approval.
Many of the concerns raised at the hearings were similar to those raised by the F.D.A. in its deferral. In particular, the agency wanted to know more about why implants sometimes rupture or leak, how women can know if their device has failed and what are the consequences of broken or leaking implants. Should women have frequent magnetic resonance imaging tests to look for silicone implant ruptures that remain confined to scar tissue surrounding the implant? Should the device be removed? What happens if they leave it in?
''What we are saying is that we think that a lot of information has been developed over the last 10 years that increases our assurance of the safety'' of silicone implants, said Dr. David Feigal of the F.D.A. in a telephone news conference yesterday. ''But there is additional information that we think is necessary for this product to pass the threshold of what we would consider necessary.''
The agency also announced yesterday that it was revising the guidelines for such devices, requiring more information and data from the makers of implants, which are designed to enlarge breasts or are used in the reconstruction of a breast after removal because of cancer.
Dr. Dan Schultz of the F.D.A. said that the agency wanted better information on the long-term effects of implants.
''What we want is a picture of the device over its lifetime,'' Dr. Schultz said. But, he said, that did not necessarily mean that the agency would require that companies do clinical trials lasting a decade. ''We are open to different kinds of studies, some prospective, some looking at failed products,'' he said.
Nick Teti, chairman, chief executive and president of Inamed said in an Internet Webcast yesterday, ''This is obviously not the brightest day in the last few years.'' But, Mr. Teti added, ''we are planning very diligently to move forward.''
He said the company also planned to continue development and testing of a newer style of implant that is firmer.
''At this point, our plan is to work cooperatively with the F.D.A. on this application and to actively and aggressively pursue the accumulation of data and the acquisition of data and the submission of data for the cohesive gel product,'' Mr. Teti said.
Inamed's stock price fell 12 percent on the news, falling $5.80 to $44 by the end of the day. Another company, the Mentor Corporation, has also applied to the F.D.A. to market its silicone breast implant.
The agency's decision is slowing Inamed's push to return silicone implants to the market after an absence of more than a decade.
Many people expected the agency to follow the recommendation of its advisory committee, which is its usual practice. But the implant issue was particular fractious.
''This was a very visible product, and we had input from almost everybody and anybody,'' Dr. Feigal said.
The debate did not end with the vote in mid-October. Two weeks later, Dr. Thomas V. Whalen, the panel chairman, wrote to the F.D.A. and asked that it not approve the devices because, he said, they had not been shown to be safe. He also sent copies to politicians.
In November, the agency also received two citizens' petitions that asked it to delay its review. One was filed by the National Organization for Women, Public Citizen's Health Research Group and the National Women's Health Network and the other by the Chemically Associated Neurological Disorders.
''We thought well, if we can ask them to delay maybe there will be some more studies that come out that continue to tip the balance,'' Cynthia Pearson, the executive director of the National Women's Heath Network. said.
The advisory committee heard entreaties from women who said that silicone implants had made them ill and ruined their lives and from women who said that they needed silicone implants for breast reconstruction after cancer or because they wanted larger breasts.
But the implants, which women and doctors say look and feel more natural than the saline-filled ones that are now on the market, have been largely unavailable since 1992, when the F.D.A. asked manufacturers to withdraw them voluntarily. Women and their lawyers were charging that implants caused serious diseases and the agency determined that safety data were lacking.
In the years that followed, hundreds of thousands of women claimed that implants made them ill, with disabling diseases that included cancer, autoimmune and neurological disorders and chronic fatigue syndrome. Lawsuits drove one implant maker, Dow Corning, into bankruptcy and forced it and other companies to set up a multibillion dollar fund to compensate women whom the implant makers had always argued were not sickened by the devices in the first place.
Over the years, groups like the Institute of Medicine, which reviewed data, concluded that there was no conclusive evidence linking the implants to serious diseases.
In the meantime, Inamed approached the F.D.A. about returning to the marketplace and began studies it hoped would satisfy the agency's concerns. The company said in its Internet Webcast that it had more data than it submitted in its application, including some that might help satisfy the F.D.A.'s new guidelines.
Groups that had opposed the marketing of implants praised the agency's decision.
''We're delighted, we're absolutely delighted,'' Ms. Pearson said. ''They balanced it just perfectly,'' she said of the F.D.A. ''They sent a message that the current implants don't have enough safety data for women to make an informed decision yet at the same time they said, we want implants but we want safe and effective implants. That's as good as it gets.''
Dr. Scott Spear, a plastic surgeon at Georgetown University who is a consultant to Inamed, asserted that the F.D.A.'s decision should not be interpreted as a rejection of the product or a judgment on its safety.
''In defense of the F.D.A., there's a tremendous amount of political pressure,'' he said. ''They want to make sure they've dotted every i and crossed every t.''
''I could have predicted what the F.D.A. was going to ask for,'' Dr. Spear said. Some of the agency's requests may prove difficult, he said. For example, Dr. Spear said, it was no surprise that the agency wanted tests that could predict whether an implant would rupture. Now, companies pummel implants millions of times, showing, Dr. Spear said, that ''they were very, very sturdy.'' But that test was useless in predicting what would happen when devices were put into a woman's body. ''The F.D.A. wants a better test. That's not unreasonable.''
In the end, Dr. Spear said, he thinks that the company will find a way to get the requested data. ''I think silicone gel implants will be approved eventually,'' he said.
