Rick DiPietro got another chance Thursday night against the Edmonton Oilers to show that he is the Islanders' goalkeeper of the present and not just the future.
Fortunately for the 22-year-old DiPietro, another young Islander, Justin Papineau, was also on a mission to prove himself. Papineau, a second-year center, slid in the second of his two power-play goals with 1 minute 18 seconds left in the third period to overcome a game-tying score surrendered by DiPietro 1:24 earlier.
The Islanders won, 3-2, at Nassau Coliseum, digging out of a three-game rut without a victory and giving DiPietro his first victory since Dec. 6, in his second start since then.
The Islanders have a record of 20-17-3-1 at the halfway point, slightly better than last season's 18-18-5-0 mark on the way to the playoffs.
The Oilers (15-18-7-1) obliged DiPietro with a tepid attack. DiPietro made a few difficult saves, stopping 21 shots and helping the Islanders extinguish all four of their penalty-killing situations.
''I felt a little rusty,'' he said, adding that the game was still a confidence-builder. ''I couldn't even get a win in the minors.''
Edmonton's Cory Cross nearly ruined his evening when he whipped a line drive that caught DiPietro's stick and ricocheted in to tie the score at 2-2.
DiPietro, the first overall choice in the 2000 N.H.L. entry draft, had taken a seat on the bench and even a drive north to Bridgeport, Conn., for a self-imposed exile in the minors while the team's other goalie, Garth Snow, 34, went on a six-game winning streak and made 15 straight appearances.
The last time DiPietro appeared in a game, Dec. 21 against Washington, he was yanked 27 minutes into it after spotting the Capitals a 3-1 lead. The Islanders came back to win, 5-4, with Snow in goal.
Despite outshooting Edmonton, 29-23, the Islanders lacked a consistent surge Thursday night. Isles defenseman Radek Martinek went the long route, slamming in a goal from the blue line to tie the score at 1-1 late in the second period.
Papineau seized a two-man advantage near the start of the third period by cracking in a rebound to give the Islanders a 2-1 lead before the Oilers tied it.
''Our younger guys will have to step up to the plate and take advantage of it,'' Papineau said.
HOCKEY
