An American Black Hawk helicopter crashed Thursday in this tiny village near the restive town of Falluja, killing all nine soldiers aboard. Less than a week ago, another American helicopter was shot down in the area.
The United States military said the cause of the crash was still under investigation, but witnesses near the mangled wreckage said the helicopter had been downed by a missile.
The crash was the most deadly incident in a 24-hour span that clearly illustrated the continuing risk to American soldiers and other foreigners in occupied Iraq. One soldier died Thursday of wounds sustained in a mortar attack on Wednesday evening that wounded 30 other soldiers and a civilian at Logistical Base Seitz, west of Baghdad.
A spokesman for the Air Mobility Command, which oversees military transport, said a C-5 transport plane with 63 people on board was struck Thursday by ground fire but returned safely to Baghdad airport.
Six months from now, the American-led occupation authority plans to hand political power to a transitional Iraqi government, but the shape of that administration remains unclear and its ability to guarantee the safety of more than 100,000 American and other troops highly uncertain.
Since the capture of Saddam Hussein on Dec. 13, attacks on Iraqis and occupation soldiers have continued with deadly efficacy. The American military and civilian leadership maintains, however, that the arrest of Mr. Hussein has prompted larger numbers of Iraqis to provide more accurate intelligence about the insurgency.
In what the American-led occupation is hoping will be seen by Iraqis as a gesture of goodwill and a sign of success against the insurgency, about 500 Iraqis detained in recent months for possible connections to the attacks are to be released.
On Thursday, near the gate to Abu Ghraib prison, west of Baghdad, where thousands of suspected insurgents are held, about 60 men were brought out in American Army trucks and let out into a crowd of jubilant friends and relatives, but it was not clear if they were part of the release program.
So far, little seems to have discouraged the stubborn insurgency, which is mainly concentrated in a swath of territory west and north of Baghdad called the Sunni Triangle, encompassing Falluja.
The Black Hawk helicopter that crashed was one of many that regularly fly over Nuaymiya, ferrying soldiers from nearby Habbaniya to Baghdad, said Ikab, a farmer who stood on the roof to his unfinished two-story brick house about six hundred yards from the wreckage. He and other witnesses said the helicopter was painted with the distinctive red cross of a medical aircraft, a detail the American military confirmed.
About six miles southeast of Falluja, Nuaymiya is a scattering of houses dotting softly green potato fields and wide stands of reeds. By evening, American soldiers had cordoned off the area with Humvees. But the burnt husk of the helicopter could be seen behind a sparse screen of grass deep in the fields, and around 6 p.m., another Black Hawk landed nearby as part of the clean-up and investigation.
Witnesses said they saw the rear of the aircraft catch fire, and three people said they saw the helicopter struck by a projectile before it crashed. ''It was hit by a missile,'' said Mahir Abdul-Hamid, a 27-year-old student. ''There were women working in the fields when it flew by and was hit.''
No Iraqis were hurt in the incident.
Just six days ago, an OH-58 Kiowa helicopter was shot down in Falluja as it circled over soldiers who were conducting a search to clamp down on attacks at a nearby intersection called Death Square. One soldier was killed and another wounded in that incident.
Roadside bombs are the most frequent weapon used by the insurgents. But militants have exploited the vulnerability of American aircraft, beginning with a rash of attacks on helicopters in November. The most American soldiers killed in one day since the war began -- 17 -- came in mid-November when two Black Hawks crashed near Mosul as they tried to avoid hostile fire from the ground.
Militants have also used surface-to-air missiles to pursue the big planes that use Baghdad airport, a trend that has delayed opening Iraq to commercial flights. Fox News attributed Thursday's attack on the C-5 to a surface-to-air missile but the military did not confirm this.
In a sign of Iraqis' frustration with the persistent violence, Sayyed Muhammad Bahr al-Uloum, an influential Shiite cleric who is a member of the American-appointed Governing Council, said in Kuwait that Arab countries should press Syria to police its borders to prevent foreign fighters from crossing into Iraq, Al Iraqiya television reported. Iraqi and American authorities have said foreign militants intent on fighting the occupation have entered from neighboring states but it is not clear what role if any they have played.
American military officials say they now hold about 9,800 people suspected of attacks on occupation soldiers and Iraqis. Under the current system, those arrested are generally held for 72 hours, after which they are released, sent to the Iraqi police if they have committed run-of-the-mill crimes or held for further investigation if they are suspected of involvement in the insurgency.
The 500 or so to be released under the program announced Wednesday have been deemed to offer a low risk of getting involved in attacks. But they will still need guarantors, ideally a respected elder or cleric, to vouch for them. Such guarantors would not be punished if those they have sponsored take part in future attacks, American military officials said.
Anxious Iraqi families and the media waited at Abu Ghraib until late afternoon, when about 60 men were released. But some American officials cautioned that these detainees were among those let out after the 72-hour wait, not those who have been scrutinized under the new program. According to these officials, about 100 men now have guarantors, who are gradually coming forward.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INSURGENTS
