Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion Museum  1 West Fourth Street  Greenwich Village  Through Jan. 25
With old age running rampant through the country, it is not surprising to find more than 80 artists in this packed show. Not that all of them are so old. The idea, says Jean Bloch Rosensaft, the museum's director, in the show's catalog, is to engage the ''larger community'' in Jewish values relevant to the aging process and to show the many apsects of aging, among them creativity, vitality, memory, anxiety, wisdom, physical change, loss and intergenerational interaction.
It's a large order, entrusted here not only to painters, sculptors, photographers and craftsmen but to cartoonists as well. Alas, the talent runs from polished professionals to, well, Sunday painters. Among the better-known names are Kiki Smith, Hyman Bloom, Eleanor Antin, Audrey Flack, Al Hirschfeld, Ben Katchor, Ibram Lassaw (who died on Dec. 30), Elaine Reichek, George Segal, Barbara Zucker and Joan Snyder. But they are not in the best of company, and the theme gets a little lost.
The best works here, it seems to me, are photographic. They include Ms. Antin's wonderfully ditsy confabulations about her career in Diaghilev's ballet, with photographs in costume accompanied by textual reminiscences; Alicia Milosz's photographs of her parents, each at the age of 25 and 77, their faces seen as moving from youth to age by means of photo manipulation; and Donald Woodman's series depicting an old man getting a shave in an isolated mountain village of Yugoslavia.
Worthy of mention, too, are Aliza Auerbach's studies of older people still engaged in industrial and agricultural labors, Mark Bergash's six Polaroids of an old man's face in stages of disintegration, and Janice Rubin's shots of family events in which children interact with grandparents, uncles, aunts and cousins in homey activities like eating, storytelling and exchanging gifts.
But if there was ever a show that needed stringent editing, this is it.
GRACE GLUECK
ART IN REVIEW  Correction:  January 10, 2004, Saturday  A report in the Art in Review column of Weekend yesterday about ''The Art of Aging,'' at the Hebrew Union College-Jewish Institute of Religion Museum in Greenwich Village, misstated the closing date. The exhibition continues through June 25, not Jan. 25.
