A 57-year-old man buried by rubble in an earthquake was rescued 13 days later by workers in the southeastern city of Bam, state television news reported Thursday.
The man, who was alert when found but has since slipped into a coma, gave his first name as Jalil. He was said to have come to Bam from a provincial town for medical treatment the day before the quake.
Workers said he survived because he had been trapped under a closet, which left him some breathing space.
Mehdi Shanoush, an Iranian doctor at the Ukrainian-Iranian field hospital, said he believed Jalil must also have had access to water.
''It seems he had some water because around him was wet,'' Dr. Shanoush told Reuters. ''When he arrived at the hospital his signs of life were very weak. He was frozen, and now he is in a coma.''
Dr. Shanoush also told the Islamic Republic News Agency that Jalil was suffering from a serious lung infection.
More than 30,000 people are estimated to have died in the quake, which occurred on Dec. 26. Jalil was the first victim to have been found alive since a 97-year-old woman was rescued on Saturday. Nighttime temperatures in Bam have fallen to freezing since the earthquake, and hope of finding any more survivors is scant.
Aftershocks in recent days have hit nearby provinces, raising concerns about further loss of life.
In particular three towns in the southwestern province of Khuzestan -- Izeh, Masjed Soleyman and Baghmalek -- have suffered 36 lower-level jolts in the past two days, the state television reported.
--------------------
U.N. and Red Cross Ask for Funds
UNITED NATIONS, Jan. 8 (Reuters) -- The United Nations and the Red Cross on Thursday began a $73 million appeal for victims of the earthquake that razed the Iranian city of Bam, killing 30,000 people.
United Nations' agencies are trying to raise $31.3 million and the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies is hoping for $42 million.
The money will be used over the next three months to provide medical care, revive agricultural production, restore water and sanitation services and educate children, among other efforts, Jan Egeland, the United Nations coordinator for emergency relief, said.
The Dec. 26 earthquake, which had a magnitude of 6.8, destroyed 90 percent of the city's buildings, including hospitals and schools.
