Carolina Panthers defensive tackle Brentson Buckner created a firestorm last summer when he declared that his linemate Kris Jenkins was better than Tampa Bay's perennial Pro Bowl tackle, Warren Sapp.
The trash talk that ensued not only drew headlines and stirred the rivalry between the teams, it also created a standard by which the Panthers' defensive line would be measured this season.
Five months later, Sapp is watching the playoffs on television as the Panthers try to match Tampa Bay's Super Bowl run of a year ago. When Carolina goes on the road to face the St. Louis Rams on Saturday in a National Football Conference divisional playoff game, its defensive line will be charged with the task of slowing running back Marshall Faulk and disrupting one of the most daunting passing attacks in the N.F.L.
''For us to be able to do that in St. Louis, that would be a big statement because they haven't lost out there,'' Jenkins said Thursday. ''That would be a great thing to be able to say.''
The Panthers' defensive line has spent the season backing up Buckner's preseason bravado. Carolina beat Tampa Bay twice this season, and Jenkins was named a starter on the Pro Bowl team. Sapp is a reserve. Defensive ends Mike Rucker and Julius Peppers combined for 19 sacks.
It is a unit that has drawn praise throughout the league for its physical play. Against Dallas in the N.F.C. wild-card game last Saturday at Ericsson Stadium, Jenkins and the key reserve Al Wallace each had sacks, Peppers had an interception and the Panthers held the Cowboys to 204 total yards in a 29-10 victory.
''They're probably the best collective group we've seen,'' St. Louis quarterback Marc Bulger said. ''Usually, there's one or two guys you've got to really worry about. As a group, these guys are all studs.''
It is no surprise that the emergence of the Panthers' defensive line coincides with the team's resurgence after a 1-15 season just two years ago. To understand the fall and rise of the Panthers, one need look no further than the defensive line.
For years, the Panthers had tried and failed to build a formidable defensive front through free agency. In 1998, the coach, Dom Capers, spent $46.5 million and two first-round draft picks to sign the free-agent tackle Sean Gilbert. He was no better than average, and Capers wound up being fired after a 4-12 season.
George Seifert made the same mistake two years later. In 2000 he signed the free-agent defensive lineman Chuck Smith to a five-year, $21 million contract, then brought Reggie White out of retirement and added Eric Swann, another free agent.
It wasn't a line for the ages. It was a line of the aged.
Smith had a bad knee and was forced to retire after playing only two games. White was only a shell of his once-dominating self, and Swann never recovered sufficiently from his knee problems to be an impact player. A year later, Seifert was dismissed after going 1-15.
It was in that disastrous season that the Panthers made a philosophical change in their approach to rebuilding the team. Learning from some of the worst personnel moves by the franchise, they decided to forgo the big-name quick fix and chose to rely on draft picks.
Rucker, a second-round selection in 1999; Jenkins, a second-rounder in 2001; and Buckner, a relatively low-cost free-agent pickup that same year, were already in place when John Fox was hired as the head coach to replace Seifert. Fox added the final pieces: Peppers, the second overall pick in the 2002 draft; Wallace, acquired in a trade with Miami; and the reserve Shane Burton, a free-agent pickup in 2002.
''If you look at the defensive line we built, it symbolizes the philosophy of how we tried to build the team,'' General Manager Marty Hurney said.
Suddenly, after years of embarrassing failure, the Panthers had a formidable defensive front. Jenkins said he sensed it during Fox's first training camp in 2002, when the Panthers went from a passive read-and-react defense to a more aggressive approach.
''Everybody was practicing and you got to see how some guys were, how athletic they were,'' he said. ''We knew we were going to be something special going into that.''
Buckner said he felt no vindication for saying that Jenkins was better than Sapp.
''I knew what Kris was going to do,'' Buckner said. ''So I wasn't worried about being vindicated. Because we went into those games against those guys, it wasn't, 'Well, our D-line or Kris got to play better than little man down there.' It was just that we just go out there and win for what we wanted to do as a team.''
That's right: Buckner called Sapp little man. Some rivalries never end.
PRO FOOTBALL
