A Georgia man who the police say killed four people and fled with three girls was found shot yesterday after a police chase near the Georgia-Tennessee line, the authorities said. The girls appeared to be unharmed.
The man, Jerry William Jones, 31, was accused of killing his former wife's parents and sister and his 10-month-old daughter and fleeing with three girls -- Mr. Jones's stepdaughter and other two daughters. The infant appears to have been strangled. The adults were shot.
After an Amber Alert was issued across the South, a tip led the police to Mr. Jones as he headed north on Interstate 75 out of Georgia. His vehicle had an accident and went off the road, a spokesman for the Georgia Bureau of Investigation, John Bankhead, said.
The officers approached and found Mr. Jones wounded and the girls in the car. He was taken to the Erlanger Medical Center in Chattanooga, a spokeswoman for the hospital, Jan Powell, said. The children were evaluated at T. C. Thompson Children's Hospital at Erlanger.
''Considering what's happened,'' Ms. Powell said, ''if they're found to be fine -- I don't know, I'm just making a guess -- they might be kept.''
''There'll never be any justice for the lives he ruined,'' said Benny Blaylock, a nephew of Tom Blaylock, Mr. Jones's father-in-law. ''I'm very thankful that the kids are O.K. But there's no justice in anything that happened.''
The ordeal unfolded on Wednesday after Mr. Jones had called his former wife, Melissa Peeler, ''told her what he had done'' and said that if she called the police he would harm their children, Sheriff Jerry Davis of Gordon County said.
The authorities first went to the scene, a modest area near horse and cattle pastures 60 miles north of Atlanta, after Ms. Peeler called about 3:30 p.m. on Wednesday to ask them to check on her family.
Deputies looked around and found ''nothing misplaced or improper,'' Sheriff Davis said, and left.
Ms. Peeler called again seven hours later, said Mr. Jones had called her and ''explained to us that he had done harm to her mother and daddy,'' Sheriff Davis said.
Deputies returned and found the bodies of the parents, Tom and Nola Blaylock; their daughter Georgia Bradley; and the infant, Jerri Jones, in two houses in Ranger, Ga.
He took ''the time to clean inside the home and hide the bodies,'' Sheriff Davis said.
Two abducted children, Brandy Jones, 4, and Tammy Jones, 3, are Mr. Jones's daughters. The third, Brittney Phelps, 10, is his former stepdaughter.
The Associated Press quoted an in-law of the Blaylocks as saying Ms. Peeler was in Oregon visiting a boyfriend. A spokesman for the sheriff's office said the officials believed that Ms. Peeler was driving a tractor-trailer and was stuck in snow.
The children often stayed with her family when she was away, Benjamin Blaylock said. Mr. Blaylock said Mr. Jones and Ms. Peeler had lived in an apartment above his for a short time about five years ago.
''There was a lot of traffic, people coming all hours of the night,'' he said. ''He had a motorcycle he drove as fast as possible, and he was in trouble a lot with the police then.''
When he last spoke to his uncle, Benjamin Blaylock said, Tom Blaylock told him that Mr. Jones had been calling the family to harass them about the children, saying ''that he wouldn't ever let them go.''
''He just did things to cause trouble,'' Mr. Blaylock said.
An Amber Alert was issued at 8:30 a.m. yesterday in Georgia, nine hours after the bodies were found. The authorities said they then worked to determine which vehicle was missing.
