Betty Trantham is 62 years old and has 16 great-grandchildren, 22 grandchildren and nine children. She falters at the last number and amends it with, ''Only it's eight now.''
It has only been two months since her daughter Carrie, 36, died of an aneurysm caused by 20 years of drug abuse. In Mrs. Trantham's mind Carrie, whom the family called Neicy because her middle name was Denise, is the one she could not save.
But she did not let Carrie go without trying. For several years Mrs. Trantham had taken a bus and a train after finishing work as a home attendant in New York to visit Carrie every Thursday in Bridgeport, Conn. She had furnished Carrie's small apartment with thrift store finds. She had taken her daughter to drug rehabilitation centers. But nothing could release her from an addiction to crack cocaine.
''I couldn't do nothing,'' Mrs. Trantham said, weakly laughing at the futility. ''Me and my big mouth was shut down. There's not anything a person can do.''
Before Carrie died, Mrs. Trantham did the most important thing she could have done: she went to court and was awarded custody of Carrie's three sons, Nolandro, 9, Nicolia, 6, and Nevon, 5. But that was only half of Carrie's brood.
''One got away,'' Mrs. Trantham said of a child who was taken into state custody in Connecticut. ''That's the one called Natalie. But I got the three.''
Another daughter, Wendy, has custody of a fifth child, Natasha. The oldest daughter, Nadia, lives with her father.
Carrie was only one of Mrs. Trantham's children to become involved with drugs. But two other daughters who became addicted have been through recovery.
Mrs. Trantham has another daughter who has another battle to fight, however. Eight years ago, the woman, now 35, who did not wish to be named, was found to be infected with H.I.V.
Once again, Mrs. Trantham stepped in to try to help another of her children back to health.
''I don't care what nobody says, you are going to love your child no matter what,'' Mrs. Trantham said. ''I bathed her. I fed her. I moved her legs to keep the muscles working. I cooked oatmeal with milk and I poured it in her. She's 210 beautiful pounds. I nursed my daughter back.''
Mrs. Trantham had three young children when she married her husband at 26. Thirty-six years later she still has three young children in her care.
Her life is different from the one she knew as a young woman -- she is retired and has paid for her house in South Jamaica, Queens -- but caring for these three boys presents other problems.
After the death of their mother, the boys began to act out at school. The school suggested counseling for the family. Mrs. Trantham was referred to FEGS Honorable Caroline K. Simon Counseling Center in Rego Park, Queens, a beneficiary of UJA-Federation of New York, one of seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund. The family began counseling there in November and while the treatment was initiated for the boys, Mrs. Trantham found it helped for her, too.
''I had to talk to somebody, it just came out,'' she said, sitting in an office at the FEGS center. ''I felt better because I had never really let anybody know what was really, really happening.''
Jody Shatkin, a clinical social worker at FEGS who has been working with the family, said: ''Nevon may have a host of developmental problems. All of the children were born addicted and have developmental and emotional issues like hyperactivity.''
Mrs. Trantham is raising the children on an income of about $1,600 a month. She cobbles it together from $270 in public assistance every two weeks for all three children, $357 a month in food stamps and $714 a month in disability payments. She gets $60 monthly from her pension.
''I don't know how I do it, but I do it,'' Mrs. Trantham said. ''You don't have to live expensive. I'm 62 years old, what do I need? The only thing I have to worry about is the kids. But --'' She paused, then said emphatically, ''They will never be without.''
However, after the expense of paying for the funeral for her daughter in October, Mrs. Trantham's budget is tighter than usual. When she mentioned that the children had outgrown their winter clothes, the staff at FEGS secured $600 in Neediest Cases money for her to buy warm coats, hats, gloves and sweaters for the boys.
Mrs. Trantham said that she made a point of keeping her three grandsons aware of the cautionary tales around them.
''I don't hide nothing from them,'' she said. When she is walking with the boys and they pass a drunken person on the street she says to them: ''You know what got that man down there is drinking. If you start drinking, that's what's going to happen to you.'' If they see a line of young men in handcuffs she'll explain: ''They're dealing in drugs. This is what happens when you come up here dealing in drugs.''
And when they see people they know who were once healthy and now haggard-looking, Mrs. Trantham will tell the children: ''Crack did that to her. You want to smoke crack, this is what's going to happen to you.''
Mrs. Trantham said, ''I have a daughter with H.I.V. I don't have time for foolishness.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,422,924,95  Recorded Thursday: 265,631.69
Total: $6,688,556.64  Last year to date: $7,110,201.85
