A bitter internal fight has consumed the family that runs one of this city's oldest charitable foundations, pitting uncle versus nephew and cousin versus cousin, with accusations of conflicts of interest, self-dealing and a boardroom power grab.
Strangely enough, the battle over the Omaha charitable group, the Gilbert M. and Martha H. Hitchcock Foundation, has more to do with issues raised by Enron and other corporate scandals than a squabble among rich relations.
Scrutiny of corporate governance has grown intense after scandals at companies like Enron, WorldCom and Tyco, whose executives violated the law and shareholders' trust. That scrutiny has seeped into the nonprofit arena.
In the charitable world, the exploitation of personal connections has long been seen as more virtue than vice. But in the new climate, lawyers for charities say they have been flooded with requests for counsel on potential conflicts: Should a lawyer or an accountant whose firm is paid to work for a charity or foundation sit on the organization's board? Given the news media's increasing role in questioning nonprofit activity, should a newspaper publisher be on the board of any charity?
''Should you hire your best friend?'' asked Eve Borenstein, a lawyer in Minneapolis who specializes in nonprofit law. ''State and federal law may not tell you that you have to do anything better, but the public is going to wonder whether she was really the best candidate.''
In some cases, the new scrutiny has provoked heated controversy, as in Omaha, where Denman Kountze, president of the Hitchcock Foundation, contends that grants it made represent conflicts of interest and self-dealing by his nephew, who is a trustee and a foundation manager.
The nephew and his allies accuse Mr. Kountze and his sons, Edward and Charles, who are also trustees, of violating foundation bylaws by trying to take various actions without a board vote.
These recent cases have arisen in the nonprofit world:
*The University of Georgia Foundation, which manages the college's $400 million endowment, has come under fire for spending more than $30 million on business with companies linked to 27 of its 55 trustees, according to reporting by The Atlanta Journal-Constitution.
*A judge ordered the Minnesota Partnership for Action Against Tobacco to overhaul its board after Attorney General Mike Hatch questioned its administration of the state's tobacco settlement funds because members of its board were representatives of organizations and agencies that were very likely to seek its money.
*Foundations linked to two of the nation's major stock exchanges, the New York Stock Exchange and Nasdaq, have come in for similar criticism for making donations to organizations with ties to their board members.
*The Senate Finance Committee is investigating the Nature Conservancy, in part for its purchases of land from companies affiliated with board members and for selling prime real estate to trustees at a discount in exchange for promises to limit development.
The Nasdaq has a conflict of interest policy that seeks to ensure that grants are made objectively. The N.Y.S.E. relies on guidelines but is considering a formal policy similar to its competitor's, a spokesman said.
Steven J. McCormick, president and chief executive of the Conservancy, said the organization and its trustees involved in such transactions were surprised that they attracted such scrutiny.
''We never thought of the trustees as related parties before,'' Mr. McCormick said. The Internal Revenue Service has a conflict of interest policy for nonprofits, but many lawyers say it is inadequate.
''It is deficient in two areas,'' said Michael W. Peregrine, a lawyer in Chicago. ''Its scope is limited and does not address the fact that relationships that can create conflict issues can be both financial and nonfinancial, and it does not address conflicts involving professional advisers and consultants.''
At the same time, Mr. Peregrine and other lawyers caution that the new concern about conflict is turning into a witch hunt. ''A rule that would bar grants from a foundation to a nonprofit simply because they share a director would also discourage philanthropically minded people from community involvement,'' Betsy Buchalter Adler, a lawyer in San Francisco, said, ''and that's not a consequence that anyone would want to see.''
Denman Kountze, whose uncle Gilbert Hitchcock was a United States senator and the founder of The Omaha World-Herald, said that he and his sons, Edward and Charles, who are trustees of the Hitchcock Foundation, were only doing their duty in raising ethical questions.
''The Hitchcock Foundation has benefited the people of Omaha and the Midwest since I have been president, and I simply wish to defend and preserve its integrity,'' Denman Kountze said in an interview here.
The groundwork for the fight was laid two years ago when Thomas R. Burke, a lawyer who had served as the Hitchcock Foundation's longtime secretary and general counsel, suggested that the foundation make a grant to the Stephen Center, which operates drug treatment programs here. Mr. Burke mentioned that his daughter Lisa had benefited from its services.
Denman Kountze agreed to let the board consider the grant, and in January 2001, it gave $25,000 to the center for the overhaul of transitional housing units. In a letter later that year, Mr. Burke told board members that the Stephen Center was seeking another $25,000.
But a note scribbled at the bottom of the copy sent to Denman and Edward Kountze set off an alarm.
''Denny and Teddy -- This is the center where my daughter is living and raising her two boys,'' Mr. Burke wrote. ''They do great work -- low budget. Tom.''
After an investigator established that Lisa Burke and her sons had been living in the center's housing since 1999 -- the very housing the foundation was paying to help upgrade -- Edward Kountze said he felt certain the grant had amounted to self-dealing.
Denman Kountze said that he had assumed Mr. Burke's daughter had left the Stephen Center well before her father suggested that the foundation give it money.
Mr. Burke was asked to resign at the foundation's annual board meeting in January 2002, and he appeared to do so in a videotape of the meeting, which indicates that the board's seven members unanimously elected Edward Kountze to replace him.
''As a matter of our fiduciary duty to the public and our responsibility to protect the donor's wishes, we must self-police,'' Edward Kountze said. ''We sought guidance from experts in nonprofit law, tax accounting and compliance, and they all shared our concerns about the apparent self-dealing and conflicts of interest in the foundation's governance.''
Edward Kountze said that Mr. Burke had never sent the foundation's records to him. Mr. Burke continues to do the work he always did for the foundation -- and to charge for it, bills show. Mr. Burke declined to comment.
Neely Kountze, Denman's nephew; Neely Kountze's wife, Mary, and Tyler Gaines, his longtime lawyer, all of whom are foundation trustees, said in depositions that they voted only to strip Mr. Burke of his secretarial title, not to relieve him of the general counsel role.
They also said they were waiting to find a replacement for him, because Edward Kountze had no experience in the job.
But Denman and Edward Kountze contend that after they raised concerns about potential conflicts of interest, Neely and Mary Kountze and Mr. Gaines, with Mr. Burke's aid, began plotting to take control of the foundation by amending its bylaws to eliminate a provision that requires Denman Kountze's presence to effect a quorum or adding a board member to tip the balance of power in their favor. The seventh board member died after Edward Kountze was elected secretary.
Mr. Gaines would not discuss the situation and the Kountze couple did not return a telephone call.
But in court papers, they have a lot to say, not always nice.
Denman, Edward and Charles Kountze say the other board members ''ambushed'' them at a meeting at the First National Bank of Omaha in September 2002 to iron out the dispute over Mr. Burke and his mounting fees.
The meeting quickly disintegrated into a shouting match, depositions show, as Mr. Gaines moved to elect John W. Webster, an Omaha businessman, to the board, ripping a sheet of yellow legal paper into strips for ballots. Denman Kountze and his sons left immediately, and the remaining board members elected Mr. Webster.
In January 2003, Mr. Gaines and Neely and Mary Kountze sued Denman, Edward and Charles Kountze in the foundation's name. They have asked the judge to declare Mr. Webster's election legitimate and remove the defendants from the board.
In a countersuit, Denman Kountze and his sons say their adversaries are trying to control the foundation to paper over self-dealing involving Neely Kountze.
In 1990, Neely Kountze and a business partner gave the property and buildings that had been used by a car dealership they owned to the Omaha Children's Museum.
Neely Kountze took tax deductions for the gift, and the museum agreed to assume $505,000 in mortgages on the property held by him and his partner.
Denman and Edward Kountze said they did not know about that gift when they voted three years later to give the museum $50,000, which was exactly the amount needed to pay down the remainder of the debt the museum had assumed from Neely Kountze and his partner. Had they known, Edward Kountze said, they would not have approved it.
Bruce R. Hopkins, a lawyer they hired who is an expert in issues of nonprofit conflicts of interest and self-dealing, found in a report that the grant to the museum was self-dealing by Neely Kountze. The report contends that the grant subjects Neely Kountze and the foundation to tax penalties.
Edward D. Hotz, the lawyer for Mr. Gaines and Neely and Mary Kountze, has contended that the report was false, defamatory and slanderous, and that the foundation's grant to the museum was for exhibits.
In an amended report, Mr. Hopkins dismissed the accusations and argued that since money is fungible, the museum grant still raises questions about self-dealing.
Judge James T. Gleason of Douglas County District Court, who is presiding over the case, did not allow Mr. Hopkins's report as evidence.
Judge Gleason's involvement itself presents a potential conflict: He sits on the board of the Omaha Home for Boys with Mr. Webster, the disputed Hitchcock Foundation board member.
A spokeswoman for the judge said he considered it inappropriate to comment before ruling on the case.
