The United States, which has often viewed most nations of Latin America as reliable and docile allies, is increasingly facing resentment over security and trade policies that some of them view as inimical to their interests.
When President Bush travels to Mexico next week to confer with leaders from throughout the hemisphere, he will meet a more assertive Latin America. It is a region that spurned Washington on the war in Iraq, is demanding better treatment for immigrant workers and continues to block a hemispheric trade agreement that some nations, led by Brazil, view as unfair.
Mr. Bush will try to patch up relations with his Mexican counterpart, Vicente Fox, by presenting his new proposals to normalize immigration between the two countries and ease the plight of millions of illegal workers in this country. Mr. Fox's political standing at home has been undercut by his failure to win action from Mr. Bush on immigration.
But immigration is just one element in a series of pent-up issues, and largely irrelevant to the rest of the region, which is grappling with weak economies, corruption, crime and anemic trade. Many nations look to Mr. Bush to invigorate economic development and help them emerge from political crises in places like Venezuela, Haiti, Colombia and Bolivia.
Arturo Valenzuela, a senior White House aide on Latin America in the Clinton administration, called the new Bush immigration proposal ''a very significant boost for the relationship with Mexico.'' But he added, ''It's a wash or a negative for the other nations of the hemisphere.''
Mr. Bush, who speaks Spanish and grew familiar with Latin American issues during his tenure as Texas governor, came into office promising to improve relations with the countries of the region. He began his presidency by emphasizing his friendship with Mr. Fox. Since Sept. 11, 2001, however, Mr. Bush's attention has been focused on other regions. One expert described the president's visit to Monterrey, Mexico, the site of the next week's meeting, as ''a second coming out'' in the neighborhood.
Latin American leaders say they are newly pragmatic in their relations with the United States. They are also unafraid to challenge Washington, even in the face of considerable pressure.
The most pointed example of such independence was the refusal of most Latin American nations to support the American-led war in Iraq. In the United Nations Security Council, Chile and Mexico opposed a resolution authorizing force in Iraq, and only 7 out of 33 Latin American and Caribbean nations supported military action.
In Latin America, there was broad, popular resistance to an American strategy that was seen as unilateral and pre-emptive. Ill will from that standoff lingers, both in Latin America and in the United States, which has long taken regional support for granted.
Gabriel Marcella, a Latin America expert at the United States Army War College, said that Latin Americans ''were asked by the United States to support a preventive war.''
''They did not,'' he said. ''The ugly head of unilateralism seemed to reappear.''
Peter Hakim, the president of the Inter-American Dialogue, a forum for hemisphere leaders, said: ''I don't think you can overestimate the damage to the U.S.-Mexican relations. No relationship was more damaged, with the possible exception of France.''
After months of giving President Fox the cold shoulder, Mr. Bush's action on immigration may foretell an end to the tensions, particularly since Mr. Bush is taking a political risk by angering anti-immigration Republicans.
Mexico's ambassador to Washington, Juan José Bremer Martino, said this week that his country had worked closely with the Bush administration to address most of its concerns on security, most of them regarding border issues. The disagreement over Iraq, he said, is part of the past.
''This issue has been left behind,'' he said. ''Our cooperation in the field of security has been outstanding.''
After Chile joined Mexico in opposition to the war, Washington delayed approval of a free trade agreement. The agreement was later signed.
Colombia ran into trouble with the administration on the issue of the International Criminal Court. When Bogotá balked at signing an exemption from prosecution for American personnel, the administration withheld some aid and threatened to cut off $160 million more. Colombia, which gets more American aid than any other country except Israel and Egypt, eventually acceded.
Argentina, which was the only Latin American nation to take part in the Persian Gulf war in 1991 and was later designated a major non-NATO ally, found itself in a spat with the administration this week over ties with Cuba. When Roger Noriega, the assistant secretary of state for Latin America, criticized Argentina's warming relationship with Cuba, the reaction from Buenos Aires was swift and indignant, with one cabinet official declaring that the days of ''automatic alignments'' with Washington were over.
The administration has clashed repeatedly with Brazil, South America's largest country. The disagreements have resulted in a stalemate over what is probably the most widely sought project in the hemisphere: the establishment of a free trade area from Alaska to Argentina by next year.
When Brazil led nations in insisting that American farm subsidies and steel protections be included in trade negotiations, Robert B. Zoellick, the United States trade representative, lashed out at what he termed ''won't do'' nations. But Brazil held its ground, and the two nations settled on a watered-down agreement that set aside the most sensitive issues.
''Brazil is severely penalized by restrictions in the United States,'' said Rubens Barbosa, Brazil's ambassador to Washington.
On the security front, Brazil has been equally adamant. When the administration began requiring photos and fingerprints of foreign visitors who are from countries that require visas to United States, a Brazilian judge took umbrage and ordered the same treatment for American visitors to Brazil.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell on Thursday argued that Brazil's action was discriminatory, while the administration's position was universal, with admitted exceptions. After speaking with his Brazilian counterpart, he said an end to the dispute was in sight, with Brazil moving to modify the judge's instructions.
In the absence of a grand bargain on trade, the Bush administration has pursued bilateral and multilateral pacts with regional blocs. Central American nations were among the first to sign a free trade agreement, called Cafta, last month.
But some experts said Cafta merely pointed up the asymmetrical relationship that the United States has with its neighbors. The deal largely protected trade benefits the Central Americans already have, said Nancy Birdsall, the president of the Center for Global Development.
''They have such a weak negotiating position with the United States,'' Ms. Birdsall said. ''They're desperate to stay in the club.''
Still, for some individuals, the cost of membership is too high.
Adolfo Aguilar Zinser, who served as Mexico's ambassador to the United Nations throughout the debate on war in Iraq, gave a speech in November that asserted that the United States sought a subservient relationship with Mexico.
''It sees us as a backyard,'' he said.
Mr. Aguilar Zinser was promptly fired, Mexican officials said -- under pressure from the United States.
News Analysis
