NEVER mind what T. S. Eliot wrote. January can be the cruelest month, the young man said on Wednesday night. It is for him, anyway, and the icebox weather has nothing to do with it.
''I'm a huge sports gambler,'' he said. Everywhere he looks right now, there is action, which for him is the same as temptation, powerful and almost irresistible.
Last weekend brought the kaleidoscope of bowl games in college football. The professional football playoffs are under way. The basketball season is in high gear, with 12 pro games scheduled tonight. Hockey is skating along. This is ''juice time,'' as someone else put it.
But the young man said he had not placed a bet since just before Christmas. That may not sound like much of an accomplishment to many people. For him, it was something.
''At least I got through the weekend, so it's a start,'' he said. He even managed to make it through a family dinner without bouncing up and down to check the sports scores. ''It felt good,'' he said, ''to have a conversation where there was clarity.''
His confessional moment came at a session of Gamblers Anonymous, one of a dozen such meetings held in and around New York City on Wednesday night alone. Quite a growth industry, gambling is. So, it would seem, is gambling to ruination.
This gathering was in Manhattan. The exact location is not a secret; you can easily find it if you want. But the price of admission was an agreement not to reveal it in print, or to mention even the incomplete names used by the 13 people who attended -- all but one of them men -- a quorum of pain tempered by hope.
One man recalled playing baseball in high school, his attention focused the whole time on the racetrack program stuffed in his back pocket. Another fellow said he had recently considered joining his family on a vacation in Las Vegas, until he finally asked himself, ''Am I out of my mind?'' Yet another guy told of how he had hurt loved ones as he bet away a normal life.
Several people there had something else on the brain: Pete Rose, the baseball giant with a million-dollar talent but, it is now obvious, a dime's worth of integrity.
Time and again, flawed athletes become central characters in America's moral dramas. This week the spotlight falls on Mr. Rose, whose gambling led to his banishment from the sport he graced with excellence.
Finally, after years of pugnacious denial, he acknowledges in a book that officially went on sale yesterday that, yes, he bet on baseball games. But he insists he never bet against his own team, and says that while he still plays the horses, he no longer wagers on baseball at all.
To the people at Wednesday's meeting, who spoke only for themselves and not for Gamblers Anonymous, which takes no position in this matter, much of what Mr. Rose says is sad yet laughable. He has a gambling monkey on his back, they said, but refuses to acknowledge it.
''He just admitted that he bet,'' one man said. ''He didn't admit that he has a problem. There's a big difference.''
TAKING his turn, another fellow said, ''He didn't bet against his team? Come on. Anybody who's a compulsive gambler knows that you'd bet against your mother living till tomorrow if that worked to your advantage.'' Still another said: ''There's no way this man can stay clean. It's only a matter of time before he's back to betting on baseball.''
Their own recovery program, they all said, requires as a first step that they accept they were ''powerless over gambling'' and their lives ''had become unmanageable.'' Pete Rose clearly has not made it even that far, said Arnie Wexler, a New Jersey-based counselor on compulsive gambling who has wrestled with his own demons.
Mr. Rose says he bets on horses? ''That's like an alcoholic who was drinking Scotch saying that he now only drinks beer,'' Mr. Wexler said in a phone interview. ''Rose doesn't understand the addiction that he has, and neither do most professional sports people. No sports program has a truly effective program for dealing with this.''
Not everyone on Wednesday gave a hoot about Pete Rose. They had their own troubles, including the lone woman there, attending her first session. Her English was imperfect, so she brought along a daughter to translate the conversation into Spanish now and then. ''If I make it through two weeks without betting, I'll feel like it's a victory,'' she said through the daughter.
Don't think in terms of weeks, a man told her. Real victory lies in not gambling today.
NYC
