Gigantic ArtSpace  59 Franklin Street, TriBeCa  Through Jan. 31
Gigantic ArtSpace, a new gallery in TriBeCa, makes a winning debut with this group exhibition based on the image of an all-American city with a shaky reputation. The Detroit most non-Detroiters know -- and the one represented here -- is a former industrial capital seriously on the skids, its buildings crumbling, its population depleted after decades of white flight. Like most cities, Detroit is actually a more complicated and more ordinary place than that picture suggests. But a lot of what makes it dynamic comes across in the show, which also includes one of the best individual pieces I have seen in a gallery this season.
Innovative pop music -- from Motown, early punk and techno to a recent garage rock revival -- is surely post-industrial Detroit's best-known export, and it is right at the center of the exhibition, in a listening station with an 18-hour-long sampling of songs compiled by the music journalist Mike Rubin. Around the station is art by nine artists, all but one of them past or present Detroit residents.
Doug Coombe, a freelance photographer, documents a monument of distressed architecture in a shot of the city's Michigan Central train station. So, in a different way, does Thomas Rapai in paintings of roadside motels that suggest mausoleums. A world of street-based pop art is summed up in copies of Motorbooty Magazine, created by Mark Dancey, a former rocker, and in storyboards by the graphic artist Kenjji, a founder of Griot Comics, who brings superheroes and social dysfunction together in his deft drawings.
Similar dualities play out elsewhere in the show, organized by Trevor Schoonmaker, a sharp young independent curator. Mark Powell's photographic portraits of Detroiters have a kind of antiheroic glamour, while multimedia silkscreen pieces by Thom Klepach and a video by Susan Cook address a long local history of incendiary racial tension.
Among the show's most moving entries is a video by Nicole Cattell about the sculptor and painter Tyree Guyton; beginning in 1986 and using found materials, he transformed blocks of abandoned houses on Detroit's East Side into extended pieces of open-air assemblage. Despite the city government, which bulldozed the project more than once, Mr. Guyton's work of urban renewal goes on. It's fantastic.
So is the video ''Hot Irons'' by Andrew Dosunmu, an artist born in London and raised in Nigeria. Although he has no personal connection to Detroit, his 50-minute film records one of the city's more intriguing events, the Hair Wars convention, a kind of battle of the bands for African-American hairstyling.
With a soundtrack of Motown, Nina Simone and Jessye Norman singing Strauss; interviews with a smart and funny cast of stylists, models and fashionistas; and a glimpse at some of the most out-there style statements imaginable -- wait till you see Miss Solar System -- the film is genius.
It won the Best Documentary award at Fespaco, Africa's largest film festival, in 1999 and comes to the New York art world, often the last stop on the international culture express, only now. By itself, it makes ''D Troit'' something not to miss.
HOLLAND COTTER
ART IN REVIEW
