A high-born daughter who has an incognito fling with a working stiff who is aware of her disguise. This motif of romantic comedies like ''It Happened One Night'' and ''Roman Holiday'' is the theme of the pallid ''Chasing Liberty,'' which stumbles as it tries to stay in the footfalls of those earlier films.
Though its title suggests the flat-footed literalism of ''Poetic Justice,'' there actually is a Liberty being chased in this movie. That's the code name of Anna Foster (Mandy Moore), a freedom-hungry first daughter and a pouty, selfish 18-year-old trapped in a security bubble.
Anna eventually runs off through much of Europe with Ben Calder (Matthew Goode), who rescues her from her plexiglass prison. Resemblances to screwball comedies aside, it should also be noted that ''Liberty'' is the sacrificial first studio release of 2004, which means that this movie is more like a Secret Service agent taking a bullet for the President.
''Liberty'' has a WB-winsomeness, asking its audience to feel for its beautiful, tragic heroine. (And it has the odor of an eventual spinoff for that network, too.) The movie works so hard at making Anna an American Rapunzel that no one gets around to giving her much of a personality; why would a comedy think pitying its heroine somehow makes her likable?
It's charming when Anna is shown going though a blizzard of costume changes for a first date and cooing ''Of course you can kiss me'' in anticipation as the camera pirouettes around from her bedroom window to the front of her family home, 1600 Pennsylvania Avenue. (It's a smooth, amusing use of computer graphics, too, and Ms. Moore almost seems like a special effect; she appears to get younger with every movie.)
Yet the film telegraphs the looming interruption of her date by protective Secret Service agents so that it becomes inevitable, like something from a Wes Craven thriller, ''Last White House on the Left.'' It may be the first time you've felt sorry for Secret Service agents since Clint Eastwood broke a sweat trying to keep up with a motorcade in ''In the Line of Fire.''
When Anna and her family head to Prague for a summit meeting, she begs her dad (Mark Harmon, who seems less presidential and more like a president pro tem) for a chance to hang with her friend Gabrielle, the daughter of the French ambassador. Anna asks that they be accompanied by just a couple of protectors, the agents Weiss (Jeremy Piven) and Morales (Annabella Sciorra). He accedes until a moment arises that sends his parental instincts to DefCon 4: the arrival of Gabrielle (Beatrice Rosen) wearing a slinky black dress and a tongue stud that make her look like a Maxim magazine cover girl or an apparition of White Houses past.
Like any other dad, Anna's pop ratchets up the security detail. At a Roots concert, Anna spots the incongruous Secret Service phalanx and runs off. She's aided in her escape by the lean, cooled-out Ben; she jumps on his motorbike and they putter off in a less than intense 10-kilometer-an-hour chase.
Let's not give away too much more, except to say that Ben is inveigled into helping Anna get to the Love Parade techno-gig in Berlin. The movie puts a lot of weight on Ms. Moore's adorability factor -- and exhausts it rather quickly -- since the director, Andy Cadiff, can't quite get the timing together to make the comedy click.
''Chasing Liberty,'' which opens nationwide today, has the feel of corporate indifference, as if it were put together with a stopwatch on a two-second delay. (Mr. Cadiff's experience with knockabout slapstick, earned off Broadway while directing ''3 Guys Naked From the Waist Down,'' doesn't help here.)
It's not a good thing if you can anticipate the jokes, and the jokes and the scenes still go on several beats too long. (''Liberty'' is littered with teeny-weeny electronica quips, like naming a hulking German character Gusgus.) The picture doesn't want to scare off fans of Ms. Moore's earlier ''Princess Diaries,'' so there's never a sense of jeopardy that might bring some comic tension to Anna's flight.
The lack of narrative sophistication allows an Ecstasy-like disposition to set in; ''Liberty'' becomes goo-goo eyed over itself. It lacks the discipline to define Anna sufficiently; rather, it portrays her as either a lovable naïf or a spoiled narcissist in desperate need of a lesson, the kind of thing found in some of the screwball comedies this movie tries to pickpocket. The unintended result is that she comes off as the worst of both -- a whiny brat.
And Mr. Goode, with his mellow, humid voice, is more suited to announcing the D.J. changes at Love Parade. He's so chicly languid that he's more believable when he's bored by Anna's tantrums than when he's supposed to fall for her.
The long pursuit of Anna and Ben, who disappear from the Secret Service's view, hits nearly every European capital and makes the picture feel as long as a primary season; I started to wonder if we were going to see President Foster on the hustings in Iowa before the end of the film.
''Chasing Liberty'' puts aside time for the agents Weiss and Morales to have a similar romantic squabble, unable to express their adult feelings. And like their youthful charges, they have just as little chemistry. But a likable, obviously substance-addled backpacker (Martin Hancock) -- a Scottish version of Shaggy from ''Scooby-Doo'' -- brings some energy to the film when he elbows his way into Anna and Ben's trip.
All the noise and mischief leads to a happy ending when Anna puts aside her cargo pants and takes on more adult challenges, like heading off to Harvard. During the film's climax, there's a scene lifted from ''The Bodyguard''; Ben scoops up the fallen Anna and carries her off to safety, which brings to mind that movie's Rule No. 3, ''Never fall in love with your client.'' Unfortunately, it's a lesson that applies to the audience's feelings toward this movie, too.
''Chasing Liberty'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned). It includes strong language intended to charm this film's braces-wearing audience and Anna's getting adorably lightheaded from a single glass of beer.
CHASING LIBERTY
Directed by Andy Cadiff; written by Derek Guiley and David Schneiderman; director of photography, Ashley Rowe; edited by Jon Gregory; music by Christian Henson; production designer, Martin Childs; produced by David Parfitt, Broderick Johnson and Andrew A. Kosove; released by Warner Brothers Pictures. Running time: 100 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Mandy Moore (Anna Foster), Matthew Goode (Ben Calder), Jeremy Piven (Alan Weiss), Annabella Sciorra (Cynthia Morales), Beatrice Rosen (Gabrielle), Caroline Goodall (Michelle Foster), Mark Harmon (James Foster) and Martin Hancock (McGruff).
FILM REVIEW
