THE AMATEUR MARRIAGE  By Anne Tyler  306 pages. Alfred A. Knopf. $24.95.
Anne Tyler's 1988 novel, ''Breathing Lessons,'' worked an artful variation on the old Audrey Hepburn-Albert Finney movie, ''Two for the Road,'' giving us a portrait of a marriage as a couple go on a long car trip and reminisce about their years together. Her affecting, if somewhat warmed-over new novel, ''The Amateur Marriage,'' gives us a similar portrait of a 30-year-long marriage between a warm, ditsy blabbermouth and her cautious, stick-in-the-mud husband -- minus the road trip.
Michael and Pauline Anton in ''The Amateur Marriage'' have so much in common with the couple in ''Breathing Lessons'' that the reader of both novels may well come down with a case of déjà vu: the husbands are both proprietors of small businesses that they took over from their families; the wives are both bad drivers and impetuous zanies; both couples are given to pondering the roads not taken in their pasts; both must contend with a wayward child and the unexpected arrival of a grandchild.
The main difference is that the mismatched people in ''Breathing Lessons'' somehow persevere in spite of their differences, whereas the couple in ''The Amateur Marriage'' fight and flounder. Indeed, the latter novel is an altogether darker, less comic production than its predecessor: the melancholy melody that threads through many Tyler novels is more pronounced in these pages; a sense of loss and mortality more insistent. The cloying cuteness that has curdled some of her recent fiction is largely absent here, and so is the tetchiness of her last novel (''Back When We Were Grown-Ups'') that pushed its characters perilously close to caricature.
Though ''The Amateur Marriage'' spans some six decades, from Pearl Harbor through the present day, Ms. Tyler is less interested than John Updike was in his Rabbit novels with the effect that public events and changing social mores have on the day-to-day lives of her characters; her people, after all, live in a hermetic Baltimore world of family and neighbors and seem largely impervious to the gyrations of the world beyond.
In fact, the larger world intrudes on the Antons' lives only twice -- in sequences that number among the novel's most forced and unconvincing. Early in December of 1941, shortly after meeting the pretty Pauline Barclay, Michael Anton ends up enlisting -- more out of a misunderstanding and a desire to impress Pauline than a genuine desire to see action. Many years later, their eldest daughter, Lindy, will run away from home, join the San Francisco counterculture and develop a drug problem.
From the start of their marriage, it's clear that Pauline and Michael are a dreadful mismatch. She chafes against what she sees as his failings: ''his rigidity, his caution, his literal-mindedness, his ponderous style of speech, his reluctance to spend money, his suspicion of anything unfamiliar, his tendency to pass judgment, his limited understanding of his own children, his uncharitable attitude toward people down on their luck, his dislike of all social occasions, his stodginess in bed, his magical ability to make her seem hysterical.''
He is irked by her sociability, her garrulousness, ''her fickle, irresponsible unpredictability.'' Why, he wonders, did he marry ''such a frantic, impossible woman, so unstable, even in good moods, with her exultant voice and glittery eyes, her dangerous excitement.''
Although acquaintances like to think of them as a perfect couple, Pauline and Michael are constantly bickering, sulking and fighting at home. And by cutting back and forth among the viewpoints of different characters, Ms. Tyler is able to provide a kaleidoscopic view of their marriage, and the ripple effect that their contentious relationship has on their children.
''You were ice and she was glass,'' Lindy tells her father later. ''Two oddly similar substances, come to think of it -- and both of them hell on your children.''
As for Lindy's brother, George, he thinks, ''So much about their parents had been embarrassing,'' their ''lives were more extreme than other people's.''
Lindy, who has always been a stubborn, willful child, becomes increasingly defiant as a teenager, and one day, she just leaves home -- and doesn't return. Her disappearance -- like the abrupt, sometimes violent events that occur in many Tyler novels, propelling heretofore passive characters into a re-evaluation of their lives -- does not bring her parents closer together, but instead results in another round of accusations and recriminations.
The lives of the Antons, of course, are not just about fighting; Pauline and Michael are also tied to each other by their children, by shared adventures and, as the years pass, by bonds of memory and inertia. Caring for aging parents, witnessing the illnesses and travails of friends, adapting to a move to the suburbs -- these are all experiences that bind Pauline and Michael to each other, even as their very different temperaments and interests increasingly pull them apart.
Though ''The Amateur Marriage'' can leave the longtime Tyler fan with the sense that the author is simply reconnoitering territory long ago annexed and mapped out, it is so psychologically detailed that the story as a whole stands as one of her more convincing efforts: an ode to the complexities of familial love, the centripetal and centrifugal forces that keep families together and send their members flying apart, the supremely ordinary pleasures and frustrations of middle-class American life.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
