The logjam blocking an important step forward in the government's criminal investigation into the collapse of Enron showed tentative signs of breaking on Thursday.
A federal judge here said he would allow Lea Fastow, the wife of Enron's former chief financial officer, to plead guilty to a single tax violation, but he signaled that he had not yet decided whether he would feel bound by the agreement she reached with prosecutors on a five-month sentence.
In announcing his position, Judge David Hittner of Federal District Court said he would reserve the right to impose a longer sentence than the one called for in the plea bargain and would ask for a presentencing investigation of about two months before reaching a final decision.
Judge Hittner said that he would give Mrs. Fastow until noon Friday to think about his position and decide whether she wanted to proceed with her plea. If so, and if both sides agreed, he said he would postpone Mrs. Fastow's trial, which is scheduled to begin on Feb. 10. Lawyers for Mrs. Fastow and the government met throughout much of the day trying to reach a resolution.
On Wednesday, in what lawyers in the case had expected would be a routine hearing, Judge Hittner rejected the plea bargain outright because it limited his ability to sentence Mrs. Fastow, a former assistant treasurer at Enron, to a longer term.
Judges are allowed to reject plea bargains that they think dictate inappropriate terms under what is known as Rule 11 of the Federal Rules of Criminal Procedure. However, the rule, as written, suggests that a decision to reject the agreement should come after a defendant pleaded guilty, and not before, legal experts said. Once a judge rejected the agreement, a defendant would usually have the option of withdrawing the guilty plea or accepting whatever terms the judge imposed.
By his announcement on Thursday, Judge Hittner signaled that his earlier decision was not intended to block Mrs. Fastow from changing her plea but rather was a demonstration of deep concern about the proposed sentence.
The plea deal with Lea Fastow, the wife of Andrew S. Fastow, is the first part of a complex arrangement structured by prosecutors that would propel the investigation of the events in Enron to a new level. Mr. Fastow, the central figure in several Enron cases, has tentatively reached his own deal with prosecutors under which he would be sentenced to at least 10 years in prison, but he has made that agreement contingent on the resolution of his wife's case.
In turn, Mr. Fastow has already provided information against another executive, the company's former chief accounting officer, Richard Causey, who is expected to face criminal charges once the Fastow matter is resolved.
At a hearing on Thursday, Leslie Caldwell, the head of the Justice Department's Enron Task Force, told Judge Hittner that the proposed deal was an important element for a ''global resolution'' of the two cases.
The timing is an impediment to a deal largely because of personal reasons. The Fastows are the parents of two young sons, and they are insisting that they serve their sentences at different times so that one of them will be available to care for the children.
''If Andy, her husband, has to go to jail at some time, we don't want the children to be without parents,'' Mike DeGeurin, one of Mrs. Fastow's lawyers, told reporters outside the courthouse. ''For reasons I don't want to go too much into right now, five months will work.''
Mr. Fastow was indicted in 2002 on charges that he constructed a complex series of off-the-books partnerships at Enron both to disguise the company's sagging financial performance and to enrich himself with corporate cash through secret dealings. Mrs. Fastow was indicted last year on charges that she conspired with her husband and others to defraud Enron shareholders through a particular transaction and had failed to report income from the deal.
The case against Mrs. Fastow has never been considered by legal experts to be an important element of the Enron prosecution, beyond the incentive that it created for her husband to strike a deal with prosecutors. Now, however, because of Judge Hittner's position, the least significant of the cases that have been brought is impeding the most important advance in the government's investigation since it began two years ago.
The deal struck with Mrs. Fastow is not unusually soft. Indeed, it is unusual for a first-time offender in a comparatively small tax case to receive a prison sentence at all as part of a plea bargain, legal experts said.
If the deals fail to go forward, the government could well lose its best opportunity to obtain direct evidence about what took place at the highest reaches of Enron.
Mr. Fastow, as chief financial officer, has long been seen by government officials as one of the executives most culpable for the collapse of the company, making him also, in their view, one of the senior officers most likely to cut a deal and cooperate.
