Eddie Griffin paced the sideline, fiddled with his new practice jersey and rubbed his goatee as if he had just grown it last week.
Later, he would say that he felt like a kid on his first day of school.
And that is exactly how Griffin appeared to his new coaches and teammates, who seemed to be expecting a weathered veteran, hardened by suspensions and criminal charges.
When Nets Coach Byron Scott walked into the practice facility Thursday, he took one look at the baby-faced Griffin and could not believe the contrasting image between the 21-year-old in front of him and the player he had heard so much about.
''When I first came out, I didn't know who he was,'' Scott said. ''I got a little closer and said, 'That's Eddie.' He just looked so young. I forgot he's only 21 years old.''
His age belies his past. Griffin is facing charges in Houston for felony assault and misdemeanor drug possession. He is accused of punching his girlfriend and firing a gun in her direction in October; he was charged with marijuana possession in April. He has two hearings Jan. 20 in Houston and is under a court-ordered curfew. Yet after the Rockets released Griffin last month, the Nets pursued him as if he were a prodigal son, and they embraced him as such Thursday.
After his first workout, Griffin said he had not played competitive basketball in almost three months, was only 60 percent to 70 percent in shape and would need a few weeks to regain full strength. The Nets are more optimistic. Scott indicated that Griffin would not have to go on the injured list, that he would be with the team starting Friday night in Philadelphia, and that he could play right away if necessary. Because the Nets do not want to rush him, he will probably not get into a game for at least a week.
For now, Griffin appears most concerned about meshing with a team whose personality runs counter to his own. Griffin is admittedly introverted and anxious, and the Nets are a raucous group. During his first practice, Griffin shyly introduced himself to his new teammates, and they loudly introduced themselves back.
Griffin underwent treatment for substance abuse and depression in Houston and Nets officials have been in contact with his doctors to arrange any additional treatment in New Jersey. But the team could play the most important role in Griffin's rehabilitation.
''We need to make sure this kid is taken care of on and off the court,'' Scott said. ''The guys were tremendously helpful talking to him and letting him know where to be. He's going to feel a connection because this team is behind him and we're going to take him under our wing. Basketball is the least of our worries with Eddie.''
Still, basketball is why they signed him to a guaranteed contract worth about $400,000, the league minimum, taking a chance on Griffin, a talented 6-foot-10 forward who punched a teammate in high school and another one at Seton Hall.
''We have to try to make him feel comfortable,'' said Kenyon Martin. ''I wanted to explain to him how we're always laughing. I think that will make him relax. Hopefully, we'll make it easier for him.''
PRO BASKETBALL
