The two women's favorites performed well Thursday night in the United States Figure Skating Championships. Of the two men's favorites, one did decently and the other, by his admission, was simply awful.
Of the 21 women who skated the short program at Philips Arena, the best, as expected, were two California natives, 19-year-old Sasha Cohen and 23-year-old Michelle Kwan. Kwan, who has won the national title six straight years and seven of the last eight, was considered the one to beat.
According to seven of the nine judges, Cohen did that, and she enters Saturday night's free skate in first place. Kwan was second and Jennifer Kirk, 19, of Newton, Mass., was third. The free skate is worth two-thirds of the final score.
The men's short program was marked by perhaps the poorest performance in memory by a world-class figure skater. Timothy Goebel, a silver medalist at the last two national and world championships, knocked himself out of title contention.
Michael Weiss of Fairfax, Va., the defending champion, made two errors in his program, but his scores were not disastrous. Weiss stood fourth among the 22 skaters. Goebel (pronounced Gable) was 10th.
The surprise leader was 19-year-old Johnny Weir of Coatesville, Pa. Matthew Savoie of Peoria, Ill., was second and Evan Lysacek of Naperville, Ill., was third.
When the men left the ice, the women took over for their short programs. The spirals and layback spins that helped Cohen do so well under the new scoring system during the Grand Prix events this season did the same for her under the old system, which is still being used in this competition. Cohen received scores of 5.6 to 5.9 for technical merit and 5.8's and 5.9's for presentation.
Kwan had a shaky landing on the first of her eight required elements, a double axel. She called it ''a wake-up call'' and had no real problems after that. Her scores ranged from 5.4 to 5.7 for technical merit and 5.7 to 5.9 for presentation.
Kwan said the second-place showing did not bother her because any of the first three finishers in a short program could win the title by winning the free skate.
''I'm not mad at my performance,'' Kwan said. ''It could have been better, but I'm pleased with it. There's a lot of room to do better.''
Cohen showed more verve and joy than usual on the ice, and afterward.
''I always have joy when I compete,'' she said. ''I felt it in the warm-ups. I feel great. I'm real happy with my skating.''
For the last five years, the men's competition has been primarily a battle between Weiss, 27, and Goebel, 23. Weiss won the title in 1999, 2000 and 2003. Goebel has finished in the top three throughout that span, winning the title in 2001.
Thursday night, Goebel made mistakes on five of the eight required elements. He fell on a quadruple toe loop, wiping out a quad-triple combination. He did a single axel instead of a triple, fell hard on a triple flip and was painfully slow on straight-line footwork and a combination spin.
His scores ranged from 3.2 to 4.5 for required elements and 4.7 to 5.3 for artistry. No matter how low he finishes, he could still be placed on the United States team of three men for the world championships.
A grim Goebel, who has been having trouble all season with his boots, made no excuses. He said it was not the equipment.
''I don't know what happened,'' he said. ''I'm much better than that. I don't really understand it. If my skates were on backward, I should have done a triple axel. The scores were accurate.''
Weiss started with a two-foot landing on the first part of a quadruple toe loop-triple toe loop combination. Then he fell on a triple axel. After that, he was sound.
''I know what I need to get done Saturday,'' he said. ''Just skate a clean program.''
FIGURE EIGHTS
The pairs competition began Wednesday night with an expected result. TIFFANY SCOTT, 26, of Hanson, Mass., and PHILIP DULEBOHN, 30, of Germantown, Md., the defending champions, won the short program. RENA INOUE and JOHN BALDWIN JR. of Santa Monica, Calif., were second. The free skate will be Friday night. . . . Friday's program also features the free dance, which counts for 50 percent of the final score. After the compulsory and original dances, the leaders were TANITH BELBIN and BENJAMIN AGOSTO of Bloomfield Hills, Mich.
FIGURE SKATING
