Any documentary that focuses on the final days of a prisoner locked on death row is inescapably tinged with voyeurism, no matter how high-minded its intentions. Nick Broomfield's ''Aileen: Life and Death of a Serial Killer,'' which chronicles the courtroom shenanigans that led up to the Florida execution of Aileen Wuornos on Oct. 9, 2002, is an absorbing film, partly because its subject exudes a scary charisma. But even though its portrait of Wuornos is sympathetic, the movie still carries a ghoulish taint, especially when the camera zooms in for extreme close-ups of her stricken face.
A sequel to Mr. Bloomfield's 1992 exposé, ''Aileen Wuornos: The Selling of a Serial Killer,'' ''Life and Death'' presents itself as an anguished brief against capital punishment, especially the execution of people who are legally insane. But the timing of its release to follow ''Monster,'' the semifictionalized account of Wuornos's rampage as a homicidal truck-stop prostitute, smacks of the very exploitation that Mr. Bloomfield condemns.
Some who were entranced by Charlize Theron's eerily accurate impersonation of Wuornos in ''Monster'' will want to compare her performance with the real Wuornos, who comes across in the documentary as a raving paranoid. The prosthetic makeup that transformed the sleek, gorgeous actress into a bedraggled, weather-beaten street person was uncannily good at recreating Wuornos's crooked teeth. And the vocal similarity between the fictional and the actual Aileens, though not exact, is striking.
Some of the events depicted in ''Monster,'' like Wuornos's rape and torture by the sexual sadist who was her first murder victim, parallel events that she graphically described in her original courtroom testimony but later took back.
Mr. Broomfield's movie makes it absolutely clear that Wuornos was insane at the time of her execution, even though a 15-minute psychiatric exam at the last minute found her sane. In the days leading up to her death, she became convinced that she was being controlled by police-directed radio waves and said she would be carried from the earth by angels on a spaceship. The conspiracy against her, she insists, began when the police, who knew of her guilt after the first killing, didn't arrest her and allowed her to continue.
Mr. Broomfield, with his directorial partner and cinematographer, Joan Churchill, also visits Wuornos's hometown, Troy, Mich., to construct an account of her troubled childhood. In the muddled, fragmentary story that emerges, Wuornos was thrown out of the house as an adolescent and forced to camp out in the woods. Already a prostitute, she cleaned herself up in her clients' motel rooms and eventually fled to Florida.
This movie, which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, recycles and updates the ugly premise behind the earlier documentary: that the police covertly collaborated with her lawyer and mother to try to make a buck by selling her story to the movies. Although no hard evidence is offered, enough is brought out to leave you with the strong suspicion that it happened.
Like many of Mr. Broomfield's other documentaries, including ''Heidi Fleiss: Hollywood Madam'' and ''Kurt and Courtney,'' ''Aileen: Life and Death of a Serial Killer'' is partly an exercise in frustration in which the doggedly persistent filmmaker, with his plodding, haranguing tone, tries in vain to uncover dark personal secrets to prove a hypothesis. Here the obstacle is Wuornos herself. After more than a decade on death row, Wuornos, having embraced Christianity, has decided that she wants to be executed as soon as possible.
She recants all her previous testimony that the murders were committed in self-defense and insists she invented the graphic details of her first murder and the rape and torture that incited it. Only once, when she thinks she's off camera, does she whisper to Mr. Broomfield that her original testimony was accurate.
Although Wuornos is perversely buoyant throughout much of the movie, now and then her rage leaks out. Her fury and despair seem bottomless.
AILEEN  Life and Death of a Serial Killer
Directed by Nick Broomfield and Joan Churchill; director of photography, Ms. Churchill; edited by Claire Ferguson; music by Rob Lane; produced by Jo Human; released by Lantern Lane Entertainment and HBO/Cinemax Films. At Landmark's Sunshine Cinema, 139-143 East Houston Street, East Village. Running time: 89 minutes. This film is not rated.
FILM REVIEW
