Pete Rose has always loved to talk. About baseball. About himself. About everything. The walking, talking, infamous legend has grudgingly added a humiliating subject to his conversations after admitting in a new book that he bet on baseball games. For 14 years, Rose had publicly denied that he gambled on baseball while managing the Cincinnati Reds.
Rose was willing to discuss his transgressions as he sat stoically in a hotel suite near Central Park yesterday. He looked as if he were poised for a round of batting practice in a red exercise shirt, black running pants and white-and-black sneakers. But for 20 minutes, all the 62-year-old Rose did was take vocal swings at questions about his uncertain future and his muddied past.
''It was a part of my life that I'm embarrassed about,'' Rose said. ''I just went through a bad period of time those couple of years. I can't explain it. It was stupid. I was so stupid.''
The book, ''My Prison Without Bars'' (Rodale Press), was released yesterday, but excerpts were published on Monday. Rose has faced escalating criticism for the timing of the book and the tone of his remorse. His confessions about betting overshadowed the election of Dennis Eckersley and Paul Molitor to the Hall of Fame this week, and his apologies in the book were considered inadequate by some baseball officials.
Commissioner Bud Selig has told associates that he wants to see Rose show contrition for his damaging actions, and Rose was asked if he could have been more atoning in his book. Initially, Rose said that he is an unemotional type, so it would have looked insincere if he had been too fervent in apologizing for betting and lying about it. But, Rose eventually said, in his feisty way, that he was remorseful.
''I know you're not going to sit there and think that I'm not sorry this happened, that I don't understand I made a big mistake,'' Rose said. ''I'm not going to put an act on and try to cry. That's not the way I am. But I do understand what I did, and I'm willing to stand up and be counted. And, if it's not enough, I'll continuously say I'm sorry. I'll get down on my knees and say I'm sorry.''
Rose paused for only a few seconds, not allowing the image of him on his knees to settle, before adding, ''But then I can just hear people say, 'Well, he's really pouring it on now.' ''
In a matter of moments, Rose went from plucky to penitent and back again. He did separate interviews with eight journalists yesterday before a book signing in Ridgewood, N.J., and he appeared on ABC's ''Primetime Thursday'' in a taped interview last night. Rose, baseball's career leader in hits, was polite, chatty and occasionally fidgety in the afternoon interview, folding his arms, rubbing his hands and lifting a copy of his book off a table to illustrate a point. ''It's embarrassing,'' Rose said of his situation. ''I'm sorry I ever bet on baseball. It's the worst thing I ever did in my life.''
Rose was banned from baseball in 1989 for his alleged gambling on sports and applied for reinstatement in 1997. He met with Selig almost 14 months ago and said he had come away from the meeting with ''good vibrations'' about being reinstated. Not only is Rose eager to get on the Hall of Fame ballot, he also wants to become a manager again. Rose called himself one of the ''best ambassadors'' in the sport and said it would benefit baseball to have him on the field ''because some people are meant to be leaders and other people aren't.''
But Selig has not ruled on Rose's application for reinstatement, and Rich Levin, a spokesman for Major League Baseball, said it will most likely remain on the back burner for a while. Rose said that he thinks Selig has waited because Rose was cited for not paying back taxes soon after they met.
''I think Bud has to be super careful because his reputation is at stake,'' Rose said. ''He has to be absolutely sure that nothing is going to backfire on him. I understand that.''
In that respect, Selig has talked to Rose about the unsavory appearance of a former player with a gambling problem popping up at casinos. But Rose said that he is ''not a casino gambler'' and that Selig ''understands things are exaggerated when it comes to casinos.'' Selig has declined to comment about Rose's status or the revelations in the book.
When Rose attended the James Toney-Evander Holyfield fight at Mandalay Bay in Las Vegas last year, he said it was the only time he had ever visited a casino in which he was not paid for a speaking engagement or an autograph-signing event.
''As a retired player who does corporate appearances and memorabilia shows, who pays the best in this country?'' Rose asked. ''Casinos. I don't care if it's Foxwoods, Tunica, Biloxi, Atlantic City or Las Vegas. Every time I go there, I'm getting a check. That's a fact. You can check any casino you want to see if I have a gambling line. I don't.''
Debbie Munch, a spokeswoman for Caesars Palace in Las Vegas, a casino where Rose has made appearances, was asked if he had a credit line there. She said, ''As you can imagine, in deference to the privacy of our hotel guests, we don't confirm or deny who is a player here.''
In the book, Rose said he did not use any inside knowledge to alter his bets. When Rose was reminded that a bettor would be poor at his job if he did not use every piece of vital information he had before making a bet, he leaned back in his chair, dismissed the idea that he quizzed other managers or advance scouts, and said, ''I understand what you're trying to say, but I don't look at it like that.''
Rose told Selig that he bet four to five times a week and that he bet on the Reds, but never on the Reds to lose. When it was suggested to Rose that he was essentially betting against the Reds on the days he did not place a bet on them with a bookie, he said, ''You can interpret it that way, but I don't know if I agree with that.''
Asked why he disagreed, Rose said, ''I can't give you a good answer, but I just don't look at it that way.'' Before the next question, Rose asked, ''So you're saying I would have been better off if I bet every day on my team?''
Rose avoided a question about why people should believe him now after he had lied about betting for so long. He said that he was willing to tell the truth only to Selig, who would decide his fate, and that he had to wait for their meeting.
Rose acknowledged that his public admission was tardy and did not reject the notion that public confidence in him has eroded since his revelations about gambling on baseball. ''You might be right about that,'' he said.
Interestingly, Rose, who went about one fifth of his life without telling the truth about betting on baseball, said there was only one thing he could do to help nudge Selig to reinstate him and to persuade the fans to support him: be positive and be honest. Rose then said he has always been positive and honest about baseball.
BASEBALL
