The last pieces of a legendary collection, the nine Imperial Fabergé Easter eggs from Czarist Russia acquired over a lifetime by Malcolm Forbes, the publishing magnate, are to be sold at Sotheby's in New York in April, the auction house announced yesterday.
The collection, second in size only to the 10 in the Kremlin, will be offered along with 180 other Fabergé objects from the Forbes holdings. Together they are expected to sell for at least $90 million, at a time when the market for them seems receptive.
Many Americans are passionate collectors of Fabergé, but there is also a growing number of newly rich Russian collectors who, thanks to a booming oil industry in their country, have added to the strength of this market. Another potential buyer is the Kremlin, which might want to add to its trove of Imperial eggs. Britain's royal family also has important Fabergé holdings, which are on view in Buckingham Palace.
The extraordinary materials and workmanship that went into these eggs, coupled with their size (most are no more than six inches tall), make them perhaps the most luxurious, over-the-top baubles ever produced.
Among the treasures is the fabled Coronation Egg, which Czar Nicholas II gave Empress Alexandra for Easter in 1897 to commemorate his ascension to the throne. The egg reveals a velvet-lined compartment containing a replica of the coach in which Alexandra made her grand entry into Moscow. George Stein, a master in the House of Fabergé, spent 15 months working 16-hour days to complete this composition in gold enamel, diamond and rock crystal. Sotheby's expects it to sell for between $18 million and $24 million.
Christopher Forbes, vice chairman of Forbes, said he and his siblings began seriously considering selling the rest of their father's collection in 2002, when Christie's auction house sold another Fabergé work, the Imperial Winter Egg, on behalf of an unidentified collector for a record price of $9.5 million. Shortly afterward, Mr. Forbes said, the family began receiving offers from collectors all over the world willing to pay handsomely for their eggs.
The Forbes family is ''taking advantage of ripe times,'' said Peter Schaffer, an owner of À la Vieille Russie, an antiques gallery on Fifth Avenue in Manhattan. ''It's a good moment.''
Malcolm Forbes's five children have been selling portions of the Fabergé collection, but none of the Imperial eggs, since 1990, when Forbes died. (He had divorced his wife of 39 years in 1985.) But the selling, through Sotheby's and its archrival, Christie's, has increased in intensity in the last three years.
Also during the last three years Forbes Magazine, the family's chief holding, has experienced a 50 percent drop in advertising pages. But Christopher Forbes said yesterday that the drop in company revenue was not the reason that he and his brothers and sister had decided to sell the last of the collection, including the Imperial eggs.
''We're trying to make sure that the real jewel -- Forbes and Forbes .com -- stays within the family,'' Mr. Forbes said. He added: ''None of us are getting any younger. It was a great passion of Pop's, and we have had a great time owning these objects.''
For Sotheby's, the chance to show and sell the best of the Forbes Collection, which has been exhibited around the world as well as in a special gallery in the Forbes Building at 60 Fifth Avenue, at 12th Street, is a great coup. The objects will be on public view at Sotheby's York Avenue headquarters from April 12 to 20. The sale is to be on April 20 and 21. Sotheby's expects the kind of crowds that lined up outside in 1988, when it held a 10-day sale of art and objects belonging to Andy Warhol, and again in 1996, when it sold the contents of Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis's houses and and her jewelry.
The public showing could be the last time that the Forbes eggs will be seen together. ''We're expecting this to be one of those extraordinary events,'' Bill Ruprecht, Sotheby's chief executive, said. ''Fabergé eggs have always had an amazing pull on the world. The arc of history they embody is amazing. It's the kind of thing that doesn't exist in today's world.''
The first of the eggs was commissioned from the House of Fabergé by Czar Alexander III in 1885 as an Easter present for his wife, the Czarina Maria Feodorovna. His son, Nicholas II, later commissioned treasures for his wife, Alexandra, and for his mother, the Dowager Empress, continuing what became an Imperial Easter tradition lasting more than 30 years.
The first Imperial egg, the Hen Egg, has a plain white-enameled exterior with a band of gold around the center that twists open to reveal a gold yolk holding a gold hen. Sotheby's estimates it will sell for $3 million to $4 million. Also for sale will be the last Easter egg commissioned by Czar Alexandra III, made for presentation in 1894. It consists of an egg-shaped box carved from white agate and mounted with a trelliswork of gold and jewels. Sotheby's said it expected this one would bring $5 million to $7 million.
Only 50 Imperial eggs are thought to have been produced. Besides the 9 Forbes eggs, 8 are missing, 28 are in museums and 5 are in private collections.
Other Fabergé designs in the sale include a miniature watering can carved from a single piece of jade, and a pink carnelian rabbit with diamond eyes, which was once owned by the Dowager Empress Maria Feodorovna.
The news that Sotheby's won the sale of the Imperial eggs has prompted much speculation as to why the family chose that house over Christie's. While both auction houses were willing to offer the family comparable financing, Mr. Forbes said, Sotheby's ''came with a very good offer and an aggressive plan of attack.''
While no one at either auction house would speak about the deal for attribution yesterday, it is believed that Sotheby's has given the Forbes family a guarantee -- an undisclosed sum regardless of the outcome of the sales -- on four eggs. Sotheby's employees said it totaled less than $50 million.
While it might seem that selling all their eggs at once would devalue the collection, Mr. Forbes and Mr. Ruprecht said that they were hoping for just the opposite. ''It's going to be an event,'' Mr. Forbes said. ''It will bring the market to a whole new level.''
