Of all the subjects that can cause political and governmental upheaval, an old-fashioned tax revolt is high on the list. Over the years, elected officials from Sacramento to Chicago have faced the wrath of voters angry about high property taxes.
This year, in New York, the subject is particularly emotional. A study released in November by a budget watchdog group found that New Yorkers pay more of their income in local taxes than residents of any other state. The news was received like the fuse of a bomb that is moving along closer to detonation each day.
On Thursday, both Republican and Democratic elected officials from counties around the state gathered at the State Capitol to demand a solution to the skyrocketing costs of Medicaid, which they say is a prime cause of local property tax increases and a strain on county budgets from Erie to Suffolk.
''I am targeting the issue of Medicaid, and I am going to be involved in this year's election cycle,'' said Joel Giambra, the Erie County executive and a Republican. ''We are creating a revolution. It's bubbling right now. It's simmering. It's going to boil over.''
All week, county officials have been saying they are fed up with Albany's failure to pay for the health programs that Gov. George E. Pataki and state legislators like to take credit for as they pass the costs on to counties. New York is that rare place where localities share with the state and the federal government the cost of providing Medicaid services to the poor.
On Thursday, many county officials pledged to battle state legislators who ignore their pleas. They are collecting signatures from taxpayers, and plan to deliver them en masse to the governor and both legislative chambers in February. Most of the state's counties as well as New York City are said to be on board.
As a last resort, some of the officials even promised to work to defeat legislators individually. That political battle plan was laid out in November at the Citizens Budget Commission's annual meeting by Thomas R. Suozzi, the Nassau County executive and a Democrat, who suggested one solution might be to defeat one state senator and one Assembly member from each county in this year's legislative elections.
Mr. Suozzi, who has become the leader of the statewide movement, stood with nearly 30 of his fellow county officials on Thursday, a day after Governor Pataki gave the subject of Medicaid a few sentences in a 75-minute annual speech to lawmakers, and said county leaders had no choice but to fight back. He said the cost of Medicaid mandates imposed by the state were putting intense pressure on his county's ability to deliver basics like social services, law enforcement and road repair.
''We are making it very clear that local taxpayers, our residents, our voters, cannot continue to bear the property tax burden being foisted upon us by the State of New York through this Medicaid program,'' Mr. Suozzi said. ''And we are going to continue on a bipartisan basis, from rural to suburban to urban counties, to make this fight and make it clear that the reason property taxes are going up at the county level is because of Medicaid.''
When asked if the fight was worth the potential loss of millions of dollars in legislative pork that state lawmakers from his district use each year to impress their constituents, Mr. Suozzi said yes.
''Job No. 1, for us, is to connect the dots between Medicaid and property taxes,'' he said. ''As the public begins to realize that, we will see more action from our state officials.''
Tom Santulli, a Republican and the Chemung County executive, agreed. ''I think we are on the verge of a taxpayer revolution,'' he said. ''And let me tell you, when it happens, there will be no survivors, and it's as simple as that.''
In Suffolk County, on Long Island, Steve Levy, the newly elected Democratic county executive, said the county collects $1 million worth of property taxes, alone, each week but sends more than that to Albany for Medicaid costs.
''We cannot keep going in this fashion or soon my county government, like all the other county governments here, are just going to be a shell that is a distributor of state services with absolutely no discretionary parts of the budget left,'' Mr. Levy said.
For his part, Governor Pataki, in his annual address to the State Legislature, acknowledged that the $42 billion Medicaid program was fast becoming unaffordable. But it was a quick point he ticked off near the end of an 8,300-word address, and while some said they were happy to hear him mention it at all, it left many county executives in the crowd hungry for more details.
The governor gave high praise to Joseph L. Bruno, the state Senate majority leader, for his proposal to cut about $2.5 billion for health insurance for the poor over the next five years and then help pay the counties' share of Family Health Plus, one of the most expensive and fastest-growing programs.
So far, Albany does not seem deeply troubled by the threats. Some in the capital have shrugged off Mr. Suozzi's comments as the words of a politician whose name has been raised as a potential candidate for governor.
When asked if any senators were politically vulnerable to the local uprising, John E. McArdle, a spokesman for Mr. Bruno, a Republican, said, ''No, not at all.''
Ken Brown, a spokesman for the State Division of the Budget, said that since 1994 Governor Pataki had saved localities $2.8 billion through Medicaid cost containment measures. ''His Medicaid reform task force is now developing sound initiatives to improve the system,'' Mr. Brown said.
Mr. Levy, a former state assemblyman, pointed out that Sheldon Silver, the speaker of the Assembly, had supported, in 1999, having state and federal governments pay the full cost of the Family Health Plus program to lighten the load on local governments.
Charles R. Carrier, a spokesman for Mr. Silver, said Thursday that the Assembly was anxiously awaiting the governor's budget, due Jan. 20, to fill out the details. He said, ''Clearly, that is the point where our joint efforts to work cooperatively with the governor, the Senate, localities and health care providers to bring about Medicaid reform this year will begin.''
The county officials agreed there was still time to work cooperatively to get relief from Albany and said they were seeking meetings with the governor and the two legislative leaders to explore a ''menu'' of initiatives, from revenue sharing to cost containment. Andrew Spano, the Westchester County executive and a Democrat, said he viewed the governor's speech as ''opening the door to conversation.''
That the issue has suddenly hit the forefront, after nearly two decades of effort by county officials, is easy to understand, Mr. Suozzi said. First, in the last five state budgets, the cost of the program has risen $12 billion, or about 40 percent, as Governor Pataki and the legislators have expanded the program at the same time the cost of medical services has outstripped inflation. Next, the bipartisan coalition of local leaders is united as it never has been. Third, property taxes are so onerous that voters are starting to complain.
''The time is now for action,'' Mr. Levy said.
