Mo Vaughn, the Mets' colossal and colossally disappointing first baseman, said yesterday that he would definitely not play this year, would probably not play in 2005 and was unlikely to play any time after that.
''I don't see it coming down the line -- ever,'' Vaughn said of a possible comeback.
It might sound as if Vaughn was retiring. But Vaughn, whose 2003 season ended after 27 games because of an arthritic left knee, made no announcement to that effect in a conference call with reporters.
There are some financial benefits for both Vaughn and the Mets in not defining his status. If Vaughn, who is 36, spends the entire 2004 season on the injured reserve list, he will be eligible to receive his $15 million salary. If he retired, Vaughn would get nothing.
An insurance policy taken out by the Mets on Vaughn would reclaim most of the $15 million after Vaughn spends 90 days on the disabled list. The Mets have a $14 million option, with a $2 million buyout, in 2005.
Neither Mets General Manager Jim Duquette nor Jeff Moorad, Vaughn's agent, would discuss the terms of Vaughn's contract yesterday.
''It may seem a fine line,'' Moorad said. ''We don't hold great hope that Mo will be able to play again. We are stopping short of calling this a retirement at this point.''
When Duquette was asked if the Mets now had more money to spend on a free agent like right fielder Vladimir Guerrero, he said, ''Our plans haven't changed.''
Vaughn is still holding out hope, although it is a very slim hope, that he may be able to play again. On the advice of Andrew Rokito, the Mets' physician, Vaughn will not have surgery on his knee.
''The main thing is to get as light as you can and strengthen the knee,'' said Vaughn, whom the Mets have said weighs 275 pounds.
Vaughn explained that his knee, which has almost no cartilage in it, would probably have to be replaced if he had surgery. He believes he is too young for a knee replacement.
''A knee replacement at 40 means another one at 60,'' Vaughn said.
In his third game with the Mets in 2002, Vaughn was hit on the right hand with a pitch. He went on the disabled list from April 6 to April 21, and never seemed to catch up. Vaughn hit .259 with 26 home runs and 72 runs batted in that season.
His knee was so sore he was barely a factor in 2003. He hit 3 home runs and drove in 15 runs in 79 at-bats before going on the the disabled list on May 3 for the rest of the season.
Moorad said in November that Vaughn, who had been working out two hours a day, four days a week, was planning to report to spring training. Vaughn said yesterday that his knee is probably in worse shape than it was in June.
''If I work out consistently, it feels pretty good,'' he said. ''But if I don't, I feel horrible.''
He said he was in no shape, either physically or emotionally, to attempt to play for the Mets in spring training. ''For me,'' Vaughn said, ''it's kind of tough to smell that cut grass and dirt a little bit.''
Minor League Deal for Valentin
John Valentin, a 37-year-old infielder who did not play in the major leagues last season after having shoulder surgery the year before, signed a minor league contract yesterday with Houston and will go to spring training with the Astros.
Valentin, a .277 career hitter, spent most of the 2002 season with the Mets, where he was a teammate of Mo Vaughn, his former college teammate at Seton Hall. With the Astros, Valentin will join another former Seton Hall teammate, outfielder Craig Biggio. (AP)
BASEBALL
