By promising to hand over political authority in Iraq to Iraqis on June 30, the United States sent a useful message about its desire to lower its profile there and forced Iraqis to get to work on a constitutional structure and an electoral system. Unfortunately, the door is now open to radical forces, which in volatile situations and in the face of short timetables tend to be the best organized, with the clearest agendas. Washington needs to do all it can to block the radicals' path -- and postpone the handover if certain conditions are not met.
A central challenge is the extent of Kurdish power and independence. Since 1991, the Kurds have lived in an autonomous zone in the north. Some had hoped that once Saddam Hussein's regime had been toppled, the Kurds would give up autonomy to ease the concerns of other Iraqi groups and of neighbors, like Turkey, with their own Kurdish populations. That shift would have been hard to pull off in the best of circumstances. The shortened timetable makes it impossible. The Kurds dream of a separate state. Maintaining autonomy is their minimal demand.
That should be accepted, but with conditions. The Kurds consider the oil fields of Kirkuk to be theirs. They are not. They are part of the national patrimony, and the so-called basic law that is due at the end of February has to make clear that oil will be under federal control, with Kurds getting their share of the revenue. The 50,000 Kurds under arms should be turned into a branch of a federally commanded national guard. The rights of the Turkmen and Chaldean minorities who live among the Kurds must be protected in the basic law from both federal and regional governments.
How can Kurdish autonomy be accepted without inviting separatism from the Shiites, who make up 60 percent of the country? One possibility is to plan for provincial governments in each of Iraq's existing 18 provinces. The provinces could be permitted to group together. The three Kurdish areas would doubtless do so. Others could as well, but since their populations are more mixed, this would favor geographic over simple ethnic autonomy.
Two other factors need to be ensured for the June 30 handover date to stand. First, an electoral system that is recognized by all groups as legitimate must be constructed. That is especially a concern for the Shiite religious leaders, who fear that Shiite strength will be diluted, but it is also a serious issue for the Sunni minority. Second, the country must have a modicum of physical safety.
If Washington had involved the United Nations or in some other way internationalized the rebuilding of Iraq, it would not have such a desperate need to telescope this initial, vital period of institution-building. Having failed to do that, the Bush administration should keep in mind a major lesson from previous efforts of this kind. Systems established early in nation-building are unlikely to change drastically. That is why June 30 should be seen less as a deadline than as a guideline. Extremists must not be permitted to set the agenda.
