It seems safe to admit this: I like the crawl, the sometimes inane but often brain-saving text that runs across the bottom of the screen on 24-hour news channels. Although it has become de rigueur to hate the crawl -- even Jim Walton, the president of CNN, has said publicly that he dislikes it -- CNN's research has shown that 70 percent of its viewers favor it. And why not? At times it's your only hope of getting real news.
While Larry King and Kim Novak are blathering away, it doesn't exactly tax your mind to glance down and see that yet another British Airways flight has been delayed by security concerns. The disjunction between the two captures the way we live now: faster than ever, wishing we had eyes in the back of our heads.
Since September 2001, when the crawl appeared and never left, a cluttered screen has become standard for cable news. CNBC usually shows two stock tickers, stock market averages and a talking head, with the speaker sometimes reduced to a passport-size photo in the corner of the screen.
But multiple screens have moved quickly into the arts and entertainment. Film and television screens crammed with text and images are everywhere from the Museum of Modern Art to ''Access Hollywood.'' Once we were couch potatoes, but we are all active viewers now, flipping the remote through channels, flipping our eyes around the screen. Even deciding to ignore the crawl requires an active choice.
Duncan Roy's brash, engaging movie ''A K A'' splits the screen into a triptych of images throughout, a device that enhances the story of a con man masquerading as a millionaire's son. The director Mike Figgis has made several exciting, ambitious split-screen movies like ''Time Code,'' which divides the screen into four squares with different but connected story lines. On the real-time television series ''24'' split screens put us in two places at once, watching the counterterrorist heroes and the villains they're chasing. The screen even splits occasionally in Ang Lee's big-budget movie ''The Hulk,'' usually to allow a close-up view of a lab experiment.
The concept itself of course is as old as the three-ring circus, and in film Abel Gance divided the screen into a triptych as early as 1927 for his silent epic ''Napoléon.'' But the extent to which split screens have become commonplace is a major change. There are solid artistic reasons behind this. Multiple images capture the fragmentation of our postmodern world, with its sense that truth is often subjective. The Figgis films work that way, as dazzling immersions into many points of view at once.
But there are more practical reasons, as close by as your computer screen. Television and movies are echoing the cluttered screens of the Internet. Computer users are accustomed to Web sites set up for multiple-choice reading. Video-game players leap around the screen faster and faster. To young people raised with computers, it looks ordinary when MTV inserts an image teasing the next program inside the main screen.
MTV-style visuals have been criticized for promoting short attention spans. ''You might almost say quick attention span,'' Prof. Mary C. Potter of the department of brain and cognitive sciences at M.I.T. said in a phone interview. ''Some information can be picked up fairly rapidly, in a fifth or a tenth of a second. We move our eyes around three to four times a second.''
That's plenty of time to hop from one part of a screen to another and pick up the essence of a story, though not long enough to retain many details or reason about it later. ''If there's some hook or connection like a chase scene, we can go back and forth more easily,'' she said.
It's even more efficient to move your attention instead of your eyes, said Prof. Daphne Bavelier of the department of brain and cognitive sciences at the University of Rochester, who caused a stir last year with a study that showed playing video games regularly can improve a person's ability to take in objects quickly. As she emphasized in a phone interview, dividing your attention is very demanding if you want to do it well.
''It's easier to get the gist of a story than the details,'' she said, and more efficient to move your attention rather than your eyes. ''It takes at least 120 milliseconds to move your eyes to a new location, but only 30 to 40 milliseconds to move your visual attention,'' she said. Any way you look at it, that's encouraging news for those of us who simply want to keep the thread of a movie plot straight.
Watching ''A K A,'' it's remarkable how easily you become accustomed to the triptych, partly because the screen does not usually display different scenes but different angles on the same scene. In a two-way conversation, you can see both faces at once and never have to watch the boring back of somebody's head. The triptych is a stylistic flourish that suits the story, in which the working-class Dean (Matthew Leitch) moves into a fragmented wonderland of lies, half-truths and fake identities when he pretends to be the son of the self-absorbed Lady Gryffoyn (a wonderfully comic performance by Diana Quick, still best known as Julia in ''Brideshead Revisited'').
Mr. Figgis's ''Time Code,'' shot in real time over one and a half hours, is more challenging and ultimately more satisfying. In this all-star yet decidedly un-Hollywood movie, all strands of the satiric story lead to Red Mullet Productions, a fictional Hollywood company casting a movie.
In one square Salma Hayek plays an actress on her way to an audition, arguing in a limo with her lover, Jeanne Tripplehorn. In two squares we see the audition site -- offices or screening rooms and the filmmakers (including Stellan Skarsgard and Holly Hunter). In the fourth square Mr. Skarsgard's betrayed wife (Saffron Burrows) talks to her therapist (Glenne Headly). Plots overlap and characters from one quadrant turn up in another; the film ends with a violent death and nearly everyone in the same place, but the fragmented screen remains.
When it was shown in theaters in 2000, ''Time Code'' seemed an intriguing, gimmicky experiment, partly because the soundtrack directed your eye, allowing you to hear only one thread of the story at a time. The DVD offers a far better experience because it lets you choose which soundtrack to listen to as you go: you can leap from one story line to another, or watch one from start to finish. Demanding a pieced-together version of reality, the film's approach reflects its theme: the subjective way relationships function.
Mr. Figgis created an even more complicated, constantly shifting visual surface for ''Hotel'' (2001), about a group of actors filming Webster's ''Duchess of Malfi'' in Venice, while a documentary crew films them. Even with digital cameras, it is beautifully shot. The story is less sustained here; it involves the producer's plot to murder the director, and in an even clumsier touch, vampires. Yet ''Hotel'' has some spectacularly fascinating moments as it veers from what one character calls a ''McMalfi'' production to scenes rich with Webster's language. (It has not been released on video or DVD.)
Such approaches have ordinarily been confined to festival films like Julie Talen's accomplished 75-minute ''Pretend.'' The film uses as many as 12 boxes on screen, yet also has a strong narrative about two young sisters who pretend that one of them has been kidnapped, hoping to prevent their parents from breaking up, only to have the girl really disappear. The shattered screen captures the disoriented family's emotions and at times a sense of onslaught: we see different angles on the husband and wife screaming at each other in the kitchen while the little girls huddle worriedly in their bedroom.
Increasingly, though, split-screen movies are less avant-garde than mainstream. The Bolivian film ''Sexual Dependency'' divides the screen in two to present stories of teenagers and sexual awakening, five in sequence. Artistically the film is uneven: three segments shot in Bolivia are sharply written and acted while two shot in New York State are didactic. But it was a box-office hit in Bolivia and is that country's official entry for the Oscars.
There are of course stupid uses of split screens. This week the entertainment show ''Access Hollywood'' ran a crawl with weekend box-office results just minutes after its story about the same subject. That is simply aping the form of hard news.
More often split screens shrewdly address an audience ready to jump in. Fuse, a music-video channel competing with MTV, is built on multiple images and interactivity. Its daily music video show ''IMX: Interactive Music Xchange,'' lets viewers buy and sell fake shares of artists online (www.fuse.tv), then runs a ticker revealing each artist's value during the show, complete with mock market symbols (the rapper Ludacris becomes LUDAC). Its new show ''4Play'' features a screen divided into four like ''Time Code,'' with a music video in one square and extreme sports action in the others. Some things just don't demand your undivided attention. Others do, and since we don't have eyes in the back of our heads, splitting screens may be the next best thing.
Busy Divided
The major films and television shows in the Critic's Notebook article on split screens:
''A K A'' is playing through Jan. 15 at Cinema Village, 22 East 12th Street, Greenwich Village, (212) 924-3364. Screenings this weekend are at 3:45 p.m. today through Sunday. Tickets, $9; students, $7; 65+, $5.50. The film is also being shown at the Roxie Cinema in San Francisco. It will open in Denver Feb. 20 and in Miami March 5.
''PRETEND'' will be shown on Monday by the Museum of Modern Art at the Gramercy Theater, 127 East 23rd Street, Manhattan. 8 p.m. Admission, $6; free for museum members. Information: (212) 777-4900.
''SEXUAL DEPENDENCY'' will be shown tomorrow and Sunday at the Palm Springs International Film Festival. Information: (760) 322-2930 or www.psfilmfest.org.
''TIME CODE'' is available on DVD. Columbia/TriStar, 2000. 97 minutes. $24.95.
''IMX: INTERACTIVE MUSIC XCHANGE'' is on the Fuse cable channel weekdays at 6 p.m. The weekly series ''4Play'' is scheduled to have its debut on Fuse at 9 p.m. on Feb. 6. The Fuse channel is available through digital cable, as well as the satellite servers Directv and Echo Star.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
