The nation's high-rolling shoppers, full of pent-up desire to spend, propelled luxury stores like Neiman Marcus, Tiffany and Saks Fifth Avenue to hearty increases last month, but over all, many merchants were disappointed by the holiday season. Store sales for last month, measured against the same stores open in December 2002, rose 3.7 percent, according to the Bloomberg composite same-store sales index. Last year, called one of the worst in decades by analysts, holiday sales rose 2.2 percent.
While the numbers released yesterday were better than last year's, they were less than the double-digit turnaround retailers had hoped for in September, before three major snowstorms hit the Northeast, and buyers told pollsters there was no must-have toy or item of clothing.
Bloomberg said its composite index rose 3.26 percent in November.
More than in the last few years, the holiday season of 2003 showed a wide gap between winners and losers. In the end, even the electronic stores selling bargain flat-screen televisions and $29 DVD players to lines of customers clutching newspaper advertisements were a ''very, very mixed bag,'' said Matt Fassler, who covers the group for Goldman Sachs. ''Best Buy stood alone,'' he said, while the others, including Circuit City, lost ground.
Quirky items, like a $25 candle called Fig, flew off the shelves, helping the Bath and Body Works chain -- part of Limited Brands -- to a 16 percent increase over last December. But Victoria's Secret, also owned by Limited, did worse than expected: its pajamas and sexy push-up bras failed to attract enough shoppers, and sales fell 5 percent. Gap rose only 1 percent; Wal-Mart Stores rose 4.3 percent, but that figure included a hefty 6.1 percent increase at Sam's Club, Wal-Mart's discount warehouse. Yesterday, Wal-Mart announced that fourth-quarter profit would be at the low end of its estimated 63 to 65 cents a share.
Expensive items -- cashmere and diamond watches -- filled hand-knit stockings. The sale of 18-karat gold watches, for example, rose 12 percent in the holiday season, through December; watches from $5,000 to $10,000 rose 16 percent, according to LGI Network, which tracks watch sales.
Over all, while store sales were up 12.6 percent at Neiman and its Bergdorf Goodman unit, sales rose 27 percent for Neiman's online and catalog sales.
''The last 18 months have been a little challenging; the customer made a decision to spend a little less,'' said Burt Tansky, the chief executive of Neiman. But the holiday shoppers, he said, ''proved that luxury is alive.''
The scale tipped both ways: Kohl's, a few years ago the hottest retailing story in the country, fell far below its executives' estimates for December: instead of a mid-single- digit increase over last year, the moderate-priced department store chain fell 1.2 percent. Then there were the dark-horse stories: Ann Taylor, whose numbers had been dispiriting, climbed into the retailing stratosphere, with a 26.2 percent increase.
Analysts said that, despite some disappointing results, retailers' profits might have risen nicely during the holiday period when the final accounting was complete. Earnings statements will be released next month.
This was the holiday season when merchants, particularly in apparel, tried to hold the line on deep discount sales -- and, by and large, succeeded, analysts said. ''The two biggest trends were high-end selling, and less promotional merchandise,'' said Margaret Mager, a retail analyst with Goldman Sachs.
''Expect some good gross margins in the fourth quarter,'' she said. ''We're predicting a nice swath of better-than-expected earnings reports.''
For the customer, that meant there were not as many bargain sales. J. Crew and Gap, for example, curtailed a lot of the post-Thanksgiving markdowns, as did Saks and Lord &amp; Taylor, a unit of May Department Stores. J. Crew is a unit of the Texas Pacific Group. And while it seemed as if the electronics stores were cutting prices like crazy, Mr. Fassler, the analyst, said that the holiday's low prices were due more to price deflation than to discounting.
Kenneth T. Stevens, president of Bath and Body Works, said yesterday that part of his company's success -- besides the fig-scented candle, which, he said, brought in ''hundreds of thousands of dollars'' -- was due to this year's policy of marking down far fewer items, and rearranging the stores in a more sophisticated manner.
''We had more than 20 in-store deals last year, and this year, we had less than 10,'' Mr. Stevens said. The old look of the stores? ''Farmstand in the Heartland,'' he replied. And this year? ''A modern apothecary of beauty.''
Altogether, the stores also had less inventory going into Christmas, at higher prices. That meant they had less to mark down after Christmas -- a double-edged sword.
On one hand, that means less clutter and a clean entrance into spring. But on the other, that may mean a weak January in terms of sales at stores open at least a year.
That may cause even more problems for some of the teenager-oriented retailers, which continued their erratic path. PacSun stores, owned by Pacific Sunwear, continued to rise, coming in with 12 percent higher sales this December than last.
But Abercrombie &amp; Fitch, the once ever-so-hot chain, continued its decline: down 13 percent for the month, another in a long string of negative numbers. American Eagle, too, is troubled, although a spokesman said the company was starting to turn around; sales were down 6.1 percent -- but that was a lot better than in October, when sales at stores open at least a year fell 18 percent.
All told, the discount stores that strived for the high-end seemed to do well. Costco, the discounter that offers some high-end branded goods at a discount, rose 8 percent in December, while Target, which some analysts say has lost a lot of its chic image, rose 4 percent.
The Bloomberg index for department stores rose only 1.62 percent, weighed down by the more traditional department store chains -- Federated and the May Company -- which barely eked out a positive comparison with last year. Saks, on the other hand, rose more than 9 percent and Tiffany rose 16 percent. ''Luxury is back,'' Jaqui Lividini of Saks said.
Yesterday, Karen Katz, chief executive of Neiman Marcus, said that handbags -- especially those by Chanel, Prada and Gucci -- had been ''absolutely miraculous.'' Next in line of importance was jewelry, especially watches in the $1,000 category by Michele and Phillip Stein, a new brand made by Teslar.
Speaking about the Philip Stein watch, which sells from $700 to $2,000, Ms. Katz said Neiman ''started getting the buzz, and then when Madonna gave one to Oprah, it's been amazing.''
Customers decided to spend -- especially on goods with big-ticket names. The luxury market began to turn around in the autumn; early this year, Domenico De Sole, chief executive at Gucci, made what became a famous comment, picked up by other chief executives of luxury brands, to describe their own predicaments.
Gucci, said Mr. De Sole, had been caught in ''the perfect storm,'' which combined general economic unease and, among other things, SARS and the war in Iraq. Things started to improve, but this holiday season, the luxury turnaround really came into its own.
''I think there was a little pent-up activity,'' Mr. Tansky of Neiman said.
Customers, even the well-to-do ones, had been holding back, Ms. Katz said. ''It wasn't that they couldn't spend money. They didn't lose their jobs or anything. But the economy wasn't good and they just didn't feel like spending.''
