The New York State attorney general and the Securities and Exchange Commission are investigating whether some large banks financed improper mutual fund trades by hedge funds.
The financings being investigated, which involved total return swaps, are reminiscent of the sort of transactions done by bankers on behalf of the Enron Corporation to conceal debt and artificially inflate earnings, regulators said. In both situations, the banks appear to have been ''knowingly aiding and abetting a securities violation,'' said Stephen M. Cutler, director of enforcement at the S.E.C.
David D. Brown IV, head of the Investment Protection Bureau under the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, and the point person on its mutual fund investigation, said, ''This is the next big focus of our investigation.''
Among the banks whose transactions are being studied are Bank of America and the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, people briefed on the investigation said.
C.I.B.C. reached an $80 million settlement with the commission last month for its role in setting up vehicles that allowed Enron to hide debt and inflate its profits by more than $1 billion and its operating cash flows by almost $2 billion.
Neither Mr. Brown nor Mr. Cutler would comment on any specific subjects of their investigation.
A spokesman for the Canadian bank said it would ''not comment on speculation.'' A spokesman for Bank of America said that the bank announced in October that it would no longer do business with hedge funds involved with improper mutual fund trading and that it continued to cooperate with regulators. He declined to comment on the regulators' latest area of interest.
Regulators are examining whether derivatives trades allowed hedge funds that were engaged in improper fund trading to expand greatly the size of their bets, Mr. Brown said.
In some instances, the banks set up accounts that were one-third backed by hedge funds engaged in the improper trading, with the remaining two-thirds backed by the banks themselves, Mr. Brown said. In return, the hedge funds agreed to pay a specific interest rate on the bank's capital.
The hedge funds were essentially betting that they would earn a greater return on their mutual fund trades than the rate that they had promised the banks. This trading is known as a total return swap and allowed the hedge funds to produce greater profits on smaller investments.
The hedge funds routed mutual fund trades by these accounts through brokerage firms or other third parties. Many trades were processed after the market closed but at an earlier price, a process known as late-day trading, Mr. Brown said. This form of trading is illegal, regulators have said, because traders could take advantage of information available after the close.
For at least one of the banks being investigated, ''this was a major business,'' Mr. Brown said. There is evidence that the banks, through their own due diligence, knew that the hedge funds were engaged in illegal trading, he added.
C.I.B.C.'s name surfaced in a suit filed in November by the commonwealth of Massachusetts against former brokers and managers of Prudential Securities who regulators say made many improper fund trades. Prudential had trading arrangements with two hedge funds, Head Start and Chronos Asset Management, referred to it by C.I.B.C., the suit said. The bank provided financing for Chronos, the suit said.
Derivatives trades by Bank of America tied to improper fund trading were described in the settlement reached in September between Mr. Spitzer and Canary Capital Partners, a hedge fund managed by Edward J. Stern. The trades described in that complaint relate to another form of derivatives trading, which involved selling a portfolio of securities mimicking the holdings of the mutual fund, which would protect the hedge fund against a loss if the fund's value declined.
But Bank of America may also have arranged total return swaps, according to a person briefed on the bank's activities.
Many banks provided some form of derivatives financing for hedge funds engaged in frequent trading of mutual funds, said Frank Partnoy, professor of law at the University of San Diego who was a derivatives salesman in the mid-1990's. ''Every derivatives desk had good order flow'' from these sorts of trades.
