Jeff Van Gundy thought all the fuss was out of order -- reporters calling him every hour of the day, writing stories about his return last night to Madison Square Garden.
''I appreciate all the attention, but this night is about trying to win,'' Van Gundy said before his Houston Rockets pasted his former team, the Knicks, 111-79, in his first trip to the Garden as an opposing coach. ''My players, I'm not even sure they know I coached here. What's the number, 19,763? I've got like four friends here, so 19,759 don't care.''
Deep down, Van Gundy knew better. He knows he is perhaps the only Knicks coach to ever have a sellout Garden crowd of 19,763 chant his name -- ''Jeff Van Gun-dee.'' He knows many fans associate the recent demise of the franchise with his stunning resignation on Dec. 8, 2001. He knows many wonder, now that Stephon Marbury is a Knick, what Van Gundy would do with the current Knicks squad.
The Garden was always buzzing during Van Gundy's stretch as the Knicks' head coach, when he went 248-172 from 1996 to 2001, becoming the third-winningest coach in franchise history.
Van Gundy did not go down memory lane last night with his former players, only four of whom remain (Allan Houston, Kurt Thomas, Shandon Anderson and Othella Harrington). He did not speak with any of them before or after the game. But in returning to his place of glory, Van Gundy admitted to being more nervous than he usually is for a game.
''You can't play here or coach here and have this place not mean something extraordinary,'' he said afterward. ''If you love basketball and you love competing, there's no place like walking out of that tunnel. So certainly I was nervous, not just about how we were going to play but coming back. You felt a bit awkward going down the other way.''
When Van Gundy's name was announced last night, the fans showed him how much they appreciated him. The cheers were not raucous, but they were loud and solid. Patrick Ewing, Van Gundy's assistant, drew greater cheers when he was introduced, and Van Gundy probably thought that was apropos.
After all, it was Ewing's support of Van Gundy that helped him rise from being an overlooked assistant to one of the most respected coaches in the N.B.A.
''How lucky was I?'' Van Gundy said. ''I came here as a 27-year-old assistant coach because Stu Jackson believed in me and then I was kept on through great fortune by Hall of Fame coaches. Dave Checketts and Ernie Grunfeld gave me a chance to be a coach before I probably ever deserved it, and I was blessed with great players who gave me respect before I deserved it.
''No one could've been more fortunate than me to coach here. I had it good.''
Van Gundy has definitely gotten nice breaks, perhaps the reward of his tireless work ethic. He was taken from McQuaid Jesuit High School in Rochester to Providence College by Rick Pitino, and from Providence to the Knicks by Stu Jackson. Then he went from being an assistant to being Don Nelson's replacement as the Knicks' head coach in 1996. Van Gundy's career was also bolstered by Allan Houston's game-winning, series-clinching, rim-bouncing buzzer beater in Game 5 of the playoffs against Miami in 1999.
If Houston had gotten a bad bounce instead of a majestic one, Van Gundy would probably have been fired on the spot and might not be coaching in the league today. Even his controversial decision to walk away from the Knicks 19 games into the 2001-2 season worked in his favor.
Who knows what the Knicks would have done had he not left, but his ability to escape unscathed kept his record solid and made him one of the hottest coaching candidates of last summer. Now, fresh from a year and a half off, he is leading one of the most promising young teams in the league.
Van Gundy said leaving the Knicks was best for him, the team and the organization. But later, he slipped in that he thought it was ''wanted by the organization.'' Perhaps he was revealing his belief that, because of his less than amiable relationship with the Garden chairman, James L. Dolan, he might have been fired if the Knicks had struggled under him as they have under Don Chaney, who was an assistant under Van Gundy.
When chants of ''Fire Chaney'' rose up 4 minutes 54 seconds before halftime, Van Gundy, pacing the sideline as usual, looked at his assistant Tom Thibodeau and mumbled, ''That's bull,'' under his breath. The fans were reacting to a horrible performance by the Knicks, as Van Gundy's Rockets smothered them defensively in taking a 21-point first-half lead.
''The other chants, I thought, were totally unfair,'' Van Gundy said. ''They're fortunate to have who they have running the team, very fortunate. It's as quality a guy as I've ever been around and a quality coach.''
As his club rolled, Van Gundy did not look stressed, but when the going gets tougher, as it always does in the Western Conference, he admitted that he is as despondent as ever. All the preseason talk of changing his ways and having some fun quickly went out the window.
''That all sounded good,'' Van Gundy said. ''I'm still miserable when we lose.''
Knicks fans, on the other hand, might be miserable that they lost Van Gundy.
PRO BASKETBALL  Correction:  January 12, 2004, Monday  A sports article on Friday about the return of the former Knicks coach Jeff Van Gundy to Madison Square Garden as coach of the Houston Rockets omitted a job in his career history. He was an assistant coach at Rutgers for a year after coaching at Providence College and before joining the Knicks as an assistant coach.
A picture with the article in some editions, showing Van Gundy talking with Yao Ming of the Rockets, carried an incorrect credit. It was by Barton Silverman of The New York Times.
