'Wedding Singer' Is Warming Up
The last time New Line Cinema teamed up with the Broadway producer Margo Lion, they turned a 1980's cult film into a Tony Award-winning blockbuster, ''Hairspray.'' So expectations will be high for their follow-up effort, a musical version of ''The Wedding Singer.''
Bob Shaye and Michael Lynne, the co-chairmen and chief executives of New Line, announced yesterday that the show was scheduled for Broadway in the 2005-6 season. ''The Wedding Singer,'' the romantic comedy that was a 1998 hit film starring Adam Sandler in the title role, Drew Barrymore as his love interest and Billy Idol as, well, Billy Idol, is to be brought to the stage by the lyricist Chad Beguilin and the composer Matt Sklar and, as book writers, Mr. Beguilin and Tim Herlihy (who wrote the screenplay along with other Sandler projects including ''Big Daddy'' and ''The Water Boy''). No word yet on whether Mr. Idol has been approached.
New Line is also working on a stage adaptation of the Johnny Depp film ''Don Juan DeMarco.''
A Group Effort
The seemingly endless process of moving ''Caroline, or Change'' to Broadway is finally coming to an end after a meeting of likely producers, including Carole Shorenstein Hayes, Margo Lion, Daryl Roth and Roger Berlind, on Wednesday evening in Rocco Landesman's office above the St. James Theater. It looks likely to transfer to the O'Neill Theater in April.
The list of producers who have shown interest in the $5 million project includes Mr. Landesman, Fox Theatricals, HBO, Ruth Hendel, Cheryl Wiesenfeld, Freddy De Mann, Scott Rudin and the Frankel, Baruch, Viertel, Routh Group.
''What you're seeing is that the whole theater community is getting involved to do this,'' Mr. Landesman says.
''Caroline'' will not be the first Off Broadway show to transfer this spring. That distinction goes to ''Duet,'' a modest drama about an imagined meeting between Sarah Bernhardt and Eleonora Duse by Otho Eskin, a former diplomat making his New York debut as a playwright.
As unlikely as it may sound, ''Duet,'' playing through Jan. 25 at the Greenwich Street Theater in the West Village (not exactly a breeding ground for Broadway hits), is to move uptown to the Circle in the Square Theater in early March. While it received mixed reviews at best, it does have some serious assets in Laura Esterman and Pamela Payton-Wright, who play the rival actresses. The producer, Ludovica Villar-Hauser, who also staged the show as well as ''The Countess,'' said ''Duet'' could be perfect for Broadway. ''It's highly theatrical, and it's about the theater,'' she said by phone. ''It's about the question: What have I amounted to?''
Return to Tradition
After a tumultuous autumn, the O'Neill Theater Conference, the most prestigious of the six programs run by the Eugene O'Neill Theater Center in Waterford, Conn., is restoring a vital piece of its almost four-decade history: the tradition of considering unsolicited plays for its annual four-week workshop.
J Ranelli, the new artistic director of the O'Neill Center, announced this reversal on Tuesday. In September a much-criticized cost-cutting decision replaced open submissions with a system of nominations. The conference, a premier breeding ground for new work that has helped the careers of writers including August Wilson and John Guare, will now use both systems.
''This is crucial for its real and symbolic value,'' Mr. Ranelli said. ''Limiting the opportunities for a playwright is unnecessary. We're a nonprofit. We shouldn't worry about losing our jobs. We're here to take risks.'' Many playwrights loudly protested the elimination of open submissions as a major blow to aspiring playwrights with no connections.
Festival's Debt
Another important theater institution trying to put its house in order is the New York International Fringe Festival, which sank into debt last year for the first time in its seven-year history. The producers of the shows in last August's festival still haven't been paid the final 10 percent of their portion of the box-office receipts.
For Fringe producers every penny counts. ''We are owed $400, and while that may not be much, $400 is still $400,'' said Bill Thompson, producer of ''Cats Talk Back,'' the Fringe hit that he is currently trying to remount.
The Fringe's producing artistic director, Elena Holy, cited the blackout, which cut the festival short by two days, and increases in insurance costs and salaries as major factors in creating the $20,000 deficit. She also mentioned the poor climate for arts fund-raising, which has hit Fringe theater particularly hard. ''New York isn't nearly as dire as the Seattle Fringe,'' she said. The board of the Seattle Fringe Festival, the country's oldest, has said that it needed to come up with $115,000 by Thursday to continue.
Ms. Holy said the New York Fringe must make some changes, including using larger theaters and automated phone services for information and ticket sales. As for the rest of Mr. Thompson's money, he's not optimistic. ''I bet I never see that 10 percent,'' he said.
5 One-Acts in a Car
On March 1 MCC Theater will present five one-acts by Neil LaBute under the title ''Autobahn'' at the Little Shubert Theater on 42nd Street. Each of the plays -- ''more like playlets,'' Mr. LaBute says -- is set inside a car. Mr. LaBute, the author of plays including ''The Shape of Things'' and ''The Mercy Seat,'' said a car was the perfect setting for drama. ''It could be a really intimate space, or it could be somewhere where you feel trapped,'' he said by phone. In these plays, ''the conversation can be as difficult to negotiate as the road. There's more potholes and no AAA in sight.''
If Mr. LaBute's fans can't afford the $125 ticket, they can wait for the American premiere of ''The Distance From Here,'' his latest full-length drama, whose performances will begin on April 14 at the Duke on 42nd Street.
On Stage and Off
