BY 5 p.m., there were about 125 fans and a sizable news media contingent waiting for baseball's most famous nonperson near the basement book-signing table, with another 100 snaking through the store and the procession resuming outside, down East Ridgewood Avenue.
First person in line: Edith Altomare of Washington Township, N.J., who arrived at 4:30 a.m. and waited patiently in her car, in the dark, for the store, Bookends, to open.
First question shouted out at the dishonored guest when he strode to the table in a long brown coat that looked like linoleum: ''If you go in the Hall, which cap are you going to wear?'' (Hint: the cover of the book, ''My Prison Without Bars,'' is bright red.)
First disenchanted customer: A short man with blond hair who complained that none of the five books he had purchased were signed to the names he had requested. ''The guy's a jerk,'' the man said. ''I'm going to sell these books, not keep them.''
And so it went last evening, Pete Rose signing away with only an occasional grunt or grin, the all-out hustle continuing because, after all these years, the game is still played at the only speed he has ever known. Rose never finessed anything, even for fun. He ran over a catcher, Ray Fosse, in the 1970 All-Star Game and was celebrated for separating a man from his senses in a meaningless exhibition. The message was clear: subtlety was for suckers.
For 14 years, when contrition seemed to be his only logical course of action, Rose essentially tried to lower his shoulder and take out the wall between him and the game. Inside his hard head was the belief that the obstruction, like all others, was temporary, eminently movable.
Go all the way back to 1989, the day he was escorted to baseball's county line by the commissioner, Bart Giamatti. ''I've been in baseball for three decades,'' Rose said. ''To think I'll be out for a very short time hurts.''
He has always been in denial about his gambling addiction, but so were those who banished him and were convinced they had not only properly punished Rose, but had also constructed a moat around the institution that would keep this battering ram of a man from the front gate.
''The banishment for life of Pete Rose is the sad end of a sorry episode,'' Giamatti said that day. ''The matter of Mr. Rose is now closed.''
Rose didn't have the academician's flair but, however honorable the intentions, Giamatti was himself a wishful thinker, or guilty of his own grandstanding. The matter was closed only if you believed that Rose had bet away his credentials in addition to his credibility. Rose was destined to become a great bar stool argument in a sport that draws its lifeblood from the equation of one bloke's opinion equaling another's.
''Bart did say it was a sad end of a sorry episode,'' Fay Vincent, who succeeded Giamatti after his death, said yesterday in a telephone interview. ''It was a sorry episode, but not the end.''
It didn't have to come to this, the callous upstaging of the Hall of Fame election announcement this week for Dennis Eckersley and Paul Molitor, because Rose's necessary removal from the sport had nothing to do with his getting the plaque he deserved.
It was in 1991, Rose's first year of eligibility, that the Hall of Fame board of directors approved a rule change eliminating from consideration anyone on the permanently ineligible list. ''I was on the board, but it was Ed Stack, what he wanted,'' Vincent said of Stack, the Hall of Fame's chairman from 1977 to 2000. ''People thought I rigged it, but I didn't.''
That said, Vincent made it clear that he agreed with the rule. ''There's been no gambling in baseball because that deterrent has been effective,'' he said. ''I don't believe you can separate one from the other.''
But if the threat of losing one's place in the Hall is a necessary deterrent, doesn't that counter the claim made by many -- and by Vincent yesterday -- that Rose's campaign for reinstatement is all about money? If the threat of permanent forfeiture of a major league paycheck isn't enough to keep Rose or any ballplayer from dialing up a bookie to bet on baseball, doesn't that make the case for compulsive gambling as a potent disease?
Back in 1989, Giamatti said he wasn't prepared to delve into the medical profession. ''Bart was an agnostic on that issue,'' Vincent said. Rose apparently never did pursue serious treatment, which is why, despite his belated admission, he doesn't deserve full reinstatement, for which there has never been a groundswell of support.
''Two out of three fans want him in the Hall,'' Vincent conceded. In my own interviews, not one of about 15 people asked at the New Jersey bookstore preferred him out. Not Karen Pollack of Springfield, Rick Federico of Wayne, Kenneth Schwartz of Cliffside Park or Don Merritts of Closter. Fans, collectors and kids who never saw Rose lift a bat just wanted him to scribble in their armloads of books.
If baseball had only let the writers vote him into the Hall in the early 1990's, Pete Rose by now would have been marginalized, a pitiable hustler chasing his own tail. Instead, an industry that convulses over the thought of gambling but for years ignored the parallel problem of performance-enhancement drugs handed Rose a credential to wear outside the gate that said: All-Time Hit Man and Martyr.
''Pete Rose is not going away,'' Vincent said with a sigh.
Next stop: the best-seller list. Rose will go hawking his case, because at this stage of the game he can't change the way he plays. Sadly, baseball brought this latest sorry episode on itself.
Sports of The Times
