Marc Bulger was standing by a chain-link fence last summer on one of the hottest days of training camp in Macomb, Ill., signing autographs until the ink in his pen ran dry.
He listened as fans of every demeanor asked him about West Virginia, where Bulger played in college, and Notre Dame, where Bulger's father backed up Joe Theismann at quarterback.
Later, a questioner wondered how he and Kurt Warner could remain friendly while fighting each other to be the leader of the St. Louis Rams.
''We didn't have the egos going into the N.F.L.,'' said Bulger, who was Warner's backup then but is now the team's starting quarterback. ''We weren't high draft picks. I got cut as a rookie, bounced around. He had a tougher time. You get an opportunity and you just appreciate being in the N.F.L, more than some guys that see it as a rite of passage.''
It is Bulger's humble approach and his 18-4 record as a starter that has allowed his teammates to move on from their wondrous days with Warner and embrace Bulger as a leader.
On Saturday, the 26-year-old Bulger and the Rams (12-4) will play host to the Carolina Panthers (12-5) at the Edward Jones Dome, marking Bulger's first postseason start and the Rams' first without Warner since he led them to the Super Bowl after the 1999 and 2001 seasons, including victory in Super Bowl XXXIV.
Although Bulger, who replaced Warner in Week 2, helped steer the Rams into the playoffs, how he will respond to the spike in pressure is a mystery. As quarterbacks through time have learned, the postseason is a different beast, not one easily slain.
''It's definitely a new experience,'' Bulger said. ''I know that the level of play is going to go up and the speed may go up, but it is still football.''
Rams Coach Mike Martz said: ''Here's what I think about all this first time stuff. He'll be fine with that. He's been in some big games before. I think he understands how to deal with that. He's had to come back and win some terrific games to be in this position for us, so I feel good about where he is with that.''
Martz can speak boldly about it now, but Bulger has been susceptible to mistakes, throwing 22 interceptions along with 22 touchdowns this season. Martz pulled Bulger in favor of Warner at the end of the Rams' season-finale, a 30-20 loss to the Detroit Lions, because Bulger was taking so many shots.
Martz also considered benching Bulger on Nov. 16 against Chicago when he threw two interceptions in the first half, but Warner told Martz to leave Bulger in.
''Basically, I told coach, 'If this is the guy you're going to build your future around, you have to play him through these things,' '' Warner said. ''You have to let him fight through these things. Win or lose, you have to show both the rest of the team you have confidence in this guy and also him that you have confidence in him, that if things are a little bit shaky, that you're going to stick with him to pull it out.
''It was just something that he'd always done with me,'' Warner said. ''Yeah, I wanted to be in there and I could have used the opportunity to get back in there, but more importantly I had to do what I would want someone to do for me.''
Martz kept Bulger in the game, and he rallied the Rams to a 23-21 victory.
As a backup and a starter, Bulger has maintained a calm, measured quality, those close to him say. Bulger grew up in Pittsburgh in a family where athletic participation was as common as dinnertime meals.He attended Central Catholic High School, where Dan Marino went, and his father and grandfather played at Notre Dame.
Jack Snow, a Rams radio broadcaster and a former Rams and Notre Dame receiver, said Bulger's early exposure to sports protected him from the peaks and valleys of emotional games. Snow said Bulger reminded him of his son, J. T. Snow, the first baseman for the San Francisco Giants, ''because J. T. is also a quiet kid.''
''You don't have to tell him what a great job he's doing or jump on his case and tell him what a bad job he's doing,'' Snow said of Bulger. ''You just say, 'This is what I want from you; go out and do it.'
''If you talk to the Mannings, Archie and Peyton and Eli, they're quiet guys because they've been around that stuff all their lives. They learn from their father about maintaining composure.''
Bulger, who is 6 feet 3 inches and 215 pounds, blends easily into the locker room. He is a man without swagger, a trait he leaves to his more extroverted teammates like receiver Torry Holt, who had a career season with Bulger throwing him the ball.
Bulger was a sixth-round pick of New Orleans in 2000 but was released that summer. He spent a few weeks on the practice squads of the Rams and the Falcons before the Rams re-signed him in January 2001.
Running back Marshall Faulk said Bulger did not have to worry about the faith the Rams have in him.
''It is more him trusting us within the offense that everyone is going to do their assignment'' Faulk said. ''We have to do our job and get to a certain spot, and he has to get the ball to that area. If anything, it was him getting confidence in the guys that, regardless of what kind of throw he made, we were going to make the catch.''
The formula worked during the regular season, especially at home, where Bulger contributed to a perfect record. But can Bulger gain a playoff victory in his first try, something Peyton Manning did not achieve until his fourth?
''You have to play and not get too worried and too tense, and just let your ability take over,'' Bulger said. ''I want to stress this: we are preparing a little more, but you don't want to alter what you've been doing all year.''
PRO FOOTBALL
