WHO -- Stephen McKnight, 59, professor of European history at the University of Florida in Gainesville, shown with his wife, Becky  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  WHERE -- In the Appalachian Mountains near Mars Hill, N.C.
Rather than teaching the entire academic year, I teach the spring semester. It's the best of both worlds. My wife, Becky, and I escape a little bit of the winter here, enjoy the spring in Florida, and when we get back up here, it's just turning spring.
The closest big city is Asheville, that's at 2,200 feet, but once you get off the main road and start climbing the mountain, you get to 4,000 or 5,000 feet. Our house is at 4,500 feet. And the weather is very different here.
For the first five years we could only stay for the summer and the baseboard heat -- that's now disconnected -- was adequate. But now that I'm doing this semiretirement, we moved from needing just a little bit of supplemental heat to needing a full-fledged heating system.
I always try to do research, and the hydronic radiant system seemed to be highly efficient and fairly simple mechanically. Flexible tubing runs under the floor; a high-efficiency heater heats the water. Pumps circulate the heat. The high efficiency, the low operating cost and the simple mechanics appealed to me. And the uniform heat. You don't have any hot or cold spots, and you have no forced air blowing allergens and dust.
The southern wall is all glass -- wonderful for views, but not very heat efficient. That room needed to be independent of the others because it would get colder. You can't do that nearly as easily in a traditional system.
I more or less installed it, using help from the Radiant Floor Company in Vermont. The actual installation is fairly simple. Even a college professor can do it.
As told to Seth Kugel
ON THE MARKET  Information on properties was provided by the listing companies.
WHERE -- Casper, Calif.  WHAT -- 2-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $3 million  This oceanfront house has a nine-zone solar-powered radiant heating system with a propane system for backup. The house is on two acres on a bluff west of the village of Casper and four miles north of Mendocino. It is 3,800 square feet, with 2,700 additional square feet of decking. There are a sauna, a hot tub, two fireplaces, many skylights, two and a half bathrooms and an artist's studio with a darkroom. An automatic generator kicks in when electrical power is lost. Broker: Jim Hay, Sea Cottage Real Estate, (800) 707-0423; www.seacottage.com.
WHERE -- Westcliffe, Colo.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $318,000  Radiant heating for this entire house was installed when a new sitting room and a master bedroom were added to what had been a hunting cabin. It is on two acres 50 miles west of Pueblo and has mountain views, cedar siding, three bathrooms, a sauna, a hot tub and a detached one-car garage with a studio above. Broker: Charlie Barks, Adobe Gold Properties, (719) 941-9919; www.adobegold.com.
WHERE -- Biwabik, Minn.  WHAT -- 5-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $495,000  This 3,618-square-foot log house in the Giant Ridge Recreation Area, built in 2000, is heated entirely by a multiple-zone radiant heating system. The house is on one acre and has an open floor plan with a loft, interior and exterior balconies, vaulted ceilings, a wraparound deck, an oversize two-car attached garage, a sauna and four bathrooms. It is on the 12th tee of the Giants Ridge golf course and includes dock space at nearby Sabin Lake. Agent: Randall Kirt, Century 21 New Horizons Realty, (320) 632-4993; www.arewehomeyet.com.
WHERE -- Springtown, Pa.  WHAT -- 4-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $1.75 million  A radiant system heats the limestone floor of the great room in this 5,200-square-foot house overlooking Cook's Creek on three acres in Bucks County, an hour and a half from New York City. Other rooms have baseboard heating. There are a pool, three fireplaces, antiqued plaster walls and five and a half bathrooms. Antique glass, woodwork and iron are found throughout the house, which has a 1910 stained-glass window from England. Agent: Adam Shapiro, Weidel Realtors, (800) 246-0702; www.buckscountyproperty.com.
WHERE -- Derby Center, Vt.  WHAT -- 5-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $650,000  A multizone radiant system heats this contemporary stucco house, including its two-car attached garage. The house, on 10 acres with views of the Green Mountains and the Jay Peak ski area, is in the Northeast Kingdom area of Vermont 100 miles southeast of Montreal. The house has a walkout basement with a family room, a slate fireplace, hardwood floors, three and a half bathrooms and a second family room on the main level. Agent: Rosemary Lalime, All Seasons Real Estate, (802) 334-7277; www.allseasonsre.com.
WHERE -- Scottsville, Va.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $425,000  There is radiant heating in this house's marble-floored dining room and sun room, both of which are in the daylight basement. Other rooms have original heart pine floors and forced-air and conventional radiator heating. The house, known as Tipton House, was built in 1842 and is in a national historic district. It has two and a half bathrooms and a two-car detached garage with a heated workshop and studio space. It is a half-hour south of Charlottesville. Agent: Ross L. Stevens, (434) 296-6104; www.stevensandcompany.net.
HAVENS: LIVING HERE
