Questions are not answered in November and December when the opponents are Morgan State, Stetson, Army and Florida International, when even a suspect basketball team like Georgetown (10-1) can compile a gaudy record. The questions will be answered now, with conference play under way in the Big East.
By tomorrow night, when Providence faces Rutgers, all 14 Big East teams will have played at least one conference game, and the long process will have begun to figure out which teams are worthy of advancing to the N.C.A.A. tournament and whether it will be an up or down year for the conference that produced last season's national champion, Syracuse.
Some things seem certain. Connecticut, ranked No. 1 in the Big East, is talented, experienced and has the goods to win a national championship. St. John's, while having improved some under its interim coach, Kevin Clark, will have a hard time winning more than a handful of conference games. Seton Hall is better than it has been in years, in large part because of the confident and improved play of guard Andre Barrett, who may be the best college player in the New York metropolitan area.
Beyond that, there are plenty of unresolved issues.
How well is Syracuse compensating for the departure of Carmelo Anthony to the N.B.A.? The Orangemen (10-1) won their 10th straight game Wednesday, 65-59, over St. John's in the Big East opener for both teams. Syracuse, ranked 17th in the nation, is getting production from Hakim Warrick (19.5 points a game), Gerry McNamara (17.3) and Billy Edelin (15.3) and had an easy time against Michigan State in one of the team's few games against a high-profile opponent.
But Coach Jim Boeheim has not been impressed. After the victory over St. John's, he struggled to find anything nice to say about his team.
''Do I look happy?'' Boeheim said. ''Am I happy right now with the way we are playing? No, not at all. Defense, rebounding and turnovers are some of the areas where we're just not doing things.''
When pressed about Syracuse's overall record this season, Boeheim said: ''I don't look at records. I look at how we play. If more people did that, they would have a better check on what reality is. We've got to play a lot better than this. It's that simple.''
Is No. 15 Pittsburgh for real? Despite losing three starters, including the star point guard Brandin Knight, and Coach Ben Howland, who left for U.C.L.A., the Panthers have been perfect. Under Coach Jamie Dixon, Pittsburgh is 15-0. It went unbeaten in nonconference play for the first time in team history. Then again, among the teams Pitt defeated were Robert Morris, the State University at Albany, Georgetown (Ky.) and Chicago State.
Pitt will have its first big test when it plays Connecticut in Hartford on Jan. 19.
Can Seton Hall ride its momentum to the N.C.A.A. tournament? The Pirates finished strong last season, but a 17-13 record was not good enough to receive an invitation to play for the national title.
Instead, Seton Hall had to settle for the National Invitation Tournament, where it was dispatched in the first round by Rhode Island. The Pirates, who were 7-9 at one point last season, have figured out that they cannot afford another slow start.
Having already compiled a 10-2 record, they will begin their conference schedule tomorrow at St. John's. The losses came against ranked teams, No. 10 Louisville and No. 24 Purdue.
Barrett is leading the conference in assists (7.42 a game) and is sixth in scoring (18.7), while giving the team senior leadership.
No. 25 Providence (8-2) is ranked No. 4 in the Big East. The Friars, who are coming off a 79-77 overtime loss to No. 18 Texas, are getting tremendous production from Ryan Gomes, who is averaging 20.4 points and 9.9 rebounds a game. Monday's game between Providence and Seton Hall should provide a good barometer of both teams.
But Providence, Seton Hall and everyone else seem likely to chase Connecticut all the way to the Big East finish line. The Huskies have hardly been a surprise. They returned two of the top players in the country, guard Ben Gordon and center Emeka Okafor, from a team that advanced last season to the Round of 16, and they have added another impact player in Charlie Villanueva, a freshman forward.
Villanueva missed Connecticut's first six games while waiting for the N.C.A.A. to determine his eligibility. Once cleared, he has been as good as advertised, averaging 13.8 points a game. The Huskies (12-1) are playing so well that Coach Jim Calhoun did what few coaches do: he admitted this week that he liked his team.
''There will be nights where we will be really, really good against some very good teams,'' he said after a 75-74 victory over Rutgers on Tuesday. ''We can be a very good team. We just have to develop some toughness.''
BASKETBALL
