Bingham Ray, an independent film stalwart who took over United Artists less than three years ago in the hope of turning it into a leading art house boutique, resigned late Thursday.
According to Chris McGurk, the vice chairman of Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, which owns United Artists, both he and Mr. Ray agreed in 2003 that Mr. Ray would not renew his contract, which ends this year. The two discussed it again this week and Mr. Ray's decision to leave was mutual, Mr. McGurk said.
United Artists was formed in 1919 by Charlie Chaplin, Mary Pickford, Douglas Fairbanks and D.W. Griffith and for many years was a leading Hollywood studio. It was acquired by MGM in 1981, a year after the release of ''Heaven's Gate,'' the critical and financial disaster that led to the studio's downfall.
Mr. Ray could not be reached for comment and Mr. McGurk declined to discuss his relationship with the former executive. But two people apprised of their relationship said that they had different ideas about what direction United Artists should take. Mr. McGurk, one of these people said, wanted more commercial fare while Mr. Ray wanted to take more creative risks.
Mr. Ray has long been influential on the independent film scene, backing movies like Mike Leigh's ''Secrets and Lies'' and Robert Duvall's ''Apostle'' while he was at October Films, a company he helped found. Mr. Ray was recruited to work at United Artists by Mr. McGurk nearly three years ago with the hope that the company would become a powerhouse in making or acquiring Oscar-winning art house and foreign films.
In 2002, United Artists was lauded for releasing ''Bowling for Columbine,'' the documentary for which Michael Moore received an Academy Award. A year ago, Mr. Ray helped negotiate the acquisition of ''Pieces of April,'' a movie that United Artists holds worldwide distribution rights to and that is currently in theaters. Many people in Hollywood think it could be nominated for an Oscar as well.
Mr. Ray was instrumental last fall in rallying support against the ban on major studios or their subsidiaries sending out screening tapes and DVD's during the coming awards season. The ban was ultimately challenged in court and deemed legally unfair.
