Mayor Michael Bloomberg has rarely seemed so peppy and upbeat as he did yesterday, when he promised each New York homeowner a $400 property-tax rebate this year. That would cost the city $250 million -- a hefty chunk when the coming budget shortfall could be $2 billion.
The promise, offered in the State of the City address, was trumpeted in a kind of ''Everything's Coming Up Roses'' manner. The mayor hailed the city's falling crime rate, the decrease in unemployment, the cleaner streets, the reductions in traffic accidents and the help given to children and the elderly. He noted that 20,000 homeless people were put into permanent shelters last year. Wall Street, he said, had the best showing in three years, which helped generate hundreds of millions of dollars in additional city revenue.
It was brave of Mr. Bloomberg to push through hefty tax increases last year to keep city services running, and take the huge blow to his popularity that followed. No one could blame him for wanting to use the first new money he gets his hands on to repair the damage to his poll numbers, especially since he is up for re-election in 2005. But the tax rebates could pose a problem when it comes time to balance the next budget. It will give labor unions ammunition when they fight against givebacks, which the administration has maintained it needs. And Albany -- which must approve the rebate -- has in the past been reluctant to offer any special aid to local politicians who have cut taxes. When political credit for cutting taxes is handed out, state legislators want it to go to them, not to any mayor.
Mr. Bloomberg reminded the city that he had also promised that other tax bites from last year would disappear according to a set timetable. That means revenue from a higher surcharge on personal income tax will begin to dwindle this year, and the sales tax will disappear on clothing under $100. Meanwhile, the city is hurtling toward budget gaps of $2 billion in the next budget, and $4 billion after that. It's easy to see why Mr. Bloomberg is eager to woo the city's homeowners with substantial rebate checks. But it's hard to believe that the city can keep paying for services while delivering the entire menu of tax cuts outlined by the mayor as well.
