Peter Holmes à Court, an Australian businessman, has a reputation for making unconventional trades. He left a career on Wall Street to become a stage producer, importing Eddie Izzard, the British transvestite comedian, to the United States and exporting Jerry Seinfeld to Europe.
Now he is betting big on beef.
Earlier this week, Mr. Holmes à Court, who left show business to become chief executive of the Australian Agricultural Company, a beef producer, announced that his company would pay 50 million Australian dollars ($38.4 million) to buy 58,000 head of cattle and some land to put them on.
The purchase expands the company's herd by 14 percent, to 460,000 head.
Mr. Holmes à Court is among a minority of Australian cattle ranchers who view the latest outbreak of mad cow disease as a temporary window of opportunity, albeit an unfortunate one.
Australia is the world's largest exporter of beef -- to the tune of almost $3 billion a year -- and beef is its largest agricultural export.
With nations from Antigua to Vietnam banning American beef after the discovery of a single cow in Washington State with mad cow disease, or bovine spongiform encephalopathy, many Australian exporters think they have a chance to expand market share before the bans are lifted and global sales resume a recovery from three decades of decline.
''There will be a short-term advantage for us,'' Mr. Holmes à Court said in a telephone interview from his office in Sydney. ''It's unlikely to be the avalanche of demand that people might write about,'' he said, adding that the market tremors from the latest mad cow report had to be seen against the larger global trend. ''We're in a period of low global supply and increasing demand,'' he said.
Most Australian beef producers appear to be more pessimistic. The export opportunities created by bans related to the mad cow problem, they say, may not last long enough to benefit Australian ranchers. And whatever gains Australia makes in exports could be more than offset by lost sales to the United States, which imports more Australian beef than any other country.
''I don't think there's any great windfalls in the Australian industry from this,'' said Keith Adams, president of the Cattle Council of Australia and a cattle rancher.
Mr. Adams and others express sympathy for their American counterparts, and Mr. Holmes à Court is careful not to crow. Many also worry that America's mad cow problems could delay the conclusion of a free-trade agreement between the United States and Australia, under which Australia is trying to gain greater access to America's beef market.
Australia has never had a recorded case of mad cow disease. It bans feeding cattle the kind of recycled animal remains that are thought to transmit the disease.
It also keeps track of every cow with a radio-frequency identification tag, recording the animal's movements once it leaves the farm where it was born. More important, most Australian cattle are not raised on feed at all, but on pasture.
Australia's reputation for disease-free cattle helped it win consumers during past outbreaks in Europe and Japan, where ''Aussie beef'' gained market share as overall beef consumption declined. During Japan's mad cow outbreak in 2001, the Australian government sponsored an advertising campaign extolling the safety of its beef.
''We put a lot of emphasis on Australia being clean and green,'' Australia's agriculture minister, Warren Truss, said.
The government is considering an advertising campaign in Japan in response to the latest reports of mad cow disease, he said. McDonald's Japan already advertises that it uses only Australian beef.
There is little market share to be gained in Europe, which already bans most American beef because of its hormone content.
In many cases, Australian beef cannot replace American beef. Pasture-raised Australian cows are leaner than grain-fed American cows.
Because fatter meat is tastier and more tender, most Australian beef bound for the United States is frozen and later ground up with the less desirable parts of American cows for hamburger and hot dogs.
Many Australian cattle ranchers predict they will actually lose sales in the United States.
''There's quite a bit of meat that will stay at home that used to be exported,'' said Richard Rains, chief executive of Sanger Australia, another large beef producer.
And if what happened during Canada's outbreak of mad cow disease is any guide, Mr. Truss said, those Americans who do not avoid beef altogether will not switch to Australian beef despite its perceived safety, either out of a sense of patriotism or because domestic beef is becoming cheaper.
Diners in Japan and South Korea prefer America's grain-fed cattle, which produce meat marbled with more fat. But with no American beef allowed, both countries are turning to Australia and New Zealand, another major beef exporter, to fill the gap.
Japanese and Korean buyers are scouring the two countries for beef, and the Japanese government is reportedly sending a delegation to Australia this week in search of new supplies. Mr. Holmes à Court said Australian Agricultural would receive a team of Japanese and Korean buyers this week.
At 35, Mr. Holmes à Court is already a celebrity in Australia's business community. He is the eldest son of the late Robert Holmes à Court, a corporate raider and one of the country's best-known tycoons. After studying in New England and at Oxford, the younger Mr. Holmes à Court became a financial analyst for the New York investment bank formed by James D. Wolfensohn, a fellow Australian and a former World Bank president.
Mr. Holmes à Court left Wall Street in 1993 to start a theater company. In addition to producing tours by Mr. Izzard and Mr. Seinfeld, he brought the dance production ''Tap Dogs'' to New York and London.
Less successful was his production of a play written by the son of another famous financier, Ivan F. Boesky, the speculator who was convicted on insider-trading charges.
In 1999, Mr. Holmes à Court sold his production company and his stake in the family business and the next year took the job as chief executive at Australian Agricultural.
In 2001, he helped take the company public, raising 127.5 million Australian dollars from investors.
Like most Australian producers, Australian Agricultural exports almost 60 percent of its beef, most to the United States and Japan. But Mr. Holmes à Court said the company was in a good position to take advantage of the opening in Asian markets.
While a record drought has cut Australia's total cattle herd by roughly 10 percent, Australian Agricultural has been investing to increase its stock, he said. It is also Australia's second-largest producer of the grain-fed cattle preferred in Japan and South Korea.
Other Australian ranchers are likely to have a tougher time. Many are still trying to rebuild their herds, Mr. Truss said.
''Because of the drought, Australia has a limited ability to increase its exports to anyone,'' he said.
If Asia's bans on American beef last more than a few months, Australia's ranchers may have time to put their cows in feedlots and fatten them on grain, industry executives say.
But many Australian executives and officials predict the United States will contain its mad cow problems and persuade Asian importers to lift their bans on American beef before that is possible.
Mr. Holmes à Court is already looking beyond the mad cow situation, saying his expanded herd will pay greater dividends when the market recovers.
Not only has the Australian herd been decimated, he said, but the American herd is also at its lowest in a decade.
After declining since the 1970's, meanwhile, global demand for beef is starting to climb. Mr. Adams at the Cattle Council of Australia said new demand is coming from emerging Asian markets like Indonesia and China.
And, according to Mr. Holmes à Court, America's new demonization of carbohydrates and the popularity of high-protein diets are buttressing demand for lean beef.
''We're in a rising market long term,'' he said.
