The board of the New York Stock Exchange recommended yesterday that legal action be taken against its former chairman and named a chief regulatory officer, but it remained conspicuously silent on perhaps its most pressing issue: naming its next chairman.
John S. Reed, the interim chairman, has been searching for months for a candidate, preferably a retired chief executive from an industrial company, he has said.
But according to former stock exchange directors, several of the candidates he has approached have turned the job down, including John H. Bryan, the former chief executive of Sara Lee, and Ralph S. Larsen, the former chief executive of Johnson &amp; Johnson.
These people say it is becoming more of a possibility that Mr. Reed may extend his tenure as chairman, even though he has expressed many times his intent to return to full-time retirement.
Several people have asked Mr. Reed to change his status as chairman from interim to permanent. Mr. Reed said this week that an exchange director had asked him to stay on. Also, the head of a major specialist firm asked that Mr. Reed extend his stay, according to a person who was present at the meeting.
In light of recent events at the Big Board, it is understandable why potential chairmen have been reluctant to step into the continuing fray.
Controversy still swirls around the exchange, ranging from what legal action to take against the former chairman, Richard A. Grasso, and former directors over his $188 million pay package, to continuing questions about the exchange's regulatory authority.
Mr. Reed sent a letter yesterday to state and federal regulators recommending that they pursue legal action against Mr. Grasso. In it, he referred to the damage to the exchange caused by the Grasso affair.
''Serious harm has been inflicted on the exchange by unreasonable compensation of the previous chairman and C.E.O., and by failure of governance and fiduciary responsibility that led to the compensation excesses as well as other injuries,'' he wrote.
The letter was sent to the Securities and Exchange Commission and Eliot Spitzer, the New York attorney general, with a copy of an investigative report on how the previous board came to award close to $200 million in pay to Mr. Grasso.
Mr. Spitzer and William H. Donaldson, the chairman of the S.E.C., met yesterday in Washington to discuss how to join forces as they contemplate bringing legal action against Mr. Grasso and the former directors of the exchange.
The board also named Richard G. Ketchum, the former president of Nasdaq and a former regulator at the S.E.C. and the National Association of Securities Dealers, as its chief regulatory officer.
And, in an acknowledgment that its role as a self-regulator may still be subject to debate, the board announced that it would hire an outside lawyer to undertake an independent study of the exchange's ability to regulate itself.
While Mr. Reed has been a strong advocate of maintaining the exchange's internal regulatory division, the S.E.C. has said that it intends ultimately to pass judgment on the matter. Public pension funds have criticized the exchange for not separating the unit after the uproar over Mr. Grasso's pay.
The extent to which the exchange can continue to regulate itself and maintain its 80 percent market in the face of increased competition from electronic competitors is the type of issue that will top the agenda of any new chairman.
The Nasdaq market, for example, has been contacting major corporations listed on the exchange and asking them to list their shares on Nasdaq's market in addition to the Big Board.
Among those contacted was the American International Group, whose chairman, Maurice R. Greenberg, has been critical of how the specialist traders at the exchange have traded shares of A.I.G.
A spokesman for A.I.G. said yesterday that Nasdaq had approached the company about a dual listing but that no decision had been made.
In a conference call, Mr. Ketchum, who is the general counsel of Citigroup's investment banking division, said that he was a strong supporter of the concept of self-regulation, even given the recent investigations by the S.E.C. and the exchange into trading abuses by specialist traders.
''Does self-regulation create effective regulation?'' he said. ''I've seen it time and time again, notwithstanding the fact that there have been some failures in the past.''
Unlike his predecessor, Edward A. Kwalwasser, who reported to Mr. Grasso, Mr. Ketchum will report to Marshall N. Carter, the chairman of the board's regulatory oversight committee and regulatory budget committee. He will start work in June.
