The small stage with the bright yellow brick wall is crammed with props and gadgets: schoolroom chairs, multicolored cords with lights hung from them, costumes, a huge gramophone horn and a tiny disco ball. A pine frame encloses this deftly arranged chaos. Let's put on a show; let's take a short journey through the vast land of Faust and Mephistopheles.
But there's nothing small about Target Margin Theater's plans to present Goethe's ''Faust: Parts I and II,'' as translated and adapted by Douglas Langworthy, in its entirety over the next few years. The first installment of ''These Very Serious Jokes'' (the phrase Goethe used to describe his work), which takes us up to the moment that Faust glimpses the lovely Margarete and drinks the Devil's youth potion, plays at the Here Arts Center in the South Village through Jan. 24.
Under the direction of David Herskovits, Target Margin has developed a very inventive repertory. The company has done great standards by Chekhov and Shakespeare, but also intriguing forgotten plays like Dorothy and DuBose Heyward's ''Mamba's Daughters,'' which originally starred Ethel Waters. It also turned E. T. A. Hoffmann's great tale ''The Sandman'' into a chamber opera.
The troupe creates theatrical montages of high drama broken by deadpan gestures and reactions; formal and slangy speech; full-volume voices punctuated by miking (usually of a character's secret thoughts); props that move; and lighting effects that catch you off guard.
So what about Goethe's voluminous poetic drama? (''For more than 60 years the conception of Faust has lain here before my mind with the clearness of youth,'' he wrote not long before his death in 1832.) It is filled with lofty, impassioned talk (between the Lord and Mephistopheles, Faust and Mephistopheles, Faust and his student Wagner), as well as long, grand soliloquies by Faust on the futility of life on earth and the intolerable boundaries of human knowledge. There are choruses of angels and bands of peasants, as well as a witch (who brews the elixir of youth) and two monkey assistants.
The Target Margin's tone is set by a rowdy ''Prelude at the Theater,'' a debate about what we, the audience, want, between the all-for-art Playwright (E. C. Kelly), the cynical Producer (Yuri Skujins) and the kindly, down-to-earth Actor (George Hannah). That scene concluded, two more ensemble members join in, and the group hustles into Angel and Lord costumes. They strap on small white wings and tinsel haloes and arrange themselves on a platform with some white tulle behind them. We could be watching one of Shakespeare's eager, provincial acting troupes -- Bottom and his cohorts, say.
Mr. Herskovits goes for broke with this kind of humor. It suits the company's trademark style: competing accents (Borscht Belt, West Indian) and rhythms (classical and everyday American); deliberate anachronisms; and music that goes from medieval to Classical Europe and from Spain to Latin America, hitting a few of pop's global villages along the way.
Some of this works. Some of it -- too much of it -- feels overused, and not just by Mr. Herskovits, but also by other companies. The jokes and effects must seem fresh and vigorous. They can't if they don't have anything to work against. What they need is a good dose of Goethe's grandeur. We need it, too. Otherwise, where's the tension, the excitement?
As Faust, Will Badgett does get some of the grandeur. He takes hold of the verse, and his voice compels us. His performance is still shaping itself. I think the production is, too. It is very much a work in progress.
There's plenty of wit in the text of ''Faust.'' And whenever David Greenspan is in sight as Mephistopheles, we see and hear it. Mr. Greenspan is one of the most stylized wits on the Off Broadway stage. Anyone who saw him in the revival of ''The Boys In the Band,'' in ''Lipstick Traces'' or in his own one-man comic epic, ''Myopia,'' knows this. His Mephistopheles appears first as a working man in a gold corduroy shirt, then as a black poodle with a huge silver head and, at last, triumphantly, in a black tuxedo jacket with cream elbow patches, and then by a snappy red suit.
There's no shame in a production's being a work in progress. Theater is process, not just product. I want this ''Faust'' to keep revising itself and evolving.
THESE VERY SERIOUS JOKES
Translated by Douglas Langworthy; directed by David Herskovits; lighting by Lenore Doxsee; sets by Carol Bailey; costumes by Kaye Voyce; sound consultant, Tim Schellenbaum; production stage manager, Christine Goutmann; production manager, Bradley Crews; production supervisor, Ms. Doxsee. Presented by Target Margin Theater. At Here Arts Center, 145 Avenue of the Americas, at Dominick Street, South Village.
WITH: Will Badgett (Faust), Pun Bandhu (the Lord/Ensemble), Purva Bedi (Ensemble), David Greenspan (Mephistopheles), George Hannah (the Actor/Ensemble), E. C. Kelly (the Playwright/Ensemble), Wayne Scott (Wagner/Ensemble) and Yuri Skujins (the Producer/Ensemble).
THEATER REVIEW
