After insisting for months that Iraqis must determine their future under a kind of passive American supervision, the Bush administration is being forced to take sides in several Iraqi disputes and running into friction with groups long friendly to Washington.
How these new confrontations are resolved will probably determine the staying power and effectiveness of Iraq's future government and, ultimately, even its territorial integrity after the United States transfers sovereignty to Baghdad.
Among the difficulties are the American efforts, so far unsuccessful, to convince a leading Shiite cleric of the legitimacy of the administration's plan to transfer sovereignty to Iraq on June 30, and American wrangling with Islamic groups over the role of Islam in Iraq's laws and constitution.
In addition, the United States has had to dash the hopes of several Iraqi exile leaders who had worked with Washington to plan the Iraq war and now want to stay in power even if they are not selected as part of the government in a future Iraq.
But the biggest dispute, which has become public only in the last few days, is with the Kurds in the north, whose regional state has been democratically run, largely autonomous and protected by the American military since the end of the first Persian Gulf war in 1991.
For years, the United States has stated as a matter of policy that even though it encouraged the existence of an autonomous Kurdish regional government under Saddam Hussein, a post-Hussein Iraq should be divided into provinces based on geography rather than ethnic identity.
The American fear is that an ethnically divided Iraq would stir instability in the region, especially in Turkey, which has a large and restive Kurdish population. Saudi Arabia, a Sunni Muslim country, also fears that a Kurdish withdrawal from Iraq would give too much power to the nation's remaining Shiites, who the Saudis fear would be sympathetic to largely Shiite Iran.
It was not until last Friday, however, that the Kurds got word from L. Paul Bremer III, the American administrator in Iraq, that the United States wanted them to give up their powers over security, oil resources and other matters and accede to the authority of the new Iraqi state that is about to be born.
''It was not a happy meeting from our point of view,'' said a Kurdish official. ''It was totally contradictory to the spirit of the relationship we have had with the United States as allies in the war against Saddam.''
Kurdish spokesmen say that Mr. Bremer was rebuffed and that he came back for another meeting with Kurdish leaders on Wednesday, expressing flexibility on the idea of autonomy.
Evidently aware that his maximalist approach had simply provoked an angry counterreaction, Mr. Bremer was more conciliatory the second time around, while still insisting that the Kurds back down on at least some of their demands for full powers.
''He didn't go through the laundry list of all the requirements he laid down earlier,'' said an administration official. ''Essentially, he said to the Kurds, 'What I need from you is flexibility.' He went to the bigger picture.''
Some in the Bush administration speculate that the United States, in the end, will have no choice but to accept Kurdish autonomy. There is not enough time to change the status quo, they say, given the timetable for a new ''transitional'' Iraqi government to take full sovereignty after June 30.
Concern about angering the Kurds is also prevalent at the Pentagon, where officials remain grateful for the role Kurds played in the war.
In a recent memo to Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell and Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, Mr. Bremer warned that American opposition to ''ethnic federalism'' espoused by the Kurds would ''create political problems where none currently exists.''
Forcing the Kurds to back down, he wrote in the memo, a copy of which was obtained by The New York Times, ''will likely require the expenditure of significant political capital on our part'' and ''also surely upset the political stability we have enjoyed thus far in northern Iraq.''
Some Kurds, expecting the United States to back down, wonder if Mr. Bremer was not pressing a tough line with the Kurds only to be able to tell Turkey, Saudi Arabia and other nations that he tried as hard as he could before giving in to the creation of a Kurdish state.
Meanwhile, a senior Turkish official, watching the situation closely, said it seemed that the United States had already gone too far in letting the Kurds ''hijack'' the process of drafting a federal setup for Iraq.
''We find these events very disturbing,'' said the Turkish official. ''The United States cannot let the Kurds abuse their current privileged status in Iraq.'' He explained that he was referring not only to their leverage within Iraq but also to their ties to the Pentagon.
Part of the American problem is that the Kurds have actually won support for retaining their autonomy from other members of the Iraqi Governing Council, the American-created body that now manages Iraqi affairs and is planning for the transition to self-rule.
Though the Kurds have only five votes on the 25-member council, they have a unique status because they actually can claim a mandate from the Kurdish population, under elections held in 1992.
The Kurds also can use their five votes to get support from non-Kurds by promising to support what other groups want.
Thus the United States may actually have to oppose the wishes of the council, a body that is essentially its own creation.
Given the difficulties of standing up to the Kurds and to other Iraqis who are America's allies, many experts say the United States may have no choice, in the end, but to accept Kurdish demands.
''This will get resolved one way or another,'' said a Western diplomat involved in the situation. ''I won't be surprised to see it resolved in the Kurds' favor.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: OCCUPATION
