The Seventh Avenue marquee blazed with optimism as the fans streamed into Madison Square Garden last night. ''Stephon Marbury Comes Home,'' it proclaimed.
Jeff Van Gundy's name did not appear, nor did Patrick Ewing's, the two former Knicks on the Houston Rockets' bench who once made Madison Square Garden the epicenter of the New York sports world.
But Van Gundy's Rockets ruined Marbury's Garden debut in a New York uniform when they dissected the listless and aimless Knicks in the first seven minutes, taking a dizzying 23-2 lead.
Instead of the capacity crowd of 19,763 chanting for Marbury, the Coney Island legend, the fans inevitably turned to chiding the man who replaced Van Gundy as coach.
The cries of ''Fire Chaney! Fire Chaney!'' grew louder and louder as the Rockets stretched a 22-point lead in the third quarter to 33 in the fourth. All the while, Isiah Thomas stood in his usual spot in the tunnel with pursed lips and burning eyes.
After each humiliating loss in his 19-day tenure as Knicks president, Thomas has reacted swiftly, cutting or trading players. After seeing the Rockets pound the Knicks, 111-79, Thomas left the building last night without commenting, leaving a trail of speculation that he could make another move, this time with Coach Don Chaney.
Chaney, whose job was under scrutiny even before Thomas took over, insisted he did not hear what the fans were saying. ''I found out later,'' Chaney said with somber eyes. ''It's a good chant. We stunk.''
Thomas does not take losing well, and after watching the Knicks win four in a row in his first week when he was publicly supportive of Chaney, he has seen them lose four straight and drop to 14-23.
Late in the game, when a fan wearing a Charlie Ward jersey loudly criticized Thomas for trading Ward in the Marbury deal on Monday, Thomas said to the fan, ''You talking to me?'' according to two witnesses. The fan was then taken away by security through the tunnel, but he kept taunting Thomas. Thomas then rushed toward him and had to be restrained by security, the witnesses said.
The Knicks did not show the same amount of passion. Chaney denounced the lack of effort.
''That was the most disappointing thing of all because I was ready to go and I was surprised that our guys didn't really get up for the game to the point where it was like a playoff atmosphere,'' Chaney said.
The Knicks came into the game having had just one game -- a loss in Cleveland -- and one practice with Marbury. It showed. While Marbury was driving and kicking, his teammates were moving in opposite directions. He finished with just 6 points, on 3-of-12 shooting with 10 assists, even worse than his debut Tuesday. ''I would never think that it would happen this bad,'' Marbury said.
But the capacity crowd did not care that the Knicks had just been thrown together. They expected instant results from Thomas's blockbuster trade, and when Van Gundy upstaged his former assistant, they unleashed their frustration.
After the game, the Knicks and their former coach, Van Gundy, defended Chaney. ''I would just say we all know the real good part about coaching in New York and that's the bad part,'' Van Gundy said. ''That game had nothing to do with coaching. That was a team that needs patience. I think if everybody just has the right amount of patience, they're going to get going and be real different to deal with.''
The Knicks were preaching patience, too. ''You're making major changes right in the middle of the season, and they are for the better, but you can't expect to be clicking the way we were clicking,'' Allan Houston said.
''It's tough to hear your home crowd booing your coach when he's not really the one playing,'' he added. ''You know that he's doing everything he can to prepare us in practice. Sometimes you get out there and you're cloudy out there.''
Marbury has played for seven coaches and four teams in his 8-year career, and the last thing on his mind is whether Chaney will get fired.
''That's New York, when you're losing, that's what's going to happen,'' Marbury said. ''We heard it, but I wasn't paying attention to that because I know that's how it goes.
''The only thing I'm trying to do is go out and try to get adjusted to playing with these guys.''
The offensive troubles seemed understandable -- the Knicks' 33.3 percent shooting was a season low -- but the Knicks barely played any defense against a team that scored just 66 points the night before in a loss to Detroit.
By halftime, the Rockets led, 54-37, but the game was over by the 6:16 mark, when the Knicks trailed by 23-2.
The night could not have been worse for Marbury, the frustration complete when Francis stuffed him on what appeared to be an open layup off a 2-on-1 break. Francis, born one day after Marbury in February 1977, has always had a fiesty, competitive relationship with him and outplayed him.
''You go into the game expecting to have a good performance, expecting to fight, and when the game starts out the way it does, it's like you slip in some quicksand and couldn't get out of it,'' Houston said. ''It just kept going bad, we kept missing shots.
Marbury was reduced to a footnote before his family and friends and hopeful fans. In the two games Marbury played against the Rockets with the Suns this season, he scored 33 in a loss and 25 in a victory. He never got close to that tonight.
''We played like strangers on both ends of the court, and in a sense we are,'' Chaney said.
REBOUNDS
ISIAH THOMAS said after trading for STEPHON MARBURY that he still wanted to make the team more athletic. According to two people with knowledge of Thomas's conversations, he is continuing to talk to Portland regarding a trade for RASHEED WALLACE involving KEITH VAN HORN. ... Talks for Cleveland's DARIUS MILES, sending FRANK WILLIAMS and OTHELLA HARRINGTON, have stalled.
PRO BASKETBALL
