Charles Kushner, a member of one of the groups bidding for the Nets, said yesterday that he may raise his bid of $267.5 million to narrow the gap between his offer and that of Bruce C. Ratner, who has bid $300 million.
The sale process, now in its fourth month, features Kushner, whose lead partner is Senator Jon S. Corzine, Democrat of New Jersey; Ratner, whose partners include the rap mogul Jay-Z; and Stuart Feldman, a venture capitalist.
A fourth bidder, Charles B. Wang, withdrew last month.
''Our bid is at $267.5 million,'' Kushner, a developer in Florham Park, N.J., said in a telephone interview.
''The ultimate price will depend on the information that we're currently examining.''
In a prepared statement released last night, Kushner added, ''We're weighing all options, including adjusting the purchase price if it's warranted.''
The investment banks Goldman Sachs and Lehman Brothers are seeking the highest bid with the greatest certainty of being completed.
Feldman's most recent bid was $257.5 million.
Kushner said he had been in very active discussions with the banks and Edwin Stier, president of the Community Youth Organization, the Nets' ownership group.
''The indication is they want a decision made within a short period of time,'' Kushner said.
Stier held a get-acquainted meeting yesterday with National Basketball Association officials. A buyer needs approval from three-quarters of the league's board of governors.
Kushner and Corzine have said they intend to keep the team in New Jersey, and they are working on a $150 million deal with the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority to renovate Continental Arena.
Ratner wants to move the team to a proposed new arena in downtown Brooklyn.
Talks between Kushner and the sports authority continued yesterday on the proposed renovation of Continental Arena, which would include adding 30 luxury suites and 1,900 club seats.
The state authority originally envisioned financing the arena renovation with a loan to the Kushner-Corzine group, if it buys the team.
The new owners then would have repaid the authority over 10 years from the increased revenue from the new luxury suites and club seats.
But George Zoffinger, president of the sports authority, said yesterday that he is willing to extend the term to 20 years if the new owners sign a lease for that period of time.
Zoffinger said that there have been no talks with Feldman, a venture capitalist, about a prospective arena deal.
Feldman has been the quietest of the bidders, declining to speak publicly or to raise his initial bid, as the others have.
Kushner declined to discuss a federal investigation in which he appears to be involved.
Last month, the F.B.I. raided an accounting firm connected to Kushner and the home of a former executive.
The investigation was prompted by charges made in lawsuits that have been settled or dropped.
''Nothing new is going on regarding Charles Kushner,'' Steven Kodak, a spokesman for the F.B.I.'s Newark office, said.
BASKETBALL
