Give me an A; give me a B; give me a C; or any other letter of the alphabet. And what does it spell? ''Very beautiful,'' if they are illuminated letters of the kind that ornamented the grand liturgical books of medieval and Renaissance Europe.
Before Gutenberg, painted books were among the most lavish of Western art objects. They were handwrought in every detail, from their scraped and tempered parchment to their elegantly copied words to their illustrations, often in the form of figures or narratives ingeniously packed within the outline of the large initials that opened written passages.
Such storytelling characters are the primary focus of ''Treasures of a Lost Art: Italian Manuscript Painting of the Middle Ages and Renaissance'' at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, a sweetheart of a show that catches an art form and a culture on the turn. But most of the examples on view are long since separated from the books and pages they once adorned. After printing became widespread, the big, old church books, designed to be read from a distance by many eyes -- those of a choir, say -- moldered away in monastic libraries, then were dispersed into the secular world during the Napoleonic invasions of Italy, and often broken up in the process. In the 19th century, antiquarians inflicted other kinds of damage as dealers and collectors snipped out the painted initials from pages of text or music. The British collector William Young Ottley, at the first auction of such cuttings in London in 1825, referred to them as ''monuments of a lost Art,'' and he was closer to the truth than he may have known.
The Met show, organized by Pia Palladino, assistant curator of the Robert Lehman Collection, has 101 of these mini-monuments. And viewers who tend to associate manuscript paintings with hand-held Books of Hours or other compilations meant for personal prayer may be surprised to find how genuinely monumental some of these images are, in physical scale and concept.
Both factors are instantly apparent in an early Italian cutting titled ''St. Francis in an Initial I.'' The painted initial, extracted from what must have been a hefty 13th-century volume of sung responses to the Mass, is large enough to fill a page of any normal-size book. As the first letter in the Latin phrase ''In medio Ecclesiae'' (''In the gathering of the church''), it began a long passage of text with a flourish. But it also served a structural function, providing an architectural niche to hold the image of the saint.
With his substantial figure, broad face and fetching Dutch boy tonsure, this is a more robust Francis than the ascetic we are accustomed to. The depiction may be historically accurate; it was done within 40 years of the saint's death. More likely, though, it reflects the influence of the full-bodied style of Roman artists who were executing frescoes in the basilica at Assisi around the same time. This St. Francis is not all that far removed from the chunky realism of late antique portraiture.
No one knows who painted this charming confection. This is true for many paintings in the show, all of which were collected by Lehman. At the same time, certain pieces are identified with some of the starriest names in Italian art.
One is an initial B from a slightly later Sienese book, with the curves of the letter filled by two small paintings, one of God the father, the other of the Virgin and Child. Their poses adhere to Byzantine convention, but their faces are tenderly modeled, and the naturalistic gesture of the child reaching for his mother's veil is something new: archaic reserve is thawing before our eyes. Both paintings, dated around 1290, are attributed to the innovative Duccio di Buoninsegna and may be the only surviving examples of his manuscript work.
In a Florentine manuscript from the early 1400's, the artist Lorenzo Monaco used the letter C as a frame for a kind of cropped, circular, telephoto-lens view of a Last Judgment, in which Jesus and the revivified dead are equally flesh-and-blood creatures infused with intense emotion. The painting distills a classic Renaissance ideal of beauty -- with body and spirit, fact and faith, audacity and humility in balance. Then, within a matter of decades, the balance is gone. St. John the Baptist, in a 1470's painting by Cosimo Tura, artist to the Este court in Ferrara, wears a gold halo, but he is basically a self-possessed runway model with good bones and a haughty frown.
In the two centuries from Duccio's barely-on-earth divinities to Cosimo's courtier-saint, we travel an interesting ideological route. One image looks back to a tradition in which humans had a tightly scripted role in a drama of salvation, but received, as compensation, assurances about the ultimate logic of life and death.
The other image exemplifies a tradition, the modern humanist tradition, in which the person -- the individual, the personality, the ego -- is the scriptwriter. The cosmic drama is his drama, and in it the word salvation may have no more ring than the sound of two coins clinking together.
Adherents of both perspectives would call them realistic, and both have produced seductive art. Few could not be beguiled by paintings like the initial A from a 13th-century Bolognese church book, within which a Byzantine-inspired Virgin, an icon come to life, hands candles, like lollipops, to a kneeling worshiper. Here the divine descends to touch the ordinary.
But equally appealing, and in a very different, sensuous way, is a sophisticated 1430's painting by Stefano da Verona of the Blessing Christ as a stout, twinkly eyed burgher, and another by Girolamo da Cremona of God the Father as a kind of heard-it-all judge in family court with a rainbow-colored throne sort of in the shape of a 1960's peace sign. In both, the ordinary is the model for divinity.
In the long run, both kinds of images, and the attitudes about life they represent, coexist in time, as demonstrated in two remarkable paintings that fall outside the book format.
One is by the Emilian artist Francesco di Marco Marmitta da Parma, one of the most elusive of late Italian manuscript artists. He is represented by a free-standing miniature, done in the early 1490's, of the Adoration of the Shepherds, probably created for private devotion. An extraordinary thing, it combines Ferrarese stylization with the realism of Flemish landscapes in a tableau that has the peculiar, dainty poignancy of a court masque, with odd-lot wigs and powdered skin. How spiritual is it? Let's just say that the Mannerism of Parmigianino, with his ostrich-necked madonnas and bruised-fruit putti, is here in the bud.
The second piece, from the early 1470's, is a painting by Francesco di Giorgio of St. Bernardino of Siena preaching. The Franciscan monk was a contemporary of the artist and may be depicted from life: his gaunt face has the specificity of portraiture, and his boxlike wooden pulpit is too homely to have been invented. Whether the picture was conceived as a frontispiece for a book, or meant to stand alone, we don't know. But its emblematic naturalism feels at once archaic and modern, and its spiritual utility is clear.
An image like this is a graphic illustration of an ethos, and the same can be said of nearly all the illustrated alphabetic characters that surround it at the Met. Indeed, in the context of the show, the exhausted, exhorting figure of the saint himself, with his curved back and semaphorically raised arm, suggests a variety of initials in formation: a C, maybe, for Change; a Y for Your; an L for Life, or Love.
''Treasures of a Lost Art: Italian Manuscript Painting of the Middle Ages and Renaissance'' remains at the Metropolitan Museum of Art, 1000 Fifth Avenue, at 82nd Street, (212) 535-7710, through Feb. 1.
ART REVIEW
