Phat Fashions, the clothing business co-founded by Russell Simmons, the hip-hop impresario, will be bought by Kellwood, one of the country's largest -- and most staid -- clothing producers for $140 million, plus performance incentives, the principals said yesterday.
The announcement was not totally unexpected. In August, Mr. Simmons said that he was negotiating with Kellwood, after initially favoring a deal with Tommy Hilfiger.
Yesterday, Mr. Simmons praised Hal J. Upbin, Kellwood's chief executive, and Robert C. Skinner Jr., Kellwood's president, for having the vision to take on his urban design company, which includes Phat Farm (the men's line) and Baby Phat (the women's line, designed by Mr. Simmons's wife, Kimora Lee Simmons).
The deal does not include Def Jam University (a midprice vaguely preppy line) and Run Athletics (running shoes and outfits).
''I was in a Macy's in San Francisco the other day, and there was Phat and Sean John and Ecko and Rocawear and Enyce and Shady,'' Mr. Simmons said, naming other so-called urban brands. ''Then in the corner, I saw Calvin and Polo -- I didn't see Tommy anymore; all those brands have gone ice cold.''
He added that he was not ''knocking'' Calvin Klein or Ralph Lauren or Tommy Hilfiger. ''I learned a lot from them,'' he said.
Phat Fashions will operate as a Kellwood subsidiary, and Mr. Simmons will remain chief executive. Ms. Simmons will also retain her position as ''principal creative arbiter'' for Baby Phat, according to the press release issued yesterday.
Kellwood already had a licensing agreement with Mr. Simmons to produce clothes for Def Jam University and Run Athletics. Phat Farm was founded by Mr. Simmons and a partner in 1992. Baby Phat was introduced in 1999.
Yesterday, Mr. Skinner said that Baby Phat had greater growth potential than Phat Farm, one of the leading urban fashion companies. The performance incentives in the deal will include some unusual royalty arrangements, Mr. Upbin said. He declined to provide details until the deal officially closes, some time next month.
