The troubled Westchester Medical Center lost more than twice as much money last year as it had anticipated, according to financial analysts studying the company. The finding has led a credit rating agency to downgrade the rating on a large portion of the center's $278 million in long-term debt to one step above junk.
Officials at the hospital and in Westchester County, which underwrites much of the center's debt, said they planned to ask the state government for immediate financial assistance to keep it afloat. The hospital offers the most extensive advanced care between Westchester and Albany.
''We are very concerned,'' said William Ryan, the chairman of the Westchester County board of legislators. ''Our biggest concern right now is how the state may be able to quickly assist with some bailout measures.''
The loss of about $50 million last year, coupled with one-time charges and increased expenses, will most likely create a $100 million hole in the center's budget for this year despite a number of cost-cutting measures, including hundreds of layoffs, that the center undertook last year, analysts said. The hospital's financial problems are also imperiling the bond ratings of the county.
The center has exhausted an $85 million line of credit, which is backed by the county, and it has just $6 million in cash on hand, the analysts found, enough to keep it going for just a few days. Standard &amp; Poor's, the rating agency, also placed the center on a watch list for possible further downgrade.
Although the credit downgrade will have no immediate effect on the center's operations, it is a sign of increasing financial distress that has raised alarm, particularly among county officials who want the center to remain open and are eager to protect the county's AAA bond rating, the highest of any county in the state.
''We need to work with the medical center and help them,'' said Larry Schwartz, deputy county executive. ''But they have to continue to prove to everyone that they have the will, the commitment and the drive to get themselves out of this mess.''
In a statement released late Thursday, Gene Capello, the chairman of the board of the Westchester County Health Care Corporation, the board that oversees the center, said that the hospital's problems were no different from the ones facing many hospitals in the state and that he was not surprised by the downgrade.
''We will continue to work on various solutions to our financial issues that will allow us to continue to provide the highest level of quality medical care,'' the statement said.
The news of the downgrade was the latest in a series of grim announcements from the center, a 1,000-bed hospital that spun off from the county into a public benefit corporation in 1997. The center lost more than $60 million in 2002 and laid off hundreds of workers last year in an effort to close its budget gap. But the measures will not be enough to stave off financial disaster, said Martin Arrick, an analyst at Standard &amp; Poor's.
''It is hard to see how they can get through this without some kind of state assistance,'' Mr. Arrick said.
A plea for government help would represent a marked turn for the center, which in 1997 broke free from Westchester County and began what was to be a remarkable transformation from a public hospital focused on serving the poor into a world-class center. Now the center is struggling for survival. It owes $12 million to New York Medical College, which shares its campus.
Increasingly concerned about the hospital's problems, the county hired a consulting firm to examine its operations. Rating agencies say that because of its links to the medical center debt, the county's own ratings faced a possible downgrade.
Like many other hospitals across the nation, the medical center struggles with lower reimbursements under managed care, rising insurance costs, the cost of care for the uninsured, and expensive pension programs for its workers.
But Westchester Medical Center's problems go beyond those forces, according to experts on hospitals and local officials, and the roots of its crisis lie in its failure to fully make the transition from a public to a private institution.
''When Westchester Medical Center spun out into a public benefit corporation, suddenly it had to act like everyone else,'' said Pamela Federbusch, a senior vice president at Moody's Investors Service Inc. who follows the health care industry. ''They really didn't change their culture.''
Patients stayed longer than they needed, and unpaid patient bills stacked up without an aggressive plan to pursue payment. The hospital's purchasing and distribution system was in such disarray that supplies piled up and expired unused, and doctors did not aggressively seek out new patients.
The hospital also made bad business decisions. For example, it took over two failing hospitals; one ended up in bankruptcy protection, and the other had to be shut down.
