Lorenzo Lamas is hot or not, but Simmone Jade MacKinnon, his co-star in ''Dark Waters,'' an original thriller about sharks that has its premiere tomorrow on the Sci Fi channel, is hot beyond dispute. Ms. MacKinnon, an Australian brunette, is a favorite of Sci Fi Pictures, having appeared in ''Deep Shock'' and ''Python 2.'' Viewers may also remember her as Allie Reese on ''Baywatch.''
In ''Dark Waters,'' Ms. MacKinnon plays Robin, a mercenary M.I.T. dropout with ties to deep-sea syndicates. Built with precision and care, she is styled here under the talented supervision of Mariana Love, the show's hair and makeup chief. A ponytail and a white tank top show off her bone structure and perfect figure, respectively. A few times she wears less than the tank, as when Mr. Lamas, for their mutual safety, commands: ''Take off your top. Take off your top, now! You're wearing a bra! Do it!''
She does it, soaks the shirt in another friend's blood and lures the snapping predators to their doom. All the while, she mouths off and vogues. Mr. Lamas vamps up his role, too, appearing in low-buttoned shirts and his trademark highlighted shag. His character is named no less than Dane; Robin calls him a ''drunken womanizer moron,'' and he doesn't protest.
Together Dane and Robin, enigmatic submariners-for-hire, drink a good deal, and Robin smokes, even in their submarine, where oxygen isn't cheap. Once she starts to light up on a commercial airplane, reasoning that their rich sponsor will pay the whopping fine as part of their travel expenses. He does not, because he comes to a bad end. For their efforts massacring outlaw fish, however, as well as undifferentiated military men who have contrived to use sharks as weapons, Dane and Robin do get a reward. It's from his long-lost father, it turns out, and it's something big, along the lines of a foolproof map to a certain lost underwater city -- a city, let's just say, that people have been looking for for quite a while.
''Dark Waters'' is 50 percent genre whirligig, during which some viewers might wonder why we're usually so captious about television when Mr. Lamas and Ms. MacKinnon are clearly just playing with mechanical fish. And maybe we shouldn't act so high and mighty because we're probably just jealous of their easy fun. The other 50 percent is a bona fide bore -- a late-night drinking game that drags on too long. The problem with watching ''Dark Waters'' is only that you must risk tedium for spikes of amusement, since, as is usual with television's B-minus movies, the whirligig, the hot stars and the boring game are inextricable.
DARK WATERS  Sci Fi, tomorrow night at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8, Central time. Repeated at 1 a.m. Eastern and Pacific times; midnight, Central time.
Directed by Walter Salles. Produced by Unified Film Organization and Sci-Fi Pictures.
WITH: Lorenzo Lamas (Dane), Simmone Jade MacKinnon (Robin), Jeffrey Gorman (Miklos) and Bruce Gray (Summerville).
TV WEEKEND
