Gen. Wesley K. Clark has begun to show a softer side.
Gone are his navy blue suit, red tie and loafers, replaced by argyle sweaters, corduroys and duck boots.
At many campaign events recently, a woman has accompanied the general, who is retired, to introduce him. Earlier this week it was the lieutenant governor of Wisconsin. On Thursday General Clark was accompanied by Sherron Watkins, the Enron whistle-blower, who endorsed him here at a center for the elderly.
The Clark presidential campaign is also running a commercial featuring a female soldier who formerly reported to him. And it is sending out fund-raising letters from Madonna announcing her support ''not only as a celebrity but as an American citizen and a mother.''
The efforts are intended to lessen a potential vulnerability for the general. Even as he is rising in national and New Hampshire polls, his advisers say women significantly trail men in support for the four-star general and former Supreme Allied Commander of NATO.
''There is a gender gap,'' said Geoffrey Garin, who heads the Clark campaign's polling operation, though Mr. Garin did not give out numbers.
Some Democrats say the problem is that women are put off by the military persona.
Mr. Garin said the campaign believed that men had tuned into the race sooner, and that generally those who know General Clark better responded more positively. ''Once we control for that, a lot of the gender gap disappears,'' he said.
But even General Clark acknowledges he has a problem to overcome with women. ''I think there's an impression that the armed forces is a male-dominated, hierarchical, authoritarian institution,'' he said in an interview on Thursday. ''And I think they have to get to know me.''
Certainly, as he races from one to another of his town-hall-style meetings called ''Conversations with Clark,'' he is attracting people eager to take his measure. He regularly draws crowds of 500 or more.
His overall poll numbers have been rising, nationally and here in the first primary state, where he is concentrating his efforts, having decided to skip the Iowa caucuses. A CNN/USA Today poll this week found General Clark in a statistical tie with Howard Dean nationally.
And for the first time in months, as he tries to establish himself as the leading Democratic alternative to Dr. Dean, the general is drawing sharp attacks from his rivals.
On Thursday the Republican National Committee also weighed in, distributing two attacks on General Clark to reporters. One, titled ''Making Sense of Clark's Conspiracy Theories Is No Easy Feat,'' recites some of the general's accusations against the Bush administration.
A second, ''Question of the Day: Who Is Wesley Clark?,'' accuses General Clark of dissembling about whether he had supported Mr. Bush in the past and of flip-flopping on whether he would use a ''litmus test'' on abortion in judicial nominations.
The latter was a reference to an article in Thursday's Union Leader in Manchester, N.H., in which General Clark was quoted saying, ''I don't have litmus tests.'' But he then called back a reporter to clarify, saying, ''I'm not going to be appointing judges who are pro-life.''
His aides say the attention means that General Clark is succeeding in reaching voters of both sexes. Still, one aide acknowledges that the gender gap remains.
''Generally women have not had major experience with military people, much less as a candidate for president,'' the aide said. ''We've had to educate them not only on where he stands on domestic issues but on the fact that he's not just talking about the war and military issues.''
To do so, the campaign has recruited a network of women who speak in a weekly conference call, exchanging ideas about how to win over women with endorsements, advertisements and events. A 17-minute biographical film by Linda Bloodworth, which is being shown weekly on a New Hampshire television station, has numerous references to General Clark's wife and his work with women in the military, portraying him as a champion of family issues.
The campaign rolled out a television commercial with Maj. Pat Williams, a black woman who served in the First Cavalry Division under General Clark and is now retired. ''Even though he was the commanding general, you were never left to feel less than, regardless of your rank, your gender or your race,'' Major Williams says in the advertisement. ''General Clark was very supportive of women.''
General Clark is not the only Democrats who has events aimed at women, but pollsters say he may need them more than some of his rivals. Ed Sarpolus, of EPIC-MRA, an independent polling and research firm in Lansing, Mich., said he picked up on the sex differences on General Clark within a few weeks of his entry into the race. While the differences have diminished, he said the gap would have to be further reduced if the general's campaign is to succeed. Mr. Sarpolus said Dr. Dean and Mr. Gephardt did better with women.
Women in the general's audiences are divided. ''My sense is that he is not the person I would vote for,'' said Lynn Gallin, one of about 400 residents of Bedford, N.H., who came on Tuesday to a Clark gathering. ''I didn't think a military background is what the country needs right now. He just didn't sell me.''
Other women say the military experience is part of the general's appeal. ''I'm a Kucinich fan, but I think Clark is the most electable,'' said Shilo Porter-Elliott of Peterborough, who attended a ''Conversation with Clark'' in Peterborough, N.H.
Indeed, some of General Clark's most ardent female supporters say that for them, getting to know him was the key.
''When I met him, I wanted to know what happens if you interrupt and challenge a general,'' said Lt. Gov. Barbara Lawton of Wisconsin, who was traveling with the general this week. ''I didn't want to be party to the election of one more defensive, arrogant male. What I found was that it's part of his nature to understand the lives of women.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE GENERAL
