Night after night, it's the same old song. The more the Rangers refuse to learn from their defensive mistakes, the more they are doomed to repeat them.
''It's the same thing over and over,'' said center Bobby Holik, who committed perhaps the most egregious error here Thursday night, as the Rangers kicked off an important stretch of 14 games against Eastern Conference opponents with a 3-2 loss to the Carolina Hurricanes.
In the process, the Rangers lost their most reliable defensive defenseman, Greg de Vries, to a sprained medial collateral ligament in his right knee early in the second period.
''Unless there is some miracle coming, he's going to miss a month,'' Rangers Coach Glen Sather said of de Vries, who is scheduled to have a magnetic resonance imaging test in New York on Friday. ''It's a tough time of the year to lose a player like that.''
By the time the second period ended, the Rangers had once again imploded defensively, and the Hurricanes took a 3-1 lead into the third. Aleksei Kovalev recorded his first power-play goal of the season 1 minute 42 seconds into the third period, but it was not enough to prevent the Rangers from losing for the third time in four games.
The defeat, coupled with victories by the Islanders and Tampa Bay, dropped the Rangers (16-16-5-3) into 10th place in the Eastern Conference, 4 points behind the eighth-place Islanders. The top eight teams in each conference make the playoffs.
The Rangers squandered yet another opportunity to keep pace in what figures to be a tight race for the final three Eastern playoff berths with Boston, the Islanders, Tampa Bay, Florida and Carolina, all of whom won Thursday. The Hurricanes (14-17-8-2), who scored more than two goals for the first time since Dec. 9, pulled 2 points behind the Rangers. Florida is only a point behind the Rangers.
Eric Lindros's seventh goal of the season gave the Rangers a 1-0 lead at 15:58 of the first period. But they fell apart in front of goaltender Mike Dunham, who started after Jussi Markkanen missed two days of practice because of flu-like symptoms.
''I don't blame him for any of the goals,'' Sather said of Dunham.
The Rangers' collapse came shortly after de Vries was injured in a leg-on-leg collision with Bob Boughner. Carolina, which improved to 6-5-0-0 under Peter Laviolette, the former Islanders coach, tied the score at 1-1 at 2:44 of the second period on Kevyn Adams's fifth goal. When Boris Mironov could not clear the puck from the Rangers' zone, Adams turned him around with a nifty move out of the right corner and backhanded the puck from the right circle into the top left corner of the net.
''I don't think Jacques Plante could have stopped that shot,'' Sather said.
Midway through the period, Josef Vasicek, who had gone 18 games without a goal, scored twice in a 1:39 span to give Carolina a 3-1 lead. Vasicek's first goal, at 10:19, deflected off Tom Poti's stick and past Dunham. Vasicek's second goal, at 11:58, came after Holik's ill-advised backhanded pass up the middle at the Rangers' blue line was intercepted by Carolina's captain, Ron Francis.
With the assist, the 40-year-old Francis passed Marcel Dionne and moved into fourth place in N.H.L. career points with 1,772.
Holik has made the loudest calls this season for Sather to hold his players accountable for errors in judgment. Of his own, Holik said: ''It's a mistake. If I skate to our blue line with it, it's a different situation. I just didn't see him.''
He added, ''But if I'm that close to the blue line, I've got to be more aware of where their players are.''
SLAP SHOTS
Rangers forward JAN HLAVAC was a healthy scratch for the fourth consecutive game. . . . The rookie forward CHAD WISEMAN appeared in his first game with the Rangers in place of DAN LaCOUTURE, who is out with a concussion.
HOCKEY
