The Bush administration has seen a downturn in what it considers credible terrorist threats and is considering lowering the nation's threat status to an ''elevated'' level after nearly three weeks at high alert, officials said Thursday.
''The volume of credible threat reporting has gradually lessened since the holidays,'' said Brian Roehrkasse, a spokesman for the Department of Homeland Security.
Mr. Roehrkasse said that officials were continuing to evaluate terrorism intelligence daily and that it was ''impossible to speculate'' when the administration might decide to change the status.
Other administration officials, however, said that because terrorist intelligence pointed to a somewhat reduced risk, the administration was considering lowering the status level to ''elevated,'' or yellow. The current status is ''high,'' or orange, the second highest level on the five-step alert system. The change could come within the next several days, although no recommendations have been made, officials said.
The threat status was raised from elevated to high on Dec. 21 after intelligence officials said they had picked up an alarming rise in threats, some indicating the prospect of attempted hijackings on specific overseas flight routes.
Officials have been particularly concerned about flights from London to Washington, Paris to Los Angeles and Mexico City to Los Angeles. The threat to the Paris and Mexico City routes appeared timed to the Christmas and New Year's holidays, and officials said they had become less worried about those routes this week. But concern about the London route -- particularly on British Airways flights -- ''remains high,'' officials said.
Concerns about terrorism have prompted the cancellation or disruption of at least 15 overseas flights in the last two weeks, F-16 military jets have escorted some commercial flights into the United States, and Mexican officials agreed to turn around one Los Angeles-bound flight in midair because American officials were worried about security lapses.
The Bush administration also put foreign carriers on notice last week that it expects them to be ready to put armed air marshals on certain United States-bound flights that may be at risk. Although some foreign governments have complied, others have resisted the idea.
