A lot of police officers are not used to being touched. They are trained to keep suspects out of reach, far from their gun belts, their personal space, their bodies.
That is one of the many pieces of a police officer's training that must be unlearned when the assignment moves from the streets to the hallways of a school.
Outside Jane Addams High School in the Bronx yesterday, teenagers wrapped in heavy coats and hoods barely broke stride as they passed the tall police officer standing at the front gate, their little puffs of breath marking each mumbled hello in the frigid morning air. But one by one, dozens of students reached out to clap the officer on the shoulder.
''You make lots of little adjustments,'' said Officer Kenan Sheppard, 32. ''Raymond, what's up?'' he asks one student. ''How's it going?'' he asks another. ''How's your friend doing?'' Several girls approach, smiling, knowing they are late and knowing they are caught. ''Stragglers,'' he called out. ''Straggling in.''
Officer Sheppard is one of the many New York City police officers stationed in public schools. Next month, those ranks will expand by 150 officers, after Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg's announcement on Monday of new assignments to the city's 12 most violent schools. Those 12 schools account for fewer than 3 percent of the city's 1.1 million schoolchildren, but 13 percent of the system's serious crimes this school year.
Most of those schools had one uniformed police officer until this week, when many received a second. That number will rise to an average of more than 10 per school next month. But Officer Sheppard is an example of how the world of school policing works today, and watching him provides hints and lessons to be learned for the reinforcements who will come tomorrow.
Twenty years ago, a school officer's biggest job seemed to be making sure that the teacher's cars were not broken into and that fights in the hall were broken up. What used to be akin to professional banishment has evolved into a high-profile and sought-after assignment.
The modern school officer is more akin to an educator than a guard, said Ronald Stephens, of the National School Safety Center. ''We try to tell the officers, 'Look, you're not just there to arrest the students. You're there primarily as a problem solver, second as a role model, and third as an officer,'' he said.
Experts say that the sudden influx of officers presents opportunities for lasting changes in the schools. But those same experts warn that the sheer number of officers could backfire by alienating students, by creating the perception that they are targets, that they are the enemy. ''Your message can't be, 'Hey guys, go get the fort back,' '' said Gregory Thomas, a former executive director of safety for the school system. ''You don't want hats-and-bats, a task force coming to take the school over.''
An officer on street patrol does not have to care whether Denise is still mad at Janice, does not have to dispense advice or say a hundred hellos, or even smile. Officer Sheppard had worked with children before his first school posting four years ago, but he still found surprises in the changes from his street work.
''How much work it was,'' he said. ''I didn't know it would be so proactive. I thought it was going to be more, a problem comes up, you address it.''
It is not unusual for Officer Sheppard to mediate an argument between two students in the dean's office, for example, or cross Tinton Avenue to the housing project and climb the stairs, walk the halls, in a vertical sweep for truants, and end up at the corner of the school, a favorite spot among thugs looking to steal a Starter jacket from a student running late.
''A lot of cops don't want to deal with kids,'' he said. ''They'll test you. A lot of these kids don't respect cops, don't respect authority.''
Last year, he took a loaded handgun from the purse of a female student. Someone had smelled marijuana on the girl, and, confronted, she reached for her purse, and Officer Sheppard grabbed her wrist. Last month, a student assaulted a teacher. Just Wednesday, Officer Sheppard handed out three summonses to students for disorderly conduct.
In return for fair, consistent treatment, he said, the students -- who refer to him as ''Shep'' -- have become valuable sources of information for school and neighborhood conflicts, rivalries and brewing fights. ''They'll tell you a lot; they'll help you out a lot. They've got my back.''
School safety is the fastest-growing area of law enforcement in the country, said Curt Lavarello, executive director of the National Association of School Resource Officers and, a deputy sheriff in Florida, himself a former school officer.
''The selection process is so crucial,'' he said. ''When I went in, it was a punishment. I was the union rep, and the chief didn't want me around, and he sent me to the school. You actually have to get the road syndrome out of your system. Police tactics change considerably when policing a school. It's a very officer-friendly approach, and that's an adjustment to make.''
He cited a common example: a student whose backpack is stolen. ''To a street officer, that would be a minor incident. However, in that particular child's life, that's the most important incident in his life that day. You have to take what ordinarily might seem like a minor crime, you have to take that very seriously.''
But you cannot take it too seriously, warned Mr. Thomas, the former school security director.
''The uniqueness of this whole cops-in-schools issue, especially in New York City, is that law enforcement tends to operate in areas that are black and white, that are very clear, whereas schools operate in a gray area,'' he said. ''That right there is a recipe for major challenge.
''You have the potential to chill the development of children if it's not done the right way. A lot of potential for danger.''
Officer Sheppard said he was one of 8 or 10 school officers in the 42nd Precinct.
Jeremy Travis, a senior fellow at the Urban Institute in Washington, put it this way: ''You have to understand young people, and understand the school environment and work closely with sources of intelligence that are quite different. Guidance counselors, peers, administrators, teachers and parents. You have to be respectful of the learning environment at the same time as you're focusing on safety.''
Yesterday morning on the sidewalk outside the high school, a girl passed by, and the officer asked her if everything was all right. ''She was having some problems with other girls,'' he explained later.
A group of grinning young men approached, craning for a glimpse behind the school's front door. They are not students. ''My everyday guys,'' Officer Sheppard said. ''My neighborhood guys.''
Another group entered the school, and for a moment, he sounded like a street officer again, walking a beat and spotting a neighborhood troublemaker, as he called to them, ''No funny stuff today, all right?''
