Influenza has killed 93 children since October, but there is no way to determine whether this season is more severe for children than earlier years, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention said yesterday.
The number of children's deaths has risen from the 42 reported late last month. Precise assessments of the severity of the flu epidemic for children are impossible because influenza is not nationally reported, said Dr. Julie L. Gerberding, director of the centers, in Atlanta.
The children who died from influenza ranged from 4 weeks to 17 years, with a median age of 4 years. Children younger than 5 accounted for 55 deaths, or 59 percent, and infants 6 to 23 months accounted for 24 deaths, or 26 percent.
Thirty-three of the victims had not been vaccinated. The disease control agency recommends vaccinations for all healthy children 6 months and older.
The deaths occurred in a variety of settings. Of the 55 cases for which locations were reported, 15 children, or 27 percent, died at home; 12, or 22 percent, died in emergency rooms; and 3, or 5 percent, died being taken to hospitals. The remaining 25, or 45 percent, died in hospitals.
In the absence of specific case reports, the centers monitors influenza activity for all ages in several ways. Using those yardsticks, Dr. Gerberding said, the agency was ''cautiously optimistic'' that the peak of the flu epidemic had passed.
In a teleconference with reporters, Dr. Gerberding said the number of states reporting widespread activity declined last week, to 38, including New York City and the District of Columbia, which are separate reporting areas, from 42 for the week ended Dec. 27.
The percentage of outpatient visits for influenza dropped in all monitoring regions, the centers said in its weekly report.
The percentage of deaths attributed to pneumonia and influenza rose slightly to exceed the epidemic threshold, a crucial determinant of the severity of an influenza season. The threshold is based on a statistical calculation that the centers derives from the number of deaths from pneumonia and influenza in 122 cities. The data usually reflects deaths three to four weeks earlier.
Recent studies and widespread publicity about children's deaths in Colorado and other states have underscored the need to learn more about how the flu virus affects young people, Dr. Gerberding said.
The agency has asked doctors to report all influenza-related deaths in children younger than 18 through local agencies. Doctors are also being asked to submit virus isolated from fatal cases and tissues from autopsies. The intent is to help determine whether unusual characteristics are killing children.
In another step, the agency is asking state officials to consider making children's deaths from influenza routinely reportable. The sole estimate of children's influenza deaths is in an academic study that indicates that the total is 92 in an average year.
Dr. Gerberding said her agency was campaigning to help parents and teachers educate children about preventing the transmission of colds, influenza and other illnesses. Information about steps like using a tissue and discarding it are at the agency's Web site, www.cdc.gov.
