THERE were howls of exultation and dreams of expectation and, surely, a tingle of trepidation from the capacity crowd as the Knicks' new point guard, Stephon Marbury, took the floor at Madison Square Garden last night against the Houston Rockets.
And standing quietly in the runway near the court, in a suit and tie and watching intently, was someone nervously rooting and hoping as hard as any of the nearly 20,000 fans. This was Isiah Thomas, the recently appointed president of basketball operations, who engineered the trade with Phoenix that brought Marbury, a Coney Island kid, back home.
Before the first quarter of this supposed new era was over, boos were heard, leftover echoes from the old era. And that's how it continued and ended, with the Rockets walloping and embarrassing the Knicks, 111-79.
And Marbury, trying perhaps too mightily, found his clever passes landing as frequently in the enemy's hands as in those of his teammates. His shots rolled agonizingly around and out of the rim. He ended the game, one of the most forlorn of his eight-year N.B.A. career, scoring 6 points on 3-of-12 shooting from the field, with 10 assists and 4 turnovers.
This was Marbury's second game with the Knicks, and the second loss.
''We have to learn to play with each other; it's a transition period,'' Marbury said after the game.
The point guard must adjust the pace, and as he said: ''Guys will adjust to it. Tomorrow we go to practice and revamp.''
Marbury comes with baggage, and stunning credentials. At age 26, he is playing for his fourth N.B.A. team, and most of the teams he has played for have had little success, never getting past the first round of the playoffs. On the other hand, Marbury is one of only two N.B.A. players to average more than 20 points (20.5) and 8 assists (8.2) for his career. The other was Oscar Robertson (25.7 and 9.7 over 14 seasons).
Thomas averaged 19.2 points and 9.3 assists over 13 seasons, just behind Magic Johnson's 13 seasons at 19.5 and 11.2. The darling of the once-upon-a-time Knicks, Walt Frazier, averaged 18.9 points and 6.1 assists in 13 seasons.
The difference between those players and Marbury, besides the fact that he is in midcareer, is that the others led their team to titles.
And the knocks on Marbury, as broadly talented as he is, as sharp a shooter, as deft a driver, as pretty a passer, are that he has not learned how to lead a team; that he's selfish and a griper; that he does not bring out the best in his teammates but distrusts them; and that when it comes to crunch time, he'll dribble to exhaustion and fire up a shot.
The guess here, though, is that Marbury will play better and wiser than he has ever played before. There can be no excuses with Thomas, whom Marbury admired as a player, as his boss.
Marbury understands that if the Knicks don't play well, he will bear the brunt of the disappointment and despair as the team leader.
''We will click,'' Marbury said afterward, natty in a blue striped suit and a pair of diamond earrings. ''We're destined to click.''
Before the game, Thomas said: ''There are five things that a winning player must have. Commitment, courage, respect, trust and loyalty: those are the things I look for in a player. Stephon has demonstrated three of them: commitment to winning, the courage to overcome things in his life -- coming from a tough background -- and loyalty, to family and friends. Now, there is respect and trust. You have to be able to respect and trust your teammates, and that's leadership. The question is, can Stephon lead men? I think he can; that's why I made this commitment to him in the trade.''
Before making the eight-player trade with Phoenix on Monday, Thomas said he kept asking himself three questions:
*Is Marbury, who was the centerpiece of the trade, worth the risk of paying him a multimillion-dollar salary and giving up significant future draft picks?
*Can he learn to lead a team?
*If I had a second or third pick in the draft, would I pick a high school star or Stephon Marbury?
And the answers to those questions ''every time,'' Thomas said, were, yes, yes and Stephon.
Thomas recalled that in his first years in the N.B.A., he was determined to prove that, at 6 feet 1 inch -- the same height as Marbury -- he belonged.
''Because as a little guy, you learn quickly that this is a big man's league,'' Thomas said. ''At first you just try to fit in; then you want to dominate. These are the stages. Stephon has proved he belongs. Now I hope he can understand what it takes to dominate.''
Thomas added, ''Stephon, I think, knows now that he will no longer be judged on how many points he scores, but how he leads.''
When asked the other day about his tune with the Nets from 1999 to 2001, Marbury said: ''I was younger. I've matured so much from playing in New Jersey.''
Thomas said he and Marbury had not yet talked about leadership. But Thomas has given him important advice. Marbury, a team official said, wasn't sure how to handle the many ticket requests from family and friends. Thomas suggested that he buy a suite in the Garden, seating 20 to 25 people. Marbury wondered how to control food and drink orders, anticipating a colossal bill.
''They order from the telephone in the suite,'' Thomas said.
''I know,'' Marbury said.
''Just take the phone out,'' Thomas said.
''Ah,'' Marbury said, brightening.
Last night's game notwithstanding, Marbury is getting the drift.
Sports of The Times
