A Loan From Tehran
For the first time since arriving in Iran 36 years ago, ''Two Figures Lying on a Bed With Attendants,'' a 1968 triptych by Francis Bacon, is to be exhibited publicly. But not in Iran: it will be the centerpiece of a small exhibition of Bacon's work at Tate Britain in London in April.
''Obviously it's very exciting,'' said Stephen Deuchar, director of Tate Britain. ''The chance to bring a work by Bacon completely new to the British public animates our existing collection.'' While the Tate has important holdings of Bacon, it doesn't have a 1960's triptych, which makes the loan particularly interesting.
The Marlborough Gallery in New York sold the painting to the Shah of Iran the year it was made. Since then it has mostly been in storage at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Tehran, along with works by other masters like Picasso, de Kooning and Warhol that have not been considered suitable for display for political and cultural reasons.
Although so much of the collection has gone unseen, museums and collectors worldwide have known about it and have coveted some of what it has in storage. Last fall the museum turned down a staggering $105-million offer from an unidentified collector for a single painting: a rare and exceptional 1950 de Kooning drip painting from its collection.
Even though none of its holdings are for sale, the museum will readily lend works. Three paintings -- a Picasso, an Ernst and a de Kooning -- just came come off the walls of Le Scuderie Papali al Quirinale in Rome, where they were part of a show called ''Metafisica,'' which ended on Tuesday and centered around de Chirico and his followers.
''We are going to send the Bacon in two or three months,'' said Ali Reza Semiazar, director of the museum in Iran. ''They asked for it unofficially a year and a half ago.''
In exchange the British Council has organized ''British Sculpture in the 20th Century,'' scheduled to open next month at the Tehran museum. The show is to include works by Henry Moore, Anthony Caro, Damien Hirst and Bill Woodrow. Tate Britain is among the show's lenders. Still, Mr. Semiazar stressed, the sculpture show isn't the reason for the loan. ''The Tate Gallery has one of the best collections of Bacon,'' he said.
Asked if officials at the Tate were concerned about the safety of artworks being sent to Iran, Sir Nicholas Serota, director of all the Tate galleries, said, ''As the British Council is the cultural arm of the Foreign Office, we are happy to be advised by them concerning security and safety issues.''
Jewish Museum at 100
The Jewish Museum in Manhattan is gearing up to celebrate its 100th anniversary this month. In addition to special exhibitions and programs, it has commissioned Shimon Attie, an American installation artist and photographer, to create a work especially for the event. He has decided to create an environment that will change throughout 2004. The first chapter, as he calls it, will be unveiled on Jan. 21.
''We were looking for someone who could deal with history, and Shimon has this wonderful way of bringing the past into the present,'' said Joan Rosenbaum, the museum's director. ''We were intrigued by the idea that he wanted to create a visual dialogue using a range of the collection.''
Together with Norman Ballard, a laser artist who specializes in new-media art installations and theatrical special effects, Mr. Attie has created a darkened hexagon-shaped enclosure in which images from the museum's collection will be projected three dimensionally with texts from the museum's archives, which will be written in laser light as if by an unseen hand. The entire presentation, in a gallery on the museum's third floor, will last about 20 minutes.
''The two media create a ghostly aesthetic that hovers between presence and absence, the material and the ethereal,'' Mr. Attie said. He has not determined when the other chapters will be installed.
The objects Mr. Attie has chosen range from a biblical-era stone weight from 600 B.C. to a 20th-century Pop Art painting. The texts will make use of a wide range of material, too, from art reviews to private correspondence and staff memos. By the end of the year, Mr. Attie said, about 16 objects from the collection will have been in the three-dimensional display. ''For viewers it's a full-immersion environment,'' he said. ''By telling the story of four objects at a time, we're collapsing thousands of miles of time, space and geography and letting the objects speak.''
While the museum already has work by Mr. Attie in its permanent collection, it hopes to add this one to its holdings. But Ms. Rosenbaum said its fate ''remains to be seen.''
''We'll have a year to live with this work,'' she added. ''And we hope there's a donor out there who will give it to us.''
Art Fair Alliance
In this age of globalization, even art fairs are beginning to form European alliances. The Armory Show -- the ''International Fair of New Art,'' as it calls itself -- is linking up with Arco, the large contemporary art fair held annually in Spain.
''By working together we can gain from each other's experience,'' said Katelijne De Backer, the Armory Show's director. To begin with, the two fairs will collaborate on panel discussions at the Armory Show from March 12 to 15. (The show takes places not at one of New York's armories, but on Piers 90 and 92 in Manhattan.) Among the topics are ''Starting a Collection'' and ''Curating for Today's Museums.''
The Armory show has grown steadily since it began six years ago, and now it includes about 190 contemporary-art galleries.
Arco, which takes place in Madrid from Feb. 12 to 16, has works from 200 international contemporary galleries. Last year it attracted 250,000 visitors, 10 times the numbers at the Armory Show, which attracted about 25,000 people to the piers.
Ms. De Backer said the two fairs were looking for a separate exhibition space to show larger works that simply won't fit in the booths at the piers.
Inside Art  Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  A report in the Inside Art column of Weekend last Friday about the Museum of Contemporary Art in Tehran misidentified the artist who made a 1950 drip painting that the museum declined to sell after being offered $105 million. He was Jackson Pollock, not Willem de Kooning.
