The Taliban have returned to the offensive in southern Afghanistan with a string of attacks, Afghan officials said Thursday.
After something of a lull during the constitutional convention, or loya jirga, Taliban militants have killed at least 27 people in three days.
Twelve civilian men were tied up and executed on a remote mountain road in Helmand Province, west of Kandahar, on Tuesday night. The attack had all the hallmarks of Taliban militants, police and human rights officials said. On Thursday, two Afghan soldiers were wounded in a bomb blast at a military base in Kandahar.
The latest attacks also came two days after a double bomb blast that killed at least 15 people and wounded 55. Among the dead and wounded were many children who happened to be emerging from a nearby school. Officials immediately blamed the Taliban, citing intelligence reports warning that the Taliban were preparing a campaign of urban violence.
The United States military said in a statement on Thursday that it had evacuated 28 wounded from the double bombing to their field hospital at an air base east of the city. Three of the wounded died, and the others were treated in military hospitals in Bagram and Kandahar. In addition, 30 people were treated at the civilian hospital in Kandahar, the statement said.
The attack on the 12 civilians was a calculated murder, Col. Muhammad Ayub, a police official in Helmand Province, said. The civilians were villagers among a group of 20 traveling from their home in Kijeran in Oruzgan Province south through Helmand to the provincial capital, Lashkar Gah, witnesses said. They had stopped for the night at a small hotel when at 10 p.m. gunmen surrounded the building and broke in, tying the hands of the travelers. They took the 12 men outside, up a small hill and executed them, the witnesses said.
The men who were killed were all Shiite Hazaras, said Musa Husseini, 30, who said he arrived at the village on Wednesday morning and saw the bodies. Six men were missing and two had managed to escape. One was injured in the shooting and was now in a hospital, he said.
''Obviously, it is those people who are against national unity and are making problems between the tribes,'' Colonel Ayub said. ''We are investigating into it, but I am sure it is those terrorists -- Taliban, Al Qaeda and followers of Gulbuddin Hekmatyar.''
Amir Muhammad Ansari, the local representative of the Afghan Independent Human Rights Commission, said, ''Unfortunately, the situation is bad in these provinces.''
He said some of those behind the violence and instability in the region were allied to the government, in particular commanders who often fight one another. ''The Taliban are taking advantage of this situation and making things worse,'' he said.
In Kabul, Nader Naderi, chief spokesman of the Human Rights Commission, said, ''The nature of attacks of the Taliban in the last six to eight months is that they are not choosing targets on specific grounds. They are attacking any accessible target that creates an impact. To attack Afghan nationalities, such as the Hazaras, is easy. It is a soft target and makes a noise.''
Allied forces recently established a provincial reconstruction team in Kandahar to try to enhance security and increase reconstruction efforts in the region.
