Shares of TV Azteca, the second-biggest television broadcasting company in Mexico, fell more than 10 percent yesterday after three brokerage firms recommended selling the stock because of an investigation of debt sales involving company officials.
Analysts at Merrill Lynch, J.P. Morgan and Deutsche Ixe cut their ratings yesterday on TV Azteca after meeting with the company's chief executive, Pedro Padilla, to discuss transactions between the company and its chairman, Ricardo B. Salinas Pliego. Mr. Padilla said that the Securities and Exchange Commission might investigate the matter. Investors fear that could delay the spinoff of the company's Unefon cellphone service, analysts said.
Mr. Padilla was responding to concerns raised by a Dec. 24 article in The New York Times that outlined a dispute between the company and some of its outside lawyers about disclosing details of the transactions.
In correspondence with executives and board members, lawyers at the law firm of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &amp; Feld said they would resign from representing the company because it refused to tell investors that Mr. Salinas and a Unefon executive might have made more than $200 million from the deals.
In a report to clients yesterday, René Pimentel, an analyst at Deutsche Ixe, said he was ''astonished by the confirmation of the size of the profit they reaped, which was not shared with Unefon's shareholders.'' Mr. Pimentel reduced his target price for TV Azteca's American shares to $8 from $10.
Jean-Charles Lemardeley, an analyst at J.P. Morgan, said in a report that ''this situation once again brings under the spotlight the issue of corporate governance'' at TV Azteca.
Whitney Johnson, an analyst at Merrill Lynch, also cut her rating on the shares, to sell from buy. In a report, she wrote: ''We believe that the stock price will decline until such time as internal matters are clarified.''
On Dec. 24, the company's American depository receipts fell 8.9 percent, to $8.93, from a 52-week high of $9.80. Yesterday, they fell 10.3 percent, to $8.18 from $9.12.
On Wednesday, TV Azteca said that a committee of independent directors had hired a law firm, Munger, Tolles &amp; Olson, to study the transactions at the center of the dispute. James R. Jones, a former chairman of the American Stock Exchange, is leading that committee.
Analysts said that Mr. Padilla had confirmed details of the transactions, which involved Codisco, a private company owned by Mr. Salinas and Moisés Saba Masri. Codisco bought $325 million of Unefon debt held by Nortel Networks, the Canadian maker of phone equipment, for $107 million. Unefon then paid the debt in full, giving Codisco a profit of $218 million in just a few months.
Company officials said that Mexican laws did not require disclosure of the role of Mr. Salinas in the transactions. Lawyers at Akin Gump disagreed, however, and asserted their right under the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002 to tell the S.E.C. about the dispute.
TV Azteca is the second-largest broadcaster in Mexico, behind Grupo Televisa.
