Dance and film rely on movement for much of their effect. Each is capable of instantaneous visual metaphor. The earliest American filmmakers turned to dance to test their unruly new art. If the camera could capture elusive movement, it could do anything.
The Dance on Camera Festival, now in its ninth season, will acknowledge the relationship this month in an ambitious 13-program series that opens today and runs weekends through Jan. 24 at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center. Produced by the Film Society of Lincoln Center and the founding Dance Films Association, the festival focuses on documentaries, dance-influenced experimental films and choreography for the camera. This weekend they range in theme from the filmmaker Anne Belle and her eloquent portraits of ballerinas to ''Destino,'' a 1946 collaboration between Salvador Dalí and Walt Disney. (Oh, to have been a fly on the wall of that editing room.)
Belle, who died last June, captured all the gaiety and perfume of Alexandra Danilova, a poignantly determined trouper for all her glamour, in the 1983 ''Reflections of a Dancer.'' The documentary includes clips of the performing that made Danilova an international ballet star as well as her coaching of young American dancers. Frederic Franklin, her favorite partner, is seen working with her in the film, and he will be on hand to offer typically vivid recollections of Shura, as Danilova was affectionately known.
Belle must have been an extraordinary interviewer. She gets Suzanne Farrell to talk about previously undisclosed aspects of her relationship with George Balanchine in the 1996 ''Suzanne Farrell: Elusive Muse,'' which includes charming and revelatory glimpses of Jacques d'Amboise, the New York City Ballet star who encouraged the young ballerina early in her career, and Maurice Béjart, who offered her an artistic home after her break with Balanchine and his company.
The festival opens this afternoon with ''A Dancer's Life'' (formerly ''First Position''), a documentary by William Richert that takes the camera into the worn studios and dressing rooms of the school at American Ballet Theater in the early 1970's, a world that no longer exists. Age trumps dewy inexperience in two other documentaries this weekend. Andy Abrahams Wilson's 2003 ''Returning Home'' is a profile of the free-spirited postmodernist Anna Halprin at 80. And retired dancers rehearse and perform a new piece with members of Pina Bausch's company in ''Damen und Herren ab 65'' (''Ladies and Gentlemen Over 65''), a 2002 film by Lilo Mangelsdorff and Ms. Bausch.
Also of note this weekend is Wilbert Bank's ''4 Emperors and 1 Nightingale,'' a recent documentary that is about as close as we are likely to get to seeing Balanchine's historical 1925 ''Chant du Rossignol,'' a Diaghilev ballet reconstructed in 1999 by Les Ballets de Monte Carlo. And 10 short films in varying techniques, made by Scandinavian directors and choreographers, will be seen in a mini-series called ''Moving North.'' The subjects range from a couple confronting each other and an unruly water pipe to a 12th-century French dance that has survived only on the remote Faeroe Islands in the North Atlantic.
''Moving North'' will be seen again next weekend, when the programming also includes ''Mary Anthony: A Life in Modern Dance,'' a new documentary by Tonia Shimin about a modern-dance teacher who has become a quiet New York institution, influencing generations of dancers and choreographers, including Ronald K. Brown. Ms. Anthony will be present at the second screening, on Jan. 23. In ''La Recontre,'' a recent film by Seydou Boro that will be seen next weekend, performers of African traditional dance are seen working with a French modernist in Burkina Faso. And two films about the choreographer Anne Teresa De Keersmaeker depict her collaboration with the composer and director Thierry De Mey.
Also of note next weekend is ''Kinetic Spaces,'' a suite of short films by directors from five countries that address the space beyond the proscenium frame. The directors include New York's own Mitchell Rose, once known as the Woody Allen of modern-dance choreography. And ''Nostalgia del Cha Cha Cha,'' a 1991 film from Cuba by Miguel Torres, should get the feet and hips swiveling in anticipation of Heddy Honigmann's ''Dame la Mano'' (''Give Me Your Hand''). This recent documentary, which closes the festival, looks in on Cuban exiles and their Saturday night social dancing in a Queens club.
The Dance on Camera Festival runs through Jan. 24 at the Walter Reade Theater at Lincoln Center. Schedule and information: (212) 496-3809 or www.filmlinc.com. Tickets: $10; $7 for students with ID; $6 for Film Society members; $5 for 65+ weekdays before 6 p.m.
Critic's Choice | Dance on Camera
