AT 10:30 on Wednesday morning, a big, bundled-up crowd filed into a small second-floor theater in the heart of Chinatown to watch the H. T. Chen and Dancers Company, a respected Asian-American troupe, both educate and, the company hoped, impress.
The crowd for the education part was 75 well-behaved students from Community Intermediate School 166 in the South Bronx, a chatty, enthusiastic group that seemed transfixed by the company's tales of Chinese-American life and the funny audience-participation routines. But the troupe was also especially interested in impressing another audience member: an arts administrator from MassMoCA, the arts center in North Adams, Mass., who sat in a reserved seat with a big smile.
This was more than just another educational outreach program; it was something of an audition, just one of hundreds planned as part of the annual conference of the Association of Performing Arts Presenters at the Hilton New York and Towers in Midtown.
Doesn't ring a bell? Well, odds are if you have seen a piece of theater, modern dance or classical music in New York or, especially, outside the city, you have probably seen something at an association member's theater. The group, founded in 1957, is the nation's largest advocacy and service organization for the performing arts, whose members represent 1,100 nonprofit and university-based theaters, dance halls and other performing arts sites around the country.
Every winter thousands of association members descend on New York City for a weeklong conference featuring all the age-old staples of conferences, including workshops, lectures and, needless to say, cocktails. But the principal draw is something else: showcase performances like the one put on by the H. T. Chen company.
The conference functions as something of a freewheeling art marketplace where those who program (buyers) and those who perform (sellers) can get to know one another's work. The principal conduit for all that creative networking is more than 1,000 performances around the city, continuing through Tuesday, when the association's members scurry back to their artistic homes to program the 2004-5 season and beyond.
''New York is a unique venue because it has everything: emerging talent, midcareer talent and big-name performers,'' said David Rodriguez, the executive director of the Apollo Theater Foundation, which runs the Apollo Theater in Harlem. ''With the conference you have an opportunity to meet with the artists themselves and build relationships. And it really does give a flavor of what you might be buying.''
For programmers like Mr. Rodriguez, who has also worked with arts groups in Washington, Chicago and Los Angeles, the conference is a useful way to avoid the sometimes tricky practice of ''buying from a brochure or a videotape,'' he said.
For New York-based companies, meanwhile, the conference offers the opportunity to showcase their work for bookers outside the city and potentially build up touring schedules.
''We want to expand our touring activity, and you need to work at it,'' said David Herskovits, the artistic director of the experimental troupe Target Margin Theater Company, whose new Faust adaptation, ''These Very Serious Jokes'' (review, Page 36), will do six performances during the conference. ''You need to bring people in and let them look at it.''
Mr. Herskovits's company planned its run of ''Jokes'' around the gathering and will offer 20-minute snippets of its spring production for conference members. ''You do it strategically,'' he said. ''And you do it because you want to reach out to a broader audience.''
Eye on the Unconventional
Interested? Well, there is one catch: many of the showcases mentioned on the association's Web site (www.artspresenters.org) are special performances arranged for delegates only. Some, though, are regularly scheduled productions at which regular old audience members will be sitting alongside invited conference members.
The showcase schedule, and the association members' programming, tend to be decidedly more eclectic than the offerings at large, major-name institutions.
A glance at the schedule bears out a boggling range, everything from mainstream fare like ''Forbidden Broadway'' at the Douglas Fairbanks Theater (432 West 42nd Street, Manhattan) to Charlotte Blake Alston, who is performing at the Hilton. She advertises herself as a ''master storyteller'' and plays traditional African instruments like the 21-stringed kora, the djembe (an African drum) and the berimbau (a Brazilian musical bow).
There are traditional circus acts (including one, Greg Kennedy, who calls himself an ''innovative juggler''), puppeteers (a Japanese bunraku show called ''Hiroshima Maiden'') and a cappella groups (the Persuasions, who proudly announced that they've been around for 40 years, and ''we still ain't got no band'').
Pop music, chamber music, world music, jazz and folk are also all represented in showcases, as are well-known modern dance troupes like those of Martha Graham and Trisha Brown. The conference members also include hundreds of agents and managers for acts ranging from mimes to singer-songwriters.
''It provides the spice that makes a venue's season different from year to year,'' said Mr. Rodriguez, of the Apollo, who added that he had booked hundreds of acts through the conference or contacts made there. ''It's what sets their programming apart.''
There will be some serious chin stroking going on as well. Tomorrow morning the playwright Tony Kushner and John R. Killacky, the program officer for arts and culture at the San Francisco Foundation, will deliver the conference's opening address on the state of performing arts in America in the age of George W. Bush. The performance artist Tim Miller will close the conference on Tuesday. Also scheduled to speak at panels are D. J. Spooky, the gospel group Sweet Honey in the Rock and the violinist Regina Carter.
A Lobbying Function
While Sandra Gibson, the association's president and chief executive, said her group's lobbying efforts were primarily concerned with federal financing from the National Endowment for the Arts, she acknowledged being increasingly concerned about the sharp drops in support from private sources and local governments.
''It is a major issue,'' Ms. Gibson said. ''There are much higher stakes at the state and local level than at a federal level.''
Late last month the National Assembly of State Arts Agencies reported state arts spending for the 2003 fiscal year fell 23 percent, though the cuts were in many cases less severe than initially suspected. In states like California, where cuts were deep and where there are several high-profile university arts halls, the shrinking pool of state money was sometimes doubly painful as education cuts and arts cuts took large bites out of budgets.
To help stem that tide, conference officials hope to teach companies outside New York to mount grass-roots campaigns to maintain arts financing. ''What state legislatures don't want to hear is what Sandra Gibson in Washington has to say,'' she said. ''It's not as good for us to write letters as it is for them to write letters.'' Other workshops will focus on dry but necessary issues like marketing, copyright law and performance visas.
The heartbeat of the conference, however, remains the showcase performances, at which an array of performers large and small try to make connections with presenters large and small for the pure and simple purpose of trying to show their work to more people (and maybe make a buck or two, of course).
Hoping to Connect
For H. T. Chen, whose dance company is celebrating its 25th year (and its 18th year as an association member), it has been satisfying to see the system work. The company has toured to San Francisco, Chicago, Cincinnati and many other cities where association members have welcomed them.
''It's very interesting to see the culture change,'' he said. ''I used to come to these conferences and there would hardly be any Asian organizations on the floor. Now it's much more colorful.''
