''Balanchine 100: The Centennial Celebration'' continued at the New York State Theater on Wednesday night, when the New York City Ballet presented three works by George Balanchine that offered his personal interpretations of dance history and style.
The evening opened with ''Apollo,'' choreographed in 1928 to music by Stravinsky. The ballet shows the growth of the young god Apollo and his encounter with three muses.
Much happened to this work over the years. In various stagings after its premiere ''Apollo'' had scenery, often elaborate. Then in 1957 Balanchine, who liked to pare away productions, discarded the scenery.
Unfortunately, at the end of his life, he went on also to pare away the choreography, cutting the incidents that depicted Apollo's birth and early childhood. As a result there is now little opportunity for dancers to suggest dramatic development.
Some companies still perform the complete ''Apollo.'' City Ballet remains faithful to Balanchine's final revision. But this ''Apollo'' retains many remarkable sequences, for Balanchine both uses traditional ballet technique and invents unusual tilts, balances and lifts.
The ballet received a generally satisfying performance. Nikolaj Hubbe was a handsome and powerful Apollo whose upraised arms seemed to extend into the heavens to receive divine messages.
Rachel Rutherford made a successful debut as Calliope, the muse of poetry. Balanchine's choreography makes Calliope gesture as if she were reciting flamboyantly. Ms. Rutherford's movements were appropriately florid, yet she never exaggerated them. And her changing states of tension and relaxation suggested that this muse's verses expressed many moods.
Jennie Somogyi turned Polyhymnia, who represents mime, into an exuberant muse. But Ms. Somogyi should strive to keep her upraised finger motionless in front of her mouth, for that finger is Balanchine's reminder that mime is a silent art. Yvonne Borree was gracious as Terpsichore, muse of dance. Yet her dancing never grew sufficiently radiant in her pas de deux with Apollo. Hugo Fiorato conducted Stravinsky's score with obvious devotion.
In the other two works, Balanchine honored 19th-century ballet. ''Scotch Symphony'' (1952), to Mendelssohn, evokes the Romantic era's fondness for ballets about the loves of mortals and supernatural beings. Although ''Scotch Symphony'' has no fully developed plot, certain sequences recall scenes from ''La Sylphide,'' a Romantic masterpiece about the fatal love of a young Scotsman for a sylph. Nilas Martins might well have stepped out of that older ballet, for he appeared to be an introspective wanderer through the Highlands. But Balanchine gives his Romantic ballet a happy ending, and Mr. Martins danced the final solo with verve.
Kyra Nichols became Balanchine's serenely gliding equivalent of the sylph. In contrast Carrie Lee Riggins was delightfully pixieish in her debut as a Scottish lassie in kilts. Andrea Quinn conducted.
''Tchaikovsky Piano Concerto No. 2'' (1941) is Balanchine's celebration of late-19th-century Russian ballet at its most glittering. The work was originally titled ''Ballet Imperial.'' Balanchine changed that title in 1973 to avoid implying that the ballet honored the czarist regime. But it remains imperial in terms of its magnificence.
Balanchine's choreography and the Tchaikovsky score are extremely demanding. At this performance both the orchestra, conducted by Maurice Kaplow, and the piano soloist, Susan Walters, had ragged moments. So did the dancers. Confidence increased as the work progressed. Philip Neal brought a princely bearing to the central male role. But neither Miranda Weese nor Ashley Bouder sparkled consistently in the two ballerina roles. This choreographic concerto needed more imperial grandeur.
DANCE REVIEW
