About a dozen suitors have signaled their intention to bid as much as $900 million for the assets of Strong Capital Management, one of the mutual fund companies caught up in an investigation into improper trading, according to executives close to the auction.
Strong Capital is racing to sell itself before too many clients withdraw their money from the company's funds. The potential buyers -- which include Bank One, Lehman Brothers, the Wachovia Corporation, KeyCorp, Wells Fargo &amp; Company and the New York Life Insurance Company -- submitted ''expressions of interest'' late Wednesday night to Goldman Sachs, which is managing the auction for Strong, the executives said.
Each suitor proposed a price range that it would be prepared to pay, the executives said; the most any suitor offered was about $900 million, slightly less than the $1 billion goal the company set at the beginning of the process.
Strong Capital, based in Menomonee Falls, Wis., is rushing to reach a deal before the company's value deteriorates further and, perhaps more important, before the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, brings charges against its largest shareholder, Richard S. Strong. Mr. Spitzer vowed in October to bring charges against Mr. Strong, contending that he improperly traded in and out of the shares of his company's funds. Mr. Strong resigned as chairman and chief executive of the company in December.
At the time of Mr. Spitzer's complaint in October, Strong Capital managed nearly $43 billion in mutual funds and institutional assets, including pension funds.
According to the executives close to the auction, Strong Capital is planning to trim the list of suitors and begin a round of binding bids as soon as next week.
The Strong investigation flows from a complaint filed in early September by Mr. Spitzer in connection with a $40 million settlement he reached with Canary Capital, a hedge fund, which he accused of improper trading in mutual funds. The same informant who told the attorney general of the Canary trading also provided information about Strong.
A spokesman for Strong Capital did not return phone calls seeking comment.
