Just Don't Call Him 'Doogie Howser, M.D.'
NEIL PATRICK HARRIS, the actor famous for playing a certain teenage doctor, remembers going as a youngster to a production of ''Fences,'' AUGUST WILSON's play about a black sanitation worker and his troubled relations with his wife and son. JAMES EARL JONES, in an acclaimed performance, starred.
''I would seem to be one of the last people to be affected by 'Fences,' '' Mr. Harris said yesterday at a Starbucks on the Upper West Side. ''It wasn't written for a 14-year-old white kid from Albuquerque!''
But ''Fences'' kindled a love for the theater that has stayed with him, Mr. Harris said. He has served a long stage apprenticeship that included good notices in productions of ''Rent,'' ''Proof'' and ''Cabaret.''
But, he said, ''If you go into a 'Proof' or you go into a 'Cabaret,' and you're No. 6 or you're No. 5'' in a role established long after the show has opened, he said, ''then it's mostly tourists or foreigners at that point. It's TKTS now, so the audience is not quite as savvy.''
Mr. Harris, glancing at the tape recorder, said: ''That may sound insulting. I don't mean it that way. But it's not as informed an audience.''
Mr. Harris will soon have his chance to perform for an audience presumably savvy enough to want to see a thematically prickly musical by STEPHEN SONDHEIM.
''Assassins'' is Mr. Sondheim's musical about the men and women who have attempted, with or without success, to assassinate the president of the United States. The show closed Off Broadway after a brief run in 1991. ''I wouldn't say it was not successful,'' Mr. Harris said. ''It just didn't transfer to Broadway. It was going to transfer to Broadway and then the gulf war happened. They pulled the production just because of circumstances.''
In the Broadway premiere set for April, the production casts Mr. Harris as a folk balladeer and Lee Harvey Oswald. The Roundabout Theater Company production will be at Studio 54, on West 54th Street, where Mr. Harris starred last year as the bisexual M.C. in ''Cabaret.''
Whether this year's production of ''Assassins'' faces a fate similar to the earlier version is an open question, Mr. Harris conceded.
But controversy is important for the theater, he said. ''What makes live performance so exciting for the performer,'' he said, ''is a kind of bait and switch,'' referring to the ending of ''Cabaret,'' where a night of song and dance ends with a hiss signifying the gas ovens of the Holocaust. ''You're sucker punched by the ending.''
Mr. Harris, still recognizably Doogie Howser at 30, added: ''I don't want to be on a bus and truck tour of 'The Music Man' for two years. That's not why I'm acting.''
Ribbons and Padded Bras? But Look at Her Apartment
BARBARA CORCORAN, the SANDY DUNCAN doppelgänger, won her reputation as the Queen of New York Real Estate through hustle and bravado. And she didn't disappoint at the press luncheon she held yesterday for the new paperback version of her self-help book once titled ''Use What You've Got.''
Between hardback and soft cover, Ms. Corcoran's book title became ''If You Don't Have Big Breasts, Put Ribbons on Your Pigtails.''
She had amused scores of reporters around town by announcing the luncheon with intimate wear -- a pink padded bra -- enclosed.
Thirty men and women showed up. Some of them (our Boldface correspondent included) were brazen enough to ask Ms. Corcoran's bra size. ''Why, 34A,'' she responded.
We can connect the dots on why Ms. Corcoran was wearing a wig with pigtails tied with red ribbons.
But why, in point of fact, is the founder of the Corcoran Group, who sold her company for a gazillion dollars a few years back, now wearing black satin Prada high heels and a black-and-white waitress uniform?
She quit her job as a waitress in Fort Lee, N.J., to become a receptionist at a Manhattan real estate firm. The eventual reward? Look around you, she seemed to say. The luncheon was being held at her $3.6 million Park Avenue co-op in Carnegie Hill.
Ms. Corcoran, having left her real estate business, contrasted her life as an author with that of a business executive. Authorship, and what we will call in this space engaging in blarney, are ''vastly different,'' she said. ''It's lonely writing.''
with Rosalie R. Radomsky
Boldface Names  Correction:  January 10, 2004, Saturday  Because of an editing error, a report in the Boldface Names column yesterday about the release of Barbara Corcoran's book ''If You Don't Have Big Breasts, Put Ribbons in Your Pigtails'' misstated her involvement with the Corcoran Group, which she founded and later sold. She remains chairwoman; she has not left the business.
