WHAT would Margaret Mead make of a tribe of 6,703 people that each winter celebrates its land as the coldest spot in the contiguous United States with an outdoor festival that features such rituals as ''Turkey Bowling,'' in which frozen poultry takes the place of bowling balls, and a ''Freeze Yer Gizzard Blizzard Run,'' billed as the coldest 10-kilometer race in the United States? (In 1987, that race was run in temperatures that plummeted to minus 28 Fahrenheit.)
But that's what things are like in International Falls, Minn., which hangs like a stalactite from the Canadian border, and for which ''Ice Box Days XXIV'' (to be held next Thursday through Sunday and not to be confused with Super Bowl XXXVIII) is a celebration of its idiosyncratic fame. Not for nothing, in fact, did the town fathers trademark the term ''Icebox of the Nation'' in the 1950's, thereby embracing its status as the punch line of weathermen from Maine to Maui, who each day let their viewers know there is always someone else in the country worse off than them.
Not so fast, says Roland Fowler, a 64-year-old former Army mule skinner, or driver, who lives 120 miles away in Embarrass, Minn., a hamlet with 640 people, just one gas station and no visitor accommodations. ''There's no way International Falls can keep up with us,'' he said earlier this week, when the thermometer outside his farmhouse recorded a low of minus 25 and a high of minus 14. ''Even in July we've had garden-killing frosts.''
For two decades, Mr. Fowler has argued that International Falls has been dining out on its status as America's ''Ice Station Zebra'' for too long. Way too long. On Feb. 8, 1982, Embarrass hit 52 below on an unofficial thermometer that shattered while the mercury was still headed south. But it wasn't until eight years ago that Embarrass, honoring trademark laws, started billing itself with a less poetic, but more straightforward slogan: ''The Nation's Cold Spot.''
For Embarrass, the biggest bonanza is bragging rights, nothing to sneeze at when the comparative megalopolis up north can also boast that Bronko Nagurski and Tammy Faye Bakker learned, respectively, to play football and to apply makeup in their native International Falls. ''We're famous, everywhere you go in the country, people have heard of us because of the Weather Channel,'' said Esther Myers, the editor of Embarrass's monthly newspaper, The Flying Finn, whose major feature each issue is a day-by-day recording of the previous four weeks' temperatures.
Indeed, for the last few years, and often several times a day during the dead of winter, the weather network beamed into 87 million American households and across the world has trumpeted Embarrass as the site of that day's low temperature, leaving the city known regionally as the Falls out in the cold. It wasn't so long ago that even high-brow media venues like public radio's ''Car Talk'' would focus on International Falls, with residents getting their 15 minutes of fame telling tales of local inebriates urinating on their frozen car door locks to thaw them out.
There is much more at stake than winning bar bets for International Falls. In fact, for decades, the city has lured dozens of car, aviation and clothes manufacturers to subject their new designs to the town's harsh climate. And when it's too warm outside, testers can use a 2,000-square-foot ''cold box'' built in 2000. The facility can hold up to a dozen cars in temperatures reaching 40 degrees below zero, bringing millions of dollars to the local economy in fees, motel rooms and on-hand spare parts.
More recently, International Falls has tried to convince tourists that it is a swell place to visit year-round, an attitude adjustment for a city that for so long prided itself on how inhuman it was to live there. ''We made this image for ourselves in the past, and then we wanted the rivalry with Embarrass,'' said Harry Swendsen, the good-humored 44-year-old mayor of International Falls, speaking from his office at The Daily Journal, where he doubles as the paper's general manager. ''Now, we want people to know it's not only not that bad here, it's a great place with plenty to do.'' (Among the features promoted: some of the best walleye fishing in the state, winter or summer.)
For Mr. Fowler, the person most responsible for getting places like the Weather Channel to switch allegiance, recognition has been long coming. ''For decades, International Falls was supposed to be the coldest, but we knew just by looking at the thermometer that that couldn't be,'' he said. ''It took 12 years before we could officially prove we were colder, and muscle our way into the limelight.''
A longtime activist who served as a union leader when he worked in a nearby mine, Mr. Fowler now mows the grass in the Embarrass cemetery, floods the local ice rink, and serves as Embarrass's representative on the local school board (Embarrass itself has no schools).
If there was a crucial moment in Mr. Fowler's odyssey, it was a day 15 years ago when he was watching the Weather Channel and saw International Falls named as having that day's low. He began by sending the broken Taylor thermometer that had hit minus 52 to its manufacturer, whose scientists analyzed the reading and sent a letter confirming it as accurate. He then mailed the letter to Bruce Watson, a meteorologist with the National Weather Service in Minneapolis, who in the coming years would lobby on behalf of Mr. Fowler and Embarrass to make the readings official. Mr. Watson sent weather-recording boxes up to Mr. Fowler to take daily readings, and three years ago, Embarrass was rewarded with official status, meaning that the Weather Service would now accept Embarrass's reported temperatures as accurate.
Paul Kocin, a meteorologist and winter weather expert for the Weather Channel, headquartered in Atlanta, is well aware of the tussle. ''We're always seeing temperatures lower than International Falls, but compared to these other places it's a large, sizeable city that always has had proper equipment. It's no problem finding a guy in a small town with a thermometer that's colder. We report the lows as interesting trivia, but we have to be very careful that people don't report temperatures lower than they really are just for the attention.''
As for the battle between Embarrass and International Falls? ''Whoever brags most wins,'' Mr. Kocin said. ''They're both cold. What difference does it make if it's minus 35 one place and minus 40 not far away?''
Since Embarrass's recognition three years ago, Mr. Fowler has been rewarded with a new National Weather Service-sanctioned thermometer, stationed in a white box in his backyard that registers highs and lows on a clock-radio-looking device inside his house. He and his wife also staff an 8-by-10-foot weather station a few dozen yards down the road. Mr. Fowler is nothing if not diligent as he pulls out his notebooks showing daily highs, lows and precipitation recorded in neatly penciled columns. ''When it's sunny, it's usually coldest between 8 and 8:04 a.m.,'' Mrs. Fowler chimed in from across their dining room table.
As Embarrass's cold war ambassador, Mr. Fowler has learned over recent years how to deal with reporters from as far away as Japan, unfailingly offering cups of coffee and asking visiting journalists if they've eaten or want to take their shoes off. He was thrilled when ''Good Morning America'' first called him in 1998 for an on-the-spot report.
Some in International Falls are not willing to give up on the rivalry just yet. Tim Shuff, 54, owner of the Sportsman's Service fishing gear store, contended a few weeks ago, on a morning that hit 5 below, that ''our weather station used to be a lot more elaborate, while in Embarrass they just had a guy with a thermometer.''
The official word, though, at the National Weather Service in Duluth, Minn., as at the Weather Channel, is: Who really cares? Cold is cold.
Here, for the record, are the facts: The official average low in December, January and February in International Falls is minus 3.4 degrees, while Embarrass measures minus 6.3. And the year-round temperature in Embarrass averages out at 34.4, a full degree colder than anyplace else in Minnesota. (Wednesday, as a cold front moved across the country, International Falls recorded a low temperature of 15 below and Embarrass one of 24 below.)
Meanwhile, a lot of people in International Falls don't seem all that interested in keeping the competition going. In 2002, workmen dismantled the giant thermometer in Smokey Bear Park, the one that in 1968 recorded a temperature of minus 46 degrees and was long a fixture on the thousands of postcards sold to tourists passing by on their way in and out of Canada. It had recently broken, and no one seemed willing to cough up the $30,000 it would have cost to fix it. ''The idea just didn't come up in city council meetings,'' Mayor Swendsen said.
If anything, International Falls seems to be recasting itself. ''I'm embarrassed to say I've never been to Embarrass, but it's too darn cold there,'' said the Falls's Mayor Swendsen. ''Some people here have suggested we have a big to-do, go to Embarrass, and officially present them with the title of 'Icebox of the Nation.' ''
Then, of course, there is this sobering thought: Perhaps Embarrass and International Falls may both be wrong about Minnesota's coldest place. ''I hate to tell them, but it might be colder in Tower,'' said Dan Markee, another weather specialist at the National Weather Service in Duluth. ''The same night it hit 57 below in Embarrass, it was minus 60 in Tower. They just haven't made a big deal out of it.''
JOURNEYS
