SITTING in a mesh-covered pit in the middle of winter was never Christopher D'Annibale's idea of fun. That is until last January when he went on his first goose hunt on the Eastern Shore of Maryland. ''It's actually not so different from golf,'' said Mr. D'Annibale, 33, a hedge fund manager in New York City. ''It takes patience.''
Long out of favor, hunting is fast becoming a hip way to spend the weekend for the young and upwardly mobile. According to the United States Fish and Wildlife Service, the number of hunters with household incomes of $100,000 or more increased more than 25 percent, to 1.3 million, from 1991 to 2001 (taking into account inflation and population increases). And over the last three years alone, upscale hunting clubs like the Mashomack Preserve Club in Pine Plains, N.Y., and Pintail Point in Queenstown, Md., report that business has grown as much as 20 percent, while high-end gun manufacturers and specialty clothing retailers say that sales of hunting jackets and other gear are up 10 percent or more.
Most of the growth, industry watchers say, comes from an unlikely group of newcomers: adults in their late-20's to mid-40's who did not grow up hunting -- and who may have friends and family who are appalled by it. That has not stopped the new hunters from spending thousands of dollars on Barbour hunting coats and Beretta shotguns to use in the woods near their weekend homes or to take on guided trips to hunt upland game (pheasant, partridge and other birds) in places like South Dakota.
''Traditionally, you'd be introduced to hunting by your father or an uncle, but what's happening far more these days is younger people are taking it up and getting their friends to come along,'' said Daryl Greatrex, a New York-based director of Holland &amp; Holland, a nearly 170-year-old British hunting outfitter.
Helen Nigg, a managing partner at an Internet services company in San Francisco, grew up in Irvine, Calif., and had never held a gun until last year. But on a recent weekend excursion to a private ranch in Sun Valley, Idaho, she shocked her friends by bringing down a chukar (a bird similar to a partridge) with one shot. ''I guess I just had this stereotype of hunting as just a bunch of big, burly guys who wear plaid and N.R.A. caps and say, 'Let's go out and kill some defenseless animals,' '' said Ms. Nigg, who is planning to go bird hunting next year in Northern California. Her friends still think it is a ''rednecky thing to do,'' she said.
Of course, hunting has long been popular among upper-crust American families, but until recently the majority of hunters came from rural communities where fathers and sons would go out each fall to shoot a deer. But over the last 40 years, that tradition has been waning. In New York State, for instance, slightly more than 750,000 hunting licenses were sold last year, compared with 1.27 million 20 years ago.
That has encouraged hunting-related companies to increasingly focus on a more upscale market, said Bob Ireland, a branding specialist in New York and an avid hunter. The sport's popularity falls into the same ''country'' lifestyle category that has soccer moms buying Range Rovers and wearing Beretta jackets in suburbs like Greenwich, Conn.
Dan O'Conner, the director of licensing and outdoor services at the Orvis Company, which sells bird-hunting gear and runs three shooting schools, said that bird hunting is up 20 percent at Orvis's Sandanona game preserve in Millbrook, N.Y. ''Bird hunting has always been done by an elite group of people, and young successful people in the city are caught up in that whole thing,'' he said.
Indeed, gun makers and hunting outfitters are increasingly pushing high-end goods designed for the new hunters. Kimber, a New York-based manufacturer, and the Remington Arms Company of Madison, N.C., are introducing new shotguns featuring checkered stocks for an enhanced grip and more aesthetic appeal (the priciest are $6,000). And the U.S. Repeating Arms Company, of Morgan, Utah, maker of Winchester rifles and shotguns, recently reintroduced stack barrel shotguns, which are frequently used by clay sports shooters and bird hunters, and which the company had not sold in the United States in more than a decade. The top model of the new line sells for $2,227.
So many people want to look as if they spend the weekend flushing grouse that Barbour, the British-based retailer, opened its first United States store in December, in New York, Barbour by Peter Elliot, to sell items like its classic waxed-cotton, corduroy-collared sage green jacket. ''We built this store to cater to the urban hunter,'' said Elliot Rabin, Barbour's American partner.
Even retailers that haven't traditionally produced hunt-friendly gear are getting into the act. The high-end men's store Paul Stuart, for instance, added a $1,000 field jacket to its men's collection three seasons ago and is now selling heavy boot socks and $130 sport shirts in traditional hunt-style checks and plaids. Sales of the jackets have almost quadrupled since their introduction, said Jack Freedman, the brand manager for Paul Stuart.
Elizabeth Van De Bogart, 32, an account manager for a marketing company, understands the appeal of hunt fashion. She went on her first armed hunt in October, after completing her 10-hour hunter safety course (a requirement in New York State). For her weekend hunting jaunts in the Adirondacks, at a family second home, she bought a fitted camouflage jumpsuit and gloves. ''I look really good in it,'' she said of the outfit, which she wears with pearl earrings.
But hunting, as many neophytes find out, is not only about fashion. On his first hunt, Mr. D'Annibale hit a goose on the wing but then had to finish the job at close range. ''I had to put it out of its misery,'' he said. ''It kind of bummed us out.'' Nevertheless, he said he found himself enamored of the sport.
Others have drawn the line at killing. Gregory Barnard, 48, a senior vice president with Bank of America in Washington, has loaded up on hunting gear, like a shooting vest with a padded shoulder (it helps with kickback), special walking boots and electronic ear protectors. But the only thing he has shot in the two years since he took it up are clay disks, which are ejected into the air at different angles to mimic the flight of birds. ''I don't feel much desire to go out and shoot animals,'' he said.
Then there's Bryan D'Orazio, 35, a senior vice president at a printing services company in Somers, N.Y., who took up hunting last year near his family's second home in the Catskills. Since then, he said, his sisters have been giving him a hard time. ''They kind of yelled at me, '' 'How can you shoot animals?,' '' Mr. D'Orazio said. His answer: ''I still haven't hit anything.''
GOING AFIELD?  When Style Is the Game
HUNTING outfitters, retailers and gunsmiths have spent the last few years coming up with new gear to appeal to the growing crop of neophyte hunters. And although it takes more than a fancy shotgun and a stylish new hunting jacket to become a hunter (often including a state-sponsored safety course), here's a head start on how to look the part, as well as where to show off your hunt-chic attire.
BARBOUR INTERNATIONAL JACKET  Price: $298.  What it is: A waxed-cotton cross between a motorcycle jacket and a hunting coat, this unisex belted-waist, tear-resistant outerwear is appropriate for hostile environments, from a Park Avenue rush hour to a crack-of-dawn goose hunt in upstate New York.
Contact: Barbour by Peter Elliot, 1047 Madison Avenue, New York; 212-570-2600; www.barbour.com.
BERETTA CARTRIDGE CUFF LINKS  Price: $195.  What it is: Sterling silver miniature replicas of shotgun cartridges, available in jasper, lapis or tiger's-eye, were introduced two years ago to give hunters an understated ''way to wear your sport on your sleeve,'' said Robert Booz, the manager of the Beretta Gallery in New York. Other items but not the cuff links are available on the Internet.
Contact: Beretta Gallery, 718 Madison Avenue, New York; 212-319-3235; www.berettausa.com.
KIMBER AUGUSTA SHOTGUN  Price: Starts at $6,000.  What it is: This new Italian-made over-and-under shotgun was designed for and used by target-shooters in the 2000 Olympics and can be customized with exhibition-grade walnut and a hand-checkered stock.
Contact: Kimber, 800-880-2418; www.kimberamerica.com.
GREENBRIER SHOOTING WEEKEND  Price: $2,600 for two people sharing a room and both participating in the weekend activities; $2,200 with only one of the two people participating; $1,700 for one participant in a single room.
What it is: Holland &amp; Holland Outdoor Pursuits at the Greenbrier offers a weekend of shooting at clays and targets using Holland &amp; Holland guns and off-roading in Land Rovers. This year it is scheduled for the weekend of June 25 at the Greenbrier Resort in White Sulphur Springs, W.Va.
Contact: The Greenbrier Resort, 800-624-6070; www.greenbrier.com.
PUBLIC PRESERVES  Where the Deer and the Antelope Worry
IT'S been a good season for hunting preserves across the country. Here are some places where hunters have been logging some time behind a gun.
ORVIS SANDANONA
At this 400-acre shooting preserve in Millbrook, N.Y., members reserve hunt times much like tee times. Guided hunts for pheasant, chukar and Hungarian partridge are available from Sept. 1 to March 31. There is a $2,500 initiation fee plus a $2,000 yearly usage fee. For information: www.orvis.com; (845) 677-9701.
DAKOTA HILLS HUNTING LODGE
This 4,000-acre, 12-year-old hunting preserve in Oral, S.D., overlooks 80 miles of the famous Black Hills. Guests hunt pheasant, partridge and grouse, aided by German shorthaired pointers, Labrador retrievers and English springer spaniels from the lodge's 35-dog kennel. The cost is $2,672 for a three-day, four-night stay, including meals, airport transportation and taxes. For information: www.dakotahills.com; (800) 622-3603.
FORBES TRINCHERA RANCH
Malcolm Forbes bought this 250-square-mile ranch in Fort Garland, Colo., in 1969 and turned it into a hunters' paradise. Elk, deer, mountain lion and bear can be hunted, but serious -- and deep-pocketed -- hunters sign up for one of the three $42,500 bighorn sheep permits handed out each year. Elk hunts are $6,000, and deer hunts are $4,000. License fees are extra. For information: www.forbestrinchera.com; (719) 379-3263.
BROADMOUTH CANYON RANCH
Owned and operated by Rulon Jones, the former Denver Broncos' defensive end, this 12,000-acre ranch in Liberty, Utah, in the Wasatch Range, allows guests to hunt elk, mule deer and cougar on foot or horseback, as well as in all-terrain vehicles when deemed necessary. A five-day trophy elk hunt is $5,900 (license fees are extra). Mule deer and cougar hunts are less expensive. For information: www.utahelkhunt.com; (800) 745-1912.
GREYSTONE CASTLE
Guests of this 24-room lodge in Mingus, Tex., can choose from an assortment of game: mallard ducks, quail and Rio Grande turkeys to white-tailed deer. Deer hunts start at $4,000; a three-day, two-night spring turkey hunt costs  $1,500 a person. For information: www.greystonecastle.com; (800) 399-3006.
RITUALS  Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  An article last Friday about a new generation of hunters gave an incorrect telephone number in some copies for the Broadmouth Canyon Ranch in Liberty, Utah. Its number is (801) 745-1912.
