President Bush said on Thursday that he would propose increased spending on a number of education programs in the budget he sends to Congress next month. But Democrats said the election-year proposal would not change what they called Mr. Bush's record of consistently underfinancing education.
Mr. Bush announced the proposed spending increases during a trip to Tennessee, a state he won in 2000 despite it being home to his Democratic opponent, Al Gore. Coming a day after Mr. Bush unveiled a plan to give illegal immigrants temporary legal status to work, the announcement continued the administration's strategy of rolling out initiatives the president is expected to highlight in his State of the Union address this month and in his budget next month.
It was also another step by the White House to keep Mr. Bush in the political center heading into his re-election campaign. Mr. Bush has sought to use education to bolster his case for being more interested in results than in ideology on issues of concern to swing voters, especially women and suburbanites.
Mr. Bush also made two fund-raising stops on Thursday, one in Knoxville and the other in West Palm Beach, Fla. Each event raised $1 million for his re-election campaign, which through Dec. 31 had taken in $130.8 million in donations.
At a school here, Mr. Bush said he would ask for spending increases in the next fiscal year, which starts Oct. 1, for three specific areas: Title I, which provides money to schools in low-income areas; reading initiatives; and special education.
The White House said Mr. Bush would seek an additional $1 billion for Title I, which is expected to receive $12.3 billion in the current fiscal year once Congress belatedly completes work on spending bills. For reading programs, Mr. Bush will ask for an increase of $138 million over this year's anticipated total of $1.12 billion. For special education, the president will ask Congress for $1 billion more than the expected $10.1 billion this year.
Mr. Bush sought to focus attention on the No Child Left Behind Act, the education bill he signed into law two years ago, which called for increased testing to hold schools accountable for improving the performance of students in reading and math. ''Putting money into a system that believes in the worth of every child and is focused on results is money well spent,'' he said.
Figures from the White House indicated that Mr. Bush intends to call for spending of $36.7 billion next year on kindergarten through 12th grade, up from $35.5 billion for the same programs this year. Democrats on the House Budget Committee said Mr. Bush's proposal might actually amount to a cut: by their accounting, those programs are budgeted for $37.6 billion this year.
It was not clear whether Mr. Bush's call for higher spending on some programs next year would be offset by proposed cuts elsewhere in education.
With the announcement, Democrats renewed criticism of how the education law had been carried out. In a statement Thursday, Representative John M. Spratt Jr. of South Carolina, the senior Democrat on the House Budget Committee, said that last year Mr. Bush had tried to cut 46 programs covered by the law.
''I hope the No Child Left Behind Act will improve student achievement,'' Mr. Spratt said, ''but teachers and administrators everywhere are telling us that it can do so only if it is funded at the levels the law originally called for.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRESIDENT
