WITH elevations above 1,700 feet, among the highest in Connecticut, that produce frigid winter temperatures, Norfolk seems to enter hibernation once cold weather arrives. Many weekenders would not have it any other way.
''The snow turns the town into a very cozy place. Winter in Norfolk is a great chance to reconnect with people after a hectic summer,'' said Louise Davis, an interior designer who divides her time between an apartment on the Upper East Side of Manhattan and a gray-shingled four-bedroom lodge in Norfolk, which her grandfather built as a summer home in 1900.
''People turn to their own resources,'' she added, ''whether it's writing, painting or making music.''
Indeed, many of the town's 2,200 full- and part-time residents (about 30 percent of them weekenders, according to town officials) are creative types -- artists, designers, publishers, painters, photographers and writers. They include Jonathan Galassi, the poet; Starling Lawrence, editor in chief at W. W. Norton; and Anne Garrels, a National Public Radio correspondent.
And they are likely to be attracted by the same things that drew Ezra Pound and Mark Twain to Norfolk years ago: minimal development in an almost-Adirondack setting. These days some 24,300 acres, or 80 percent of the town, are protected, including the former Ellen Battell Stoeckel estate, now the summer home of the Yale School of Music and the Norfolk Chamber Music Festival.
The Scene
Norfolk's blend of high culture and the great outdoors, coupled with enough fanciful old buildings to earn it 24 entries in the National Register of Historic Places, has bred a fierce loyalty among weekenders. They revel in the notion of the town as a beautifully preserved secret, with little obvious social hubbub and just beyond the two-hour drive that is the limit for many owners of second homes.
''There is a real commitment to take care of the community, shared by people who live here full-time and those who come for summers,'' said Kate Wenner, a New York novelist who in 1980 bought an eight-room 1792 farmhouse on just over an acre near the Massachusetts border.
The town center consists of a restaurant, pizza parlor and liquor store; an independently owned convenience store, a place to reserve out-of-town newspapers, is opening this month.
On Friday and Saturday nights in the summer, townspeople and tourists alike enjoy picnic dinners on the lawns of the Battell estate before attending concerts in the music festival's cedar and redwood ''shed.'' Since 1899, artists like Sibelius, Rachmaninoff and Caruso have journeyed to Norfolk; last summer, the festival featured the Tokyo String Quartet. Across the street towers the Greenwoods Theater, a renovated vaudeville house that presents plays each summer in addition to classic movies.
Norfolk winters are considerably quieter. Ms. Davis presides over the women-only Isabella Eldridge Club, which requires members to give monthly lectures on topics like Islamic architecture or Russian literature. It is named for the founder of the Norfolk Library, a 26,000-volume, 115-year-old barrel-vaulted Romanesque-style icon designed by the Hartford architect George Keller. The library, whose russet-colored shingles overlap like the scales of a fish, is also part art gallery and concert space and lecture hall; it is the town's intellectual fulcrum.
Pros
For the nature-minded, the abundance of open land in Norfolk means that there are miles of hiking trails that lend themselves in winter to cross-country skiing and snowshoeing.
In addition to locally protected land, the town has three state parks. The windswept Dennis Hill park contains the sagging remains of the 240-acre former estate of Frederick Shepard Dennis, a New York physician who gave the property to Connecticut in 1935. Today, it is a popular spot for picnics. In the Campbell Falls park at the northern edge of town, the Whitney River tumbles 60 feet over two cascades. At Haystack Mountain, whose entrance is just a short walk from the town center, hikers can bound up steps carved into the rocks to a 1,677-foot summit. A 34-foot cylindrical tower, set to reopen in the spring, has sweeping views of the Berkshire foothills, blanketed with hemlock, birch and mountain laurel.
On summer days, expect to see bathers at Tobey Pond, Norfolk's motorboat-free municipal swimming area, though many residents prefer their own private lakes. At nearby Wood Creek Pond, meanwhile, a state-owned boat ramp is an ideal spot to begin fishing trips for pickerel and carp. In the winter, the pond freezes for much of the season and is popular with ice skaters. The Norfolk Curling Club, which has its own facility, also draws crowds in the colder months.
Many of Norfolk's homes were built as summer retreats for wealthy Hartford and New York families whose descendants continue to return to town. Among them is Michael Gates Gill, a communications writer from Manhattan who also owns a seven-bedroom, four-and-a-half-bathroom 1790 house on 1.2 acres, which was once the town's general store.
Mr. Gill, whose family has been going to Norfolk since the 18th century -- including his father, the late Brendan Gill, who was a critic at The New Yorker -- says the town won't satisfy a weekender seeking the kind of bold-faced celebrity associated with Long Island's East End.
''There is no status in Norfolk, and we respect that you are not here for fame and fortune,'' said Mr. Gill, who remembered that as a child he threw apples at Ezra Pound at Tobey Pond.
''Norfolk is hard to pronounce and even harder to reach, so it sort of selects itself out,'' Mr. Gill said, referring to the preference among both weekenders and locals to say the town's name as NOR-fork.
Yet even relative newcomers say that palpable sense of pedigree in the town doesn't translate into exclusivity.
''Norfolk does have a feudal quality about it, but it's a place where reasonable people can make friends,'' said Warren Carter, a former banker from Brooklyn Heights who first rented a house in town in 2001 and the next year bought a 1919 Dutch colonial-style home with three bedrooms on an acre. Now, like a growing number of ex-New Yorkers, he lives in Norfolk all year.
Cons
Norfolk residents like their rustication. Going there and back is challenging. All that's left of the Connecticut Western Railroad that shuttled New York summer residents to Norfolk from 1871 to 1927 is a bridge and station, which has been converted to office space. The closest Metro North stop is in Wassaic, N.Y., about 30 miles away. There is no gym, dry cleaner or pharmacy, and the nearest grocery store is six miles away in Canaan. And while Litchfield County does have top-notch restaurants, the offerings in town are limited to the Mizza Pizza shop and the Pub &amp; Restaurant, which is owned by Ms. Davis's husband, David.
The population, both full- and part-time, is overwhelmingly white and wealthy. And while many people talk about the strong sense of community, in the last year, a battle has erupted over the proposed Yale Farm Golf Club, an 18-hole course that is planned for the border of Norfolk and North Canaan. Weekenders are largely opposed to Yale Farm, saying it would ruin Norfolk's small-town character; year-rounders generally argue that the course would bring economic benefits like a lower tax burden.
The project, which other town commissions have conditionally approved, is before the Planning and Zoning Commission, which should complete public hearings within weeks. The plan is also subject to the approval of the Army Corps of Engineers and the Connecticut Environmental Protection Department.
The Real Estate Market
Prices in Norfolk have risen about 40 percent the last five years, said Tom McGowan, an agent in the Norfolk office of Elyse Harney Real Estate (860-542-5500). Still, the distance from New York and lack of transportation means homes still sell at a 15 percent discount to those in parts of Litchfield County that are closer to the city.
''You can get really good value here and find more sophistication than anywhere else in Litchfield County,'' Mr. McGowan said.
The town's history as a summer spot for the wealthy has left it stocked with rambling century-old homes with as many as 15 bedrooms, wraparound porches and names like the Alders. The largest estates could cost $5 million and stay on the market a couple of years, but homes priced $1 million and below tend to move quickly, usually selling within 90 days, Mr. McGowan said.
There is not much buildable land left because of restrictions that most lots must be at least two acres and have 200 feet of streetfront.
At the end of 2003, there were 15 properties on the market, ranging from $200,000 to $2.6 million, though most were $300,000 to $600,000. They included a 1746 six-bedroom, five-bathroom Colonial with two fireplaces, situated on an acre, for $730,000. Also, an eight-bedroom, five-bathroom, white 1905 Colonial Revival home, with a carriage house, is listed for $579,000.
LAY OF THE LAND  Where Outdoors And Music Meet
POPULATION -- 1,751 full time.  SIZE -- 46.4 square miles.  MEDIAN HOUSE PRICE -- $142,500.  RECENT SALES -- From the beginning of August through November, a relatively slow period, eight homes were sold. They included a 200-year-old, one-and-a-half story house with three bedrooms and two and a half bathrooms, for $220,000; also a 75-year-old Cape Cod-style house with three bedrooms and two bathrooms, on a half acre less than a mile from the town green, for $247,000; and a 100-year-old two-story 5,000-square-foot Victorian, with four bedrooms, three fireplaces and three and a half bathrooms on a seven-acre lot for $671,500.  DISTANCE FROM NEW YORK -- 130 miles.  TRAVEL TIME -- In light traffic, two and a half hours.  GETTING THERE -- Take Interstate 684 north to Route 22 North. At Route 44, drive west to Norfolk.  WHILE YOU'RE LOOKING -- The Blackberry River Inn (538 Greenwoods Road Route 44 West, 860-542-5100) is a newly refurbished 1763 inn listed on the National Register of Historic Places, with 20 rooms in three separate buildings and priced from $85 to $225. The Manor House (69 Maple Avenue, 860-542-5690) is an 1898 Tudor-style mansion that has 19 Tiffany windows. Some of its nine rooms have working fireplaces, private balconies or two-person whirlpool baths, and are $125 to $250. Both inns include full breakfasts, and on weekends both require a minimum two-night stay.
HAVENS  Correction:  January 23, 2004, Friday  The Weekender column on Jan. 9, about Norfolk, Conn., misstated highway directions from Route 22. Drivers must travel east on Route 44, not west.
