One day after Gov. John G. Rowland apologized to the citizens of Connecticut for lying about gifts he received, Democratic lawmakers at a caucus decided that they needed to take action, most likely in the form of beginning an impeachment process.
After the meeting, which lasted late into the night Thursday, the speaker of the House, Moira K. Lyons, said, ''From what I heard tonight, we must take action.''
She said she had two choices: beginning an inquiry, or starting an impeachment process. ''The weight was toward an impeachment process,'' she said. She said she would try to make a decision next week.
If the House does begin an impeachment process, it means that a committee would be formed to look at all the evidence regarding the governor and then decide whether to recommend beginning formal impeachment hearings.
Ms. Lyons's announcement brought Mr. Rowland significantly closer to impeachment. No governor in the history of the state has ever been impeached.
Dean Pagani, Mr. Rowland's chief of staff, said it is understandable that legislators want to take action, but ''it is unfortunate that they are choosing to move forward in this way.'' He added, ''The Legislature is not set up to conduct this kind of investigation.''
The governor has been trying hard to prevent an impeachment by setting up a series of intimate meetings to placate lawmakers on both sides of the aisle.
The meetings all begin the same way. The governor welcomes a small group of lawmakers into his official residence here, exchanges greetings, offers coffee and sits them down in his bright sunroom.
Then the pleasantries stop and the grilling begins.
As he fights to keep his job, Governor Rowland has had to issue humiliating apologies and pleas for a new start. But chances are, nothing is as hard -- or perhaps as crucial to his future -- as the half-dozen sessions he has had since Sunday with groups of about a dozen legislators.
In the sessions, each lasting about two hours, lawmakers have taken turns telling the governor what he has done to upset, offend or betray them. Legislators from both parties have asked him why he should still be trusted, how he can still lead, and why he does not just quit.
''At the end of our session, I would say he was brought close to tears,'' said Representative Stephen D. Dargan, a Democrat from West Haven. ''It was rough.''
Mr. Dargan was among 17 Democrats who met with Mr. Rowland, a Republican, on Thursday afternoon, shortly before the House caucus began at 4 p.m. The caucus lasted seven hours.
In the private sessions at Mr. Rowland's residence, the mood has been somber and serious. But still, very brutal.
And it has not been just Democrats who have been hard on the governor.
Before a two-hour meeting with Republican legislators on Thursday morning, Senator John A. Kissel of Enfield took Mr. Rowland aside in his library to tell the governor that he had lost his support.
''I felt it was very important for me to meet with Governor Rowland, man to man, face to face and eye to eye, to tell him that I believe he should step down now for the good of the people of the state of Connecticut,'' Mr. Kissel said later.
In a session Wednesday, two other Republicans told Mr. Rowland that they believed it was time for him to go. ''I told him I think he should step down,'' said Representative Robert J. Peters of Berlin. He said the governor put his head down, took a moment, and then told him he had no intention of doing that.
Representative Kevin D. Witkos of Avon also told the governor that he believed he should resign. After the session, he said, ''I think he felt exhausted, and I think he felt beaten.''
There has been little good news for Mr. Rowland lately. Even his apology, televised live across the state, seems to have done little to help his case, according to a poll conducted by the University of Connecticut.
In the poll, 60 percent of those surveyed said the speech had done nothing to change their opinion, 24 percent said it made them less supportive of the governor, and 11 percent said it made them more supportive. Conducted immediately after the speech on Wednesday night, the poll involved interviews with 491 residents and has a margin of error of plus or minus 4 percentage points.
While Mr. Rowland has forged many close bonds in both the House and the Senate, he has also made a good number of enemies. For instance, last year he sent lawmakers subpoenas forcing them to assemble to discuss the budget. Now, many of those lawmakers to whom he issued subpoenas may help decide his fate.
Mr. Rowland cannot control what federal investigators do as the pace of their investigation quickens. Federal investigators in Connecticut are consulting with the Justice Department's public integrity section in Washington, according to The Associated Press, which cited two unidentified law enforcement officials. It also said Mr. Rowland's status in the investigation had been changed from ''witness'' to ''subject.''
Mr. Pagani, the governor's chief of staff, said he was unaware of the change in status but said it would not be unexpected. Lawmakers emerging from the caucus said it was one more troubling development.
But the governor has tried in the sessions at his residence to at least dampen the anger of legislators.
''Sometimes we need to be humbled,'' said Senator Ernest E. Newton II, a Democrat from Bridgeport.
In the many meetings, Mr. Rowland has apologized dozens of times, and, when pressed to explain why he took gifts and then denied it, he has often had to fall back on simply saying, ''I messed up,'' people at several meetings said.
But the extraordinary and emotionally draining sessions with lawmakers may have come too late. Already, five Republicans have called for Mr. Rowland to resign, and legislative aides said more defections were likely on Friday.
The Democrats at the caucus on Thursday night made it clear that the governor's troubles would dominate the agenda for the foreseeable future. The likely situation, according to a top legislative aide, is that assuming Ms. Lyons moves forward with an impeachment inquiry, she would inform Mr. Rowland before announcing the decision.
The hope is, according to the aide, that Mr. Rowland looks at his options at that point and decides to resign.
