''You will like my painting,'' wrote Victor Brauner, ''because its unknown world is peopled with somnambulists, incubi, succubi, lycanthropes, éphialtes, phantoms, specters, sorcerers, seers, mediums and a whole fantastic population.''
This pitch to viewers was made by Brauner, a Romanian-born artist, in an appreciation he wrote of his own work (reprinted in Mary Ann Caws's 2001 book, ''Surrealist Painters and Poets: An Anthology''). He also mentioned as lures for the viewer the lyricism, symbolism, seductiveness, passion, madness, obsessiveness, prophecy, eroticism, primitivism and the fact that the art was created with ''immense love.''
On seeing ''Victor Brauner (1903-1966),'' mounted by the Ubu Gallery to honor the 100th anniversary of his birth, you have to agree that some, if not all, of the above is true. His zany but deeply felt creations were heavily influenced by world religions and mythologies, from Oceanic to Jewish; other artists like Picasso, Klee and Dalí; and, of course, a large dose of personal idiosyncrasy.
Brauner was a fine draftsman and well versed in the sophisticated art of his day; he was early on a member of the Romanian avant-garde and then, beginning in the 1930's, the Surrealist circle in Paris led by André Breton. But there is also more than a touch of the Outsider in his work.
His strange, metamorphic humanoids, with their grotesquely distorted bodies made of misplaced, mismatched parts and their sometimes multiple heads (more than occasionally the heads of beasts), often seem like the work of a visionary doodler, dictated by his dreams. One of the earliest paintings in the show, ''Composition'' (1934), has as its centerpiece an extremely robotic-looking male figure in a stiff, frontal pose; some of his gutty insides are visible, his genitals are dangling, and his face is enclosed in a sort of cage, with a long mustache escaping from it.
Echoing the pose of the figure, which stands on a square black ground, are 11 tiny men on smaller squares, done in a variety of styles and accouterments. Several wear what look like fencing outfits; one is almost anatomically human, with a wrestler's physique; still another is a melting anthropoid ogre encased in a rock or a block of ice. Dedicated to the Surrealist poet René Char, the painting is like a primer showing the range of Brauner's stylistic reach but suggesting also the compulsiveness of his vision.
Among Brauner's obsessions were eyes, reflected here in his multiple placements of large orbs and other eyelike images not only in their proper facial positions but also in other areas. In a small figural drawing, ''The Great Sleep'' (1948), a complexly rendered creature with a snake encircling its profiled head, one hand holding a dagger pointed down, sits backward atop a small, lizardlike beast.
In its klutzy battle-readiness, the figure vaguely suggests Sancho Panza, Don Quixote's fearless but feckless companion (as do a number of Brauner's works) and could be a stand-in for the artist.
Eyes are prominent not only in the creature's double face -- elongated from human to that of a bird -- but also in a pair of double heads, set sideways in the middle of his body. The lizardlike beast also has an eye, albeit smaller, and a black tongue that flicks out to end in a curious bell shape.
The odd thing is that for many years Brauner had a fixation on mutilated eyes, which revealed itself early in a 1931 self-portrait showing him with his eye put out. The portrait and many other traumatic eye images predate a singular accident. Trying to break up a fight between the Spanish-born Surrealist Oscar Dominguez and another painter in Dominguez's studio, Brauner was hit by a glass thrown by Dominguez. It literally ripped out his left eye.
In a 1939 account of the incident for the Swiss art magazine Minotaure, Pierre Mabille, a physician and frequenter of Surrealist circles, took note of Brauner's long interest in eyes and their destruction. He wondered if the accident was explainable by ''a persistent premonition, or was the painter a victim of a sort of sympathetic magic?'' He asked, ''Could the mutilated shapes have put magical forces to work, created a psychic atmosphere, the unavoidable result being the accident?''
In Brauner's case the questions do not seem at all off the wall.
But with all its presumed psychic baggage and mystical abracadabra, Brauner's work is full of graphic wit and playful mischief. In ''Mirror of the Uncreated'' (1945), an angular nude woman bends over a table, agonizingly regarding herself in a mirror. From the middle of her long neck, a horizontal in the painting, springs the much more vital head of another woman with huge, staring eyes. Floating above her is the corpselike head and torso of an inert male, seemingly supported by two candles flaming under him.
In ''Seven Senses'' (1948), two huge-eyed, distorted figures, cavorting in air, double over to face each other's posteriors: a blue-headed woman clutching a snake, a green- headed man holding his fist aloft. And in ''Monster'' (1954), an assemblage of geometric planes and human parts with a fishlike appendage takes on the aspect of a box kite or an early flying crate.
Brauner's work, like that of Klee and Saul Steinberg, is full of puzzles, riddles, puns and mysterious allusions, not unlike, of course, the Surrealism of which it was a part. But the graphic skills he used to carry out his oddball vision keep it very much alive.
''Victor Brauner (1903-1966)'' remains at the Ubu Gallery, 416 East 59th Street, Manhattan, (212) 753-4444, through Jan. 24.
ART REVIEW
