Which tells us more about history: drawing or photography? That is one question brought to mind by ''Depression-Era Prints and Photographs From the W.P.A. and F.S.A.,'' an exhibition at the New York Public Library. The two-part show was organized by Margaret Glover, curator of the library's print collection, and Devon Cummings, curator of its photography collection, who both drew on the library's own extensive archives of works produced under the New Deal programs of President Franklin D. Roosevelt.
The differences between the programs that supported printmakers and the ones that employed photographers in the 1930's and early 40's are worth noting. While printmakers working for the Works Progress Administration's graphic arts division were free to pursue whatever aesthetic or themes they wanted, photographers had more specific assignments.
Roy E. Stryker, who directed photography projects for the Farm Security Administration and other agencies, hired photographers not to make art but to document and publicize the need for rural assistance programs. Stryker's photographers, including Walker Evans, Dorothea Lange, John Collier and others, produced some of the most memorable works in the history of American photography. But their initial charge was essentially to create New Deal propaganda.
It may seem paradoxical, then, that part of what makes the exhibition's 73 photographs so compelling is how enigmatic they are. Among pictures taken in the Northeast by Lange, Collier, Jack Delano, Arthur Rothstein, Russell Lee and others are no images of calamity: no lynchings, riots or crime scenes and few portrayals of obvious economic privation or social oppression.
Mostly what you have are glimpses of ordinary and apparently not unbearable life: farms and farmers; families at home or out strolling; high school students chatting on a downtown sidewalk in Amsterdam, N.Y.; migrant workers and factory workers, none seeming obviously dehumanized by their jobs; commuters on trains and at Grand Central Terminal; new flat-roofed cinder-block homes in a New Jersey housing development; and worker housing in older company towns. If you had only these photographs and no wall text or labels to go by, you might not realize that they were images of a nation in crisis.
Many of the photographs are accompanied by labels with information copied from notes written on the backs of the pictures. It adds meaning to know that this farmer has suffered a catastrophic flood, or that that powerfully handsome man is ''Mr. Miller -- minister and only Negro farmer in the submarginal area of Rumsey Hill, N.Y.,'' or that the young woman on a sofa reading the newspaper to her young daughter is about to be relocated.
Still, whatever additional information may be provided, the photographs have in general a curiously distant, meditative mood. They are magnetically absorbing to look at, but more for the curiosity and nostalgia they make you feel than for any social urgency. The greatest historical resonance is in the appearance of things: how people once dressed, combed their hair and carried themselves; what cars, stores and neighborhoods looked like. The images are at once utterly specific and hauntingly otherworldly.
Compared with the photographs, the W.P.A. prints express social interests far more explicitly, variously and heavy-handedly. Hanging in alphabetical order (by artist name), works by 56 of the 80 printmakers supported by the W.P.A. in New York City abound in images of hard labor, urban ennui and rural desolation. But there are also people at leisure: commuters playing bridge on the train; bohemian vacationers relaxing on a Catskills bungalow's front porch; jazz musicians jamming in a claustrophobic bar; stagehands resting behind the scenes of a production of ''Porgy and Bess.''
Rendered by all sorts of methods -- often technically accomplished -- and in many different styles, including Social Realism, Expressionism, Cubism and Surrealism, the prints collectively produce a panoramic vision of a society struggling with psychological as well as economic depression but still bristling with nervous energy.
One of the most peculiarly suggestive prints is a lithograph by Phil Bibel that translates the typical Social Realist subject of swimmers leaping from riverside docks into a semi-abstract composition of Cubist geometry and Surrealistic biomorphism.
It's not a great work of art, but the collision between the old swimming hole and the newfangled art forms speaks volumes about the complexities and contradictions of urban modernity.
Other remarkable prints include Louis Lozowick's elegantly formal rooftop view of workers below lugging an enormous I-beam; M. Lois Murphy's wood engraving of a woman at a lunch counter, rendered with a crystalline geometry and radiant white hatch marks that make her look like a futuristic robot; and Ann Nooney's ''Closing Time,'' a darkly colored, Hoppersque lithograph of a store's proprietor pausing under the light above his back door.
Images like these don't capture the momentary actuality of things the way photographs do, but they tell much about what people were feeling: determination, grief, euphoria, agitation, longing. Those feelings, too, are part of history.
''Depression-Era Prints and Photographs From the W.P.A. and F.S.A.'' is at the New York Public Library, Fifth Avenue and 42nd Street, (212) 869-8089, through Jan. 17.
ART REVIEW
