Few could accuse Newark politicians of faintheartedness this week after the sale of the New Jersey Nets to a developer who plans to move them to Brooklyn.
City officials are trudging on with their bid for a Newark arena minus the Nets. The basketball team, with its playground heroes, would have been the marquee anchor for a two-team arena that Newark officials still envision as the crown jewel of the city's revitalization. Newark officials insisted on Friday that they could still make a scaled-down version of their proposed arena economically viable with just one team, the decidedly un-urban New Jersey Devils of the National Hockey League, whose players are more likely to be heroes to those skating around suburban ice rinks.
But in order for any such arena to be remotely workable, said Richard Monteilh, Newark's business administrator, it would have to attract a host of other events through the year such as Bruce Springsteen concerts, the Ice Capades, the circus and all manner of trade shows.
And in order to do that, he said, the Continental Arena at the Meadowlands, 12 miles away, where the Nets and Devils currently play and which would compete for such events, would have to close. This would require the approval of Gov. James E. McGreevey and George Zoffinger, the president of the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority.
''The governor has said from the beginning that he will support wherever in New Jersey the state's sports teams want to go,'' said Mr. Monteilh, noting that Devils management and one of the team's principal stockholders, Raymond Chambers, wanted to move to Newark. This week, Lou Lamoriello, the team's president and general manager, spoke in favor of a new arena in Newark.
Mr. Monteilh added, ''Well, we have a team in the Devils, and Continental Arena doesn't have a sports team.''
As of this week, Mr. Zoffinger had no plans for closing Continental Arena and was talking about repositioning it in the marketplace to compete for other, non-sports events.
''Whether the Meadowlands arena closes or not is a decision that the governor and George Zoffinger have to make,'' said Essex County Executive Joseph DiVincenzo. He added, ''I see a Newark arena as a New Jersey arena and it should be here in Newark because it is just more convenient with the public transportation and the roads widening.''
Years ago, when momentum seemed to be with the idea of a Newark arena for the Nets and the Devils, it was envisioned that the Meadowlands arena, which both teams considered lacking in many of the money-making amenities of newer arenas, would be torn down. It was this prospect that drove Governor McGreevey to promise, and eventually deliver, a new economic engine for the Bergen County sports complex in the form of Meadowlands Xanadu, a $1.4 billion family entertainment, sports, retail and office complex unveiled last month along with a long-promised rail spur to the Meadowlands.
The momentum has now shifted in favor of the Xanadu project, with Mr. Zoffinger insisting that such a development would also help make a refurbished Continental Arena an attractive site next door.
Rick Thigpen, a former executive director of the state's Democratic Party who is a lobbyist and political consultant, said that from the beginning, white and black New Jersey residents were of very different minds about a Newark arena, according to polls.
''White New Jerseyans did not want to come to Newark for sports events, and they didn't want to spend public money to help keep teams in the state,'' said Mr. Thigpen. ''Because of the public opinion polls and the racially distinct viewpoints, it has had a significant political impact on the governor's behavior. And it has tied the state's hands on putting public money into the effort.''
The same dynamic could affect any decision about closing Continental Arena, said Mr. Thigpen, noting that it sat there ''like a mountain.''
Newark Councilwoman Gayle Chaneyfield-Jenkins added that from the beginning, ''the pink elephant standing in the middle of the room that no one wants to acknowledge in all of it is race.'' But she added that the governor should be able to argue that there is no need to treat Newark ''like some welfare case or some child that needs taking care of'' because the city has its own resources to bring to the table.
Those resources are working in Newark Mayor Sharpe James's favor. They amount to nearly $200 million in cash, which the city has on hand to aid any arena project. The money is an upfront payment growing out of a recent renegotiation of the city lease with the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey for Newark Liberty International Airport. Consequently no state money is likely to be needed to aid in the construction of the arena.
But at the same time, an arena with only a hockey team might not look as compelling to Newark residents who argue that the money could be better spent on city neighborhoods, schools and property tax relief. Many members of the City Council, which can reject any arena plan, may see the mayor's case for an arena as weakened by recent events.
''I don't think people would see this as his failure politically,'' said Mr. Thigpen. ''But it is a loss of an opportunity for the mayor to have a big success.''
