EARLIER this week President Bush used his State of the Union address to shed light on the realm of athletics' dirty little scandal: the use of performance-enhancing drugs.
Saying that athletes play an important role in society, the president acknowledged that some of them ''are not setting much of an example.''
''The use of performance-enhancing drugs like steroids in baseball, football and other sports is dangerous, and it sends the wrong message -- that there are shortcuts to accomplishment, and that performance is more important than character,'' the president said.
He called on ''team owners, union representatives, coaches and players to take the lead, to send the right signal, to get tough, and to get rid of steroids now.''
The president's message resonated in New York, where USA Track and Field is about to kick off its indoor season and the march to Athens for the 2004 Olympic Games.
This is a great time of year for track and field, and today is a great day for the sport. Track and field, however, is trying to come out from under a cloud created by a series of scandals involving its top performers.
Craig Masback, the chief executive of USA Track and Field, introduced 13 of the sport's brightest young stars at a news conference Wednesday at Madison Square Garden.
On Thursday at the Armory Track and Field Center in Washington Heights, track and field legends attended a preview of the National Track and Field Hall of Fame, and today the Hall will open after spending years, mostly in storage, in Indianapolis. For those of us who love track, this will be remembered as the day a troubled but noble sport found a fitting home.
President Bush's unexpected but welcome mention of steroids comes at a time when sports in general, and track and field most notably, have been devastated by disclosures of positive drug tests by some of the highest-profile athletes. The disclosure of the creation of a synthetic drug, THG, has shed new light on an unrelenting war between track and field, a sport with limited resources, and drug gurus with unlimited resourcefulness.
''The president of the United States now says this is an important issue,'' Masback said in an interview. ''So what we've been saying for quite some time -- which is: this is not a track issue, this is an American issue -- has now been raised to the highest possible level of discussion.
''America has a problem where it has sent cues, subtle and otherwise, to people in every endeavor, whether it be Wall Street or sports, that cheating might be something that you consider. America's got to deal with that problem.''
Many fans of track and field and many of my colleagues who regularly cover the sport wring their hands over what appears to be an epidemic of doping. Some say they can't watch athletic competition with a straight face.
I've never looked at track and field that way. I don't look at track meets and wonder who is on steroids and who is not. I look at who finishes where; I look at effort. While I certainly don't approve of performance-enhancing drugs, I won't allow an athlete's recklessness -- if someone wants to destroy his body -- to destroy the greater values of competition.
There is an element of skulduggery in every profession: the politician who goes to any extent to win a race; the business executive who goes to any extent to turn a personal profit; the athlete who goes to any extent to win a gold medal. I'm not sure we expect much in the way of ethics out of highly commercialized sports like football, basketball, baseball, hockey, boxing.
There has been cheating in sports since antiquity. Heavy fines were imposed for cheating. Statues of Zeus, paid for by fines, were set up along a wall leading to the entrance of the Olympic Stadium. According to the Greek geographer and chronicler Pausanias, there were 16 of these statues, 6 of which were erected from fines levied on Athens when Kallipos, an Athenian, bribed his opponents in the pentathlon.
There is always someone who comes up with a shortcut to circumvent a safeguard that was designed to counteract an earlier shortcut.
Masback has a theory.
''What I say about track and field is that 90 percent have never even thought about cheating,'' he said. ''I think 10 percent have thought about it, but 7 of that 10 percent have been scared off by what we already do with drug testing; 2 to 3 percent are thinking about, 'Can I game the system somehow?'
''To me that's the problem: it's 2 to 3 percent.''
Track and field, because of its ancient roots, should be more painstakingly scrutinized than the highly commercialized sports.
Masback agrees. ''If track and field wants to say it is at the pinnacle of Olympic sports, then we should be held to the highest standard,'' he said. ''I would say we have been. We've paid a terrible price because we started drug testing when no one else was.''
Despite the blemishes, there is still a difference between the high-profile team sports and track and field. The difference is an Olympic ideal. Increasingly in sports, that's all we have to cling to.
Sports of The Times
