Efforts by the Fire Department to root out drinking on the job has resulted in the temporary reassignment of two highly regarded captains and two lieutenants and in departmental drug charges against two firefighters at a storied East Harlem firehouse where beer and liquor were found in a locker last weekend.
The actions came after recent violence at a Staten Island engine company, where alcohol may have been involved, and a previously undisclosed case in September in which a lieutenant and two firefighters from another firehouse were caught drinking in a Manhattan bar, in uniform and on duty, while their fire truck was parked outside, department officials said.
Those events have pushed the Fire Department to crack down harder on the use or presence of alcohol in firehouses, a senior department official said. The inspection in East Harlem was one of two planned for Sunday night, but the second was not carried out, the official said.
Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta declined to make a direct link to the Staten Island case, saying the inspection was one of a series of spot checks that he reinstituted a year ago. He did say, however, that he was mindful of the possibility that alcohol had played a role in the Staten Island altercation.
''This is really just another program to ensure that we make firefighting as safe as possible,'' the commissioner said in a telephone interview. ''The job is dangerous enough as it is.''
In the East Harlem case, investigators from the department's Bureau of Investigations and Trials showed up Sunday night at Engine Company 53-Ladder Company 43 on Third Avenue between 101st and 102nd Streets in Manhattan. In searching the firehouse, the investigators snapped the lock on a locker and found at least one case of beer and several bottles of hard liquor inside, Fire Department officials said.
The investigators then ordered drug tests for the firefighters present, and two tested positive, officials said.
Mr. Scoppetta said the two would be suspended and face departmental charges of using a controlled substance, which he declined to identify. He said it was the investigators' decision to order firefighters to undergo tests for alcohol and drugs after finding the bottles.
While the investigation continues, he said, the two captains and the two lieutenants were moved out of the firehouse.
''How long they'll be reassigned is a matter we will revisit,'' the commissioner said. ''But with respect to the use of alcohol, it's an enormously important matter to keep it out of the firehouse, to eradicate it.''
Officials said they had not determined who was responsible for the alcohol's presence. The senior department official said it did not appear that the reassigned officers had known about the alcohol. According to a member of the firehouse, the official said, it was left over from an off-premises holiday party.
''It's not like there's a party going on here, where everybody's hammered,'' the official said.
Nevertheless, those ultimately responsible for the house - the captains and the two lieutenants, who were the officers in charge at the time of the inspection - ought to be held accountable, the official said. The swiftness of the temporary reassignments may also have been an attempt to send a message that drinking in the firehouse will not be tolerated.
The reassigned captains, Kerry Hollywood, 55, of Engine 53, and Alexander Hagan, 54, of Ladder 43, both have at least 30 years of service and are considered highly experienced and respected leaders who could have retired after Sept. 11 with large retirement packages, like many of their colleagues did, but chose to stay on. They have been sent to other divisions in the city to fill in as needed, the department said.
The lieutenants were identified as Joseph Patriciello, 43, who has 14 years in the department, and Glenn Rohan, 46, a 17-year veteran, who helped lead a group of trapped firefighters to safety from a stairwell in the World Trade Center's north tower during the terrorist attack.
Commissioner Scoppetta identified the firefighters facing suspension and charges as Brian McParland, who has been a fireman for two years, and John Condon, an 11-year veteran. A spokesman for the Uniformed Firefighters Association, Tom Butler, said that the drug test was unjustified because no drinking had been going on - as the department acknowledged - and that it was carried out by nonmedical personnel.
''We question the validity of the results,'' he said.
Since Mr. Scoppetta established a zero-tolerance policy in April 2002, 12 firefighters have been terminated after testing positive for illegal drugs, he said.
The firefighters at Engine 53-Ladder 43 call themselves ''El Barrio's Bravest.'' The firehouse is considered a coveted assignment because of the historically heavy volume of fires in the area, although the number has declined there and throughout the city. The house was established in 1974 when the two companies were consolidated. Engine 53's origin dates to 1885 and Ladder 43's to 1913.
Officials said Mr. Scoppetta signaled the crackdown on drinking by issuing a special order to all firehouses laying out the powers of department investigators and sternly reminding firefighters that they are required to cooperate during inspections.
The order is dated Jan. 16 and warns that department investigators are acting with the full authority of his office. When they or investigators from the city Department of Investigation visit, the order says, ''no announcement shall be made by housewatch over the intercom.'' It reinforces that investigators should have total access to the firehouse and its members.
In the interview, the commissioner said at least three other random inspections in the last year had turned up no alcohol.
In the Staten Island case, a firefighter was accused of smashing another in the face with a chair on New Year's Eve after an exchange of words at a firehouse in Tottenville. The injured firefighter, Robert Walsh, was found to have a trace amount of alcohol in his blood, although officials said there was no evidence of alcohol at the firehouse when investigators arrived hours after the altercation.
The incident last year happened on Sept. 21. A chief noticed Engine 21, based at East 40th Street and Third Avenue, outside a tavern a few blocks away and went inside to investigate, the department said. Inside he found a lieutenant and two firefighters drinking. They were suspended without pay for 30 days, the maximum, and departmental charges are pending.
It was only in the late 1960's that the Fire Department banned alcohol from firehouse premises and firefighters from drinking on duty, motivated partly by the discovery that a firefighter who fell off a truck and died in 1969 had alcohol in his blood. Veterans have said that drinking in some firehouses was common in previous decades until firefighters began moving to the suburbs and faced drives home.
