Diplomacy may work best when nobody says anything. The Americans and the French, at any rate, are getting along admirably in the midst of a three-week, seven-program Festival of France here at the Kennedy Center. The National Symphony under Leonard Slatkin is doing the playing; the French are providing the music. Aside from Ravel's ''L'Enfant et les Sortilèges'' last week and Renée Fleming singing his ''Shéhérazade'' next weekend, words are few.
Acting as negotiator is the splendid young French pianist Pierre-Laurent Aimard, increasingly busy in this country. One groped for a theme in Thursday's grab bag of Frenchness: from Mouret's famous Baroque ''Fanfare'' (high trumpets, ''Masterpiece Theater'') to the dessertlike pleasures of Jean-Jacques Di Tucci's recent ''Antarès.''
Satie's ''Parade'' perhaps spoke most about French temperament. In World War I, barricades are up against the Romantic Hun, favoring machinelike repetition and city sounds over warming fat.
''Parade'' also functioned as a wry rebuke to the two Saint-Saëns potboilers later in the evening, the ''Danse Macabre,'' and the ''Bacchanale'' from ''Samson et Dalila.'' Perhaps the greatest prodigy since Mozart, Saint-Saëns was too good for his own good; music flowed swiftly and easily from him, so, too, these pieces, which slid enjoyably by.
''Antarès'' is the work of an orchestral voluptuary, a pursuer of the delicious sound and avoider of the harsh and aggressive. Even the moments of anguish have a luxury about them. Much in contrast was Steven Stucky's ''Jeu de Timbres,'' one of the orchestra's commissioned encores. Here was high-pitched good cheer, rhythmic surprise and moments of cinematic explosiveness.
Debussy thought some of his early pieces unworthy, among them the Fantasy. Do we honor him by exhuming music he took with him to the grave? Not even Mr. Aimard could make the Fantasy anything more than amiable, especially next to the Études' magnificent severity.
The orchestra, with a busy three weeks, sounded more functional than inspired. The sharpest performance was ''Antarès.'' Being new, it may have gotten more rehearsal.
MUSIC REVIEW
