At various points this season, Byron Scott has been angry, exasperated and hurt.
For one night, he sounded flat-out confused.
After an 85-64 loss to the Miami Heat on Friday night, Scott, the Nets' coach, lingered in the hallway of American Airlines Arena and pondered some of the key questions that will determine his future.
Asked where his team was headed, Scott said: ''I don't know. I don't know what we're thinking right now.''
Asked whether he was still getting through to his players, he replied: ''I don't know. That's a question I can't answer. Only the individuals in that room can answer that question.''
Not since the 47-point loss at Memphis on Dec. 13, which was followed by Jason Kidd's outburst at the coaching staff, has Scott seemed so vulnerable and the Nets so lost. In the postgame meeting Friday night, Scott asked his team: ''What are we waiting for? What are we waiting for, to start playing the way we're capable of playing?''
Apparently, the first half of the season was not long enough. The Nets have lost five games in a row for the first time since Kidd arrived in 2001, and they sit at 21-20 as they start the second half of the season.
Several players, including Kidd, said Scott was still getting through to the team. But they bristled at his suggestion that they did not expend satisfactory effort.
''Every time we take the floor we're out there to fight,'' Kidd said. ''You'll have some tough times, but they will help build character.''
Richard Jefferson said: ''We go out there knowing what we need to do. But I don't think J-Kidd is trying to miss shots, I don't think anyone is trying to miss shots.''
Yet they missed plenty. The Nets made only 21 field goals, the fewest in franchise history. Their starters were 16 of 57 and the starting backcourt, Kidd and Kerry Kittles, was 7 of 31.
Instead of moving the ball around for the best possible shot, the Nets kept taking jumpers, and only three players recorded an assist. When the Nets did pass, they often launched the ball out of bounds in transition, racking up 17 turnovers.
Miami (17-26) took advantage, with Eddie Jones scoring 18 points and Lamar Odom grabbing 18 rebounds.
''That was bad from start to finish,'' Scott said. ''We just didn't compete. I don't think any of us thought this is where we'd be at the halfway point. We had bigger plans. We are at a crossroads right now and we have to figure out if we want to be a .500 team or one of the elite teams in this league.''
Scott was encouraged before the game because the Nets seemed loose and laid back in the locker room. He had canceled practice Thursday, but several players did extra work after Friday's shoot-around, prompting Scott to say they would ''play with reckless abandon'' and ''show we have a much better team.''
Rod Thorn, the team president, sat in the stands and shook his head as he watched the Nets unravel. Scott said he could completely understand why Thorn would look so utterly displeased.
Also in attendance was Lewis Katz, the Nets' chairman, who is part of the ownership group that sold the franchise to Bruce C. Ratner. Katz, who is also involved with Ratner's group, did not comment on the sale.
A crowd of 16,028 flocked to the arena Friday, not necessarily to watch the Heat, which had lost six out of seven games and was without the injured rookie Dwyane Wade. Many of the fans bought tickets to see Alonzo Mourning, the former Heat center who started this season with the Nets, but is now recuperating from a kidney transplant.
Mourning must have covered his eyes. He spent seven years with the Heat before leaving Miami last summer because he thought the Nets could win a championship.
Right now, that prospect appears almost laughable.
REBOUNDS
The Nets expect HUBERT DAVIS to sign a 10-day contract by Monday. Davis, 33, played only three games this season before getting waived by Detroit, but he has the second-best career 3-point shooting percentage in the N.B.A. . . . MIKE FRATELLO, the Miami Heat announcer who was a candidate for the Knicks' coaching job that went to LENNY WILKENS, will return to Madison Square Garden to broadcast the Heat-Knicks game Saturday night. ''It will be awkward,'' Fratello said. ''That's a good choice of words.'' . . . EDDIE GRIFFIN has been so impressive in individual workouts that BYRON SCOTT said Griffin could play his first game with the Nets on Tuesday in his hometown, Philadelphia. ''I think I'm ready,'' Griffin said. ''I'm just waiting for the O.K.'' . . . In a news conference in Miami, the N.B.A. deputy commissioner, RUSS GRANIK, said the league ''has no predisposition against'' the Nets' moving to Brooklyn. Asked about the possibility of dwindling crowds at Continental Arena, Granik said: ''It's an issue of some concern. We'll have to see what the plan is.''
PRO BASKETBALL
