The announcement this week that AT&amp;T Wireless, the nation's third-largest cellular company, is for sale adds uncertainty to growth projections for wireless equipment suppliers at an especially sensitive moment for investors, according to industry analysts.
Increased demand for wireless networking equipment helped companies like Lucent Technologies, Motorola, Nortel Networks and Nokia achieve solid earnings and revenue growth for the last quarter of 2003 and sent stock prices soaring.
But some fund managers are worrying that the stocks have climbed so far, so quickly that they will tumble at the slightest disappointment. Indeed, share prices for the major companies in the sector, except Nokia, which reported earnings on Thursday, have already retreated from 52-week highs achieved in recent days.
The many unknowns contributing to the uncertainty include who will buy AT&amp;T Wireless, which is based in Redmond, Wash., and when the deal could be completed. Some analysts are not yet convinced that any deal will be struck. The major equipment companies declined to comment on the potential impact of a deal, or did not return calls seeking comment.
The current favorite among potential buyers is Cingular Wireless, which operates wireless networks built using the same transmission standards as AT&amp;T Wireless. Nextel Communications, which delivers cellular service using a different digital wireless technology developed by Motorola, has also expressed interest. Other potential suitors for AT&amp;T Wireless include NTT DoCoMo, the Japanese company that already owns 17 percent of AT&amp;T Wireless, and the Vodafone Group, a British company that owns 45 percent of Verizon Wireless. Even AT&amp;T, the long distance giant that spun off AT&amp;T Wireless in 2001, has been reported to be taking another look.
A sale of AT&amp;T Wireless, analysts said, would at the very least suspend investment of hundreds of millions of dollars. The parties will need many months to review their assets thoroughly and determine where to eliminate duplication, where to fill in holes in coverage and where to invest in expansion. But the resulting company could eventually end up investing more aggressively to upgrade its networks than either of its predecessors would have been able to on their own. That in turn could force rivals to step up their spending.
''It's not a wipeout or a home run for anyone,'' said Thomas Lauria, founder of Avtera Management, a market research firm in Guttenberg, N.J., that follows the equipment sector.
Still, some analysts say it is easy to envision trouble if the deal simply brings a competitor with deeper pockets than AT&amp;T Wireless into the already crowded American cellular market instead of reducing the number of players. The arrival of a phone giant like NTT DoCoMo on the scene could ignite a price war that would eventually force other carriers to cut back on capital spending.
''That's the worst scenario,'' said Susan Kalla, who follows the industry for Friedman, Billings, Ramsey &amp; Company in New York. Ms. Kalla recently told clients that spending on wireless equipment by the six major cellular carriers in the United States could grow 5 percent this year, to $16 billion, after declining 25 percent last year.
That spending includes labor and other costs associated with deploying the equipment. Sales of the equipment itself should be just over $9.5 billion this year, according to IDC, a market research firm in Framingham, Mass. The majority of the investment will go toward extending the coverage and reliability of older networks, according to Shiv K. Bakhshi, an analyst with IDC.
The companies with the most at risk if AT&amp;T Wireless is sold appear to be Ericsson of Sweden, traditionally AT&amp;T Wireless's largest equipment supplier, and Nokia of Finland, which has become a major supplier of gear for the new network AT&amp;T Wireless has been building to enhance its ability to offer wireless data services. Siemens of Germany and Nortel are also major AT&amp;T Wireless suppliers.
But because Ericsson, Nokia and Nortel are also suppliers to Cingular, analysts speculate that they might actually benefit from a merger in the long run. Their position as preferred suppliers to the combined company could be particularly important as the industry matures.
''Consolidation has been in Ericsson's game plan for a long time,'' said Leif-Olof Wallin, an analyst for the Meta Group, based in Gothenburg, Sweden. Mr. Wallin said that there were roughly 1,000 cellular companies in the world, and that Ericsson and other large equipment companies assume many of them will disappear.
If an AT&amp;T Wireless sale were followed by other mergers that reduced the North American market to two or three major cellular carriers, they would in theory be in a strong position to press the equipment companies to cut prices.
But some analysts say that even before consolidation happens, Huawei Technologies, a large equipment maker based in China, and other low-cost Asian manufacturers trying to break into the American market will give the carriers plenty of leverage in price negotiations with equipment suppliers. The immediate threat appears to be in routers and other gear for wired networks, but the Asian companies are expected to focus more on wireless equipment as they grow.
''All of Lucent's projections assume that the Asians won't get anywhere in the American market,'' said David Burstein, publisher of DSL Prime, an industry newsletter, recalling a recent Lucent presentation he covered. ''That's not a good assumption.''
While carriers may be able to exert pressure on suppliers, they are also reluctant to rely entirely on a single supplier and cannot easily sever established relationships, because networking equipment is complicated to manage and a shift can be costly. Once they are established as preferred suppliers, the big equipment makers that lose out in consolidation are more likely to get fewer orders from the surviving customers than to be completely shut out of new business, according to industry analysts.
But each major equipment company works with a galaxy of software vendors and manufacturers of network components, and some of those companies could be severely squeezed by a consolidation.
''Each equipment company has its list of preferred partners for different situations,'' said Daniel Briere, chief executive of TeleChoice, a telecommunications consulting firm. ''When you have consolidation, a lot of these players fall out. They are more easily jettisoned.''
Analysts caution that even if AT&amp;T Wireless is sold and there is further consolidation in the North American cellphone market, the billions of dollars in equipment contracts that could be affected represent just one piece of a complex landscape for investors to evaluate.
None of the major equipment sellers are entirely reliant on wireless networking equipment. For most, it is a relatively small part of their overall business. And the North American wireless equipment market represented just 28 percent of the worldwide market last year, according to IDC. While it has begun to grow strongly as mobile carriers upgrade their networks to handle data, photo transmission and other uses, companies losing ground in North America may still prosper if they are gaining market share in China and Europe.
