President Bush told the nation's mayors on Friday that he would send them more money to protect their cities from potential terrorist attacks. But his remarks were greeted with skepticism from some officials who said that Mr. Bush had not followed through on earlier pledges.
Speaking here at the winter meeting of the U. S. Conference of Mayors, the president restated a promise made on Thursday in New Mexico to increase next year's budget for domestic defense by 10 percent.
''We will continue to work with you on homeland security,'' Mr. Bush told the heavily Democratic group of some 600 mayors. ''My '05 budget has got $30 billion in there for homeland security. That's three times the amount spent prior to Sept. 11.''
The president acknowledged that domestic security money for the cities had often been held up in governors' offices, and he promised to help.
''We'll work with the mayors to make sure it gets unstuck,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I understand sometimes it gets stuck not in Washington, it gets stuck at the state level.''
When the crowd agreed, Mr. Bush interjected, to laughter, ''Hold on, I'm an ex-governor.'' But then he concluded, ''Listen, I'm not interested in pointing fingers, I'm interested in making the system work better.''
Mayors in the crowd said they would adopt a wait-and-see attitude.
''I hope he can pull it off,'' said John N. Howe, the mayor of Sunnyvale, Calif., a nonpartisan seat in a heavily Democratic area.
Mr. Howe added: ''They've given us about 10 percent of the homeland security funds they promised. Where's the other 90 percent? It's just not coming down. It's promises, promises.''
When the Homeland Security Department was created in 2002, the Bush administration chose to distribute billions to try to keep the nation safe through state and county governments, which have in many cases been slow to disburse it to cities.
One reason is bureaucratic delays, but another is politics, particularly when the money needs to flow from a Republican- or Democratic-controlled statehouse to a city represented by a mayor from the opposing party.
Some mayors said that they appreciated Mr. Bush's remarks, but doubted that he could do much to move the machinery of government.
''I think he does recognize the problem,'' said William A. Johnson Jr., a Democrat who is mayor of Rochester. ''But saying it and getting it done are two different things.''
Others were more sympathetic.
''We just got a couple of hundred thousand dollars a few weeks ago for the Fire Department,'' said Bob Young, a Republican who is mayor of Augusta, Ga. ''Some of these mayors are saying they have problems, but those are problems between the states and the cities.''
In his speech, Mr. Bush made a vigorous appeal for Congress to renew the sweeping antiterrorism legislation passed as a result of the Sept. 11 attacks. The law is due to expire next year.
The appeal mirrored remarks Mr. Bush made in his State of the Union address on Tuesday. It also reflected what White House political advisers said would be a central theme of his re-election campaign: national security.
''I wish I could report to you that the war on terror is over with and America is safe and secure,'' Mr. Bush said. ''But I cannot. I can't tell you that in good conscience because I don't believe in it. The truth is that there's an enemy that still lurks out there.''
Despite the grim subject matter and the mixed reception from the mayors, Mr. Bush was in a markedly relaxed mood.
He delivered his remarks almost extemporaneously and spent the first minutes in a lengthy warm-up.
''It's not easy to be a mayor,'' Mr. Bush said. ''Probably a lot harder than being president. After all, I don't have to fill potholes, or empty the trash.''
