The single-digit temperatures did not faze Michael Alvarez, a 20-year-old with spiky dark hair from Los Angeles Valley College. He danced around excitedly during a tour of New York University last week, tucking his gloveless hands in his pockets. His mind was not on the weather, but on the plays he hoped to see and the directors he hoped to meet during a semester at the university.
''I've always wanted to come to New York,'' he said. ''I want to be the youngest director ever to win a Tony Award. That gives me eight or nine years, and New York is the right place to be. I'm like a kid in a candy store.''
Mr. Alvarez is one of 31 college students from around the country attending a new N.Y.U. program called Spring in New York. The university's immediate goal in creating the program was economic: to fill classroom seats and residence hall beds vacated when 700 of its own students spend the spring semester abroad. (Only half that number study abroad in the fall.)
For Mr. Alvarez and his spring-semester classmates, the thought of living in New York and exploring Broadway and the Metropolitan Museum of Art was as intoxicating as getting to know the Champs-Élysées and the Louvre.
''It's like study abroad, but it's not abroad,'' said Mimi Cave, 20, a student from Colorado College who said she had traveled to Canada, Mexico, Italy and Belize. ''New York is not like any other place I've been to,'' she said.
New Yorkers often take their surroundings for granted, but the spring-semester students see the city for all its possibilities.
''You can walk across the street or go uptown and see real van Goghs,'' said Sarah Bair, 19, an art history major at Utah State University. ''At home, you have to look in a book.''
She called New York the best place to study art in the United States. Her goal, she added, is to visit at least one museum or gallery each week.
New York has long been a magnet for college students, and applications to N.Y.U., Columbia and other city campuses have shot up in the last decade. But the idea of packaging college in New York in smaller chunks grew out of a brainstorming session among N.Y.U. officials last spring.
The Tisch School at the university already ran a more narrowly focused program for students in the arts. But the university thought it could attract students interested not only in art and theater, but also in writing, architecture and culture. They would take courses centered on New York's museums and galleries, Broadway musicals, skyscrapers and literary works like E.B. White's paean, ''Here Is New York.''
Many of the students said they had thought about attending college in New York. Some applied to N.Y.U. but were rejected. Others decided that New York was too cold, too far away, too imposing or too expensive. Some did not even think about New York when they were graduating from high school, but found that it fit their interests now.
''I didn't know whether I wanted to live in Manhattan, so I went to the mountains,'' said Ms. Cave, who is from the Chicago area. ''This offered me a taste. But the good thing is that I get to go back to Colorado College.''
N.Y.U. is not the only campus capitalizing on its location to attract students from other American colleges. For example, Simmons, a women's college in Boston, recently began offering women at other colleges a Boston Semester to focus on urban issues. American University in Washington draws about 1,000 students a year to a growing range of politically focused programs.
The Washington semester participants are interested in ''making contacts and building their résumés,'' said David C. Brown, dean of American's Washington semester program, adding that he expected students to choose N.Y.U.'s program for similar reasons.
''These programs give students a credential,'' he said.
He said his university benefited, too, attracting students it would not otherwise have, building its prestige and revenues.
Last week, the N.Y.U. students were racing to absorb the city on their own terms before classes began. Mr. Alvarez, the Los Angeles Valley College student, took in two shows, ''Hairspray'' and ''Rent.'' Over the weekend he tried to see ''Wicked'' but was unable to get tickets.
Kathryn Long, 23, a journalism and film studies student from the University of Georgia, started by roaming Greenwich Village, learning the subway system and trying to find ''the best and cheapest'' cup of coffee near N.Y.U.
A film buff, she was also beginning to log hours in movie theaters. She has seen ''Lost in Translation'' twice since she arrived, and also saw ''American Splendor'' and ''The Fog of War'' -- both films she had already seen at the Cannes Film Festival. The Metropolitan Museum and a Diane Arbus photography exhibit at N.Y.U. topped her art agenda.
Many of the students said that N.Y.U. offered a breadth and depth of academic opportunities not available on their campuses. Examining a Tisch catalog, several students marveled at its specialized offerings: Hollywood Comedy in the Great Depression. Documentary Traditions. The Vampire Film.
''There are so many things here that my school doesn't have,'' Ms. Long said.
N.Y.U. is offering the spring-semester students a selection of courses from five of its schools, including the College of Arts and Science, the Tisch School of the Arts and the Stern School of Business. (Stern is offering both the Business of Producing and Entertainment Marketing.)
''I didn't want to develop a concentration in a field like chemistry, where a student would spend all his time in lab,'' said Sharon Weinberg, the N.Y.U. vice provost who developed the program.
For many of the students, even a semester at N.Y.U. is a costly luxury. Tuition and fees amount to $14,248, and the residence hall costs $5,430 more. Some students said the financial aid programs at their home colleges would have covered study abroad but did not cover N.Y.U., and some said they had taken out loans.
Although N.Y.U. carefully promoted the program as a one-semester visit, not as a transfer program, some of the students are already dreaming about the possibility of staying.
Mr. Alvarez, the California theater student, said he had begun to pump N.Y.U. officials about how to transfer, and over lunch in N.Y.U.'s Kimmel Center last week, he offered to share phone numbers and Web addresses with his new classmates.
''Being here in the city now,'' he said this week, ''I just feel very right.''
He has even bought a pair of gloves.
