At a lunch on Friday, part of the World Economic Forum here, speakers were invited to answer a simple question: what advice would they give the next president of the United States?
''Listen to others,'' said Thierry de Montbrial, head of a French policy research institute. Irene Khan, secretary general of Amnesty International, said: ''Look around the world. And remember the impact of your power.''
These two remarks evoked some of the profound mistrust of Washington in Europe and many other places, and the sense of impotence against American might that was conjured up by the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq and the campaign against terrorism.
But there was another voice, suggesting that compared with one year ago, when the forum became a bitter joust between America and opponents of war in Iraq, some of those skeptics and foes have begun to acquiesce in Washington's exercise of power, or at least to acknowledge that this new world order would not simply be wished away.
''It's a lot more comfortable this year,'' said Representative Rob Portman, a Republican from Ohio, who spoke at the same lunch. ''There's a better environment for a better dialogue.''
The shift is partly atmospheric and partly fatigue, and does not hide the chasm that opened before the invasion of Iraq.
''Last year it was the United States that was in the dock, not Saddam Hussein,'' said Rabbi Arthur Schneier, head of the Appeal of Conscience Foundation and a participant in the forum, a gathering predominantly of the business and political elite. This year, Rabbi Schneier said, there are ''reduced decibels, a less belligerent anti-American mood.''
But even now, many critics of the United States say that while some of the rawest emotions may have dissipated, many basic perceptions of the Bush administration as brusquely disregarding the rest of the world remain, albeit in a muted way.
''We may be getting used to the idea'' of America's exclusive hold on global power, said Nabil Shaath, the foreign minister of the Palestinian Authority. ''But that doesn't mean we change our views.''
Mr. Shaath's appeal to the next American president was for a quick effort to solve the Israeli-Palestinian conflict. Indeed, it is the collapse of the administration's latest Middle East peace proposal last year that seems to have left many from that region as distressed with Washington as they were over the war in Iraq.
''Why are we assuming that there's less anti-American feeling?'' asked Samer Majali, a high-ranking Jordanian executive. ''If anything, there is more,'' because of continued upheaval in Iraq and the Israeli-Palestinian stalemate.
In Europe, too, Mr. Monbrial suggested, many still feel that Washington not only exercises power unilaterally, but wields it inconsistently in areas like human rights. ''Try to have a more positive attitude vis-à-vis international law,'' he counseled. ''Try to learn to and expect to have respect for others.''
But in the corridors and lounges of the Congress Center, there was a sense among some that opposition to the perceived American juggernaut had given way to other calculations, suggesting that beyond the forum, people had begun to adjust to the realities of American power. In the business world, said Bjorn Edlund, head of corporate communications for ABB Ltd., the Swiss-based engineering giant, ''they understand that there's a way to maneuver through the monopolar world.''
Of course, during last year's conference, the United States and Britain had not yet invaded Iraq and both countries had embarked on a campaign to broaden their coalition against Saddam Hussein.
''Last year they were bidding for moral authority,'' said Andrew Williams, a British investor. This year, he said, ''I don't think the United States comes across with any sense of moral authority.''
Conversely, the relative speed of the formal military victory in Iraq, the capture of Mr. Hussein and the effort to transfer power to Iraqis has given some Americans a sense that they are in a stronger position to put forward a case that, as Attorney General John Ashcroft said on Friday: ''The United States is not an aggressor. It doesn't seek to consume territory or build empires.''
Against that, Kamal Kharrazi, the Iranian foreign minister, declared at a separate session: ''As long as the message is, 'You are either with us or against us,' there will not be a solution to global problems. We need to talk to each other, work together on security and not use axis-of-evil threats.''
Mr. Kharrazi also said Iran would put a dozen jailed Qaeda suspects on trial, Reuters reported, the first such announcement by Iran. Washington immediately opposed this plan, demanding instead that the captives be handed over to their countries of origin.
Still, said Richard N. Haass, president of the Council on Foreign Relations and a former senior envoy at the State Department, ''the talk of a crisis in trans-Atlantic relations is more muted; it's the most low-key Davos in five years.''
