George Balanchine would have been 100 years old on Thursday, and a packed house was on hand that night to sing ''Happy Birthday'' and celebrate with a vodka toast and a cascade of balloons in the New York State Theater.
The program, in its simple dignity, included three works (''Apollo,'' ''Serenade'' and ''Prodigal Son'') that Balanchine choreographed before founding New York City Ballet with Lincoln Kirstein in 1948. The preceding evening referred to even earlier roots with the season's first performance of Michel Fokine's ''Chopiniana'' and ''Harlequinade,'' a Balanchine tribute to his mentor, Marius Petipa.
The Balanchine centennial will be observed by City Ballet throughout its spring season, but the fact that this was actually his 100th birthday added an edge.
Peter Martins, City Ballet's artistic director, appeared onstage with Barbara Horgan, who had started as Balanchine's secretary and after his death in 1983 formed the George Balanchine Trust to license his ballets. Mr. Martins said he wanted to talk about love and Balanchine, which he defined as not only love for Balanchine's ballets but also for ''what he instilled in us: ethics and integrity.''
The audience rose to toast Balanchine with the vodka provided at intermission but was spared the horror of nibbling at Balanchine's face, outlined on chocolate disks decorating a huge cake onstage.
As outrages go, the disks couldn't quite compete with the one delivered by Balanchine himself in 1972 when he produced Fokine's famous ballet ''Les Sylphides'' as ''Chopiniana'' (its original title in 1908) and had it danced in tunics, stripped of its usual romantic atmosphere. Alexandra Danilova did the staging for the company, but Balanchine's influence was paramount in this bare-bones approach. The Chopin music was played (speedily) on the piano rather than in Glazounov's orchestration, and Fokine's mimetic gestures were discarded.
Yet on Wednesday as then, this daring experiment revealed how classical a choreographer Fokine was. It also decoded the link between ''Chopiniana'' and the Balanchine-Stravinsky ''Apollo'' of 1928. Fokine had a poet and three sylphs; Balanchine, following the Stravinsky scenario for the original ''Apollo,'' choreographed by Adolph Bolm, had Apollo and three muses.
City Ballet's ''Chopiniana'' was soon dropped, but Cynthia Gregory, the former American Ballet Theater star, staged it recently for the School of American Ballet. It was this production that was seen on Wednesday. And it was still danced in tunics.
The student cast was clear and dutiful, and Ms. Gregory obviously instilled something new. Tyler Angle and Sara Mearns, highly impressive as his partner and in the Mazurka solo, understood that some of the gestures and head movements had to be expressive. The leads were completed by Lauren King in the Waltz and Likolani Brown, fine in the Prelude. Nancy McDill was the pianist.
To say Fokine influenced Balanchine is questionable. True, ''Chopiniana'' was a plotless ballet, the genre Balanchine took up in ''Serenade'' in 1934. But ''Apollo'' and ''Prodigal Son'' (1929) are not, and when Balanchine cut ''Apollo'' in 1978, he muddled its dramatic meaning.
What remains? The movement, as wonderfully embodied by Jennie Somogyi as the muse Polyhymnia. Respectable backup came from Nikolaj Hubbe, Rachel Rutherford and Yvonne Borree.
A windswept corps in ''Serenade,'' led by Kyra Nichols, Maria Kowroski, Ms. Somogyi, Philip Neal and James Fayette, was on a higher plane. So was Peter Boal, all passionate fervor in ''Prodigal Son,'' seduced by Darci Kistler's insidious Siren. Andrea Quinn and Hugo Fiorato, the evening's conductors, deserve a big hand, too.
BALLET REVIEW
