Italian police officials searched the Milan offices of Deutsche Bank on Friday, taking away documents, as the investigation into the collapse of Parmalat continues to examine the relationship between the company and its banks.
The nearly monthlong investigation has now apparently taken a personal toll: a midlevel Parmalat executive who worked in the finance department committed suicide on Friday, Italian police said. And Calisto Tanzi, 65, the founder of Parmalat and one of the figures at the center of the investigation, was moved to a Milan hospital from prison, where he has been for almost a month. While he has lost about 15 pounds in prison, his health is not in serious danger, the Italian news agency ANSA reported.
In the investigation of Parmalat, the Italian dairy and food giant, magistrates in Milan are seeking to learn how much Italian and foreign banks and others knew about the company's precarious financial situation in the months before its collapse in December. The search for documents at Deutsche Bank came the same week that investigators searched the Milan offices of Bank of America, Morgan Stanley and Nextra, the fund management arm of Italy's largest bank. On Thursday, authorities searched the office of Standard &amp; Poor's, the credit ratings agency.
Deutsche Bank was one of a number of banks that helped Parlmalat sell bonds. In late September, the bank placed a bond of 350 million euros ($390 million) for Parmalat.
But Deutsche Bank also advised Parmalat at the end of November and early December at a time when Standard &amp; Poor's was considering lowering its credit ratings on Parmalat, according to a person close to the investigation. Deutsche Bank gave Parmalat's financial team general advice on how to deal with S.&amp;P. and did not discuss or review the company's finances, the person said.
''Deutsche Bank is collaborating completely with the Italian authorities and the search was carried out cordially,'' a spokesman for the Frankfurt-based bank said. He declined to give further details.
None of the banks whose offices have been searched are officially under investigation.
S.&amp;.P. has come under scrutiny because it had an investment-grade rating on Parmalat until about a week before the company collapsed. S.&amp;P. has defended itself, saying Parmalat provided false information. Parmalat was forced into bankruptcy after Bank of America said on Dec. 19 that a bank account that Parmalat said held 4 billion euros was nonexistent.
Nextra's relationship to Parmalat is also drawing attention because the bank bought a 300 million euro Parmalat bond in June and sold the debt to Morgan Stanley in September and October. Morgan Stanley then sold the bond before Parmalat began to collapse in the middle of December, according to investigators.
The executive who committed suicide, Alessandro Bassi, was in his early 40's and was married with two children, according to Salvatore Di Paola, an officer with Italy's state police in Fornovo. Mr. Bassi jumped off a bridge near Fornovo, a small town southwest of Parma, he said. Collecchio, where Parmalat is based, is halfway between Parma and Fornovo.
Mr. Bassi worked for about 10 years at Parmalat and had close contact with Fausto Tonna and Luciano Del Soldato, two former chief financial officers who are in jail, according to a company spokesman. Mr. Tonna is considered by investigators to be one of the masterminds behind Parmalat's web of hundreds of affiliates that siphoned off more than $10 billion. Neither he nor Mr. Del Soldato has been charged with a crime. Mr. Bassi was not under investigation.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
