Al Oerter was attending a condominium board meeting in Fort Myers Beach, Fla., last March when his heart stopped. Minutes later, he was in a hospital emergency room. An hour later, he was on a respirator in intensive care.
''He was sure he was going to die,'' his wife, Kathy, said.
Oerter survived, and he said this week that it had been a strange experience.
''It was as close as I ever want to come before the final journey,'' he said. ''It wasn't uncomfortable. It was strangely peaceful.''
Oerter won the Olympic discus throw in 1956, 1960, 1964 and 1968; he was the first track and field athlete to win the same event in four consecutive Olympics. Today, he will attend the dedication of the National Track and Field Hall of Fame's new home at the Track and Field Center at the Armory in Upper Manhattan.
In separate interviews, the Oerters told about his harrowing medical experience.
''At the condominium meeting,'' Kathy Oerter said, ''he started panting like a dog. He was sweating. He sneaked outside and had the security house call an ambulance. When the ambulance came, it went to the wrong place to pick him up and the security guard had to chase it.''
Meanwhile, Oerter passed out. When he arrived at the hospital, he did not have his wallet, so his name was entered as John Doe. When Kathy arrived, she was told that things looked bleak and she should call the rest of the family. The doctors said it would be 24 hours before they knew if he would survive.
Oerter is shaky on the details. ''All I remember,'' he said, ''is waking up in intensive care. They told me they had to paddle me three times to get my heart going.''
He survived, but three cardiologists told him he would need a heart transplant. He refused. He suspected that the medical emergency arose because he had been taken off medication. Now he is back on that medication, and his heart is supported by a combined defibrillator-pacemaker. He says he feels fine.
''My heart is weak from high blood pressure,'' he said. ''On every Olympic team, they said my blood pressure was too high, and I told them that's the way I am. I'm like a big old ship. Nothing bothers me.''
Now Oerter seems a picture of health. With his hair still sandy, he is 67, but looks 20 years younger. He last competed in 1988, when, at 52, he threw 204 feet in the world masters championships. As for competing or even having a recreational fling of the discus, he said, ''I'm never going to throw again.''
He has become a full-time artist whose abstract paintings sell for $500 to $1,200. His work has been exhibited in Athens; Lausanne, Switzerland; and Monaco.
At the Armory on Thursday, he ran into a fellow 1964 Olympic gold medalist and Hall of Fame member, Billy Mills.
''It's good to see you,'' Mills said.
''It's good to see anyone,'' Oerter replied.
INSIDE TRACK
St. John's Prep in Astoria, Queens, was named the winner of the annual Marty Glickman Award for scholastic and community-service achievement by a metropolitan area high school track team yesterday. In a ceremony at today's New Balance Games at the Armory, St. John's will receive a check for $10,000, and the runner-up, Stuyvesant, $5,000. The award is named for Glickman, the track star and broadcaster who died in 2001.
TRACK AND FIELD
