The apology -- be it heartfelt, made under duress or coupled with salty tears -- is a staple in American political life.
In the last few weeks alone, Howard Dean apologized for his antics in Iowa, Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut said he was sorry for lying to the residents of the state about inappropriate gifts and Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton issued a mea culpa for quipping that Mahatma Gandhi had run a gas station in St. Louis.
But sorry is a not a word beloved by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg. And his refusal to dole out apologies sometimes becomes the narrative of his mayoralty.
That was underscored this week when Mr. Bloomberg steadfastly refused to apologize publicly to the widow of Dr. Robert Atkins, the diet guru whom Mr. Bloomberg mocked on Tuesday, not realizing that his remarks were being taped.
As he chowed down with a bunch of firefighters, Mr. Bloomberg used a profanity to characterize the veracity of the account of Dr. Atkins' death last year -- he slipped and fell on a sidewalk -- and said that the doctor had been ''fat.'' Mr. Bloomberg also derided the appetizers served at a fund-raiser he had attended at the Atkins home in the Hamptons as ''inedible.'' The remarks were recorded for NY1 News.
Dr. Atkins' widow, Veronica, demanded an apology. When one was not forthcoming, Ms. Atkins went on ''Good Morning America'' yesterday to press her case. (She added that her Hamptons caterer was very good.) Thus a one-day gaffe became a weeklong semi-national story.
This is not the first time Mr. Bloomberg has refused to issue an apology. He once suggested that the World Trade Center site ought not to be turned into a cemetery, infuriating victims' families. His aides cringed, but he did not back down.
At the time he was seeking control of the city's schools, Mr. Bloomberg suggested that minority parents who had been resisting the move might not fully understand how bad the schools are, prompting City Councilman Charles Barron to call the mayor a racist. Far from apologizing, Mr. Bloomberg's aides called for Mr. Barron to say he was sorry.
Generally, New York City mayors are not the most penitent of politicians. But even Rudolph W. Giuliani -- who was generally unapologetic even in the face of relentless criticism -- threw out a few ''sorrys'' once in a while. Most notably, he apologized for criticizing Ruth W. Messinger, who challenged his bid for a second term, because she missed a Columbus Day Mass.
''An apology when people are angry with you is often a good political tactic,'' said Hank Sheinkopf, a political consultant. ''It goes back to the Nixon Checkers speech. It is a way to win relationships with the electorate and get you out of trouble. This mayor has yet to use it as a tactic.''
It is also true that those firefighters -- and now much of the rest of the city -- saw a side of Mr. Bloomberg that he usually keeps hidden. Salty, off-the-cuff comments, made in the context of one of his oft-repeated stock tales (many of them involving dinners), are part and parcel of this mayor's socializing style.
But Mr. Bloomberg's lack of apology -- other than a nebulous comment to reporters that ''you are what you eat'' -- seems to have had the opposite of his intended effect, prolonging rather than killing the story. Yesterday, the mayor's press secretary, Edward Skyler, would not comment.
In his recent speech on the state of the city, Mr. Bloomberg said that he would not back down from foes of the city. Perhaps that sentiment extends to those he insults along the way. ''An apology implies a sort of backing off,'' said Mr. Sheinkopf, in an on-the-other-hand reflection. ''New York mayors often refuse to back off, and that also creates some interest, so it is a two-edged dynamic.''
Political Memo
