The production is there, although it's not what it used to be. The skills remain impressive. Few doubt that Jaromir Jagr is still one of the great talents in the National Hockey League, the kind of player who can turn both heads and a game with a deft move or flick of the wrist.
But it is hard to argue that Jagr is still a great player, not after all that has happened in recent years, not after so much was expected and not enough delivered in his more than two seasons with the Washington Capitals. Now it is up to the Rangers, who acquired him yesterday in exchange for Anson Carter, to try to inspire him to greatness once again.
''We've scouted him a great deal and we've watched him play probably more than 20 times,'' Glen Sather, the Rangers' coach and general manager, said during a conference call with reporters yesterday. ''He's going to help us. The atmosphere is right for him because he knows so many people here. And he wants to be in New York.''
The mood was similar in Washington when the Capitals acquired Jagr, a right wing, from Pittsburgh in a blockbuster deal in 2001. But it never quite turned out that way. Jagr scored, but not quite enough. The team reached the playoffs once, but did not win a round.
Washington General Manager George McPhee said the trade was made to unload Jagr's contract, believed to be worth $77 million when he signed in 2001. But there was more to it than that.
''I'm uncomfortable pinning any blame on him,'' McPhee said last night in a conference call. ''I don't think that's fair. It was a nice try by us, a chemistry experiment that didn't work.''
Maybe the chemistry will work with the Rangers and Jagr will be the player he was earlier in his career with Pittsburgh: a difference maker for a franchise. But some who have watched Jagr's intensity decline wonder if a change of scenery will matter.
''I think he has flashes of what he was,'' said Bob Errey, who played alongside Jagr during the Stanley Cup years in Pittsburgh and is now a broadcaster for the Penguins. ''I don't think he's as hungry as he was. He lost that hunger. And I don't know how important winning is to him. He's set for life and I don't know if the drive is still alive in him.''
Errey remembers how different it used to be for Jagr, a first-round pick of the Penguins in the 1990 draft. Back then, an 18-year-old Jagr was eager to prove that he could play with Pittsburgh's premier players, Mario Lemieux, Kevin Stevens and Larry Murphy. Jagr helped the Penguins win two Stanley Cups in the early 1990's.
In the prime of his career, Jagr went on to win five scoring titles, a Hart Trophy as the N.H.L.'s most valuable player and an Olympic gold medal for the Czech Republic. But Jagr could not carry the Penguins to another Cup when he became the top player in Pittsburgh.
Under financial duress, the Penguins traded Jagr to Washington in 2001.
The Capitals immediately embraced him, giving him that huge contract and anointing him as the player who would lift the Capitals to Stanley Cup contention.
Yet he was never the player or the draw the Capitals expected. Jagr could not approach the numbers he produced in Pittsburgh, whether because of the players he was surrounded with, the defensive system used or his own drive.
With the Capitals, Jagr was never more than a point-per-game player; he has 16 goals and 45 points in 46 games this season, giving him 522 goals, 758 assists and 1,280 points for his career. The Capitals made the playoffs once, losing to Tampa Bay in the first round last year.
''Yes, he's tough because he's a unique individual,'' Bruce Cassidy, who was fired as Washington's coach on Dec. 10, said in a telephone interview. ''He's got a great mind for the game. He's a guy I was always interested in talking to. I just think some days were better talking to him than others. That's the only thing I've said about him, that he could be moody. And that's O.K., you've got to figure out which days are the best days to sort of work with him.''
Along the way, a dark side of Jagr emerged. According to reports in Sports Illustrated and The Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, Jagr became heavily involved in gambling and the stock market. He reportedly ran up a debt of nearly $500,000 on an Internet gambling site and lost millions in the dot.com implosion on Wall Street. Jagr has had further problems with the Internal Revenue Service. According to Sports Illustrated, Jagr had an I.R.S. tax lien of $3.2 million as of last November. Jagr recently told the magazine his finances were fine.
Sather said yesterday that Jagr's personal problems were in the past.
The Rangers are counting on Jagr, 31, to work well with their aging All-Stars, and this could be the right move for him. He made it clear that he wanted out of Washington, where he had to carry the hopes of a team on his shoulders. In New York, players like Mark Messier, Eric Lindros and Bobby Holik will take care of that.
They figure to be the ones who will have to push Jagr, or inspire him to push himself.
HOCKEY
