From 1969 to 1991, a fondly remembered club called Mikell's occupied the corner of 97th Street and Columbus Avenue. On Thursday night Mikell's was resurrected a few blocks away for a concert of soul, funk and jazz at Symphony Space. It was a tribute to how a club can be both a scene and a musical crucible.
Musicians who turned up regularly on Mikell's stage or in its audience performed a benefit concert for the club's owner, Mike Mikell, who now suffers from Lou Gehrig's disease. Mr. Mikell and his wife, Pat Mikell, booked jazz and soul groups at the club and made it a refuge for New York's top studio musicians. After days and nights playing other people's music, they came to Mikell's to jam as they wished.
The lineup on Thursday night included the singers Chaka Khan, Freddie Jackson, Melis'a Morgan, Alyson Williams, Will Downing, Chuck Jackson and Johnny Kemp; the jazz pianists George Cables, Michel Camilo, Hilton Ruiz and Onaje Allan Gumbs; the keyboardists Paul Shaffer and Ray Chew with their bands, and the guitarist Doc Powell, whose latest album is called ''97th &amp; Columbus'' (Heads Up).
''Mikell's was a place where we could not only hang out, but was a musical communion,'' said Mr. Chew, who was the concert's musical director. He recalled coming to the club ''every night of the week, sometimes starting at 7, sometimes starting at 4 in the morning.''
Mr. Shaffer described the club as ''soul heaven,'' and added that many musicians were now making a living from what they had learned there.
Mikell's nurtured a particular kind of New York soul, a mixture of urbanity and heat. The music placed suave, leisurely grooves, jazz chords and guitar with a bluesy twang behind singers and musicians who let loose with gospel-rooted passion.
It was music of uptown sophistication that hadn't forgotten its roots, and it was distilled by a group called Stuff, the alliance of studio musicians that made Mikell's its home in the 1970's. Now, it's the sound of television bands like the ones on ''Saturday Night Live'' and ''Late Night With David Letterman.'' Gordon Edwards, Stuff's bassist, led Stuff II on Thursday night.
The jazz contingent played with fondness and gusto. Mr. Cables led a superb quintet through a sunny hard-bop tune, and Mr. Gumbs played a probing, waltzing ''Daydream.'' Mr. Camilo's galvanizing solo showpiece jumped from Chopinesque introspection to brittle, two-fisted Latin vamps; in ''Mike's Mambo,'' Mr. Ruiz attacked the keyboard with forearms and elbows.
But most of the concert belonged to singers riding plush soul grooves and celebrating love, physical and spiritual. Ms. Khan was in joyful form, unleashing a voice that could be coy or brightly trumpeting in her own hits and in Joni Mitchell's ''Two Gray Rooms.''
Ms. Morgan made Prince's ''Do Me, Baby'' into a supercharged seduction; Freddie Jackson embellished his songs with aerobatic falsetto curlicues. Chuck Jackson reached back to the 1960's for his stentorian heartbreak songs, and Johnny Kemp moved toward 1980's funk with his hit ''Just Got Paid.'' The husky-voiced Ms. Williams led off the finale, a rewritten version of Stevie Wonder's ''Love's in Need of Love Today,'' which brought everyone back onstage, jamming as if they were back at Mikell's.
POP REVIEW
