It would have been a delicate question under any circumstance. But the surprise presence of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg turned it into a New York farce.
At a table in the plush, quiet bar of The Mark hotel on the Upper East Side, a woman asked fellow drinkers if they minded her lighting a cigarette. She leaned from a perch on an armchair toward well-dressed diners at four tables near her. In the dimly lighted room, where about seven small groups sat sipping wine and cocktails, most guests simply muttered that they were not opposed.
But Richard Medley, out for a drink with friends, spotted an important reason to say no. He had watched as Mr. Bloomberg entered the bar earlier. The city's antismoking champion had taken his seat behind the unsuspecting smoker.
''She turned to me and said, 'Do you mind if I smoke,''' Mr. Medley recalled. ''I said, 'I don't mind, but he might,''' he said, loudly enough for the room to enjoy the joke, and he pointed to Mr. Bloomberg.
The woman, dressed in jeans and a sweater, swung around to face him, and began to laugh. She then asked him if he minded her smoking. Mr. Bloomberg, laughing, expanded the joke. It was the bar owners who would be offended, he said. They stood to pay a fine for her indulgence.
''It was a very New York thing,'' Mr. Medley said. ''It was all in very good humor.''
Mr. Bloomberg remained unfazed. He even offered the woman a lesson in how to quit. Some time later, in a charm offensive, he bought her table drinks. The guests laughed at the joke. But in a New York minute, the room went back to nursing their drinks. The woman, ultimately, was not won over.
''I don't think she was going to follow his advice,'' Mr. Medley said. ''I think she just dropped the subject.''
A spokesman for Mr. Bloomberg declined to comment on the incident.
Yesterday morning, Mr. Bloomberg gave a glimpse into the pressures of being the city's smoking conscience. On his radio show on WABC-AM, he was asked by a caller whether he would crack down on energy waste, like air-conditioners that blast in stores in the summer.
"I took on the smoking,'' he said. ''I'm not sure I want to take on air-conditioning this year.''
