Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut is in the process of establishing a legal defense fund, a person close to the administration said yesterday.
Last fall, Mr. Rowland hired a prominent criminal defense lawyer, William F. Dow III. The governor's supporters are now exploring ways to create a war chest to help defray what is likely to be a huge legal tab.
The person close to the administration acknowledged that any donors may be scrutinized by prosecutors, given a federal investigation into whether the governor used his office to help people who did him favors. But this person said that it might be possible for the fund to be structured to ban donations from lobbyists or to create a blind trust so that Mr. Rowland would not know who his benefactors were.
That may help, but the fund ''will be scrutinized,'' said Philip Russell, a former Bronx prosecutor who is now in private practice in Greenwich, Conn. ''It's a fairly routine investigative tool to look at the source of a legal fee, and it's well settled that the source of a legal fee is not privileged or protected in anyway.''
Michael Sklaire, a former prosecutor in New Haven who helped convict Mayor Joseph P. Ganim of Bridgeport on corruption charges, said he would not expect people who were caught up in the government's investigation to participate. ''Odds are at this point you're not going to find a Tomasso giving money to a legal defense fund,'' he said, referring to the government's recent interest in how Tomasso Brothers of New Britain won some of its state contracts.
Still, Mr. Sklaire said, ''It's incredible chutzpah to be accused of accepting illegal gifts and then to ask everyone to pay for your legal defense for having accepted the gifts.''
Mr. Claire said this case was different from President Bill Clinton's allowing supporters to create a legal defense fund for his benefit. ''I don't know of another situation where they had a legal defense fund where a politician has been accused of accepting gifts,'' he said.
In Hartford, more allegations of illegal state contract awards were raised on Friday when Attorney General Richard Blumenthal told legislators his office found evidence that the state had paid a contractor $8 million, probably for doing nothing.
He said he could not comment further.
