Even as President Bush sets a modest goal of reducing the federal deficit to about $200 billion by 2009, many budget analysts and economists doubt he can achieve it.
Under fire from Democrats as well as conservative Republicans for allowing the deficit to reach more than $400 billion this year, White House officials say Mr. Bush's budget for next year will hold the growth in domestic discretionary programs to less than 1 percent.
That would amount to a budget cut for many agencies, after adjusting for inflation, and it would be a sharp turnaround from the increased spending Mr. Bush has supported or condoned for the past three years.
But Mr. Bush's budget proposal, to be unveiled on Feb. 2, is likely to omit several huge costs that would derail his projections if they were included.
Administration officials said his budget plan will not include the costs of supporting American troops in Iraq and Afghanistan beyond this year because administration officials say those costs are unknowable.
The cost of maintaining 100,000 soldiers in Iraq, which would be a decrease from the current troop levels, has been estimated at $50 billion a year. Even a significantly smaller force could cost tens of billions of dollars in 2005.
President Bush is also unlikely to include the cost of fixing the so-called alternative minimum tax, a set of provisions that will lead to big tax increases for millions of families unless the law is changed.
Lawmakers in both parties want to prevent that from happening, but analysts across the spectrum say the cost will be more than $100 billion over the next five years and more than $400 billion over the next 10 years.
''The budget will cut the deficit in half in five years only on paper and not in the real world, and only by omitting roughly $200 billion in costs for 2009 that the administration has itself indicated it favors and will request,'' said Robert Greenstein, director of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities, a liberal research group in Washington.
Meanwhile, President Bush will also face enormous difficulties on the spending front. Congressional Republicans are already pushing for a large increase in spending on highways and mass transit over the next six years.
In a rare display of bipartisanship, House Republicans and Democrats are jointly pushing to spend $375 billion over the next six years on highway and mass transit, while Senate leaders have proposed $311 billion. Fuel taxes are supposed to pay for those projects, but Congressional analysts estimate that fuel taxes will at most supply $265 billion -- leaving a shortfall that could total $110 billion.
The good news for the administration is that the economic recovery is now beginning to generate additional tax revenue, after three years of declining revenue.
But forecasters in the administration and in Congress had already been assuming an increase in tax revenues, so the added revenue may do little to offset the cost of extra spending and additional tax cuts that are not in the administration's official proposal.
On Friday, the Pentagon announced it would seek 7 percent more money next year, or $401.7 billion. But that increase does not include money for Iraq or Afghanistan, which administration officials say they will seek in supplemental funding if they need to do so next year.
Administration officials are already looking for ways to squeeze spending in many domestic programs. They are also quietly prodding Republicans in Congress to drop billions of dollars in proposed tax cuts from the energy bill that was narrowly defeated last year.
Mr. Bush's Democratic opponents blame some tax cuts passed since 2001 for much of the problem. But conservative critics are fuming that Mr. Bush has allowed government spending to soar.
Brian Riedl, a budget analyst at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative research group, estimates that government spending climbed twice as fast under President Bush as under President Bill Clinton, and that only about one-third of that increase came from defense spending and homeland security.
On Friday, the administration showed its own numbers to refute the criticisms, saying that nondefense discretionary spending -- from parks and museums to the Energy Department -- has grown more slowly in the last three years and will climb only 4 percent in 2004.
''This president is helping to rein in the growth in government spending by the budgets that we have put forward, and he remains committed to doing that,'' said Scott McClellan, a White House spokesman.
But even if Mr. Bush does hold down the growth of domestic spending, he will have trouble cutting the deficit in half by 2009 and even bigger deficit problems in the five years after that. The reason is that Mr. Bush has vowed to make most of his tax cuts permanent, rather than allowing them to expire.
''It is a tall order, and after five years you have very big hurdles,'' said Edward McKelvey, an economist at Goldman Sachs, which predicts that the federal government will run up deficits totaling more than $5 trillion over the next 10 years if the tax cuts become permanent.
Analysts at the Brookings Institution, a liberal-leaning research organization, predict that the budget deficit will remain above $400 billion a year for the next five years and climb to $687 billion a year by 2014.
''There is no doubt they're going to claim the budget meets their goal,'' said William Gale, a longtime budget expert at Brookings. ''The queston is how are they going to pull the rabbit out of the hat.''
The Brookings analysis assumed that spending would grow more slowly than it has in the past three years, but slightly faster than the rate of inflation. It also assumed that Congress continues all expiring tax provisions and fixes the alternative minimum tax.
Representative Jim Nussle, Republican of Iowa and chairman of the House Budget Committee, said the core problem is spending rather than tax cuts.
''The deficit is a manifestation of the real problem, like sneezing when a person has the flu,'' Mr. Nussle said. ''Spending growth over all is the issue here.''
Mr. Nussle has been pressing the administration to include cost estimates for military operations in Iraq in its budget request, and he expressed frustration at the probability that Mr. Bush would once again wait until he has to make a supplemental funding request.
''It's time to stop using the excuse of not knowing the future,'' Mr. Nussle said. ''We know things we didn't know two years ago. We know the costs of the war. We know we're in a war.''
