The jury has reached its verdict: two enormous square voids, set on the spots where the twin towers once stood, will be the centerpiece of the World Trade Center memorial. But now a jury of a different kind must weigh in: the engineers, horticulturalists, carpenters, electricians, and plumbers who will actually build it.
Transforming the design by Michael Arad and Peter Walker from a rough sketch into what will almost certainly be one of the nation's most popular memorials may require significant changes or at least ingenious solutions to important questions the two architects acknowledge have already surfaced about their seemingly simple composition of water-filled voids in a parklike plaza.
What will happen when the temperature drops so low that any traditional reflecting pool would freeze? How will people be able to take rubbings of victims' names near a waterfall that could be a messy spray? And who will be responsible for maintaining what is built and providing the money for what will certainly be an enormous annual cost?
''We have a schematic design,'' said Mr. Arad, the lead architect, in an interview this week. ''Working out all the details is something that will involve a lot of people and a lot of expertise. What we know is what direction we want to pursue.''
Answering these questions, and the countless others that will surface in the coming months, will be as important as the original design in determining the success of the memorial in a notoriously unforgiving city, experts in urban planning said.
''The real thing that makes all the great memorials in the world work are the details,'' said Jeff Soule, policy director at the American Planning Association, who helped supervise the design competition for a women's rights historical park in Seneca Falls, N.Y. ''The design is just the start.''
The central design element of Mr. Arad's composition -- outside of the two 200-foot-square voids that sit in the footprints of the twin towers -- is a steady flow of water. Walls of water will drop into these voids from the plaza level down about 30 feet, falling into two enormous reflecting pools. The water will drop once again, falling down an additional 15 or so feet, until it nearly reaches the bedrock.
It is this combination of the voids and pools of water that give the design its name: ''Reflecting Absence.'' But Mr. Arad's water-filled vision will certainly complicate the job at hand. First, to ensure that visitors feel intimately connected to the constantly flowing water, Mr. Arad's design specifies that there be no glass between the falling water and a viewing spot, which is just behind where the water will drop.
''It is about having that direct relationship between you and what is in front of you,'' Mr. Arad said. ''Glass would isolate you. It would create a very sort of sterile barrier which I would hope to avoid.''
But a falling wall of water has a tendency to move laterally as a result of the vacuum it forms as it drops, said Wayne Pierce, design director at Hobbs Architectural Fountains, an Atlanta-based company that Mr. Arad has consulted on his trade center memorial plans. Combined with the wind, this could send streams or at least sprinkles of water into the underground assembly area, where crowds are supposed to gather to view the engraved list of victims' names, unless the area is properly designed.
Winter conditions would complicate this setup even further. The mist of the falling water -- Mr. Pierce called it the Niagara effect -- could create a thin layer of potentially dangerous ice on this walkway, which Mr. Arad wants to be open to the elements.
In Washington, the National Park Service turns off almost all of the fountains it operates in the winter months. But there are a few exceptions, including the fountains at the Franklin D. Roosevelt Memorial. Keeping the water moving helps prevent it from freezing. Yet this past week, after the recent bitter cold arrived in the region, some of the F.D.R. fountains froze, leaving the Park Service with no choice.
''We had to turn the water off,'' said John Parsons, associate regional director for the Park Service in Washington. ''But it becomes a much different memorial then.''
Various techniques are also available to try to prevent the water from freezing over in the winter, including chemical additives, special heat-producing lights or a combination of electric or gas heaters that could be installed in the reflecting pool. But each of these has its own complication, as heated water could produce a wind-blown steam or mist that might ice up, National Park Service officials said.
And then there are the leaves and the pocket change. Mr. Walker has proposed filling the plaza with deciduous trees, hardwoods that shed their leaves each fall, creating a potential hazard for the pumps that will be constantly circulating water through the fountains.
The coins, of course, come from a human source: that almost automated response among Americans when they approach any kind of fountain or reflective pool. In Washington, this repository of change draws the homeless, Mr. Parsons said, who tend to jump into the fountains late at night picking out everything but the pennies.
Already, Mr. Arad and Mr. Walker realize these issues related to the water are some of the most complicated design questions facing them. ''Both Michael and I are trying to keep it an outdoor experience, so that it is not like going inside a building,'' Mr. Walker said. ''But this presents very real problems. They are on our list of first things up. And we don't have technical answers for them now.''
Mr. Pierce, from Hobbs Architectural Fountains, said one way to ensure that the falling water does not cause a problem might be to build a mock-up of the design and use powerful fans to simulate winds that would blow through the memorial. ''There has got to be some kind of an engineering solution,'' he said.
The experience of the National Park Service at some of its busiest monuments in Washington offers another lesson for Mr. Arad and Mr. Walker as they begin translating their ideas into a real place. Use of structures like the Washington Monument and the Lincoln Memorial is so intense that even the most innocuous acts by visitors can cause flaws to surface, said Stephen C. Lorenzetti, acting deputy superintendent for the agency in Washington.
At the Lincoln Memorial, for example, in a spot within the complex where visitors often pause to look up at the inscriptions of Lincoln's words on the upper wall, natural oils from the hair of people who accidentally rub their heads against one of the columns has left an unattractive discoloration on the stone, Mr. Lorenzetti said. ''People sometimes ask us, why don't we clean it better,'' Mr. Lorenzetti said. ''Well, it is almost impossible to get those stains out.''
With the intense pedestrian traffic that is expected at the World Trade Center memorial -- five million people a year are expected and up to 50,000 a day -- Mr. Walker also said he realized that he must be extremely careful in deciding which floor surfaces must be made of stone and where it would be possible to have grass or other natural covering.Mr. Arad has set up the memorial so that it has two distinct but adjacent zones: the memorial footprint voids, which visitors will enter from ramps that run alongside the open-air reflective pools, and then the underground interpretive center, which visitors will enter from a ramp that is on the western edge of the site.
The intent is to ensure that the contemplative reaction the memorial is designed to evoke is not disrupted by the more didactic experience offered in an education-oriented, interpretive center, which will tell the story of the trade center and the day of the attack. Yet on both sides of this divide, there are complicated challenges underground.
At the bottom of the north tower footprint, Mr. Arad has set aside space for a structure that will hold the unidentified or unclaimed remains of World Trade Center victims, which have carefully been dried and placed into separate plastic bags. There are currently more than 19,900 pieces awaiting identification. Mr. Arad now has this chamber in a room that is open to the elements, allowing family members who visit the area to look out unobstructed to the sky. That privilege will complicate maintaining this sacred space, particularly during summer downpours or winter snows.
The interpretative center will be next to, but also separated from, the so-called bathtub wall, which is on the western edge of the site. The bathtub, which kept the Hudson River-fed groundwater from flooding the site, is one of the only surviving parts of the trade center complex that remains in place. But because it remains in a delicate state, it will have to be maintained behind a glass wall that creates a special temperature-controlled space into which special structural supports for the wall can also be constructed.
Who will control the World Trade Center memorial site, and how the construction and the maintenance will be paid for, are perhaps the most fundamental open questions that need to be resolved before the project can progress much further. Just filling in the 4.7-acre memorial section of the pit that was dug out during the ground zero cleanup will cost an estimated $175 million. Completing the memorial by 2009 is expected to cost $350 million, not including the interpretive center.
So far, all that has been announced is the creation of a nonprofit group called the World Trade Center Memorial Foundation, which will soon start raising private funds for the project. It now has only $400,000 in money raised. Representative Jerrold L. Nadler, a Democrat from Manhattan who represents Lower Manhattan in Congress, has introduced legislation that calls for the federal government to pay for half of the memorial construction cost and then assume the burden of maintaining it once the project is finished.
''This was an attack on New York, but New York itself was not the target, it was the United States,'' Mr. Nadler said. ''We were immediate victim of the attack against the entire country.''
But the bill Mr. Nadler has drafted is not yet up for consideration by the House, and so far, there is no companion piece of legislation in the Senate. Mr. Nadler's proposal would turn the management of the site over to the National Park Service after the construction is complete. This choice, he said, is based on the agency's well-established reputation as the custodian of so many important national monuments.
Putting the Park Service in charge could end up placing the agency in the line of fire as debate brews over what items are displayed in the underground interpretive center that Mr. Arad has included in his design. How much space should be set aside to tell the story of the firefighters and police officers who died on Sept. 11? How about the passengers on the two planes? How should the center explain the international background that inspired terrorists to hijack planes and crash them into the towers?
Each of these decisions will be delicate choices that Mr. Nadler said he was not yet sure the National Park Service should appropriately be involved in.
''This is something we are going to have to look at, Mr. Nadler said in an interview this week. ''I reserve the right to change my mind on this.''
