Just when it looked as if the Knicks were going to lose their polish and luster, Stephon Marbury stepped in.
The Knicks were struggling against the 13-30 Atlanta Hawks on Friday night when Marbury asserted himself and sustained the team's recent success. He scored 10 points in the last 5 minutes 20 seconds as the Knicks held off the Hawks, 96-94.
Marbury finished with 24 points and hit 9 of 14 shots, including a 3-pointer that banked in with 30 seconds remaining and gave the Knicks the lead for good, 92-89.
''Keith and Allan are our two All-Stars, and whenever they're not in their groove right away or not in their groove throughout the whole game, there is a time where you have players who have to step up,'' Marbury said of Keith Van Horn and Allan Houston. ''Those are our two main players, and whenever them guys are not hitting, that's an opportunity for yourself.''
While Philips Arena exploded with cheers from a large contingent of Knicks fans, there could only have been sighs of relief from the victors. Their four-game winning streak had ended in Houston on Wednesday, and a two-game losing streak looked like a possibility as the Knicks struggled Friday night.
But Marbury rescued them. The Knicks trailed by 83-81 with 5:20 left when he hit a shot from the top of the key to tie the score. After Shareef Abdur-Rahim put the Hawks back in front, the 6-foot-2 Marbury charged down the lane and floated a short shot over Atlanta's best shot blocker, the 6-10 Theo Ratliff, to make the score 87-85.
The score was tied at 89-89 when Marbury launched the winner over Jason Terry. The ball caromed off the glass and into the basket, but the way Marbury was making shots, it was not all luck.
''I'll take luck all day,'' Marbury said.
Van Horn added 18 points, and Houston had 17. Shandon Anderson did not play, ending the N.B.A.'s longest active streak of games played at 543.
Abdur-Rahim, a 6-9 forward, led the Hawks with 25 points. He has been the subject of trade rumors between Atlanta and the Knicks, but Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president, said before the game that a trade was not imminent.
''I don't think we'll do anything quite as good, probably in my time, as getting a player such as Stephon Marbury,'' Thomas said. ''You only get a chance, I think, in your career once or twice to trade for those kinds of guys. We're always trying to improve, that being said, at this point in time we don't have anything that is imminent.''
The Knicks had trouble in the post with Abdur-Rahim, and also with the Hawks' pressure on the offensive boards. Atlanta grabbed 15 offensive rebounds and had 18 second-chance points; the Knicks had 6 second-chance points.
The Hawks did not get the one offensive rebound they needed most. Terry missed a 3-pointer from the left corner with 9.3 seconds left that would have tied the score, but Kurt Thomas boxed out Abdur-Rahim and controlled the rebound.
''Instead of boxing out and getting rebounds, we were turning our backs and trying to run,'' Coach Lenny Wilkens said. ''They were hurting us on the offensive glass. We didn't do a very good job.''
The Knicks made up for their rebounding trouble with solid shooting (33 of 63, 52.4 percent). They also had decent production from their bench, outscoring Atlanta's reserves by 23-14.
The Knicks led by 75-74 entering the fourth quarter, but they were settling for shooting jump shots while the Hawks were going inside to Abdur-Rahim, who made 10 of 14 field goals.
The Knicks looked as if they were going to assert themselves and pull away when Michael Doleac hit two free throws to start the fourth quarter. Penny Hardaway hit a jumper and Van Horn drove the lane hard for 2 points, and the lead stretched to 81-76.
After an Atlanta timeout, the Knicks' momentum disappeared. They failed to score on four straight possessions while the Hawks scored on three straight opportunities. Terry hit a jump shot with 6:06 remaining to give the Hawks an 82-81 lead.
Stephen Jackson made a free throw for Atlanta to make the score 83-81 with 5:43 to play, but then Marbury took over.
''He's trying to get others involved,'' Wilkens said. ''That's great, but I remind him you've got to sense when you can go.''
REBOUNDS
LENNY WILKENS said that he and SHANDON ANDERSON talked about the streak this week and that Anderson agreed that victories were more important. ''It's always a tough decision, but you're trying to win the game,'' Wilkens said.
Wilkens said this week that he was trying to get ALLAN HOUSTON better opportunities to score. It worked early as Houston made 4 of his 5 shots in the first period. But Houston made just 3 of his next 12.
PRO BASKETBALL
