If anyone can handle the big egos that flock around the small Paris Review -- its wealthy patrons, the famous writers who once in a while send their third-best stories in after The New Yorker has rejected them -- it would be Brigid Hughes, chosen this month to succeed the magazine's editor, George Plimpton, who died in September.
Ms. Hughes, 31, appears gracious and tactful, deflecting questions that might result in even the tiniest frisson in the tiny literary world of New York. What is her goal for The Review? Answer: ''To publish good writing, whatever form that takes.''
Will she make any changes at The Review? ''I don't think it needs to change. The goal is to publish good writing. I intend to do that.'' Things will not remain entirely as they were, however. ''There are authors who've appeared previously who may not continue,'' Ms. Hughes said. ''There will be a different mix.''
How will she turn down those big egos? ''It's not a big brouhaha in my experience,'' she said. ''If a good writer sends you something, the chances are it's good.'' Rejections therefore, are seldom necessary.
Still, she added: ''Do we want to publish a third-best story by a big name? Is it worth it to us? No.''
Ms. Hughes may be the ideal editor from the writer's point of view, since, at least from the testimony of one famous writer, she has a light touch. Richard Ford remembers sending The Review a fragment of his novel ''Independence Day'' that he had cut out of the published book. ''She was thoughtful enough to leave well enough alone,'' Mr. Ford said in a telephone interview from Maine, where he is completing his next book. ''Not that the piece wasn't improvable,'' he added with a laugh.
What about more female writers? The Review has often been perceived as a bastion of male authorial output. ''I'm not consciously going to insist on half men and half women,'' Ms. Hughes said. ''I have different tastes than George.''
Ms. Hughes agreed that there is some truth to the perception about the dominance of male writers. But she pointed out that The Review has published many distinguished women, including Adrienne Rich, Alice Munro and Christina Stead early in their careers.
Ms. Hughes grew up in Buffalo. Her father, Patrick, is a doctor who loves poetry and who lines his office with works of literature as well medical journals. Her mother, Patricia, is a research nurse.
Ms. Hughes graduated from Northwestern University in 1994. After a summer in Europe she wrote a letter to Richard Howard, with whom she had studied in a writing workshop at Skidmore College and who is poetry editor of The Paris Review, asking if he knew of any jobs at the magazine. She was hired as an intern in 1995 and given a full-time job later that year.
The question, of course, is can Ms. Hughes fill the shoes of Mr. Plimpton, a larger-than-life figure who ran what the writer Gay Talese called ''the liveliest literary salon in the city,'' attracting both young writers and wealthy donors.
''I'm not replacing him,'' she said, but ''continuing on something that was important to him.''
Mr. Plimpton took no salary. Ms. Hughes's pay is hardly lavish: somewhere around $50,000 a year, she said. Like most of The Review's staff of five (including both part time and full time), she lives in Brooklyn, where rents are cheaper than in Manhattan.
But The Review is in good health. It has a circulation of about 10,000, with about 5,000 subscribers, Ms. Hughes said, and subscriptions doubled last year. James C. Goodale, who is on the board of the Paris Review Foundation, which runs the magazine, said it had an endowment of about $770,000. The 50th anniversary benefit in October grossed another $550,000, he said, although he said he did not know how much of that would go for the benefit's expenses. Ms. Hughes said she did not know what the budget for each issue was, and Mr. Goodale declined to say because the foundation is in the middle of rethinking the magazine's finances.
Ms. Hughes said that the storied parties of Mr. Plimpton's era will go on. The Review will remain in its tiny office in the same building as Mr. Plimpton's apartment on the Upper East Side.
The office is lined with covers from The Review, ''about 40 by 30 issues wide,'' in the words of one editor, Ben Howe. Mr. Plimpton's bicycle hangs upside down from the ceiling, as does a lion tamer's chair bearing teeth marks. Rats come in from the pipes in the basement. In the bathroom there are framed letters, including one from Bill Clinton congratulating The Review on its 50th anniversary. ''Art in all its forms is a celebration of culture,'' Mr. Clinton wrote.
Finally, in hope of a bit of self-revelation, a standard question: Any personal goals? ''To run the New York City marathon,'' Ms. Hughes said. ''But I haven't been accepted yet.''
