For the second time this week, Senator John Edwards on Friday detoured to South Carolina from New Hampshire, rallying voters in this state that may well play the larger role in deciding whether his bid for the presidency goes forward.
The trip, just four days before the New Hampshire primary, demonstrated the challenge facing Mr. Edwards's campaign: the need to make a showing in New Hampshire while staying strong in South Carolina, his neighboring state. Mr. Edwards's advisers say he must win here and raise the money needed to carry on beyond that.
The crowd of about 200 people gathered at a voter education forum to see him applauded when he promised to crack down on lobbyists and government corruption. They clapped and answered ''All right'' when Mr. Edwards vowed to make civil rights a priority. And cheers rose when he called for higher pay for teachers.
But Mr. Edwards's most vigorous applause came when he reminded his listeners that he was one of them.
''I was born in South Carolina,'' he said. ''I have lived here a chunk of my life, I know what goes on here every day, I still have lots of family here.''
''After Feb. 3,'' he said, ''I will not forget where I came from, I will not forget what matters to me and I will be back here to campaign in the fall as your nominee.'' Mr. Edwards, 50, was born in Seneca, S.C.
Mr. Edwards's visit, which included an evening side trip to a campaign fund-raiser in Birmingham, Ala., kept him off the trail in New Hampshire for half of the day.
''South Carolina is important. I want to make sure the people and voters know that I consider South Carolina a priority,'' Mr. Edwards told reporters after his event here. ''I'm also campaigning every day in New Hampshire.''
But South Carolina, his aides say, is critical to his candidacy and he does not have the state locked up. Independent polls here suggest there is no clear front-runner. Mr. Edwards has often led the pack but surveys suggest large numbers of people have not made up their mind or have not paid the race much mind.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark, a southerner like Mr. Edwards, has campaigned and advertised heavily here. Senator John Kerry, who has not campaigned much here in recent months, is now lining up support, including an endorsement on Thursday from Senator Ernest F. Hollings. And the Rev. Al Sharpton has successfully courted many politically active African-American ministers and congregations here.
Ike Williams, the former South Carolina director for Representative Richard A. Gephardt's campaign, said of Mr. Edwards, ''Out of the two Southern candidates he is the one who can come out with a decisive victory.''
Mr. Williams is a strategist for Representative James E. Clyburn, an influential black leader in a state where African-American voters are expected to make up 30 to 40 percent of the primary turnout.
Mr. Williams said he is now supporting Mr. Edwards because ''he touches equality issues, race issues and issues of affordable housing so it was a natural fit.''
John C. Moylan, Mr. Edwards's campaign chairman in South Carolina, said he believed Mr. Edwards's strong showing in Iowa had resounded here. ''I think what we needed here was people to believe a South Carolinian could be president, a viable candidate, and people now believe,'' Mr. Moylan said.
The home-grown pitch seems to work with some voters.
''He talks our language and he is not negative,'' said Lessie V. Pope, a retired teacher who heard Mr. Edwards here and is leaning toward voting for him. ''He has something that will bring us all together and unite us.''
Still, even before he hits the South, Mr. Edwards is trying to make a showing in New Hampshire. But he faces a more compressed run-up to the New Hampshire primary than the Iowa caucuses -- where he came from behind to place second -- and a broader range of competitors.
In Iowa, he rose in the polls in an intense three weeks of campaigning and held five or six events almost every day. Although he plans to return to New Hampshire and stay until Tuesday, with a heavy weekend schedule, he has held fewer daily events during the week than in Iowa.
New Hampshire polls this week have shown him gaining some strength but lagging behind Mr. Kerry, Howard Dean and General Clark, all of whom have more robust campaign treasuries as well. Advisers to Mr. Edwards say he wants to finish third or better in the Jan. 27 primary.
New Hampshire, his advisers say, is a more media-driven state than Iowa and they note that at least one of his rallies every day has attracted large crowds or media attention or both. Mr. Edwards is running two television commercials in the state. He is also aggressively giving interviews to a range of local and national news outlets to spread his message without having to spend large sums on advertising.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
