Republican legislators in Nassau County accused the Democratic county administration on Friday of hiring a law firm for $750,000 in return for $33,000 in campaign donations. The administration and the law firm, Crowe, Deegan, Dickson &amp; Benrubi, denied the charge.
The issue arose here in a County Legislature hearing into irregularities in Nassau's economic development agencies. The deputy county executive in charge of them, Peter T. Sylver, quit last month under fire for disputed charges on a county credit card.
The witness for most of Friday's hearing was Daniel P. Deegan, a partner at Crowe Deegan, which has been used by the economic development agencies for more than two years. The firm says it has billed about $750,000 for its work and been paid $650,000 so far.
Mr. Deegan also serves as Glen Cove's city attorney, a post he was picked for by Thomas R. Suozzi when he was mayor, before becoming county executive.
''Yes, I'm friendly with Mr. Suozzi,'' Mr. Deegan testified, but he added that ''I have a lot of friends that are a lot closer.'' He acknowledged that his firm's members donated $33,000 to Mr. Suozzi's campaign.
The legislature's Republican minority leader, Peter J. Schmitt, said: ''Thirty- three thousand in campaign contributions brought in three-quarters of a million dollars -- not a bad investment.'' Mr. Deegan said he resented the implication, and in an interview he denied giving money to get work.
A Democratic legislator, David Denenberg, challenged Mr. Schmitt to prove wrongdoing and said that Republican legislators accepted donations from lawyers hired under the previous Republican administration.
Republicans also criticized the firm for doing county work before it was formally authorized to do so, but the firm says it eventually got the approvals it needed.
The county hired Crowe Deegan without competitive bidding, which county officials say is not required. But an audit by the county comptroller urged that as a prudent practice, the county should seek multiple proposals.
Mr. Suozzi's spokeswoman, Arda Nazerian, denied that the donations were a factor. ''People are hired on merit,'' she said, and Crowe Deegan has ''a strong track record.''
Mr. Deegan testified that ''Crowe Deegan has delivered tremendous value to the county.'' He said that its $175 hourly rate is $50 below what the previous firms charged.
He said his firm had saved $21.5 million in endangered federal grants, won a $1.2 million grant to develop polluted sites and executed the long-delayed transfer of the Navy's Grumman site in Bethpage to the county, a property he valued at $50 million.
The hearing resumes on Monday.
