On the desk of John Chaney's office sits a large paperweight that reads, ''Winning is an attitude.''
Chaney has won plenty, with plenty of attitude. Wednesday night, he celebrated his 72nd birthday by doing what he loves, coaching his Temple Owls to a victory over Penn, and moving closer to another career milestone. When Temple visits Massachusetts on Saturday afternoon, Chaney will seek his 700th career coaching victory. Among active Division I coaches, only four have more victories than Chaney -- Bob Knight, Lou Henson, Eddie Sutton and Lute Olson -- and only 15 Division I coaches have ever reached 700 victories.
A member of the basketball Hall of Fame, a trailblazer for many African-American coaches and a beloved father figure to players past and present, Chaney is still a fighter, facing his job, his players, his opponents and his critics with the fiery passion he brings to everything he cares about.
''I think I've always been on the right track,'' Chaney said during an interview Thursday in his office. ''If you sit down on the track, that's when you get run over.''
So Chaney keeps going, hoping to coax, direct and inspire this season's young team into a berth in the N.C.A.A. tournament. It will not be easy. Temple is 6-8, and after a remarkable run in which Chaney led the team to 17 N.C.A.A tournaments in 18 seasons, it has failed to make the tournament the past two seasons. With a career record of 699-277, Chaney understands that some people believe his best days have passed. He doesn't care. He has seen enough, heard enough and endured enough to handle criticism. Since he was hired at Temple in 1982, when there were few black coaches in Division I, Chaney has beaten the odds, running one of the nation's most consistent programs. When he stops coaching, he plans to do it his way, on his terms. And that day does not appear imminent.
''The same thing is hitting Joe Paterno,'' Chaney said, referring to Penn State's longtime football coach. ''The other coaches are telling players: 'You don't want to go to Penn State. The man is old. He's going to retire when you get there. He's not going to be around for you, to see you graduate, to make decisions on your life. So why should you go there?'
''I have the same problem here. Wherever I go, that's the first thing somebody asks me. 'Coach, how long are you going to be at Temple?' Well, I could leave tomorrow. But I plan to be here as long as I want to stay here, as long as my health is good.''
Born in Jacksonville, Fla., Chaney played college basketball at Bethune-Cookman and became a star in the old Eastern League before turning to coaching when his playing career ended. Despite never coaching a player who became an N.B.A. All-Star, Chaney's teams have won 20 or more games in 15 of his 21 seasons at Temple. Before that, Chaney built a Division II powerhouse coaching for 10 years at Cheyney State (Pa.) College, winning the national championship in 1978.
Through it all, Chaney's coaching style has not changed. On defense, his teams play various combinations of zone. On offense, his teams play a deliberate tempo, trying to avoid the turnovers that Chaney despises.
''Since I don't get great talent, I can't put guys on the floor and let them run up and down the floor and pick up fouls, then go to my bench and expect to be as good,'' Chaney said, explaining his affinity for zone defenses.
His practices typically begin at 5:30 a.m., when most of his competitors are asleep. Chaney makes his players wake up with the roosters not only to teach discipline, but also to leave time for academics. Chaney has recruited many players considered to be academic risks, but he believes his program offers the right environment to help players succeed in the classroom. Many of Temple's players who were academically ineligible as freshmen have gone on to have successful careers, including Eddie Jones of the Miami Heat and Aaron McKie of the Philadelphia 76ers. Both have credited Chaney's guidance for helping them grow not only as players but also as students.
''I've taken chances on some players that other programs wouldn't have,'' said Chaney, who has a master's degree from Antioch College. ''But they have to go to mandatory tutoring, four days a week. If you miss a session, you make it up on Saturday or Sunday, and don't even go to practice.
''We can't have practice from 3 to 6 and have all our players make class. So we practice at 5:30, so there's no excuse for missing an 8:40 class. And the ultimate is, they go to bed early at night.
''Temple is not for everyone. It's for the kids that want to be here, and for the kids I want to be here. You're going to have kids who drop out. But if you spend even one or two years in college, your life has been enhanced. And I'm damn sure going to try, with every ounce of strength and feeling that I have, to get you to do the right thing in school.''
Chaney was in typical loquacious form Thursday, walking into his office carrying groceries and offering visitors some food, as well as his opinion on a variety of subjects. A visit to his office is like a visit to the local barbershop. You'll hear stories. You'll debate issues. You'll discuss far more than just basketball.
He is a people person, which has been just as important to his program as the winning. The biggest disappointment of his Temple career is never reaching the Final Four, having lost four times in the regional final. To him, however, his success and his joy come from the relationships he has made, the former players who stay in touch, the parents of players who have thanked him for leading their sons in the right direction.
''I feel comfortable and good about what I do here,'' Chaney said. ''I'm not looking forward to retiring. I can't do anything else.''
So Chaney plans to be on the sideline on Saturday, for the rest of the season, and perhaps many more seasons, exhorting players with his tie loosened and his face sometimes contorted in anguish. Simply put, he loves his job. Few Division I coaches stay 22 years at the same school anymore, and few coaches at any level win 700 games.
Whenever he reaches that milestone, Chaney will not dwell on No. 700. He will think about the journey, the lives he has influenced along the way, and the challenges he has overcome. One of his favorite paintings, titled ''Dreams,'' hangs on his office wall; it depicts a young boy asleep on his bed, dreaming of a better life.
''Don't just dream, chase your dreams,'' Chaney said. ''I'm living mine.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL  Correction:  January 31, 2004, Saturday  A sports picture caption in some copies last Saturday about a 72nd-birthday celebration for John Chaney, Temple University's basketball coach, misstated the time. It took place before the game on Jan. 21, not after.
