Prosecutors took the first formal steps yesterday to send a convicted rapist to prison for life, arraigning him in Queens Criminal Court on murder and weapons possession charges in connection with a violent 13-hour crime spree in three boroughs on Wednesday.
Queens prosecutors are following a well-worn path: by district attorneys in the Bronx, who in the 1980's devoted extraordinary resources to send the man, Andre Shobey, to prison for life as a persistent offender, but failed; by state parole officials, who five times denied Mr. Shobey release from maximum security prisons; and by officials of a private transition program, who sought to supervise Mr. Shobey, 45, after his release last year. In a criminal career that began with the robbery of $117 and some subway tokens from a transit worker in 1976 and grew more violent as he settled into a pattern of trapping women in elevators and raping them on rooftops, Mr. Shobey was imprisoned for as long as rape and robbery convictions and plea bargains would allow without designating him a persistent offender.
After 18 years in prison, he was released last Aug. 27. In a little under six months he went on another violent binge, prosecutors said, this time a deadly one: one man was killed, a woman was grazed in the head by a bullet, and a teenage girl was sexually abused.
The new charges, including a count of second-degree murder in the fatal stabbing of Terrance Neal, 18, are serious enough to send Mr. Shobey to prison for life.
''This guy needed to be kept in jail,'' Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said on his radio program yesterday. ''He's obviously a danger to society and it's very tragic, and nothing's going to bring back the life of the person that was lost, or emotional scars that he left in the case of the rape victim.''The complaint filed in Queens accuses Mr. Shobey of stabbing Mr. Neal in the chest and throat while Mr. Neal was caring for a 4-year-old girl, and of possessing a .32-caliber revolver and a knife.
In court, an assistant district attorney, Josh Martin, read from a statement that he said Mr. Shobey made to detectives: ''I slashed Terrance with the knife. Terrance ran into another room. I chased him and stabbed him. Terrance was making noise so I slashed his neck. The little girl was in another room.''
Mr. Shobey's lawyer, Thomas Johnson, of the Legal Aid Society, said in an interview that the accusations were illogical.
Judge Lenore Gerald ordered Mr. Shobey held without bail.
Richard A. Brown, the Queens district attorney, issued a statement saying, ''The defendant will be prosecuted to the full extent of the law to ensure that he is severely punished.''
In the mid-1980's, after Mr. Shobey was released from an eight-year prison sentence in connection with robbing a transit employee, prosecutors in the Bronx sought to connect him to a series of rapes and robberies. Frank Iannucci, an assistant district attorney who retired last year, was assigned the case as a member of a special unit focused on violent repeat offenders.
Mr. Iannucci said yesterday that he remembered being told by his supervisors to hand off his other cases and focus on convicting Mr. Shobey of raping several young girls.
Securing one rape conviction and guilty pleas to other charges, Mr. Iannucci said, he sought to have Judge Joan C. Sudolnik declare Mr. Shobey a persistent offender, qualifying him for a life sentence, but the request was not approved.
''That young man, Mr. Shobey, should have been in prison for life,'' Mr. Iannucci said. ''He had proven that he was going to go out into the community and commit mayhem.''
Judge Sudolnik, now a justice in State Supreme Court in Manhattan, said in a telephone interview that she did not remember that request. She declined any further comment.
The last sentence Mr. Shobey served, of 12 1/2 to 25 years, ended after he had served two-thirds and was required by law to be set free. The state parole board had denied him early release on five occasions.
On his release, he was taken in by the Fortune Society, a nonprofit group that provides housing, counseling and security and that enforces curfews and the rules against violence. JoAnne Page, executive director of the group, said that Mr. Shobey showed promise for a successful transition out of prison.
