One day after a public relations offensive to counter the fallout from Iowa, Howard Dean's campaign pronounced itself on the mend on Friday.
But the impact on New Hampshire's voters was still unclear. All the campaigns were waiting for the weekend polls to assess whether Dr. Dean had succeeded in persuading New Hampshirites that his third-place finish and raucous concession speech in Iowa were aberrations.
Dr. Dean was in reassuring mode.
''Things have started to turn a little bit,'' he told several dozen volunteers at a phone bank in Milford. ''We're back on the upswing, and you know what? New Hampshirites love to undo what Iowa does.''
His voice still hoarse, Dr. Dean was much livelier in public than he had been since arriving here on Tuesday morning from Iowa.
In three town-hall-style meetings, he continued to trumpet his experience as a budget-balancing governor and to deride Washington politicians as promising more than they can deliver.
While he drew a large crowd on Friday night in Keene, some of his earlier audiences were smaller than normal but generous with their applause. They also included many people who said they were undecided.
''If you just want to change presidents, go to the polls on Tuesday and vote for whoever you want,'' Dr. Dean told about 100 people at the Lions Club in Londonderry just after 8 a.m. ''But if you really want to change America, I ask for your vote. I think we need somebody outside the Washington game, somebody who just doesn't promise everything, somebody who's actually balanced budgets and delivered health care.''
Several strategists said Dr. Dean had probably done as much as he could on Thursday night to steady his campaign, with his debate performance, the lengthy interview he and his wife granted to ABC News and his self-deprecatory appearance on David Letterman's ''Late Show.''
The challenge facing Dr. Dean was complex: to demonstrate humor, to acknowledge error, to display a calm and presidential demeanor but also to remind constituents of the passionate antiwar insurgent who first attracted them.
''I thought he did what he had to do to stop the bloodletting and let the healing begin,'' said Donna Brazile, a Democratic strategist who is not affiliated with a campaign. ''Now it's time to recapture his fire, go out there and charm his neighbors.''
Since the Iowa caucuses, Dr. Dean's support has steadily declined in the New Hampshire polls.
One strategist for a rival campaign, alluding to Dr. Dean's base of support, said, ''Everybody's asking the same question: where's the floor?''
Dr. Dean's allies note that the final weekend before the primary here has seen stunning political comebacks before.
''Most voters keep the ledger open to the last moment in New Hampshire,'' said Dayton Duncan, a Dean supporter who is a longtime Democratic activist and a filmmaker.
While the Dean campaign has stopped polling, its pollster, Paul Maslin, said, ''I have eyes, I can see, I can hear, and you know, I have no doubt in my mind that we've not only turned a corner, but that we're moving right now.''
But Gerry Chervinsky, president of KRC Communications Research, which is polling New Hampshire for The Boston Globe and WBZ TV, argued that there was a limit on how much Dr. Dean could rebound. The percentage of voters who have an unfavorable view of the former governor of Vermont has steadily risen in recent weeks, Mr. Chervinsky said, meaning they will be very tough to convert.
Moreover, Dr. Dean must carefully calibrate his message to rouse his core supporters and and also to defuse any concerns about his temperament among the undecided.
''In their advertising they're trying to present him as a sober, serious person who handled big responsibilities well,'' a strategist for a rival campaign said. ''But that isn't what brought people to him. What brought people to him was that he was a hell-raiser, and now he's on probation and can't raise too much hell.''
Still, members of Dr. Dean's staff said the energy level at the grass-roots was rising. Karen Hicks, the New Hampshire state director, said the phones had returned to pre-Iowa ringing levels, with some people calling to say they were outraged at how frequently the raucous Iowa concession speech was being replayed.
''Clearly we had some people who moved away from us,'' Ms. Hicks acknowledged. ''We lost some people, but they called to tell us they were going somewhere else. It allows us to engage in a conversation with people.''
Jay Carson, a spokesman for the campaign, said that the video of the Deans' interview on ABC was posted on the campaign's Web site and was viewed 95,000 times by 5:30 p.m. Friday. Donations continued to pour in to the campaign over the Internet, he said, with $923,000 raised since Iowa.
Dr. Dean continued to walk a careful line. In a news conference on Friday afternoon, he told reporters, ''All I want is a candidate who tells the truth,'' though he declined to name which of his Democratic opponents do not do so, simply saying he was the only candidate making realistic promises.
In response to a voter's question about the Federal Reserve, Dr. Dean also said he thought its chairman had become too political and should be replaced. He later clarified that he would not remove the chairman, Alan Greenspan, from office, but simply appoint someone else when the time came.
At each of Dr. Dean's events Friday, a voter stood to praise either his Thursday night performances or the now legendary concession speech.
''Just for the record, I really enjoyed your speech in Iowa,'' a woman from Derry said at the morning forum.
''So take that, CNN,'' Dr. Dean responded over applause.
A few moments later, another woman rose to say she had liked Mrs. Dean's performance the previous evening. ''I saw a woman of substance and not glitz,'' she said. ''I also saw a very healthy couple relationship.''
Dr. Dean set the tone for the day with a visit to a guitar shop, trailed by entourage. He pulled down a $249 acoustic guitar from the wall, and began to strum while photographers snapped. He said the tune he was playing was called ''Come Back Baby.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
