THE divers from the Police Department tried again yesterday, immersing themselves in the wintry dark waters of the lake at Prospect Park. And, again, they failed to find the body of a man who decided to take a Sunday morning stroll across thin ice.
A search for a body trapped beneath ice seems like the awkward kind of tragedy that is more likely to occur someplace else, someplace colder; upstate, maybe, or in New England. But in a man-made lake in Brooklyn? In water about six feet deep? It all seems so out of place.
Then again, these are among the very elements that make the event seem almost distinctly, eerily New York. In a popular park in a heavily populated part of the city, a man shakes free of the urban crush to cross his personal tundra, which then rewards his independence by swallowing him up.
Or not. No one has filed a missing person's report in the week since, and there are conflicting reports about whether he managed to reach shore. Will the police eventually find a body? Or will the man become the subject of Brooklyn lore, a Prospect Park phantom, spotted for certain at summer's dusk by boys and girls aching to be scared?
The answer has yet to surface. The police, who suspect that he did die, have no recourse but to continue their search. And visitors to the park can only stand at the lakeshore and read significance into the many shoe prints - of recovery workers and, who knows, the man himself -- that will remain imbedded in the lake's surface until the next thaw.
''I don't ever recall a situation like this,'' Liam Kavanagh, a deputy commissioner of parks and recreation, said. ''Usually the victim is recovered within hours of the incident.''
On maps of Brooklyn, the 60-acre lake looks like a wispy blue whale nestled at the park's southern corner. Since its construction in the late 19th century, the lake has gone through cycles of grandeur and neglect, and is now a clouded refuge for frogs and ducks, a place for children to fish with rolled-up balls of bread on their hooks.
On Sunday morning, some dog walkers spotted a young man in brown clothes walking on ice toward the center of the lake, parts of which were not frozen. Some people shouted at him to come back -- What, was he crazy? -- while others hurriedly dialed 911. He fell through the ice, pulled himself out, and then fell through again.
Several witnesses told the police that he screamed for help before disappearing for the last time, although one witness planted some doubt by saying that the man had made it to shore and walked away.
Rescue divers from the Police and Fire Departments spent Sunday searching waters so murky that they could do little more than hunt by hand. The police divers have returned several times since then without luck. Sometimes their scuba equipment freezes up; sometimes the water surface above them begins to ice over.
After three hours in the morning bite of yesterday's cold, the police divers set aside their manhunt and drove away, allowing the lake to keep its secret for at least another day -- and casting this corner of the park in an unsettling winter light. Did this jogger huffing his way past, or that horseback rider bouncing along, know that lodged beneath the lake's icy layer there might be the body of a man dressed in brown?
THE January sun threw the skeletal shadows of barren trees upon the gray ice, while Canada geese rising from the water honked in farewell. Along the lake's southern shore, yellow strips of plastic bearing a familiar phrase, ''Police Line Do Not Cross,'' fluttered from trees and lampposts.
On the western shore, two park officers sat in the warmth of their idling truck and stared out at the lake, which looked like a gray-white meadow interrupted only by a wide circle of unfrozen water. That is just one reason the city ought to fence the lake off in winter, one of the officers said.
They said their job was to keep people from venturing onto the ice, which happens regularly, despite the dozens of signs that say, ''Danger, Keep Off at All Times.'' It might be people emboldened by liquor or subdued by depression, or pet lovers dashing after their seagull-chasing dogs.
''Next thing you know, you're in there,'' the officer said.
And across the lake, on the eastern shore, there sat a single police car. Any time a passer-by ventured close to the pallid body of suspended animation, the police car emitted a wah-wah of warning that told the living to keep moving.
About New York
