As we bounced along rural Cambodian roads, away from the wild brothel town of Poipet, the two teenage prostitutes I had just purchased told me how they had come to be 21st-century slaves.
As described in my last couple of columns, I had visited Cambodia to write about one of the great scourges of the third world, human trafficking, which ensnares some 700,000 people worldwide per year. At its worst, the trafficking system takes innocent village girls, often sold by relatives or kidnapped by neighbors, imprisons them in brothels to be raped repeatedly and leaves them dead of AIDS by their early 20's -- and yet there is far less international effort to save these children than to, say, save the Brazilian rain forest.
I ended up buying the freedom of two girls, Srey Neth for $150 and Srey Mom for $203. Srey Neth, a 17-year-old with short hair and increasing sass as she left servitude behind, is a third-grade dropout. Her family owns five acres of farmland, but her father caught malaria and they had to mortgage the land to pay for treatment to save him. The family risked losing the land altogether, so an older female cousin, Mam Di, suggested a solution.
''Mam Di said, half-seriously, half-joking, 'Your family is in debt, so you'd better go make some money by selling your virginity,' '' Srey Neth recalled. ''At first I didn't understand what she meant. But she kept explaining.''
In a third world country like Cambodia, where girls are second-class citizens and steeped in the notion that they must sacrifice for their families, Mam Di's argument was persuasive.
''I agreed because I knew my Mom was in debt and I wanted to help her,'' Srey Neth said. ''I didn't care what kind of job I had to do to help her.''
So Mam Di told the family that she would get Srey Neth a job selling fruit and then took her to a brothel, which sold her virginity to a casino manager. A doctor examined Srey Neth to confirm to the casino manager that she was not infected by the AIDS virus and that she was a genuine virgin. Then, for $750, Srey Neth spent a week with the casino manager. He did not use a condom.
Afterward, Srey Neth was confined to the brothel and sold for $13 a session. She worked as a prostitute for a month, until I met her and freed her.
Srey Neth grew more animated as we finally rumbled down a dirt road and reached her home, a thatch-roofed hut on stilts. But her family showed more interest in our car than in Srey Neth; she was treated as no more than a lost cat that had shown up again.
I could see how a girl with gumption like Srey Neth, unschooled and naïve, could yearn to get away. It is precisely this low status of peasant girls in so many countries that makes the trafficking possible. For trafficking to be wiped out, the low status of girls needs to be addressed through literacy and job programs and other efforts.
To keep girls from being trafficked again, aid workers had told me, two things are necessary. First, their past must be kept secret, for otherwise they will be stigmatized and can never marry. Second, they need some alternative way of earning a living.
We had discussed business possibilities on the long drive, and I left Srey Neth's family with $100 so she could build and operate a small grocery shop on the village street outside her home. I also arranged for American Assistance for Cambodia (www.cambodiaschools.com), an excellent aid organization experienced in helping Cambodian children, to visit Srey Neth periodically, help her open the business and train her in reading and perhaps other skills, all as a pilot effort to help teenage prostitutes start new lives.
That evening, Srey Mom's cellphone chirped, and it was Srey Neth, excited and joyful in her restored freedom. ''I've already bought the wood to build the grocery store,'' she declared.
So one girl was back in her village, seemingly adjusting well. But the one we really worried about was Srey Mom, who had been a prostitute for much longer, and whose family did not even know she was alive. We got back in the car for the long trek, clear to the other end of Cambodia, to Srey Mom's village. Stay tuned.
Op-Ed Columnist E-mail: nicholas@nytimes.com
