On a recent afternoon, 40 college engineering students, an all-male menagerie of sweaty palms, thick eyeglasses and short-sleeve button-down shirts, emerged from a tour of India's satellite manufacturing plant in the technology boom city of Bangalore. To a man, they burst with ambition, vision and confidence.
All expressed the same hope: to work for India's prestigious national space program. And all dismissed a simple question: why should a country with as many poor as India spend hundreds of millions of dollars on a space program when it could use satellites from Europe or the United States?
''We will not depend on others,'' declared Raj Shecker, 21, an engineering student. ''It's just an Indian feeling.''
Forty years after the launching of a small American-made rocket marked its humble beginnings, India's national space program bills itself as thrifty space exploration for the common man.
With a budget of only $450 million a year -- one-thirtieth of NASA's $15.5 billion annual budget -- India has 13 satellites in orbit, produces some of the world's best remote imaging satellites and is planning to send a satellite to the moon by 2007 or 2008.
But unlike space programs in other developing countries, including Brazil, low costs have not meant catastrophic launching failures. Only 6 of India's 37 satellite launchings have failed.
This month the national newsmagazine The Week ran a grandiloquent cover story that captured the country's infatuation with its space program and its self-image as an emerging power.
''Every space power is trying to develop launch vehicles and spacecraft to colonize the moon,'' the article declared. ''India, too, is racing ahead.''
Less than a week after China became the third country to put man in space last October, India launched a satellite into orbit and Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee declared India a world leader in ''applying space technologies to development.''
In Bangalore, the headquarters of the space effort, offices brim with optimism reminiscent of NASA during its golden age in the 1960's, as Indian engineers breathlessly describe how they use space technology to improve the lives of tens of millions of average Indians.
Satellites reclaim farmland, they say, bring medical care to remote villages, predict natural disasters and help planners control the country's explosive urban growth.
''Our program is entirely oriented toward applications for the national development,'' said Madhavan Nair, chairman of the Indian program, formally named the Indian Space Research Organization. ''Water management, satellite television, phone links, telemedicine.''
One of the clearest examples of how the program benefits average Indians is in the village of Majhgawan Karan, in the northern state of Uttar Pradesh. Using satellite imagery, technicians have helped 175 villagers reclaim 40 acres of barren land in an area long haunted by hunger.
Alok Mathur, a project manager at the Remote Sensing Application Center of Uttar Pradesh, said farmland could be reclaimed by simply pouring gypsum on it. He said the gypsum set off a chemical reaction in the soil, which had too much sodium in it. Barren farmland is transformed into rich farmland, and the lives of subsistence farmers are changed.
Mata Prasad, a young Dalit, or untouchable, one of India's outcastes, stood beside his tiny but verdant one-acre plot of wheat and rice. He was pleased. For years the land was barren, he said, and his family's primary concern was getting enough to eat. Not any more.
''Earlier, I used to worry about food,'' Mr. Prasad said. ''Now I worry about the education of my children.''
Forty miles to the northeast lies another example of the space program's benefits. Doctors in the basement of the main public hospital in the city of Lucknow, the state capital, chatted over a live satellite link with doctors in rural hospitals hundreds of miles away.
Dr. S. K. Mishra proudly explained how he and his staff examine dozens of patients a day in remote corners of India via satellite. Color monitors allow face-to-face conversations with patients. Test results, X-rays and echocardiograms from the rural hospitals are all transmitted instantly to Lucknow.
But even these showcase projects have their limitations. Space officials estimate that the farming project has helped 500,000 farmers reclaim 667,000 acres of farmland in 3,100 villages. In Uttar Pradesh, a state of 160 million people, that is a drop in the bucket.
Doctors said that being able to offer a diagnosis by satellite had helped tens of thousands of people. But they conceded that it would be far too expensive to equip India's hundreds of thousands of rural hospitals with satellite dishes. They predicted that in the end, cheap Internet access in rural areas, not expensive satellites, would revolutionize communications between hospitals.
''For technology to be used by everyone it has to be cost-effective,'' said one doctor. ''Not every small hospital can have a satellite.''
The euphoria over the space program is by no means universal.
In the last five years, Indian rockets have successfully launched two German, one South Korean and one Belgian satellite in orbit. But with the commercial space market flooded with heavy lift rockets from the United States, Europe and particularly Russia, the Indian program, whose rockets remain smaller, has not attracted droves of customers and has not proved the moneymaker originally promised.
And privately, Indian officials concede that they remain dependent on foreign components. While India's satellites are assembled in India, a majority of electronic components for India's satellites continue to come from the United States, Europe and elsewhere, they said.
Some Indian space analysts say the moon probe, which is expected to cost $84 million, is the first sign that the space program is moving away from its practical roots and becoming politicized. Reports in recent months of plans for expensive manned missions have only deepened concern.
Despite an economy that is expected to grow by 8 percent this year, India is home to the world's largest concentration of poor. Three hundred million of India's one billion people live in poverty.
Gopal Raj, a journalist and the author of a history of the Indian space program, ''Reach for the Stars,'' questioned the scientific value of the moon probe. The satellite will spend two years making a three-dimensional map of the moon's surface and surveying its soil for minerals.
''Frankly, I think this has more to do with prestige than anything,'' Mr. Raj said. ''I am not convinced about anything else.''
American space experts warn of problems as well. They accuse Indian managers of not spending the money they should on projects and leaving unnecessary debris in space.
There are also questions about whether India is planning to mount a military effort in space. After China launched a man into orbit last fall, the head of the Indian Air Force was quoted as saying that India was developing space-based weapons. Within days the country's civilian leaders forced him to retract the statement.
For many years, in fact, the United States viewed the Indian program as a proliferation and security risk, despite its civilian oversight. Remote sensing satellites that can track erosion and crop yields can also act as spy satellites.
Indians vehemently deny the charge, but American analysts say rocket technology produced by the civilian space program, as well as some of its top engineers, have ended up in the military's ballistic missile program. They include even the country's president, A. P. J. Abdul Kalam.
''A space program and a missile program tend to go hand in hand,'' Theresa Hitchens, vice president of the Center for Defense Information in Washington, said in a telephone interview. ''The technologies are the same. A rocket is a rocket is a rocket.''
Those concerns appear to have eased of late. In early January the Bush administration announced that it would lift a ban on the export of some civilian space technology to India. Indian space officials said they did not know exactly what bans would be lifted and did not know the full significance of the move.
As a result of the sanctions, and an urge for independence after 300 years of British colonial rule, Indian space officials have furiously worked to make sure their program does not rely on foreign technology. In many ways they have succeeded.
In 1992 the United States pressed Russia not to give India the technology for a cryogenic rocket. Two weeks ago, on Jan. 10, Indian engineers announced that they had successfully tested an Indian-built cryogenic engine.
Pride in that kind of independence and initiative is shared by many, including the prospective young engineers who visited the satellite plant. ''It's a benefit for ourselves,'' said Srinath Hanaji, a 21-year-old engineering student. ''We will not depend on others.''
This is the last of three articles on the expanding space race in the developing world. Earlier articles examined China's rising challenge to the United States and a setback for Brazil.
The Next Space Race
