The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York said yesterday that it would close two financially failing parish elementary schools -- Our Lady of Mount Carmel/Holy Rosary School in Harlem and St. Ann's Parish School in Rockland County -- at the end of this academic year.
Both schools have long suffered from low enrollment and sizable budget deficits. They were among six Catholic schools marked for closing in March 2001 but were permitted to remain open after developing business plans aimed at financial recovery and raising private donations.
In a statement yesterday, the archdiocese said those plans had failed. ''The schools developed business plans that included aggressive marketing and development in an attempt to increase enrollment and move toward self-sufficiency,'' it said. ''This has not been the case.''
Our Lady of Mount Carmel/Holy Rosary on Pleasant Avenue now enrolls 180 students, the archdiocese said, 62 fewer than in the last academic year. Since September 2000, the school has received $162,034 in direct subsidy from the archdiocese and an additional $758,251 in support from private donors through ''patron programs,'' the statement said.
St. Ann's Parish School in Nyack, N.Y., currently has 66 students, about half of its enrollment of 124 in the 2000-01 academic year, the archdiocese said. After the school was nearly forced to close, a private donor pledged $100,000 a year for three years to help keep it open, but even that was not enough to meet expenses, according to the archdiocese.
In addition to the $300,000 gift, the school received $270,312 in direct subsidy from the archdiocese from 2000 to 2003 and is to get a $182,000 subsidy this fiscal year.
The Rev. Robert P. Henry, the pastor of St. Ann's parish, said that while his school's enrollment had fluctuated, the financial problems ultimately proved to be insurmountable.
''We have worked very, very hard -- myself , the principal, the teachers, the parents,'' he said. ''It was coming to the point where we would really have to lower the quality of education.'' He added, ''It was just decided we're not going to do that.''
The archdiocese said that each school would hold an information night next month to help parents pick another Catholic school nearby.
