At a news conference yesterday that was filled with hugs, jokes and unabashed good cheer, Bruce C. Ratner announced that he had officially signed a contract to take control of the Nets, whom he plans to move to Brooklyn in about three years.
It was Ratner's birthday and a host of New York politicians -- who had joined him at the Brooklyn Academy of Music -- said there could have been no better gift than having his $300 million purchase of the Nets completed.
To house the team, Ratner plans to build an 800,000-square-foot sports arena with 19,000 seats in an unused railroad yard that lies between Flatbush and Atlantic Avenues.
Brooklyn has not had a major league professional sports team since Sept. 24, 1957, the day of the Dodgers' last game in Brooklyn before Walter O'Malley moved them to Los Angeles. Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg reminded the crowd that it was 46 years, 3 months and 29 days ago.
''It's the right place to put it,'' Bloomberg said of the arena. ''It's a huge win for Brooklyn.''
Bloomberg said that he expected the arena to generate about $400 million a year through various economic activities. He said construction of the arena would create about 10,000 jobs and that its operation would create a few thousand more. In addition, Ratner plans to build some 2.1 million square feet of office space over the railroad yard. His plan also calls for the construction of about 4,000 housing units, from low-income properties to luxury apartments.
Among the public officials who spoke at the event were Marty Markowitz, the Brooklyn borough president, Bloomberg, Gov. George E. Pataki and Senator Charles Schumer.
The self-deprecating Markowitz said the closest he had ever come to playing basketball had been holding coats on the sideline of games at his alma mater, Wingate High School in Brooklyn.
In what became a recurring joke, Markowitz said that he and Bloomberg, who are relatively short, were bucking for slots on Ratner's new team.
Pataki, who towered above his fellow politicians, suggested a game of two on two: Markowitz and Bloomberg versus him and Bernard King, the four-time N.B.A. All-Star forward, who was also at the news conference.
Ratner, who is the development partner of The New York Times Company in a new building for the newspaper's headquarters, spoke about his desire to include community residents in his building plans. About 100 families may have their homes seized for the project through eminent domain, and Ratner said that he would listen to their concerns.
Assemblyman Roger Green, who represents the neighborhood, spoke about the relationship between Branch Rickey, the onetime executive of the Dodgers, and Jackie Robinson. Green said he hoped that Ratner would show the same racial sensitivity and sense of social responsibility in his construction plans.
PRO BASKETBALL
