The Mars rover Spirit called home on Friday morning, re-establishing contact after two days of garbled transmissions. But mission controllers said that they were still confused by its brief messages and inconsistent behavior and that it would be some time before the problem could be diagnosed and repaired, if ever.
''I think many days, perhaps a couple of weeks, even under the best of circumstances,'' Peter Theisinger, project manager for the mission, said at a news conference at NASA's Jet Propulsion Laboratory here.
But Mr. Theisinger added that it was too soon to give up hope, saying, ''We've got a long way to go here with the patient in intensive care.''
Talking with journalists later, Edward J. Weiler, the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's associate administrator for space science, compared the problem to a jigsaw puzzle. ''We're starting to get some of the perimeter pieces,'' Mr. Weiler said.
The troubles with the rover are likely to lead mission controllers to take extra caution in deploying Opportunity, a robotic twin of the Spirit. That rover is to land on the opposite side of Mars at 12:05 a.m. on Sunday, Eastern Standard Time, in the second half of the $820 million mission.
With the limited data they received from the Spirit on Friday, mission controllers have determined that its power systems are working properly, and that it can hear and respond to commands from Earth. This will enable them to begin question-and-answer sessions with the rover to determine what ails it.
The rover's software has been crashing repeatedly, and the Spirit is unable to use its main antenna. It has also not shut itself down at night, draining batteries.
''I expect this to go on in this mode for several days,'' Mr. Theisinger said, ''talking to the spacecraft, gathering more data, whittling down theories, testing those theories against spacecraft observables and continuing that process.''
In the last two days, the computer on the Spirit has rebooted itself more than 60 times, but each time the problem recurs. ''For you at home, this is just like resetting your computer,'' Mr. Theisinger said. ''We should boot up fine.''
That leads him to suspect that something on the rover has broken, he said, and that the hardware failure is confusing the software.
''It is still critical,'' he went on. ''We are still critical. We do not know to what extent we can restore functionality to the system, because we don't know what the problem is.''
At the least, the diagnosis sessions are likely to cut deeply into the amount of exploration the rover will be able to do. Its mission, to examine the geology of what might be an ancient lake bed, was to last three months, and three weeks have already passed. Extending the mission may be troublesome, because dust collecting on the solar panels will reduce the power they can generate.
Controllers spent the first two weeks after the rover's landing on Jan. 3 checking out its systems. Last Saturday, it finally rolled off its platform and moved 10 feet on its first expedition, to examine a rock that scientists have named Adirondack.
The rover, which had been working almost flawlessly, began malfunctioning on Wednesday as it started its work on Adirondack. Controllers radioed a series of commands for the rover to pivot a mirror in an instrument to test its performance. ''That sequence did not run to completion,'' Mr. Theisinger said.
The instrument's motor is one area controllers are looking at, as well as the rover's most powerful antenna, which has not sent any data since the problems began.
Brief beeps via a smaller antenna were received by the orbiting Mars Global Surveyor on Wednesday night, but the message contained only a random series of meaningless 1's and 0's. Another beeping signal was received Thursday morning, but it also held no information.
Early Friday morning, mission controllers tried to hail the rover. It did not respond.
''As we were preparing to send a second beep,'' Mr. Theisinger said, ''the spacecraft talked to us.''
The message, dispatched at a glacial 10 bits per second, was heard about 7:34 a.m. Eastern Standard Time by NASA's Deep Space Network antennas near Madrid, and lasted 10 minutes. About an hour later, the flight controllers successfully communicated with the spacecraft for 20 minutes at 120 bits per second. The rover's most powerful antenna, when working, sends data at 11,000 bits per second.
A further problem, perhaps unrelated, is that the rover has not been shutting itself down at night as it should. The rover could exhaust its batteries overnight.
Even with dead batteries, the rover can still revive itself each morning with energy from its solar panels, and recharge the batteries. But if the condition persists, it could limit the rover's activities if it is resuscitated. On Friday afternoon, when the Spirit should have been sleeping, it sent a large burst of data, mostly gibberish, to the Mars Odyssey as it passed overhead.
The rover Opportunity will make its plunge through Mars atmosphere about midnight on Saturday, aiming for a spot on the other side of Mars from the Spirit. Like its twin, the Opportunity will be slowed first by a parachute, then retrorockets. Finally, at a height of about 30 feet, it will be dropped, and the rover, encased in a cocoon of air bags, will bounce and roll for perhaps half a mile before coming to a stop.
At the news conference on Friday, Wayne Lee, chief engineer for entry, descent and landing for the rovers, said the Spirit's landing worked mostly as expected, although the craft was buffeted by a large gust of wind just before landing. The retrorockets were able to compensate, Mr. Lee said, slowing the speed of the rover's first bounce to 25 miles per hour from 50 m.p.h. The air bags are designed to cushion impacts up to 60 m.p.h.
The unrolling of the tether connecting the retrorockets and the rover, encased in air bags, also took longer than expected, so controllers have modified the Opportunity's landing sequence to deploy the parachute at a higher altitude.
The Opportunity's target is a region known as Meridiani Planum, which contains a deposit of iron oxide the size of Oklahoma. The iron oxide, known as hematite, interests scientists, because on Earth, it usually forms in the presence of water.
