Bobby Sanabria, a New York jazz drummer and educator with a barking voice, stood behind a microphone on Thursday afternoon in a crisp black suit. He was in a conference room at the Sheraton New York Hotel on Seventh Avenue and in full teaching mode.
''This is a historic occasion,'' he boomed, speaking of the panel discussion that was about to start in front of about 200 people.
It did not look very historic: there was no bouquet of news microphones on the table, and it was not being taped for television. Nearly everyone in the room -- participants in the annual International Association of Jazz Education conference -- came in with a dogged, slightly dazed look, clutching their schedules. The name of this particular discussion was ''The Contributions and Influence of Latino Musicians in Jazz: A Supreme Historical Oversight.''
But for a speedy hour -- it felt far too short -- Mr. Sanabria and his panelists showed how Puerto Ricans, Cubans, Mexicans, Panamanians and other Latinos have brought their music and their culture into jazz since the music's prehistory, naming names and citing specific accomplishments.
The panelists, mainly historians and musicians, directly challenged the perception that jazz in America is principally black and/or white, suggested that the subgenre name ''Latin jazz'' is a ghettoizing subdivision, since all jazz is inherently Latin, and pointed out that nearly all canonical histories of jazz are basically underinformed on these issues.
A valid theory of jazz is that it evolves according to whatever information is available in any given place at any given time. Jazz musicians are involved in both high art and popular culture: they are intellectually hungry but keep their ears to the ground. The conference -- this year's is the 31st -- is a huge, buzzing mainframe of information on jazz of all kinds; there was nothing like it before.
The conferences started in the early 1970's as meetings primarily for jazz educators, the charismatic, mustached, earth-tone suited men with quarter-note lapel pins who direct high school and college jazz bands. Since then, particularly in the last five years, it has expanded to become a meeting place for musicians, critics and journalists, historians, broadcasters, record and concert producers, publicists and so on.
Attendance this year was close to 8,000, and the four days of day-and-night panels, presentations and performances have been filling up five floors of two midtown hotels, the Sheraton New York and the Hilton New York. And an indication of the conference's wider influence, the quality of the jazz shows -- unaffiliated with the conference -- booked in New York's clubs this weekend far exceed the usual high standards: it's like an unacknowledged festival.
Jazz may have gone through its solipsistic, self-indulgent phases. But the best panels and workshops dealt with the concrete issues of cultural identity and how jazz musicians seek out and use specific information that is not second nature to them.
In a morning panel on Indian music and jazz, the saxophonist Rudresh Mahanthappa talked about growing up in Colorado and absorbing jazz as any American might have in the 1980's, starting with Grover Washington Jr. and ending with Charlie Parker and John Coltrane. But by the time he became serious about playing jazz, he was confronted with the question of how his South Indian heritage might become part of his work. At first he found it oppressive; he said he felt misunderstood and was skeptical of even trying to reconcile the two. But some records by the shehani player Bismillah Khan drifted into his hands, and he began to understand how they informed Coltrane's music in the 1960's; now he had something to work with.
But Mr. Sanabria's panel was the purest example of this principle. Though its explosive title made it sound as if it were about race, it was basically about information. (The racial considerations were there but secondary.) First he mentioned the 1884 World's Industrial and Cotton Exposition in New Orleans, at which Mexico was a principal exhibitor, and at which 80 musicians from the the Eighth Regiment Mexican cavalry band were performers. Those musicians stayed in New Orleans; one of them, Florenzo Ramos, became the founder of the musicians' union there.
Later, explained the historian Rene Lopez, when Louis Armstrong was developing as a musician, he listened a great deal to the Cuban trumpeter Manuel Pérez. Pérez had moved to New Orleans at the turn of the century, when many Cuban musicians during the war of independence against Spain were persecuted. Armstrong himself said a great deal of his trumpet tone came from studying Pérez's.
And so on and so forth, on up to the present. It all proved that understanding jazz history comes down to a matter of specifics: who heard what at which time. The music students, historians and aficionados present who had not known the specifics, having heard the panel, will no doubt start thinking in a different way. Historic is probably the right word, after all.
