Venus Williams was shrieking with every groundstroke, groaning with every serve: a telltale sign that what was happening in the third round at Rod Laver Arena against Lisa Raymond was risky business.
Williams seldom raises her volume unless she needs to raise her game, and she was in serious need as the baseline rallies stretched on and the unforced errors piled up. But though Williams could change the soundtrack, she could not change the flow of this surprising match, and her comeback to professional tennis after a six-month layoff did not last past the first week of the Australian Open.
''I'm pretty much in shock,'' Williams said shortly after losing, 6-4, 7-6 (5). ''But that's the way I feel after every loss, whether I've been off or on or what have you.''
Raymond's remarkable victory was not only the result of Williams's rustiness. Best known for her doubles prowess, the 30-year-old Raymond has traditionally had difficulty keeping her nerve against the game's best singles players on the game's biggest stages. With her attacking instincts, flashy volleys and versatile backhand, she has the style of play to bother them, yet she has seldom been able to punch through the third-set pressure.
On Saturday, she avoided that problem altogether by not allowing Williams the luxury of a third set. At 5 feet 5 inches, she is eight inches shorter than Williams, but she routinely matched her imposing opponent's shots. She attacked early and, for a change, attacked late, too: ripping big forehand returns off Williams's second serves, more than holding her own in the baseline rallies and charging the net effectively.
In her three previous matches against Williams, Raymond had not come close to winning a set. What was the difference on Saturday?
''Just believing; believing that I deserved to be on the court with her and believing that I was able to beat her,'' the 25th-seeded Raymond said.
Raymond, who had never reached the fourth round here in 10 previous appearances, acknowledged that the Williams sisters had lost some of their mystique in their extended absence. Venus's younger sister Serena is not expected to return from her layoff until next month in Paris.
''I think to a degree they've certainly lost a little bit of their luster,'' Raymond said. ''But at the same time, you know they're going to play well. You know that they're going to compete. You know they're hungry, probably hungrier than ever now that they have been off the Tour for so long, and they want to come back and establish themselves. So, I think it works a little bit both ways.''
Raymond has received plenty of support this week from her new doubles partner, Martina Navratilova. Raymond began playing at the end of last season with Navratilova, who is now a 47-year-old doubles specialist, and their main goal this year is to compete in the Olympics for the United States.
''She's just been great,'' Raymond said. ''I knew playing doubles with her was not only going to be an unbelievable partnership on the doubles court, but she was going to help my singles, too. And she has already.''
On Saturday morning before the match, Navratilova sent Raymond a text message that read, ''Just be brave and believe in yourself.''
''I thought about that out there today,'' Raymond said.
Williams, who was given a special seeding here of No. 3, had not played in an official tournament since the Wimbledon final last July because of an injured abdominal muscle and the death of her older half-sister Yetunde Price, who was murdered in Compton, Calif., in September.
Asked whether she might have won a match like this without her layoff, Williams answered: ''I'd like to think so, but what I need to do is just put my break behind me and keep moving on with the now and with each match that I play from here. And learn from each one, learn from each one.''
Williams said her long-injured stomach muscle was not a problem here, and it certainly did not appear to be a concern as she struck huge serve after huge serve. She hit 12 aces in the second set alone, finishing with 14. But she appeared hesitant in her movement on occasion, perhaps attributable to the mild right ankle sprain she sustained in the first round. Or perhaps attributable to the tendinitis that occasionally resurfaces in her right knee. Or perhaps attributable to something else. Williams was not saying.
''Everybody has their issues, I don't really want to get into that,'' she said.
Williams's loss created major opportunities for those in her quarter of the draw. Raymond's fourth-round opponent will be the French teenager Tatiana Golovin, who turns 16 on Sunday and had never won a Grand Slam singles match until arriving here. Golovin, who was born in Russia and has trained in the United States for seven years, defeated No. 23 Lina Krasnoroutskaya of Russia, 6-2, 7-6 (4), on Saturday.
Andy Roddick, the top-seeded men's player, advanced on Friday night with a 6-2, 6-0, 6-2 defeat of his fellow American Taylor Dent. Roddick will face Sjeng Schalken of the Netherlands in the fourth round. Three other American men are also in the round of 16: James Blake, Robby Ginepri and the defending champion, Andre Agassi, who overwhelmed Thomas Enqvist of Sweden, 6-0, 6-3, 6-3. Agassi will face Paradorn Srichaphan of Thailand in the next round; Ginepri, into a Grand Slam fourth round for the first time in his career, will face No. 9 Sébastien Grosjean of France.
TENNIS
