Four large school bus companies that repeatedly let the diesel engines on thousands of their buses idle far longer than allowed by law agreed yesterday to reduce idling time near schools to no more than a minute, according to the state attorney general's office.
Three of the companies also agreed to participate in a long-delayed state program to retrofit some buses with new exhaust filters. Combined with ultra-low sulfur fuel, the filters substantially reduce harmful exhaust emissions and soot that contribute to high rates of asthma and other illnesses.
In Harlem, where the settlement with the attorney general's office was announced, one child in four has asthma.
Attorney General Eliot Spitzer said that after a brief investigation last year, his office found that the four companies routinely parked their buses with the engine running for as long as half an hour. By doing so, they spewed 1.3 million tons of soot into the city's air. The idling also produced 60 tons of nitrogen oxides and 20 tons of carbon monoxide.
Mr. Spitzer said the bus operators agreed to comply with standards that were more rigorous than current laws. In New York City, trucks and buses with diesel engines may not idle for more than three consecutive minutes. The state law limits idling to no more than five minutes.
The four companies that signed the agreement operate 60 percent of the city's 6,000 yellow school buses, and compliance with the agreement will let them avoid substantial fines. Mr. Spitzer's office will investigate about a dozen other companies that operate the remaining 2,400 buses.
Craig L. Wilson, associate director of environmental health for the New York office of the American Lung Association, said that there was a ''definitive link'' between diesel emissions and asthma, premature mortality and lung cancer.
A check of the buses outside the same Harlem school where the settlement was announced Friday morning found that buses run by two of the companies in the settlement were left idling for as long as 15 minutes.
''Nobody told us about this,'' said the driver of an Atlantic Express Transportation Corporation bus that was observed idling for at least 15 minutes on the corner of 123rd Street and Morningside Avenue, half a block from the entrance to P.S. 135. The driver, who refused to give his name, shut off his engine after a reporter approached.
Peter H. Lehner, chief of the attorney general's Environmental Protection Bureau, said the companies had 30 days to fully implement the idling agreement. But today's performance, he said, ''shows there's a real problem there.''
The companies will also have to monitor their drivers and pay the city $47,000 to plant trees near schools.
Schools Chancellor Joel Klein said that by helping clean the city's air, the settlement would improve the health of the one million children who attend the city's public schools. Mr. Klein pointed out that until now, the companies had been reluctant to take steps to make their buses run cleaner, even though the New York Power Authority made more than $6 million available in 2001 to help cover the cost of installing new exhaust filters on 1,000 school buses.
Since then, not one bus has retrofitted. Peter R. Silverman, a lawyer representing the Atlantic Express Transportation Group and several other bus companies, said confusion in the state program caused the delay. But as part of the agreement, Atlantic and two other companies -- Consolidated Transportation Group and Pioneer Transportation Group -- have agreed to install the filters.
Mr. Lehner of the attorney general's office said there was not enough money in the program to cover the fourth company, Logan Transportation Group.
