A day after Gen. Wesley K. Clark was asked in a debate about his Democratic credentials, he was again confronting the subject on Friday, saying the question, by a Fox News anchor, was ''part of a Republican Party agenda.''
The newsman, Brit Hume, one of the moderators, told General Clark at the debate on Thursday night that given his votes for Ronald Reagan and Richard M. Nixon, ''I think it is not unreasonable to ask you when you first noticed that you were a Democrat.''
General Clark responded by saying he had voted for Democrats in the last three presidential elections. But when the issue popped up again on Friday, he took his swipe at Mr. Hume.
''I looked at who asked the question,'' he said, ''and you know, I think that that's part of a Republican Party agenda in the debate.''
Asked later about that assessment, a Clark campaign spokesman, Jamal Simmons, described Fox as ''a right-wing network.''
To some Democrats, General Clark's response and his inability to put to rest this and a number of other campaign distractions are a sign of the difficulties he faces in his first run for political office.
Howard Wolfson, former executive director of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee, said General Clark's linking Mr. Hume's question to a Republican agenda indicated problems greater than merely being inexperienced as a candidate. ''That is not a good answer,'' Mr. Wolfson said. ''I think a lot of Democrats are asking the same question. It is not limited to people who work for Fox.''
General Clark has also become tangled this week in questions about his stance on abortion, and in lingering doubts about his position on the war in Iraq.
Just a few weeks ago, he was on the rise in New Hampshire. But in the last few days, Senator John Kerry has been gaining in the polls here while the retired general has been steady or falling, a development raising the question of whether his candidacy may have peaked.
One week ago, he drew more than 1,800 people to a rally in Pembroke, N.H., where the filmmaker and author Michael Moore called President Bush a deserter, a reference to Mr. Bush's attendance record when he served in the Texas Air National Guard.
Since that rally, General Clark has faced questions about whether he agrees with the remark. Some Democrats say his answers, in which he has defended Mr. Moore's right to free speech but did not say until Friday that he disagreed with the characterization, have not been entirely convincing.
When asked in Thursday's debate about Mr. Moore's comment, General Clark said: ''Well, I think Michael Moore has the right to say whatever he feels about this. I don't know whether this is supported by the facts or not. I've never looked at it. I've seen this charge bandied about a lot.''
Tony Coelho, a Democratic strategist who served as Al Gore's campaign manager in 2000 but who like Mr. Wolfson has not aligned himself with any of the current candidates, said Friday that the response ''tells us that he is inexperienced at this business.''
''I understand his unwillingness to take on a supporter,'' Mr. Coelho said. But, he said, General Clark should have said that he disagreed with the description and tried to put it behind him. ''His answer tells me he's not ready for the big time,'' Mr. Coelho said.
The issue was still alive on Friday. At a news conference here, General Clark said, ''I can't agree with Michael Moore, but I can't dispute his right to say what he feels.''
''I think there is a larger issue in here in this,'' he added, ''and that is the issue of freedom of speech.''
Chris Lehane, a senior communications strategist for the Clark organization, dismissed the criticism of the general, saying the fact that he is not a practiced politician is exactly the campaign's point.
''I think he is not going to communicate like your antiseptic, blow-dried, poll-tested, typical Washington, D.C., politician,'' Mr. Lehane said. ''But there is no one else in the race who has run a war, who has negotiated a peace and ended a genocide,'' a reference to General Clark's tenure as NATO commander during the Kosovo war.
Others remain unconvinced, however. Mr. Coelho said General Clark's responses in the last couple of weeks ''show that he is a little out of sync.''
''When you run for president, there is a presumption of being a leader,'' he said. ''People don't care as much if they disagree with you. They just want to be able to trust you.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE GENERAL  Editors' Note:  January 27, 2004, Tuesday  An article on Saturday about Gen. Wesley K. Clark's difficulties in his first run for office quoted him as saying that a question about his Democratic credentials by the Fox News anchor Brit Hume at a debate on Thursday was ''part of a Republican Party agenda.'' The article also quoted a spokesman for General Clark as criticizing the network.
