There is a seemingly endless stream of entertaining, moving and historically significant documentaries at the Sundance Film Festival this year, on subjects ranging from the rock group Metallica to Imelda Marcos. One of the hottest tickets has been ''Super Size Me,'' the McDonald's Corporation's worst nightmare. It's a film by Morgan Spurlock about his decision to eat nothing but McDonald's food for one month to see what effect it would have on his body.
Both he and his doctors were amazed to find that after just 20 days, the 33-year-old Mr. Spurlock, who started in supreme physical condition, was almost in liver failure. They encouraged him to abandon the diet, but he continued through the month, gaining a total of 25 pounds and finding himself depressed and listless.
While on the McDiet, Mr. Spurlock said in an interview, he felt ''horrible'': ''Physically, emotionally. I was ashen, pale, my energy level was low. Then I'd eat the food, I'd feel great, and an hour later I'd feel hungry again.''
He said he believed that McDonald's loads its food with so much fat, salt, sugar and caffeine that it becomes addictive. The doctors who monitored his progress are now writing a medical paper about the effects of the all-McDonald's diet on his body. In the film McDonald's declined to comment.
''My case was extreme,'' he admitted. ''But some people eat at McDonald's three and four times a week.''
Another film on everyone's lips at this Sundance Film Festival is ''The Motorcycle Diaries,'' a travelogue through Latin America recounting the political awakening of Che Guevara.
Gael García Bernal (''Y Tu Mamá También'') plays the young Ernesto Guevara before he became the revolutionary leader Che, chronicling his transformation from adventurous young member of the Buenos Aires bourgeoisie to radical devoted to social change through revolution.
But the film is remarkably nonpolitical. Based on Che's own diaries, it starts out like a milder version of the racy Mexican film ''Y Tu Mamá'' -- two men on the road, heterosexual tension in the air, lots of swearing in Spanish -- but slowly shifts into a different gear.
Traveling the continent on a beat-up motorcycle with his best friend, Alberto Granada, Che encounters peasants thrown off their land by the government, Communists forced to work in dangerous mines, sprawling cities filled with impoverished children. The pair end up volunteering in a leper colony.
The Brazilian filmmaker Walter Salles (''Central Station'') shot the film's lyrical, lush images in sequence, the crew retracing the trip through Chile, Peru and Venezuela. He said he had tried to keep the film from becoming dogmatic.
''This was a film about the crystallization of identities, first a Latin American identity and then two characters who at the end of their journey find out who they are,'' said Mr. Salles, 47, in an interview after the premiere. ''I wanted it to be a political film, but not a dogmatic film.''
During the filming, Mr. Salles said he could not help but notice that most of the social disparities that transformed Che Guevara in 1952 into a revolutionary still existed. That did not discourage him, he said.
''One thing I feel stronger than ever is the necessity for change,'' Mr. Salles said. ''If the film reaches a younger audience, I hope it will inspire people to read 'The Motorcycle Diaries,' to have the impression that change can occur.''
Guevara died in 1967. Mr. Granada lives in Cuba but was denied a visa to attend the festival.
The filmmaker Ramona Diaz spent five years making a film about Imelda Marcos that went beyond the shoes. Mrs. Marcos did not attend the festival but participated in the documentary.
In ''Metallica: Some Kind of Monster,'' the filmmakers Joe Berlinger and Bruce Sinofsky (''Brother's Keeper'') chronicle the intimate emotions of the most successful heavy metal band of all time, Metallica. The band members turn out to have a lot more emotions than one might have guessed.
The filmmakers had access to the group's sessions with its therapist, who dissects the conflicts and resentment built up over nearly 20 years of recording ear-splitting music together.
Often comical, the sessions allow the audience to get to know and like the band members James Hetfield, Lars Ulrich and Kirk Hammett, and to learn that for Metallica, like many of us, life needs balance: ballet recitals and jam sessions both have their place.
Since 1996 the filmmakers had been trying to convince the band to allow them to make something more than just a behind-the-scenes documentary. In 2000 they finally agreed.
''They were all hitting 40, things were tumultuous in the band -- they were ready to open up,'' Mr. Sinofsky said. Mr. Berlinger had just finished a disastrous directing project, ''Book of Shadows: Blair Witch 2,'' and was looking to reaffirm his love for moviemaking.
But what started as a six-month project stretched into two years as Mr. Hetfield left the band for rehab, the album was on hold and the filmmakers kept shooting. ''The budget kept escalating,'' Mr. Berlinger said, ''what was going to be a one-hour special of them in therapy continued for two years.''
The film's budget ultimately swelled to $4 million, and Metallica's record label, Elektra, which owned half the project, had had enough. The band bought out Elektra's ownership for $2 million and let the filmmakers complete the film. The band had ultimate control over the finished work but changed almost nothing, the filmakers said. ''We've really grown to love them,'' Mr. Sinofsky said.
Mr. Berlinger bristled at the notion that some might compare their film to the heavy metal spoof ''Spinal Tap'': ''I get touchy about 'Spinal Tap.' '' ''This is a heroic portrayal of guys who we think'' are cool, he said. ''It's the greatest professional experience I've had.''
REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK
