James Tillis has never set foot in Cameron Indoor Stadium at Duke, but he is there every day, his picture taped to the locker of his daughter, Iciss Tillis.
Twenty-two years after he lost to Mike Weaver in a World Boxing Association heavyweight title fight, Iciss is now the family's world-class athlete, a 6-foot-5 senior forward for the Duke women's basketball team who won a silver medal last summer with the United States team at the Pan American Games.
Her father's picture is a constant motivator as she pushes herself to help the Duke women win their first N.C.A.A. title. The top-ranked Blue Devils are 15-1 heading into Saturday night's showdown against No. 2 Tennessee.
But the picture is not a tribute. It is a reminder of all Tillis hopes she will never be.
''This is the year to win a national championship,'' she said recently. ''I just feel like I'd be such a failure. I'd feel like I didn't finish if we didn't win one before I left and that bothers me, because every time I don't finish something, I feel like I'm regressing back and I'm going to end up like my dad: a nobody.''
Quick Tillis, as he was known, was somebody back in the 1980's. He lost the title fight to Weaver in 1981, shortly before Iciss was born. In 1985, he had a small role as the boxer Buster in the movie, ''The Color Purple.'' And in 1986, Tillis became the first boxer to go the distance with a young Mike Tyson, lasting 10 rounds before losing a unanimous decision.
But Iciss Tillis says her father never went the distance for her. After her parents divorced when she was 6, James Tillis severed his relationship with her.
''Their relationship hasn't been the best,'' said her mother, Melanie Hughes-Morris, in a telephone interview. ''Especially from the age of 13, the formative years, when she really realized during those years what kind of dad he really was, not really being there.''
James Tillis remains in Tulsa, Okla., where he earns a living working on ranches. He rarely sees his daughter. He has never attended a Duke basketball game, even when the Blue Devils played in Tulsa last season.
''I told her I did the best I could,'' Tillis said in a recent telephone interview. ''Tell her that I love her.
''I'm going to see her play when I'm able to; I've got a lot of pride. I've seen her on TV playing. I told her the sky's the limit.''
Iciss Tillis has already shown that at Duke, and not just on the court. It's not just about her height. It's her look: the dreadlocks, the outfits, the baby oil gel she puts on before games so she can shine on the court, the Jimmy Choo and Manolo Blahnik designer shoes she buys in bulk. She once strolled around campus in a blue unitard and white-spiked heels. She is majoring in economics and plans to play in the Women's National Basketball Association and attend law school. She also wants to become a Victoria's Secret model, she worships Oprah Winfrey and is a faithful follower of the show ''Sex and the City.''
''She's brought great fashion sense to our team,'' Duke Coach Gail Goestenkors said with a laugh.
Not to mention campus recognition. In four years, Tillis and guard Alana Beard have lifted Duke to the upper echelons of women's basketball. The Blue Devils have reached the Final Four the past two seasons. Tillis and Beard were named to the Kodak all-American first team last season.
Tillis is quick like her father, quicker than the other post players in the women's college game. She is also an outside threat -- she is just as likely to launch a 3-pointer as she is to post up an opponent in the paint.
''We had a game the other night and she hit a 3 and two plays later, she tried to dunk the ball,'' Goestenkors said. ''And then she hit a 15-foot jumper and then she made a really beautiful pass to somebody for a layup. And I thought, 'How many people in America can do what she just did?' ''
Perhaps nobody else has that combination of size, skill, quickness and vision in the women's college game. Yet few would rate Tillis ahead of the top two players in the country: Connecticut's Diana Taurasi and Beard. Sometimes Tillis's performance does not match her ability.
''When you have that much talent, there comes an expectation,'' said the former player and coach Nancy Lieberman, now an analyst for ESPN. ''I think it's something Iciss has to recognize and accept. When you're that good, when you're one of the elite players, it's going to come with a different price.''
Tillis would be the first to say she struggled in last year's N.C.A.A. tournament, particularly in the semifinal game against Tennessee, when she had 9 points and 5 rebounds.
Tillis is trying to spend more time in the post and is working to become more of a physical player, despite a reputation for avoiding contact. She is averaging 11.4 points this season; she was averaging 18 points before a six-game scoring slump. But she broke out with 21 points against Maryland on Thursday night.
''Am I ever going to be good enough?'' she said. ''That's the thing I'm going through right now -- the frustration. I feel like I have to come out and have a triple-double, dunk the ball over-the-head-360 and maybe people will be like, 'Oh, she's not that bad.' ''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
