A federal judge said yesterday that she was generally satisfied with Microsoft's efforts to comply with the settlement terms in the government's antitrust case, after the company announced steps to make it easier for outside companies to license its technology.
The judge's comments come a week after the Justice Department, in a joint court filing with 16 states and the District of Columbia, said the November 2002 consent decree had ''fallen short'' of its goal of nurturing competition in the software industry.
''The decree seems to be operating,'' Judge Colleen Kollar-Kotelly said during a hearing yesterday in Federal District Court in Washington. ''We only have concerns about one provision.''
That provision, however, was also the focus of the Justice Department's criticism last week. It is intended to ensure fair competition in the market for server software for computers that run corporate networks. Unlike the personal computer operating system market, where it has a monopoly with Windows, Microsoft faces substantial competition in server software. I.B.M., Sun Microsystems, Oracle and others compete against Microsoft in the server market. So do more specialized rivals, like Real Networks, which makes server software for streaming music and video over the Internet.
This element of the consent decree called for Microsoft to share or license on reasonable terms the software it uses for sending data between personal computer and server versions of Windows. The remedy was included in the consent decree to prevent Microsoft from using its monopoly on the desktop to gain an unfair advantage in competition for server software.
To address that competitive concern, Microsoft introduced its ''communications protocol program'' in August 2002, before the consent decree was approved in court.
Microsoft announced yesterday that it was publishing free about 20 of the 113 protocols, or pieces of computer code, needed for smooth communications between desktop and server computers. The company also said it was simplifying its licensing terms for gaining access to the other communications protocols.
''It's all to make it easier for licensees,'' said Mary Snapp, a deputy general counsel at Microsoft.
Ms. Snapp also noted that the communications software licensing provision was only one part of the consent decree. Other provisions called on Microsoft to set uniform pricing and royalty fees for the 20 largest personal computer makers, a measure included to make sure Microsoft could not use discriminatory pricing to force PC makers to favor Microsoft over competitors.
Still, the communications licensing provision for server software companies will remain a focus of attention, not only in the United States but in Europe, where a major antitrust investigation of Microsoft is near a conclusion. Protecting competition in the server market is a major concern of the European Commission, which is expected to decide early this year whether to punish Microsoft.
Only 11 companies have licensed some of Microsoft communications protocols since August 2002. They include a few large companies, like EMC and Cisco, but nearly all of them have licensed specialized portions of the protocols for niche uses. The big companies with large server and middleware portfolios, like I.B.M. and Sun Microsystems, which really compete with Microsoft have not decided to seek a broad license under the program. Nor has Real Networks, Microsoft's major competitor in Internet media software.
Some companies that have looked at the licensing program say that the price is too high and that Microsoft's conditions are prohibitive.
One large company, for example, said a five-year general license would have cost it hundreds of millions of dollars, and Microsoft wanted the right to audit the company's customers and access to its intellectual property.
