A special prosecutor has begun presenting evidence to a grand jury about the improper disclosure of an undercover C.I.A. officer's identity and has advised several people who have been employed at the White House that they could be summoned to testify, senior officials said on Friday.
The prosecutor, Patrick J. Fitzgerald, began submitting evidence this week to a grand jury at the federal courthouse here. It was not immediately clear who faced subpoenas. At least some White House employees have been asked to meet informally with the prosecutor in what appeared to be a possible effort to obtain voluntary admissions of wrongdoing in exchange for offers of immunity, the officials said.
Mr. Fitzgerald's decision to use a criminal grand jury, first reported by Time magazine on its Web site, www.time.com, was not unexpected, but it did ratchet up the seriousness of the criminal inquiry, raising a possibility of courthouse appearances by Bush administration officials compelled to testify under oath.
Mr. Fitzgerald has been pushing to obtain the cooperation of witnesses close to the White House who might otherwise be subpoenaed to testify before the grand jury, officials said. Such a tactic is routine in criminal cases. It often results in agreements in the form of immunity pledges or plea deals that can provide prosecutors with additional evidence to use against other suspects.
Law enforcement officials said few details were known about the status of the case, because Mr. Fitzgerald had operated in secrecy, remaining United States attorney in Chicago. At times, he has refused to tell associates when he would arrive in Washington. As a result, it was not clear who at the White House had been invited to meet Mr. Fitzgerald. Nor was it clear how many were current or former employees, although the list does include relatively high-level staff members, the officials said. A spokesman for Mr. Fitzgerald declined to discuss the case.
The Justice Department named Mr. Fitzgerald last month to lead the investigation after Attorney General John Ashcroft withdrew amid concerns about the appearance of a conflict. Mr. Fitzgerald is a veteran prosecutor known for aggressiveness and persistence, and he has extensive experience in using grand juries to obtain indictments in difficult terrorism cases like those he managed in the 1990's in New York.
Mr. Fitzgerald's use of the grand jury could prove awkward for the White House, which has sought to control the damage over accusations that unidentified administration officials leaked the name of the C.I.A. operative, Valerie Plame, in retaliation for her husband's public criticism of President Bush's policies on Iraq last summer. This week, a group of former intelligence officers pressed Congressional leaders to open a separate review into the case because they were concerned that the Justice Department was not moving quickly enough.
Joseph C. Wilson IV, the former ambassador who is married to Ms. Plame, said on Friday that neither he nor his wife had been subpoenaed for the grand jury.
''If it's useful for them to have me there,'' Mr. Wilson said, ''I'm happy to do it, but I really have no idea what to expect.''
His lawyer, Christopher Wolf, said he was unaware of the grand jury proceedings, but that ''the investigation seems to have been lagging, so this has to be seen as a positive development.''
Senator Charles E. Schumer, the New York Democrat who has led the calls for an aggressive investigation, said the report on the grand jury suggested that investigators might be zeroing in on suspects.
''Inevitably,'' Mr. Schumer said, ''you don't convene a grand jury unless there's something serious.''
White House officials refused to discuss any grand jury developments or whether employees had been contacted or subpoenaed, but they affirmed President Bush's commitment to resolve the four-month-old inquiry.
''No one wants to get to the bottom of this more than the president of the United States,'' the White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, said. ''And that's why he directed the White House to cooperate fully with the officials at the Department of Justice who are looking into this.''
Using a grand jury offers valuable tools, current and former prosecutors said. It allows investigators to obtain testimony from witnesses and subpoena telephone logs and other records that people may be unwilling to turn over voluntarily, and it gives them some cover by giving the grand jury, at least officially, the final say over whether there is enough evidence to indict anyone. Using a grand jury ''is a prelude to the end,'' a former senior Justice Department official said.
Prosecutors ''could never get away with shutting this thing down without putting the principals before a grand jury,'' the former official said. ''This way, you force them to testify or take the Fifth.''
Under case law on journalists' First Amendment privilege, prosecutors generally have to show they have exhausted all other means of identifying an illegal leak before subpoenaing a reporter, officials said.
Neither the syndicated columnist who printed the name, Robert Novak, nor any other journalists in the case are known to have been subpoenaed. A decision on subpoenaing a journalist must be made at the highest levels of the Justice Department, normally by the attorney general, under guidelines. Because Mr. Ashcroft has left the case, that decision would be left to Mr. Fitzgerald.
