The inflation in the number of life masters since the title was created in 1936 has been astonishing, reminiscent of German currency in the 1920's. In 1937 there was one new addition to the ranks, but in 2003 there were 2,259.
To start this year, there were seven new life masters at the Tristate Regional in Rye, N.Y., which ended Monday. One of them was Lynne Greenberg Koeppel, who reached the final of the Compact Knockout Teams with Susan Wexler, Judi Radin and Shelly Ferenbach. They eliminated a top-ranked group in the semifinal, then succumbed to a team led by Jacqui Mitchell, a 2003 inductee into the Bridge Hall of Fame.
The diagramed deal was not easy to analyze. Against three no-trump, Wexler led a club from the West position, and dummy's queen won. South finessed the diamond 10, losing to the king. The heart eight was returned, a slight deception, and the declarer finessed in this suit, playing the 10. Koeppel, sitting East, ducked smoothly, and South was left in the dark. He took another diamond finesse and continued the suit, establishing a winner.
East shifted to a spade, and after taking the ace, West led her remaining heart. South finessed the jack and went down to defeat. This defense was praised by the experts, but in theory it was wrong. If South judges the position correctly, he can arrive at this tricky ending after surrendering the fourth round of diamonds:
East must lead a spade, and if South plays the queen, he cannot be defeated. West does best to win and return a heart, but the declarer can win with the king and lead a spade from the dummy. East cannot prevent the dummy from taking three tricks, and South has nine.
But if East takes her heart queen at the third trick and returns a heart, the contract can be defeated. That is not easy to see.
The International Fund Game, which supports American representation in world championships, will be played this afternoon at these clubs:
Manhattan: Honors, 115 East 57th Street
Long Island: FrankLin, 340 Dogwood Avenue, Franklin Square
Vanderbilt, 2500 Marcus Avenue, Lake Success
110 Club, 135 Spagnoli Road, Melville
Westchester-Rockland: Bridge Deck, 313 Central Avenue, Scarsdale
Harte's, 1131 North Street, White Plains
Rockland, 27 Kennedy Drive, Spring Valley
New Jersey: Essex, 95 West Mount Pleasant Avenue, Livingston
Plaza, 257 Prospect Avenue, West Orange
Wyckoff, 424 West Main Street, Wyckoff
BRIDGE
