Some of the prospective jurors in the Martha Stewart case say they have lost money on their investments as a result of recent corporate scandals or have been victims of crime, transcripts released yesterday show. Some of them may end up serving on the jury when it is chosen next week.
About 50 people will return to court Monday for the final round in jury selection, which began with questionnaires on Jan. 4 and intensified this week behind closed doors under an order by Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum that seeks to promote candor from the prospective jurors by barring reporters from the proceedings.
During the session on Monday, lawyers for both sides will use peremptory challenges to pick jurors they prefer. The prosecution has 6 challenges; the defense will have 10, a person briefed on the case said.
The prospective jurors were asked in the questionnaires about events at Enron, Tyco, Adelphia and other companies caught up in corporate scandal. On Thursday, according to the transcripts, one man, identified as Juror 102 and described as an equities analyst in the ''telecom, machinery and utility context,'' told the court that ''I see a lot of corruption, and it seems very widespread.''
He was excused from serving on the jury, but another man who said he lost money in a mutual fund that had invested in Enron remained in the group. Another man who was defrauded when his friend created fake trading in biotechnology stocks, using his account and others, also remained.
A woman identified as Juror 101 told of once owning stock in Ms. Stewart's company and of continuing to buy products through the company's Web site. She also told of relatives who had had their purses stolen; she remained in the group. Later, a woman who admitted that she felt that the crimes Ms. Stewart had been charged with were ''probably not as bad as what a lot of people have done and gotten away with'' was excused from serving.
Another woman, who had been interviewed Tuesday and seemed to be highly desired by Ms. Stewart's team -- one of her lawyers volunteered to baby-sit after the woman said she could not leave her teenage children alone while she sat on a jury for several weeks -- was dismissed after the judge cited concerns about ''her demeanor'' and ''her body language.''
After four days of interviewing prospective jurors, lawyers involved in the case indicated late yesterday that they were nearing the end of the process, and one said that opening arguments in the case would begin Tuesday.
Ms. Stewart, the former chairman and chief executive of Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, is charged with five crimes including conspiracy and securities fraud. She appeared weary but determined as she left the courthouse late yesterday. Asked whether she had any comment, she replied, ''Good night.''
She is being tried with her former stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic, who is also accused of an assortment of crimes stemming from Ms. Stewart's 2001 sale of nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone Systems, a biotechnology company founded by her friend Samuel D. Waksal. Prosecutors contend that the two concocted a false tale about the reasons for Ms. Stewart's trade and that she made it after learning that members of Dr. Waksal's family were selling their own ImClone stock. While she does not face a criminal charge of insider trading, she faces a civil lawsuit brought by the Securities and Exchange Commission that accuses her of that.
Also Monday, lawyers representing news organizations that are seeking to have Judge Cedarbaum's order overturned will argue the case before the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. The United States attorney's office sent a letter to that court yesterday, suggesting that the issue may be moot because juror questioning has nearly ended.
