Iraq's most influential Shiite cleric asked his followers on Friday to suspend demonstrations demanding direct elections, even as a prominent political leader joined the call for such elections.
The cleric, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, asked his followers to wait while the United Nations decided whether to send a team to Iraq to weigh whether early direct elections were possible.
The growing chorus of calls for direct elections signaled increasing trouble for plans by the American occupation authorities to turn over sovereignty to Iraqi representatives in June without a popular vote.
Ayatollah Sistani, who lives off a narrow alleyway here in Najaf, delivered his message through a representative at a mosque in Karbala, a holy city nearby.
Last Monday, before American and Iraqi officials met at the United Nations to discuss Ayatollah Sistani's demands, as many as 100,000 people marched through Baghdad in support of the cleric. It was the largest demonstration in Iraq since Saddam Hussein's government was ousted in April, and it came as Shiite religious leaders were beginning to realize their enormous influence on American policy here.
American officials still insist they will hold caucus-style ballots in Iraq's 18 provinces to select members of a transitional assembly, though they have said they are willing to make some changes in this mechanism. L. Paul Bremer III, the top American administrator in Iraq, has repeatedly said there is not enough time to organize direct elections before June 30.
But a prominent member of the Iraqi Governing Council, Ahmad Chalabi, contested that view in a speech at the American Enterprise Institute in Washington. ''Elections are possible,'' he said. ''Seek to make them possible, and they will be possible.''
Mr. Chalabi, who has had strong backing from the Pentagon, added that the caucuses proposed by American officials were a ''sure-fire way to have instability'' because they would result in a transitional assembly lacking legitimacy.
Direct elections would favor Shiites, who make up more than 60 percent of the population in Iraq.
American and United Nations officials, who refused to be identified publicly, expressed irritation at Mr. Chalabi's comments. They said his true agenda was to feed the current impasse over the transition to self-rule in the hope that the United States would eventually empower the Iraqi Governing Council, on which he serves.
Mr. Chalabi joins other Shiite members of the Governing Council in calling for direct elections. Ibrahim Jafari, head of the Dawa Islamic Party, said Wednesday that he favored direct elections. Mowaffak al-Rubaie, an independent member of the council, said in an interview on Thursday that the caucuses would result in an illegitimate government.
Adnan Pachachi, the current chairman of the council and a Sunni Arab, has said he does not think quick direct elections are possible. He has reportedly asked the Bush administration to reach a compromise by expanding the Governing Council to 125 members, from 25, and turning it into an interim legislature.
Ayatollah Sistani has said that if the United Nations sent a team of experts to assess whether elections could be organized quickly, he would listen closely to their opinions. That helps explain why he has called for calm as Kofi Annan, the United Nations secretary general, continues to weigh whether to send such a mission here.
''This issue concerns all the sects that comprise the Iraqi people,'' Abdul-Mehdi al-Karbali, a representative of Ayatollah Sistani, said Friday at the mosque in Karbala, according to The Associated Press. ''Sunnis, Christians and all other sects are urged to support the religious order in its position, so that the occupation forces will not adopt any steps that serve their interests and that do not serve the interests of the Iraqi people.''
Protests can be held later if needed, he said, adding that the most senior clerics in Iraq were supporting a halt to demonstrations.
In an interview in Najaf on Friday, the son of one of those clerics said getting a United Nations electoral assessment team here was absolutely crucial.
''Who will supply legitimacy to the new government?'' said Muhammad Hussein al-Hakim, the son and spokesman of Grand Ayatollah Muhammad Said al-Hakim. ''I think you will agree with me when I say the U.N. or the rule of the U.N.''
In Baghdad, a two-person team composed of a military adviser and a security coordinator arrived on Friday to assess safety conditions on the ground for United Nations' Iraqi staff members and for the eventual return of its international workers, United Nations officials said.
Their presence was unrelated to Mr. Annan's pending decision on whether to send an electoral assessment team, a spokesman said. He added that a separate security team would have to prepare the ground for that mission.
American diplomats at the United Nations expressed frustration at the delay in sending experts to assess the prospects for elections. ''The U.N. said they wanted to have a significant role in the country, and now that we have offered them one, they seem to be dragging their feet,'' a senior American official said.
Lakhdar Brahimi, who has just returned from two years as the United Nations special envoy to Afghanistan, was invited to Washington on Thursday, where President Bush joined in the campaign to enlist him for Iraq, according to a senior United Nations diplomat.
Mr. Brahimi also met with Secretary of State Colin L. Powell; the national security adviser, Condoleezza Rice; and her aide on Iraq, Robert Blackwell. Mr. Brahimi told them he was not available and intended to take time off before taking up his new position as Mr. Annan's special adviser on peace and security, the diplomat said.
In late August, a suicide truck bomb exploded at the headquarters of the United Nations in Baghdad, killing 22 people. By October, the United Nations had withdrawn all its foreign workers, and Mr. Annan has said the tenuous security situation is the main reason the United Nations is reluctant to return.
Violence continues in Iraq.
A bomb planted at a branch office of the Iraqi Communist Party in Baghdad exploded on Thursday, killing two people and destroying much of the office. Eleven people, including two American soldiers, were killed in various attacks on Thursday, continuing a deadly string of assaults that began Sunday with a suicide car bombing at the American occupation headquarters.
