MANUEL BUSQUETS has starred in some of Colombia's most popular television soap operas, which are something of a religion in Latin America, including the blockbuster ''Cafe,'' watched with devotion from Havana to Buenos Aires.
With thick, wavy hair, big round eyes and the million-dollar smile of a man who has had an intensely comfortable life, Mr. Busquets, 59, has often been cast as the moneyed, hard-nosed landowner or the wise old doctor.
''I'm always the loving rich guy, and very handsome,'' he said with no trace of modesty. ''I have this rich-fellow face. Well, I come from a rich family, a very upper-class family.''
His father, a Spaniard from an aristocratic family, was an executive at Standard Oil; his mother is of Italian lineage. Mr. Busquets (pronounced Boose-KETS) himself has enjoyed the good life as a self-styled party boy, at one time jet-setting from Manhattan to Paris and Madrid.
Yet these days one of this country's most famous actors is playing against type. On a recent windswept day, he could be found in worn baggy pants and a T-shirt accompanied by a pack of some of Colombia's poorest youths -- former child soldiers of Marxist rebel groups -- on a tour of the street set where his latest soap was being filmed.
Mr. Busquets has taken it upon himself to teach them about a slice of life he is passionate about -- acting, directing and writing scripts, work he has been doing four decades.
''They want to know everything, I mean everything, right away,'' said a delighted Mr. Busquets. ''This is just simply delicious, to show them this world of fantasy, what is film, what is television.''
''Hang in there,'' he says to the children. ''Little by little we will see how it works. You will come away loving television. I promise.''
THE tour is part of a program Mr. Busquets decided to fashion a few months ago to teach former child soldiers about his profession, a proposal readily accepted by the government.
These are not just any poor children in a country with deep pockets of poverty. Most are now in their teens, and to Colombia's upper classes, they are little more than terrorists. They were pressed into fighting or recruited by Colombia's most violent insurgent groups. Some served as spies. Others became assassins. Some even killed their fellow teenage comrades.
''Their parents have been killed, some have been raped, they've been mistreated,'' Mr. Busquets said. ''They had no childhood.''
But as Colombia's government slowly tries to turn a corner in the civil war, these child fighters have been deserting the rebel armies in ever larger numbers. Weaving back into a social fabric already badly tattered by nearly four decades of war presents a special challenge. Mr. Busquets, who considers himself something of a patriot, said he wanted to do his part.
To him, the fact that these former rebels deserted and disarmed means that they have gone back to being children again, in need of love and attention. Many now live in halfway homes as part of a resettlement program set up by the government. But they often arrive there bewildered and scared, unfamiliar with city life and a broader society so vastly different from the isolated mountains where they once fought.
Mr. Busquets treats them like children once again, and he does not hide his affections when he is with the group -- ''my children,'' as he calls them.
''I have to teach them what I know,'' said Mr. Busquets, who is as raspy-voiced and dramatic in life as he is on television. ''We need to show them that people don't need to fear them. They need to get to know them. They don't have to be ashamed of their past.''
He effusively praises Monica, 17, who once helped National Liberation Army rebels plan attacks on isolated police posts, for her acting skills. He playfully teases one pint-size boy for being so small. He wrestles with others in the immaculately green lawn of the large house outside Bogotá where a group of 20 lives.
''He is a good man,'' said Yolanda, 17, who was until last summer in Colombia's largest and most violent rebel group. ''He gives us so much support. I did not think I would find people like him.''
AFTER years of work on screen and stage, Mr. Busquets, who never married and has no children of his own, could be taking it easy. His life is one surrounded by the trappings of success. His country home, framed by a weeping eucalyptus in the emerald highland fields outside Bogotá, is stacked with books. The walls feature the works of Luis Caballero, the famed Colombian painter, as well as decades-old posters of Spanish bullfights and a 17th-century French tapestry.
But Mr. Busquets, like the former child soldiers he teaches, also knows about hard falls and redemption. At one time he soaked himself with alcohol and was a hard-core drug user, a tailspin that he says began more than 30 years ago when he studied acting in Vancouver. Rum was his drink of choice. Cocaine was a constant companion. ''Imagine how good I could have been had I not been stoned all the time,'' he said. ''It stopped me from being brilliant.''
He was forced to sell his stake in a successful marketing company; his partner had told him his bouts of drinking were costing the company clients. Acting jobs began falling by the wayside. His career nearly collapsed.
Mr. Busquets said salvation came when one day when he took a close friend, dying of AIDS, to a religious revival. In a dramatic retelling in a Bogotá cafe, he recalled how he was healed on the spot and quit drinking and drugging cold turkey. He said he remained devoted to God to this day.
After studying acting, he played ''Wag,'' a giant bear, and entertained children from Alaska to Medicine Hat in community theater, good training for the vocation he has now adopted. ''I learned that for children, you have to give them all your energy,'' he recalled.
Now he is also trying to get a children's show, of which he is the host on a small television station, picked up by one of Colombia's major networks. The International Organization for Migration has expressed interest in financing an expansion of Mr. Busquets's theater classes.
On the recent shoot where the children accompanied him, in an elegant neighborhood of old Tudor-style homes, his young charges watched with wide-eyed fascination as the crew set up a scene from Mr. Busquets's latest soap opera, ''Retratos,'' or ''Images.''
In the scene, Alejandra, a passionate lover played by Angeli Moncayo, runs out of a house, trailed by cameramen. Moments later, another actor is shot in the street.
The children squealed with joy. They rattled off questions. How was the scene staged? How did the actors prepare for their roles? They also giggled at the make-believe violence they had just seen.
It did not look like the real thing, they said.
THE SATURDAY PROFILE
