Faced with a drastically changed political environment, Howard Dean's campaign said Friday night that it had scaled back its nationwide advertising until it got a better sense of its standing in the states voting on Feb. 3.
Rather, campaign officials said, they are focusing the bulk of their advertising here in New Hampshire, where they are considering introducing a new spot over the weekend featuring Dr. Dean's wife, Dr. Judith Steinberg Dean.
The re-jiggering of Dr. Dean's advertising strategy comes in response to a sharp reversal of fortunes in the Democratic campaign after Senator John Kerry's victory in the Iowa caucuses on Monday and Dr. Dean's surprising third-place finish.
It also comes as all of the campaigns begin to look more intensively beyond the two states they had focused on so far, New Hampshire and Iowa. Seven more states vote on Feb. 3, including Arizona, Delaware, Missouri, Oklahoma and South Carolina.
Steve McMahon, Dr. Dean's media adviser, said the pause in national advertising would most likely last only a few days, as the campaign waited to see how poll numbers shook out to determine in which states advertising would makes the most sense and where it would be a waste of money. That is a sharp shift from promises by Dr. Dean's advisers to run a ''50-state campaign,'' including thorough national advertising.
These officials said the pause had nothing to do with the campaign's finances, which they said remained robust.
''The smart thing to do is to spend when you have momentum and to marshal your resources and prepare for your next battle when momentum returns,'' Mr. McMahon said. ''It's a marathon, not a sprint. We trained for a marathon, and now we're ready to run one.''
Mr. McMahon said that the campaign was continuing to advertise on radio in South Carolina and that some viewers in states other than New Hampshire might continue to see Dr. Dean's advertisements, as stations showed spots that had been paid for but unexpectedly bumped.
Data provided by a rival campaign -- which Dr. Dean's campaign did not dispute -- showed that Dr. Dean had been heavily advertising in Arizona, New Mexico, South Carolina and, to a lesser extent, Oklahoma.
In Arizona, for instance, he spent nearly $932,000 before Jan. 20, the day after the Iowa caucuses, when the campaign chose not to buy more time before getting a sense of the new environment.
In South Carolina, he spent roughly $1.3 million through Jan. 20, the last day of its latest run in that state, according to the data.
The campaign has spent $750,000 in New Hampshire and in Boston in the last week alone, at or near the top of the Democratic field here for advertising spending.
Dr. Dean's campaign officials said their decision to scale back their national campaign was informed by lessons learned in Iowa, where Dr. Dean and Representative Richard A. Gephardt had advertised heavily throughout the fall. But as the two candidates turned their advertisements on each other, Mr. Kerry and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina made renewed, last-minute advertising pushes that many strategists have credited as helping them rejuvenate their campaigns.
And, Dr. Dean's campaign officials said that to advertise in states voting on Feb. 3 as Mr. Kerry is surging would be to throw money into the wind, an acknowledgment that Mr. Kerry's momentum, for now, seems to have legs.
Now, they said, they are hoping to rebuild their momentum, then flood advertising into those states where they believe they have the best chance to win a primary.
''Obviously, we're looking at a different situation than we were a week ago,'' said Joe Trippi, Dr. Dean's campaign manager. ''We have resources. I just don't want to make a mistake by putting too much into one place when we should put that money into states where we have a better chance.''
The campaign was still deliberating on Friday night whether to show a new commercial, shot after Dr. and Mrs. Dean sat for an interview with Diane Sawyer on ABC.
Dr. Dean's campaign officials said that in the new spot Mrs. Dean would laud her husband as a doctor and a father.
But officials said that they might not want to alter their current New Hampshire mix, which includes a recently added spot that shows Dr. Dean meeting last weekend with former President Jimmy Carter and ends with a prolonged shot of Dr. Dean smiling widely.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: ADVERTISING
