By now, New Yorkers should be used to seeing themselves portrayed in architectural renderings. Over the past year or so, in image after image, we have seen ourselves shown gazing at the wonders that will someday be built in Lower Manhattan. On Thursday, we got yet another glimpse of the future, when Santiago Calatrava's design for the new transportation hub at ground zero was revealed. If anything, the New Yorkers pictured in the computer renderings of this design appear too complacent. They should be pictured with looks of surprise and gratitude on their faces.
For the past two years, many of us have been waiting for a building that embodies grace and simplicity to fill the aching space tragically created on 9/11. Mr. Calatrava's station may well be that building. He explains its soaring twin-winged glass and steel arc with the image of a child releasing a dove, which is the kind of anticipatory architectural symbolism that has become familiar over the past few months. He quotes Matisse on the character of New York's extraordinary light -- something we don't often pause to notice -- and suggests that this station is itself a sculpture made out of that light.
But this permanent PATH station, which will replace the temporary one now in service, is likely to become the kind of creation that is iconic in its own right, that needs no explanatory buttressing. Its functional virtues will be as obvious as its aesthetic ones -- only appropriate in a station. As construction winds down in several years on this building and on the new Daniel Patrick Moynihan Station, New York will probably find itself in the extravagant position of possessing three of the greatest stations ever built.
It's worth noting that Mr. Calatrava's design came about in an old-fashioned way: a client hired an architect. No public process, none of the constant oversight that has helped shape other designs in Lower Manhattan. In this case, the client is the Port Authority. A few years ago, the thought that the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey could have grasped the eloquence of Mr. Calatrava's idiom would have seemed almost absurd. But as Mr. Calatrava points out, he discovered, in working with the men and women of the Port Authority, a ''hidden emotion'': the echo, of course, of what they lost on Sept. 11. We do not usually suspect such institutions of having emotions, hidden or otherwise. It is the extraordinary achievement of this building that it catches that emotion and translates it for us to share.
