En route to his fourth event of the day on Friday afternoon, Senator John Kerry was shown the latest digest of New Hampshire polls. Every one had him up by a wide margin, three out of four by double digits.
''I like the direction,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I don't trust the numbers.''
Three and a half days from the primary here, which polls increasingly suggest is his to lose, Mr. Kerry, the surprise victor in Iowa, is crisscrossing New Hampshire in a race to round up every last vote.
Rather than running out the clock on his lead, aides say, Mr. Kerry is trying to run up the score on his rivals by playing to his strengths: emphasizing his experience and demonstrating a mastery of domestic and foreign policy in frequent question-and-answer sessions. He is surrounding himself with war heroes and veterans to play up his military record, and rolling out endorsements to prove he has electoral strength for the contests outside the Northeast on Feb. 3 and beyond. The League of Conservation Voters, an environmental group, was set to endorse him on Saturday in Concord.
On Friday, as Senator Ernest F. Hollings of South Carolina and former Senator Max Cleland of Georgia appeared with Mr. Kerry before veterans in Manchester, N.H., the campaign disclosed that former Vice President Walter F. Mondale had given Mr. Kerry his support, saying in a release that he had the ''experience, judgment and character'' to ''do the job on Day 1.''
''This is the take-nothing-for-granted, just-begun-to-fight, fight-for-every-vote campaign,'' said Robert Shrum, Mr. Kerry's media consultant and strategist, who has been at his side more often than not the past few weeks. ''And it will be that way from now until November.''
As he did in Iowa, Mr. Kerry is relying heavily on veterans in his quest for victory in New Hampshire. Out of 139,000 veterans in New Hampshire, the campaign has identified 15,000 Democrats and independents eligible to vote on Tuesday.
''The best thing we can call him is brother,'' Mr. Cleland, who lost three limbs in Vietnam, said of Mr. Kerry at a rally in Manchester. ''Why? Because he's been there, done that, and gotten a few holes in his T-shirt.''
A moment later, Mr. Hollings, a veteran of World War II, took a jab at Gen. Wesley K. Clark, the other candidate promoting his war record, who had disparaged Mr. Kerry earlier in the week by pointing out that he was only a junior officer in Vietnam. ''We're going to teach that fellow in South Carolina that there are more lieutenants than there are generals, I can tell you that,'' Mr. Hollings said. ''John didn't give his life to another, but he was willing to, I can tell you that, time and time again.''
While his rivals struggle to adapt to the shifting dynamics in the race -- Howard Dean to the twin blows of his poor showing in Iowa and the devastating reaction to his postcaucus speech, General Clark to the sudden lack of urgency for an anti-Dean candidate to emerge -- Mr. Kerry is essentially following the course he hit upon weeks ago.
The major change is that he no longer is compelled to point out the differences between his and his opponents' positions and record.
Instead, he is directing his attacks solely at President Bush -- and in another noteworthy change, Republicans have begun to respond. In a speech to the Conservative Political Action Committee on Friday in Washington, Ed Gillespie, chairman of the Republican National Committee, said Mr. Kerry was ''out of sync with most voters.''
''Americans for Democratic Action, the premier liberal rating organization, puts his lifetime rating at 93 percent,'' Mr. Gillespie said, while Senator Edward M. Kennedy ''has a lifetime rating of 88 percent -- five points less. Who would have guessed it? Ted Kennedy is the conservative senator from Massachusetts!''
David Wade, a spokesman for Mr. Kerry, responded almost gleefully. ''If Ed Gillespie and his Republican attack dogs want to have a fight over who's out of sync with America, then bring it on,'' he said. ''With 3.1 million jobs lost, 2 million fewer Americans without health care, veterans denied disability benefits and record budget deficits, it's George W. Bush who's caved in to the special interests and the radical ideologues, and John Kerry who's fighting for Main Street America.''
Mr. Kerry may be talking like a front-runner by looking ahead to the general election, but his aides insist he is hardly acting like one.
''He's pushing to get out there, to meet people, talk to people,'' Mr. Shrum said after Mr. Kerry spoke to about 1,000 people who hung on his every word at Phillips Exeter Academy on Thursday night. ''The front-runner response to that crowd is to wave and applaud. He stopped to say hello to everybody. There were like 200 people lined up when he came in, and he stopped to shake every hand.''
The crowds Mr. Kerry is seeing are a far cry from a few months ago, when he limped along far behind Dr. Dean in the polls. But it was in his difficult autumn that Mr. Kerry, out of the limelight, began to connect at house parties where he stood on chairs and took on all questions, even the absurd, with equanimity.
Mr. Kerry now fields questions for an hour or more in increasingly personal terms. Asked about health care, for example, he speaks of his parents' deaths in recent years and the challenges of long-term care.
His crowds are not only larger, they are more sympathetic. Where Mr. Kerry used to face frequently hostile questioning over his vote to authorize the use of force in Iraq, now he more often is asked simply to explain his plan for bringing American troops home.
In Laconia, N.H., on Thursday morning, Harry Valenciano, 44, a legislative advocate for Housing Works, said he saw sincerity in Mr. Kerry's answers. ''He's the one I believe more than anyone,'' Mr. Valenciano said. ''I just feel it, the way he speaks -- and all these other guys are just in it for the personal gain.''
Later, Lee Hart, a retiree, said she had been for Mr. Kerry as far back as June, and even put a bumper sticker on her car. But a few months ago, as his campaign seemed in meltdown, she tried to peel the Kerry sticker off. ''I wondered if maybe we ought to go with somebody who's got it together,'' she said.
But Ms. Hart took another look at him on Thursday and loved what she saw. ''He looks like he's relating to people better. Listening better. Listening more,'' she said. ''He was pretty solid and stiff back in June.''
With his rivals refraining from attacking in the open, Mr. Kerry's biggest threat now may come from within. He remains uneven and windy on the stump, to tell from the pained looks on his aides' faces as he rambles on from time to time.
And while his listeners frequently say they relate to him intellectually and feel a shared outrage at the state of things in the country, they say they can be left wanting on an emotional level.
Steve Chugg, a salesman from Plymouth, drove to Laconia to listen to Mr. Kerry after souring on Dr. Dean earlier in the week. ''I'm shopping,'' he said. ''I'm in between Kerry and Edwards.''
Then, during the question-and-answer, Mr. Chugg watched as an elderly woman, Elizabeth Dion, passed a handwritten question to Mr. Kerry, who read it. It was a sad story of her husband's recent death and her struggle to collect the benefits owed to widows of veterans.
Ms. Dion wept openly. A stranger next to her patted her shoulder. But Mr. Kerry, turning away from her, segued into a riff about corporate wrongdoing and unfairness.
Mr. Chugg watched and grew angry. ''He blew it,'' he said. ''He missed a golden opportunity to show a real human side. John Edwards would've bent down, gone over and hugged her. I've made up my mind -- I'm for Edwards.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
