In 1850, two brothers from Ireland named Devine bought two 30-acre farms in upstate New York outside of the town of Canastota. The Devine clan grew and prospered, consolidating their holdings into one 1,200-acre dairy farm that locals referred to as ''Devine country.''
The Devine family farm was virtually debt free and had never been mortgaged. ''We lived simply and saved our money,'' said Anita Devine, 57, whose sons Robert, 34, and Tim, 30, now operate the sprawling dairy farm, about 25 miles east of Syracuse in Madison County.
But a fire in July 2002 caused by an exploding hot water tank changed all that, they said. The fire destroyed half the farm buildings, including the main barn or milking parlor. It also set off a chain of events that has left the Devine family deeply in debt, fighting foreclosure of the seventh-generation farm and embroiled in a product liability battle over milking equipment that the Devines blame for the death of hundreds of cows, they said Friday at a news conference at the farm.
The product liability suit, filed last month in State Supreme Court in Madison County, seeks compensation from Bou-Matic, the Wisconsin-based maker of the milking equipment. Tim Devine said the apparatus turned their brand-new milking parlor into an electrified zone in which deadly stray voltage was transmitted through ordinary metal objects such as drinking troughs.
In all, 110 cows died instantly as they drank from troughs, which carried a 40-volt jolt, said Tim Devine. Such a jolt, he said, ''could have killed even a person.''
Over a three-month period after the new milking barn began operation in January 2003, some of the cows stopped drinking water from the troughs and became so dehydrated that many drank their own urine. As a result, 390 more cows died of diseases such as pneumonia or were injured and unable to produce milk, the suit alleges.
Tim Devine said the family was at first mystified by the high mortality rate in the new barn, but deduced the problem with the help of an electrician and some research on the Internet. He learned other farmers had experienced similar problems.
Tim Devine now blames what he said is described by Bou-Matic as an optional electrical filter kit that was not installed along with the rest of the automated milking equipment bought from a local Fisher Farms dealer. The filter cost $400, a fraction of the $500,000 for the overall system, he said.
''That little part did all that damage,'' said Tim Devine. ''It shouldn't be an option.''
The local Fisher Farms dealer referred calls about the lawsuit to Bou-Matic headquarters. Calls to a company spokeswoman were not returned. The Associated Press quoted a company official as saying that the company did not wish to comment on the suit at this time.
The Devines said their once settled life has been turned upside down, with stacks of unpaid bills to local suppliers and $400,000 in credit-card debt. ''It's just been really devastating,'' said Anita Devine, whose husband, James Lawrence Devine, died of a heart attack at age 63 nine months before the 2002 farm fire.
To replace the under-insured milking parlor after the fire, the brothers for the first time considered a mortgage, and turned to the National Bank of Geneva in Warsaw, N.Y. After the fire, the Devine brothers went to a farm show to look at the latest milking equipment and spoke with a representative from at the National Bank of Geneva's booth.
Originally, the brothers wanted to expand their milking herd to 700 from 400 to help recoup their losses. But they said the bank encouraged them to build a new parlor that would accommodate 1,400 cows. ''They told us to do whatever it takes,'' Tim Devine said.
Faced with a pressing need to get back on their feet and a displaced herd of cows being kept by a neighbor, the brothers tried to rebuild, expecting to receive a bank loan. One key aspect of the proposed loan deal would be to allow the Devines a six-month grace period in which they would make a monthly interest payment of roughly $20,000 a month. After six months, the payment would include money toward the principle and would jump to roughly $60,000, Tim Devine said he was told.
But the day the loan papers were signed in June 2003, the bank's loan officers said they were withdrawing the offer of the grace period. Hobbled by a sick and dwindling herd, the Devines were able to make their July and September mortgage payments, but not their October payment. In late October, with the mortgage payment 19 days past due, according to Tim Devine, the banks called in the entire $5.5 million note.
The Devines were unable to pay. The bank initiated foreclosure action.
Bank officials did not return phone calls Friday.
