An intense, wind-whipped fire ravaged a building in a condominium complex here on Friday, killing a woman, injuring four firefighters and a resident, and leaving about 100 people homeless, the authorities said.
As smoke filled the apartments and hallways of the three-story brick building, part of the Northridge complex, police officers and firefighters hurried door to door, alerting residents. Many fled with only the clothing they wore and said later that all their possessions had been destroyed.
''Everything is gone -- furniture, clothing, jewelry,'' said Tamer Khodier, a 34-year-old limousine driver, at an emergency Red Cross shelter at nearby Middlesex County College. ''I just have to take it day by day by day and try to get it back.''
Officials said they believed the fire had started in the second-floor apartment of the woman who died. She was not immediately identified. Some residents described her as elderly and in poor health and said that she called Edison's ambulance squad several times in the past for medical help.
The cause of the fire, which started about 9:35 a.m., was not immediately determined, said Edison's fire chief, G. Robert Campbell. A stiff northwesterly wind and bitter temperatures in the high teens added to difficulties firemen faced as the flames spread through the building. By early afternoon, the quick-moving fire had gutted much of the building and destroyed most of its roof.
''The wind complicated everything, and the cold complicated things,'' Chief Campbell said.
One of the injured firefighters suffered frostbite, the chief said, and the three other firefighters and the resident who were hurt were overcome by smoke.
One resident, Michael Skowronski, 48, said he was in his underwear when police officers pounded on his door. ''They told me to grab what I could and get out,'' he said.
Mr. Skowronski put on a pair of camouflage pants, a flannel shirt, a sweatshirt and a knit cap, hurried down a smoky stairway and then watched the fire from a courtyard.
''It just kept getting worse and worse,'' he said. He was later allowed to retrieve some of his belongings and found that his apartment was only smoke damaged.
Other residents were not so fortunate.
''Everything, I lost everything,'' said Sam Hanna, 53. ''I don't know what I'm going to do now. I feel like I'm in a dream.'' He said he was worried about his 9-year-old daughter, Stefani, who had left for school about 45 minutes before the fire started. ''I have to make sure she's protected,'' he said.
Kevin Sullivan, chief executive officer for the Red Cross in central New Jersey, said the building had 35 apartments. He said his staff was trying to arrange emergency shelter for those left homeless.
''Many of them are still unaware of the fire,'' Mr. Sullivan said in late afternoon. ''They'll be coming home from work and finding out.''
