Poor planning for a new center for disruptive high school students contributed to recent violence at a Bronx high school, the New York City principals' union charged yesterday.
The union said the Department of Education had placed the center for suspended students in Theodore Roosevelt High, a school with a history of problems that is now being overhauled, without giving the principal the resources to handle her new charges.
On Wednesday, eight students, three of them assigned to the school's suspension center, were arrested and charged with disorderly conduct and inciting a riot, officials said.
''It appears that people did not think this one through as they put this suspension center in a school that last year had high incidents,'' Ernest Logan, a vice president of the principals' union, the Council of School Supervisors and Administrators, said in a telephone interview yesterday. ''It means that nobody did an analysis, which we were promised would happen.''
Mr. Logan said the principal of Roosevelt, Cynthia List, was ordered three months ago to open the center, intended for up to 20 students from Bronx high schools who have been suspended for infractions including vandalism and striking a teacher.
Mr. Logan said Ms. List was given money to hire only one extra teacher, but education officials said the center also received a part-time guidance counselor.
After years of failing test scores, Theodore Roosevelt High School is being phased out and replaced with a number of smaller schools. The school is now known collectively as the Roosevelt Educational Campus. According to the principals' union, the school has generally been much calmer this year than last, an accomplishment that Mr. Logan suggested has been threatened by the existence of the suspension center.
Instead of receiving more safety agents, the principals' union said, Ms. List was told this fall that the school would lose five agents, bringing the number down to 14. In the end, Ms. List was able to keep 16 agents.
Deputy Mayor Dennis M. Walcott said he visited the school on Thursday and met with Ms. List and other officials.
He said eight more safety agents had been assigned there.
Officials said the disturbances on Wednesday began about 11:45 a.m., when 10 students at schools inside the Theodore Roosevelt building started fighting in the fourth-floor cafeteria.
As that fight was broken up and the students were being escorted to the first floor, officials said, a separate fight broke out among eight students assigned to the school's suspension center. The two groups of unruly students faced off on the first floor.
All 18 students will be suspended, officials said, and those who were already in the Roosevelt suspension center for committing serious, sometimes violent infractions at their previous high schools will be assigned to other suspension centers. Eight of the students were also arrested.
