In the early 1990's, with the disintegration of European Communist states, the National Hockey League enjoyed what now seems like a distant and dreamlike era. Talented players from Europe flowed across the ocean to add skill and style to the league.
With fresh talent, a new commissioner, expansion into new markets, a surge of arena-building and a burst of cable television exposure, the N.H.L. finally seemed ready to enter the mainstream of sports consciousness in the United States.
No player better exemplified the new N.H.L. than Jaromir Jagr, a big kid from what used to be known as Czechoslovakia. A shaggy mop of sweaty hair hung out from his helmet. He wore the number 68 to commemorate a significant year of strife in his country's political history.
But this was not a grim guy. Jagr's face, still boyish and chubby, seemed to break naturally and often into a grin. His efforts at English were part of his charm as he tried to describe all those great goals while helping Mario Lemieux and the Pittsburgh Penguins to two Stanley Cup championships. His first name was even an anagram that spelled Mario Jr.
With strength, skill and will, Jagr would bull down the boards into the right-wing corner, fight off a check with one arm and a big hip and draw another defender or two in a merry chase. Then he would fling a one-handed pass to the front of the net. Suddenly, a teammate, now uncovered, would swoop in to finish the play by putting the puck past the goalie. Even a casual sports fan viewing his or her first hockey game could see Jagr play and say: ''Wow! This sport is fun to watch.''
But the 31-year-old Jagr who came to the Rangers yesterday in a trade from the Washington Capitals is a different guy in a different era. His hair is shorter, his face less expressive.
Although he has a respectable 45 points in 46 games, it is far from the pace that gave him 149 points, his career best, in 1995-96.
In part, this reflects developments throughout the sport. Goals per game, which hovered around 7 in Jagr's first few seasons, are down to a half-century low of 5. Creative artists like Jagr have complained about defensive systems and obstruction tactics.
And Jagr has changed so much, too. The Penguins traded him in 2001 after Lemieux -- by then a playing owner -- expressed dismay over Jagr's lack of spirit. Jagr displayed the kind of lethargy that discouraged teammates and drew hoots from paying customers.
Despite a league-best salary of $11 million and the team leadership in points last season, Jagr failed to kindle much interest in the nation's capital and did not lead Washington to even one victorious round in the playoffs over two years. Now the Capitals will pick up part of the money owed to him for the next four years. The trade comes as the league's 30 teams and the union prepare to negotiate a new collective bargaining agreement with the possibility of a lockout. George McPhee, the Washington general manager, said, ''This was a contract we had to move.''
Of Jagr's style of play and the lack of scoring, McPhee said: ''It's hard for all the players. The league has become very, very well coached. It's hard to get offensive opportunities.''
And regarding Jagr's failure to improve the Capitals, McPhee said: ''I'm uncomfortable pinning any blame on him. It was a nice try by us, a chemistry experiment that didn't work.''
What does it all say about the chemistry of the team that acquired him? Perhaps that the Rangers, out of the playoffs since 1997, are desperate. Their fans are chanting for the firing of Glen Sather, their coach, general manager and president.
Sather said: ''He was available. Now's the time, before it's too late.''
With three defensemen and a goalie injured this week, Sather has added a forward. Why?
''I'd like to think this is going to make the difference,'' Sather said. ''We think he's going to help us. We think he's going to make a huge difference.''
About half the Rangers of today -- Jagr, Eric Lindros, Mark Messier, Vladimir Malakhov, Darius Kasparaitis (injured), Petr Nedved, Pavel Bure (injured), Bobby Holik, Brian Leetch and Aleksei Kovalev -- were at or approaching their peak in the 1993-94 season. All are now over 30. Critics among the fans contend they are also overpaid and over the hill.
Most of those players prefer an up-tempo style in a downbeat league. It is as if Sather is telling the hockey world, ''Everyone is out of step but us.''
The Rangers' high spending and Sather's brusque air have not pleased everyone around the league in recent seasons. Should his Rangers fail to make the playoffs again, some people around the N.H.L. will quietly cackle in glee. Should the team qualify for the playoffs, Madison Square Garden can sell that small victory as vindication of its ''plan.''
Whatever happens, objective people who love this sport and yearn for its success may look at Jagr, the Rangers and the N.H.L. of today and wonder: What is going on here?
N.H.L. Analysis
