In the escalating battle between Conrad M. Black and Hollinger International, Lord Black moved yesterday to stop the company from selling any of its newspapers, which include The Daily Telegraph of London, The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post.
Hollinger Inc., the company that holds Lord Black's controlling stake in Hollinger International, notified Hollinger International that it had revised Hollinger International's bylaws so that no assets could be sold without unanimous approval from the board. Although Lord Black is no longer chairman or chief executive, he remains on the board.
Lord Black is rushing to stop Hollinger International from selling individual properties to potential bidders as he tries to complete the sale of his controlling interest in Hollinger International to a company owned by the secretive Barclay brothers of Britain for $178 million in cash.
A special committee of Hollinger International, which was created to investigate charges that Lord Black and some colleagues received noncompete fees that were never authorized by the board, filed suit last week contending that Lord Black, a colleague and two companies Lord Black controls had received more than $200 million in questionable payments.
Concerned that it might not be able to recover that money if the deal with the Barclays went through, the board created a corporate review committee and gave it the power to sell assets without full board approval. Three directors -- Lord Black; his wife, Barbara Amiel Black; and Daniel Colson, the vice chairman -- were not named to the committee, whose creation did not require a unanimous vote. Mr. Colson is said to support Lord Black.
Hollinger Inc. disbanded the corporate review committee yesterday by changing the bylaws of Hollinger International to dissolve all committees except the audit committee and the special committee.
It declared that a unanimous vote was required of the board on any sale of assets of more than $1 million or a merger or sale of all assets as well as changes in the number of directors or any move to fill a vacancy on the board. Hollinger Inc. also declared that all board members be given seven-day written notice of a coming board meeting and a statement of the business to be conducted at the meeting. (Last Saturday, the executive committee met, without notifying Lord Black, who is on the committee, of its intent, and removed him as chairman, according to a person briefed on the meeting.)
Hollinger Inc. said it had the right to make the changes as controlling shareholder of Hollinger International, which is incorporated in Delaware.
Given the efforts of Hollinger Inc. to block Hollinger International, Charles Elson, professor of corporate governance at the University of Delaware, said: ''This is an extraordinary development. If I were a minority shareholder in Hollinger International, I would be extremely troubled by the move. The majority is acting in its interest, but the question is whether this change was in the interest of the corporation and all its shareholders. They are effectively blocking the sale of the corporate assets of Hollinger International. The resolution of this action will be determined by the courts of Delaware.''
Also yesterday, Hollinger Inc. filed papers in Federal District Court in Chicago seeking a chance to respond to a court order issued last week that protected the powers of the special committee. That order included constraints on the ability of Hollinger Inc. to elect or remove directors.
The developments yesterday came as Lazard, the investment bank hired by Hollinger International, continues its efforts to sell the company's assets. It has already distributed financial data on The Daily Telegraph, which is the company's most valuable property, to several potential buyers. But even if that sale is allowed to proceed, it is complicated by the fact that Hollinger International would have to pay hefty capital gains taxes on the transaction, according to a person who has reviewed the financials.
Lazard has been seeking a sales strategy that might minimize the effect of those taxes. Lazard declined to comment.
Although the Barclays are said to be primarily interested in acquiring The Daily Telegraph, they did not receive the financials from Lazard. Although one person close to the company said that the Barclays had not asked for the materials, another person said that Hollinger International clearly viewed the Barclay bid, supported by Lord Black, as hostile.
Hollinger International said late yesterday that its corporate review committee had met to consider a poison pill provision in the event that the Barclays pursued their bid and planned to vote on it in the next few days. The company added that in light of the attempt by Hollinger Inc. to change the bylaws, it proposed a meeting of the full board to review corporate governance issues in addition to the poison pill provision.
In the complex transaction between the Barclays and Lord Black, the brothers would buy a 78 percent stake in Hollinger Inc., which is based in Toronto and is owned by Ravelston Management, a private company controlled by Lord Black. Hollinger Inc. owns 30 percent of Hollinger International but has 73 percent voting control.
In recent days, the Barclays have approached some minority shareholders in Hollinger International about possibly buying them out. That may be because of a ruling in Delaware that pertains to hostile bids. It says that if a hostile buyer gains control of a company without board approval, the buyer cannot merge the acquiring company with the target company or sell assets for at least three years unless the buyer receives 85 percent of the total shareholder votes, receives board approval or receives the vote of two-thirds of the minority shareholders.
Given Hollinger International's resistance to the Barclay deal, it appears that their offer would be unlikely to ever receive enough board support.
It is not clear that the Barclays would be dissuaded from proceeding with the deal without that flexibility, but it would certainly give them more operating leeway.
