From Mass cards under glass to a cross-shaped coffin that was popular among undertakers in the 1800's because it had ample shoulder room, the National Museum of Funeral History, on Barren Springs Drive here, offers a wide survey of funeral articles in 20,000 square feet.
There is a hearse with carved-wood window coverings, a Victorian-era mourning tableau complete with kneeler and foldable organ set to play ''In the Garden'' and an exhibit on Dr. Thomas Holmes, an embalming innovator in the Civil War who also, the display says, had quite a good hand at making root beer.
Robert M. Boetticher is vice chairman and president of the museum, 20 minutes from George Bush Intercontinental Airport. Mr. Boetticher spent 40 years as a funeral director, starting when a natural fascination led him to spend time at a mortuary as a teenager. The mortuary eventually offered him work.
When work began on the museum more than 10 years ago, Mr. Boetticher, similarly fascinated with the prospect of a central location for the display of so much funeral history, began to hang out at the museum and was again offered a position.
''Funerals are just so unpredictable,'' said Mr. Boetticher, walking between an exhibit on Egyptian mummification, which features a reproduction of King Tut's sarcophagus and an elongated hearse that caused a corpse several thousand years later to have a slightly less regal afterlife. Created to replace cumbersome and long-winding church-to-burial funeral processions, the 1916 Packard funeral bus, one of two dozen hearses in the museum's collection, was made by the Fifth Avenue Coach Company. Mounted on a truck chassis, the hearse-bus could fit almost two dozen mourners and pallbearers, not to mention the corpse. While climbing a San Francisco hill, however, the bus tipped backward, sending the mourners and coffin tumbling atop each other. That was the bus's last run from church to grave site. It served the next 40 years at a standstill, as the home of a California ranch hand.
Most of the items in the museumwere donated by collectors and funeral homes, and Mr. Boetticher is constantly searching for castoffs in antiques stores, on e-Bay and through his connections in the field. The museum was started by Robert L. Waltrip, the founder and chairman of Service Corporation International, a national funeral, cremation and cemetery company. The museum, operated separately from the company, is a nonprofit with an annual budget of $200,000 and is connected physically but not financially to the Commonwealth Institute of Funeral Service, a college of mortuary science popularly known as Undertaker University.
Aside from the physical trappings of funerals, one of Mr. Boetticher's biggest fascinations is the interplay between the consistency of religious funeral rites over the years and the comparatively faddish nature of the more secular customs surrounding death. ''The religion portion of funerals hasn't changed,'' Mr. Boetticher said. ''It's the everything before and afterward that has.''
A central current display is that of colorful and playfully ornate coffins designed by a Ghanaian sculptor named Kane Quaye, which resulted in tension between church authorities and families of the deceased, the exhibit says. The fanciful coffins are built in the form of everything from a crab to a Mercedes-Benz. They can cost a year's salary in Ghana and are designed to honor the dead by capturing the spirit of the person's life. A fisherman might be buried in a coffin shaped like a crab, a canoe or a lobster, someone powerful in a coffin resembling a leopard and a mother in one that looks like a hen. While the packaging of bodies in status symbols for eternity has caused debate between church members over Kane Quaye's ''fantasy coffins,'' such discussion is not limited to Ghana and colorful coffins, said Rabbi David-Seth Kirshner, the general director of institutional advancement at the Jewish Theological Seminary, who also worked for six years at Riverside Memorial Chapel in Manhattan. But such discussions, he said, most often end in the favor of the mourner. A funeral, unlike a wedding, has little lead time, so there is less room for a cleric to weigh in, he said, adding that the influence of funeral homes, which cater to many denominations, also breeds flexibility. Most importantly, said Rabbi Kirshner, the sensitivities involved in death usually lead to a wide berth for mourners, as long as it does not conflict with the letter of religious law. Rabbi Kirshner said that while Jews are frequently buried in plain wooden coffins, he recently presided at the funeral of a young boy whose schoolmates colored and drew on the coffin as if it were a cast -- something that seemed the most fitting tribute.
Though the museum attracts its share of senior citizen and school groups, plus the occasional Goth, on a recent weekday a group of Japanese tourists wound their way around along with two sisters, Karen Solomon of Millburn, N.J., and Jill Cunningham of Houston.
The sisters were milling about in the celebrity funeral section, where there was information on where and how notables were buried, like the football coach Vince Lombardi. He was first mourned by 2,000 at an ecumenical service in Green Bay then, a day later, by 3,000 at St. Patrick's Cathedral in New York, before a long funeral procession took his coffin to a gentle slope in Red Bank, N.J.
Religion Journal
