After watching Senator Ernest F. Hollings endorse Senator John Kerry for president in Columbia on Thursday, Donald L. Fowler returned to his office and telephoned important Kerry supporters.
Mr. Fowler, a former chairman of the Democratic National Committee, told them that the endorsement would mean little unless Mr. Kerry rebuilt his local organization, bought television commercials here and campaigned personally in the state in the week between next Tuesday's New Hampshire primary and South Carolina's balloting on Feb. 3. Among those he called was Hassan Nemazee, a New York financier and one of Senator Kerry's chief fund-raisers.
In less than an hour, Mr. Fowler said, he received a call from Mary Beth Cahill, Mr. Kerry's national campaign manager, assuring him that Mr. Kerry intended to make a major effort in this state, the first in the South to hold a primary this year and the first with a sizable black population.
The reassurance came not a second too soon for the senator's political well-being in South Carolina, where two other candidates, Senator John Edwards, who was born in the state, and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, seem to hold the advantage.
''If Kerry doesn't compete here,'' said Dick Harpootlian, the former state Democratic chairman who led the effort to move the primary up to Feb. 3, ''it'll look as if he's writing off the South in the general election, the exact same mistake that Al Gore made four years ago.
''More important, it'll be a huge insult to African-Americans.''
For most of the last week, rumors swirled in political circles in Columbia, the capital, that Mr. Kerry intended to give the primary here a pass, perhaps to concentrate on Missouri, which has 88 convention votes to South Carolina's 55.
Missouri, which also votes on Feb. 3, went up for grabs when Representative Richard A. Gephardt of St. Louis withdrew from the presidential race this week. The Kerry campaign immediately began sending aides there and inquiring about the availability of television time.
So far, Mr. Kerry is the only major candidate who has run no commercials in South Carolina. He has opened only two offices, fewer than his main rivals have, and he has only seven paid employees here, compared with 50 for Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, about 40 for General Clark and nine for Mr. Edwards.
After sending six staff members to work with the state party in the 2002 election, Mr. Kerry seemed to assign South Carolina an important role in his campaign in September when he made his official declaration of candidacy near Charleston, with the carrier Yorktown as the backdrop.
''Then lights out,'' said Mr. Harpootlian. ''One night his whole staff snuck out of town, almost every one, and he hasn't been spotted here since.''
Most of the Kerry operatives who left South Carolina headed for Iowa, to help in the ultimately successful effort to energize his candidacy by winning the caucuses there. The candidate said Thursday in New Hampshire: ''I needed the time to break through in other states. I will be down there in South Carolina, and I intend to come down there with a head of steam.''
Along with Dr. Dean, Senator Edwards, General Clark and other candidates, Mr. Kerry is committed to taking part in a debate in Greenville on Thursday, two days after the voting in New Hampshire. His South Carolina manager, James Dukes, a former field representative for Mr. Hollings, said that he hoped to schedule ''a couple of other events'' in the state next week as well.
Though Mr. Dukes said no decision had been made about whether to buy television time, he asserted that ''South Carolina is very important to us.'' The state's concentration of 412,000 veterans form a target group for Mr. Kerry, a decorated naval officer in Vietnam.
Some here, like Lee Bandy, senior political writer for South Carolina's largest newspaper, The State, think Mr. Kerry will be handicapped by ''his image as a Northeastern liberal -- from Massachusetts of all places -- even though his record is not that far left.''
This is, after all, a very conservative state, dominated like most others in the South by the Republicans. It was here that President Bush turned around his campaign for the Republican nomination.
Still, Mr. Fowler argued that ''anyone who emerges from New Hampshire with credibility -- a first-place finish or a strong second or even third'' -- would be a contender in South Carolina.
''We still like home cooking here,'' Mr. Fowler said, ''which gives Edwards an edge, but he'll have to do well in New Hampshire to stay in the hunt. Momentum will count for much more than organization, I think, because no candidate has a substantial enough organization to set him apart from the other guys.''
Mr. Edwards, seen as a regional candidate until his surprise second-place finish in Iowa, has concentrated heavily on this state from the start. The consensus among politicians and pundits here is that his candidacy might well not survive a loss on Feb. 3. Certainly, it is unlikely that both he and General Clark, who has made much of his Arkansas origins, will emerge from the South Carolina test in a tenable position for later primaries.
On Wednesday, flush with his Iowa success, Mr. Edwards campaigned briefly in Greenville and suggested that he understood South Carolina better than General Clark. He told a smallish crowd at a sandwich shop: ''I was born here. I still have family here. When I leave here, I won't forget South Carolina.'' Today, he returned for an appearance at a voter education project in Columbia.
General Clark is a puzzle to many South Carolina politicians. His military career, his Southern roots and his emphasis on patriotism and faith make him look conservative, but his support for gay civil unions and, with some limits, abortion rights, and his endorsement this week by George S. McGovern make him look quite the opposite, at least to Democrats here.
Along with the Rev. Al Sharpton, another candidate who has been active in the state, General Clark took part in an N.A.A.C.P. rally on the grounds of the State House in Columbia on Martin Luther King's Birthday, protesting the continued flying of the Confederate flag at the foot of the building's front steps. General Clark said the feverishly disputed flag was ''hate-filled.''
''I am a proud product of the most integrated institution in America, the armed forces,'' he declared.
African-Americans, who make up 29.4 percent of the state's population, may cast as many as 50 percent of the votes in the primary. Though there is no party registration and anyone can vote in the Democratic balloting, Democrats are expected to make up the bulk of the electorate, and as many blacks as whites often vote Democratic here.
But they do not usually vote as a bloc. A state party survey showed that 75 percent are evangelical Christians and unlike their Northern urban counterparts tend to oppose abortion and gay rights and to support the death penalty. No candidate has established a dominant position among blacks, and all major contenders have the backing of the Legislature's black caucus.
Whoever wins will probably assemble a coalition of white moderates and blacks, Bill Clinton's recipe for success in the state and region.
The most intensely courted African-American leader is Representative James E. Clyburn of Columbia, the vice chairman of the House Democratic Caucus, who had supported Mr. Gephardt. A poll taken by the Gephardt campaign in December found that almost two-thirds of likely primary voters would be more inclined to vote for the man that Mr. Clyburn backed. But he said this week he would make no endorsement, at least until after primary voting in New Hampshire.
Mr. Clyburn's support might be especially helpful to Dr. Dean. When the first Dean office opened in South Carolina , almost no blacks attended the ceremony. Nearly all those holding up ''African-Americans for Dean'' signs were white, though Representative Jesse L. Jackson Jr. of Illinois, who was born in Greenville, endorsed Dr. Dean at a news conference shortly before.
''He's not going to get Southern votes anyway,'' Mr. Harpootlian asserted. ''He's not one of us. He's toast. Stick a fork in him. He's done.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: SOUTH CAROLINA
