A year after assuming Brazil's presidency, Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva, a longtime labor activist, has displaced Vicente Fox of Mexico as the most influential Latin American leader, and he is an increasingly powerful presence on the global stage. The repercussions of Brazil's ascendancy for the Bush administration are clear: better ties with the rest of Latin America now hinge on a closer relationship with Brasília.
Brazil's retaliatory fingerprinting of visitors from the United States in response to new American security measures is an indication of longstanding frictions in the relationship. Despite being the largest country in Latin America, Brazil has usually stood apart from its Spanish-speaking neighbors. And Mr. da Silva's leftist world view is often at odds with that of the Bush administration.
His growing clout reflects a broader shift in the continent's center of political gravity in the last three years. In the absence of robust economic growth, Latin American governments eager to follow Washington's lead on trade and economic policy have been replaced by more populist ones, which are wary of American intentions. From Hugo Chávez of Venezuela to Néstor Kirchner of Argentina, Latin leaders are looking less to Mexico and more to Brazil to provide regional leadership.
Our relations with Brazil, a country little understood by Americans but which sees itself as the United States of South America, have always been complicated. A medium-size industrial power and an agricultural superpower, Brazil does not rely on trade with the United States to the same degree as most Latin American countries. Brasília is more interested in cementing a close-knit South American bloc than in buying into a Washington-dominated hemispheric arrangement.
Brazil led the entire developing world last year in opposing the further liberalization of global trade until and unless the United States and Europe stop giving their farmers subsidies that provide them an unfair advantage on world markets.
Still, Brazil's president is hardly a reckless firebrand. Wall Street applauds his prudent fiscal policies, which helped stave off a potential debt and currency crisis that could have affected all emerging markets. Moreover, President da Silva has acknowledged that it is important for Colombia to defeat its drug-trafficking guerrilla movements.
So long as Washington moves beyond outdated notions that Latin America must march behind us in lock-step unity on every issue, there is reason to believe that a more constructive relationship can be cultivated with Brazil. It's important to try.
