Glen Sather, the Rangers' embattled coach and general manager, obtained the perennial All-Star right wing Jaromir Jagr from the Washington Capitals yesterday for right wing Anson Carter in a desperate move to shake the team from its playoff drought.
The Rangers will pick up roughly 60 percent of the remainder of Jagr's contract, which will pay him about $50 million for the remaining four and a half seasons.
''We needed a shot in the arm to help us get into the playoffs,'' said Sather, whose team has won twice in the last 10 games (2-5-2-1). ''And if we were going to do something, the time to do it is now, before it's too late.''
Sather is gambling that Jagr, who will turn 32 on Feb. 15, will make an immediate impact on the Rangers (18-19-7-4), who have failed to qualify for the playoffs the past six seasons.
Sather has been under fire recently, hearing chants of ''Fire Sather'' during the team's three-game losing streak at Madison Square Garden.
''He's just in a spot now where he had to do it,'' a National Hockey League official said.
Before flying to Ottawa for tonight's game against the Senators, Jagr told reporters in Sunrise, Fla.: ''I'm kind of nervous. I don't know what to expect. I'm not scared, but it's different.''
Capitals General Manager George McPhee said: ''This was a contract we had to move. He could have scored 300 points a year; we couldn't afford him.''
The Capitals signed Jagr to a seven-year, $77 million deal shortly after obtaining him from Pittsburgh in July 2001. The trade, a league official said, will save them $5 million this season.
Jagr, who will play in his ninth All-Star Game, has 45 points (16 goals, 29 assists) in 46 games. Sather said Jagr would skate on a line centered by Jagr's good friend and former teammate, Petr Nedved. In Pittsburgh in the mid-1990's, Nedved, Ron Francis and Jagr combined to form one of the most potent lines in the league.
''In a lot of the games we have lost, if we had a little more production from our power play, we wouldn't have the same problems,'' Sather said. The Rangers have converted only 14.8 percent of their power-play chances.
The Rangers' most pressing needs are consistent goaltending -- especially with Mike Dunham out with a mild concussion -- and competent, healthy defensemen (three of the top six defensemen are out with knee injuries).
According to a league official, Sather, who nearly obtained Jagr from Pittsburgh in the summer of 2001, was ambivalent about acquiring Jagr almost until the deal was completed.
Sather disputed that assertion. ''We've been trying to make this deal for quite some time,'' he said.
The Rangers hope Jagr can provide the impetus for their first playoff berth since the 1996-97 season. Sather's other deals for high-scoring forwards like Carter, Aleksei Kovalev, Pavel Bure and Eric Lindros have yet to put the Rangers into the postseason.
When asked why he felt this trade would be the one that finally made the difference, Sather said, ''Because we're only 2 points out of the playoffs.''
In Jagr, the Rangers are obtaining one of the premier right wings in the game, a player who has long craved the opportunity to compete under the bright spotlight that comes with playing in New York. The Rangers are also obtaining a player whose desire was sometimes questioned in Pittsburgh and Washington, and whose financial troubles have been well documented over the years.
The addition of Jagr pushes the Rangers' payroll well beyond $80 million, another N.H.L. record for a franchise that has won one Stanley Cup since 1940.
Jagr is tied for the distinction of being the highest-paid player in the league, at $11 million a season. His contract runs through the 2008-9 season, with the last season a club option.
Carter, a 29-year-old right wing who scored his 10th goal of the season in a 4-2 loss to Philadelphia at the Garden Thursday night, has a one-year deal for $2.8 million.
Sather obtained Carter from Edmonton at last season's March trading deadline for Radek Dvorak and Cory Cross.
Carter was seventh on the Rangers in goals this season, and ninth on the team with 17 points. After Thursday night's game, Carter once again reiterated his desire to stay with the Rangers.
But Carter's agent, Pat Brisson, said of yesterday's trade: ''Honestly, he's happy with it. I asked him this morning, 'Are you O.K. with it if you're traded?' He said: 'If they want me and I'm going to be playing hockey and I'm going to be playing a lot of minutes. That's all I want.' ''
Brisson, who is also one of Jagr's representatives, said of Carter, ''It was clear things didn't work out for him in New York.''
Carter learned that he was traded while sitting on the team charter just before it was scheduled to fly to Ottawa; he had to deplane.
SLAP SHOTS
The Rangers also negotiated with JAROMIR JAGR's representatives on restructuring the contract so there would be deferred compensation. According to a National Hockey League official, the Rangers and the Philadelphia Flyers are believed to be pursuing Washington goaltender OLAF KOLZIG.
In a temporary move to shore up his defense, GLEN SATHER traded an eighth-round pick in this summer's draft to Columbus for the journeyman defenseman JAMIE PUSHOR, who had been playing at Syracuse of the American Hockey League.
HOCKEY
