The Halliburton Company acknowledged that at least one employee had participated in a $6.3 million kickback deal with a Kuwaiti company, and it said Friday that it had paid the money to the government.
Halliburton said it discovered the improper payments in a routine internal audit. It reported the results to Defense Department officials last week after company officials found that one or two Halliburton employees apparently had been paid by the Kuwaiti company for giving it work helping to rebuild Iraq. Halliburton did not name the Kuwaiti company.
''We will bear the cost of the potential overcharge, not the government,'' said Randy Harl, the president and chief executive of the Halliburton subsidiary, Kellogg Brown &amp; Root, to which the contract in question was awarded, in a statement.
The contract was awarded two years ago by the Army Field Support Command. It called for the subsidiary to provide a number of logistical services for troops in Iraq, including housing, transportation, food, laundry and recreation. Kellogg Brown &amp; Root, in turn, contracted with the Kuwaiti company to handle some of the work.
The Pentagon inspector general is already examining separate accusations that the subsidiary overcharged the government by $61 million for gasoline imported into Iraq from Kuwait under a contract with the Army Corps of Engineers.
The Pentagon and the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress, also have undertaken separate investigations, examining all government contracts for reconstruction in Iraq, including how they are awarded and whether they are properly monitored.
The disclosure of another financial anomaly involving Halliburton and Iraqi contracts, raised new concerns among Democrats who have been critical of the contracting process for Iraq in general and of Halliburton in particular, in part because of its ties to Vice President Dick Cheney, the company chairman until 2000.
Representative Henry A. Waxman, Democrat of California and a persistent critic of the company, said on Friday he found it troublesome that Halliburton, which has more than $9 billion in contracts for Iraq, won its latest government deal, worth up to $1.2 billion, last Friday. That was just a day after the company informed the Pentagon of the possibilities of kickbacks. The contract calls for additional work in the oil fields in southern Iraq.
''It is incomprehensible,'' Mr. Waxman wrote to Representative Thomas M. Davis III, Republican of Virginia and the chairman of the Committee on Government Reform, in a letter calling for hearings, ''that the administration could give Halliburton another billion-dollar contract without fully investigating such serious criminal wrongdoing.''
Calling the latest disclosure of possible kickbacks ''terribly disturbing,'' the Senate minority leader, Tom Daschle of South Dakota, called for a halt to all further government contacts with Halliburton, adding, ''Awarding contracts under circumstances such as these makes no sense whatsoever.''
Senator Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey, urged that all of Halliburton's contracts ''need to be terminated.''
For the moment, at least, President Bush is satisfied that the Defense Department is taking all necessary steps to deal with any problems involving contracts for Iraq.
While a department spokeswoman declined to comment on the latest developments, citing the continuing Pentagon investigation, the White House spokesman, Scott McClellan, told reporters on Friday, ''There are a lot of safeguards that have been put in place in the contracting process, and we expect those safeguards to be followed.'' In the case of an overpayment, he added, ''We expect that to be repaid in full.''
Halliburton is one of the country's largest contractors working in Iraq and is certain to be a leading contender for more of the $18.6 billion the government has appropriated for additional work there. Yet the company also has been at the forefront of controversy, fueling a drumbeat of criticism by elected officials, mostly Democrats, who contend that Halliburton's bidding success reflects more its past association with Mr. Cheney than its experience as a defense contractor. Halliburton began government contracting during World War II.
Company officials said once they found evidence of a potential problem, which was first reported on Friday in The Wall Street Journal and in The Houston Chronicle, they informed Pentagon officials and dismissed the employees involved. Their identities were not disclosed.
''We have diligent internal controls and a strong corporate code of business conduct,'' Mr. Harl said. ''We have a fiduciary responsibility to our clients to carefully monitor every transaction.''
