Carolina Coach Peter Laviolette did not settle his grudge against the Islanders on Friday night. Laviolette, the coach the Islanders fired in June after he guided them to the playoffs for two straight seasons, could only do so much in a coat and tie behind the Hurricanes' bench. He chewed gum and adjusted his hair as the Islanders won, 3-2, at the RBC Center.
It was the Islanders' Trent Hunter who earned a measure of vindication. Hunter never won the full confidence of Laviolette, but he showed his former coach what he might have been missing.
Hunter's pinpoint assist to Justin Papineau began the scoring in the first period. Then Hunter provided an even more impressive display of stickwork late in the second. With the Islanders leading, 2-1, he faked a shot to freeze Carolina goalie Kevin Weekes, scooted a few feet forward, then blasted in a close-range shot for a security goal.
''It was just kind of a spur of the moment,'' Hunter said.
The Islanders (23-20-4-1) celebrated their first road victory in six games. They have another away game on Saturday against the Atlanta Thrashers (21-21-5), from whom they took sole possession of the eighth playoff spot in the Eastern Conference. The Islanders also increased their lead to 4 points over the idle Rangers, who were active off the ice in obtaining Jaromir Jagr from Washington.
Hunter also had a second-hand assist on a Michael Peca slap shot that put the Islanders ahead, 2-1. Hunter, 23, has a team-leading 16 goals and also leads the league's rookies.
Hunter played eight games last season and four playoff games the season before for Laviolette, spending most of his time in the minors.
Hunter insisted he was not out to prove anything to Laviolette. ''That they were close to us in the playoffs was more of an issue than Pete,'' he said.
So far, Laviolette is not working any magic in Carolina. The Hurricanes (16-22-9-2) are 8-10-1 since he took over on Dec. 15.
Islanders goalie Rick DiPietro (11-9-1) had 25 saves. Coach Steve Stirling is juggling him and Garth Snow to find who has the hot hand.
DiPietro had trouble staying on his skates the first two periods. Sean Hill's slap shot rocked DiPietro onto his heels and his back. The referee ruled that the puck crossed the goal line, and the score was tied 1-1 in the first period. DiPietro fell two other times but with no harm done.
The Islanders struck first when Hunter shoved a pass to Papineau, who had just a few feet of ice to rap the puck past Weekes. Weekes, a former Islander, shut out his former team on Nov. 26.
As it turned out, the Islanders needed Hunter's highlight moment, which was his first goal in nine games. Justin Williams scored for the Hurricanes to trim the Islanders' lead to 3-2 with 16 minutes 38 seconds remaining.
The Islanders' defense clamped down. Things got hectic in their defensive zone when Carolina pulled Weekes. Bret Hedican flung the puck at DiPietro, and he snagged it with his glove with 16.8 seconds left.
For the Islanders, there was no score to settle.
''It means nothing to me,'' Stirling said. ''Two points was the most important thing to me.''
SLAP SHOTS
Islanders center JASON BLAKE, who had an assist, has scored points in 11 of his last 16 games. . . . Hurricanes center RON FRANCIS joined MARK MESSIER and GORDIE HOWE as the only players to play in at least 1,700 games. Francis did not record a shot in 17:39 on the ice.
HOCKEY
