What is the most pressing issue facing urban life? Debates over welfare, crime, arts financing and urban development have been relatively quiet of late. But when plans for the World Trade Center memorial were unveiled last week, a more fundamental tension was revealed: an unsteadiness and uncertainty about the nature of the public realm.
Those memorial plans may even provide a perfect illustration of a fault line that has been getting more obvious after a century of efforts to understand and redesign the American city. The terrorist attacks, after all, were aimed at the city's public fabric. The mourning that followed was public mourning, binding citizens in vulnerability, anger and sadness. And the most heroic acts were those of public servants who sacrificed themselves out of public duty.
Yet the memorial's design is peculiarly focused not on the public but on the private and the personal. The idea of inscribing the name of every person killed echoes Maya Lin's Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington. But those engravings marked the deaths of soldiers -- a sacrifice demanded by the public in its own name.
Here, at first, there were no plans to make distinctions between those who died in public service and the attack's other victims. The initial proposal would have even allowed private decisions about how names were to be listed. There have also been discussions about a private underground mourning area, something almost contrary to the function of a public memorial.
Perhaps not much should be made of this seeming contradiction. After all, the memorial results from months of lobbying by various groups wishing to ensure that their interests are represented. The development of the surrounding downtown area will surely be even more riven by such debate.
But now this kind of debate is typical of urban life. The city is a terrain wrestled over by competing private interests. The city's greatest achievement, it often seems, is the protection of the private realm and of competing private interests; about the public realm there is no clear understanding.
This is far different from the utopian perspective enshrined by much urban planning and design of the last century, a succession of visions of an ideal public in its ideal home. In the early part of the century, the City Beautiful movement imagined an almost pastoral city where aesthetics and planning would help resolve the most grievous social problems. Another view, which fell in and out of favor, was that commerce alone could provide the engine that would eliminate crime, poverty and the slums that had developed after decades of industrialization and immigration. And finally there was the mid-century dream of urban renewal, in which federally financed housing, the destruction of slums and the careful management of zoning would end the poverty and racial tensions that had scarred the American cities of the middle decades of the century.
The failures of these movements -- and there seems to be widespread agreement that they were failures -- have led to new forms of discussion. But many of these efforts reveal new uncertainties about the nature of public life, some of them similar to the hesitations that haunt the World Trade Center memorial.
One new book, ''Story and Sustainability: Planning, Practice and Possibility for American Cities'' (The MIT Press), edited by Barbara Eckstein and James A. Throgmorton, argues that a successful American city should offer ''stories'' to its citizens that would accommodate competing claims and cultures. These could literally be narratives about city life, but they could also be figuratively embodied in buildings and designs that seem connected to a particular group's identity. As some of the book's contributors acknowledge, however, such urban ''stories'' do not in themselves create a wider public and in fact may do just the opposite.
In more utopian fashion, William J. Mitchell, in ''Me++: The Cyborg Self and the Networked City'' (The MIT Press), argues that information technology is bound to affect the landscape of the city, liberating its inhabitants, turning the city into a node within a worldwide web, creating a new kind of public.
Mr. Mitchell, a professor of architecture at M.I.T., celebrates the populism and protest that might grow out of this connectedness, pointing, for example, to the worldwide protests against the United States's invasion of Iraq -- an outcry coordinated through the Internet and cellphones. But such networks, however geographically broad, are not necessarily broadly conceived, nor do they necessarily represent a public interest. They can even be inspired by narrow-minded concerns.
The real consequence for the fate of the city, as the book's title implies, may be an almost privatized sense of citizenship. Each person chooses individual allegiances and alliances. There are no other claims to be answered or wider perspectives offered. No other public emerges.
Is there a vision of the city that might offer different prospects? In Jane Jacobs's 1961 classic, ''The Death and Life of Great American Cities,'' the very texture of daily life and social interaction creates a sense of the ''public.'' How is that sense to be cultivated today?
In ''City: Urbanism and Its End'' (Yale University Press), Douglas W. Rae, a professor of political science at Yale, offers some sense of what might be possible and how difficult it might be to sustain.
The book is an extraordinarily detailed study of New Haven, tracing the city's rise in the early part of the 20th century and its fall in the second half -- an almost archetypal tale of the American city. Mr. Rae has gone back to company payrolls, city property records and private correspondence, trying to illustrate the city's history in the movements and activities of a wide range of its citizens. Mr. Rae also has firsthand experience: he took an 18-month leave from Yale in 1990 to serve as New Haven's chief administrative officer.
Mr. Rae finds the very qualities of urbanism so often celebrated: close-knit neighborhoods of mixed populations and businesses, flourishing factories, communal and religious organizations, all of which helped create a sense of public affiliation. But that urbanism, he stresses, should not be idealized; it was accompanied by poverty and filth and social ills, and was a result of forces that cannot be replicated.
During the second half of the 19th century, Mr. Rae points out, there were ''accidents of urban creation,'' forces that favored high-density, centralized growth in particular locations. Among them were the rise of steam-driven manufacturing, the development of a rail system and a national marketplace, and sustained waves of immigration. But then came the disruptive centrifugal forces created by the introduction of the automobile and the AC electric grid, which ultimately helped bring urbanism to its end.
The crisis of the American cities in the 1960's and 70's is often ascribed to racial tensions. But Mr. Rae suggests that the problems were broader, that what was later called ''white flight'' actually began in the 1920's with the weakening of the city center. The tragedy, in his account, is that the great migration of blacks to Northern cities in the 1930's and 40's began at the very moment when the jobs and factories they were seeking were becoming less stable.
At the same time -- sometimes with the best of intentions, sometimes not -- the federal government began a series of initiatives. One was the New Deal's Home Owners Loan Corporation, which surveyed urban housing stock to guarantee loans to owners who could not otherwise obtain them. The lowest grade of housing -- and thus rated at the highest risk -- was the oldest housing in urban areas that were also losing their manufacturing base, conditions that condemned them only to further disrepair and disrepute. After the war, redevelopment demolished whole neighborhoods generally with still less success. Urbanism had come to an end.
Mr. Rae points out that since the 1980's there have been efforts to recreate urbanism in the architectural movement known as New Urbanism. As explained in ''The Urban Design Handbook'' (W. W. Norton) by Urban Design Associates, an architectural firm, the New Urbanism strategy is to create neighborhoods that imitate the traditional urbanism of the early 20th century. There, walking becomes more important than driving, blocks are designed for mixed use and diverse inhabitants, and emphasis is placed on public consensus. It is a form of artifice, of course, trying to recreate a world that never really existed in such a pristine, principle-driven form. It guarantees neighborhood loyalty, perhaps, but not the development of a public sensibility.
New forms of urbanism have yet to develop. But in the meantime a clear sense of public life seems to exist only in the midst of cataclysm, and a public memorial is now fated to be saturated with private sentiments.
