The sirens were wailing. Martin Brodeur had one shutout in the Devils' previous 16 games. His backups had two.
So the Devils did for Brodeur on Friday night what they had done for Corey Schwab and Scott Clemmensen. They used a dead-bolt defense and the result was a 2-0 victory over the Montreal Canadiens at Continental Arena.
''When you have Marty, you have half the battle done,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said.
Brodeur had to make only 21 saves to earn his 10th shutout of the season and the 74th of his career. He has never posted more than 10 shutouts in a season.
He took off games against Washington and Pittsburgh in the past week, and he was rusty in his return, a 2-1 loss to Carolina on Wednesday. But he had lots of help Friday.
''I think tonight was one of those games where we tried to make plays, and if they didn't work, we tried to cover up for each other,'' Devils center Patrik Elias said.
Elias scored a short-handed goal in the first period and had an assist on an all-too-rare power-play goal in the second to lift the Devils (24-12-10-1) to their fourth victory in their last seven games. Three of the four victories have been shutouts: Brodeur in a 1-0 game at Toronto on Jan. 9, and Clemmensen in a 3-0 game at Pittsburgh on Tuesday.
The victory over the Canadiens (24-17-6-2) was no small accomplishment. Montreal had gone 8-1-2-1 since Dec. 23.
But the Devils did not allow a shot in the first 14 minutes of the game and allowed two shots in the first 14 minutes of the second period.
''We did a lot of things that we did the last few games,'' Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer said. ''We just did it all game.''
Defenseman Scott Stevens, the Devils' captain, missed his eighth straight game because of what may be postconcussion syndrome. But the Devils made up for his absence.
''It's always been the same system,'' Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski said. ''Everybody knows what they've got to do.''
It helped that the Devils scored first. They are 20-4-6-0 this season in games in which they have scored the first goal.
''I think when you give him offense, you're giving him defense,'' Burns said of Brodeur.
Niedermayer tripped Montreal right wing Pierre Dagenais 15 minutes 17 seconds into the game, but Elias scored his second short-handed goal of the season a minute later.
Sergei Brylin intercepted the puck deep in the Devils' zone and shoved it to Elias. He tapped the puck around Montreal center Saku Koivu and eluded Koivu's stick.
He cruised toward Montreal goaltender José Théodore on a breakaway and put a shot over Théodore's right shoulder at 16:17. It was Elias's 16th goal of the season.
What was noteworthy about the Devils' second goal was that it came on a power play. They had just one power-play goal in their previous 20 chances over seven games, but they needed only 15 seconds of the two-minute penalty to score Friday.
After Richard Zednik tripped Devils defenseman Colin White to give the Devils the power play, Elias carried the puck up the ice at high speed. He made a blind pass to his right wing, Grant Marshall, and Marshall swept in alone on Théodore. He tried to pass back to Elias, but the puck deflected off the stick of Montreal's Francis Bouillon and beat Théodore at 4:55 of the second period.
''It was a fortunate goal, but it was a good play all around,'' said Marshall, who later had a penalty shot stopped by Théodore.
HOCKEY
