L'Oréal, one of the largest shareholders of Sanofi-Synthélabo, the French pharmaceutical company, is planning to have a board meeting on Saturday to discuss a potential hostile bid by Sanofi for its domestic rival, Aventis, according to executives briefed on the meeting.
Sanofi-Synthélabo was continuing on Friday to prepare an unsolicited takeover offer worth more than $60 billion in stock for Aventis that could come over the weekend or early next week, the executives said. Shares of Sanofi fell 6.9 percent, to 57.75 euros ($73.42) on Friday in trading on the Paris bourse after a report in The New York Times that Sanofi-Synthélabo was preparing a bid. Aventis shares rose 1.7 percent, to 57.55 euros. Shares of Aventis have risen nearly 14 percent in the last two weeks as speculation about a merger has mounted.
A successful takeover would create the world's third-largest drug company, behind Pfizer of the United States and GlaxoSmithKline, which is based in Britain. Aventis makes the allergy drug Allegra and the blood-clotting drug Lovenox, while Sanofi makes Plavix, the antistroke medicine, and Avapro, a blood pressure pill. Both of Sanofi's top-selling drugs are sold in the United States by Bristol-Myers Squibb.
L'Oréal, the cosmetics and consumer products company, and Total, the French oil company, own about a 44 percent stake in Sanofi-Synthélabo and have considerable influence over whether Sanofi pursues a bid.
Total supports pursuing a deal with Aventis, the executives said. Indeed, Total became the world's fourth-largest oil company by pursuing its own hostile takeover bid for Elf Aquitaine in 1999.
Total and L'Oréal recently declined to renew an agreement that expires in December that had prevented the companies from selling their stakes in Sanofi. A sudden sale of these shares would depress prices. A merger, however, would dilute Total's and L'Oréal's stakes and make stock sales easier.
''The momentum is for this deal to happen,'' Paul Diggle, an analyst with Code Securities in London told Reuters. ''A French merger would have government backing because otherwise one of these companies could end up in the hands of an American or another European.''
