It happens all the time to Palestinians who work illegally in Israel: they get caught, and they get expelled to the West Bank or Gaza Strip.
Adel Hussein's turn came on Friday.
Caught by an Israeli policeman, driven in an army jeep across this fortified checkpoint and dropped on a lonely stretch of West Bank road, he stood at dusk near an empty bus shelter, shivering, uncertain, waiting.
He had more reason than most expelled Palestinians to get back to Israel, and maybe more cause for hope of doing so: his son was racing from southern Israel to his side, and his son is an Israeli combat soldier.
''It'll be O.K.,'' Mr. Hussein, 52, said with a warm smile, if, perhaps, with a bit less than his usual confidence.
He said he feared he would be killed by militants if he returned to his West Bank town, Tulkarm, which he fled a few years ago after Palestinian gunmen shot at his door, accusing him of being a Jew.
As a winter storm built overhead, he was wearing the gray suit, sweater, and colorful tie that he was wearing when he was caught. He had been on his way to an engagement party, riding with two companions in a taxi near the Israeli town of Netanya when police officers stopped them.
His companions, Israeli Arabs, showed the policemen their Israeli identification.
Mr. Hussein showed the officers a photograph of himself with his son, Sgt. Muhammad Hussein, 21, in his Israeli uniform.
Mr. Hussein also pulled out a folded copy of a New York Times article, published Nov. 9, that described his unusual life: his marriage 30 years ago to an Israeli Jew, Stella Peretz; the cherished child they raised together in Tulkarm; their decision to divorce so that Ms. Peretz could take their boy, then 16, to live in the relative safety of Israel, where he was bar-mitzvahed and called Yossi Peretz; Mr. Hussein's own flight from Tulkarm, to the life of a restaurant worker living illegally in Israel.
With the help of his son and ex-wife, Mr. Hussein has tried for years to get permission to live in Israel, which recently tightened its already strict restrictions on ''family reunification.'' The government says that Palestinians were using sham marriages to Israeli Arabs to move into Israel, threatening security.
Israel says that Palestinian terrorists are to blame for the strict treatment of Palestinians who illegally enter the country. Asked Friday night about the expulsion of Sergeant Hussein's father, an Israeli military official said that the army ''is aware of the special situation of the soldier and is working to help him.''
Just Thursday, Didi Rothschild, a lawyer who began working with Mr. Hussein after the Times article appeared, filed new papers seeking citizenship or residency for him. Mr. Rothchild is also looking into gaining citizenship overseas for Mr. Hussein, so that he could at least visit Israel legally as a tourist.
The police officers were not overwhelmed by Mr. Hussein's story, and neither were the soldiers to whom they transferred the illegal worker. One soldier pointed out, Mr. Hussein later recalled, that the Times article quoted Mr. Hussein as telling his son to do his job properly as a soldier -- even to stop his own father, if they encountered each other at a checkpoint. Well, this soldier told Mr. Hussein, he had to do a job, too.
As an Israeli military investigator considered his case, Mr. Hussein used his cellphone to call a photographer from The New York Times. By the time journalists found him, he had already been expelled, just south of the West Bank town of Qalqilya.
''Where will I spend the night?'' he asked. ''I'm freezing.''
The Times journalists were joined by a photographer from the largest Israeli newspaper, Yediot Ahronot, and then by a crew from an Israeli television channel, Channel 10.
As the crew was setting up, another Palestinian was expelled on foot across the checkpoint. A young man clutching a small bag, he quietly asked a stranger if he happened to know the way to Qalqilya.
As the young man disappeared down the road into the night, Sergeant Hussein, driven by an Israeli friend, passed through the checkpoint. He had just finished a three-week stint in the Gaza Strip when he learned that his father was about to be expelled into the West Bank, which, like Gaza, Israel has occupied since the war of 1967.
Wearing fatigues, Sergeant Hussein climbed out of the car and slung his M-16 rifle around his shoulders. He strode over to his father and enveloped him in his arms.
To a reporter who had seen the two together several times, their roles were strikingly reversed. Before, it was Sergeant Hussein, a young man with a divided home and a torn identity, who wept, and it was his father who gave comfort.
Now, Adel Hussein trembled and sobbed, and his barrel-chested son held him -- even, it seemed, held him up.
''I'm here,'' Sergeant Hussein murmured in Hebrew. His father pulled his son's head down to kiss his forehead.
''You taught me how to be a man, so show me how to be a man,'' the sergeant said. ''Don't collapse here in front of everyone. I'm going to bring you back across now, no matter what happens.''
The barrier that Israel is building against West Bank Palestinians encloses Qalqilya, but it does not include this checkpoint. The checkpoint is a collection of waist-high concrete blocks that form narrow lanes, which are overseen by soldiers. Israeli settlers, soldiers and tradesmen use the road, as do rare Palestinians with permits.
The Yediot photographer had been asked by superiors to transport Mr. Hussein. Mr. Hussein climbed into the passenger seat of the photographer's car, and Sergeant Hussein climbed into the backseat. They drove to the checkpoint.
A soldier stopped the car. He peered through the driver's side window, seeing the photographer, his silver-haired passenger, and a soldier in the backseat. ''Everything O.K.?'' he asked, the men later recalled. Then he waved them through.
That was it. Mr. Hussein had returned to his fugitive life in Israel. It was not known what effect his return might have on his legal case, or his son.
But Sergeant Hussein clearly did not feel he had a choice. He was not going to risk losing his father over the West Bank boundary. As the two parted along an Israeli road on Friday night, the illegal Palestinian worker called his Israeli son by a diminutive taken from Yiddish: ''Abbale,'' or daddy.
