Turkish schoolchildren froze to death, a Greek ship sank in rough waters and the Egyptian authorities closed the Suez Canal on Friday as gales, snow and bitter cold pummeled the usually mild Mediterranean and parts of southeastern Europe.
The exceptionally cold weather wreaked havoc in at least half a dozen countries.
Turkey bore the brunt of it. The Anatolia news agency reported that at least seven people died after temperatures plunged below 14 degrees Fahrenheit in the east for the second day in a row. The agency also said that one boy froze to death on his way to school in the eastern town of Cat and another boy died walking home from class in Istanbul.
Nine people, including six children, were missing late Friday night, more than 12 hours after they left their small town to attend a sports competition, according to Anatolia.
In Egypt, heavy rains and sandstorms resulted in car accidents that claimed 13 lives, according to Reuters. On Friday morning, the authorities stopped shipping in the Suez Canal because, they said, driving rain had drastically limited visibility.
At the northern end of the canal, which connects the Mediterranean to the Red Sea, a cluster of almost 30 ships were brought to a standstill at Port Said for several hours while they waited for choppy waters to settle.
A freighter carrying concrete and a crew of 17 sank off the Greek island of Crete, Reuters reported. Nearby vessels that responded to a distress call from the freighter were able to rescue only two of the seamen. The rest, 14 Egyptians and a Greek, were still missing late this evening.
Winds of up to 90 miles per hour raced through Bulgaria, where power was cut to about 85 towns and villages, and the Czech Republic braced for temperatures expected to drop to minus 4 degrees Fahrenheit this weekend, Reuters said.
While the blustery weather brought hardship to most places, it was a pleasant surprise in others. Residents of Venice played the role of tourists in their own city and snapped photos of St. Mark's Square, over which a blanket of snow was spread. Even in Rome, snowflakes melted into the Trevi fountain and jubilant children in the playgrounds cheered, despite there being barely a dusting on the ground.
