In the race for the Democratic nomination, Senator John Kerry has nearly three times as many pledged delegates as Senator John Edwards. His other big rival, Howard Dean, is struggling to keep even his top supporters from abandoning him. Mr. Kerry has trounced his fellow Democrats, winning 14 of the 16 statewide contests so far. He has been endorsed by two men, Representative Richard A. Gephardt and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who until recently were running against him.
Sounds like the front-runner, doesn't he? Not if you ask Mr. Kerry.
''I don't like the word 'front-runner,' and John Kerry abominates it,'' Bob Shrum, Mr. Kerry's media strategist, declared Saturday, even as his candidate was picking up yet another set of victories, in caucuses in Nevada and the District of Columbia. Mr. Kerry himself resisted the tag at Sunday night's debate here, insisting, ''I'm campaigning for every vote.''
Indeed, the mere use of the word is enough to send the senator and his advisers into a full-blown tizzy. It is like the elephant in the room. Everybody, most of all Mr. Kerry, knows he is the leader of the Democratic pack. He just will not say so.
With a series of primary contests still ahead, here in Wisconsin on Tuesday and in big, delegate-rich states like New York and California on March 2, Mr. Kerry is not taking any chances. He only needs to look to Dr. Dean to know that he risks alienating voters if he wears the front-runner's mantle too proudly.
''John Kerry has to defend his title without showing his crown,'' said Donna Brazile, who was Al Gore's campaign manager in 2000. ''He is the front-runner. Everyone knows that. At the same time, if voters get a whiff of somehow or another he's bragging about it, if he's confident that no one could knock his crown off, it could spell trouble for him.''
No one knows that better than Mr. Kerry. He was, after all, widely viewed by Democratic leaders as the front-runner before the insurgent candidacy of Dr. Dean turned the race topsy-turvy. Now the national chairman of Dr. Dean's campaign, Steve Grossman, says he will join the Kerry campaign if Dr. Dean loses the Wisconsin primary on Tuesday.
Those who know him say Mr. Kerry is determined not to appear as if he is taking his good fortune, or the voters, for granted.
''We have seen others at other times and campaigns where people have indicated that they had it locked up, or where they were the front-runner,'' said Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Mr. Kerry's fellow Massachusetts Democrat. At another time, Mr. Kennedy said, ''He is obviously hungry to get delegates, but he is also hungry to give a positive impression.''
But appearing humble takes discipline, especially when the candidate is being treated like a rock star. Campaigning in Nevada this weekend, Mr. Kerry was besieged with admirers straining to get close enough for a handshake.
Mr. Kerry, whose closest brush with rock stardom came during his 1961 stint as a bass guitarist with a band called the Electras, appeared not to have a swelled head.
''Until he puts this nomination process to bed, he has got to resist the temptation to embrace the notion that he is already the nominee,'' said Bill Carrick, a strategist who advised Mr. Gephardt. ''And it's tough. The normal human reaction is to just get caught up in it.''
To make matters more confusing, Mr. Kerry is trying to diminish his status as front-runner just as President Bush is treating him like one. This past week, the president's re-election campaign posted a video on its Web site criticizing Mr. Kerry as a tool of special interests, prompting Mr. Kerry to accuse the president of playing ''attack politics.''
But while their candidate was publicly complaining, some of Mr. Kerry's advisers were secretly pleased. Why? The Bush attacks help them make the argument that Mr. Kerry is the candidate the White House fears most -- in essence, the front-runner.
Every politician knows that voters are fickle -- Dr. Dean surely learned that lesson when his huge lead in the polls evaporated -- and it is always possible that Mr. Kerry could falter. Candidates who appear to be front-runners will often lose states late in the game, if only because some voters like to keep the process alive.
But Geoff Garin, a Democratic strategist who advised General Clark, said this year seemed different. ''Democrats are so committed to defeating Bush in November, they are much more willing and ready than ever before to rally around the presumptive nominee to make sure that he is in the strongest possible position to win,'' he said. ''What we have this time is a very strong inclination to rally around the front-runner.''
Maybe so, but do not try getting Mr. Shrum, the Kerry adviser, to admit it. ''Every single day,'' Mr. Shrum said, speaking of Mr. Kerry, ''he is determined to get up and fight for every vote, never to act like a front-runner, never to take anything for granted.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
