With 7 minutes 22 seconds remaining in the N.B.A. All-Star Game on Sunday night, the fun and frolic was pushed aside, and real, hard-nosed basketball took the spotlight.
With the Eastern Conference leading by a point, each coach inserted his starting lineups -- with Shaquille O'Neal replacing Yao Ming for the Western Conference -- and asked for a return to normalcy, where the desire to win overrides the desire to dunk.
From that point on, the substitutions were strategic, the plays run with a purpose.
Nonetheless, it was still a slam-dunk that highlighted the final moments.
O'Neal, vying for the game's most valuable player award, barreled down the court with 3:22 remaining. With the smaller defenders for the East parting like the Red Sea, O'Neal drove toward the rim and ripped a one-handed jam to put the West up by a point.
It was not the most important play of the game, but it was enough to seal an M.V.P. honor for O'Neal, the league's largest player, before his home crowd at Staples Center.
O'Neal, scoring 24 points in 24 minutes and grabbing 11 rebounds, led the West to a 136-132 victory and received his second All-Star Game M.V.P. award. He shared the award with Tim Duncan in 2000.
''Can you dig it?'' O'Neal screamed after being presented the award, using a line from the 1979 gang movie ''The Warriors.''
Turning serious, O'Neal said: ''I just wanted to come out and have fun today. The guys were looking for me today, so I just came out and had some fun.''
Duncan made the game's most important play. With 37 seconds remaining and the East ahead by a point after a free throw by Tracy McGrady, Duncan received a pass in the post.
Duncan put in a short jumper off the glass to give the West the lead for good with 26 seconds left.
Kobe Bryant, O'Neal's teammate on the Lakers, followed O'Neal with 20 points as the West won the game for the third straight year. Jamaal Magloire led the East with 19 points and 8 rebounds.
Jason Kidd of the Nets had 14 points and 10 assists, and his Nets teammate, Kenyon Martin, had 17 points and 7 rebounds.
Magloire of the Hornets was the leading scorer in the first half with 12 points. He also grabbed six rebounds.
Dunks were frequent, and Tracy McGrady, Orlando's swingman, provided one of the finest in All-Star Game history.
Two years ago in Philadelphia, McGrady left the audience and his competitors astounded by throwing the ball off the backboard, catching it and reverse dunking it over a few defenders.
On Sunday night, he might have outdone that. Driving against Utah's Andrei Kirilenko, one of the league's best defenders, in a packed halfcourt set, McGrady tossed the ball off the glass underhanded, caught it with two hands and slammed it.
McGrady, who finished with 13 points, had said Friday that he did not have such tricks up his sleeve.
''My body's aching,'' he said. ''I think if I tried something like that I might break down. I'm just going to go out here and have fun, try to get a win. I need to get a win.''
After Sunday night's game, McGrady said, ''Sometimes tricks just come out of the bag.''
McGrady had more than one burst in him. In the third quarter, with the East on a four-on-zero fast break, Allen Iverson could have driven in for a dunk. Instead, he threw the ball off the glass for McGrady, who snagged it with two hands, brought it down to his hip and dunked it.
Moments after passing to McGrady, Iverson hurled the ball skyward from the left wing. the Raptors' Vince Carter, streaking along the right side, rose to retrieve the pass and throw it down with a windmill jam.
The East continued to provide most of the highlights when, late in the third quarter, Kidd drove in front of Brad Miller and laid the ball off the backboard for Martin, who nearly got eye level with the rim in slamming it through with two hands.
But while the East racked up style points, the West rallied to go ahead by 7. The East would not go away, though, and the West settled for a 103-101 lead after three quarters.
Asked if the East gave the fans more to cheer about, McGrady said: ''Absolutely. We've got the guards that can really bring that excitement to the game, that can give the fans the spectacular dunks they want to see.''
PRO BASKETBALL
