North Fork Bancorporation is in advanced negotiations to buy GreenPoint Financial for about $6.3 billion in stock, creating one of the larger consumer banks serving the five boroughs, executives briefed on the talks said yesterday.
The combination would unite two New York-area institutions that hope to better compete in the increasingly hyper-competitive local banking market. The combined company would have more than $50 billion in assets and $30 billion in deposits, the executives said.
The companies were locked in talks last night, the executives said, in an effort to reach an agreement by today. Still, the executives cautioned that the deal had not been completed and could still collapse.
If consummated, GreenPoint, with some 90 branches, would be the latest in a growing list of New York-area banks to be acquired by banks impatient to increase their presence in the city. Citigroup acquired European American Bank in 2001, and Washington Mutual bought Dime Bancorp in 2002.
The deal would come at a time when the neighborhood bank branch, once a dying breed, appears to be making a comeback. Close to 100 bank branches opened in the city in the two-year period ending last June, the latest period for which federal data is available. Big banks have begun to embrace the retail bank customer again, attracted by the stability of that business, and the realization that automated teller machines and online banking are not a sufficient replacement for face-to-face communication.
GreenPoint is the holding company for GreenPoint Bank, a New York State-chartered savings bank and GreenPoint Mortgage, which sells mortgages nationwide. The company is worth about $6.2 billion, based on its closing stock price Friday of $46.83, meaning the deal from North Fork would offer little premium.
Since the first of the year, shares of GreenPoint have risen 32 percent as reports surfaced that GreenPoint had hired investment bankers to advise on a possible sale, and they rose again on Friday after Thomas K. Brown, an investor in bank stocks, posted that a deal was near on his Web site, Bankstocks.com.
Shares of North Fork, which has a market value of $6.7 billion, fell $.16 Friday, to $43.75.
GreenPoint has remained committed to its branch network over the years and has been successful at attracting New Yorkers' savings despite being far smaller than Chase and Citibank, the two dominant banks in the area.
The bank was one of the first in the city to promote free checking accounts, Mr. Brown said on Bankstocks.com. Deposits at GreenPoint increased 25 percent last year.
For its part, North Fork Bancorporation, based in Melville, N.Y., operates 177 branches in the New York metropolitan area, New Jersey and Connecticut. It is the holding company of North Fork Bank and Superior Savings of New England.
North Fork first appeared in Manhattan in 1996, after it acquired certain branches from Extebank. The company has been expanding its presence in recent years in the New York City area, both by opening branches and acquiring other institutions. It has made about a dozen acquisitions since 1988.
In December, it announced plans to acquire the Trust Company of New Jersey, the fourth-largest bank in that state, for $726 million. Banking deposits at North Fork increased 19 percent last year.
North Fork has been particularly aggressive about courting the small-business customer in the city, going head to head with Chase and Citibank. John A. Kanas, chief executive of North Fork, has long argued that entrepreneurs would rather avoid the bureaucracy of a large institution. ''People who own their own companies would rather deal with decision makers,'' he said in an interview in 2001. ''The Manhattan market is huge; there's room enough for everybody.''
A spokesman for GreenPoint declined to comment late last week. Mr. Kanas did not return a call on Friday.
The deal also comes at a time when banking mergers are generally on therise. In the last few months alone, J.P. Morgan Chase agreed to merge with Bank One, and Bank of America announced plans to merge with FleetBoston Financial.
