The government on Sunday announced the appointment of seven ministers in a cabinet reorganization aimed at ending a political crisis that threatened the presidency of Alejandro Toledo.
Since his election in 2001, President Toledo has gone through four major cabinet shake-ups and four prime ministers, shuffling his 16-member cabinet whenever his government has hit a difficult stretch.
The idea has been to add a blast of ''oxygen,'' as Peruvians put it, and restore confidence -- something that has never been more needed than now, with Mr. Toledo's popularity rating at just 7 percent in greater Lima in the wake of a string of nepotism and corruption scandals and personal gaffes.
But political analysts and some former cabinet members say Mr. Toledo's new cabinet could well be his last. They say the revolving door has given Peruvians an impression of weakness and lack of direction, rather than the firm hand the president wants to convey.
A host of influential politicians, as well as the country's leading newspaper, have been pushing for Mr. Toledo to take a subordinate role and give broader powers to his prime minister, Carlos Ferrero.
They said Mr. Toledo should also allow ministers to choose their own teams freely rather than be compelled to provide jobs for governing party officials.
''This is the only way there will be stability and allow the president to finish up his term,'' Fernando Villarán, a former labor minister, said in an interview.
''If it does not happen, then the cabinet will be fragile, and he will continue in this free fall,'' Mr. Villarán said.
Mr. Toledo did not comment Sunday on the cabinet changes, which were announced by Prime Minister Ferrero, and it remained unclear if the cabinet would have broad new powers. The seven ministers assume their new jobs after a swearing-in ceremony on Monday.
But politicians, former cabinet ministers and political analysts say the president needs to cede more power to his ministers if his government is to finish its five-year term.
''Change, or the Peruvian people will surely change the government,'' Alan García, a former president and Mr. Toledo's leading political foe, said in a fiery speech on Friday.
Polls show Mr. Toledo has lost credibility among Peruvians for an often ostentatious lifestyle that has alienated those who once saw his government as the reformist alternative to that of former president Alberto Fujimori, who fled into exile in 2000. Many Peruvians also view Mr. Toledo as incapable, disorganized and deceitful, despite the country's strong economic growth in the last two years.
Four former ministers said in interviews that the cabinet shuffle had been difficult because many prospective members had no interest in serving a government that could throw them out in the next crisis.
In the most recent reorganization, in December, Mr. Toledo, under pressure from old-line politicians in the governing party, got rid of Peru's first female prime minister, Beatriz Merino, whose rising popularity and efforts to reform the tax system and the government bureaucracy won her a host of enemies.
''The sensation now is that in this government you cannot do anything,'' said Cecilia Blondet, the former minister of women and social development. ''There is a sense that it is not interested in reforming the state or changing the country, but rather in finding jobs for its own people.''
