Rotten luck tailed the Devils for a while Sunday. The Los Angeles Kings took a two-goal lead when a shot that appeared to be sailing wide of the net hit defenseman Scott Niedermayer's shin pad and squirted between goaltender Martin Brodeur's pads.
But the Devils tied the score in the next 17 minutes, then beat the Kings, 3-2, when Paul Martin, a rookie, scored 3 minutes 53 seconds into overtime.
''It's not how you'd draw it up,'' Niedermayer said of the victory, ''but at that point, there was nothing you could do but try to get back in it.''
The victory was the second in two afternoons for the Devils (30-16-10-1), who gained 2 points on idle Philadelphia in the Eastern Conference standing. The Flyers lead the Devils by 7 points but have played two more games.
''When it goes well, it seems to go well for everybody,'' said Devils right wing Jamie Langenbrunner, who scored his first goal in eight games since returning from knee surgery.
Martin, 22, a defenseman who helped Minnesota win the last two N.C.A.A. championships, was instrumental in Sunday's comeback. His overtime goal was a result of center John Madden's shrewdness and quickness.
Madden noticed a Kings defenseman stationed near the boards before a face-off in the Los Angeles zone. Madden motioned Martin toward the center of the ice, then won the face-off against Kings center Éric Bélanger, drawing the puck back to Martin.
''I moved Paul over a couple of feet just in case we did win it,'' Madden said, referring to the face-off. ''What a great shot.''
Martin's shot stayed low to the ice, hit the left post and bounced past goaltender Roman Cechmanek. It was Martin's third goal of the season and his first since Dec. 4.
''It's been a good learning experience for me,'' Martin said of his rookie season.
Martin has been receiving more ice time because of the absence of Devils defenseman Scott Stevens, who missed his 18th straight game Sunday because of postconcussion syndrome.
''It's good to see that he's getting the confidence to play with the big boys,'' Brodeur said of Martin.
Martin has played more than 20 minutes in 13 of his last 16 games; he played more than 20 minutes in only 3 of his first 29 games. Because he has a hard shot from the point, he has also been receiving more time when the Devils are on the power play.
''He's a heads-up guy, and his shots usually get through to the net,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said.
During the final seconds of the Devils' second power play, Martin took a pass from defenseman Colin White and let a shot fly. Langenbrunner deflected the shot past Cechmanek for a 2-2 tie as the penalty expired.
''He's going to continue to get better,'' White said of Martin. ''The more you play, the more confidence you get.''
The Kings took a 2-0 lead in the opening 10 minutes, on goals by Pavel Rosa and Tomas Zizka. Neither had scored this season, and it was Zizka's first N.H.L. goal.
Langenbrunner had an assist on the Devils' first goal, which was scored on a power play at 18:20 of the first period. He appeared to miss a shot close to Cechmanek, but the puck dribbled to Devils left wing Jeff Friesen. Friesen nudged it to center Sergei Brylin, who rapped in his 11th goal.
The Devils outshot the Kings, 35-26.
The Devils, who beat Carolina by 4-1 on Saturday to end a three-game losing streak, appear to have regained their footing.
HOCKEY
