The team, the car, even the sentiment favored Dale Earnhardt Jr. heading into the Daytona 500 on Sunday at Daytona International Speedway.
Three years after his father was killed in a crash on the final lap of the Daytona 500, Earnhardt was poised to capture his first victory in this famed race, which annually opens the season of Nascar's top series.
Unlike his father, Earnhardt did not have to spend a career trying to win it.
He took the checkered flag Sunday in his fifth attempt and the first under the new series name, the Nextel Cup. Earnhardt passed Tony Stewart on Lap 181 of the 200-lap race and held him off to win by about four car lengths.
''This has got to be the greatest day of my life,'' the 29-year-old Earnhardt said as he stood in victory lane after an on-track celebration with his team. He had stopped on the track at the start/finish line, got out of the car and embraced his teammates as they raced out to greet him.
Earnhardt then drove his Chevrolet in circles through the infield before arriving in victory lane, six years to the day after his father won this race for the only time. Earnhardt said he felt his father's presence in the passenger side of the car with him as he drove for the victory on Sunday.
''The things that have happened here affected so many people we're close to, the entire team,'' Earnhardt said in his postrace news conference. ''Every time we come to Daytona, we just feel, we all feel it whatever it is, we just feel real strong about being here.
''In a way, it feels like you're closer to Dad, but at the same time it feels like it's a reminder of losing him all over again. So I wanted to come down here and win.''
Earnhardt Sr., despite winning seven Winston Cup championships, did not win the Daytona 500 until his 20th attempt, in 1998.
Many times he went in as the favorite, only to fall short.
Earnhardt Jr. said that inspired him, saying that what happened to his father might have made his team ''try to win this race more than any other.''
''I'll be honest with you, this is more important to me than any other race I run all year,'' Earnhardt said. ''I'm not ashamed to say I put a lot of emphasis on coming down here and winning this race just because of what I've been through down here. You see Dad run second, blow tires out, flip over on the back straightaway year after year after year after year. There's nothing at all that ate that man's insides out but losing this race over and over. You could see it on his face.
''Inside of me, back then, just a little bit of wanting to win this race started up and it's been building ever since.''
Going into this year's race, few doubted that Earnhardt would be the leading contender. The Dale Earnhardt Inc. racing team has dominated at Daytona in recent years, winning five of the past seven events here. His teammate Michael Waltrip was the defending Daytona 500 champion and had won twice in three years heading into this race. Earnhardt finished second behind Waltrip in 2001.
Earnhardt had won on this track before, having captured the 2001 Pepsi 400 race. He also won one of the two 125-mile qualifying races on Thursday, when no one could pass him.
On Sunday, Earnhardt led the first 29 laps and spent most of the day racing either in front of or behind Stewart. (Earnhardt led 59 laps and Stewart 97.)
That was by design. The drivers, who are friendly off the track, teamed up at Daytona knowing they could outrace the rest of the field and battle each other for the title in the end.
That was what happened on Sunday. But when it came down to the final laps, it was clear that Earnhardt had the better car.
After he passed Stewart's Chevrolet late in the race, Stewart could not mount a challenge in the final laps.
When it was over, Stewart walked to victory lane to hug Earnhardt, who had averaged 156.345 miles an hour.
''I'm happy about the day we had,'' Stewart said. ''But you know, considering what that kid went through losing his father here in the Daytona 500 and knowing how good he's been here and just something's happened, it's nice to see him get his victory here, too. I think his father was really proud today.
''I would have loved to have won the race, trust me. I did everything I could to still win the race. If I could have held him off and had him finish second, I'd have done that in a heartbeat.
''But there was just was no holding that kid back today. Today was his day.''
Few in the garage could complain about the final result.
''It's cool to see him win the 500,'' said Matt Kenseth, the 2003 Winston Cup champion, who finished ninth. ''I'm sure it's probably a race he's always wanted to win. He always comes down here and has the fastest car, and all week he's been saying was gonna win, so it's not really a bit surprise.''
Perhaps the biggest surprise of the day came from the rookie Scott Wimmer, who finished third.
He took the lead briefly after a pit stop in the late stages, only to have Earnhardt and Stewart pass him in the final stretch.
''They were too strong when they were teamed up together, Tony and Junior,'' Wimmer said.
Still, for any rookie at this track, a third-place finish is a victory in itself. Many of this year's rookies were not able to challenge at the end of the Daytona 500, though.
As with many races here, there was a big wreck midway through the race.
On the 71st lap, the rookie Johnny Sauter appeared to ride up the track and bumped the rookie Brian Vickers and Waltrip. That set off a chain reaction of collisions with 12 cars involved, including last year's winner of a series-high eight races, Ryan Newman.
Waltrip's car flipped upside down and it took several minutes to get him out, but he was not hurt. There were no injuries in the wreck.
Waltrip, however, was unable to continue racing.
Perhaps that was a good omen for Earnhardt. Waltrip was among the few who might have beaten Earnhardt on Sunday.
In the end, no one else could.
''I'm a Daytona 500 champion,'' Earnhardt said. ''I can't believe it.''
AUTO RACING
