This past week tested the proposition that it may be possible to know too much about President Bush. The White House, determined to refute Democratic charges that Mr. Bush was AWOL from the National Guard, so frantically disgorged hundreds of pages of documents from Mr. Bush's military files that reporters who normally complain about presidential secrecy found themselves drowning in a monsoon of Bush World minutiae.
The documents did little to solve the argument between the president and his critics about where, when and how often Lieutenant Bush turned up for Guard duty in 1972 and 1973. But they did reveal that while in Alabama, Mr. Bush had at least nine cavities and that he has gained 19 pounds since 1971.
There were other details even more arcane, like the fact that the president worked as a salesman of sporting goods at Sears, Roebuck in Houston the summer of 1966, after his sophomore year at Yale.
To begin at the beginning of a very strange week, the White House's shower of documents started as a light drizzle on Tuesday. That's when officials released Guard payroll records that Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary, asserted were proof that the president had turned up for service. But the records were fuzzy 1970's-era microfiche files and nearly impossible to read. More to the point, they did not definitively place Mr. Bush in Alabama during the period when Democrats charge he shirked his Guard duties there.
The White House tried again on Wednesday night with, of all things, 31-year-old dental records, complete with black spots indicating cavities and X's for extracted wisdom teeth. The records of an exam performed at the Dannelly Air National Guard base in Montgomery, dated Jan. 6, 1973, were the first unearthed documents that placed Mr. Bush at an Alabama Guard base. White House officials had clearly decided that, however much of a stretch, they were the best they had.
''I can't understand any more hard evidence than having his teeth there,'' Dan Bartlett, the White House communications director, commented dryly.
Friday night brought a final tidal wave of paper, much of it highly repetitive and already released in previous years, that once again offered no new proof that Mr. Bush had turned up for duty in Alabama. But the mountain did add up to a molehill of additional trivia, some of it known and much of it forgotten, about the 43rd president of the United States.
Anyone with a strong cup of coffee and a few hours to go through the two-inch stack of paper learned, for example, that Mr. Bush worked the summer he turned 16 as a $200-a-month messenger at Baker Botts, the Houston family law firm of James A. Baker III, who later became secretary of state and helped Mr. Bush win the contested 2000 election. Mr. Baker is now the president's special envoy for Iraqi debt relief.
The following summer, Mr. Bush worked as a ranch hand at the XX Ranch in Arizona, where he also made $200 a month. He worked as a $250-a-month bookkeeper at the First City National Bank in Houston in the summer of 1967 and the next year, after graduation from Yale, he joined the Guard.
The documents also included numerous copies of Mr. Bush's Yale transcripts, showing that he took anthropology and city planning his junior year and political science and Japanese his senior year. The Guard blacked out Mr. Bush's grades, but the president's average scores are widely known. ''I can assure you that he lived up to his C-plus reputation,'' Mr. Bartlett said.
Medical files in the stack show that Mr. Bush was 5 feet 11 1/2 inches tall, with a weight that fluctuated from 175 pounds to 184 pounds between 1968 and 1971. (In his most recent physical, in August 2003, Mr. Bush weighed in at 194 pounds.)
The weirdest document of the week was by far the dental records, which the White House sent out by e-mail with almost no warning at 8:30 p.m., meaning that reporters who clicked on the file at home suddenly found themselves face-to-face with a full-screen, close-up diagram of the president's teeth.
The teeth arrived with no explanation of their markings, but James Feldman, the president-elect of the District of Columbia Dental Society, said he was happy to interpret. ''Teeth No. 4, 5, 15, 19, 20, 21, 29, 30 and 31 are fillings,'' he said.
Was that a lot? ''For when he grew up, no,'' Dr. Feldman said of the 57-year-old president. ''Based on his age, he probably didn't have a whole lot of exposure to fluoride. Therefore, this is a fairly common presentation with cavities on most of the back teeth.''
Dr. Feldman noted that the records also showed evidence that the dentist had taken pictures of Mr. Bush's back teeth. ''So there should be X-rays hanging around somewhere,'' Dr. Feldman said.
Well, maybe they'll clear all this up.
White House Letter
