It began, law enforcement officials said, as a robbery plot: Two teenage friends placed an order from a Chinese restaurant in South Jamaica, Queens, on Friday night so they could steal from the man delivering the food.
But after they lured the man, Huang Chen, 18, into the apartment, and he pleaded with them just to take the money he was carrying, they stabbed and beat him to death with a baseball bat because they feared he would identify them to the police, the officials said. Then they took Mr. Chen's body from the apartment in a shopping cart and dumped it in a pond in Brookville Park, the officials said.
The youths, Charles Bryant and Nayquan Miller, both 16 and of Queens, were charged as adults yesterday with second-degree murder, robbery, tampering with physical evidence and criminal possession of a weapon, said the Queens district attorney, Richard A. Brown. The investigation was continuing, the police said.
Mr. Chen was a polite, hard-working and doted-upon only son of Chinese immigrants who own the Ming Garden restaurant, at 134-14 Guy R. Brewer Boulevard, customers and area merchants said. He had worked full time as a cashier, cook and deliveryman since graduating from high school.
''He was just a wonderful kid,'' said Al Moonad, 47, who owns a convenience store next to Ming Garden. ''You should have seen the parents crying yesterday. You could hear the cries from over here.''
Friends and neighbors of Mr. Miller's and Mr. Bryant's expressed shock at their arrests, describing them as well mannered and quiet.
Mr. Miller and Mr. Bryant called Ming Garden to place the order around 10 p.m. from Mr. Miller's apartment in the sprawling Rochdale Village housing complex.
Investigators would not say whether Mr. Miller and Mr. Bryant were alone in the apartment when Mr. Chen arrived with the food. Mr. Miller's next-door neighbor, Jhari Wheaton, 24, said the boy's mother works as a bus driver and had left for a late shift around 4:30 p.m. on Friday.
The police did not release details about how Mr. Chen was lured into the apartment. A law enforcement official said Mr. Miller and Mr. Bryant later told detectives that Mr. Chen had pleaded with them just to take his money, which his family said was less than $100.
Mr. Chen was beaten repeatedly in the head with a baseball bat and was stabbed several times in the upper torso with a knife, the police said. His body was wrapped in a covering, possibly a carpet, taken from the apartment in the shopping cart and placed inside his car, which Carmen Rampersad, a friend of Mr. Chen's, said was a new black Lexus that Mr. Chen's father had given him. The car was driven to Brookville Park, where Mr. Chen's body was dumped in a pond, the police said.
Mr. Chen's parents became worried when he did not return to the restaurant Friday evening and called the police to report him missing. When officers went to the restaurant, the parents gave them Mr. Miller's address because it was the location of the last delivery Mr. Chen had made, police officials said.
Investigators arriving at Mr. Miller's apartment found him washing blood off a wall, the police said. He and Mr. Bryant, who had left by the time the police arrived, had also tried to dispose of blood-stained clothing, police officials said.
Mr. Miller was arrested immediately and, under questioning, told the police that Mr. Bryant had been involved in the crime, police officials said. Mr. Bryant, who lives on 147th Drive, was arrested on Saturday.
Mr. Chen's body was found in the pond at 8:30 a.m. Saturday, said the police, who gave no additional details.
Mr. Moonad said Mr. Chen's parents, who had remained at the restaurant all night, were told by the police of their son's death on Saturday morning. Besides his parents, Mr. Chen is survived by two sisters, family friends said. The chef at Ming Garden, Chen Zuang, said the family emigrated from the Fujian province to the United States six or seven years ago. No one answered the door at the family's Elmhurst apartment yesterday afternoon.
Huang Chen ''was a good-natured person, a hard worker,'' Mr. Zuang said through a translator.
Last night, a small shrine of candles, flowers and a teddy bear stood outside the restaurant, which remained closed.
''He was a kind and honest person,'' said Ms. Rampersad, 38, who became friends with Mr. Chen while working at a restaurant next door to Ming Garden.
A few blocks away, at the building where Mr. Chen was attacked, residents expressed bewilderment.
Mr. Miller is a ''good kid'' who liked to play video games and had a devoted mother who hired a tutor for him recently when he broke his leg and could not go to school, said Mr. Wheaton, the neighbor. ''His mother loved him to death,'' Mr. Wheaton said.
At the two-story house where Mr. Bryant lived, a woman who identified herself as his mother but would not give her name said: ''He grew up in a good atmosphere. He never had a brush with the law. He follows the crowd.''
