In a rational world, the events last Monday in New York's State Capitol would have been cause for heady celebration. Late that afternoon, the State Assembly passed four new reform bills, a veritable good-government wish list. But alas, in Albany, voting for a reform bill and ultimately passing a real reform bill are not the same thing -- not by a very, very long shot. So if your local legislator sends a newsletter that brags about voting for a spectacular reform package (a vote that could have been automatic since a legislator's desk is rigged to vote ''yes'' unless instructed otherwise), don't be fooled. Send back a postcard that says, ''And then what?''
It's the ''then what?'' in Albany that seldom gets asked and almost never gets answered by New York's 212 legislators. Bills aimed at cleaning up Albany's governmental stables tend to disappear into legislative limbo. History suggests that the State Senate will pass an equally impressive-sounding but somewhat different batch of reforms and that the two versions will never be reconciled.
Since this year is an election year, there is some faint hope that the state's politicians will feel the need of a reform badge to wear on the podium and actually accomplish something. The best hope so far is budget reform. Both houses have passed bills, and Joseph Bruno, the Senate majority leader, and Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver seem close to activating a rare conference committee to iron out the many differences.
Other important reforms aren't even there yet. New York desperately needs to expand its lobbying code to include lobbying of Gov. George Pataki's state government. Right now, people who get paid to try to influence the Legislature have to report what they do, but not those who lobby for those sweet, fat state contracts and those secretive deals at the secretive authorities. Enforcement should go to the Temporary State Commission on Lobbying, which, despite its tentative name, is extremely unusual for an ethics panel in Albany. It enforces the law on everybody, no matter how noisy or powerful.
Now that the Assembly has passed a bill on lobbying, the next step is for Senator John Flanagan, a Long Island Republican, to get the Senate's version of lobbying reform to the floor as soon as possible. Mr. Flanagan has promised that -- unlike last year -- this year's bill will arrive without the extra last-minute baggage. But even when the Senate passes a better bill, that is not enough for bragging rights. The idea is to turn it into a good and workable law.
Fixing Albany: Editorials in this series remain online at nytimes.com/albany.
Fixing Albany
