President Bush has rightly called attention to one of the world's most alarming problems, the quickening spread of nuclear weapons technology, but proposes a disappointingly limited series of responses. The initiatives he set forth last week were all timely and useful and deserve international support. But they do not go far enough.
Mr. Bush called for tighter export controls by the leading nuclear supplier nations, strengthened intelligence and law enforcement against rogue proliferators, and expanded efforts to eliminate or secure nuclear bomb fuel left over from abandoned weapons programs. What he failed to do was put America's weight behind a sustained effort to revise and strengthen the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty and persuade the handful of countries outside the treaty to join. Also disappointing was his failure to propose increased American financing for the expanded bomb fuel elimination program. In addition, Mr. Bush refuses to recognize that established nuclear powers like the United States undermine antiproliferation efforts when they talk about developing new nuclear weapons for possible use against non-nuclear states.
The president is right to call on the major nuclear supplier states to ban exports of uranium enrichment and plutonium reprocessing equipment to countries that do not now have fully developed nuclear fuel programs. These are the two main technologies for producing bomb fuel. As the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty now stands, signatories are free to dabble in such proliferation-prone technologies as long as they allow regularly scheduled inspections. Several countries, including Iraq and Iran, have exploited this loophole in the past to acquire the means to develop nuclear weapons.
Banning the export of fuel processing technology and equipment is not enough, however. As continuing disclosures about Pakistan make plain, these items can easily be acquired from rogue sources outside the official suppliers group. It would be more effective if supplier states also refused to sell reactors, which they alone can provide, to countries that insist on the right to develop new programs for producing enriched uranium and plutonium fuels. Such a wider ban might not be popular with the nuclear power industry, but it would be a much stronger tool against weapons proliferation.
Over the longer term, the nonproliferation treaty needs to be amended. It should ban nuclear fuel processing while guaranteeing supplies of reactor fuel to countries that accept this ban and subscribe to the treaty's tough new inspections arrangements. Only about 40 countries have so far accepted these arrangements. Mr. Bush rightly proposes banning nuclear equipment exports to countries that have not signed up for strengthened inspections.
Mr. Bush support for the nonproliferation treaty's tough new inspection rules is welcome. But in other areas, his embrace of the treaty, and the International Atomic Energy Agency that monitors it, seemed lukewarm. Amending the treaty will take lengthy negotiations and time, while export controls could, if the supplier countries agree, be applied right away. But law enforcement and intelligence agencies will have an easier time detecting and shutting down new programs for making nuclear bomb fuel if they are outlawed under the treaty. The treaty is now accepted by all but four countries. Controlling nuclear proliferation will be easier when India, Pakistan and Israel sign and ratify the treaty and North Korea, which pulled out last year, returns.
Those countries will not sign on without an American-led diplomatic effort that it is hard to imagine this administration leading. Mr. Bush has gone part of the way toward accepting that only concerted international action can counter the growing threat of nuclear weapons proliferation. The remaining steps cannot be delayed much longer.
