According to Terry McAuliffe, chairman of the Democratic National Committee, one of John Kerry's main advantages in the coming presidential campaign is his ''chest full of medals.'' His remarks leave little doubt that Democrats will continue to make an issue out of whatever questions may linger about President Bush's service in the National Guard.
What's doubtful is whether Americans care. After all, President Bush defeated not one but two veterans on the way to the White House four years ago. And his predecessor, Bill Clinton, twice prevailed over decorated combat veterans to win the presidency.
So why does Mr. McAuliffe place so much importance on Mr. Kerry's Silver Star, Bronze Star and three Purple Hearts? Recent history would seem to indicate that medals don't necessarily help a candidate, while their absence doesn't necessarily hurt.
Consider: in 1993, George H. W. Bush, a Navy pilot in World War II, packed up his Flying Cross medals to make room for Bill Clinton, who famously avoided service in Vietnam. In the Democratic primary campaign the previous year, Mr. Clinton had defeated Bob Kerrey, who was awarded the Medal of Honor for his service in Vietnam, and in 1996 he would win re-election over Bob Dole, who won two Purple Hearts and a Bronze Star in World War II.
President Bush has an equally impressive record. In the 2000 Republican primary, he vanquished John McCain, a decorated war hero who was a prisoner of war for more than five years in North Vietnam. In the general election he defeated former Specialist Al Gore, who worked near Saigon as an Army journalist.
Of course, that was before the attacks of 9/11 and the subsequent wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, which seem to have made voters more appreciative of military experience. At least that's the Democrats' hope -- a hope that may have been bolstered by none other than President Bush himself. ''I'm a war president,'' he said last week. ''I make decisions here in the Oval Office in foreign policy matters with war on my mind.''
But the war's effect on Mr. Bush may be greater than its impact on American politics. Gray Davis, who won a Bronze Star in Vietnam, was recalled as governor of California last year despite the support of Gen. Wesley Clark, whose presidential ambitions were dashed last week. Max Cleland lost his bid for re-election as Democratic senator from Georgia in 2002 despite losing both legs and an arm in Vietnam. Mr. Cleland was defeated by Saxby Chambliss, a Republican member of the House who never served in the military.
That campaign was especially vicious, with Republican advertisements showing Mr. Cleland with Osama bin Laden and Saddam Hussein. If that race is any guide, this year's presidential campaign may reach new depths.
In the coming months, members of both parties may want to reread a speech delivered from the floor of the Senate on the eve of another presidential campaign in which Vietnam was an issue. ''We do not need now to divide America over who served and how,'' it reads. No group ''has cornered the market on virtue or rectitude or love of country.''
The year was 1992. The speaker, then as now a decorated combat veteran, was Senator John Kerry.
Op-Ed Contributor Jake Tapper is a correspondent for ABC News.
