This is the winter when more snow fell in this town than anywhere else in New York State, when construction equipment was needed to clear driveways, when children turned their houses into sledding hills, and when roofs buckled -- but not the people beneath them.
''The snow started and it just kept coming,'' said Susan M. Fox, a third-grade teacher and volunteer medic for the local fire department. ''It's the worst I've ever seen.''
She was talking not about a single storm but about the month of January, when snow seemed to fall continuously, leaving banks taller than a college basketball player. By Jan. 31, Parish had recorded more than 19 feet of snow for the winter, making the town the state's snow capital, according to data collected by volunteers for the National Weather Service.
''That's because of our good friend Lake Ontario,'' said Maureen McCann, a meteorologist with WTVH, the CBS affiliate in Syracuse, which is about 25 miles south of Parish. ''There was a persistent wind pattern that drew snow from the whole length of Lake Ontario. I think Parish is the big winner.''
Usually, the worst lake-effect snow lands in the Tug Hill plateau, a stretch of land between the lake and the Adirondack Mountains not too far from Parish. Residents in that extremely remote area take pride that Tug Hill averages more snowfall than any place east of the Mississippi.
''If Parish had more snow this year, it would be the first time in 100 years,'' insisted Michael G. Yerdon Sr., vice chairman of the Tug Hill Commission, even though National Weather Service data showed his town, Redfield, and others in the Tug Hill region received two feet less snow than Parish by Jan. 31 this winter.
Parish residents did not have to look to the statistics to prove what their community has been living with for weeks.
''You put your clothes on in the morning and go out and shovel,'' said Judy Phillips, a school secretary. ''Shovel when you go home from work. Shovel before you go to bed. And shovel again the next morning to get out of the driveway.''
Not to mention the necessity of shoveling off the roof. Lori Grist discovered that when she came home from work one day recently to find the porch roof collapsed on her stately 1890 Queen Anne- Victorian home in the center of town. ''It's kind of depressing,'' she said.
Ms. Grist's friends had helped her shovel the roof before the porch collapsed, but they hadn't been able to catch up with a couple of strong storms at the end of January. She said her insurance agency told her it had received so many claims, it had declared the damage catastrophic without visiting her home.
Earlier this month, Gov. George E. Pataki requested federal relief money for four snow-stricken counties -- Oneida, Lewis, Cayuga and Oswego, which includes Parish. ''There's a couple vehicles right there,'' said Ms. Grist's brother, John Grist, pointing to a mound of white at the end of the driveway. ''The van and the S.U.V. are buried.''
But residents are proving to be as hardy as the weather pattern.
''I love the snow,'' said Mrs. Fox. ''I happily shovel.''
A few grumbles aside -- about annoyances like the inability to keep a dog in the backyard because the snowbanks are taller than the fences -- most people say they relish the feeling of being a survivor. Stories about the community's taking care of its own abound.
Nearly two weeks after those storms, Ms. Grist's friends are still coming over, climbing a ladder, throwing a rope around themselves and cleaning off other parts of the roof to avert more damage. Next door, where John Grist lives with their ailing father, the driveway had been cleared -- not with a snowblower, but with a friend's construction equipment.
''I love this community,'' Ms. Grist said. ''I wouldn't consider moving.''
The schools have been closed for only five days because of snow, half the snow days of most other places in the state, according to Mrs. Phillips. Grocery stores usually do not run out of food because people keep their pantries well stocked in the winter and feel no need to hoard.
''It's nothing we can't handle,'' said David Chapman, owner of the town's 24-hour diner, the Grist Mill, just off Interstate 81.
When the last storm hit, Mr. Chapman plowed ''around the clock'' to keep his business open, he said. Then he let stranded travelers stay in their booths as long as they needed, and never had to ask the truck drivers to move their rigs so he could plow near them, for they did it on their own.
When the regulars came in to eat, he asked if they wanted avalanche seating as he pointed to the windows, where the view was mostly blocked by the drifts.
''It's the community we live in, and it gets a lot of snow,'' he said.
That's just why Daniel Keppler and his friend Michael Lewis from Vernon, N.J., visited here recently. Where better than Parish to run their snowmobiles? ''In New Jersey, if we got three to four inches, they'd be going nuts,'' Mr. Keppler said. ''They get 79 inches here and it's like nothing to them.''
But there is no sense of superiority, at least not from Harold D. Kinney, who is said to be the town's snow guru. He plows for a living, takes measurements with a yardstick to satisfy his own curiosity, and is quoted in the local newspaper whenever a reporter needs to know something about snow.
Coping with snow is hard, no matter how little you get, he said. ''How do I feel when New York City gets five or six inches? I feel sorry for them,'' he said earnestly. ''I know what it's like; it's the same here when we get five to six feet.''
Parish Journal
