Now that media merger mania is back in the air, thanks to the Comcast's Corporation unsolicited bid for the Walt Disney Company, publishers are hoping it revives popular interest in how it all went down the last time, when AOL and Time Warner became one. That merger, consummated in early 2001, yielded a boomlet of book deals. And now that all but one of those books are out, it is becoming possible to tell whether publishers have fared much better than the unhappy holders of Time Warner shares.
The short answer is not really.
The last book signed but the first one published was ''Stealing Time,'' by Alec Klein, a reporter for The Washington Post who had covered AOL and had broken an important story about accounting irregularities there. When Simon &amp; Schuster signed Mr. Klein to a contract, it was on the stipulation that his book be the first about the merger to reach bookstores, and he rushed to finish it in six months.
For those efforts, the publisher was rewarded with a cameo appearance on business best-seller lists and sales so far of about 9,200, according to Nielsen Bookscan, which industry executives say tracks about 60 percent to 70 percent of book sales. ''I can't say we did fabulously,'' said Bob Bender, Mr. Klein's editor at Simon &amp; Schuster. ''But the number is decent, and it would've been a lot lower if we hadn't been first.''
That notion is supported by the sales performance of the second book to come out, ''There Must Be a Pony In Here Somewhere,'' by Kara Swisher of The Wall Street Journal, with Lisa Dickey. Published by Crown Business last October, it has sold about 3,200 copies, according to Nielsen Bookscan.
''Fools Rush In,'' by Nina Munk, a contributor to Vanity Fair and a former writer for Time Warner's Fortune magazine, came out last month, and after receiving the strongest reviews of the three, it has sold about 3,000 copies, according to Nielsen Bookscan.
Marion Maneker, the editorial director of Harper Business, Ms. Munk's publisher, said he expected the book would eventually pass ''Stealing Time'' because ''Nina's book is not just about one deal, it is about the late 90's and the delusions of that era.''
To do that, however, Harper Business will have to halt the slide in week-to-week sales. Though a spokesman for Nielsen Bookscan supplied only a sales total, an editor at a major trade publisher with access to the figures said that the weekly sales of Ms. Munk's book have recently dropped by more than 50 percent.
Meanwhile, Knopf, the first publisher to sign a deal for a book on AOL and Time Warner, has yet to announce a release date for ''The Deal of the Century'' by Frank Gibney Jr., a former writer for Time magazine. Originally scheduled for this April, it has been pushed back until at least next year, and the focus expanded. ''It's as much about the system that breeds deals like this as it is about the deal itself,'' Mr. Gibney said.
HUGO LINDGREN
