The New York City Ballet has had a summer home at the Saratoga Performing Arts Center in Saratoga Springs for nearly four decades, but this year's regular summer season is to be its last.
The center's board of directors voted unanimously late last week to sever the long and historic relationship, which began in 1966.
''It was a cost-cutting measure,'' Herb Chesbrough, the president and executive director of the center, said on Friday. ''We hope to continue to work with the company but not in a residency situation.'' Mr. Chesbrough said the center hoped to have City Ballet perform there every three to four years and to bring in smaller dance companies in other years.
In a Feb. 11 letter to board members, Peter Martins, ballet master in chief of the City Ballet, wrote: ''We understand from Herb that SPAC is under severe financial pressure, and that despite the decision to license a significant portion of SPAC's capacity to a commercial promoter, it appears that you will not have the necessary financial resources available to present New York City Ballet after this summer.''
The center brought in ClearChannel Entertainment in 2000 to book rock programs. ClearChannel booked 16 of 75 events last year, Mr. Chesbrough said.
City Ballet had accepted a 12 percent cut in its fee for last summer's season, Mr. Martins wrote, adding that the company could not accept an additional 35 percent cut proposed by Mr. Chesbrough. (City Ballet's fee last year was about $1.8 million.)
Mr. Martins described the board's move as ''one of the most disheartening developments since I succeeded George Balanchine at NYCCB more than 20 years ago.''
Balanchine and Lincoln Kirstein, co-founders of City Ballet, helped to design the 5,100-seat amphitheater in Saratoga Springs, and the ballet company's involvement helped sell the project to major donors like the Rockefeller Brothers Fund and New York State. Balanchine's 1974 staging of ''Coppélia,'' choreographed with Alexandra Danilova, was created specifically for the summer performing arts festival.
The center and its festival were conceived in large part to revive the sagging economy of the once-thriving resort town. But the center has been losing money, with a deficit of $1.8 million for 2002, the most recent figure available. The center's annual operating budget is from $13 million to $14 million.
Mr. Chesbrough's salary was an issue cited by a founding board member, Mary Lou Whitney, as a factor in her resignation in 2001, The Albany Times Union reported on Saturday. The article said Mr. Chesbrough's salary had risen 70 percent since 1995, according to Internal Revenue Service files, to more than $300,000 annually. Mr. Chesbrough did not dispute the figures.
The center ended a relationship with the New York City Opera, a resident company for 12 years, in 1997. And rumors had persisted that the next company to go would be City Ballet, which performed its three-week engagements on a year-to-year contract.
Revenue from ballet performances rose by 12.9 percent to $1.24 million in 2003, with attendance rising 7.6 percent. There was a decline in revenue and attendance during the same period for the Philadelphia Orchestra, the center's other classical resident since 1966, which has a contract through 2005. Both companies operate at a deficit, but Mr. Chesbrough described the orchestra loss as significantly less.
''The orchestra is not quite as costly to produce, and they can do a certain amount of pop programs,'' he said.
