The Washington Post is throwing a party on Wednesday in honor of the 54 reporters, editors, photographers and other newsroom staff members who recently took advantage of an early-retirement program. But for more than a dozen of those to be honored, the celebration is somewhat premature: they have signed contracts to stay on as freelancers for as long as a year to help the paper ease the transition in losing so many longtime employees -- about 7 percent of the newsroom staff -- at once.
The freelance contracts were necessary because more reporters and editors than expected decided to retire under the incentive program, the first offered broadly in the newsroom, said Boisfeuillet Jones Jr., the publisher and chief executive of the newspaper.
And so Helen Dewar, who has covered the Senate for more than two decades, will continue to do so. Andrew Beyer, considered among the nation's pre-eminent reporters on horse racing, remains in the saddle.
And two top lieutenants of the newspaper's executive editor, Leonard Downie Jr. -- Mary Hadar and Tom Wilkinson, each of whom retired late in December as an assistant managing editor -- continue to come to work, in an advisory capacity.
''There hasn't been an emotional change,'' said Ms. Hadar, 58, who joined The Post as a copy editor in 1977 and had been the assistant managing editor for front-page features since 1996.
''I'm still with the people I've always worked with,'' said Ms. Hadar, whose new title is writing coach. ''My office is the same.''
The newspaper had offered the enhanced severance package -- including as much as two years' salary in a lump payment and an extensive medical plan -- to employees in many departments who were 55 or older and had worked there for more than 10 years. The enticements proved particularly tempting to many of those hired during a wave of growth in the late 1960's and early 70's. In addition to those on the news side, about 70 people on the business side, including in the circulation and advertising departments, also retired under the program.
''It was basically a financial decision,'' said Edward Walsh, 61, who retired as a general assignment and political reporter after a 32-year career that included tours in The Post's Chicago and Jerusalem bureaus. ''In the end, it struck me as being financially irresponsible not to take it.''
While intended to save money in the long run -- though how long, the newspaper is not willing to say -- the buyout program has not come cheap. The parent Washington Post Company announced last month that it had taken a charge of $19.5 million after taxes in the fourth quarter to start to pay for the program. John B. Morse, the Post Company's chief financial officer, said the charge would be paid out of the company's pension plan, which has assets of more than $1 billion, and not from the operating budget.
''You don't enter into these unless you expect some benefit,'' Mr. Morse said.
On the newspaper's business side, some savings may be realized by leaving some jobs unfilled and distributing the responsibilities among those who remain.
But such bargains are harder to strike in a newsroom, where a reporter can be overwhelmed by having to cover more than one beat. Thus, Mr. Downie said that after the dust settles -- already, some reporters and editors are moving into jobs held by those who retired -- the paper intends to fill nearly all the vacancies that remain, often by hiring people from outside.
In the short run, all of that movement has created a logistical challenge, Mr. Downie said. To compensate for the drain of institutional memory -- Michael Getler, The Post's ombudsman, has calculated the loss at about 1,000 years of ''cumulative journalistic experience'' -- the newspaper has had to make accommodations, some of which have prompted double-takes among reporters and readers.
For example, John M. Berry, who covered the Federal Reserve among other economic subjects for 25 years until he retired in December, has had two bylines in the paper's financial section since he left. And that was not because he signed a freelance contract.
Mr. Berry, 65, now writes a column about the Federal Reserve for his new employer, Bloomberg News, and The Post has periodically reprinted it.
But the disruptions have also created opportunities to present fresh voices to readers by giving reporters, and editors, new assignments that might not have otherwise been made. Mr. Berry, for example, has been replaced on the economic beat by his editor, Nell Henderson.
''None of us has the sense of something being sucked out of the newsroom,'' said Mr. Downie who, at 61 and with nearly 40 years of service in the newsroom, was eligible for a buyout but chose not to take one. ''I would say 'bittersweet' is a better word.''
