In the end, the Yankees' trade for Alex Rodriguez is just another instance in which the Yankees beat the Red Sox. They beat them by finishing first in their division last season; they beat them in the postseason and went to the World Series; and now, in the game of winter hardball, it's Yankees 1, Red Sox 0.
The funny thing about this latest competition is that the Yankees were not even competing with the Red Sox for Rodriguez, a star shortstop and the American League's most valuable player last season. When the Red Sox were trying to get him in a trade from the Texas Rangers this winter, they were all alone. It was as if they had their batting practice pitcher throwing to their own hitters in the American League Championship Series.
And the Red Sox still couldn't win.
They had an exclusive period to meet and court Rodriguez, courtesy of an overly sympathetic baseball commissioner, Bud Selig, and they still couldn't win. The Yankees weren't in the picture; they were almost disinterested observers. Nevertheless, with the official announcement of the trade expected today, it's Yankees 1, Red Sox 0.
''We wouldn't be much of a contender for a title if we couldn't take a punch,'' Larry Lucchino, the Red Sox president, said yesterday. ''This is a haymaker, to be sure, but you still have to win it on the field.''
But what chance do the Red Sox really have of winning on the field? Sure, the teams have to play 162 games, but the Red Sox could lead the Yankees for 161 games and still lose to them. They could have a three-run lead and be five outs from going to the World Series and -- oh, right, that happened in October.
''The Red Sox had a chance to get this done,'' a baseball official said. ''They thought in the end there was no other competition.''
The Red Sox would have been right had they worked out a deal that was acceptable to the players union, but the union found that the Red Sox' proposal was a reduction, not a restructuring, of Rodriguez's contract -- by far the largest in baseball history -- and rejected it under provisions in the collective-bargaining agreement.
The Yankees found a way to maintain his salary, and the union approved the deal yesterday. All that remains is for Selig to approve. He would most likely have taken that step yesterday, but an official said he wanted to take more time because never before had so much money, $67 million, been included in a deal.
''This is a historical deal,'' the official said. ''This is the result of the largest deal in baseball history.'' Rodriguez and Tom Hicks, the Rangers' owner, agreed to the $252 million deal three years ago, but by this winter both wanted out of it. Hicks had to do it for personal reasons and team economic reasons; Rodriguez wanted to flee the Rangers.
''They had a clubhouse thing that was intolerable,'' an official said. ''Alex told people this winter that the thought of going back to Texas was driving him crazy.''
In their negotiations with the Red Sox, the Rangers offered no money to offset Rodriguez's salary. Instead they wanted the Red Sox to give them $15 million. But the Rangers will pay an annual average of $9.57 million of Rodriguez's salary, leaving the Yankees with an average of $16 million a year for seven years.
''That's a great deal for the Yankees,'' a general manager of another team said. ''It's a steal.''
The Yankees also got Rodriguez to defer an additional $1 million a year for each of the first four years with no interest. They offset that reduction in value by giving Rodriguez a hotel suite on the road (an old players' perk) and allowing him to link his Web site to the Yankees' Web site (a new perk).
The Rangers, who will work out Rodriguez's New York State tax payments, agreed to purchase Rodriguez's house in Texas (he is so eager to flee the Rangers that he will not be going back anytime soon) and his suite at the American Airlines Arena.
The Red Sox, on the other hand, wanted to reduce Rodriguez's salary by $4 million a year and in return offered to let him become a free agent after each season. Some additional benefit that would have been. Give up salaries of $25 million and $27 million and try to find that money elsewhere in a declining market.
Compounding the problems toward reaching an agreement acceptable to all sides, the Rangers asked the Red Sox for $15 million to offset the salaries they would pay Manny Ramirez, who would have gone to Texas. Given that a trade would have relieved the Rangers of $179 million on Rodriguez's contract, some dictionary might use the Rangers' request for money as the definition of chutzpah.
But Ramirez did figure in the difference in the deals the Rangers made and did not make. Ramirez is owed $97.5 million over the next five years. But Alfonso Soriano is signed only for the coming season at $5.4 million. That difference made it easier for the Rangers to agree to pay part of Rodriguez's salary.
''One of the keys here is Texas taking Soriano instead of Ramirez,'' a baseball lawyer said.
In rejecting the Red Sox proposal, the union offered a counterproposal, but the Red Sox wanted no part of it. It will be a cold day somewhere before Lucchino accepts a union idea.
Baseball's telephone lines were hot yesterday as owners and general managers called one another and major league officials to discuss their views of the trade. One general manager said he was stunned at the suddenness of the trade but not surprised that the Yankees pulled it off.
Some general managers just shook their heads, at least figuratively, and said that's the Yankees.
''I respect them,'' Mark Shapiro, the Cleveland general manager, said. ''I don't begrudge them. Within the standards and rules they've got, they're making a great deal that will make them a better team. There's the competitive balance issue, but that's not their problem. I don't know why they should be expected to restrain themselves. They're playing by the rules and doing a good job within those rules.''
Jim Beattie, a Baltimore executive, added: ''It's baseball. It's the way the game is right now. You can't fight the way the game is now.''
On Baseball
