Disappointment and frustration have no off-season among Red Sox fans.
To those who still bear the scars of seeing their team squander a four-run lead to the Yankees in Game 7 of the American League Championship Series in October and who devote their summers to a team that has been a bridesmaid but never a bride for 85 years and counting, this weekend brought another dose of bad news. Alex Rodriguez, the Texas Rangers shortstop and last year's most valuable player in the A.L., whose acquisition and contract restructuring with the Red Sox was rejected by the players union less than two months ago, is about to become a Yankee.
''I feel violated, upset,'' Chrissy Brown, 33, a surgical technician from Newton, Mass., said Sunday after awaking to the news of the trade. ''I feel like it is another dig once again at Boston.
''We were so close, so, so close. We lost to, of all teams, the Yankees, and now they get him right before spring training. It's a slap in the face.''
Brown started her day by hurling a remote control at a television as a news anchor was laying out the specifics of the deal, then she attended a bridal shower where the trade dominated conversation.
''Nobody had anything nice to say,'' said Brown, who was unwinding with a few friends over drinks at Joey's, a bar in the Boston neighborhood of Brighton.
Despite her frustration, Brown said she planned to jump back on the Red Sox bandwagon and ride it to the World Series, which, she said, her team will win.
Tim Athanasiadis, the owner of Center House Pizza in Brighton, said, ''Not everyone is mad, just most of us.''
To Robert Hennigan, 27, and Erica Lally, 25, travel agents from Brighton, losing out on Rodriguez is further evidence that the Red Sox are cursed.
''It's just one thing after another,'' Hennigan said.
Lally added, ''They're jinxed.''
Glenn Stout, a baseball historian, said that the Rodriguez trade was part of ''a pattern that keeps repeating itself.''
''The Yankees, usually at the very end, and usually in the most excruciating way possible, step on the Red Sox once again,'' said Stout, the author of ''Red Sox Century'' and ''Yankee Century.''
But despite the trade and the decades of distress and disillusionment that has been heaped on Boston baseball, not all Red Sox fans were despondent.
''It's not bad at all,'' said Joe Caico, 50, who owns Joey's. ''We still have the pitching. It just makes it more interesting. Nobody's heartbroken. We still feel good about ourselves.''
Caico, whose bar prominently displays Red Sox memorabilia and a few bumper stickers bearing epithets about the Yankees, said an off-season in which the team acquired two of the best pitchers in baseball, Curt Schilling and Keith Foulke, cannot be classified as a disappointment. There is ''no question,'' he said, that the Red Sox will win the World Series this year.
Bob Bracken, 40, of Brighton, spent most of Sunday analyzing the deal in the local newspapers. He said he was confident that the Red Sox were good enough to beat the Yankees this year.
Bracken holds no ill will toward Rodriguez. He did, however, direct some ire toward the Yankees' principal owner, George Steinbrenner.
''It's another example of George Steinbrenner trying to buy another World Series,'' Bracken said. ''If there's a bitterness at all, that's it.''
BASEBALL
