Before the ink dried on the 10-day contract that Omar Cook signed with the Portland Trail Blazers on Feb. 3, a cheering section had formed on both coasts.
''That's great news,'' said Speedy Claxton, the point guard from Hofstra who runs the show for the Golden State Warriors.
Rafer Alston, the New York street-ball legend who was handpicked by Pat Riley to quarterback the Miami Heat, said, ''We root for guys like Omar.''
Not long ago, it seemed that Claxton and Alston would have been rooting from the seats at Madison Square Garden for a player like Cook, who seemed destined for N.B.A. fame and fortune.
Claxton was a four-year player at Hofstra, a midmajor Division I program that hardly registers a blip on the N.B.A.'s radar. Yet Claxton became a first-round draft pick (No. 20 over all) of the Philadelphia 76ers in 2000.
Alston, renowned for his playground exploits at Rucker Park in Harlem, attended six schools before the Milwaukee Bucks drafted him out of Fresno State in the second round in 1998.
Meanwhile, several heralded point guards from each side of the Hudson River have flopped. That list includes Cook, who left St. John's after his freshman season and was leading Fayetteville of the National Basketball Development League with nine assists a game before Portland called, and Erick Barkley, Cook's predecessor at St. John's, who is now with Huntsville of the development league.
Barkley, who left St. John's after two seasons, starred at Christ the King High School in Queens with the future N.B.A. star Lamar Odom. They stole most of the headlines and recruiting visits from a teammate no one paid much attention to -- Speedy Claxton.
The cluster of point guards who have not made it in the N.B.A. also includes Shaheen Holloway, Kareem Reid and Kevin Morris. Holloway is from St. Patrick's in Elizabeth, N.J., and Seton Hall, and is playing professionally in Israel. Reid, a Bronx native from St. Raymond High School, joined Arkansas in 1994, the season after the Razorbacks won the national championship, moved on to the Harlem Globetrotters and is now with Asheville of the N.B.D.L. And Morris, of Martin Luther King High School in Manhattan, went from Georgia Tech to Georgia State to Asheville to Las Vegas of the newly formed American Basketball Association.
They were among the candidates to continue the tradition of New York City point guards' success in the N.B.A., a pipeline that produced Bob Cousy, Nate Archibald, Mark Jackson, Kenny Anderson and Stephon Marbury, to name a few.
''Speedy and I are pure point guards with good assist-to-turnover ratios who give our teams stability,'' said Alston, who was drafted after his junior season. ''A lot of guys who didn't make it in recent years went to big schools, but they were small guards who really couldn't shoot from the outside. Coaches also want to know if you can drive the lane and finish against a guy who is 7-foot-1. These were great college players we're talking about, but you have to look at their situations through the eyes of N.B.A. scouts and coaches.''
Tom Pecora, who recruited Claxton at Hofstra and is now the head coach there, offered his explanation of why the can't-miss point guards missed.
''Most of the guys who were better known didn't make it because they got way too much attention early on and were constantly pampered,'' Pecora said. He added that some also received bad advice to leave college early for the pros.
Claxton, a 5-foot-11 blur in transition, was an integral part of San Antonio's run to the N.B.A. championship last season. He has found a home in Golden State, where he is in the first season of a three-year contract and is averaging 10.1 points and 4.4 assists in 26.4 minutes.
''It's a credit to hard work,'' Claxton said about achieving his N.B.A. dream. ''Rafer and I had a lot of obstacles to overcome, but at least we never had to deal with the pressures of living up to all the hype.''
Alston, 27, is better known to New York fans as Skip-To-My-Lou, the nickname he earned at Rucker Park for his ability to dribble-dance past defenders on his way to easy baskets. Alston attended three high schools and two junior colleges before suiting up at Fresno State for Jerry Tarkanian, who had recruited him off the Rucker blacktop.
Alston, who also lists the Continental Basketball Association and the N.B.D.L. as stops along his odyssey to Miami, sat behind Milwaukee's Sam Cassell for three seasons before getting a chance to showcase his ball-handling wizardry for half a season with the Toronto Raptors.
''I learned a lot from Sam, who is a proven winner in this league,'' Alston said. ''He taught me a lot about playing the angles and not changing my game.''
Earlier this season in a three-game stretch against three of the N.B.A.'s best point guards, Alston helped hold Jason Kidd (9 points), Marbury (4) and Steve Francis (9) to a combined 22 points and 8-of-39 shooting. Alston, who has a one-year deal with the Heat, is averaging 9.5 points, 4.4 assists and 2.5 rebounds in 31.6 minutes.
''I want people to know that guys like me, and guys like Speedy for that matter, are not some type of fill-in point guards that somebody can just run over,'' Alston said.
''We're here to play ball.''
PRO BASKETBALL
