The police shot and killed a suspected car thief in the Bronx yesterday after he wrested away an officer's gun and used it to fire on the officer, wounding him in the stomach, the police said.
Four backup officers faced off against the man as he pointed the gun at them after firing a bullet that blew off the tip of Officer Gilbert Noa's little finger and lodged in his abdomen, the police said. The four officers fired a total of six rounds at the man, hitting him once in the chest.
Officer Noa, who is 35 and has been on the force for eight years, was in serious but stable condition last night at Jacobi Medical Center after surgery. At a news conference at the hospital, Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg commended the four officers who came to his aid. ''Their actions may well have saved the life of Officer Noa and his partner,'' Mr. Kelly said.
The shootings were the climax of a wild joyride in a black Lexus though the Crotona Park area of the Bronx. Police officials said the man first attracted attention in the 43rd Precinct, where, for reasons that were not clear, officers did not stop the car he was driving, but ran a check on the license plate and learned that the car was reported stolen from Suffolk County in January.
Minutes later, as the man cruised into the 49th Precinct, the Lexus clipped the front end of a silver Acura, spinning 180 degrees to face oncoming traffic on East Tremont Avenue at 177th Street.
''The car spun out of control,'' said a woman who identified herself as the sister of the Acura driver. ''The guy got out and started running.''
Officers from the 43rd Precinct came upon the accident and sent out a radio call that the driver had fled on foot north on Bronx Park Avenue.
The man ran several blocks, then tried to enter an apartment building at 2075 Boston Road in the 48th Precinct, the police said. The door was locked, so the man turned around, but was confronted by Officer Noa and his partner, Officer Leonardo Ortiz, the police said.
The three men scuffled, falling to the sidewalk in their struggle. It is not clear whether Officer Noa drew his gun, but the man wrested it from him and fired once, striking Officer Noa, the police said.
Police officials said witnesses had told them that the man then got to his feet, but kept the gun pointing down toward the two officers. By that time, the four backup officers, from Transit Unit 12, were approaching the scene. When the man caught sight of them, he raised the gun and pointed it at them, and they fired. The witnesses told police that they heard the four officers say ''stop'' before shooting.
There was some evidence that the man may have tried to fire a second round, but was stopped by a jammed gun, an official said.
The man was taken to St. Barnabas Hospital, where he was declared dead. He was carrying identification that investigators concluded was false, because it pictured a 5-foot-10 Hispanic man, and the man in the shooting was over 6 feet tall and appeared to be white, a police official said.
Last night, investigators were waiting to see whether his fingerprints matched any in the state's database. A police official said the man had stolen the Lexus by posing as a potential buyer and test-driving the car. He never returned. When the owner called the police, they discovered that the car he had left behind when he took the Lexus was also stolen.
Mr. Kelly has made a habit of responding quickly to police shootings, including the Jan. 24 shooting at a Brooklyn housing project of Timothy Stansbury, an unarmed teenager.
In that case, Mr. Kelly came under fire from some officers for saying that day that the shooting appeared to have been unjustified. Last week, the police union took a vote of no confidence against Mr. Kelly for what they called a rush to judgment. Department officials have defended him, saying that he always makes a rapid, preliminary pronouncement, but usually backs the officers involved.
Yesterday, despite his praise for the officers, Mr. Kelly stopped short of saying that the shooting appeared justified.
Though he steered clear of the word, the mayor did not. ''Sometimes force is justified, and sometimes it isn't,'' Mr. Bloomberg said. ''It would appear in this case that it certainly was justified. And the officers did exactly what they are trained to do and exactly what we want them to do to protect all of us.''
