In the television business, networks never schedule hit shows from the same producer against one another. Try it and you can be sure that the producer's next hit will appear on somebody else's network.
But NBC appeared to do just that in the last two weeks, with a producer no one should want to alienate: Mark Burnett, the man behind two of television's biggest reality hits, ''Survivor'' on CBS and ''The Apprentice'' on NBC.
NBC extended the running time of ''The Apprentice'' by 18 minutes, starting the show at 8:42 p.m. Eastern time on Feb. 5 and Feb. 12. That meant the first scenes of ''The Apprentice'' played out directly against the final scenes of ''Survivor,'' which usually include the popular sequence in which the castaways vote someone off the island.
That scheduling tactic also seemed to violate what had been a gentleman's agreement between Mr. Burnett and Jeff Zucker, the president of NBC Entertainment. When Mr. Zucker moved ''The Apprentice'' back to Thursday night at 9 (after one week of seeing the burgeoning hit show get pummeled by Fox's ''American Idol'' on Wednesday night), he told Mr. Burnett that he would not pit the show against ''Survivor.''
But there was a caveat: NBC had already committed to scheduling two extra-long (supersized, in NBC's parlance) episodes of ''Friends'' on Thursdays the first two weeks of the February sweeps period, in which the networks load up their schedules with programming gimmicks and specials because the month's ratings carry extra weight with advertisers. To start ''The Apprentice'' at 9, those two weeks would have required NBC to fill in those 18-minute gaps with other programming.
''It was the price of getting moved back to Thursday,'' Mr. Zucker said. ''Mark understood.''
He did, if a bit grudgingly. ''It was just unfortunate,'' Mr. Burnett said, ''but it was only for two weeks. NBC had a temporary problem with their schedule.''
CBS seemed alarmed enough about the development to run promotions all last week urging viewers not to miss the last 15 minutes of ''Survivor.''
But Mr. Burnett said that message was not related to the early start of ''The Apprentice,'' but to an unexpected ''format break'' on ''Survivor.'' There was no vote-off on ''Survivor'' last week because one contestant, Jenna Morasca, voluntarily left, saying she sensed that her mother, who had been ill with cancer, needed her. (Her mother died eight days after she got home.)
Mr. Burnett was also less irritated than he might have been because he is simply too busy. Beyond those two shows, Mr. Burnett is editing a second edition of the reality show ''The Restaurant,'' scheduled for NBC in April, has shot a reality plot with an undisclosed format for CBS, and is shooting yet another reality series, ''Casino,'' for the Fox network.
BILL CARTER
