Two people were killed and two others critically injured last night when dense levels of carbon monoxide seeped into a six-story apartment building on Third Avenue in the Murray Hill section of Manhattan.
Firefighters, responding to an emergency call from a technician for Con Edison, arrived at the building at 535 Third Avenue, between 35th and 36th Streets, about 7:45 p.m. They used sledge hammers to smash through apartment doors, warning those who had not already evacuated the walk-up building to get out.
But the firefighters who fought their way into Apartment 6B on the sixth floor found their efforts were in vain. Inside were a man and a woman who had succumbed to the deadly levels of carbon monoxide in the atmosphere, which officials later said had reached a concentration of more than 30 times what is considered safe.
The other victims were located a floor below: a man and woman, in Apartments 5B and 5C, were taken to New York University Medical Center, where they were listed in critical condition, the police said. They were later transferred to Jacobi Medical Center in the Bronx.
In a separate occurrence early this morning, firefighters responded at 12:20 a.m. to a carbon monoxide leak in a six-story apartment building at 1601 University Avenue in the Morris Heights section of the Bronx. By 2 a.m., the authorities said, at least 10 occupants of the building had been taken to nearby hospitals suffering from symptoms of carbon monoxide poisoning. None of them appeared to have life-threatening ailments.
The authorities would not identify any of the victims of the Murray Hill leak.
However, one of the deceased was identified last night by a neighbor on the sixth floor as Harvey Needleman. The neighbor, a 32-year-old man who declined to reveal his name, described Mr. Needleman as between 60 and 80 years old, and as a friendly, highly educated collector of art from Africa and the Caribbean.
''He was open, honest and always there when you needed him,'' said the neighbor, who was interviewed in a nearby tavern shortly before midnight as he waited to learn if he would be allowed back into the building. He said Mr. Needleman had often performed favors, like accepting delivery of packages, adding that ''I will miss him a lot.''
''I heard a lot of noise, and when I opened the door they were taking a sick woman out on a stretcher,'' said Karen So, who lives in a first-floor apartment of the rental building.
The building's ground-floor commercial tenant is Wild Edibles-Murray Hill Seafood Market.
''I went back in my apartment because I figured she was just sick,'' Ms. So said. ''Then the firefighters knocked on my door, and I didn't hear them, so they forced the door open because they thought I was unconscious.''
Ms. So was one of several residents in the crowd that gathered outside the building, some taking shelter in an Emergency Medical Service bus, others, highly distraught, milling around and wondering about other victims. Emergency workers were seen removing at least one dog from the building for medical attention.
Alisha Davlin, who lives on the building's third floor, said she heard or saw firefighters break down several apartment doors with sledge hammers. She said the building had a troubled recent past, having had a fire last May and a problem with escaping carbon monoxide less than two years ago.
What caused yesterday's leak remained under investigation by fire officials and building inspectors last night. A spokeswoman for the Department of Buildings, Ilyse Fink, said that the department's investigators were on the scene last night but that access to the building was delayed because of the work of the police and firefighters. ''All I can say is it is being investigated,'' she said.
In a statement shortly before midnight, the police said there was ''no criminality suspected.''
A Con Edison spokesman, Joseph Peta, said it could be days before residents were allowed to return to the building, which has 22 apartments. ''We've got fatalities here, and there's got to be an investigation,'' he said. ''They can't even get a plumber in right away to fix the furnace.''
Residents of the building ''would probably be best off looking for alternative arrangements for the next few days,'' he said.
Mr. Peta said a Con Ed mechanic was the first to detect high levels of carbon monoxide in the building when he responded to a call from someone on the fourth floor who had reported an unusual odor.
Although carbon monoxide is normally odorless, the mechanic arrived at the building at about 7:30 p.m., less than 15 minutes later, and almost immediately suspected problems when he went to the basement to examine the building's furnace, Mr. Peta said.
By 8 p.m., the mechanic had shut off the furnace, called the Fire Department and begun knocking on doors to evacuate people from the building, Mr. Peta said.
