THE LAST GOODBYE  By Reed Arvin  340 pages. HarperCollins. $23.95.
By the second page of Reed Arvin's smoldering new thriller, in inveterate detective-noir fashion, the main character has fallen hard for a dame. ''She was exquisitely beautiful, she was crying, and she could not be ignored,'' explains Jack Hammond, a walking amalgam of hard-boiled wisdom and heart-on-his-sleeve susceptibility. Anyone with a taste for sultry, devious, adrenaline-boosting suspense stories may want to cancel a few appointments before opening this one.
In ''The Last Goodbye,'' which is vastly better than its generic title, Jack immediately jeopardizes his successful career as a lawyer for a tryst with this woman, Violeta Ramirez. Then Violeta winds up dead, and Jack is fired. Mr. Arvin's pages overflow with yearning, intrigue and remorse. (P.S. We aren't even past the prologue.)
Two years later Jack has become a court-appointed lawyer for indigent clients in Atlanta. Though the Southern setting and legal ambience invite the inevitable Grisham comparisons, Mr. Arvin writes a more old-school, histrionic brand of nail-biter, though he also incorporates up-to-the-minute tricks. (A computer-keystroke-monitoring device, used for espionage in another current thriller, ''Paranoia,'' amounts to mere child's play here.) There may be times when you want to throw a bucket of water over this author (''There are times that tragedy flows like a river, and it takes a strong swimmer not to drown''), but you surely won't be bored.
As he waxes either love-struck (''Her mouth looked so warm, with her lips slightly parted, that it seemed like the answer to every question was hiding just inside them'') or philosophical (''There are times when questions about the future can wreck the present''). Mr. Arvin tells an enticingly devious story that overrides such fulsome excesses. Over all this is a smart, streamlined story of intrigue. Two years after Violeta's death (to which Jack has been an unwitting catalyst), there is another fatality. Doug Townsend, Jack's college buddy, has apparently overdosed on drugs.
In current technology-laced thrillers like this one, it is inevitable that the dead man leaves behind cyberclues to his real nature. Doug's laptop is loaded with information (and of course it will soon be stolen). And there is some odd artwork in his apartment. Doug has created bizarre homages to an opera diva named Michele Sonnier; not least of these is the image of a church, constructed entirely out of pictures of her eyes. This is not your father's James M. Cain-style sexual obsession anymore.
The inevitable next stage: cherchez la femme. Jack manages to catch sight of Michele Sonnier (''She was chocolate and luminous in the lights of the ballroom''), and he asks her about Doug. Naturally, in a plot like this, her first answers are transparent lies. Being no fool, Jack senses a larger species of trouble here. ''There is a kind of woman who attracts drama, whether consciously or unconsciously, and the same magnetism can make a man stick to her, metal against metal,'' Jack says. ''That, I reminded myself, I did not need.''
He may not need it, but the book turns it into a major force. Jack's weakness for Michele leads him into, among other things, an exploration of her secret-strewn past; it proves very much at odds with her current life as an opera star and the wife of ''Charles Hundred-Million-Dollar Ralston,'' a pharmaceutical company executive with an initial public stock offering in the works.
Two things worth noting: the last phase of this whiplash-inducing series of plot twists involves justice doled out by means of diabolical stock market scheming. And these days no thriller involving corporate research and spying is complete without (yawn) another supposed breakthrough said to be ''the most important event in the history of mankind.''
Mr. Arvin, a record producer as well as a novelist (and the editor of a book called ''Getting Started in Christian Music''), takes on the weight of the world in describing the socioeconomic disparities in Atlanta in a book that ranges from a ghetto housing project to Michele and Charles's private plane. The close attention to race heightens the Romeo-and-Juliet aspect of Jack's affair with Michele (so do her choices of opera roles), but it also comes dangerously close to reinforcing stereotypes.
''The moment my feet touched the ground, I was the whitest man in Atlanta,'' Jack thinks, as he enters a potentially dangerous section of the city. The crime kingpin at the housing project is the most clichéd of the otherwise well-drawn secondary characters. And the fatalism of reconnecting the glamorous Michele to the sordidness of her ghetto girlhood is a bit too easily rendered. When Mr. Arvin attempts to read a history of suffering and deprivation into the behavior of one trigger-happy boy, he is raising issues to which other more seasoned writers in this genre, like George P. Pelecanos, bring noticeably more depth.
Vigorous and jet-propelled as it is, ''The Last Goodbye'' would have benefited from closer editing. Mr. Arvin gets away with too many lines like ''She was so beautiful it hurt,'' and with frequent tone-deaf use of subordinate clauses (''unlike what Stephens had said, there was no record of any criminal activity''). None of this should seriously interfere with the reader's complete immersion into an exceptionally clever mystery and into the love, lust and chicanery that create its world of pain.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
