Alex Rodriguez was a high school senior the first time he spoke with Derek Jeter. Rodriguez was expected to be the first choice by the Seattle Mariners in the 1993 amateur draft, but true to his already poised approach, he contacted a fellow shortstop, Jeter, about being picked in the first round by the Yankees a year earlier.
The fact-finding call led to more calls, more chats between two baseball-crazed teenagers, and the discussions stretched well beyond baseball.
Soon, two players with different backgrounds and similar goals developed a strong friendship that grew as they climbed toward the major leagues.
Rodriguez, now as recognizable as any player in baseball, would laugh as he recalled fans' routinely mistaking him for Jeter when Rodriguez was with the Mariners. Jeter slept at Rodriguez's house when the Yankees were in Seattle, and Rodriguez would find a bunk in Jeter's apartment when the Mariners traveled to the Bronx. Rarely have two higher-profile opponents been as close.
''At this point,'' Rodriguez once said, ''Derek has become like my brother.''
But the friendship took a turn when Rodriguez said some unflattering things about Jeter three years ago in an article in Esquire. Jeter was irritated when Rodriguez told Esquire that when preparing for the Yankees, Jeter was ''never your concern.'' The implication was that Jeter was benefiting from being in a better situation with the mighty Yankees and that he was not as talented as Rodriguez.
Publicly, Jeter mostly ignored the static created by Rodriguez's remarks. But the words bothered Jeter, and so did having to answer questions about the depth of his friendship with Rodriguez.
''When you think about the things Alex said, there had to be some kind of jealousy,'' one of Jeter's friends said. ''Why else would you say that?''
After Rodriguez maligned him, Jeter retreated and their friendship cooled. Jeter, who could not be reached for comment yesterday, has said that he can make a quick decision to end a friendship if he feels wronged, which is what seemingly happened with Rodriguez for a spell.
The passage of time and Rodriguez's explanation of how a few critical comments should not undermine dozens of laudatory remarks he had made about Jeter over the years reduced the tension.
The two, though not road roommates anymore, are cordial again.
They filmed a commercial for Major League Baseball last month that included Rodriguez's wife, Cynthia. Jeter absolved Rodriguez for his comments of three years ago, seeming to rationalize them in an interview on the YES Network when he said that Rodriguez had been in foreign circumstances, with his status soaring after he signed his record-breaking contract with Texas and with unfamiliar kinds of questions being tossed at him.
''We're friends,'' Jeter has said.
The soul brothers who separated and regained some footing in their friendship after a verbal slip-up will be in the highest of high-rent districts on the left side of the infield at Yankee Stadium. That will become a reality if Commissioner Bud Selig approves the trade today, as expected.
Rodriguez is considered the best player in baseball, and he was chasing the title of the best shortstop in major league history, but he was so desperate to leave the Rangers that he surrendered his love affair with shortstop and agreed to move to third base. Rodriguez has snared the last two Gold Glove awards and is considered the better defensive player, so maybe he thinks a return to shortstop is always a possibility. Why not? Who thought this startling deal was possible?
Jeter helped the Yankees win a World Series title as a rookie in 1996 and added three more rings in the next four seasons. He said Rodriguez talked to him about reaching that same level. Leaving a legacy is crucial to Rodriguez; he told Jeter that he wanted to be a champion, too. That was not likely to happen in the near future in Texas.
Jeter, reared in Kalamazoo, Mich., with two strict parents, won the Rookie of the Year award after batting .314 in 1996, when he was 22. Rodriguez, who grew up in a single-parent home in Miami, hit .358 with 36 homers and 123 runs batted in that season, but 1995 was considered his rookie season, when he had 142 at-bats. Rodriguez made his debut as an 18-year-old in 1994, playing in 17 games for the Mariners.
The argument about the superiority of the shortstops raged in the early parts of their careers, but the debate began to follow a pattern. Rodriguez always had the gaudier statistics, typically dwarfing Jeter's power numbers: he hit 57 homers in 2002 and at least 40 in his last six seasons. But Jeter's teams usually had the better records and he excelled in October, when he was typically the Yankees' premier player.
Tall, regal and eloquent, Rodriguez is as polished a player as there is in baseball. He already knows several New York reporters by name, and he will probably have many more memorized before spring training ends. He seems to relish the spotlight and will instantly swipe a big part of it from other marquee Yankees.
For all of Jeter's appearances on the gossip pages, he works diligently to keep his private life private. When Jeter talked about his friendship with Rodriguez, he would usually describe it as close; it was Rodriguez who used terms like brothers. Jeter is polite with reporters, but he does not offer the voluminous answers that Rodriguez does.
''We always talk about getting old, gray and fat when our careers are over and just having a good time,'' Rodriguez once said. ''He's like me. He wants to have a good time and be a good person. It's a weird situation for us. It's just like we're looking in the mirror.''
One of the most memorable incidents involving the two occurred during a beanball-charged game between the Mariners and the Yankees in August 1999. They were near each other as the brawl dissipated, and Rodriguez playfully told Jeter, ''If we fight again, I'm coming after you.''
Jeter said he smiled or smirked at Rodriguez. The Yankees' Chad Curtis confronted Jeter by the dugout, saying he had been disloyal, and lectured him in front of reporters in the clubhouse, telling him, ''You're a good player, but you don't know how to play the game.''
Jeter was angry at Curtis, a backup outfielder, for admonishing him so publicly and for assuming to know what had happened. Curtis apologized for the way he reprimanded Jeter, but never apologized for what he said. Jeter stopped talking to Curtis.
Rodriguez rushed to Jeter's defense, calling him the ''ultimate team player'' and adding, ''For a platoon player to talk about Derek, I thought that was ironic.''
Despite the connections and comparisons, Jeter and Rodriguez probably never discussed playing together. Why talk about something that was an impossible long shot? They both played shortstop, so there did not seem to be any way they would ever unite.
When Michael Kay interviewed Jeter for YES recently, Jeter agreed to talk about Rodriguez's being traded to the Red Sox so they would have a canned answer in case the deal happened.
Obviously, George Steinbrenner's network will never broadcast Jeter's response to Rodriguez's being on the Red Sox. He will be a Yankee soon, and now the question for Jeter is what it will be like to play alongside his old phone friend, not against him.
BASEBALL
