Having in the past decade been inundated with books devoted to the intricacies of fly-fishing, I was delighted and intrigued by Chris Yates's ''The Secret Carp.'' The book is a marvelous account of the author's passion for a scaly, chunky, long-lived denizen of lakes, ponds and streams over much of the world that is usually caught -- sometimes after 12 hours or more of lounging, back against a tree, line in water, rod propped up with a forked stick -- with a hook baited with kernels of canned corn, canned beans, balls of dough or bits of bread.
Yates, who lives in a village in Wiltshire, England, brilliantly describes the enchantment experienced by an angler almost besotten with his sport, pays homage to a smart, tough and hard-fighting species, and unobtrusively suggests ways to locate and catch carp, which are highly regarded as a sport fish in Europe.
The carp also has its devotees in the United States, where the largest rod and reel common carp on record is a 57-pound-13-ounce fish caught in the Potomac in 1983. Carp cruising in the shallows are also hunted with bow and arrow.
''The Secret Carp,'' published by Merlin Unwin Books in Ludlow, Shropshire, England, and available in the United States from bookstores or Stackpole Books, is a star of the first magnitude in the literature of angling and the natural world.
The book caught me by surprise. I was was captivated by Yates's writing style and his description of a wooded valley at nightfall, a place he had been riding through, his way lost, on his motorcycle when a medley of evocative scents -- ''elder, dog rose, honeysuckle and wild garlic weaving through the denser smell of ancient water'' -- caused him to believe that a hidden carp lake was nearby.
Few longtime fishers go after all the species available to them, and halfway through Yates's book, I was suddenly a bit distressed that I had missed out on carp.
I began fly-fishing about 70 years ago, and as I went from boyhood to old age in New England, I came to regard certain species of fish as unworthy of pursuit, among them carp, suckers and dace.
For a couple of decades after World War II, I was obsessed with locating remote brook trout ponds in northern New England. I also hiked or drove by dozens of lakes and ponds that were home to smallmouth bass. It wasn't until a weekend when I had to remain close to home that my friend Vic Pomiecko and I put a canoe on the Connecticut River and went after smallmouths with fly rods. We had a wildly successful day with those powerful, chunky, acrobatic and good eating fish, and from then on they have been one of my favorites.
For a short while after reading the Yates book, I toyed with the idea of fishing for carp but soon began to waver. I have no history with carp, and sitting motionless on the shore for hours waiting for any fish to take my offering is not my cup of tea. I relish the easy rhythm of fly casting and don't enjoy messing around with bait. Nor can I shake my insular chilliness toward a non-native species that in many areas has taken over trout habitat.
Carp came to the United States from Germany in 1876, when the United States Fish Commission put 345 of them into a breeding pond in Druid Hill Park in Baltimore. Soon, according to A. J. McLane's ''Standard Fishing Encyclopedia,'' the fish ''were multiplying so rapidly that any congressman wishing to collect a few votes could pass out some carp to his constituents.'' Carp are now common in eastern North America and found from coast to coast.
Yates would understand my viewing the carp as an interloper. One chapter in his book is titled ''The Curse of the Silver Pirate,'' his name for the rainbow trout, which he calls one of his country's most calamitous importations from America, along with, to name a few more of his choices, Coca-Cola, Mickey Mouse and Elvis Presley. Since 1939, rainbows have been heavily stocked in England's lakes and rivers.
Yates writes: ''There is hardly a river system in the country that isn't plagued by these verminous silver pirates. They have snatched my cheesepaste when I was patiently fishing for chub on the Kennet, they have gobbled my worm when I was after a barbel on the Yorkshire Derwent, they have grabbed my breadflake when I was roach fishing on the Dorset Stour. . . .'' The ultimate frustration, he adds, is when a rainbow seizes his bait on a carp lake.
Years ago in early May, when fly-fishing for trout in the first big pool below the main reservoir on the East Branch of the Croton River near Brewster, N.Y., I twice hooked up with big fish that simply ran downstream for 50 or 60 yards without stopping, forcing me to clamp down and break them off. Thinking of giant brown trout, I cast again and had another fish on for a second before it pulled free. Stripping in my line, I found a huge carp scale impaled on my fly.
A return trip this spring with heavier fly-fishing gear might be rewarding.
OUTDOORS
