'Bodysong'  Jonny Greenwood
When Jonny Greenwood performs with Radiohead, he spends some time at his keyboards and guitar and some time on his hands and knees, working effects pedals to create the foreboding aura that envelops Radiohead's songs. His instrumental soundtrack for ''Bodysong,'' a documentary about human life from conception to death, largely sets aside song forms for experiments in ambience.
Its tracks are like the protoplasm of Radiohead songs: a slow sequence of piano chords with hovering strings in ''Moon Trills,'' spattered layers of percussion in ''Convergence,'' glassy synthetic tinkling that turns into a somber march in ''Clockwork Tin Soldiers,'' yearning melodies scored for string quartet in ''Iron Swallow'' and ''Glass Light/Broken Hearts,'' and muscular jazz-quartet vamps in ''Splitter'' and ''Milky Drops From Heaven.''
Radiohead fans should be fascinated by the panorama of Mr. Greenwood's musical laboratory, and it is clear how much he contributes to Radiohead's haggard beauty. On its own Mr. Greenwood's music conjures disquiet, serenity, turbulence and glints of wonderment. The entire album can be heard online at www.epitonic.com.
'Ba Ba Ti Ki Di Do'  Sigur Ros
Merce Cunningham commissioned Radiohead and Sigur Ros to each make about 20 minutes of music for ''Split Sides,'' and Sigur Ros has released its half as ''Ba Ba Ti Ki Di Do,'' which is available now on iTunes and is to be released as a (higher-fidelity) CD on March 23 by Geffen. The 21-minute piece is a gradual progression from crystalline delicacy to chaotic noise.
Its title comes from sampled vocal syllables that are treated as percussion in Part 3 (''Di Do''). But the literal mainsprings of the music are in a pair of music boxes that plink at various speeds, with ratchety sounds as they are being rewound. The music boxes are often reminiscent of Mike Oldfield's ''Tubular Bells,'' while below them Sigur Ros brings in the measured, stately keyboard processionals it is known for in ''Ba Ba'' and ''Ti Ki.'' But in ''Di Do,'' swelling feedback and distortion bury any vestige of prettiness, for a sustained assault that worked better when the group was accompanying dancers than it does as pure audio.
'They Were Wrong, So We Drowned'  Liars
The dissonant punk funk and bitter political rants of Liars' first album, ''They Threw Us All in a Trench and Stuck a Monument on Top'' (Mute, 2002), were still too accessible to satisfy the band. Its songwriters, Angus Andrew (vocals) and Aaron Hemphill (guitar), jettisoned their rhythm section and took on a new collaborator, Julian Gross, before making Liars' follow-up, ''They Were Wrong, So We Drowned'' (Mute).
The new album, made in a home studio in rural New Jersey, withdraws to murkier sounds and darker abstractions. Dance beats are destabilized, stopping and starting, while the rare melodic hooks arrive spiked with distortion. The words are chanted as often as they're sung, and abysses of reverb seem to open up below the instruments. ''We're ordinary till we get more damage done,'' Mr. Andrew observes in ''There's Always Room on the Broom.''
As that title hints, ''They Were Wrong, So We Drowned'' is a concept album about witches, fear and retribution. It draws on legends of the witches' Sabbath (Walpurgisnacht), and on records of witch trials (''If she's a witch she will drown,'' one song promises.) The lyrics, when they can be deciphered, are dialogue from believers, victims and fearful villagers.
The first time through, the album is as much an endurance test as an entertainment, reaching back to New York rock's most raucous no-wave experiments of the late 1970's and also echoing vanguardists like Merzbow and This Heat. The only way Liars might reach the mainstream with music this abrasive would be if Christian culture monitors tried to make them the next Marilyn Manson for lines like, ''Choke, choke, the devil we evoke.''
But there is intelligence behind the cacophony. Each beat is cracked differently, and the songs dive headlong into the dread and disorientation they take as their subject. Each song sets up a new way to jangle nerves, an achievement in itself.
New CD's
