Isiah Thomas's audacious restructuring of the Knicks continued Sunday when he completed a three-team trade that ended Keith Van Horn's tenure with the club after just 47 games. The deal, which included Milwaukee and Atlanta, will send small forward Tim Thomas and center Nazr Mohammed to the Knicks.
Van Horn, who was averaging 16.4 points and 7.3 rebounds for the Knicks, has had the most productive season and career of the five players involved in the trade. But Isiah Thomas said that adding the combination of Tim Thomas and Mohammed outweighed losing Van Horn.
''The only reason we made the trade was because we got both players,'' Isiah Thomas said in reference to Tim Thomas and Mohammed. ''When you add Tim Thomas and Nazr Mohammed to our team, it makes us a much more athletic team. I think we've become a better defensive team, a better rebounding team.''
Michael Doleac, who had been the Knicks' backup center, and Joel Przybilla, a 7-foot-1 center who had been playing in Milwaukee, were the other players involved in the trade. Van Horn went to Milwaukee, and Doleac, Przybilla and the higher of the Knicks' two second-round draft picks in 2005 went to Atlanta.
The trade was the third in the whirlwind tenure of Isiah Thomas, who was hired as the Knicks' president of basketball operations on Dec. 22. Thomas has acquired a superstar in Stephon Marbury, traded or cut 10 players from the Knicks' roster, fired Don Chaney as coach and replaced him with the Hall of Famer Lenny Wilkens.
''I wanted to put together a team that was exciting for the fans to come and watch, a team that had some character and some guts, but also a team that you can grab a box of popcorn and grab a soda and enjoy the game,'' Thomas said. ''You want players and you want a team that people want to see. I think this is a team that when everyone is healthy and playing well, it can be an exciting team that people will want to see and talk about.''
While it seems unlikely that Thomas could make another move before Thursday's trade deadline, he did not rule out the possibility. He also said that the addition of Mohammed would not douse his interest in possibly signing Vin Baker, the troubled forward who has been placed on waivers by Boston.
Thomas's last trade, which landed the Marbury and Penny Hardaway from the Phoenix Suns, was a no-brainer, but Sunday's move is questionable. Although Van Horn is regarded as a soft player who has underachieved, he has done far more than Thomas in his career. Interestingly, the two were traded for one another on draft day in 1997.
Philadelphia drafted Van Horn with the second pick that year, then traded his rights to the Nets for Thomas, whom the Nets selected seventh. Although Van Horn has been criticized for not living up to his superstar billing out of the University of Utah, Thomas, who was traded to Milwaukee in 1999, has been criticized for reaching just an inkling of his vast potential.
Now in his seventh season, Thomas, who will turn 27 later this month, has averaged 11.8 points and 4.1 rebounds for his career. A Bucks starter the past two seasons, he has improved those figures to 14.1 points and 4.9 rebounds this season, still very low numbers for a 6-foot-10 player with outstanding leaping ability, especially one with a six-year, $60 million contract. Thomas has two years remaining on his contract after this one, as does Mohammed, who has a five-year, $25 million deal. Van Horn also has two seasons left, during which he is to make $27 million.
In Indiana, Isiah Thomas had great success helping Jermaine O'Neal and Ron Artest blossom into stars, and he believes he can help Tim Thomas do the same in New York.
''When you make a trade for a player, you always try to imagine how the player would be in your surroundings, in your environment, under your tutelage,'' Isiah Thomas said. ''I'm confident that if Tim is willing to work and willing to listen, we can help him reach the potential that he has.''
Tim Thomas brings some advantages to the Knicks. He is more athletic than Van Horn, and he is a true small forward who excels in the open court. His running ability should mesh nicely with Marbury. Although not as good an outside shooter as Van Horn, he can get hot from beyond the 3-point arc. Whether Thomas has the mental toughness or the work ethic to reach his potential remains to be seen.
''It's up to him how good he wants to be,'' said Michael Redd, Thomas's All-Star teammate in Milwaukee. ''Tim Thomas can be as good as he wants to be.''
Redd said he believed the trade will benefit both teams.
Isiah Thomas was extremely high on Mohammed, a 6-foot-10 center with career averages of 6.5 points and 5.1 rebounds. Strong and tough, the 26-year-old Mohammed has the potential to be a legitimate starter. In starting for Atlanta during the 2001-2 season, he averaged 9.7 points and 7.9 rebounds.
Thomas said the decision whether to start Mohammed or the 38-year-old Dikembe Mutombo would be up to Wilkens, but he said the decision to acquire Mohammed was made partly because of Mutombo's age and the uncertainty of Kurt Thomas's future with the Knicks. Thomas has had negotiations with the Knicks concerning a contract extension, but his future in New York is not guaranteed.
Van Horn, 28, has been traded three times in a year and a half. Although there were doubts about his ability to play in New York when the Knicks acquired him for Latrell Sprewell last summer, Van Horn has had brilliant moments. In the first seven games he played after Isiah Thomas took over, Van Horn averaged 23 points. Since then he has returned to his typical streaky play, but he was considered one of the top third options (behind Marbury and Allan Houston) in the N.B.A.
''It was a very tough trade for us losing Keith,'' Thomas said. ''It's probably one of the most difficult trades I've ever had to make, simply because of my fondness for Keith.''
There is speculation among officials around the league that the deal was made because of Van Horn's relationship with Marbury. The players clashed while playing together years ago with the Nets, and before this season Marbury said Van Horn was not tough enough to play in New York. But when Marbury was traded to the Knicks, he apologized to Van Horn, and the players became a strong tandem during their 18 games together with the Knicks. They were seen laughing together on the bench, and their on-court chemistry was outstanding.
Thomas said concerns about problems between the pair had nothing to do with the trade.
''I don't think anybody who has watched our team play in the last month has seen anything but a harmonious group,'' Thomas said.
PRO BASKETBALL
