Little of note happened at OPEC's gathering here this week, other than an announced cut in oil production. There were no explosions. No kidnappings. No assassinations.
That was exactly what the tough-minded military-backed government would have demanded, after a decade of fighting Islamic insurgents, a battle that has left an estimated 120,000 people dead.
The government's next big test will come in presidential elections, set for April 8, elections in which some parties are not taking part, to protest the state of emergency still in effect.
In the meantime, there are signs that the country is returning bit by bit to the fold of diplomacy and international commerce.
A few days before ministers from the 11 members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries began arriving at an airport patrolled by commandos armed with submachine guns, the Chinese president, Hu Jintao, led a state visit that produced agreements allowing China to explore for oil and gas in Algeria's rich southern Saharan fields.
Secretary of State Colin L. Powell came here briefly in December during a trip to North Africa to applaud Algeria's ''exceptional cooperation in the war on terrorism.'' He called for fair presidential elections.
In March, the French president, Jacques Chirac, accompanied by executives from France's largest companies, dropped by in a display of cordial relations between Algeria and its colonial ruler until 1962. The eight-year war of independence cost a million lives.
The host of the OPEC meeting, the Algerian oil minister, Chakib Khelil, spoke of strengthening ties with other nations, illustrated by the decision of Air France and British Airways to operate flights to Algiers for the first time in years.
The area around the capital is relatively safe, but attacks are breaking out farther away. ''The security situation appears to have improved in some places but the Algerian military and government are still on a knife edge,'' said George Joffe, an expert on Algeria at Cambridge University. ''As much as the army would like to declare otherwise, the war in Algeria is not over.''
Just this week, Islamic fighters killed seven paramilitary police officers in an ambush at a coastal city east of Algiers, Bejaia, the official APS news agency reported.
In Algiers, where plainclothes and uniformed police officers keep watch, consumer trappings are becoming visible, like the Peugeots and Renaults on the streets, Korean cellphones and satellite dishes perched on balconies of crowded tenements.
The government has begun a heavily publicized campaign to raise awareness of traffic safety and road accidents, adding to the impression that Algeria may finally be ready to address issues other than terrorism. The police advertise the slogan ''Speed Equals Death.''
''The police are supposed to be fining motorists for not wearing seat belts instead of hunting people down,'' said Mostefa Bouchachi, a lawyer and president of the human rights commission of the Algiers Bar Association. ''Traveling safely around the city or even between cities, something unthinkable not long ago, is one of those subtle achievements.''
The meeting in Algiers was only OPEC's second in Algeria in the organization's 44-year history. Nearly three decades ago, Ilich Ramírez-Sánchez, the Venezuelan terrorist known as Carlos the Jackal, fled to Algiers with 11 of OPEC's ministers who had been kidnapped from a luxury hotel in Vienna.
The military has assumed great powers since 1992, when the army halted elections that Islamic opponents seemed about to win, an action that began the civil war. In a later election, in 1999, the military's candidate won the presidency only after six rivals dropped out, claiming fraud.
Fully rekindling the economy, which is heavily dependent on oil and natural gas exports, is another matter. But government officials insist that the nation is on its way to attaining stability that could soon allow it to join groups like the World Trade Organization.
''This country passed through a very difficult period in the 90's, but it is recovering fast,'' Abdellatif Benachenhou, Algeria's French-trained finance minister, said in an interview. He cited economic growth that was reported to be more than 6 percent last year, largely because of high oil prices.
Mr. Benachenhou said he expected the economy of this nation of 32 million people to grow 6 percent again this year.
Such prospects are tied chiefly to oil and natural gas sales to Europe and the United States. Once shunned by all but a handful of American and European energy companies, the nation is expected to soon become the largest supplier of gas to Spain and one of the largest to France and Italy.
Still, even Mr. Benachenhou admits that robust exports cannot easily repair the damage from a decade of civil war or bridge the hard divisions between the French-speaking elite and the mostly underemployed and underpaid masses, many of whom still receive benefits dating from the nation's once rigid socialist past.
Tension over how to share the nation's oil bounty has spilled over the campaign before the presidential elections in April. Despite the state of emergency, the city's French-  and Arabic-language newspapers carry fierce critiques of the administration of President Abdelaziz Bouteflika, who was elected in 1999 with the blessing of the army amid widespread accusations of vote rigging. Under his presidency, thousands of Islamic militants have been pardoned.
''Algeria and the Algerians deserve better from the present debate,'' La Tribune, a French-language paper, said in an editorial this week. It accused Mr. Bouteflika of using oil and gas revenues to finance social programs to win electoral support.
Facing pressure to guarantee fair elections, Mr. Bouteflika has asked the United Nations, Arab League, African Union and European Union to send observers in April. The lack of strong opposition candidates has many convinced that he is likely to be re-elected, though he has not yet officially announced his candidacy.
Mr. Bouteflika's government has yet to account for 7,000 or more people who, according to Human Rights Watch, disappeared at the hands of security forces in the 1990's.
As if to change the topic, the government has unflinchingly endorsed the Bush administration's campaign against terrorism; it did not permit protests against the war in Iraq.
