TENNIS
Roddick Tops Fish in San Jose
Andy Roddick won his first title of the year with a 7-6 (13), 6-4 victory yesterday over Mardy Fish at the Siebel Open in San Jose, Calif.
Roddick, seeded No. 1 and ranked No. 3, saved four set points in the tie breaker.
Fish, seeded third, had 17 aces to Roddick's 16. (AP)
CLIJSTERS WINS 20TH CAREER TITLE -- Top-seeded Kim Clijsters of Belgium overwhelmed Mary Pierce of France, 6-2, 6-1, to win the Gaz de France yesterday in Paris. Clijsters made did not lose a service game in earning her 20th career title. (AP)
CYCLING
Rider's Death Not a Suicide
The magistrate investigating the death of the Italian cyclist Marco Pantani said yesterday that Pantani did not commit suicide. But the magistrate, Paolo Gengarelli, said that nothing definite would be determined until after an autopsy, which will be performed today. Pantani's body was found in his hotel room Saturday night in Rimini, Italy.
The police in Rimini have ruled out violence and said there were no illegal drugs in the room when Pantani's body was discovered.
Pantani, 34, won the Giro D'Italia and the Tour de France in 1998. (Reuters)
BASKETBALL
Hall of Fame Finalists Named
Clyde Drexler won an N.B.A. title as a player, Jim Calhoun won an N.C.A.A. title as a coach and Dick Vitale won over fans as a broadcaster. Each could soon add a the honor of member of the Basketball Hall of Fame; they are among 16 finalists for this year's Hall of Fame class announced yesterday.
The new members will be announced April 5 at the N.C.A.A. men's Final Four in San Antonio. The induction is in September.
Lynette Woodard, Bill Sharman, Gus Johnson, Bobby Jones, Bernard King, Chet Walker, Maurice Stokes, Drazen Dalipagic of Yugoslavia and Hortencia Marcari of Brazil are also among the finalists. (AP)
OLYMPICS
Stadium Roof Remains a Concern
An International Olympic Committee inspector, Denis Oswald, said yesterday that the roof of the future Olympic stadium in Athens was his only major worry about the Games in August.
But Oswald told a Swiss newspaper, SonntagsZeitung, he is confident that the overall preparations will be completed in time. He said the organizers had stuck to their timetable.
''It's very complicated and there is no space for unforeseen delays in the timetable,'' he said, referring to the glass and steel stadium roof. ''But the Games can, if necessary, go ahead without this roof.''
The architect has promised that the roof will be ready in April. (Agence France-Presse)
WINTER SPORTS
Japanese Skater Wins 500 Meters
Masaari Kobayashi of Japan edged the World Cup leader in speedskating, Jeremy Wotherspoon of Canada, in the men's 500 meters yesterday in Collalbo, Italy. Kobayashi finished in 35.23 seconds, with Wotherspoon at 35.30.
Monique Garbrecht-Enfeldt of Germany won the women's 500. (AP)
LUGE VICTORY FOR GERMANY -- David Moeller of Germany won the men's singles event yesterday at the luge world championships in Nagano, Japan. Moeller won with a combined time of 1 minute 39.150 seconds. Georg Hackl of Germany was second, in 1:39.158. (AP)
LANGE SECURES WORLD CUP BOBSLED TITLE -- Andre Lange of Germany won the four-man World Cup bobsledding race yesterday in Igls, Austria, capturing his third career overall title in the event. Lange had a combined time of 1 minute 43.23 seconds. Todd Hays of the United States and his team of Paul Jovanovic, Bill Schuffenhauer and Steve Mesler were second in 1:43.37. (AP)
