The silence was broken. Now it is fixed.
The experimental rock band Sonic Youth was surprised to find out last week that Apple Computer's iTunes Music Store was restricting the sale of one of its songs, a 63-second stretch of silence called ''Silence'', by allowing it to be downloaded only by people who bought the entire 1995 album on which it first appeared.
In an article in The New York Times last Monday, an Apple spokeswoman had said that such decisions were up to the artists and that the band had requested the change. But Lee Ranaldo, a guitarist and singer for Sonic Youth, disputed Apple's version of events.
''We are very happy for the track to be sold to anyone who wants it as an individual download,'' Mr. Ranaldo wrote on Wednesday in an e-mail message to Apple. He added that the track was ''a very intentional 'piece' on our part,'' and that restricting its sale was ''against our ideas and sensibility.''
The silent track created a small stir earlier this month when an iTunes shopper ran across it and told an Apple gossip Web site about his absurdist 99-cent purchase of some copy-protected silence. A few days later, Apple made the silent track available only as part of the album.
In a response to Mr. Ranaldo, Alex Luke, Apple's director for music programming and label relations, said that there had been ''miscommunication on a few fronts,'' and that the change had been made after discussions with the band's label, Interscope Geffen A&amp;M, part of the Universal Music Group. He said that the iTunes store would reverse the change. A Universal spokesman said the track restriction had been approved by an employee who did not regularly deal with the band and ''thought they were fixing an error.''
Sonic Youth's music is typically heavier on squealing guitar noise than meditative calm. But Mr. Ranaldo said the silent track was meant as a nod to John Cage, who used a silent composition to make listeners aware of the constant presence of ambient sound. ''Conceptually, I love the idea that it's there and you can download it,'' Mr. Ranaldo said.
''We felt at the time that it was important enough for us to make it a track on the record, so why should it be differentiated from any other track on our record?'' Mr. Ranaldo added. ''Sometimes it's hard to understand how people on the business side of things think about this stuff.''
