There was no campaign speech by President Bush on Sunday as he faced some 180,000 racing fans at the Daytona 500, and that was a good thing. If he had tried, no one would have heard him over the roar.
Instead, in one of the louder political acts of the presidential campaign thus far -- save, of course, for Howard Dean's scream -- Mr. Bush stood in the brilliant sunshine and commanded, ''Gentlemen, start your engines!''
Whether that translates into the votes of ''Nascar dads,'' this year's hot political constituency, or the Nascar moms who came with them to watch the president and, later, a spectacular multicar pile-up, will not be known until November.
Nonetheless, Mr. Bush -- whose tastes run to baseball, not auto racing -- was clearly making the most of the moment. And so were his political handlers, who saw an opportunity for political spectacle that Mr. Bush, even after a rough week, was prepared to exploit.
Before the race, Air Force One buzzed the stadium, already filled with fans (some a few beers into the celebrations) and then parked on the airfield just to one side of the stands, where it became part of the televised backdrop. Mr. Bush's motorcade sped into the stadium and drove partly around the track, to rousing cheers, even though it was moving at a pace that was not about to set any records here.
The president then emerged from a sport utility vehicle and was immediately mobbed by the race car drivers, including Dale Earnhardt Jr., whose father died on this track three years ago and who went on to win the race on Sunday.
It was an appearance that brought together the major targets of this year's campaign: Mr. Bush's supporters in the corporate world (he spent much of the afternoon in the sky box of Nextel, the new sponsor of Nascar's top series), and the conservative-leaning race fans, whom every candidate is courting this year. Mr. Bush is clearly off to a head start: in December he invited some of the sport's best drivers to visit the White House while Senator John Kerry, the leading Democrat, has yet to make it near a checkered flag.
In fact, Mr. Bush was feeling good enough on Sunday to allude to the most delicate of political subjects -- his National Guard service -- as he made the point that, at heart, he was a speed demon.
The moment came as he stepped into an NBC Sports booth to join in the broadcast of the first few laps of the race -- prime airtime that money simply cannot buy -- and considered the question of whether he harbored any secret desire to ride in one of the cars he inspected Sunday.
''I'd like to, but I'm afraid the agents wouldn't let me,'' Mr. Bush said, laughing.
''I flew fighters when I was in the Guard,'' he added, making the point that he had shown up often enough to learn to fly, ''and I like speed, and it would have been fun to drive up on these banks,'' pointing to the steep curves of the track. Then, perhaps remembering that he spent some of the last campaign explaining away two speeding tickets, Mr. Bush said, ''I can't imagine taking a bank at 210 miles an hour.''
Mr. Bush did not call himself a ''war president,'' the phrase he uses often to describe his mindset, and he must have decided, amid the deafening sound and the smell of exhaust, that there were probably better places to repeat his argument that the administration was interested in greater fuel efficiency. So instead, he focused on identifying himself with Nascar fans and making the case that they were with him.
''One of the things about Nascar and Nascar fans is they support our military,'' Mr. Bush said. ''We've got a lot of really good young men and women who are sacrificing for our country,'' he added, continuing later with the reminder, ''I'm the commander in chief of a great group of people, and to know that citizens who support Nascar support them makes me feel good.''
Obliquely, Mr. Bush was addressing one of the unsettled political questions of the 2004 race: Do ''Nascar dads'' exist as a major bloc of swing votes, and if they do, which way will they swing?
The Republican Party clearly believes that the 75 million stock car fans, by Nascar's estimate, are up for grabs, and the party said it opened a voter registration booth at the speedway.
Republican strategists here argue that the Nascar dads of 2004 are similar to the Reagan Democrats of the early 1980's: cultural conservatives whose middle-class status may be threatened by their fear of losing a job, and who are ready to vote for a candidate who stresses strength.
''They're probably more conservative'' than many voters, said Bill France Jr., the former president of Nascar, whose family has a long association with the Bush family. ''I've got two expressions for them now,'' Mr. France said. ''One is, they used to say they used to win wars for America and they still do. The other is, they stand at attention when the national anthem is played. A lot of people don't do that anymore.''
They may also defy the stereotype. Nascar says its own polls show 40 percent of its fans are women, and that their fans are wealthier than the average American.
But Mr. France acknowledged that he was a registered Democrat, and clearly the Democrats have long believed that Nascar voters belong to them.
When the campaign of Dr. Dean, the former Vermont governor, was flush with optimism and money, it sponsored a driver. It may not have done him much good in the South against Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, who in his campaign autobiography, ''A Call to Service,'' described himself as a ''charter member of one the most selective but fastest-growing sports clubs in the world: the Nascar fans of Massachusetts.''
Senator Bob Graham of Florida, the first Democrat to quit the race, also sponsored a driver, as did Senator John Edwards of North Carolina.
Mr. Bush is not the first president to try to run in the stock cars' dust. Jimmy Carter was the first to invite Nascar drivers to the White House, a quarter-century ago.
''It turned out it was the middle weekend of the negotiations for the Camp David accord,'' Jody Powell, Mr. Carter's former press secretary, recalled Sunday. ''So when they showed up, he was up on the mountain negotiating peace between the Egyptians and the Israelis.''
Mr. Powell's communications firm in Washington now advises Nascar, and he said that ''this may be a case where corporate America recognized the power of this group before politicians did.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE PRESIDENT
