HIGHLIGHTS
LONDON: ADVENT OF VIRTUAL MUSIC -- Nearly half the 21 members of the orchestra in the London production of ''Les Misérables'' are to be replaced by a virtual orchestra machine when the show moves next month after 19 years at the Palace Theater to the smaller Queen's, The Guardian reported. Nine musicians will be replaced as the Symphonia synthesizer is used for the first time in the West End as a result of negotiations between the Cameron Mackintosh organization and the musicians' union. Using the full 21 members would have meant losing audience seats. The attempt to introduce virtual music in New York was resisted by a strike that briefly shut down Broadway musicals last year.
FILM: OSCAR COMPETITORS -- People who love to forecast the Oscar winners probably have seen the major contenders, but when it comes to the short films and documentaries they are usually flying blind. For those eager to advance their chances of picking the winners, a couple of noteworthy opportunities arise this week. At 2 p.m. Saturday all 10 films nominated in the animated and live action shorts categories will presented by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences at the Academy Theater at the Lighthouse, 111 East 59th Street, between Park and Lexington Avenues. For this special program in the Monday Nights With Oscar series, the doors will open at 1:30 p.m., and Robert Osborne, the author of ''75 Years of the Oscar,'' will serve as host. . . . The three nominees in the documentary short subject category will be shown at the Underdog Film Festival from 1 p.m. to 4 p.m. on Saturday and Sunday at Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Avenue, at East Second Street.
DIANA ROSS: ANNALS OF JUSTICE -- The pop diva Diana Ross, left, has paid her debt to society. After pleading no contest last Monday in City Court in Tucson to a charge of driving under the influence of alcohol, she was sentenced two days in jail. In a statement on Thursday, James A. Walters, the chief of police in Greenwich, Conn., where Ms. Ross maintains a home, said: ''To fulfill her obligation to the Tucson, Ariz., city court, Ms. Diana Ross completed 48 hours of detention at the Greenwich Police Department. Ms. Ross was treated as any other female prisoner in accordance with department policy and procedures.''
FOOTNOTES
At the Metropolitan Museum of Art today, Presidents' Day, is a holiday Monday. That means that the museum, which had been closed to the public on Mondays for some 30 years, will be open from 9:30 a.m to 5:30 p.m. Of special interest are several portraits of George Washington on view in the American Wing. . . . The performers Al Green, Sandi Patti and Vestal Goodman (who died in December), as well as Frances W. Preston, the president of BMI, have been inducted into the International Gospel Music Hall of Fame. Later this year the induction ceremony will be televised for the first time, on the Trinity Broadcasting Network. . . . Christine Ebersole, the Tony Award-winning actress (''42nd Street'') and singer, accompanied by the pianist Billy Stritch, will bring her new show, ''In Your Dreams,'' to Feinstein's at the Regency for an engagement from tomorrow through March 6. . . . As a result of a scheduling conflict, the engagement of George Shearing and his trio at the new jazz room, Le Jazz au Bar, has been postponed by a day. The new dates are Thursday through Saturday.
