Nascar officials decided several years ago to remove a requirement that racecar drivers actually hold a state-issued driver's license before they are allowed to compete.
That is fortunate for the rookie Scott Wimmer, who drove to a third-place finish in the Daytona 500 on Sunday at Daytona International Speedway despite having a suspended driver's license.
Wimmer's license was suspended, and his career almost put in jeopardy, when he was arrested on Jan. 31 on a charge of driving while impaired after crashing a truck owned by his race team near his home in High Point, N.C. Wimmer reportedly registered 0.15 on a Breathalyzer test when arrested, automatically requiring that his license be suspended.
Wimmer was concerned he would lose his ride with Bill Davis Racing and his sponsorship with Caterpillar.
''I'm very apologetic for what I did,'' Wimmer said. ''I realize it's not right. It was something I just made a major mistake in my life, embarrassed a lot of people.
''Caterpillar was willing to give me a second chance, and Bill Davis was. It's something that means a lot to me.''
While Wimmer, 28, continues to drive on the track, his wife has been his chauffeur off it. He still faces legal issues, with a March 10 court date in High Point. Nascar is also likely to issue a punishment.
Jim Hunter, Nascar's vice president for corporate communications, said the series would most likely require Wimmer to perform community service.
No Room for More Vroom
Bill France Jr., the former Nascar chairman and chief executive, would like to see more races spread to new tracks around the country, but he is not sure how to accomplish that in a season that already lasts 10 months.
''I'm trying to figure out how we can make Sundays out of Wednesdays,'' said France, who remains vice chairman of Nascar after handing the reins to his son, Brian. ''I haven't got to that point yet. That's one of our dilemmas, the amount of dates we have.''
But France did not rule out the possibility of racing during the week.
''It just takes money to do all that,'' he said. ''The driver physically has to be in one place or the other, and with airplanes now, we can move them around pretty fast.''
Boldface Names
The Daytona 500 usually brings out its share of stars, and Sunday's event was no different, even if they were outshined by President George W. Bush's appearance.
Among those involved in the prerace festivities were Ben Affleck, Whoopi Goldberg, LeAnn Rimes, Lee Greenwood and Miss America, Ericka Dunlap. Affleck drove the pace car and Goldberg waved the green flag to start the race.
AUTO RACING: NOTEBOOK
