Victor Garcia, a high school senior, dreamed of playing major league baseball and, friends said, of moving his mother and two younger brothers out of their cramped Bronx apartment.
But early yesterday those hopes collapsed when a group of young men attacked him after he left a house party on the Grand Concourse near Kingsbridge Road in the Bronx. Mr. Garcia, 18, was stabbed repeatedly in the torso, the police said, and died at St. Barnabas Hospital just after 3 a.m.
The police had not arrested anyone last night, and the motive for the killing remained a mystery.
Charles Mainer, 17, a fellow senior at Walton High School who was with Mr. Garcia at the time, said they and two other friends had left the party about 2 a.m. and walked a block or two when a group of young men -- possibly as many as 20 -- approached.
One man was shouting at Mr. Garcia and his friends to get off the block, he said.
''We left to avoid the problem,'' Mr. Mainer said, sitting on a bed yesterday afternoon in Mr. Garcia's mother's third-floor apartment on East 207th Street in the Norwood area. But one of the attackers struck Mr. Garcia on the head and he fell down.
Frightened, Mr. Mainer and the other two friends ran away. There had been several police officers outside the party when they had left, Mr. Mainer said, but he did not see them as he ran home. ''I felt so bad, I didn't want to leave him there,'' Mr. Mainer said.
In the background, the sobbing of Mr. Garcia's mother, Elida Mercedes, could be heard. Mourners streamed in and out of the house, and one friend moved from room to room with a tray of ham and cheese sandwiches.
Mr. Garcia was not much of a partygoer, Mr. Mainer said, but he had missed a class trip earlier in the month, and wanted to make up for it on Saturday night.
A varsity baseball player, Mr. Garcia had an uneven academic record but had never gotten into trouble, said his baseball coach, Joseph Alvarado.
After failing some classes in his freshman year at Walton, he had worked hard to do better so he would be eligible for the varsity baseball team, where he eventually played catcher and first baseman, Mr. Alvarado said. ''He turned it around, and he was so proud of himself,'' Mr. Alvarado said. ''He was just looking forward to graduation.''
Relatives passed around photographs of Mr. Garcia, a tall, handsome youth. In one of them, he appeared in a tuxedo with the daughter of a neighbor on her 16th birthday.
''They used to call him 'Pretty Boy P,''' said Alexandra Estevez, who said she had been dating Mr. Garcia on and off for about a year. ''He was built.''
Ms. Estevez said that she had turned 17 on Saturday, and that Mr. Garcia had called her to say he would come over after the party to celebrate with her. ''I never got to see him on my birthday,'' she said.
