Millions of businesses do without background music, but Robert Gaeta was surprised to find that the New Yorker Hotel was one of them when he became its resident manager last year. The lobby of the hotel, which is across 34th Street from Penn Station in Manhattan, struck him as oddly quiet for a venue that had been legendary as a showplace for the Big Bands of the 1930's.
''My first reflex was to call Muzak,'' Mr. Gaeta said, referring to the privately held giant of the business music field. Once known for bland re-orchestrations of aging popular tunes, Muzak now sells customized programming to its premium customers and a basic service consisting of 74 channels of various genres of music culled from a library of more than a million performances by original artists. The hotel where Mr. Gaeta previously worked played Muzak's instrumental jazz in its lobby.
But when he learned that Muzak's basic service would cost well over $80 a month including equipment leases and would bind the New Yorker to a five-year contract, Mr. Gaeta turned to Sirius Satellite Radio, an alternative he had encountered in November at a hotel convention.
Sirius, based in New York, has been focused on getting consumers to subscribe to its approximately 100 digital channels of music, talk and sports radio since it began nationwide broadcasting by satellite last June. But as a sideline that could help reach its goal of breaking even by the end of 2005, Sirius began exploring in August whether businesses -- which analysts estimate pay about $500 million a year for music -- might subscribe to its services.
Just before Christmas, Mr. Gaeta decided that at $24.95 a month with no long-term commitments, Sirius was a better deal than Muzak. While roughly double the cost of Sirius's standard consumer service, the business rate covers all fees that must be paid to artists and recording companies for the right to play the music in a commercial setting.
While Muzak, based in Fort Mill, S.C., says its business is expanding, moves like Mr. Gaeta's and by other business customers in the direction of satellite-radio alternatives suggest that pressure may grow on the company and other other commercial music specialists.
Muzak now serves 350,000 business locations, or roughly 60 percent of the market. The company, which is controlled by ABRY Partners, has lost money in recent years because of its heavy debt and the accounting impact of acquisitions from 1999 to 2001. But it expects revenue to grow 7 percent to 8 percent this year for the third consecutive year, to more than $230 million. And Muzak's churn rate -- the number of customers who cancel service or do not renew expiring contracts -- fell for the second consecutive year, Muzak's chief financial officer, Steven P. Villa, said.
''We've had nothing but good indications in the area of cancellations,'' Mr. Villa said.
But Sirius and its larger rival, XM Satellite Radio Holdings, are just beginning to gear up for the business market. XM has not begun advertising to businesses, but will be attending its first trade show aimed at the business market next month.
Executives at the two satellite companies argue that a large number of business music subscribers are ripe for their marketing message.
''Part of the business market doesn't work for us,'' said Daniel Turak, general manager for sales and distribution at XM, which is based in Washington. Big department stories that want different music programming sent to different floors, or expensive restaurants that want music uninterrupted by any announcer, will never go with Sirius and XM.
''But you don't care about that if you have a diner,'' said Mr. Turak, who added that XM is also getting calls from dentists, jewelers and car washes that have been Muzak customers.
Muzak is not the only traditional music supplier that could feel the pinch. The Soda Pop Shop, an ice cream parlor in Montclair, N.J., switched to XM after complaining about repeated service glitches with music provided by Comcast, a cable television distributor of DMX Music.
DMX, a Los Angeles-based subsidiary of Liberty Media that is No.2 to Muzak, did not respond to requests for comment on Sirius and XM. But the new companies are definitely on the radar of its distributors.
''We still have some breathing room, but as Sirius and XM come in, we're going to have to make some changes,'' said Teri Youngdale, the vice president for sales and marketing at Hi-Tech Sound, a company based in Marlborough, Mass., that sells and installs DMX services in several regions of the country.
Ms. Youngdale, who had considered becoming a Sirius distributor in areas where Hi-Tech Sound does not have the DMX franchise, said that as the satellite companies expand, incumbents like Muzak and DMX will have to focus more on their premium-price customized programming. She predicted that many Sirius and XM business customers might eventually decide that more costly services like DMX and Muzak provide worthwhile benefits, like technical support and play lists specifically screened to eliminate language and content that might offend people in commercial settings. XM and Sirius business customers receive only the same channels broadcast to the general public.
Muzak, which distributes its music via satellite, the Internet and on-premise DVD systems, said that, unlike the satellite-radio companies, it had hundreds of sales personnel calling on businesses and trained to help them figure out how and what music would help them. It can also program messages into a client's service, such as announcements about a special deal of the month.
Adam B. Brotman, the founder and chief executive of PlayNetwork, a small competitor to Muzak that is based in Redmond, Wash., said he thought that XM and Sirius would simply expand the market rather than steal business from existing business music specialists.
The early indications are that the satellite services may do a bit of both. Applied Media Technologies, which is the first distributor to focus on the business market for Sirius, is getting about half of its contracts from customers that already had some sort of paid music service, said Walter Kerner, senior director for special and commercial markets at Sirius. The rest are coming from businesses that had gone without music, played their own tapes and CD's, or relied on commercial radio stations.
''I'm sure we'll be putting more resources into it,'' said Mr. Kerner, adding that Sirius expects to announce more business music distribution agreements shortly.
TECHNOLOGY
