When Daniel B. Burke and Thomas S. Murphy ran Capital Cities/ABC Inc. in the late 1980's and early 1990's, they led annual management retreats in Phoenix that were memorable among participants for their quaint predictability.
Each year, the two men gave nearly identical speeches, always about acting professionally and with integrity, said executives who attended the retreats. And Capital Cities always began its annual report with the statement, ''Decentralization is the cornerstone of our management philosophy.''
But at one retreat, Mr. Burke added a special touch. He had a favorite quotation embossed on leather folders and gave them to the company's top executives. The quotation, attributed to an unnamed ancient Chinese philosopher, read: ''A leader is best when people barely know he exists, not so good when people obey and acclaim him -- worse when they despise him. But of a good leader who talks little when his work is done and his aim is fulfilled, they will say: We did it ourselves.''
When told of that quotation by a reporter last week, Stephen B. Burke, the president of the Comcast Corporation (and the eldest son of Daniel Burke), heard more than a description of the old days at Capital Cities/ABC, before the Walt Disney Company acquired it in 1996. ''That's our company, that's Comcast,'' Mr. Burke said. ''That's Brian Roberts, who made a deal for the cable assets of AT&amp;T, and people didn't know who he was.''
Brian L. Roberts, the chief executive of Comcast, has not needed to worry about recognition since his company made an unsolicited $54 billion offer for Disney last Wednesday. If Comcast succeeds with its hostile takeover, Disney employees will not only get new bosses in Mr. Roberts and Stephen Burke, they will be introduced to a profoundly different management style, one that is far less centralized and more willing to delegate authority to division leaders, according to many executives close to the two companies. And that could mean major changes in how Disney's movie studios, theme parks and cable channels are run. Disney's broadcast network, ABC, seems to be the division Mr. Roberts and Mr. Burke think could especially benefit from moving out of the domineering shadow of Disney management.
Certainly, executives who work or formerly worked for Michael D. Eisner, the chief executive of Disney, are unlikely to find in him all of the best qualities of a leader cited in Daniel Burke's Chinese proverb. At Disney, and elsewhere in the entertainment industry, everyone knows Mr. Eisner exists. And he is accustomed to being obeyed, acclaimed and despised in about equal measure.
Disney is known to be so centralized under Mr. Eisner, that no creative decision is too small for his consideration, whether it is viewing pilots for new television shows, selecting which animated characters to emphasize in a film, or ''right down to the color on the bumper cars in the parks,'' as one former Disney executive put it. Mr. Eisner, who took over Disney nearly 20 years ago, restored the company's creative and financial glory. But in recent years has found himself under increasing criticism for his managerial style, one that critics say has driven some talented executives away, dimming its creative spark and threatening its primacy in animation and children's programming.
Mr. Eisner's defenders at Disney say there is no other way to run a creative content company, that creative leaders like Mr. Eisner need to be hands-on. ''What Michael has done to contribute to the creative process is beyond question, and it's been crucial to the company,'' one senior Disney executive said.
The executive cited Mr. Eisner's role in the coming animated film ''Chicken Little.'' Mr. Eisner suggested to the film's creators that the title character would work better as a boy than a girl, as had first been planned. The Disney executive said that the creators said the suggestion inspired new ideas for the character and greatly enhanced the storytelling.
Comcast, unlike Disney, is primarily a cable operator (although the largest in the country) with only a smattering of entertainment programming interests like E! and the Golf Channel. The executive, like many others, spoke on condition of anonymity because of a reluctance to address publicly issues related to the Comcast bid. Mr. Eisner and other top Disney executives declined to comment for the record.
If there is one executive involved in the Comcast-Disney confrontation who is totally familiar with the corporate culture of each company, it is Stephen Burke, one reason Mr. Roberts has publicly cited Mr. Burke's experience at Disney and ABC as a built-in plus in the proposed takeover. In several interviews last week, Mr. Roberts indicated that with what he called Mr. Burke's intimacy with Disney, he would be the obvious choice to lead that part of the company. Mr. Burke, 45, spent 12 years at Disney, moving from jobs in the retail area to Euro Disney and eventually to ABC, where he became president of the broadcasting division. That did not put him in charge of the network, but of its local stations. Though he left in 1998 for Comcast, Mr. Burke is still highly thought of at ABC.
But one senior Disney executive cautioned that in the news coverage of the proposed takeover: ''A myth is being built up around Steve Burke. He's, quote, a nice man, but he was never more than middle management at Disney. Now he's running a company that has a monopoly position in the cities where they operate. That doesn't require creative decision making. That requires marketing. When Steve Burke was at Disney, he never made the significant creative decisions.''
Mr. Burke does not completely disagree with the assessment. ''I'm sure Michael Eisner would say, 'What does this guy know?''' he said.
In an interview, Mr. Burke had laudatory words for Mr. Eisner. ''Michael Eisner was very important in my career,'' he said, noting that it was Mr. Eisner and the late Disney president, Frank Wells, who brought him into the company and nurtured his advance there.
Mr. Burke declined to say if Mr. Eisner's leadership style played a role in his decision to leave ABC. But other executives who were close to Mr. Burke in his ABC years say the reasons were directly related to Mr. Eisner. ''Steve left for one big reason: he ran into Eisner's black wall,'' said a senior Disney executive in those years.
Steve Bornstein, a former Disney executive at ESPN and ABC who is now president of the NFL Network, said: ''Steve was exceptional, a really able manager, an exemplary manager. He did things exactly as they did them at Cap Cities.''
Disney was different. Mr. Bornstein said, describing a system dominated by what he called ''strat planning.'' He was referring to the strategic planning process, which involved running any deal above a minimum cost through a phalanx of internal financial analysts.
He cited the deal he was putting together in the final days of the Capital Cities management with college conferences and bowl representatives for the Bowl Championship Series playoffs. The deal was completed, but it ran into last-minute questions after Disney took over, Mr. Bornstein said. ''With all that bureaucracy, the strat planning, it would be so much harder to get a deal like that done now.''
A senior Disney executive said, ''The strat planning is not what it used to be,'' adding, ''It was a reaction to the business climate at the time.''
Mr. Bornstein said that, by contrast, the style at Capital Cities/ABC was: ''You went in to Dan Burke. If he liked it, he'd say do it. If he didn't like it, he'd say don't do it.''
Mr. Burke, who was on a cruise and not available for comment, according to his sons, retired from Cap Cities/ABC just as the Disney takeover was completed. As he left, Stephen Burke arrived at ABC, moving for a time into his father's old office in the headquarters building.
''Cap Cities is the model,'' Stephen Burke said of the managerial philosophy of Comcast, one that seems stamped in the family's DNA. ''You can hear it in that crazy quotation from my dad.''
''He and Tom Murphy allowed people to do their jobs,'' Stephen Burke said. ''We see that as the way to operate large companies. There is no other way to operate. That's also the way it was when my uncle ran Johnson &amp; Johnson.''
James Burke, older brother of Daniel, was chairman of Johnson &amp; Johnson for 13 years until 1989. Yet another Burke, Bill, also a son of Daniel, is president of the Weather Channel cable network.
''It's funny,'' Bill Burke said. ''It's not like my father held management seminars at the dinner table. But values and ethics were passed on.''
Daniel and Stephen Burke do have their differences, Mr. Bornstein said. ''Steve may be a bit more politic than his dad was,'' he said. ''I've seen the dark side of Dan Burke, and it ain't pretty. But he is a great guy.''
Mr. Bornstein added that the younger Mr. Burke had a kind of friendly rivalry with his father, looking for ways to surpass Daniel Burke had in his career. ''Steve always wants to do one more thing that his dad. So Dan had four kids and Steve has five,'' Mr. Bornstein said, with a laugh. He added, ''if anybody can restore ABC to what it was when his dad was there, Steve can.''
Comcast has certainly examined the issues surrounding ABC closely. In public comments Mr. Burke noted that ABC remains ''a weak fourth-place network.''
In an interview he went further. ''We think NBC made about $1.2 billion last year, including its stations,'' he said. ''We had Fox at about $900 million, with CBS at $800 million. And ABC did not make any money. The broadcast stations made about $400 million to $500 million. And the network lost all that.''
Though he acknowledges that broadcast television was ''not really a growth business,'' he said Comcast believes ABC can and should be fixed. The strategy, he said, would be to hand the network to talented executives.
''We would say. 'We don't expect you to be No.1. But it would be good to get halfway to CBS.' We would want them to do good quality programs, and make some money at the network''
Mr. Burke said an important difference among ABC and the others now is confusion about who is in charge. ''If people say 'Who's running CBS?' there's no doubt about the answer: Les Moonves,'' Mr. Burke said, referring to the CBS chairman. ''At NBC it's Bob Wright and Jeff Zucker,'' he said, referring to the chairman of the company and the president of NBC Entertainment, respectively.
''If you ask that question about ABC, it's harder. It's sort of Alex Wallau, but Bob Iger keeps his hand in.'' Mr. Burke was referring to the president of ABC, Mr. Wallau, and the president of Disney, Mr. Iger. ''But you also have Lloyd Braun and Susan Lyne running the entertainment division, they're in there too.''
As an example of the potential for confusion, he cited what might happen if ''a funny, overweight housewife'' -- referring to the former ABC star Roseanne Barr - ''walked into ABC today.''
''There would be five people in the room,'' he said. ''Three might like her but two might say they don't see it, and no deal would get made.''
Ms. Lyne said Comcast is using ABC's situation as an unfair barometer of what is going on throughout Disney. ''The same management guidelines that are being used for ABC are being used at the studio, home video and cable divisions, and all of them are performing brilliantly right now,'' she said. She said ABC has put a strategy in place to rebuild the network, which had just begun to show signs of working when it ran into a freight train called ''American Idol,'' on the Fox Network that is broadcast on the nights when ABC was having its greatest success.
As to whether Ms. Barr would get a show today, Ms. Lyne said, ''she surely would,'' and to say that a heavy-handed Disney management would interfere with such a creative decision ''is a total misnomer.''
If Comcast succeeds in its bid for Disney, Mr. Burke made it clear that ABC would be one of his personal priorities. ''Hopefully people would be excited if we came in and we empowered them,'' he said. ''Maybe even some people from the Cap Cities days would come back.''
