ANOTHER N.B.A. weekend is over. The kaleidoscope of events ranged from Shaquille O'Neal's party at Hugh Hefner's mansion to National Basketball Association players distributing food to the needy. Once again, the N.B.A. proved its unparalleled ability to market itself and tap into a contemporary culture of youth and glamour.
But what happens when the marketing of the game and its commercialism begin to spill over into the game itself? We may have had a glimpse of an answer this weekend.
The league's hottest young stars, LeBron James and Carmelo Anthony, sat out an All-Star Game they should have been in and played in a Rookie Challenge game that became a travesty on Friday night.
All-star games are tricky affairs, showcasing individual skills and, ideally, fostering good, injury-free competition at midseason.
Last night's well-played, hotly contested All-Star Game was a much-needed contrast to the rookie game, unprecedented in its lack of effort or competitive fire. To the extent that everything is a learning moment, the first- and second-year players could have learned a thing or two from watching the veterans play an All-Star Game that offered a balance of entertainment and competition.
For all the talk about the N.B.A.'s youth movement, the games Friday and last night showed the chasm between the players still finding their way and the veteran players who compete in every context.
''I didn't really enjoy the game,'' Dave Bing, a seven-time All-Star in the 1960's and 70's, said in an interview here yesterday. ''The game has become too much of a show for me. As a purist and a former player, it's not as competitive as I think it should be. I know they're trying to capture that market, but they can ruin the game, they can ruin the product at the same time. Everything now is about athleticism -- how high can you jump. Everything is a dunk. You just don't see the pure part of them.''
On the other hand, a lot of people are benefiting from marketing initiatives that have made the N.B.A. one of the world's premier sports leagues. The Retired Players Association, the Read to Achieve Program and other outreach programs that the N.B.A. operates flourish because of lucrative corporate sponsorships.
Marketing has taken the league to its current level of global exposure, but it has created a confusing divide between endorsement and worth.
''I just think the league is going to have to really stress and put some focus back on the game and not as much on entertainment,'' Bing said. ''They're trying to get that 15- to 30-year-old market so they can have them for a long period of time. But at some point they've got to get back to the product, which is the game.''
The Rookie Challenge premise is also good: second-year players have a chance to show the new kids how it's done. But, without direction from the league, the game can become a dunking exhibition disguised as a game, as it did Friday night. And dunking is not the most attractive thing about James or Anthony.
Bing believes as I do, that James and Anthony should have been in last night's game. Instead, after playing at a major league level for three months, they were relegated for a night to the minors. They sold tickets, but the game was not what it could have been. In a league whose forte is marketing, Friday's game was a marketing mistake. Not a big one, but a mistake.
''They're the future of the league,'' Bing said about Anthony and James. ''They were outstanding in some of the things they did in the rookie game, but there's doubt in my mind where their preference was. They're disappointed, I'm sure.''
If James and Anthony, with the skills they have, are the league's future, then the N.B.A. must do everything it can to showcase their skills in the All-Star Game, not the Rookie Challenge, Bing said.
''I just think we got to think more about where we want to take the game and not so much just focus on the entertainment piece,'' Bing said. ''I think ultimately that's going to come back to haunt us.''
Jerry West, president of the Memphis Grizzlies, said he stopped watching the rookie game.
''I turned it off,'' he said yesterday. ''I couldn't stand to watch it.''
West said that the game Friday ''looked like a bunch of kids out on the playground playing and having fun -- with no regard of who wins or loses.''
''I don't like that; I like substance over style and I think that wins for you in this league,'' he said. ''I have great respect for the game. I care about the game more than most of those guys, because this was my way out of hell. I'm not sure these young kids realize the trials and tribulations that this league has had to get to this point in time.''
The N.B.A.'s youth movement is fine, but the influx of young players has given the league's hierarchy a new challenge. This weekend, symbolized by the Rookie Challenge, is a reminder of the dangers of giving the keys to the kingdom to 20-year-olds. There is something to be said not just for experience, but also for the accumulated wisdom of age.
Sports of The Times
