It's still the waiting that gets to everyone, that and the unwanted thoughts that arrive in the silence. Give a soldier enough quiet time in a trench, and he'll start to question his cause, his identity, his very existence.
All the characters in ''Journey's End,'' R. C. Sherriff's 1928 drama set amid the front lines of World War I, wind up wondering why they are where they are and what they are doing there. The same cannot be said for theatergoers attending this epochal play's superb 75th-anniversary revival at the Comedy Theater here. ''Journey's End'' feels as fresh and forlorn as the evening news.
Directed with an open-eyed, steady gaze by David Grindley, and performed by a perfectly assembled band of actors, this fine production is cause for both rejoicing and despair. Like the National Theater's revival of Eugene O'Neill's ''Mourning Becomes Electra,'' it finds enduring life in a play you think would be irretrievably buried in dust.
Yet ''Journey's End'' suggests that, technology aside, Western civilization has been running, or limping in place for the last century. As another wartime play that has unsettled London theatergoers put it: ''There is no such thing as progress. Only the passion, and the lack thereof.''
Those lines, spoken by a marine on an assassination mission to an unspecified Arab country, come from Adriano Shaplin's ''Pugilist Specialist,'' performed recently at the Soho Theater by the Riot Group, an experimental troupe from San Francisco. Mr. Shapiro's technobaroque style of writing, with its flashy abstract language and souped-up Mametesque rhythms, is years away from Sherriff's slow, in-the-moment naturalism.
But the shows share a sharp, sad sense of indignation and futility about the nature and persistence of war. Neither is as much a play of protest as it is of appalled resignation. That tone has infused London theater since the American and British invasion of Iraq, from Nicholas Hytner's realpolitik interpretation of ''Henry V'' at the National last year to David Hare's current ''Permanent Way,'' which considers the dire human casualties of the privatization of British railroads.
There are of course political cabarets and spoofs that use the Bushes and Blairs of this world as target practice. The satirist Justin Butcher has followed up his popular revue of last season, ''The Madness of George Dubya,'' with a new work called -- inevitably -- ''A Weapons Inspector Calls.'' But the plays that truly get under your skin here are less obviously driven by agitprop.
Their surfaces promise a measured objectivity, but you're always aware of the anxious discontent percolating beneath. In a way their subtext might be the cry of Peter Finch's mad television prophet in the movie ''Network'': ''I'm mad as hell, and I'm not going to take it anymore.'' The difference is the grudging awareness that there may be no alternative to ''taking it.''
As ''Journey's End'' demonstrates, this attitude was not born yesterday. Watching Sherriff's intensely felt drama, based on his experience as a British Army captain, you think about how much of 20th-century consciousness -- its skepticism, its shivery sense of absurdity and meaninglessness -- had roots in World War I.
Listen to Stanhope, a troubled young officer who has been in the field long enough to believe that reality is unnervingly relative: ''D'you ever get a sudden feeling that everything's going farther and farther away -- till you're the only thing in the world -- and then the world begins going away -- until you're the only thing in -- in the universe. . . .''
A similar tone courses through the ruminations of Orin Mannon, a young soldier home from the Civil War in ''Mourning Becomes Electra,'' written around the same time as ''Journey's End.'' ''What are you?'' says Orin, standing above his father's casket. ''Just another corpse.'' He has learned from the battlefield that death is only ''a dirty joke that life plays on life.''
These stricken observations from military men are not so far from the wry, modernist bleakness of Samuel Beckett. And when, the night after I saw ''Journey's End,'' I attended Peter Hall's production of ''Happy Days,'' starring a brilliant Felicity Kendal as Beckett's chattering, immobile heroine, it seemed like a bizarrely natural segue.
Not that the current production of ''Journey's End'' ever steps outside itself for retrospective head shaking. Mr. Grindley's interpretation, designed with claustrophobic authenticity by Jonathan Fensom, is uncompromisingly set in its own time (March 1918) and place (a dugout in the British trenches near St.-Quentin in France).
The soldiers there are the originals of war-drama archetypes who have since been endlessly spoofed. There's the aristocratic young captain who drinks to forget, the anxious young soldier who has to be jolted out of his hysterics, the idealistic new recruit who has ''marked for death'' stamped on his forehead and the ever-cheerful working-class sergeant.
Yet the ghosts of parodies to come do not hover over this revival. The actors, led by Geoffrey Streatfield and David Haig, are so committed that a purity is restored to Sherriff's dialogue and the brimming quiet that surrounds it. (This production makes bold and splendid use of its silences.) It's a show that, like the National's ''Electra,'' reminds you that clichés were once brand new and finds the power in listening to familiar words with virgin ears.
Though clearly set in the 21st century, ''Pugilist Specialist,'' which took the top prizes at the Edinburgh Fringe Festival, doesn't have nearly the emotional immediacy of ''Journey's End.'' As it chronicles the internal politics of a four-member marine squad -- assigned to kill an Arab leader who sounds much like Saddam Hussein -- this starkly produced, lavishly wordy play maintains a cool analytical distance.
This is war in the age of spin and protective self-documentation. Everything that is said, we are told, is being recorded. Which may account for the soldiers' tendency to speak in unlikely epigrams. (The volunteer Army is ''a bunch of incentive-dependent video-game junkies with permanent erections.'' ''Longevity is the botched nose job of humanity.'')
London critics heralded ''Pugilist Specialist'' as refreshing evidence that Americans have a sense of irony. I found it all deeply earnest and self-conscious. But that is not necessarily bad when you're considering the atavistic urges behind war and the mythologies that come out of them. Riot Group has an inquiring mind and a gift for tense language-driven theater. Its members are just a bit blinded by their own youthful eloquence.
Mr. Hare, the master polemicist of the British stage, and the Out of Joint theater company apply a similar skepticism to the captains of industry in ''The Permanent Way,'' a bracing work of theatrical journalism at the National Theater. Directed by Max Stafford-Clark, nine ensemble members portray scores of contemporary Britons who are responsible for and victims of the privatization of the national rail service, focusing in particular on the causes and aftermath of three disastrous train crashes.
Assembled from interviews by Mr. Hare and by members of the company of everyone from government ministers and corporate executives to crash survivors, ''The Permanent Way'' is descended from the socially questioning school of drama embodied by Joan Littlewood's Theater Workshop in the 1950's and 60's. Yet it is by no means purely didactic. Even Americans unacquainted with British transportation problems should find it invigorating.
The play channels its characters' anger, bewilderment and frustration -- especially regarding those in charge -- into an ultimately very affecting portrait of a society that cannot find solutions to even its most practical problems. Nor does ''The Permanent Way'' have the hubris to suggest that it knows the answers.
[''The Permanent Way'' has become a subject of angry debate in the British papers, with several rail industry officials objecting that Mr. Hare made selective and distorting use of their comments to support a partisan case. In the meantime Mr. Hytner has announced that Mr. Hare is writing a play for the National about the war in Iraq, ''Stuff Happens.'' That title comes from a comment by Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld about looting in Iraq.]
Michael Frayn's acclaimed ''Democracy,'' a portrait of the political career of the former German chancellor Willy Brandt and a wonderful piece of speculative biography, has returned to repertory at the National before transferring to the West End in April. Toward the play's end Mr. Frayn (''Copenhagen'') has Brandt muse on the ebb and flow of governments.
''So many people, with so many different views and so many different voices,'' Brandt says. ''And inside each of us, so many more people still, struggling to be heard. For a moment one voice rises above the others, and everyone picks up the tune. And then the cacophony resumes.''
Much of the exceptional strength of this London theater season lies in its clear-eyed acceptance of this frustrating truth and in hearing the music within the cacophony.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
