The death toll from the collapse of the roof of a water park here Saturday evening rose to at least 25, officials said on Sunday, as rescuers clawed through glass, concrete and steel in search of survivors trapped beneath the debris.
Having quickly ruled out a terrorist attack, city and federal officials focused blame on engineering flaws in the center's construction. The popular indoor tropical oasis on the city's southwestern outskirts, called Transvaal Park, opened in 2002.
More than 100 other people who were in the park when the roof fell were injured, many from collapsing debris and some from frostbite as they fled in bathing suits into the snow and cold of a Moscow winter, with the temperature hovering just above zero. By Sunday night, 78 people, including 27 children, remained hospitalized, Moscow's mayor, Yuri M. Luzhkov, told the Interfax news agency.
Russia's minister of emergency services, Sergei K. Shoigu, said in televised remarks that rescuers believed that at least 17 people remained trapped in the debris. The 6,000-square-yard roof collapsed on the center's pools and water slides, designed to evoke a tropical paradise in Moscow's frigid winter.
At least 49 people were pulled alive from the rubble after the collapse, which brought down nearly the entire fan-shaped roof. Some reports suggested as many as 200 visitors remained missing. The search continued into a second night, with rescue workers using fans to blow warm air into pockets of debris where survivors might still be buried.
The building collapse occurred eight days after a bomb exploded on a Moscow subway train, causing at least 41 deaths at last count, and it left the authorities grappling with yet another catastrophic loss of life.
Mr. Shoigu angrily questioned the design and construction of the center, one of several elite entertainment centers that have opened in Moscow in recent years. In his remarks, he suggested the city's building boom might have spiraled out of control.
''We have to put an end to this mess, to put it mildly,'' he said. ''When facilities like this are made, there have to be controls 10 times greater.''
The exact cause of the collapse was not clear, though officials suggested it could have been caused by an accumulation of snow or by corrosion in support beams from the contrasting temperatures inside and outside. Moscow's prosecutor announced that his office had opened a criminal investigation into the cause; the state construction department immediately suspended the licenses of the center's designer, Sergei Kiselyov &amp; Partners, and its builder, a Turkish company called Koscak Insaat, forcing the latter to suspend work in several regions, Interfax reported.
