Hundreds of foster children who linger in detention centers, psychiatric wards and shelters -- sometimes for as long as a year and a half -- would be transferred into more ''familylike'' settings under a plan being drafted to overhaul New Jersey's child welfare agency.
The proposed transfers, part of sweeping court-ordered changes at the state Division of Youth and Family Services that the agency will unveil this week, is an ambitious attempt by state officials to solve one of the child welfare system's most intractable and disturbing problems.
Across New Jersey, foster children have been sent for what were intended to be short-term stays in detention centers, psychiatric wards and shelters, yet have often remained in those settings long after judges, doctors and others agree that they are ready to be released.
According to a state review conducted last August, more than one out of three foster children in group homes and other institutional settings -- 381 out of a sampling of about 1,000 -- were ready for discharge but not released. Those children, the study found, remained in those settings from six to 18 months.
The children, some of whom suffer from severe mental and emotional problems, linger because of a lack of space in long-term programs or specialized foster care.
The 10-page draft of the transfer plan, which is still being written by a team of state officials led by the acting human services commissioner, James M. Davy, and was obtained by The New York Times, lacks specifics such as how much it would cost or how the agency would recruit more foster parents or create other homelike settings for the children. Agency officials declined to comment, but details are expected to be included when the plan is submitted Wednesday to an independent panel overseeing changes at the agency.
But two child welfare advocates familiar with a draft of the transfer plan question whether the agency's timetable would move quickly enough to help children who are already among the state's most troubled.
The proposal calls on child welfare officials to move about a third of the children in residential centers and group homes -- about 450 children -- to more homelike settings over a three-year period. That translates to about 150 children a year. There are roughly 12,000 children in foster care.
Kathy Wright, executive director of the New Jersey Parents' Caucus, questioned that pace. ''Is it too slow? Absolutely,'' Ms. Wright said, noting that according to state figures there are about 1,350 children in institutional settings. ''You're talking about something that's going to take 10 years to finish.''
Ms. Wright, who reviewed a draft copy of the transfer plan at the request of The Times, said it was a significant first step that must go further. She would like to see greater emphasis placed on treating children in their own homes before they are moved to residential centers and other institutions.
''Kids do better in their homes; kids do better in their schools,'' said Ms. Wright, whose nonprofit group supports the parents of children in the system. ''All we've been doing is perpetuating this system of trauma, perpetuating more trauma in these kids' lives.''
Like Ms. Wright, Cecilia Zalkind, executive director of the Association for Children of New Jersey, also wonders if more can be done to quickly move children who have unnecessarily long stays. If officials are aware that there are 381 children ready for discharge, ''why are the kids still there?'' Ms. Zalkind asked. ''The fact that they're still there means there's no place for them to go.''
If nothing else, the draft of the transfer plan illustrates the scope of the problem of children lingering in institutional settings. It reports that there are about 550 children in shelters. Although shelters are intended for adolescents as emergency short-term stays of about a month, the draft notes that the average stay is five months and that children as young as 5 years old are being housed.
The plan also states that as of last month, there were 67 children in detention who were waiting to be moved to less restrictive settings. Those children had been detained an average of 68 days, the draft says. It also cites research that shows the children do better in ''the most familylike'' settings than in institutions that can be especially harmful to children.
''Despite all this, New Jersey places some children into institutions solely because appropriate resource homes have not been developed -- which is to say because there's no place else to put them,'' the draft reads. ''This is unacceptable.''
Ms. Zalkind, who has seen portions of the state's plan while working in an informal advisory role, gave a nod to the state for acknowledging the seriousness of extended stays. But at the same time, Ms. Zalkind said that officials would do well to back up that recognition with more money and additional staff. ''It's not as simple as saying 'Our kids shouldn't be there,''' she said, adding that without a support system, ''We won't make a dent in this problem.''
The transfer plan does include provisions for offering more in-home treatment. It also calls for the recruitment of more foster families who would receive training in dealing with the needs of children who come from residential centers and group homes.
The proposal to move children is part of the state's formula for self-reform. As part of the settlement of a federal lawsuit against the foster care system, the state agreed to take a number of steps to change the way the Division of Youth and Family Services does business.
A key part of the settlement is the agency's overhaul plan, a document expected to exceed 150 pages and titled ''A New Beginning: The Future of Child Welfare in New Jersey.''
An independent panel has 30 days to either approve the plan or send it back to the state for revisions. If the panel requests changes that the state is unwilling to make, a federal judge may intervene and order virtually any remedies to the system that he sees fit.
