The question on the chapped lips of New Yorkers these days is, Will it ever end?
Yesterday it was blustery and 25 degrees in the sun, and forecasters were predicting worse weather in the days to come. Temperatures were expected to rise by midweek, but to be accompanied by snow and sleet.
In a winter that has dumped heavy snows on New York, and sent thermometers plunging to numbing lows, it seems difficult to see, or even imagine, an end.
So, a speck of reassurance.
Even the chaos-theory scientists who concoct abstruse theories about butterflies' flight prompting hurricanes agree on this point. It will end. Eventually.
''No matter how you tilt the Earth's axis, we will always have winter for one half of the year and summer for one half of the year,'' an astronomer with Cornell University, Britt Scharringhausen, said in a telephone interview from Ithaca, N.Y., and then paused. ''It's just a simple geometrical fact.
''Let's see. I lost my train of thought. I had something profound to say.''
It was basically this: The seasons change not because of Earth's distance from the sun, but because of the angles at which Earth's axis tilts toward the sun. So in the coming months, the Northern Hemisphere will lean toward the sun, absorbing more direct rays. The endless cold will cease, and people won't have to leap over turrets of gray snow to cross the street.
But forecasts called for highs of only 31 degrees today and predicted that snow could scrape across southern New Jersey, New York City and Long Island beginning tomorrow evening and continuing into Wednesday morning.
As a chrome sun shone yesterday afternoon, though, New Yorkers inured to a cold and miserable winter chose to embrace a day that was pleasant even given the frigid temperatures.
''You see people outside today,'' Ahmed Waddell, 30, said as he walked around Washington Heights in a red plaid button-down shirt and gray scarf. ''We're all so used to worse. This is a respite.''
People strolled down the sunny sidewalks, holding their gloves in their hands. They unzipped winter coats to expose pink wool and argyle. In Midtown, a high school senior from Iowa City strolled up Eighth Avenue in khakis and a white Oxford shirt.
''This isn't horrible,'' said the student, Lucas Allen, 18, who had left behind snowdrifts and 4-degree temperatures.
In Hell's Kitchen, teenage boys in Lakers jerseys played basketball. On the Upper East Side, a man in a white chef's outfit had forgone a coat for his walk to work. In Washington Heights, parishioners who been had huddling inside foyers for after-church conversations chatted on the street.
On 151st Street, 5-year-old Ibrahim Dimson shouted, ''Mommy, it's not snowing no more,'' and ran toward a swing set. The boy's mother, Joy, 25, said she and her son had been cooped up in their apartment for much of the winter, and seized a rare chance yesterday to visit a playground.
''I'll take this to any other thing,'' Ms. Dimson said, her breath steaming. ''He asked, 'Mommy, is it nice out now?' I said, Yeah.''
