ALEX RODRIGUEZ comes to the Yankees and everyone's first thought is of the pitiable and the cursed. But by the time the thickening plot lines of baseball's percolating new dramas play out, the Red Sox may well be the least of those whose attempts to bulk up wind up blown up.
For the necessary context in the latest of Yankee coups, forget Boston. Think Balco, Bonds and the Babe. Consider the possibility of the performance-enhancement scourge that baseball has for too long hidden in the clubhouse becoming a sport all its own, with an exclusive network arrangement on Court TV. Contemplate open season on cheaters and baseball desperately needing a savior, and for history repeating itself, with A-Rod of the Yankees as a 21st century Babe.
The last player this dominant to be dispatched to the Yankees with cash at the core of the deal was Babe Ruth. What did Ruth proceed to do? He is said to have saved baseball after a gambling scandal that by comparison makes Pete Rose look like a lottery loser at the grocery store.
Now George Steinbrenner matches Rodriguez with the game's grandest stage when dark clouds of suspicion are massing over baseball's reigning slugger, Barry Bonds, among others who include the Yankees' Jason Giambi and Gary Sheffield. All three have been questioned by the United States attorney's office in San Francisco, related to the federal investigation of the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative that has produced indictments against four men, including Bonds's personal trainer.
In announcing the indictments last week, the government did not name athletes in baseball, football and track and field who have reportedly worked with Balco. Some industry experts believe it's a matter of time before the names spill out. Others suspect that Attorney General John Ashcroft is moving slowly as he gauges public support for unmasking steroid use by popular athletes during an election year.
Whatever the grand government plan, there are four indicted men with their own survival at stake, their own axes to grind. Already the lawyer for Victor Conte Jr., Balco's founder, is complaining about the perception of immunity for athletes. As Charles Yesalis, a Penn State University professor and steroid expert, told The San Francisco Chronicle yesterday, ''The biggest thing is, having been a consultant to the D.E.A. and talking to my buddies there and with the police, when people get arrested, they'll give up their mother.''
With good reason, many baseball fans already suspect steroid use, and it wouldn't be shocking to learn that a significant number of them don't much care. But to this point, the issue has been effectively relegated to the sport's fringes, to charges made by former players of dubious repute and some fuzzy math resulting from last season's implementation of a largely toothless drug-testing plan. What happens when the hurricane of enhancement hits land?
Baseball has no idea what the backlash will be to a full-blown scandal that cannot be shrugged off by clueless owners and collectively bargained away by shortsighted union chiefs. This time, the dirty little secrets have passed out of the inner circle and into the hands of federal prosecutors. This time, baseball people are good and scared, and that is why Steinbrenner, that inveterate expander of payroll, is baseball's Yankee Doodle Dandy for facilitating a sudden changing of the subject, from the specter of steroids to the superstar shortstops.
Rodriguez has apparently agreed to play third base, but in the ranking of baseball's barroom arguments, Pete Rose-to-Cooperstown has just been supplanted by the fascinating conundrum of who should play short, Derek Jeter or A-Rod. This one pits the loyalty to a beloved incumbent and captain against the cold, hard facts that say Rodriguez is better.
Who knows how this plays out, but Jeter today finds himself in the unique position of being one gesture away from becoming the most selfless Yankees star ever and probably in the history of the game. If he walks into Joe Torre's office sometime this spring and says, ''I'm your second baseman,'' imagine how that plays in this era in which athletes are typically perceived as willing to do anything for personal gain, including turning themselves into laboratory appliances.
Imagine what a double-play combination of the future Hall of Famers and teen icons A-Rod and Jeter does for baseball on the postseason stage, assuming those steroid-testing results recently subpoenaed in the Balco case don't produce more shocking revelations related to the 5 to 7 percent of positive player tests last year.
Of course, Steinbrenner continues to make a mockery of competitive imbalance, but haven't we already established that a payroll of $184 million doesn't buy the World Series? What Alex Rodriguez brings to the Yankees is more irresistibility, more megawatt appeal, as baseball apprehensively awaits the possibility of some very dark days.
His contract has been slightly devalued but -- and you can't make this stuff up -- he reportedly receives the perk of linking his Web site to the Yankees'. The union signed off yesterday. If Bud Selig is thinking clearly, there will be no complaints from the commissioner's office either. This trade, in which Steinbrenner gives up Alfonso Soriano and gets the best player in baseball for $112 million over seven years, is a steal for the Yankees.
Given what may be in store for Bonds and others, it is a good deal for everyone because it ultimately directs discussion of the game between the lines.
Better to have large swatches of the country preoccupied with hating the Yankees than having them feel revulsion for the game and everyone in it. Parity is a good idea, just not when scandal is lurking. At least for now, baseball needs the Yankees to be big, bad and bold, in the manner of the Babe.
Sports of The Times
