Can the sport utility vehicle, the bête noire of environmental advocates, be reinvented as a green machine?
This year, Ford and Toyota plan to sell the first two hybrid sport utility vehicles. With carlike mileage expected, the advent of the hybrid S.U.V. may change the uniformly visceral antipathy to sport utility vehicles among environmental advocates, even if automakers are unlikely to sell enough hybrids to significantly reduce fuel consumption or pollution any time soon.
''I would definitely encourage people who need four-wheel-drive vehicles to look at these,'' said the Rev. Jim Ball, the president of the Evangelical Environmental Network, a small group that sponsored a widely publicized grass-roots campaign called ''What Would Jesus Drive?''
''These vehicles are one small step,'' he added, ''but we've got a long way to go here.''
The Toyota and Ford hybrids, which will be 2005 models, supplement the internal combustion engine with an electric motor that takes over at slow speeds and at stoplights, a switch that they say can help S.U.V.'s get 27 to 40 miles a gallon.
The Ford Motor Company is scheduled to introduce the first of the hybrids, a version of its Escape sport utility, by the end of summer. In November or December, Toyota will follow with a hybrid version of its Lexus RX330 sport utility, the RX400h; it plans to introduce early next year a hybrid version of its Highlander S.U.V. The hybrid versions will be more expensive than the conventional models, though neither company has yet said by how much.
From a consumer's perspective, hybrids are not much different from conventional cars. They run on regular gasoline, and the batteries for their electric motors are recharged as they drive, so they do not need to be plugged in. One consideration is that battery, which would be costly to replace if it were to fail; most, however, are under warranty for at least eight years.
Because the biggest gas savings occur at slow speeds, hybrids sometimes disappoint customers who spend much of their time on highways. That is borne out in Ford's projections for the Escape hybrid: the front-wheel-drive version will average 35 to 40 m.p.g. in the city, about twice the 19 m.p.g. for the Escape that runs on gasoline only. In highway driving, however, the Escape hybrid will get 29 to 31 m.p.g., about 20 percent better than the 25 m.p.g. for the gasoline version.
Environmental advocates frustrated by the long-swelling appetite for gas have embraced hybrids. Booming sales of sport utility vehicles and big pickup trucks, coupled with increasing horsepower for vehicles big and small, have stalled advances in overall fuel efficiency.
In the 2002 model year, the fuel economy of the average new light-duty vehicle sold in the United States sank to its lowest point in more than two decades, according to the Environmental Protection Agency. Cars averaged 24.4 m.p.g. and S.U.V.'s 17.3 m.p.g. And that data understates the mileage gap, because the heaviest sport utilities with the worst fuel economy, like Hummers and Ford Excursions, are not counted. They are so big that they do not fit the definition of a passenger vehicle.
S.U.V.'s have also been widely criticized as unsafe. Because they are heavy and have high ground clearance, they are typically less stable and can inflict more damage on passenger cars in collisions than other cars do. These problems are being addressed to varying degrees by the industry; the Lexus S.U.V., for example, comes with electronic suspension-control technology that is intended to reduce rollover risk.
''We fight S.U.V.'s because it is irresponsible to make vehicles that guzzle, pollute and are unsafe,'' said Dan Becker, a global warming specialist at the Sierra Club. ''But the auto companies have the technology to fix these problems, and if they do, acceptance of S.U.V.'s will improve.''
So far, hybrids have not made much of a dent in fuel economy trends. For several years, Toyota and Honda have been the only automakers selling hybrids, and they sell just tens of thousands in the United States, a country with annual sales of 17 million vehicles. Toyota, however, has said it plans to be selling two million hybrids a year, worldwide, in a decade. The company now sells only the Prius in the United States.
By 2015, 60 percent of the vehicles sold nationwide would have to be hybrids just to stop the growth of automotive global warming emissions beyond levels expected at the end of this decade. That is according to a projection by David Friedman, research director for the clean vehicles program at the Union of Concerned Scientists, an environmental research and advocacy group in Cambridge, Mass.
Financial analysts have estimated that hybrids are more likely to account for as much as 10 percent to 15 percent of the market over the next decade or so.
''If hybrids just end up as a niche vehicle,'' Mr. Friedman said, ''they really won't have an impact on the environment and global warming. Millions of these vehicles have to be sold every year.''
But he says he thinks less ambitious technologies would also be a good option. He recently collaborated on ''a blueprint for a better S.U.V.,'' a report that laid out a design for a more fuel-efficient and less rollover-prone vehicle that used less-expensive technologies than hybrid systems. Many skeptics view hybrid power as an inherently profit-sapping technology because it involves two drive systems instead of one, though Toyota insists its hybrids are already profitable.
''I'm just not a blind monk of hybrid technology,'' the chief executive of Nissan, Carlos Ghosn, said last month. Nissan will offer a hybrid version of its Altima sedan in 2006.
The industry is struggling to decide which of three technologies has the most potential to cut fuel consumption: hybrids, advanced diesels or hydrogen fuel cells. The two vehicles to be introduced this year will present hybrid S.U.V.'s in different packages: the Escape is a basic, no-frills sport utility that starts around $20,000 with a conventional engine, about $15,000 less than a conventionally powered Lexus, a luxury vehicle. Hybrids have, in the past, cost a few thousand dollars more than similar cars, though the new midsize Toyota Prius starts at about the same price as the midsize Toyota Camry. Fuel savings can make up for the high purchase price over time; there are modest tax deductions and Congress appears close to offering more.
One feature of the Toyota Prius is a screen with a video readout that charts fuel economy as driving conditions shift. Ford will offer a similar feature as an option. The Lexus will make it a standard feature, as it is on the Prius, and will also use the screen to display the view from a rear-facing camera to make backing up easier.
Toyota, which has years of experience in the hybrid game, will pitch the Lexus RX400h as a combination of virtue and muscle. Its V-6 engine (the Escape is a four-cylinder) has 270 horsepower, 20 percent more than the Lexus RX330.
''Lexus buyers wanted a hybrid, but they didn't want to be in a vehicle that was recognized as such,'' a Lexus spokesman, Bill Ussery, said. He said about 1,500 people had already put down deposits.
Ford, as the world's third automaker to sell a hybrid, hopes to carve out a spot between Toyota and Honda and the rest of the industry. The Escape also offers a very visible vehicle to begin to deliver on the desire of William Clay Ford Jr., chairman and chief executive, to be seen as both an environmentalist and an industrialist.
And the company hopes to capture some of Toyota and Honda's green buzz. Ford executives said more than 21,000 people have signed up to receive a quarterly e-mail newsletter about the vehicle. Corey Holter, the marketing manager for the Escape, said that ''77 percent are non-Ford drivers.''
''That's a great story for us, because it shows we really are attracting incremental business,'' Mr. Holter said. ''It will provide a halo to the entire Ford division.''
The Escape hybrid has been talked about for several years, and has been previously delayed, but the company has been emphatic that it will be on the road this summer.
Jeff Young of Chicago was one of the 21,000 people who signed up for Ford's e-mail newsletter. He is a co-owner of a business that makes hand carts used for gardening. Since he bought a Chrysler in the mid-1980's, Mr. Young, 40, has not owned an American car.
''The parts don't fit right. The materials are cheaper. They tend to break down more and generally the styling lags behind the imports,'' he said. But he sent an e-mail message to Ford in 2002 because he had heard that the Escape hybrid would be coming in 2003, as was originally planned. When it did not materialize, he leased a Honda Element S.U.V. instead. But his lease is up in 2006, and he said he would consider a hybrid S.U.V. then.
''I'm not to the far extreme of either side,'' he said. ''But if you can do something like this hybrid technology, where there's not much compromise, then it can do a lot to help.''
