''She's Too Young'' is the story of teenagers, the new ones who instant-message compulsively and don't consider oral sex sex. (''It's just something we do with boys, like dancing.'') On Lifetime tonight these teenagers get syphilis, or some of them do; the school nurse then urges them to name names, the others in their sexual chain. Parents fume, remonstrate.
The movie is an after-office special for mothers, and it provides three interlocking parables. Each reinforces ideas about sexual ethics that were once considered repressive, but in doing so the movie makes plain that caring for teenagers is morally messy work. Who, after all, can distinguish preaching repression from counseling good sense? Or for that matter, interference from love?
In the logic of this movie, the worst-off girl is Becca (Megan Park), the snide, opportunistic daughter of a prim mother who futilely teaches abstinence and, what's worse, dislikes rap music. Television Land hates parents like these. There is nothing new in Becca, though Ms. Park plays the part with darling insouciance.
Next up is Dawn (Miriam MacDonald), who has a hot single mother who takes the accursed best-friend approach. World-weary and spent, Dawn appears to be headed for a pleasureless but safe life. When her sore shows up, she decides she's over sex and begins to imagine she will ''become a theater geek, join the Spanish club, do community service.''
Saved.
At a higher level of refinement, and at eye level with the movie's sensibility, is 14-year-old Hannah (Alexis Dziena), a cellist whose mother is Trish (Marcia Gay Harden), a sensible, serious career woman. Hannah faces the same sexual quandaries as Becca and Dawn, and she brings to those quandaries the same passion for popularity and attention. She is better armed than they are, however, with her artistic sophistication and familiarity with the work of Nathaniel Hawthorne.
When Hannah meets a wild one named Nick (Mike Erwin), who has an effectively smarmy manner with both parents and girls, she gives badness a whirl. She even makes the first move. Luckily, when Nick pushes for a dastardly four-way (with pornography!) and rape is in the offing, Hannah turns to the suspiciously handsome soi-disant geek whom she keeps waiting in the wings. Artsy girls are smart like that.
Hannah's mother doesn't have it so easy. As an executive at work on somber things like mergers, Trish is abject before her daughter's illegible behavior. Is Hannah really going out for ice cream? Why all the makeup? Ms. Harden is masterly at evoking the fog of motherhood; she is simply being lied to or put off all the time. The word trust is fed to her like a sedative to keep her from seeing what is going on, and this is maddening, especially for a woman with such good suits and such a straight part in her hair.
Relief comes finally when Trish crashes a high school party, breaking open the truth behind the palliatives and the kids' instant-messaging code. Here at last she gets to see how banal and how evil are teenage occupations. What do these elusive creatures actually do? Use your most sordid imagination. French kissing? Heroin? Shoplifting? Racketeering?
I'll never tell. In a story that is ostensibly about tedious issues facing today's youth, Ms. Harden plays less the authority figure and more the bewildered protagonist at the mercy of her own adolescent anxiety. She evinces great urgency simply to know. This epistemological suspense is what propels ''She's Too Young'' and what makes it a respectable television copycat of the brilliant movie ''Thirteen.''
BAD APPLE  TNT, tonight at 9, Eastern and Pacific times; 8 Central time
Before Mr. Big does or does not have the last word with Carrie on ''Sex and the City,'' Chris Noth, who plays him, is putting on his own show. This time he's an undercover F.B.I. officer. ''Bad Apple'' stars Mr. Noth, who is also its executive producer. It's miserable. Enduring this D-grade Tarantino, with its brutal action, trivial conversation and broad bozos in disco fashions feels like snorting baking soda. (Can anyone confirm?) Shopworn shots you can expect: knee-level at a pole dance, back of a wiretap van, bird's-eye in a men's room. With Mercedes Ruehl, at least, who's bearable. And Elliott Gould. What's he doing here?
SHE'S TOO YOUNG  Lifetime, tonight at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7, Central time
Directed by Tom McLoughlin; written by Richard Kletter; Howard Braunstein, Michael Jaffee, Lois Bonfiglio, executive producers.
WITH: Marcia Gay Harden (Trish Vogel), Gary Hudon (Bill Vogel), Mike Erwin (Nick Hartman), Alexis Dziena (Hannah Vogel), Miriam MacDonald (Dawn) and Megan Park (Becca).
TELEVISION REVIEW  Correction:  February 18, 2004, Wednesday  A listing of credits on Monday with a television review of ''She's Too Young'' included an incorrect surname from the Lifetime channel for the actor who plays Bill Vogel. He is Gary Hudson, not Hudon.
