Last year, when Michael Phelps became the first man to win five individual titles in the United States summer swimming championships, he broke one world record and two other American records. In this year's five-day spring nationals, which ended Saturday night, he did what he did last summer: entered five events and won them all.
But as successful as he was, he and his coach, Bob Bowman, seemed to take the epic week in stride. While Phelps won one final by nine meters and two others by five, his mechanics were not always on target. He and Bowman agreed that much work remained.
Their goals are the United States Olympic trials in July and the Athens Olympics in August. Phelps will probably try for seven or eight gold medals, but he and Bowman are not saying how many, and their plans are still fluid.
Bowman said only that Phelps would be entered in the trials ''in all relevant events'' and would swim four to eight. If he makes the Olympic team, he will be eligible for any or all three of the relays.
In last summer's world championships, Phelps won four gold and two silver medals and set five individual world records. In all, he has broken 11 individual world records. He has more national titles (20) than years (18).
Earlier last week, Phelps said these nationals ''give me a chance to see where I am.'' After the final race, he and Bowman were asked to grade his performance here. Bowman, who had given Phelps an A-plus for last summer's nationals, gave him an A-minus here. Phelps said that was on target.
''The meet was all right,'' he said at a news conference. ''Things could have gone better, but I'm fairly pleased. I'm trying to improve my turns a little bit. We started to work on my start, but Bob said it was getting worse so we stopped.''
Phelps is hard on himself, so determined to right little mechanical wrongs. He cited Saturday night's 200-meter individual medley, saying if he had had more balance on his freestyle stroke he would have caught more water with his hands. Bowman said that shortcoming might have cost Phelps two-tenths of a second.
It was hardly disastrous. Phelps won by nine meters, a huge margin for that race at this level. His time of 1 minute 56.80 seconds was the eighth fastest in history. Phelps owns six of those eight best times, including the world record, 1:55.94.
He had hoped to swim faster in that final.
''But much as you'd like, you can't set a world record in every race,'' he said. ''But it's always a goal of mine.''
Bowman realizes that his star pupil at the North Baltimore Aquatic Club is a superstar who should only get better.
''Some things have to be improved,'' Bowman said. ''Some practice habits have to be corrected. But I'm really splitting hairs. He needs fine-tuning more than adjustments. Over all, I'm very happy.''
Phelps is a coach's dream, and not only for his swimming ability and work ethic. He is gregarious and courteous, a young man growing up fast. He seems to have a strong relationship with Bowman, his coach since age 12.
Kevin Clements, who won the 400 individual medley here and was second to Phelps in the 200, has trained with him since last May.
''He likes to train,'' Clements said. ''He's never satisfied. Outside the pool, he's a normal guy to hang out with. He likes to tease and fool around with other people on the team, which is natural in this atmosphere. But he's mature in ways, too. He kind of makes training fun.''
That maturity and obsession for perfection have made Phelps a prospective Olympic star. And, as Bowman, his perfectionist coach, said, ''He's not there yet.''
SPLASHES
Longhorn Aquatics of Austin, Tex., won the combined team title with 509 points to 505 for Irvine (Calif.) Nova and 343 for North Baltimore. . . . MICHAEL PHELPS won the Bob Kiphuth high-point award for men and RACHEL KOMISARZ won for women. Phelps's victory in the men's 200-meter individual medley was chosen as the performance of the meet.
SWIMMING
