Every pothole is like a crime scene.
In the far right southbound lane of Hylan Boulevard on Staten Island yesterday morning, when Joseph Cannisi, an experienced pothole detective, was confronted by a sewer catch-basin grate surrounded by gravely wounded pavement, it did not take him long to size up the situation and figure out who -- or what -- had done it.
''We're in a bus stop right here, so you got a lot of force bearing down,'' said Mr. Cannisi, the deputy commissioner for roadway repair and maintenance in the city's Department of Transportation. ''And you got a driveway curb cut for a Meineke guy here, so it's getting a lot of action.''
The result was a size B pothole, which requires about 150 pounds of hot-mix asphalt to fill.
Fortunately, there was some close at hand.
''Johnny,'' Charles DeMatteo called out to a colleague. ''Right here, John.'' John Grieci, highway repairer, brought over another heaping shovelful of black slurry and let it slide.
One down, 54 to go.
So many things can cause potholes, it is a wonder there is an inch of roadway intact in the city. (Many drivers would say there isn't.) Each pothole is unique, like the snowflakes that help create them, and this winter they are almost as numerous.
Fortunately, they can all be healed, at least temporarily, with a few basic tools: a shovel and a rake, a broom, hot black cement and a trailer hauling three steaming tons of ground stone and asphalt.
Road crews with the Transportation Department have demonstrated this fact about 23,000 times since Feb. 7. That was the day after what Mr. Cannisi called ''the perfect storm for potholes.''
It had snowed a few days before, and crews had laid down salt, which eats away at the asphalt cement -- the tar that holds the roadway stones together. Then on Feb. 6, Mr. Cannisi recalled: ''There was a freezing rain. So that water is penetrating cracks in the road and then freezing. You have ice in the road wedging out debris, popping holes in the road. Then it rained, hard. The rain sweeps out the debris. And the debris itself acts as an abrasive.''
''That evening rush hour,'' he added, ''there were a lot of calls for brand-new potholes.''
Since then, the city has doubled the number of crews on pothole patrol to around 40, and they are working every day. Yesterday in the frigid sun, against the reassuring backdrop of Hylan Boulevard's dry cleaners, nail salons, pizzerias, orthotics stores, muffler joints -- Mr. DeMatteo and four colleagues showed how it is done, over and over again.
Sweep out the hole. Pour in a thin layer of asphalt cement. Shovel in the hot mix. Rake smooth. Tamp into place. A few passes with the 100-pound roller, a seal of asphalt cement around the edges, gather your cones and roll down the block. You will not have to go far.
Because it was a Sunday at 8 a.m., the traffic on Hylan, the main commercial strip on the east side of Staten Island, was relatively calm, and so, therefore, were the drivers.
''You should come by on a Monday when they're throwing bottles at our heads,'' said Mr. DeMatteo, who has been patching roads for 17 years.
There are plenty of other dangers. Water on hot asphalt acts like water poured into a pan of hot oil, except that instead of specks of French-fry detritus, the things popping out at you are sharp-edged rocks half an inch wide.
An assistant highway repairer, Robert Summers, cited a useful rule of thumb for the man who minds the hot mix: ''If you see green smoke, shut it down. That's the gas it emits. It's also cancer-causing.''
Despite the decidedly Sisyphean nature of the task before him, Mr. Summers said he found the work satisfying. Near the corner of Dongan Hills Avenue, the crew encountered a hole that required them to chisel planks with the side of the tamper to make a makeshift cover for a hydrant shut-off valve. After patching the hole around the valve cover with asphalt, they sprinkled sand on top, like ground walnuts on a pastry.
''It's rewarding when it's repaired; the finished product is rewarding,'' Mr. Summers said as he allowed himself a moment to admire the job. ''You can put your initials on it. You can call it your masterpiece.''
