YOUNG car enthusiasts may find it hard to believe that pickup trucks were once working-class vehicles and no more, the essential tools of tradesmen but blue-collar cousins to the family sedan.
Updated and reconfigured for the duties of everyday transportation, the trucks of 2004 are anything but bare-bones. Prices of today's fully equipped pickups overlap the lower levels of the luxury car range; automakers produce specialty models that cater to buyers in pursuit of country club amenities or scorching acceleration.
That increased sophistication has a way of spawning desire for the simple and straightforward icons of decades past, though.
Some nostalgia lovers will find fulfillment in Chevrolet's new retro-style SSR, which draws its shape from models of the late 1940's, but others will settle for nothing less than the genuine article. That urge has made the vintage pickup highly desirable among collectors, though prices remain reasonable, say experts.
''There seems to be two types of guys who are into old trucks,'' said Pat Ertel, 53, editor of Vintage Truck magazine. They are ''men who were young when these trucks were new, and younger guys who turn them into street rods. They're cheap to buy and they have a nice vintage look.''
The styling similarities of pre-World War II passenger cars and pickups can be traced to practical considerations by manufacturers, who sometimes used the hood, grille and fenders from the previous year's car line for the current year's trucks. That practice ended as cars became sleeker while trucks grew taller and beefier.
In the late 1940's, the truck market came to be dominated by Chevrolet, Ford and Dodge, with some competition from Studebaker, Jeep and International Harvester. Mr. Ertel says that trucks from first wave of postwar redesigns, 1947-54 for Chevrolet and 1948-53 for Ford, are especially desirable.
The modern shape introduced in 1947 for Chevrolet and GMC models -- which is the basis for the Chevy SSR's curvy contours -- continued essentially unchanged into the mid-50's. A complete redesign of the General Motors pickups for '55 brought a wraparound windshield and, like that year's passenger cars, an egg-crate pattern for the grille and hooded headlamps.
Two upscale versions of G.M. pickups made their debuts in 1955 as well, Chevy's Cameo Carrier and GMC's Suburban. Fiberglass panels were bolted over the stepped sides of the standard rear cargo box to bring the sides flush with the cab. Custom touches like chrome taillight housings, a special steering wheel and interior color accents were added.
Ford's introduction in 1953 of the F-100 also represented a major step in bringing carlike features to the pickup, including a curved windshield to improve visibility. A redesign for 1957 picked up on the flush-side styling trend seen earlier on the Chevy Cameo (Ford used the Styleside name on its models) and the hood now spanned the full width of the vehicle.
Dodge joined the movement toward car-influenced styling in 1957 with its Sweptside model. Quickly brought to production using rear fenders from a Dodge station wagon, the Sweptside is distinguished by prominent tailfins.
Some truck enthusiasts are drawn to less-popular brands. Gary Hallgren, 58, president of the Manhattan chapter of the Studebaker Drivers Club, has owned two Studebaker trucks, the latest a 1956 model. Mr. Hallgren has no attraction to Fords and Chevys. ''They're so common,'' he said.
Jeep does not make a pickup truck now, but might do well offering one styled with the rugged look of its models from the 50's. With flat-top fenders and a grille shaped like a boat's prow, the Jeep looked as tough as its chassis was strong.
International Harvester, whose history goes back to Cyrus McCormick, has its own following. Rarely seen today, the International pickups from the early 50's had a tall, unusually narrow hood and broad front fenders. International also pioneered the modern four-door ''crew cab'' design with its Travelette Utility version of the half-ton model, featuring two rows of seats, now a common amenity on light-duty pickups.
A standard 50's pickup in good driving condition will sell for around $5,000, said Mr. Ertel. Sought-after models like the Chevrolet Cameo and Dodge Sweptside bring premium prices, selling for as much as $15,000, and optional equipment like a V-8 engine adds to the value.
Trucks from the 40's and 50's are generally easy and inexpensive to maintain, says Mr. Ertel. But body panels and trim can be hard to find for less-common makes, he said, as there are not enough on the road to justify the manufacture of reproduction parts, as is done for popular makes.
But, Mr. Ertel points out, older trucks offer a ''grease under the fingernails'' kinship that today's computer-controlled, thoroughly civilized models just don't provide.
Collecting
