A bidding war erupted yesterday for control of AT&amp;T Wireless as Vodafone, based in Newbury, England, and Cingular Wireless, a joint venture of BellSouth and SBC Communications, submitted new bids that value the company at more than $37 billion or about $14 a share, executives close to the negotiations said.
AT&amp;T Wireless was still negotiating with both companies last evening and a decision to accept one of the offers could come as early as today, the executives said.
The decision by Vodafone, the world's largest cellular telephone operator, to raise its offer yesterday and participate in what appears to be a rapid-fire auction puts pressure on Cingular, which had long been favored by investors and analysts to win control of AT&amp;T Wireless. The new bids, executives said yesterday, came after Vodafone and Cingular submitted similar offers on Friday night, both worth about $35 billion dollars, or nearly $13 a share.
''It's going back and forth,'' said one executive close to the auction.
The executives said NTT DoCoMo, which already owns about 16 percent of AT&amp;T Wireless and had indicated that it was considering a bid, decided against participating, as did Nextel Communications, another rival that had expressed interest.
It was unclear last night just how high the bids would go. Vodafone appears to be taking the strategy of simply trying to match Cingular's offers. The assumption inside the Vodafone camp is that if the bids are equal, a Vodafone deal is more attractive because there would be less regulatory risk involved and much of AT&amp;T Wireless's management and employees would remain intact, the executives said.
If Cingular won, most of AT&amp;T Wireless's staff would probably lose their jobs because they would overlap with Cingular's management.
For Cingular, winning the auction is seen as essential if it wants to grow. AT&amp;T Wireless is one of only two cellular operators in the United States that use the same cellular technology as Cingular (the other is T-Mobile). A merger with Cingular would be expected to save $10 billion to $15 billion in costs. Combining AT&amp;T Wireless's 22 million customers with Cingular's 24 million would create the largest cellphone company in the United States, surpassing the subscriber base of Verizon Wireless, which has 37 million users.
If Vodafone wins, it will unravel its 45 percent stake in Verizon Wireless. Vodafone reached a tentative agreement on how it would extricate its stake in Verizon Wireless -- valued at $20 billion to $26 billion -- last week, the executives said.
Among other differences, there are compatibility issues. Verizon Wireless's network format, known as C.D.M.A., is not compatible with the standard that Vodafone uses elsewhere in the world, called G.S.M., while the AT&amp;T Wireless network is built upon a variant of G.S.M. Vodafone would prefer that its customers worldwide all be G.S.M. users, to make it easier for them to use the same phones everywhere.
It is unclear how Vodafone's shareholders will react today to the news that it submitted a bid. Shareholders had been selling Vodafone's stock, worried that for it to make a winning bid, it would most likely have to overpay.
Shares in AT&amp;T Wireless, which has risen steadily from about $7 in early December, rose 15 cents on Friday, to close at $11.82.
