In his State of the Union address a year ago, President Bush announced an ambitious new program to combat AIDS overseas. He pledged to spend $15 billion over five years to prevent new AIDS infections, provide antiretroviral treatment and care for the sick and orphans.
The initiative is only now getting started. Mr. Bush's new global AIDS coordinator, Randall Tobias, is about to announce the first round of grants, which will total $350 million. Mr. Tobias is full of energy and enjoys a reputation as a good manager. But there are worrisome signs that the administration may be making decisions that benefit important constituencies at the expense of fighting AIDS.
The delay of a year is an indictment of the administration's decision to set up a new bureaucracy. It could have started saving lives right away by giving the funds to the Global Fund to Fight AIDS, Tuberculosis and Malaria, an international group desperate for money that has received high marks from auditors for its care in spending it. Instead, Mr. Bush has stiffed the Global Fund.
The American program will provide countries with technical help in running their AIDS programs, an advantage over the Global Fund, which simply makes grants. But there are disadvantages with the American approach. Mr. Tobias will be giving much of his money not to African groups but to American contractors, who often charge a lot more for the same work. He is allowing the American ambassador in each country to set priorities, which could conflict with what countries want to do.
Also worrisome is that even religious groups with no AIDS work experience will apparently be getting money. Many such groups have excellent projects, but a track record should be a requirement. Mr. Tobias also backs abstinence-only education for youth, which is deadly in Africa. Training in negotiating condom use must be part of AIDS prevention for teenagers, especially because poverty has led girls into sugar-daddy relationships.
A key test of whether Mr. Tobias's office is spending its money wisely is whether it buys generic antiretrovirals, notably a new pill that combines generic versions of the three drugs in a triple cocktail. The pill can cost as little as $140 a year, a third to a fifth of the cost of the cheapest brand-name first-line AIDS drugs, which do not yet come in a one-pill form. Patients on the combination pill take one in the morning and one at night. The simplified therapy is also easier to monitor for the nurses and clinicians who will be treating patients in countries where doctors are few.
The pill is made by two distinguished manufacturers, is being used successfully and was approved by the World Health Organization. That is usually a standard accepted globally -- but not by Mr. Tobias's office, which has signaled it will not buy the pill. His office is convening a meeting of world agencies to discuss safety in generic manufacturers. This is a fine idea, but it should not preclude using safe generics today.
Mr. Tobias, who was chief executive of the pharmaceutical company Eli Lilly, must go out of his way to dispel the fear that he is too steeped in the ways of his old industry. If he is serious about saving lives, cheap, simple treatments like the combination pill are the way.
