In nearly all bridge competitions, finishing first is what matters. But there is one circumstance in which taking 10th place is more significant than being in the lead. In the Reisinger Board-a-Match Teams in the Fall Nationals, 10 teams reach the final day of play, and the 11th is out of luck. Just.
In Phoenix in December two top teams were neck and neck at the end of the semifinal stage. One included four Italian world champions, Norberto Bocchi, Giorgio Duboin, Alfredo Versace and Lorenzo Lauria, together with George Jacobs and Ralph Katz. The other was an all-American group: George Steiner, Steve Beatty, Walter Schafer, Sharon Osberg, Mark Feldman and Peter Nagy. When the two teams faced each other, the diagramed deal proved decisive.
Versace was South and arrived in five diamonds after his opponents had crowded the auction by bidding spades vigorously. East, not unnaturally, doubled, feeling that the diamond holding would be decisive in defense. This gave the declarer a vital clue.
Spades were led and continued, forcing the dummy to ruff. South cashed his queen-jack of clubs, led a heart to the king and followed with the club ace. East ruffed, South overruffed, and a diamond was led to the ace. Further club leads neutralized East's diamond jack. Whenever that card was played, South overruffed and made his contract.
Could East have done better? Apparently not. Suppose East had discarded a heart on the third round of clubs instead of ruffing. South would then have ruffed his winner, a grand coup aimed at reducing his length to match that of East. He would have crossed to the diamond ace and led more clubs. The position would have become this:
When the last club is led, East has three options. First, a discard of a spade, which allows the declarer to discard also. Then the diamond 10 is played, and the lead stays in dummy if necessary. Second, a low ruff, after which South overruffs and ruffs a spade. Third, a high ruff, on which South pitches a spade, ready to ruff a spade in dummy to achieve the coup position he wants.
This won the board, and the Italians snatched the last qualifying position. That would have changed if East had remained silent over five diamonds. Silence would have been golden.
BRIDGE
