Fourth-ranked Pittsburgh won the second round of a potential three-round Big East matchup with Connecticut, 75-68, in a home game Sunday billed by fans and the local news media as the biggest in this city's college basketball history. Connecticut Coach Jim Calhoun can envision the teams meeting in the Big East tournament championship game in a deciding third round at Madison Square Garden in less than a month.
''That's not a threat, that's a promise,'' Calhoun said of yet another encounter after his team had season lows in offensive rebounds (20, five fewer than its previous low) and steals (one, two fewer) while recording season highs in personal fouls (26) and welts (not available).
''We have an opportunity to see them again,'' Calhoun said. ''A lot of interesting things happen this time of year.'' But Calhoun added that he and Pitt Coach Jamie Dixon ''would be happy to see anybody'' in the championship game.
The game was as electric as a Steelers playoff game, and Coach Bill Cowher and Mel Blount, a Steelers Hall of Famer, were among the university's record crowd of 12,817.
The tone for the rugged Big East meeting was set early. Denham Brown, of the fifth-ranked Huskies (19-5, 7-3), and Pitt's Julius Page collided twice on Pitt's opening possession and then got entangled on a basket by Brown that tied the score at 2-2. Calhoun immediately began arguing with the officials, saying Page should have been called for a foul. His protests resulted in his getting tagged with a technical foul.
The Huskies never led over the next 38 minutes 42 seconds at the Petersen Events Center, where the Panthers (23-2, 9-2) have won all of their 34 home games since it opened last season and have run their home winning streak to 40 straight.
Pittsburgh had never before played host to a game featuring a pair of top-five teams, although its crosstown, Duquesne, held a lofty position a half-century ago and Pitt had previously flexed its muscles in the 1980's, when it had the former Knick Charles Smith, and in the 1970's, when it had Billy Knight. The volume was pumped up even further by the presence of local celebrities and ABC's broadcast of the game to a national audience.
''We tried to take it like every other game,'' said the Panthers' Jaron Brown, who scored 17 points, including 13 of Pitt's final 33. ''But it was the one everybody was talking about.''
The triumph was Pitt's third in its past four games against the Huskies and avenged a 68-65 loss on Jan. 19 in Hartford.
Calhoun said after he was called for the technical foul, in the opening minute and a half, he told his team, ''I've done all I can, now you have to play physical.''
He added: ''It ended up being a street brawl. They were just tougher. I came into the building trying to let the kids know we were in for a fight.''
Pitt scored 7 points after that technical: two free throws by Carl Krauser, a 3-pointer by Page and a basket by Jaron Brown. UConn closed the gap to 3 points, at 9-6.
But Mark McCarroll then tallied 7 of Pitt's next 12 points, and the Panthers led by 36-28 at halftime. McCarroll, replacing the interior players Chevy Troutman and Chris Taft when both got into foul trouble, finished with 15 points and 4 rebounds. He also helped to seal the victory with four free throws in the final minute after Pitt had missed 7 of 12 free throws as the Huskies worked the Panthers' lead down to 5 points on two occasions. The Panthers led by as many as 15.
''If they leave me open, I can shoot it,'' said McCarroll, a 6-foot-10 junior. ''This game was a big game for us.''
Pitt's Brown, a 6-4 senior guard, stopped a Huskies spurt midway through the second half. First, he hit with a 3-pointer and then followed it with a steal off a fast-break layup attempt by Josh Boone. Seconds later, he converted two free throws after being fouled by Emeka Okafor.
Brown added a team-high six assists and tied for the Pitt lead in rebounds with five on a day when it was outrebounded by its biggest margin of the season, 38-31.
Connecticut's Ben Gordon had 23 points and shot 8 for 21.
Okafor was limited to six rebounds, tying his season low, and had 16 points despite making just two baskets in the second half. Calhoun said that Troutman and Pitt's post defenders performed ''maybe the best job I've seen on Okafor.''
Pitt's Brown said: ''It was a physical game. That's our style. We like it. We play it every day in practice.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
