Is Comcast's bold bid for Disney in fact a conservative move?
''Audacious'' seemed to be journalists' favorite word to describe the hostile takeover offer last week. But if the Comcast Corporation, the nation's largest cable provider, succeeds in acquiring the Walt Disney Company, the move could be seen as a way to control costs and ensure adequate inventory for the most mature and slowest-growing part of its cable business: video programming.
Traditional movies, sports, news and television series will surely be a mainstay of the cable industry for years to come. So, Comcast and other cable companies have every motive to control as much of those areas as possible. But for Comcast, the real growth prospects lie in technologies and services -- particularly the bundling of high-speed Internet access and cable-based Internet telephone services -- that have little to do with an old-line media conglomerate like Disney.
''When we talk about core video, it will still be a really important part of our business,'' said David N. Watson, executive vice president of marketing for Comcast's cable operation. ''But the more rapid growth will come from high-speed data, telephone and digital services.''
To be sure, Disney movies and children's television programming could help stimulate the growth of digital services like video-on-demand. And Disney's ESPN sports network, already one of the most popular parts of any cable lineup, could persuade consumers to adopt digital high-definition program packages.
For Comcast or any other modern cable company, though, the real goal is to expand beyond television to become a household's one-stop communications shop -- collecting not only cable television revenue but also money that the consumer might otherwise be paying to a telephone company and an Internet access provider. That is why cable companies have spent tens of billions of dollars in recent years on digitally updating their systems.
For cable companies, new digital services are not just an opportunity, they are an imperative. Overall cable subscribership is basically stagnant, and in some cases it is declining because of heated competition from satellite operators. While most of the largest cable companies have used new services to essentially stabilize their subscriber levels, the satellite industry still appears to be poaching customers from smaller rural cable operators that lack the wherewithal for major digital upgrades.
''There's literally a tug-of-war going on between satellite and cable, and between telephone companies and cable, over how much revenue you can generate from a customer,'' said Richard Greenfield, a media analyst for Fulcrum Global Partners, an independent research firm. ''I think cable is probably the No.1 model for how bundling retains customers and drives up revenues.''
Mr. Greenfield is among the analysts who predict that standard television's contribution to cable operators' revenue will continue to shrink. In perhaps five years, ''at best it's 50 percent, and it could easily be below 50 percent, because I think high-speed data and telephone will take a greater percentage of spending.''
In the sheer amount of digital information they can convey, modern digital cable networks dwarf local telephone systems. Cable systems far surpass satellites in technical flexibility, especially for Internet access and video-on-demand services. It is cable's power that is causing the local telephone giants and satellite television titans to pursue joint ventures with one another so eagerly.
The shift in the cable industry's revenue model is already under way, and can perhaps be seen most clearly in the financial data of Cox Communications, the nation's No.4 cable operator. In the first quarter of 2001, video services represented more than 87 percent of the company's residential revenue of $848 million. In less than three years, in the final quarter of 2003, that figure had fallen to 70 percent, even as total quarterly residential revenue had risen to $1.32 billion. In that quarter, 18 percent of Cox's residential revenue came from its cable-modem operation, and another 10 percent came from telephone service.
''Our telephone and high-speed Internet services have been huge growth engines for us,'' said Pat Esser, Cox's chief operating officer. ''We expect that trend to continue as more customers realize the value of our bundled offerings.'' Similar trends are evident at most of the other big cable operations, including Comcast and Time Warner's cable unit.
For satellite executives, the cable industry's reach beyond video is derided as a sign of desperation.
''If I were a cable operator, I would also be talking about other sorts of services, because they have been flat or down in their core television business,'' said Bob A. Marsocci, a spokesman for DirecTV, the No.1 satellite television company, which is now controlled by Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation. Mr. Marsocci said that DirecTV intended to continue expanding its offerings of high-definition television and set-top boxes with digital video recorders. He also said that the company had struck deals with BellSouth, Qwest and Verizon to offer digital subscriber line Internet access.
The entire point of the cable industry's recent upgrades, however, was to offer such a panoply of services over a single integrated system. Local telephone networks simply cannot compete with the information capacity -- or bandwidth -- of a modern digital cable system. And satellite television systems are not well suited to the two-way communications of video-on-demand and high-speed Internet traffic and telephone calls.
''Cable clearly has a great advantage in terms of getting bandwidth to the home,'' said Bob Van Orden, vice president for strategy and product management at Scientific-Atlanta, a leading maker of cable-system gear.
The Yankee Group, a technology research company in Boston, estimates that by the end of 2006, 31.9 million United States homes will have video-on-demand over cable, up from 12.5 million at the end of last year. The firm predicts that cable-based Internet access, used by 14.6 million households at the end of last year, will be in 26.5 million homes within three years.
And by the end of 2007, the Yankee Group predicts, more than 10 million homes will receive telephone service via cable, up from fewer than 3 million at the end of last year. Last week, the Federal Communications Commission buoyed the industry's prospects by signaling that it would not heavily regulate such services, potentially speeding their rollout and adoption.
Cable operators, meanwhile, will continue to tune their networks for the next generation of digital applications.
''There are a lot of services we will offer 10 years from now that we still haven't even thought of today,'' said Dick Green, chief executive of the cable industry's research consortium, known as CableLabs. ''Our job is to make the platform flexible and efficient and useful enough so that it can support those ideas.''
Looking at a modern cable company like Comcast, it is hard to predict how owning a company like Disney would enhance that digital future. That may be one reason, so far, many Comcast investors are sour on the Disney bid.
