For most of the last quarter century, Greeks have entrusted their welfare to the Pan-Hellenic Socialist Movement, and that center-left party has racked up a string of accomplishments over recent years that would, at first blush, seem to guarantee continued hegemony.
Under the guidance of the party, better known here as Pasok, Greece got its finances in sufficient order to adopt the Euro as its currency. The country's gross domestic product has been growing substantially faster than the European Union average, and this teeming capital has a new airport, new subway system, renovated hotels: a snazzy, jazzy pre-Olympics shimmer.
But if opinion polls and the consensus of political analysts are to be believed, Greeks are poised to throw Pasok out of power in next month's parliamentary election. They seem to want new leaders and better results. Beneath all the happy figures and freshly scrubbed facades lies a serious discontent.
The election, scheduled for March 7, provides a revealing glimpse into the incomplete, uncertain state of Greece's desired progress toward greater economic parity with its Western peers. The current campaign is laden with paradoxes, to use a word that Greeks coined.
To some extent, Pasok may be falling victim to expectations raised by its own accomplishments.
In recent interviews with many Greek politicians, political experts and voters, almost no one maintained that Greece had moved backward over the four years since the last parliamentary election.
But almost everyone said Greece's accepted, stable place in the European Union had filled many Greeks with greater, unrealized ambitions and had changed their point of reference.
''We are now 30 years after the fall of the junta and the restoration of democracy,'' said Kostas Karamanlis, the leader of the center-right New Democracy Party, which is currently beating Pasok in polls. He was referring to the military government that ruled Greece, with American support, from 1967 to 1974.
''We can now be fully content that we have a European orientation,'' said Mr. Karamanlis, who will become prime minister if his party captures a majority of the 300 seats in Parliament. ''It is high time now to invest, and to put our strength to the question of raising quality of life.''
Mr. Karamanlis was making what seems to be New Democracy's best case: that Greeks lag unjustifiably far behind their European Union peers.
Greece's economy expanded by more than 4 percent in 2003, according to early estimates, perpetuating a growth rate that has been more than double the union average for three straight years.
But Greece's per capita gross domestic product remains at three-quarters the union average. Among the 15 countries now in the union, only Portugal's is lower. Many Greeks say their buying power has actually diminished as their economy has grown, because prices rose sharply with the adoption of the euro.
Greece is also attracting woefully little foreign investment, despite all the Olympics-related construction.
In addition, Greeks know that billions of dollars of European Union aid that has flowed their way in recent years will taper off after 10 more nations join the union later this year. Most of those countries are poorer than Greece.
But Pasok's main problem may actually be another: corruption scandals and revelations of blatant cronyism that have badly sullied the party's image among Greek voters.
The party's answer has been for the current prime minister, Costas Simitis, 67, to relinquish the reins and for George Papandreou, 51, who served as Mr. Simitis's foreign minister, to seize them.
Mr. Papandreou has a wholly different style, at once folksier and more dashing. He highlighted the idea that the party was trying to be more responsive to voters by asking those voters themselves, instead of party caretakers, to endorse his selection. More than one million Greek supporters of Pasok visited ballot boxes last weekend to do so.
He and his allies have also, over the last few days, aggressively publicized the support he has received from politicians across a fairly broad ideological spectrum.
''What I've been able to do,'' Mr. Papandreou said, ''is bring about major change in the party in a matter of weeks.''
''What we're saying is: We are the new party,'' he added.
That is an interesting claim for Mr. Papandreou in particular to make. He is the son of the late Andreas Papandreou, who founded Pasok and was prime minister for a total of 10 years between the early 1980's and mid-1990's.
Then again, Mr. Karamanlis is the nephew of a former New Democracy prime minister, Konstantine Karamanlis.
Mr. Papandreou's elevation to party leader seems to have tightened public opinion polls that once showed New Democracy to be as many as eight percentage points ahead. The margin now seems to be between two and five percentage points.
Mr. Papandreou may also get a push from substantial progress last week in talks to reunify the Greek and Turkish sectors of Cyprus. As foreign minister, he painstakingly pursued a policy of reconciliation between Greece and Turkey.
But political analysts said the election would turn not on foreign issues but on Greeks' desire for more economic security and better government services in areas like education and health care.
The prescriptions being offered by New Democracy and Pasok are more similar than in many elections past, a situation that leaves voters to make subtle distinctions and speculative judgments.
''Compared with five years ago, Greece is better off, yes,'' said Nikos Pelekis, an Athens lawyer, who described himself as an undecided voter. ''But compared with how it could be? No, Greece isn't there.''
