John Kerry sailed through the final debate before the Wisconsin primary -- and perhaps one of the final debates of this Democratic presidential nomination fight -- as Howard Dean and John Edwards repeatedly sidestepped opportunities to criticize him on Sunday night. It was another compelling sign that the party was closing ranks around Mr. Kerry as its likely nominee.
After a week in which Dr. Dean, had sporadically attacked Senator Kerry while campaigning across Wisconsin, he declined to do so for a statewide television audience on Sunday. Instead, with many Democrats predicting that Dr. Dean's campaign would effectively end by Wednesday if he lost here, Dr. Dean deflected question after question about the opponent he had once attacked with relish.
Senator Edwards noted that he and Mr. Kerry had different views on trade policy and at one point poked fun at Mr. Kerry's penchant for long-winded answers. ''That's the longest answer I've ever heard to a yes-or-no question,'' Mr. Edwards said when he and Mr. Kerry were asked if they had any regrets on voting for the resolution authorizing the use of force in Iraq.
And Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, bristled when Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, said he would beat President Bush. ''Not so fast, John Kerry,'' he said. ''We're going to have an election here in Wisconsin. We've got a whole group of primaries coming up. And I, for one, intend to fight with everything I've got for every one of those votes.''
But like Dr. Dean, the former Vermont governor, Mr. Edwards avoided drawing any sharp distinctions or offering any attack that might turn the course of Tuesday's vote here, where polls show Mr. Kerry with a sizable lead.
Instead, Mr. Edwards challenged the integrity and honesty of Mr. Bush when asked whether he thought the president had mislead the nation in making the case for removing Saddam Hussein.
''This president has said one of the most critical things, not only for a candidate for president, for the president of the United States, is his integrity, whether he can be trusted,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''We are in the middle, as you know, of investigating -- starting an investigation, an independent investigation about why there is a disconnect between what the American people were told by the president and others and what's actually been found in Iraq.''
The decisions by Mr. Edwards and Dr. Dean to refrain from attacking Mr. Kerry reflected different calculations. Dr. Dean's unfavorable ratings in polls here are so high that he would probably only hurt himself. Mr. Edwards has left himself little flexibility with his promise to run a clean campaign.
But the decisions were notable because, as Democrats said, time is running short before the primary and another double-digit victory by Mr. Kerry would make it difficult, though not impossible, for either Dr. Dean or Mr. Edwards to continue to present himself as a credible alternative to Mr. Kerry.
In a boost to Mr. Edwards, The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel endorsed him in its Monday edition, saying, ''He may have the stronger legs in this long-distance race.''
If Mr. Kerry emerged largely unscathed on Sunday, Mr. Bush was once again the subject of repeated attacks in a debate that demonstrated why this Democratic contest has stirred such concern in the White House. At one point, two other Democrats in the debate, Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio and the Rev. Al Sharpton of New York, directly accused Mr. Bush of lying when he strongly suggested there were unconventional weapons in Iraq.
Mr. Sharpton drew howls of laugher from the audience when a questioner asked him if Mr. Bush were deliberately lying, as Mr. Kucinich said.
''I think that if he did know he was lying and was lying, that's even worse,'' Mr. Sharpton said. ''Clearly, he lied. Now if he is an unconscious liar, and doesn't realize when he's lying, then we're really in trouble.
''You know, I'm a minister,'' he continued. ''Why do people lie? Because they're liars.''
By contrast, Mr. Kerry deflected the question when asked to offer his view on charges by other Democrats, including the party chairman, Terry McAuliffe, that Mr. Bush had not attended some sessions of the National Guard when he was a member in the early 1970's. Mr. Kerry said that he had told Democrats close to him not to pursue that line of attack.
''I have suggested to some people who are my advocates who've gone that line of attack, it's not one that I plan to do, it's not one I have. I don't plan to do that and I've asked them not to,'' he said. ''But the president has to speak for his own military record. And those of you in the news media, obviously, have asked questions about it, and that's where I'll let it sit.''
By this point, the Democratic candidates have met so many times in debates and forums that aides have abandoned any effort to keep them separate. Sunday's debate, however, on a freezing night in Milwaukee, was unusual in that the stage was so uncrowded: just five Democrats, compared with nine who had jostled for a sliver of airtime when this long process began.
With Mr. Edwards and Dr. Dean unwilling to attack, the questioners were often the ones who took the lead in pressing Mr. Kerry on issues that Republicans say they will use against him this fall, like accusations by the White House that he was enamored of ''special interests'' by taking contributions from lobbyists.
When one of the panelists asked Dr. Dean about ''special interests'' accusations made against Mr. Kerry by both Dr. Dean and the White House, Dr. Dean responded by attacking Republicans for raising some of the same questions about Mr. Kerry that Dr. Dean has.
''George Bush has some nerve attacking anybody about special interests,'' Dr. Dean said. ''Not only has he funded his campaign through special interests, but George Bush is systematically looting the American treasury and giving it to his friends.''
Mr. Kerry rejected the criticism, saying, ''I'm the best person to make the case against George Bush because for 35 years I've had an uninterrupted record of taking on powerful special interests in American politics, beginning with when I led thousands of veterans and stood up against Richard Nixon and his war in Vietnam.''
Still, even as Mr. Edwards and Dr. Dean avoided attacks in the debate, their campaigns, Mr. Edwards's in particular, were firing off attacks on Mr. Kerry in e-mail messages and statements handed out to reporters. If Dr. Dean just watched as Mr. Edwards chided Mr. Kerry for his long answer about the war in Iraq, his campaign could not resist one final word.
''Longest answer to a yes-or-no question,'' the headline on a Dean statement read. ''Memo to John Edwards: You are so right.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE DEBATE
