Labor leaders and city lawmakers urged the Bloomberg administration yesterday to abandon its efforts to increase the number of schools that are cleaned and maintained by private contractors. They also called on the city to reopen contract talks with the school custodians' union.
At a news conference outside City Hall, members of the City Council joined Robert Troeller, president of the custodians' union; Randi Weingarten, president of the teachers' union; and Ernest A. Logan, a vice president of the principals' union, in demanding that the administration prove it would save money by using the private companies.
The city uses private companies in more than 200 public schools and has solicited bids for building maintenance services in an additional 250 schools in Queens and Brooklyn.
Yesterday's event was just the latest in a string of protests against the Bloomberg administration's effort to privatize school custodial services. On Tuesday night, more than 300 parents held a raucous rally at Middle School 67 in Little Neck, Queens, in support of school custodians.
And Last month a state judge voided two contracts between the City Department of Education and private companies that handle maintenance in 228 schools. The judge ruled that the city had violated competitive bidding practices in awarding the contracts, worth $60 million, to two companies, Johnson Controls and Temco Service Industries. The city has said it will appeal the ruling, and in the meantime, the companies continue to work in the schools.
Education officials say not only that using private contractors can save money, but that the contracts require the companies to do some repairs that the unionized custodians now refer to skilled trade workers, like electricians and plumbers.
At the rally in Queens on Tuesday night, parents angrily criticized Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein over the privatization efforts and complained that the administration did not answer their questions about the plan, including concerns about school safety and background checks on private employees.
''We wrote a letter to the mayor,'' said Robert Caloras, a PTA representative from Public School 221 in Little Neck. ''Got no response. We wrote a letter to the chancellor. Got no response.'' Mr. Caloras said he finally reached Mr. Klein by e-mail and was told that schools would not be forced to use the companies.
Deputy Mayor Dennis M. Walcott said the administration had received many letters on the custodians issue and was responding to each one.
The chancellor's office has said that if it does approve a deal with private companies, principals can choose to retain their current custodians, but would have to spend money from their school budgets to cover any difference in cost, if the private companies offer a lower price.
Mr. Caloras denounced Mr. Klein for suggesting that this was not imposing privatization on schools, drawing a standing ovation from the crowd. Other speakers included parent representatives from P.S. 266 in Bellerose, Queens; P.S. 94 in Little Neck; P.S. 98 in Douglaston, Queens; and M.S. 67.
Suzanne Windland, the PTA president from P.S. 266, complained that her school, in a new building that opened in September, was already suffering at the hands of a private maintenance company. She described the building as filthy.
Marty Oestreicher, the Education Department's chief executive for school support services, said he had not received any complaints about P.S. 266. He said private companies would be required to do the same background checks on employees, including fingerprint checks, that are required of union employees.
Other speakers at the rally included State Senator Frank Padavan, Assemblyman Mark Weprin and Councilmen David Weprin and Tony Avella. Mr. Troeller, whose union, Local 891 of the International Union of Operating Engineers, represents about 850 public school custodians, also spoke to the crowd. ''We care about your children,'' he told the parents. ''We care about their safety, and we care about their education.''
