In the strongest response so far to the blackout last Aug. 14, the industry group that sets rules for the North American power grid said on Wednesday that it would begin collecting information on violations of its rules and release the names of violators to the public.
The organization, the North American Electric Reliability Council, has already concluded that violations by two Midwest entities -- the FirstEnergy Corporation, a utility company, and the Midwest Independent Transmission System Operator, the regional organization supposed to operate the transmission system -- contributed heavily to the power failure, which affected 50 million people from Michigan to New Jersey, as well as in Ontario.
Violations included failing to trim trees and failing to have a system to track performance of the grid and monitor emerging problems.
A federal investigation, led by the Department of Energy and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, has examined the sequence of the blackout but has not established why the cascade was so widespread and why it stopped where it did.
Congress has debated for years giving the energy regulatory commission or some other agency authority to impose rules for users of the transmission grid. The energy bill that stalled in the Senate last year would have authorized the commission to make mandatory the voluntary rules the North American Electric Reliability Council set up.
The energy bill could be revived, or Congress could take up a stand-alone bill on reliability, but the actions by the council are the strongest taken thus far. The reliability council said it would ''take firm actions'' to improve compliance with its rules, including sending out inspection teams. The commission said it would send representatives along.
In the past, regional committees of the reliability council met to review rule violations, but did not report them to headquarters. Ellen P. Vancko, a spokeswoman for the reliability council, said: ''There has to be more disclosure than there has been in the past. Exactly what it will look like has yet to be determined.''
The blackout was the largest ever in North America and possibly the nation's most expensive engineering failure. The federal investigation has attracted some criticism; a group of transmission experts placed an advertisement in The Washington Times on Wednesday arguing that the commission was not qualified to investigate and had a conflict of interest, because its stewardship of restructuring the industry had added to the industry's instability.
Previous blackouts have been investigated by the industry council, which was set up after the 1965 Northeast blackout. It provided most of the engineering work for this investigation but lost control to the government. Last year the commission chairman, Patrick Wood III, asked his staff to determine if the agency could institute mandatory standards, but there is doubt that it can do so.
On Wednesday, Mr. Wood said he approved of the industry group's plan. One element is to audit 20 electric control centers by June 30.
