'The Parrot'  Flea Theater
The mystical and the mundane mingle in ''The Parrot,'' a new musical for family audiences presented through Feb. 22 in a collaboration between the Talking Band and the Flea Theater at the Flea's home at 41 White Street, between Broadway and Church Street in Lower Manhattan. Centering on an adolescent girl and stories within a story, this show, while generating intermittent charm, falls well short of enchantment.
The principal pleasures of the event, the centerpiece of the Flea's Give Us Your Children Festival, are Ralph Lee's beguiling parrot masks and puppets, which cast the sort of spell -- at once beautiful and mysterious and sometimes downright funny -- that the show's creators must surely have hoped would pervade this production.
But as written and directed by Paul Zimet, with music by Ellen Maddow that is at its best in the lively and playful overture rendered at keyboards by Blue Gene Tyranny, ''The Parrot'' consistently interrupts the best of its storytelling with a return to the mundane.
''The Parrot'' tells the story of Bela (Elizabeth Daniels), a teenage girl at home on a winter night when her mother is called away on business. Bela can see a flock of parrots (actors masked in leafy green) as they banter saucily.
Outside, too, hoping to be admitted, are BB Jr. (Matthew Dellapina), the rich, spoiled son of her mother's boss, and his brighter, younger sidekick, Grovel (Paul Iacono). The real action begins when one parrot crashes against a window and the stunned bird, a puppet manipulated by an actor (Renoly Santiago), is brought inside by Bela.
When revived, the bird, who says he comes from an impoverished land, proceeds to tell a succession of stories about a princess named Bellafiore (Ms. Daniels) and adventures that take her to various lands: one where she is imprisoned by an angry queen grieving for a lost son, one where eerily stylish people dressed in black babble incessant inanities into colorfully lighted cellphones, and a military dictatorship where the ruler's son has lost his heart to a doll created in Bellafiore's likeness. Though Bellafiore, like Bela, may win hearts, she is not quick to accept proposals. Just when these stories are at their most captivating and taking wing, they are interrupted by BB Jr., a character so broadly drawn and deeply moronic as to undermine the whole thing.
LAWRENCE VAN GELDER
THEATER IN REVIEW
