The Berlin-based Artemis Quartet, one of the most impressive of the new generation of string quartets, arrived on Monday at Logan Airport in Boston, all excited to begin an American tour that includes two concerts this weekend in New York. But for a while that day it looked as if security officials in Boston might prevent the quartet's cellist, Eckart Runge, from entering the country. Could the depressing events of the quartet's aborted 2002 tour be happening again?
The problem started with a youthful indiscretion in 1991, when Mr. Runge, now 36, was a fellowship student at the Aspen Music Festival in Colorado. After a grueling day of rehearsals Mr. Runge and some fellow students were in ''one of these hyperventilation moods,'' he said in a telephone interview from Boston. They went to a supermarket, and as a prank Mr. Runge shoplifted a pair of 99-cent tweezers.
''It was one of those stupid youth things,'' he said. ''I have never done this before.''
Mr. Runge was spotted by a security guard, arrested by the police and taken before a judge, who issued a stern warning, ordered him to pay the court costs and recorded the incident in Mr. Runge's visa file.
The case was closed, or so Mr. Runge thought. Then 9/11 arrived. Artemis completed two American tours after the attacks with no difficulty, but in 2002, after the passage of the Patriot Act, the American Embassy in Berlin denied Mr. Runge a visa. The quartet appealed, but delays forced it to miss its entire 13-city tour, which was to have included an appearance at the Frick Collection in New York.
''My visa now indicates that I am not a terrorist threat,'' Mr. Runge said. Still, he added, when he arrived in Boston, he was led to a secure room, questioned at length and made to wait as his background was checked thoroughly.
Eventually he was cleared, and the musicians headed to a Boston hotel. So they will play their Manhattan programs: a People's Symphony Concert on Saturday night at 8 at Washington Irving High School (Irving Place at 16th Street), with works by Beethoven, Schumann and Ligeti, and a performance at the Frick Collection on Sunday at 5 p.m., with works by Janacek and Schubert and ''Suite del Ángel.'' The suite is Mr. Runge's arrangement of music by his current passion, Astor Piazzolla, the Argentine composer, bandleader and bandoneón player, who died in 1992.
Mr. Runge is hardly the only foreign artist to be barred from the United States after 9/11. Actors and musicians as well as athletes and academics have been detained or denied entry. In certain cases, usually involving young men from predominantly Muslim countries, visitors must undergo a three-month criminal-background check.
''It's really tough to feel so unwelcome when you come here as a friend,'' Mr. Runge said. ''It makes me feel sorry for the people here. Americans are so wonderful. But the people deserve to be better represented in the world.''
The Artemis musicians, all in their 30's, met in 1992 while students at a music school in Lübeck, Germany, and formed the quartet two years later. They made a lasting impression on me at their New York debut at Weill Recital Hall in 2000. Playing quartets by Mozart and Beethoven and, in a viscerally exciting performance, Ligeti's visionary 1968 String Quartet No. 1, they demonstrated the well-blended tone, technical command and unity of purpose that quartet playing demands. But they also exuded individual qualities that invested their performances with surprise, spontaneity and a sense of risk, qualities that remain hallmarks of their work.
The quartet's Siberian-born violinist, Natalia Prischepenko, plays with arching lyricism and rhapsodic sweep, while the violinist Heime Müller (the two alternate in the first and second violin parts) favors lustrous tone and articulate rhythmic execution. Violists are often the go-along, good-sport members of a quartet, but the tall and boyish Volker Jacobsen plays with uncommon spark and personality. Mr. Runge's cello playing abounds with character, which also comes through in the avuncular comments he greatly enjoys making to audiences during programs.
In recent months he did quite a bit of talking -- in Spanish, yet -- to audiences in Argentina when he and his frequent collaborator, Jacques Ammon, a pianist, played some concerts that juxtaposed works by Piazzolla with classical fare and music from film scores. Mr. Runge's interest in Piazzolla prodded the Artemis Quartet to make a recording that alternates fugues by Piazzolla with fugues by Bach. This CD will soon be released with another Artemis recording, a program of quartets by Beethoven, both on the Ars Musici label.
Mr. Runge's visit to South America was possible only because Artemis took six months off last year; Ms. Prischepenko was having a baby. But the sabbatical turned out to be artistically energizing for all four musicians, who finally had time to work on individual projects. They are back in action this season, with some 100 concerts scheduled.
Their able navigations around the often torturous interpersonal tensions endemic in string quartets are partly a result of their easygoing natures. They clearly enjoy one another as people and can keep music in perspective. This came through to me during the 2002 Risor Festival of Chamber Music in Norway, an intense, weeklong festival (20 concerts in six days that summer) directed by the pianist Leif Ove Andsnes.
At dinner the night before the festival's concluding Sunday afternoon concert Mr. Runge, Mr. Jacobson and Mr. Müller approached Mr. Andsnes with an impassioned request. The television broadcast of the World Cup final pitting Germany against Brazil would spill into the first half of the Sunday concert, when the Artemis Quartet was to play. Would Mr. Andsnes consider switching the order of the program? The Risor Festival Strings could play in the first half and Artemis in the second. How could anyone expect these Germans to forgo rooting for their team?
Mr. Andsnes seemed inclined to go along. But my friend Andrew Patner, a Chicago-based critic, starting making mischief by reminding Mr. Andsnes that right there on the dining room wall was a portrait of King Haakon, the Norwegian who led the resistance to the German occupation in World War II and ran a government in exile in London. ''Remember what the Germans did to Norway,'' Mr. Patner cried. Mr. Andsnes slammed his fist on the table and shouted, ''That's right!''
Joking aside, the order of the program proved too difficult to alter. The Artemis players had to catch what they could of the final on a television that was set up outside the church where the concert was held. (Germany lost.)
Though looking forward to returning to New York, Mr. Runge said he was greatly saddened to learn of the death of Robert J. Harth, Carnegie Hall's artistic and executive director. Harth previously ran the Aspen Festival and was relatively new to that job when Mr. Runge got into his youthful trouble.
''He was grateful that I came to him first, before he heard about it from the police,'' Mr. Runge said. ''He was a real warm and strong man, and very understanding.''
Harth could have expelled his errant student. But he felt that Mr. Runge had learned his lesson and that the file was closed, Mr. Runge said.
''It is now becoming an expensive lesson,'' he added. And as the Boston incident suggests, the file is still not completely closed.
