RECENTLY, Mark Geragos faced the kind of problem that most criminal defense lawyers can only dream about. Just as the murder trial of one client, Scott Peterson, was getting ready for takeoff, another Geragos client, Michael Jackson, was charged with child molesting.
So much business, so much fanfare, so little time. Mr. Geragos needed help with the Jackson case. Wanted: someone who wouldn't be rattled by the worldwide news media and could also do a bang-up job in court.
Who you gonna call?
Last month, eschewing California colleagues, Mr. Geragos reached across the country and brought in a co-lead counsel: Benjamin Brafman of New York City.
At his 26th-floor Midtown Manhattan office the other day, we cadged some time with Mr. Brafman, 55, fastidiously groomed, taut -- lunch can be the top of a muffin -- and punchy, as he was catching a breather between trips to California, to the downtown courts for local clients and weekend jaunts to Israel to visit his son's family (''My wife and I go back and forth to Israel like some people go to New Jersey,'' he explains).
Mr. Brafman is at his peak here, holding himself out as a white-collar-crime specialist. Why would he want the arduous responsibilities of a lurid, faraway case?
White collar, yes; white shoe, no: ''I'm not a snob about my practice,'' Mr. Brafman bristles. ''I'm a real lawyer! That's what distinguishes me from 'people who practice law.' My clients can be notorious or controversial, and other lawyers will say, 'Oh, we wouldn't represent someone like that!' Well, that's because they don't know how.''
He compares the invitation to represent ''the greatest entertainer in the world'' to being asked ''to be a quarterback in the Super Bowl.'' When he met with Mr. Jackson, Mr. Brafman adds: ''I saw how sweet a man he is, his courtesy, that he is devoid of arrogance, refined, not at all full of himself. That was a defining moment in making a decision about whether to participate. I think we hit it off and that Michael knew he could trust me. And he needs a guy like me.''
Meaning?
''I'm a take-charge advocate and a well-disciplined trial lawyer,'' Mr. Brafman replies. After the first blush of celebrity gee-whiz fades, he explains, ''You need to be able to pull rank and say no to a client. 'Not on my watch, it's not good for you or for the case and we're doing it my way!'''
Mr. Brafman does possess singular credentials to represent Mr. Jackson. He can stand off an advancing army of microphones and cameras, a skill honed while defending clients like the hip-hop impresario Sean Combs, aka P. Diddy; the rapper Jay-Z; the former nightclub maestro Peter Gatien; as well as politicians, religious leaders and organized crime figures. While stars dazzle him -- Mr. Combs ''calls me Uncle Benny and I call him 'P''' -- they do not daze him.
Unlike many colleagues seeking to avoid trials for their clients, Mr. Brafman shines in a courtroom, wresting acquittals that the smart money bet against. He can deliver a perfectly modulated cross-examination, and is a savvy, gutsy tactician, an elegant manipulator, a jury charmer.
As part of the package, though, he is unapologetic, aggressive and possessed of a boundless immodesty, in the grand tradition of self-made men who are long on success and short of stature. He has the defensive scrappiness of a Brooklyn guy raised without luxuries or Ivy League polish, but with a relentless work ethic.
He is not all bravado, all the time. ''It's fun to be Ben Brafman, but there are times when it's completely sad to be me,'' he says. ''Standing up and taking a verdict is one of the most terrifying, tense moments you could possibly imagine.'' When Mr. Combs's acquittal on weapons and bribery charges was announced in court, Mr. Brafman openly wept.
The hardest verdict he ever took was the conviction of a client who had become a friend. ''It broke my heart,'' he says quietly.
Declining to identify the case, Mr. Brafman says: ''He was a good man who violated the law but not for personal or corrupt reasons. As upset as I was, I knew I did everything I could -- beyond what I could do. But in my business, there is no credit for an excellent job. You either win or lose.''
IN the privacy of his office, Mr. Brafman says, many proud men have spoken of suicide. ''Perhaps 100 people have told me, 'Maybe my family would be better off if I drop dead.' You have to hold yourself back from saying, 'You may be right.' I go home and say, 'It's been one of those days, so everyone leave me alone for a few minutes.'''
Home, for Mr. Brafman, an Orthodox Jew, means Long Island, where he lives with his wife, Lynda, and in walking distance from grandsons, in-laws, synagogue. There, far from the courtroom, he is known as a soft touch who has quietly, spontaneously paid for this one's chemotherapy, that one's tuition.
His parents were Holocaust survivors who infused him with a potent sense of heritage, an awareness of how his public persona could reflect on his people.
''The teachings of Judaism I respect most,'' he says, ''are about sharing your blessings, giving people the benefit of the doubt and living your life with honesty. That's pretty much it. And that's pretty good stuff for a criminal defense lawyer, too.''
PUBLIC LIVES
