Stopped in its tracks by the unexpected death of its artistic and executive director, Robert J. Harth, on Jan. 30, Carnegie Hall proceeded yesterday, after a week's delay, to announce its 2004-5 season.
The mood at the news conference was both subdued and positive. Sanford I. Weill, the hall's chairman, read from notes Mr. Harth had prepared for the event, a poignant way to convey his spirit of optimism.
Three of the artists involved in next season -- Pierre Boulez, Marilyn Horne and Yo-Yo Ma -- spoke briefly of Mr. Harth's involvement in their work. The greatest sense of loss was conveyed by Ara Guzelimian, the hall's artistic administrator, who sketched a convincing image of a warm collaboration. (He will now be working with Klaus Jacobs, who was named acting director until a replacement for Mr. Harth is found.) He also observed that the best tribute to Mr. Harth was to outline highlights of the coming season, which is to be a vibrant memorial. Carnegie Hall is happily developing its catholic tastes.
The biggest single reason for this is Zankel Hall. In its second season, its offerings will range from a minifestival, with Carnegie's composer in residence, John Adams, as curator, that ranges through the whirling dervishes of Damascus to a Baroque series with luminaries like the Philharmonia Baroque Orchestra and Nicholas McGegan.
Carnegie's Perspectives series has become a regular highlight of its calendar; the new season brings the Norwegian pianist Leif Ove Andsnes, who planned, among other things, three chamber concerts in the spirit of his Risor Festival in Norway. Dawn Upshaw and Michael Tilson Thomas will continue the second seasons of their own Perspectives.
Even well-established areas of classical music tradition, like anniversary celebrations, seem a little less routine when the artists being celebrated include Janacek (the ethereal pianist Andras Schiff will mark his 150th birthday); Mr. Boulez, who turns 80 with the Chicago Symphony; and Abdullah Ibrahim, the South African jazz pianist and composer. In the orchestra world, meanwhile, there is extra interest in watching new relationships unfold.
Opening the season with an all-Strauss program is Christoph von Eschenbach, starting his second year leading the Philadelphia Orchestra. James Levine comes three times with his new orchestra, the Boston Symphony, and three times with the Met Orchestra. And Franz Welser-Möst, whose first Carnegie concerts at the head of the Cleveland Orchestra last year were not universally acclaimed, will get back on his horse and offer a complete cycle of Beethoven piano concertos with Radu Lupu.
Other offerings range from the Soweto Gospel Choir to Stephen Sondheim's latest ''anthology,'' which ran in London as ''Moving On,'' and comes here under the name ''Opening Doors.'' And new partners -- like the Marilyn Horne Foundation -- join old, like the JVC Jazz Festival, which is presenting K. D. Lang with the Brooklyn Philharmonic. ''It ain't gonna be 'Nuits d'Été,' '' Mr. Guzelemian said, referring to Berlioz's oft-performed song cycle.
