It was roughly a year ago that the snowboarder Craig Kelly, a four-time world champion and one of the sport's pioneers, died along with six others, buried beneath an avalanche in British Columbia. Kelly, 36, had left competitive snowboarding to launch a career as a backcountry guide.
There is no trend in the snow sports industry as hot, no buzz or vibe more ringing and relished, than the pursuit of the backcountry experiences on skis, snowboards, snowmobiles and snowshoes. Leaving designated ski areas for the largely unexplored is so common, one wonders how much longer the backcountry can remain unexplored.
Then again, it's a big (back)country. But there are evident consequences to the quest for the less charted snowfields.
Although the number of avalanche fatalities in the United States in the 1980's was approximately 15 annually, that number has doubled, on average, in the last five years. More people are now killed on public land by avalanches, avalanche researchers report, than by any other natural event, including lightning, fires or tornados.
Last year, the Forest Service National Avalanche Center says, 30 people were killed in avalanches in the United States and another 28 died in Canada. Half were backcountry skiers or snowboarders, most of the rest were on snowmobiles.
The increase in deaths is not a result of unpredictable snow. Instead, there are just more people heading out into avalanche conditions without enough avalanche awareness training.
''The technological advances in skis, and in winter clothing, over the last few years have made it a lot easier for people to try it without much of an indoctrination period,'' Janet Kellam, the director of the Sawtooth National Forest Avalanche Center near Sun Valley, Idaho, said in a telephone interview. ''It used to be that you might have several experiences, kind of getting used to the terrain, and along the way you would acquire skills for avalanche conditions.
''What we see now is that people have not gained those avalanche skills as quickly as they've gained the winter recreational skills that lead them into avalanche terrain.''
That is a dangerous combination and it is additionally fueled, perhaps recklessly, by industry magazines and movies that make heading into the backcountry seem the only cool and popular choice of serious skiers and riders. It is often presented as if it were a fashion decision, one requiring no more forethought than picking out the right beanie for après ski.
No one is trying to advise people to stay out of the backcountry. But the decision to do so demands a little homework. It might save your life.
For starters, there are several Web sites, the best probably being an interactive one devised by the Forest Service, www.fsavalanche.org. In just a few minutes, you will get a grasp for what is going on under your skis or board, what warning signs to look for and how to carry out a rescue effort. Some key avalanche recognition factors: a slope between 30 and 45 degrees, temperature changes, heavy snowfall and windy conditions.
The best alternative is to take an avalanche awareness class; they are frequently offered by regional avalanche centers spaced around the country. Every large mountain area also has an avalanche advisory hotline or Web site, something that is easy to check with on the morning before any backcountry excursion.
There are some myths and basic facts about avalanches that are worth knowing. My favorite is that large noises do not start avalanches, regardless of how many times we have seen it happen in the movies. Another is that only big slopes present the potential for a deadly avalanche. In fact, about half of all avalanche accidents occur on slopes less than 300 feet long.
The vast majority of avalanche fatalities happen in the western part of North America, but Kellam said that is because of the kind of snowpacks that develop there. ''It doesn't mean avalanches cannot happen in the East,'' Kellam said. Seven climbers were buried and two killed in an avalanche in Tuckerman's Ravine in New Hampshire in 2002.
It is true that it is very rare for someone to get caught in an avalanche within a ski area because patrols carefully monitor those slopes.
So what causes an avalanche?
''Ninety percent are triggered by the person who gets caught in the avalanche or someone else in the party that day,'' Kellam said. ''And that's a positive. We've met the enemy and the enemy is us. So if people educate themselves and learn how to avoid avalanche conditions -- and they can -- we can diminish the danger significantly.''
Kellam is hopeful. Her center routinely advised backcountry devotees to avoid north-facing slopes last year in her area. ''I have to say, I saw few tracks on the north-facing slopes,'' she said. ''People were still having fun. They were just making good decisions first.''
THE SKI REPORT
