Two lawyers who represented President Bill Clinton during his impeachment will now play roles in the impeachment inquiry of Gov. John G. Rowland, officials said on Wednesday.
The House committee that will decide whether to recommend impeachment of Mr. Rowland has hired Steven F. Reich, a New York lawyer, as its legal counsel. Mr. Reich worked as a senior associate counsel to the White House during Mr. Clinton's impeachment, and also worked for Democrats in both houses of Congress during the impeachment process. Mr. Reich, 42, is a partner in the litigation unit at the Los Angeles-based firm Manatt, Phelps &amp; Phillips.
Selecting a lawyer was the first major task facing the 10-member bipartisan committee, which was formally created two weeks ago.
Mr. Rowland's office has hired Seth P. Waxman, who served as solicitor general in the Clinton administration during the impeachment process, said Ross Garber, the governor's chief legal counsel. Mr. Waxman, a lawyer with the Washington firm Wilmer Cutler Pickering, will help only with research and analysis in connection with the impeachment inquiry and will not represent Mr. Rowland, said Dean Pagani, a spokesman for the governor.
Mr. Waxman will be assisted by Randolph D. Moss, who also worked for the White House under President Clinton, and by Paul A. Engelmayer, a former federal prosecutor.
In a memo provided to members of the House committee, Mr. Reich outlined his view of the factual and legal investigation of Mr. Rowland's misconduct. The inquiry would begin with an investigation of renovations and gifts provided by state employees at the governor's private cottage in Litchfield. Mr. Rowland admitted to having lied about those gifts and renovations in December, an admission that led to the current impeachment inquiry.
The outline includes questions about the cottage, such as ''Were subcontractors promised future state contracts?'' and ''Have people been told not to talk?''
The outline moves on to numbered sections titled, in order, ''Gifts to the governor,'' ''Awards of state contracts,'' ''Loan by CCRA to Enron,'' ''Furniture moves from official residence,'' ''Vacations,'' ''Property issues,'' and ''Provision of state jobs.'' All those sections correspond to additional questions that have been raised about the governor, including many that are also the subjects of a broad federal investigation.
Mr. Reich's billing rate is $500 an hour, but he would grant the committee a 10 percent reduction, according to his memo. One of the Connecticut impeachment committee's next tasks will be to coordinate its activities with those of the House Judiciary Committee, which is weighing the nomination of James Robertson as a Superior Court judge, committee members said Wednesday. Mr. Robertson served as a lawyer for Mr. Rowland, and because questions have been raised about whether he was paid for all his services, the issue could come before the impeachment committee, said Representative Michael P. Lawlor, a Democrat.
