The Kentucky morning was cold but clear Wednesday, with the sun breaking through the clouds, as the entire family of the racetrack, as they call it, the jockeys, the trainers, the grooms, the valets, the hot walkers, the agents and the everyday betting folks -- and the widow and three daughters, ages 20, 15 and 8 -- filed into the Homestretch dining room just off the track at Turfway Park.
The widow, Tammy Rowland, 36, sat in the front row, and for virtually the full half-hour of the memorial service, she buried her head in her arms, which were crossed on a rust-colored box in her lap that contained her husband's ashes.
By 11 a.m., some 400 people -- it was standing room only -- had gathered in the room, which was about 200 yards from the three-eighths pole near the far turn, where several jockeys had put a wreath in memory of their fallen fellow rider, whose head had been stepped on by an onrushing horse after last Wednesday night's three-horse spill. He was, at 5 feet 5 inches, 110 pounds, an athlete, the jockeys would recall, strong and courageous and gifted, dedicated to his sport and the horses he rode, and a fun-loving guy, too, with a dimpled smile, blue eyes, bow legs and the ability to play the guitar loudly, but poorly.
Mike Rowland -- Michael Francis Rowland -- age 41, was in the stirrups on World Trade, a 5-year-old bay, in the seventh race last Wednesday, a modest $17,500 claiming race, on a muddy track that was nevertheless deemed safe. He had ridden in two of the previous six races that night without incident -- and without a victory. This was rather unusual for Rowland, for he had won 3,998 races in his 24-year riding career, and he was running first in this one.
Even as he rode, a large white sign with orange-and-blue lettering lay in a conference room at the track in anticipation of a great event in Rowland's life: ''Congratulations/Mike Rowland/4,000 Wins.''
Very few jockeys ever get to 4,000 victories, anywhere, and while Rowland basically made his living in the Class AAA level of thoroughbred racing -- a step below tracks like Belmont, Santa Anita and Saratoga, in Saratoga Springs, N.Y., where he was born -- he was still closing on a significant milestone.
And while athletes sometimes try to play down such milestones, Rowland was, typically, forthright about it. ''It's something I'm really looking forward to,'' he had said. He won his first race in 1979, when he was 17, and rode in races all across the country, winning 28 stakes events, mostly in Ohio, and close to $28 million in purse earnings.
''Horses were his life,'' his wife said. ''He was one of the best. In my eyes, he was the best.''
The last time his eldest daughter, Randi, the lone child from his first marriage, spoke with him was a day or so before the accident. As she would relate the conversation in her remarks at the memorial service, dabbing at tears with a tissue, they talked by phone, he from a barn at Turfway and she from her home in Winnipeg, Manitoba.
''He tried to talk to me at the same time he was feeding and watering a horse,'' she said. ''He kept cutting away while he did it, and I heard him threatening the horse to bite him back.'' She laughed through her tears.
The service had begun with remarks by a priest and a chaplain. Then Randi spoke, as did a couple of jockey friends and Rowland's sister Tracy.
''His career in racing began when he was 5 years old,'' Tracy said, ''and my parents bought him a rocking horse. Before we knew it, he had managed to ride that wooden horse across the living room floor. He loved that horse. From that point forward, he never stopped loving horses.''
In the fatal race, Rowland was leading when World Trade broke a foreleg about a half-minute from Rowland's probable 3,999th victory.
''I was kind of midpack and stalking the leader,'' Mark Johnston, 33, who was aboard Miner Moss, said, ''and I remember Mike's horse suddenly sinking, like he was dropping into a hole. It happened so fast, but it also seemed like it was going in slow motion.''
He added: ''I saw Mike doing his best to maintain the horse, standing up and grabbing the reins. He was fantastic. And then he disappeared from sight.''
Their horses collided. Rowland was thrown to the ground, as was Johnston, who flew some 15 yards. Jessica Endres, up on Joanies No Phony, was also tossed.
The four other horses in the race swept past, but it was Johnston's or Endres's horse that couldn't avoid stamping on Rowland's head as he lay curled on the turf, as he had been taught and as he had done in other spills.
The track medic raced to the scene, the track ambulance following. Tammy Rowland ran from her seat in the stands. A helicopter had been called, but it was decided that Rowland would be taken by ambulance to University Hospital in Cincinnati, some 15 minutes away. Rowland lay in a coma for five days, and died on Monday. Johnston broke his collarbone but is expected to be racing again in a few weeks. Endres walked away with minor bruises and is riding again.
''I remember we were having dinner a few years ago and we kind of talked about the dangers of riding,'' Johnston said. ''And Tammy was talking about another accident when Mike had been thrown, and she said, 'Yeah, you got planted in the ground like a turnip.' And he gave his crooked smile and just shook his head.''
Since 1940, there have been 144 jockey deaths in North America, according to the Jockeys' Guild. The last American jockey to die while racing was Arnold Ruiz, who was thrown from his horse at Beulah Park in Grove City, Ohio, in 2001.
When Wednesday's memorial service ended, mourners filed by to extend condolences to the family. Soon the room would be empty, and the wreaths that had been placed near the podium cleared, the one in the shape of a jockey's silk, the other in the shape of a horseshoe, as well as the sign with the now unattainable: ''Congratulations/Michael Rowland/4,000 Wins.''
HORSE RACING
