More than 27,000 military contractors, or about 1 in 9, are evading taxes and still continuing to win new business, Congressional investigators have found.
The investigators also said that the government had failed to make meaningful use of its authority to collect from these delinquent companies and individuals by offsetting payments for their work.
The tax cheats owed an estimated $3 billion at the end of the 2002 fiscal year, mainly in Social Security and other payroll taxes that were diverted for business or personal use instead of being forwarded to the government, actions that could bring criminal prosecution. Lesser amounts were owed in income taxes.
The findings, by the General Accounting Office, were in a report released on Wednesday at a news briefing by the Senate Permanent Subcommittee on Investigations. The subcommittee has scheduled a hearing on Thursday to look into what Senator Norm Coleman, the Minnesota Republican who is its chairman, called an outrageous situation.
Because of Internal Revenue Service privacy strictures, no company names were divulged.
''They're being paid tax dollars and they're not living up to their obligations,'' Mr. Coleman said of the tax evaders, some of whom have been delinquent for many years. ''The Pentagon needs to start targeting more firepower on the management side on fraud and abuse in the system, and go after the thousands of defense contractors that routinely renege on paying their taxes.''
In one case, a company providing dining, security and custodial services to military bases owed almost $10 million in 2002 while receiving $3.5 million in payments from the Defense Department. The government collected only $527,000 from the company under a tax levy that year, the investigators found.
The owner borrowed nearly $1 million from the business, using company money to buy a boat, several cars and a home outside the United States. The business was dissolved in 2003, and its employees were transferred to a related business that continues to submit invoices and receive Defense Department payments, the G.A.O. report said.
Mr. Coleman said that it did not appear that any major contractors were judged to be tax evaders. But he also said that the subcommittee was not privy to any identities and was going only on the types and sizes of the 47 cases that the report described in some detail.
Despite the extensive absence of compliance, the accounting office's proposed remedies are meeting with some resistance. Notably, the Office of Management and Budget ''questioned the need for developing or pursuing additional mechanisms to prohibit federal contract awards to 'tax abusers,''' the report said.
According to Defense Department and I.R.S. records, 78 percent of the cases involving the 27,100 business and individual delinquents were more than a year old. Of the total, 25,600 involved unpaid payroll taxes, including Medicare taxes, while 1,500 involved mainly individuals who owed but had not paid income taxes.
The G.A.O. estimated that the Defense Department, one of the few government agencies that acts as its own disbursing agent, could have collected $100 million in 2002 from these delinquents by offsetting payments. The offset program was included in the Taxpayer Relief Act of 1997, which directed that agencies withhold 15 percent of any federal payment going to someone with an outstanding tax debt and to send the money to the I.R.S.
Senator Carl Levin of Michigan, the senior Democrat on the investigations subcommittee, noted that it took until December 2002 to establish the automated levy program.
In the six years since passage of the legislation to do such levying, the Defense Department has collected only about $687,000, the accounting office said. ''We're collecting peanuts when we're owed millions,'' Mr. Levin said.
The G.A.O. recommended that the Defense Department immediately provide its payment data to those running the Treasury Offset Program, and that the I.R.S. use this levy program ''as one of the first steps'' in collecting back taxes.
According to Mr. Levin, about one-third of the 27,100 delinquent contractors have active military contracts.
Federal law does not bar contractors with unpaid federal taxes from obtaining government contracts, and Mr. Coleman said it might be overly harsh to pass such a law because of a resulting loss of jobs.
The G.A.O. recommended that the Office of Management and Budget develop policy options for barring contract awards to those who abuse the federal tax system.
