Last year, Westchester County property taxes increased by 14.8 percent. This year they will increase by 18.8 percent. And next year, well, there is always wishful thinking.
''If you look at the big picture, the economy is picking up, and that could cause a big increase in sales tax revenue,'' said Michael B. Kaplowitz, chairman of the County Legislature's budget committee. ''And we are hoping to get structural relief from Albany on unfunded mandates, like Medicaid and pensions.''
On Tuesday, the Legislature amended the $1.4 billion budget for 2004 by raising the county's share of property taxes by 18.8 percent and increasing mortgage taxes, automobile taxes and sales taxes in some areas, all to close a $28.5 million budget gap. Unlike last year's budget, this year's avoided layoffs and cuts in programs and services.
''If we closed all county parks, and eliminated our bus transportation system, and closed the departments of public safety and emergency services, we would still have to raise the county property tax because of the ever-increasing costs to our residents of state mandated programs,'' County Executive Andrew J. Spano said in a statement released on Wednesday.
Counties across the state are struggling with tremendous increases in the costs of state-mandated programs like Medicaid, health benefits and pensions, said Edmund J. McMahon, a senior fellow at the conservative Manhattan Institute. But rather than just increasing taxes, they must start looking at ways to cut things they can control, he said.
''They may be back in the same boat next year,'' Mr. McMahon said. ''They have to look at the way they conduct business: will they ask for givebacks in collective bargaining agreements, do they get competitive bids for things like bus contracts?''
Kelly Jones of Hartsdale, the president of a citizens' group, the Coalition Against Unfair Taxes and Spending, said the county should have considered other measures. ''We do not have a revenue problem in Westchester County,'' he said. ''We have a spending problem.''
Mr. Jones, a senior vice president of the Empire State Development Corporation, said there should be a full audit of all county departments to find excessive spending.
George Oros, a Republican legislator, voted against the tax increases on Tuesday. He said there were plenty of county government programs and services that could be cut.
''You have to seriously question why a county that just socked taxpayers for a 19 percent increase is running an amusement park at a loss of $3 million a year,'' Mr. Oros said, referring to Playland in Rye.
