House Republican leaders, under pressure from conservatives to rein in spending, said Wednesday that they would consider trimming President Bush's new $2.4 trillion budget, including his requests for the military and domestic security.
''Everything is on the table,'' Speaker J. Dennis Hastert of Illinois told reporters after House Republicans met privately for about two and a half hours to map a budget strategy.
Lawmakers and aides at the closed meeting said members felt that spending had been proceeding unchecked in recent years and that the Republican majority needed to return to a style of fiscal discipline that was a political hallmark.
The White House issued its own spending warning Wednesday, threatening a veto of the highway and mass transportation bill on the Senate floor if it did not come in below the current $318 billion price.
''It is critical to exercise responsible restraint over federal spending in a manner that ensures deficit reduction and the administration looks forward to working with Congress to control the costs of this bill,'' the White House said in its official policy paper on the highway bill.
The statements from the House leaders and the White House indicate that Republicans see the deficit, which is expected to reach a record $521 billion this year, as a political liability in an election year.
Conservative groups and some rank-and-file lawmakers have been highly critical of the spending approach taken by the Republican leadership in both the House and Senate, with the anger reaching a new level after reports showed the cost of the new Medicare drug benefit had been significantly underestimated.
''There is a sense out there that we have been spending too much,'' a top House leadership aide said.
The new interest in going after spending was starkly illustrated by Mr. Hastert's suggestion that even Pentagon and domestic security could be pared back. Mr. Bush has proposed a 7 percent increase for the military and almost 10 percent for homeland security while trying to hold domestic programs to an increase of one-half of 1 percent.
Cutting spending below those levels, even with a push by the leadership, could prove daunting with lawmakers of both parties wanting to take home new projects and Democrats eager to highlight what they will portray as Republican shortchanging of popular programs.
Aides to Mr. Hastert said he did not envision either Social Security or Medicare being included in the reduction effort, though other entitlements such as farm spending and veterans' benefits might be included.
Democrats said Republicans were struggling with a problem of their own making due to the tax cuts they had enacted and were trying to make permanent. Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the No. 2 Democrat in the House, said Republicans had to gather for so long in their budget meeting because they were ''trying to figure out how they rationalize what they know to be unrealistic, undoable and irresponsible.''
Mr. Hastert said he hoped to complete a House budget by March 15 and to have the House and Senate reach an agreement by April 15.
Senate budget writers are already bracing for a difficult fight as they try to balance the demands of conservatives who want to take the same approach as the House Republicans and others who believe that the Bush administration budget plan is too stingy.
