But for Kurt Thomas's losing his head, the Knicks might have rolled into the All-Star Game break on an even, if not enviable, plane.
Instead of reaching .500 on this two-game trip, the Knicks lost to the New Orleans Hornets on Wednesday night, 106-98, in about the same manner as their loss to the Dallas Mavericks the night before.
Thomas, the Knicks' power forward, was suspended by the National Basketball Association for Wednesday's game after head-butting the Mavericks rookie Josh Howard early in the second quarter Tuesday night.
Without him, the Knicks were without their secondary offensive threat, their primary rebounder and the rhythm they had during their recent five-game winning streak. The Knicks dropped to 25-29 over all, 11-8 since Stephon Marbury arrived in a trade.
''I don't want to make an excuse for us because we still should have won,'' Coach Lenny Wilkens said. ''But Kurt had been playing so well that he was in the flow and he was making good decisions on top of that. So you lose all of that.''
Thomas made one poor decision, however, and it cost the Knicks. ''If I could take those 15 seconds back for him, I would,'' Wilkens said.
Despite a 6-point halftime lead, the Knicks faded in the third, made a run in the fourth, but faltered down the stretch.
Marbury scored 29 points, tying the output of his point guard counterpart, Baron Davis, who was named to the Eastern Conference All-Star team while Marbury was not.
''It's bad enough we don't have Allan,'' Marbury said of Allan Houston, who is on the injured list. ''When you don't have another one of your shooters, a guy who spreads the floor, it's extremely tough.''
The Knicks led, 54-49, at halftime but watched as Davis led the Hornets on a 20-2 run in the third quarter, taking advantage of 6 Knicks turnovers and 14 missed shots.
Penny Hardaway scored 19 off the bench and Keith Van Horn scored a quiet 14 points; his 3-pointer with 1 minute 15 seconds to play cut the Hornets' lead to 6, but it was too late.
The Knicks departed for a four-day break, and Thomas returned to his family in Dallas.
Thomas was ejected Tuesday after he was called for an offensive foul while setting a pick on Howard. The two engaged in trash-talking and Thomas admitted he made a mistake when he head-butted Howard. Thomas was given a technical, then ejected by Referee Bennie Adams.
Stu Jackson, the N.B.A.'s senior vice president for basketball operations, reviewed the play on video and from Adams's report.
''It was clear to all that Kurt made contact with Josh Howard's head,'' Jackson said Wednesday. ''A head butt is synonymous with throwing a punch or using another object to make contact.''
Jackson said this decision was not predicated on Thomas's prior incidents.
Thomas has been ejected six times in his Knicks career and suspended once. He threw a forearm at Indiana's Jalen Rose on Dec. 25, 1999, for which he was ejected, fined $10,000 and suspended two games.
Since then, Jackson said, Thomas's ''behavior on the court has been exemplary.''
Thomas knows he hurt the Knicks in Dallas. He apologized to his teammates after the game. ''I just lost my head,'' Thomas told Wilkens.
''I just feel I let my teammates down,'' Thomas said in a heavy voice in a phone interview Wednesday afternoon.
''Isiah called me, and we were both shocked and surprised,'' Thomas said, referring to the team's president, Isiah Thomas. ''We discussed it and he told me to keep my head up. Definitely I didn't want this to happen.''
Thomas was suspended for one game without pay, costing him $59,934.72. He had spent thousands of dollars on 100 tickets for family and friends Tuesday. Thomas was upset, he said, because the Knicks had been on a roll with him playing in sync with Marbury. But he was also disturbed because he had invited friends and relatives, including a 9-year-old nephew, Brandon, who was on the court as a ball boy.
Two years ago, Thomas was ejected from a game in Houston that came at a time where he let his emotions control him. The next day he saw his mother, Angela, who gave him an earful. On Tuesday night, she did so again. ''That's not something you want your children to watch on television,'' she told Thomas.
''I just want him to learn from his mistakes,'' she said. But Angela Thomas said her son had not ''reverted back to his old self.''
REBOUNDS
STEPHON MARBURY departed on the Knicks' charter with Madison Square Garden's chairman, JAMES L. DOLAN, to Los Angeles, where he will participate in the skills competition for point guards during All-Star Weekend. ''Baron came up to me,'' Marbury said, referring to BARON DAVIS, ''and said, 'You know you're supposed to be playing.' It's all right, as far as coming in and not being in the East long enough. The way I look at it, they've seen me play before.''
PRO BASKETBALL
