Moveon, the left-leaning activist group, said on Wednesday that it would start another round of advertising against President Bush this week, bringing to more than $9 million the amount it says it has spent since November on television commercials attacking Mr. Bush.
The group's latest spot is to begin running for two weeks, starting on Thursday, in five swing states, including Florida and Missouri, the group said. The commercial features audio excerpts from Mr. Bush's State of the Union Message in January 2003 in which he made the case for war against Saddam Hussein as the camera trains on a lie detector whose needles become frantic as he speaks.
Moveon officials said they had bought $1.5 million worth of television time for the spot, which was a finalist in the anti-Bush advertising contest Moveon held last month. (The spot was produced by two men from New York: Rich Garella, a political consultant, and Adam Feinstein, a filmmaker.)
Wes Boyd, a Moveon founder, said the group decided to run the commercial now to coincide with new questions about the strength of Iraq's weapons programs that the administration had cited in its call for war.
The polygraph's needles are shown reacting three times during excerpts from Mr. Bush's speech. It happens when he says: ''Saddam Hussein had an advanced nuclear weapons development program;'' ''Saddam Hussein recently sought significant quantities of uranium from Africa;'' and ''Saddam Hussein aids and protects terrorists including members of Al Qaeda.''
Late last month David Kay, the former chief weapons inspector in Iraq, said Mr. Hussein had no stockpiles of chemical or biological weapons just before the war.
And last week George J. Tenet, the director of central intelligence, said in a presentation at Georgetown University that American spy agencies might have overstated the progress of Mr. Hussein's nuclear weapons program. Mr. Bush attributed his assertion that Mr. Hussein had tried to obtain uranium in Africa to British intelligence, but it was based on faulty information.
And while there is no uniform opinion within the intelligence community about the extent of the ties between Mr. Hussein and Al Qaeda, they have not been disproved.
Moveon.org's intent is to hurt Mr. Bush's chances in the fall, but his campaign advisers have said that the spots, paradoxically, could galvanize his base of support.
Terry Holt, a spokesman for the Bush re-election campaign, said Wednesday, ''If Moveon had its way, the United States would not be fighting a global war on terror, and Saddam Hussein would still be the brutal dictator in charge of Iraq.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: ADVERTISING
