MIKE TRAINOR has the luxury of being a pragmatist who is required to spend a lot time in the world of computing make-believe.
With the title of mobile chief technology evangelist at Intel, he pictures how far personal computing technology can go and then tries to build systems that match his imagination. He is, in many ways, a pioneer of quixotic computing.
Currently Mr. Trainor is focused on creating a line of concept laptops that will serve as Intel's vision of how notebook computers might evolve in the next two years. These concepts combine imaginative designs with the latest technology and are meant to influence the gear that will be sold by PC makers like Hewlett-Packard, Dell and Sony -- and to find new applications and demand for Intel's chips.
''Our idea with these products is to provide something to shoot at and hopefully be exceeded by our customers,'' Mr. Trainor said. ''We want to try to predict, inspire and direct the industry.''
Intel started the concept PC program about two years ago in an effort to show that actual products could match the hype surrounding them. (Microsoft has similarly used concept computers to show off new versions of its Windows operating system and other related software.) It is easy to describe what is possible, the thinking went, but how can you put that vision in someone's hands?
So Intel put Mr. Trainor and other engineers to work mixing fantasy with utility.
Just as carmakers flaunt their concept vehicles, Intel shows off its futuristic gear to the public. At the Intel Developer Forum in San Francisco from Feb. 17 to 19, three laptops that make up Intel's new concept line, called Florence, will go on view before thousands of engineers, researchers and product designers.
Two of the Florence systems are geared toward a class of business customers best described as data fiends.
At first glance, these two 15-inch notebooks simply look like souped-up versions of today's popular systems. One is an ultra-thin approach to the clamshell design, while the other is a tablet PC with a detachable keyboard. What makes the computers notable is something that Intel is calling Extended Mobile Access technology, or E.M.A.
Each computer has a small liquid crystal display (4.4 inches by 2.4 inches) on the outside of its casing that offers information on whether a wireless network is in the vicinity and what its strength is. It also posts e-mail messages and appointments from standard software like Microsoft Outlook.
Basically, this makes it possible for laptop users to stay abreast of important information without wasting a lot of time or battery life. The computer stays awake retrieving relevant data but does not have to power the full display or other software. The exterior display consumes half the power of a fully operational notebook, and Intel hopes to trim that to about 10 percent.
''The belief is that people can close their laptops during meetings and just sort of glance down at the secondary display to see if urgent notes come across,'' Mr. Trainor said. ''A person that works in that mode will see great improvements in battery life.''
Later this year, Legend Group -- China's largest PC maker, also known by its Lenovo brand -- will include the E.M.A. display technology in the release of its Vela notebook in China. Asian companies tend to run first with Intel's concept designs, about a year ahead of American PC makers, said Anand Chandrasekher, general manager of Intel's mobile platforms group.
''In general, I find there is a lot more innovation and trial-and-error taking place outside of the shores of the U.S.,'' Mr. Chandrasekher said. ''The U.S. consumer is not getting the same advantages as some of the other consumers overseas.''
Hewlett-Packard and Dell declined to say whether they planned to use the technology.
Intel is working with companies like Insyde Software to add more functions to the E.M.A. technology. By 2005, it says, consumers could expect to see MP3 players and instant-messaging software pop up on the secondary L.C.D. Intel predicts that consumers will also be able to connect to both Wi-Fi and wireless carriers' data networks through the display. This would allow users to switch between networks with relative ease, receiving e-mail, for example, at all times.
Eventually the exterior screen might deliver many of the same functions found on a smartphone, giving PC and cellphone makers a new way to link their products.
The E.M.A. technology is less central to Intel's third concept laptop, designed for the ordinary consumer and for home use.
The notebook is loaded with communication and media tools. The basics for a luxury concept PC are all there, including high-end speakers, 17-inch screen, microphone and video camera. This system is larger and heavier than its 15-inch business-notebook counterparts, which place a premium on portability.
But the most eye-catching element is a wireless keyboard equipped with a removable phone on one side and a detachable remote control on the other. VoIP, or Voice Over Internet Protocol technology, allows the user to make a call with the handset or the microphone-and-camera combination.
All three concept laptops have fingerprint and smart-card readers for added security, and Bluetooth wireless technology support for any peripheral device like the detachable keyboards. All share a futuristic look, with their metallic finish and sleek lines.
The Florence designs may seem a bit overwhelming, but that is more or less the point. ''Intel wants to put stuff up on the wall and see what sticks,'' said Martin Reynolds, an analyst at Gartner. ''They are trying to do something that is a bit different and that PC makers may not have tried otherwise.''
Even some of the biggest concept-computer backers at Intel acknowledge that the designs may not find a concrete future in the marketplace. But Intel executives maintain that the concept systems are a form of practical dreaming.
''This keeps our own technology grounded in reality,'' Mr. Chandrasekher said. ''It is too easy for us to get stuck in an ivory tower and imagine what people are doing. With the concept computers, we can get live people to touch these things and see what they really like.''
