The prosecution in the aggravated manslaughter trial of Jayson Williams opened its case Wednesday with testimony and evidence establishing the fatal shooting of a chauffeur, Costas Christofi, in Mr. Williams's master bedroom nearly two years ago.
A paramedic and one of the first state troopers to respond to a 911 call from the Williams estate, in Alexandria Township, both testified about finding Mr. Christofi lying on his left side, dead, in the bedroom. The defense has acknowledged that Mr. Williams shot Mr. Christofi, but says it was an accident.
The state's first exhibit was the double-barrel 12-gauge shotgun that Mr. Williams used in the shooting. After it was shown to the jury in State Superior Court here, prosecutors lowered the lights in the courtroom and displayed on a large screen several color photographs of Mr. Christofi's body, lying on a print rug next to a highly polished round table decorated with a large bouquet. The shotgun was visible in the photos near a bedroom wall, several feet from the body.
Prosecutors also introduced the bluish-green shirt Mr. Christofi, 55, was wearing when he was shot. The front of it was covered with a large dried bloodstain. When the shirt was removed from a paper wrapper at the prosecution table, a young woman sitting in a front row of seats reserved for Mr. Christofi's family gasped.
Mr. Williams, a 35-year-old former star for the New Jersey Nets, showed little emotion during the prosecution's presentation, sitting calmly at the defense table with his hands folded in front of him.
The state has charged him with aggravated manslaughter and manslaughter, contending that he acted recklessly and with extreme indifference to the value of human life in the shooting, which occurred after a night out with friends on Feb. 14, 2002. He is also being tried on two weapons charges and four counts of attempting to cover up the shooting and make it appear to be a suicide.
The first prosecution witness, Trooper Thomas Muehleisen, testified that Mr. Williams led him to Mr. Christofi's body after the trooper arrived at the Williams estate about 3 that morning. Trooper Muehleisen said he checked Mr. Christofi's neck for a pulse but was unable to detect one. The trooper said that as he was kneeling next to Mr. Christofi's head, Mr. Williams came over to the body, knelt down and blew air into Mr. Christofi's mouth in an apparent attempt to revive him. The trooper said Mr. Williams asked if Mr. Christofi was going to be O.K.
''I said I didn't think so,'' the trooper said in response to a question from a prosecutor, Steven C. Lember.
Later, during cross-examination by a defense lawyer, Michael Kelly, Trooper Muehleisen said Mr. Williams threw his hands in the air in frustration after the trooper told him that Mr. Christofi was dead.
Matthew Wilson, the paramedic who pronounced Mr. Christofi dead, testified later that Mr. Williams seemed troubled by the death.
In response to a question by another prosecutor, Katharine Errickson, Mr. Wilson said Mr. Williams seemed upset when he told him that Mr. Christofi was dead.
''I believe he said, 'Oh, man,''' Mr. Wilson said, adding that Mr. Williams then bowed his head and left the bedroom.
During the cross-examination of Mr. Wilson, another defense lawyer, Joseph A. Hayden, contended that Mr. Williams had been more distraught than Mr. Wilson had suggested. Mr. Hayden read a statement that the paramedic had given investigators shortly after the shooting. In it Mr. Wilson said Mr. Williams ''looked dejected and physically upset'' by the death. Mr. Wilson agreed that his wording in the statement was correct.
The prosecution contends that Mr. Williams was drinking heavily with his friends, including four members of the Harlem Globetrotters, in a restaurant an hour or two before the shooting.
Trooper Muehleisen and another trooper who arrived at the Williams estate offered contradictory testimony on that point.
Trooper Muehleisen, who said he knew Mr. Williams, testified that he did not smell alcohol on Mr. Williams's breath when they were in the bedroom. ''He did not appear to be intoxicated,'' the trooper said during the defense cross-examination.
But Trooper Melvin Sanders later testified that Mr. Williams had watery eyes, slurred speech and the smell of alcohol on his breath. He said he believed that Mr. Williams had been drinking, but conceded that Mr. Williams might have taken a drink after the shooting, not before it.
The trial resumes on Tuesday.
