Federal investigators have requested information about a penny stock called Edulink Inc. that Gov. John G. Rowland reported owning in 2000, on the theory that his friend Robert V. Matthews may be linked to the company, documents show.
But company officials said in interviews that they had no idea what that link might be.
Federal investigators have taken a keen interest in Mr. Matthews's relationship with Mr. Rowland as part of a sweeping investigation into political corruption at the state level. The two men developed a friendship long before Mr. Rowland became governor, and though some of Mr. Matthews's good fortune predates Mr. Rowland's ascent to the state's top job in 1995, he has benefited from millions of dollars in state aid to his companies and a lucrative lease from the state on one of his buildings during the Rowland years.
Two weeks ago, the Connecticut Development Authority, a quasi-public agency that fosters economic development, was ordered to produce all records concerning Mr. Matthews and companies associated with him. Earlier this week, the state's auditor's office disclosed that it, too, had been asked for records concerning ''contracts, grants, loans or financial transactions'' between state entities and Mr. Matthews and his entities, The Hartford Courant reported.
What has not been reported, however, is that one of the companies on the list supplied to the state auditors by the Federal Bureau of Investigation is Edulink, a company based in Beverly Hills, Calif., that has no visible ties to Connecticut. In the letter that accompanies the list, an agent of the F.B.I. notes that these are all entities in which Mr. Matthews ''may have a financial interest.''
Neither Mr. Matthews nor his lawyer returned phone calls seeking comment yesterday. Edulink describes itself in public filings as a ''development stage company engaged in the design and development of a seamless integrated Internet educational service called the Smart Schoolhouse system for schools and homes.''
It became a publicly traded company in 1999, adopting the ticker symbol MYIQ, and its best year was 2000, the same year Mr. Rowland reporting owning it in the reports he makes to the State Ethics Commission.
The stock hit a high in early 2000 of $1 a share, but ended the year at about 5 cents. It currently trades at fractions of a penny.
Mr. Rowland is obliged to report any shareholdings worth at least $5,000, but he is not required to disclose how much money he made on the transactions or when he bought or sold the stock, assuming it was not a gift. Ross Garber, the governor's in-house counsel, said he would have no comment on the governor's investment in Edulink.
Edulink officials say they have never tapped the Connecticut market, and Tom Murphy, a spokesman for the state's Department of Education, said he had never heard of the company or its products. ''We don't have a relationship with Edulink that we know of,'' he said.
Edulink officials said that if the governor had invested in their company, he might have lost money, as did many shareholders. ''It hasn't traded over .08 cents since I've been involved with the company,'' said Charles Guy, its chief executive. He has been involved since November 2001, and he called the stock ''very, very speculative.''
Michael Rosenfeld, a co-founder of the company, said he had no idea how the governor came to invest in his stock. ''I doubt this guy had any concept of what he was buying or what the company was doing,'' he said of the governor.
As for Mr. Matthews, Mr. Rosenfeld said he had never heard of the man, but said, ''I promise you if this is a very wealthy guy from Connecticut,'' who had some interest in Edulink, ''I would know. In fact, I should probably call him.''
