February can be a hard month for movie lovers. The studios continue their annual winter clearance sales, dumping dumbed-down damaged goods into the multiplexes to offset their Oscar contenders. A few interesting films usually straggle into view, but it is easy to become dispirited and to succumb to gloomy grumbling about the sad condition of cinema.
Fortunately the Film Society of Lincoln Center is doing its part to help New York audiences dispel their midwinter malaise. The society's fourth annual Film Comment Selects program, which starts today and runs for two weeks at the Walter Reade Theater, is an eclectic and intriguing minifestival, a collection of overlooked, underappreciated and sometimes just plain odd movies that should satisfy a wide range of tastes.
This is fitting enough, since Film Comment, the magazine whose writers and editors made the selections, is a stronghold of feisty, intelligent opinion that pushes no particular party line. Its tone of plain-spoken braininess -- sophistication without snobbery, erudition with a minimum of jargon -- reflects the vitality and variety of international film culture today.
For its part the Walter Reade program blithely mixes high art and pulp, accessibility and obscurity: there are Japanese horror films, Chinese underground digital video and science fiction works, free-form documentaries, a 42-year-old curio from a maverick American character actor and new work from global art-house luminaries like Jacques Rivette, Kiyoshi Kurosawa and André Téchiné.
Mr. Téchiné's film ''Strayed'' (''Les Égarés''), and Mr. Kurosawa's ''Bright Future,'' which were shown last year at Cannes, are both interesting, emotionally complex movies. They also offer handy, borderline-parodic catalogs of their directors' preoccupations: historical catastrophe, lush countryside, anal sex (Mr. Téchiné); and urban anomie, sullen actors and animism (Mr. Kurosawa).
Other selections, like Neil Young's wondrously eccentric ''Greendale,'' (directed by Mr. Young under the pseudonym Bernard Shakey) arrive from Toronto and Sundance. Some are being shown in advance of United States distribution; others are unlikely to ever to receive it. Liliana Cavani's ''Ripley's Game,'' an adaptation of Patricia Highsmith's novel with John Malkovich in the title role, has been floating around for a while. Though the film plays well on television (where it has turned up recently on cable, never having received a theatrical release), its unnerving, cold-blooded calm would be better experienced on the Walter Reade's big screen. Ms. Highsmith's elegant viciousness is brilliantly captured in Mr. Malkovich's slithering performance, and Ms. Caviani's chilly sensibility provides a good antidote to Anthony Minghella's overwrought and over-costumed version of ''The Talented Mr. Ripley.''
Speaking of overwrought, one of the bizarre highlights of the series is ''The World's Greatest Sinner'' a 1962 vanity extravaganza directed by Timothy Carey. Carey, who appeared in small, memorable roles in films like ''Paths of Glory'' and ''The Wild One'' (in which he sprayed beer in Marlon Brando's face) and who turned down the part of Luca Brasi in ''The Godfather,'' belongs to the line of American cinema eccentrics that includes Ed Wood and John Waters.
''Sinner,'' shot over a period of seven years in El Monte, Calif., is a fevered parable about the messianic delusions of an insurance salesman, played with bellowing glee by the director himself. To describe it as cheesy would create a false impression of smoothness and polish. It is a demented, exuberant piece of outsider art, which has found a curiously comfortable home in the tasteful confines of the Walter Reade.
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
