For the first time in more than 40 years, infant mortality rates in the United States increased in 2002. Experts said the use of new technology and drugs improved the chances of high-risk pregnancies but had yet to keep some premature babies alive much longer than their first month.
In releasing the death statistics for 2002, the federal Centers for Disease Control and Prevention noted the increase, from 6.8 deaths per 1,000 births in 2001 to 7.0 deaths in 2002.
It listed several conditions that have caused high-risk pregnancies and births; fertility treatments that have led to higher rates of multiple births; complications, including low-birth-weight babies; and premature infants.
One statistician said that the increase appeared to be an anomaly, a matter of the infant mortality rate reflecting the mounting complications from high-tech and high-risk pregnancies that have become more prevalent in the last 10 to 15 years.
The statistical breakdown released yesterday also included an increase in life expectancy, from 77.2 years in 2001 to 77.4 years in 2002. That rate has been climbing steadily for decades, and the latest jump accompanied a dip in some of the leading causes of death, including heart disease, stroke and cancer.
Life expectancy grew for all racial and ethnic groups with the exception of American Indians and non-Hispanic whites. It also rose among both sexes, though the divide between men and women has narrowed, with women now averaging 5.2 years over men.
''The life expectancy rate did pretty much what we expected it to do,'' said Ken Kochanek, a statistician with the disease control centers and an author of the report. ''It sounds like a small increase, but it's actually fairly large. This was good news, with the exception of infant mortality.''
With better prenatal and newborn care, infant mortality rates have gradually -- and at times rapidly -- dwindled over much of the last century. From the late 1960's to the early 1980's, the decline averaged almost 5 percent a year, before slowing down to about 2 or 3 percent in the last two decades.
Scientists were not expecting 2002 to be any different. But predicting the direction of the trend has become trickier as women have been putting off motherhood until later in life and are now more reliant on assisted-reproduction techniques like in-vitro fertilization, two factors that have resulted in riskier pregnancies.
In-vitro methods mean a greater likelihood of having multiple babies, which are more likely to be premature or underweight.
At the same time, better drugs and improved care may have helped women give birth to babies who might not have survived pregnancy in previous years.
Joyce A. Martin, another disease-control centers statistician and also an author of the new report, pointed to one class of drugs in particular, surfactants, which are now widely used to treat premature babies with respiratory problems.
But while better drugs are keeping some infants alive longer, they are not always saving them. The latest surge in infant deaths is largely the result of more and more babies dying in the first month of life -- and particularly in the first week, Ms. Martin said.
''It's very clear that these appear to be all pregnancy-related, as opposed to later deaths caused by external causes, like sudden infant death syndrome,'' she said. ''It's always a matter of concern when you see an increase in some indicator of public health like this.''
About four million babies are born in the United States each year. In 2002, 27,977 of them died, up from 27,568 deaths the year before.
But scientists at the disease centers are cautioning that the jump may be just a blip instead of the beginning of a trend.
According to early data for 2003, the infant mortality rate is expected to go back down.
Dr. Dennis P. Andrulis, a research professor at SUNY Downstate, has studied rates of low birth weight across the country and found that they climbed three times as fast in suburbs as they did in cities in the 1990's. The latest figures, Dr. Andrulis said, might be tied to an economic downturn that ''took root in 2000 or 2001 but only manifested itself in 2002.''
He added, ''As people in the cities with limited access to health care start facing higher rates of unemployment and poverty, they worry more about putting food on the table and less about going to see the doctor.''
That, combined with the birth complications among women taking fertility drugs, might have spurred the rise in premature and underweight babies, and ultimately mortality rates, he said.
The findings were based on data culled from annual birth records and from 96 percent of state death certificates in 2002.
