Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said on Wednesday that he would probably put off making any significant changes to the city's cabaret law this year. He had drawn criticism from bar and nightclub owners who opposed his administration's efforts to replace the law with different regulations.
Mr. Bloomberg spoke at a news conference as he made the rounds on Capitol Hill trying to persuade Congressional leaders to give the city what he called its fair share of money for transportation projects and antiterrorism programs.
Asked about the cabaret law, he said: ''I think it's probably likely that we won't get to it this year. I want to make sure we get it right.''
The Bloomberg administration has sought to eliminate the city's 78-year-old law, which requires a license for any establishment that allows dancing. In the past, bars have been padlocked when a few patrons were caught swaying to music, and the Giuliani administration often used the law as a weapon against clubs deemed nuisances.
But under a proposal that Mr. Bloomberg's consumer affairs commissioner, Gretchen Dykstra, has been shopping around to community boards across the city, the cabaret license would be replaced with a more general license for all bars, clubs and restaurants that can hold more than 75 patrons in residential neighborhoods, and more than 200 in commercial neighborhoods, and that stay open past 1 a.m. and have substantial noise. In addition, the proposal would require many bars and clubs that choose to get a night life license to pay for soundproofing.
But the trade group that represents many bars and nightclubs opposes those changes, contending that bars that chose not to get a license would be required to close by 1 a.m. The group also said the proposal would make it easier for the city to revoke the licenses of bars, clubs and restaurants.
Finally, the owners complained that the Bloomberg proposal would make it much easier for the city to fine or padlock establishments. For instance, a license could be revoked if there were more than one serious assault inside the bar, and a bar could be closed for 10 days after three sanitation violations.
Given the outcry, Mr. Bloomberg most likely decided that he did not need the headache that the proposed changes to the law would have given him, even though the current cabaret law is unpopular among many bar owners. The mayor has already been hammered over the last year by bar, club and restaurant owners, as well as by their patrons, over the smoking ban he and the City Council imposed.
In discussing the matter with reporters, the mayor indicated that he felt changes to the law were needed. ''The city should not be in the business of deciding what goes on, whether there is dancing or not dancing,'' he said. ''We have dance police,'' he continued. ''This is craziness.''
His Washington trip was carefully timed: Congress is set to consider the budget President Bush proposed for the 2005 fiscal year. New York lawmakers in both parties want to make sure the city is not shortchanged as Congress decides how to spend billions of dollars in antiterrorism and transportation aid.
Congressional leaders seemed to welcome Mr. Bloomberg's visit, even though he had provoked dismay among fellow Republicans in Washington when he once seemed to suggest that New Yorkers should not contribute money to national Republicans who are not helpful to the city. He did not receive any firm commitments beyond general reassurances that Congressional leaders would keep New York's needs in mind.
