The play began with Carlos Boozer driving toward the basket. Didn't he see Kenyon Martin?
Boozer, either undaunted or naïve, went up for the shot, and a rising Martin slammed it downward as if he were playing Ping-Pong. The ball flew into the hands of Richard Jefferson, who quickly tossed it to Jason Kidd, who raced downcourt before passing to Kerry Kittles for a driving layup.
That third-quarter sequence at Gund Arena epitomized Wednesday night's victory for the Nets. With a smothering defense that left LeBron James and the rest of the Cleveland Cavaliers stupefied and a running game that appeared fit for track and field, the Nets put themselves and their hot new coach, Lawrence Frank, in the record books.
Winning their 10th straight game, 105-85, the Nets (31-20) made the baby-faced Frank only the third coach to begin his N.B.A. career with nine straight victories. The 33-year-old Frank, who replaced Byron Scott on Jan. 26, joined Kurt Rambis and Buddy Jeannette in accomplishing that feat. Rambis did it with the 1998-99 Los Angeles Lakers, Jeannette with the 1947-48 Baltimore Bullets.
''Naismith and Wooden, they would all be proud,'' Kidd said, referring to James Naismith, who founded the game of basketball in 1891, and John Wooden, the legendary coach at U.C.L.A. ''As a team, we're happy for him. At the same time, he doesn't like the credit.''
Frank deflected the praise like one of his players defending a Cavaliers pass.
''It doesn't mean anything to me,'' Frank said. ''As long as we win, that's all that matters. All the records we care about are team records.''
The Nets, who watched Kittles score every one of his game-high 27 points in the second half, set those, too. All 10 victories have been by double figures, making the Nets the first team since Red Auerbach's 1946-47 Washington Capitals to win so many games in a row by so wide a margin.
They also matched their second-longest winning streak in franchise history and tied their all-time record with five straight road victories. When the Nets play at home against Atlanta next Wednesday, following their six-day rest over the All-Star Gamr weekend, they will have a chance to tie the record for the club's longest winning streak.
They are counting on the Kidd-inspired team motto of ''It Doesn't Stop'' to keep them from getting complacent over the break.
''The motto is once we got it going, we don't need to be satisfied,'' said Kidd, who had 14 points and 12 assists. ''We've been down in the valley on a five-game losing streak. We've been there, so we don't want to go back there. Once we got on a roll, Coach gave me a practice to come up with a motto, and I did the best I could do without putting a cuss word in it.''
Frank still uses the Princeton offense, but he has the Nets running more post-ups and relying more on motion than the pick-and-roll. On the other end, the Nets' defense has improved drastically.
''They're more intense defensively,'' Cavaliers Coach Paul Silas said. ''Their transition game is the best I've seen. They're really playing super basketball right now. It seems like Jason and Kenyon Martin are really playing with a purpose.''
Their purpose on Wednesday was to slow down James, which they did for the second time in as many meetings this season. After holding James to 14 points on 6-of-19 shooting in his visit to the Meadowlands in January, the Nets closed in on him again, making him look more like a rookie bust than a rookie sensation. Off with his jumper and unable to get to the rim, James missed 11 of 13 shots and finished with 9 points.
Instead, Kittles was the star. After going scoreless while attempting just one shot in the first half, Kittles hit three 3-pointers in breaking loose for 20 points in the third quarter.
Martin led the Nets with 21 points, 9 rebounds and 3 blocks, and New Jersey got 32 points on its fast break.
As a rookie coach and a noted non-athlete, Frank is entering uncharted territory for himself. Before the game, he admitted that his only other significant accomplishment in sports came as a Little Leaguer in Teaneck.
''I held one record,'' said Frank, who had the future major leaguer Doug Glanville as a teammate. ''I never struck out in a year. I peaked when I was 11.''
Clearly, that is no longer the case.
PRO BASKETBALL
