George C. Wolfe will step down as producer of the Public Theater next season, he said yesterday. Mr. Wolfe has spent nearly a decade trying to build on the fierce commitment of the theater's founder, Joseph Papp, to new playwrights.
With his charismatic presence and creative success, Mr. Wolfe has also established something of a cult of personality at the Public, in the tradition of the legendary Papp. And as the leading black stage director in the country and an openly gay man, he embodied the Public's determination to reach diverse artists and audiences.
His is the third high-level cultural post to open in New York in the last two weeks. Robert J. Harth, artistic and executive director of Carnegie Hall, died Jan. 30 at 47, and Joseph Volpe announced his retirement as general manager of the Metropolitan Opera on Monday.
Mr. Wolfe, 49, said in an interview that he was seeking a more purely creative life, having had to balance his artistic interests with running the Public's five stages on Lafayette Street, its Joe's Pub cabaret and its summer productions in Central Park.
He said he wanted more time to write plays, screenplays and novels. ''I actually missed being a full-time artist and having the chance to write,'' he said. ''I was curious as to what would come out of me.''
Since he took the job in August 1993, he said, ''the one thing I haven't been able to figure out is how to be a writer and a producer.''
''The Public Theater requires one to be very public, and writing requires one to be very private,'' he continued. ''You have to be available to the invisible voices that are swirling around you.''
Mr. Wolfe informed the Public's board and its staff of his decision yesterday, he said, and plans to leave in the fall. A committee of the board will start a national search for Mr. Wolfe's replacement within the month, said Kenneth B. Lerer, the board chairman.
''I'm totally sure we'll be able to attract a world-class person to do this, and it will be a thorough, good search,'' Mr. Lerer said.
There is no list of successors, he said, and the board plans to hire a search firm.
Mr. Wolfe will remain a theater trustee and continue to direct there, Mr. Lerer said. Mr. Wolfe is scheduled to direct the Public's park production of ''A Midsummer Night's Dream'' in honor of the theater's 50th anniversary in summer 2005.
The Public Theater has had several years of financial problems, in part from losing $11 million on two Broadway productions, ''The Wild Party'' and ''On the Town,'' and the economic downturn that followed the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001. There has been turmoil over staff changes and board defections.
But Mr. Wolfe said he was leaving a Public Theater that was on the mend. ''The institution has fully recovered, as much as any institution can in this climate,'' he said.
The theater's past three seasons have included critical hits like ''Topdog/Underdog,'' directed by Mr. Wolfe and written by Suzan-Lori Parks, whom he discovered and nurtured. The play won the Pulitzer Prize for drama in 2002 and moved to Broadway. ''Elaine Stritch at Liberty,'' a revue Mr. Wolfe directed, moved to Broadway and won a Tony Award. Richard Greenberg's ''Take Me Out'' also won a Tony, and the Tony Kushner musical ''Caroline, or Change,'' which Mr. Wolfe directed, is moving to Broadway May 2.
The theater, with an operating budget of $12 million, is back on more solid footing financially. As of Aug. 31 the endowment was up to nearly $16.7 million from $14.4 million in 2002, according to the most recent audited statement, released to the board last week. The theater has $5 million in cash available for operations, up from $3.3 million the previous year. The company has no debt, said Mara Manus, the executive director. The theater ended the fiscal year in August with a deficit of $200,000, down from $570,000. ''It's a very healthy picture,'' Mr. Lerer said.
The board credits Ms. Manus, who came from the Ford Foundation in 2002, with much of the economic rebound. As part of a new strategic plan, Ms. Manus shelved plans for $50 million building renovation, which included a 499-seat theater.
Mr. Wolfe is known for running the theater with a strong hand, dooming earlier efforts to collaborate with someone of comparable authority on the business side. Ms. Manus's predecessor, Fran Reiter, lasted less than a year. But Mr. Wolfe said he and Ms. Manus had a good relationship. ''We've had to learn each other's language,'' he said. ''But I never felt that there was a power dynamic going on or that I had to protect the fundamental vision of the institution against someone who thought it should be different.''
Ms. Manus was equally complimentary. ''When we've had to have the hard conversations, we've gone there,'' she said. ''And we've had fun.''
Mr. Wolfe ''has been wanting to write and to do projects in the commercial arena,'' Mr. Lerer said. ''It's just not possible to do that and also be producer of the Public.'' At the end of February, for example, Mr. Wolfe is going to Los Angeles for a month to direct an HBO version of ''Lackawanna Blues,'' a play by Ruben Santiago-Hudson produced at the Public in 2001.
Mr. Wolfe's accomplishments include ''The Colored Museum,'' a satire he wrote about black stereotypes, and ''Jelly's Last Jam,'' which he wrote and directed. He directed ''Angels in America,'' Mr. Kushner's drama, and ''Bring In da Noise, Bring In da Funk,'' created with Savion Glover.
The job, Mr. Wolfe said, requires someone who feels strongly about bringing mainstream attention to artists in the margins. ''There is a strange kind of parental pride when 'Topdog' ends up on Broadway, or 'Elaine Stritch,' '' he said.
''It takes a profound passion that what you're doing is important,'' he added. ''If anybody has that, they can do the job.''
