The competition for cockles had grown stiff over the last year on Morecambe Bay, where 19 Chinese workers drowned last week after getting trapped by swiftly rising tides.
The Chinese workers were first spotted working the bay in August, when dozens turned up to harvest the beds of mollusks. They were ill-equipped and unaware of the dangers, locals said, and before long, the police hustled them off the beach.
But in December, they were back, near Bolton le Sands, driven there from Liverpool by work-gang masters and their crews to pluck the cockles from under the sand.
The long stretch of bay became so inundated with cocklers, mostly because other beds in Britain had been closed off and on for environmental reasons, that the fisheries department began to require permits. They proved easy to get, and even easier to dodge. Enforcement on the bay, in northwest England, was virtually nonexistent, cocklers said.
''People didn't want them there,'' said Alan Griffiths, a cockler who works for Wirral Seafoods, and carries a portable Global Positioning System device to make sure he never gets caught by surprise by the tides.
No longer a hobby for beach combers, cockling has blossomed into a $10 million industry, which is one reason why work-gang masters are sending illegal workers to ply the sands two miles from shore. The cockles, a seafood delicacy similar to clams, are exported to Holland for processing, then shipped on to Spain and the Far East.
''There is a lot of money out there,'' said Andrew Towers, who owns the farm that fronts the bay.
The deaths of the Chinese immigrants have renewed calls for tougher laws against trafficking and exploitation by rogue work-gang masters who pack the workers into squalid houses and farm them out to low-wage jobs in agriculture, construction, catering and, now, fisheries.
''Some of the workers had probably'' paid exorbitant sums to reach the United Kingdom, Detective Superintendent Mick Gradwell, who is leading the investigation, said at a news conference.
For the backbreaking, dangerous job of picking cockles, they were paid a pittance by work-gang masters, as little as $3.30 a day, Mr. Gradwell said, and they were given no safety equipment other than waterproof gear and rakes to claw at the sand.
The promise of money has led to scuffles between local cockle pickers, who complained that the Chinese groups were reckless and ill-informed. At least once, the feud got out of hand when several British men set fire to a large pile of cockles picked by the Chinese. Some in the group chased the Chinese workers with rakes and beat one of them.
''They brought him back like a trophy,'' said Mr. Towers, a witness.
At home, there was little respite for the workers; they lived in Liverpool, a city with the oldest Chinese community in Britain, in four-  and five-bedroom terrace houses crammed with 40 others.
The police are trying to unravel how, exactly, the Chinese workers wound up here, in Morecambe Bay, the second largest bay in Britain and a stretch of water so dangerous that guides have walked people across it for centuries.
Seven people have been arrested and questioned on suspicion of manslaughter, but have not yet been charged. Two Englishmen, a father and son who run the Liverpool Bay Fishing Company, turned themselves in to the police on Monday evening and are being questioned but, through their lawyer, deny any involvement.
