Human cloning, and stem cell medicine, the goal of the cloning experiment being reported today by scientists in South Korea, have long been the subject of intense political and religious debate in the United States.
Indeed, advocates for stem cell research say it is not surprising that the advance was made overseas, because opposition to such research is so strong in this country.
A year ago, the House of Representatives voted to outlaw all human-cloning experiments. The bill was intended to ban both reproductive cloning, the kind intended to make babies, and ''therapeutic cloning,'' the type performed in South Korea to produce stem cells that might be used for treatment of disease.
Proponents of the bill called cloning experiments of either type ghoulish, immoral and dangerous, but others argued that it was immoral to prevent research that might ultimately help people with incurable ailments like Alzheimer's disease, diabetes and spinal cord injuries.
A version of the House bill was subsequently introduced in the Senate, but so was a rival bill that separated the two types of cloning, and would have banned cloning to create babies while allowing it to produce stem cells. The Senate did not vote on either bill in 2003.
As a result, the United States has no federal laws regarding cloning, unlike Britain, which has banned reproductive cloning while allowing research on therapeutic cloning.
Most scientists and even ardent supporters of therapeutic cloning agree that reproductive cloning should be banned, saying that it is ethically unacceptable and that there are potential health risks to children conceived in this way.
But opponents of cloning reply that the therapeutic research starts down a slippery slope. ''This is a move toward creating new human lives solely to destroy them in research,'' said Richard M. Doerflinger, deputy director for pro-life activities at the United States Conference of Catholic Bishops. He termed cloning ''the ultimate way of treating life as an object, as an instrument to an end.''
Supporters of therapeutic cloning disagree. ''While those opposed to medical research may argue that this work could lead us closer to human reproductive cloning, it's just not the case,'' said Daniel Perry, president of the Coalition for the Advancement of Medical Research.
Mr. Perry added that there is a ''clear, bright line'' that separates therapeutic cloning from reproductive cloning. The dividing line, he said, is implantation in the womb, which does not occur in therapeutic cloning.
Sources of stem cells in the United States are limited. As a result of a decision made by President Bush in 2001, institutions that receive government grants for stem-cell research can work with only certain cell lines that had already been created when the decision was made. At the time, the government estimated that 70 to 80 lines, each one a colony derived from a single embryo, would be available. But only 15 lines are now listed on the Web site of the National Institutes of Health.
Dr. Robert Goldstein, chief medical officer at the Juvenile Diabetes Research Foundation, which supports therapeutic cloning, said 15 lines were not enough, because they do not offer enough genetic diversity. Equally important, he noted, some of the cell lines seem to lend themselves more to one type of research than to another. Some are better for growing nerve cells, while others are more inclined to turn into pancreas cells, he said. Researchers want to experiment with more varieties.
In a position paper in September, the diabetes group called research efforts in this country disappointing and suggested that government restrictions had discouraged many scientists from even trying to work with stem cells.
