HERE'S a radical thought. Orchids. They seem to be the juggernaut of flowers these days. Orchid shows. Orchid thieves. Books and films are made about them. Perfumers have figured out how to capture their fragrances. So, instead of giving your loved one a dozen long-stemmed roses that smell like a refrigerator, why not give him (or her) a fragrant orchid?
But be aware of the risks. Orchids are suggestive, with their glossy lips and throats and tongues that can flip an amorous pollinator into some deep chamber. Some are about as subtle as spike heels or stockings with garter belts, others demure as a glance. So it is a good idea to study the face of the orchid, to divine what message you are sending.
Then there is fragrance. Orchid flowers give off a complex mix of volatile oils, like the scent of vanilla (you know, of course, that vanilla comes from the vanilla orchid), cinnamon, chocolate and, for the junk-food lover, corn chips. While many, like the white phalaenopsis orchid, which shows up in design magazines, are not scented, there are 20,00O that are. Some smell fishy, others like rotten meat. Some are as light as a whiff of lemon, others as heavy as hyacinths.
And what smells heavenly to one person can turn off another. So, it is important to know your lover's nose. Otherwise, your Valentine's Day gift might get tossed into the trash.
If you hit the jackpot with the right look, and the right scent, then you have just saddled your loved one with the responsibility of owning a live orchid. Like falling in love with a puppy, adopting an orchid means someone is going to have to start feeding and watering. Orchids do not need walking, but they do need sun and humidity and a drop in temperature at night. A fan is always appreciated. Some might need grow lights.
''This is how crazy it can get,'' said Steven Frowine, who was standing in his basement in New Hartford, Conn. He was holding up a lady-slipper orchid, or paphilopedilum, called Langley Pride. ''It took me 26 years to get this to bloom again,'' he said.
The plant was not even fragrant, but it led Mr. Frowine down the orchid path to the ones that are, like miniature cattleya hybrids. A fragrant phalaenopsis, Caribbean Sunset, bore little rose-color flowers with a sweet, rosy fragrance. And though those orchids may look exotic, many of them are widely available for about $20 to $45 -- a lot less than a dozen long-stemmed red roses on Valentine's Day.
Mr. Frowine is so smitten with fragrant orchids that he is writing a book about them for Timber Press. His basement is filled with propagation tanks and stands of plants under grow lights.
So be careful. It can all start with a simple gift on Valentine's Day and end with your sitting alone on the couch -- while your lover is cooing over the beauties in the cellar.
''And before you know it, you're building a greenhouse,'' said Jochen Heydel, a perfumer who lives in Mahwah, N.J. ''So put yourself on alert.''
Mr. Heydel, who has made a 40-year career with his nose, brought it close to a miltonidium -- a cross between a miltonia and an oncidium orchid -- which was blooming on his dining room table. Its arching stems were full of tiny half-inch pink and yellow flowers. He closed his eyes and sniffed, with extreme concentration.
''To me, it smells like nice fresh spring flowers,'' he said, his eyes still closed. ''First, I get a green note. Grassy.''
Then, after more sniffs: ''A little soapy.''
And even more: ''A rose note. Lily of the valley.'' He opened his eyes. ''And there's a violet note underneath.''
A fragrance comes from the mixture of many chemicals, all with a different volatility, or evaporation point. ''That's what makes it so interesting,'' Mr. Heydel said. ''Because they are evaporating almost in parallel.''
The most volatile, like citrusy ones, are noticeable on top; the floral scents, like rose, lily and jasmine, in the middle.
Mr. Heydel, who judges fragrant orchids for the Greater New York Orchid Society's annual show (which will be at Rockefeller Center from April 14 to 18), has started to grow fragrant orchids in his sunny living room. They thrive, without grow lights, in a southwest-facing window. His plant stand has its own microclimate. It is shrouded with a clear plastic cloak that he bought at the Home Depot. And the little fragrant miltonidium must be happy: it has been blooming for three weeks.
Compare that satisfaction with a dozen long-stemmed roses. ''Cut flowers are dead flowers,'' Mr. Heydel said. ''And they die even faster if you forget to water. Some people, you give them flowers, a kiss and a hug, and they put the flowers in a vase and in all their excitement forget to add water.'' Those must be some kisses.
So sensitive is Mr. Heydel's nose, he says that people with red hair smell like buttermilk to him, and people with dark hair have a nuttier aroma.
Mr. Heydel has spent the last three years creating fragrances for Symrise, the German company, which has an office in Totowa, N.J. He loves the smell of apples because he used to pick them when he was a child in his grandparents' orchard near Leipzig, Germany. ''My grandparents had an old wood stove with a metal plate on top,'' he said. ''We baked apples on this plate, and that smell I never lost.''
Many fragrant orchids have food associations. Sharry Baby, an oncidium with an inch-and-a-half mahogany flower, smells like chocolate. Lycaste locusta, which has a green lady-slipperlike flower, smells like Granny Smith apples. Another orchid, Lycaste aromatica, which is yellow with dots of red, smells like cinnamon. ''Exactly like Red Hots,'' Mr. Heydel said.
Some orchids, like Dendrobium kingianum, which has an intense, hyacinthlike fragrance, may be overwhelming. ''It's extremely powerful,'' he said. Some people get a headache from it.
Eric Hansen, in his book ''Orchid Fever,'' describes how the judges at the New York Orchid Show reacted to one scented orchid, the Vanda dearii. ''I put my face near the lush yellow flowers, and my nose was immediately bathed in a warm scent of vanilla and cinnamon,'' he writes. A woman next to him was a bit blunter: ''Mm, now that's a flower that just makes you want to take your clothes off and roll around on it.'' A man whispered, ''Ah . . . just like a good woman.''
A corn chip orchid would probably not have that effect, but you never know. Of course, some orchids, like the phalaenopsis, are usually not fragrant, so if you go shopping, use your sniffer or, if the orchid is still in bud, ask the sales clerk.
J&amp;L Orchids, in Easton, Conn., sells hundreds of orchid varieties, many of them miniatures and many fragrant. Last week, Marguerite Webb, one of the three owners, showed some of those that are easy to grow. A yellow oncidium known as Twinkle Fragrant Fantasy sported hundreds of little yellow flowers with a spicy, musky scent. ''Sometimes it's a little chocolaty,'' Ms. Webb said. She also sells a red form of Twinkle.
Dendrochilum glumaceum had a long feathery white flower that smells like curry. She also had a pink Dendrobium kingianum, with a bit of violet on its lip. It was intensely fragrant. ''And it's a little soapy,'' Ms. Webb said.
If you are interested in more subtle bloomers, you might try a cymbidium. Maisie Orchids, a nursery in San Gabriel, Calif., specializes in fragrant Chinese cymbidiums. Teresa Fung, the owner, said her favorites include Cymbidium ensifolium, which has a lemony scent with a touch of jasmine, and C. sinense, which has a light, sweet scent.
Other orchid species, which are pollinated at night, do not waste energy sending out any fragrance during the day. So judges put them in a dark closet until they are ready for sniffing. Usually pollinated by moths, many night-loving orchids, like angraecums, have long spidery spurs full of nectar, and a jasminelike fragrance. But during the day, they do not smell at all. Most of those can be bought for $18 to $25, but those cloud-forest orchids need a greenhouse.
J&amp;L produced a masdevallia hybrid called Confetti, which has a sweet, spicy scent. ''Like Necco wafers, which remind me of my childhood,'' Ms. Webb said. Maxillaria tenufolia, a grassy plant with dark red flowers among the foliage, smells like coconut.
And Polystachya bella has little parasol-shape flowers that smell like Lemon Pledge.
By now, you probably have the idea. If you are not up for the risk, and the responsibility, better stick to the roses. And since it is Thursday, you had better hurry.
Letting Yourself Be Led by the Nose
SOME new hybrids, like Sharry Baby and miniature fragrant cattleyas, are widely available at the Home Depot and other large outlets for about $25. Anyone would be happy to get one for Valentine's Day and need not fret about complicated instructions. Orchids thrive with bright, diffuse light, in a room 70 degrees during the day and 60 degrees at night. Increase humidity with water-filled trays of pebbles or use a humidifier.
Miniature orchids or species with enchanting scents -- orchids that have not been hybridized -- can be ordered from J&amp;L Orchids, in Easton, Conn.; www.jlorchids.com; (203) 261-3772. Blooming plants are $25 to $45, and the owners are helpful with advice. They also provide overnight delivery.
Maisie Orchids in San Gabriel, Calif., specializes in Chinese cymbidiums and paphilopedilums; average price about $40 (www.maisieorchids.com.; 626-332-4599). Ms. Fung is happy to answer any questions, especially by e-mail: info@maisieorchids.com.
Norman's Orchids, a family-run nursery in Montclair, Calif., grows a large selection of fragrant orchids; prices $35 to $85 (www.orchids.com; 909-627-9515). Norman's will ship overnight.
And the Orchid Society (www.orchidweb.org) has links to suppliers all over the country.
NATURE
