Just days after he vowed not to run a ''scorched earth'' campaign that could hurt the eventual Democratic nominee, Howard Dean lit into Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts on Wednesday, saying that if Mr. Kerry wins the nomination, ''once again we may have to settle for the lesser of two evils.''
Dr. Dean accused Mr. Kerry and President Bush of using the same ''politically corrupt fund-raising mechanisms.'' He pointed to campaign-finance reports that Robert G. Torricelli, the former Democratic senator from New Jersey, raised money for both Mr. Kerry's campaign and a group that ran advertisements attacking Dr. Dean in Iowa.
Mr. Torricelli, who once ran the Senate Democrats' campaign committee, abandoned his 2002 re-election bid just five weeks before the balloting amid accusations of ethical misconduct over his relationship with a fund-raiser.
''I think Senator Kerry is clearly not the best person to carry the banner of the Democrats in this race because he's behaved so much like a Republican,'' Dr. Dean told reporters here before flying home to Vermont for his son's high school hockey game.
''That's just what we don't need heading the Democratic Party,'' added Dr. Dean, who has made Mr. Kerry's relationship with lobbyists the centerpiece of his effort to revive his faltering campaign here in Wisconsin. ''When you act the way Senator Kerry does, he appears to be more like George Bush than he does like a Democrat.''
Dr. Dean never specified how Mr. Kerry's behavior was similar to the president's, other than to paint both men as beholden to wealthy donors and special interests, nor did he say which fund-raising practices of Mr. Bush's he saw as corrupt.
David Wade, a spokesman for Mr. Kerry, avoided a direct response to the criticism regarding Mr. Torricelli, instead pointing to the ''large majorities of Americans from Iowa to Tennessee'' who have voted for Mr. Kerry in recent weeks.
''Another day, another Dean act of divisive desperation,'' Mr. Wade wrote in an e-mail statement. ''These inaccurate and indefensible character attacks need to end.''
In an interview with CBS News, Dr. Dean also said Senator John Edwards of North Carolina would be a stronger nominee ''because when Senator Kerry's record is examined by the public at a more leisurely time, when we're not having primaries every week, he's going to turn out to be just like George Bush.''
Mr. Edwards, told of Dr. Dean's comments about his chances in a general election, said, ''I think that he's a very wise man.''
Despite increasing signs from some of Dr. Dean's best-known supporters, including Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa, that they might switch horses if he fails to win Wisconsin's primary next week, Dr. Dean said again on Wednesday, ''We're going on from Wisconsin, win or lose.''
Dr. Dean's assault on Mr. Kerry, his harshest yet, came as many in the party have pleaded with him and the other remaining candidates to drop out of the contest altogether, or at least to avoid negative campaigning, for fear of weakening their eventual nominee. Dr. Dean himself has repeatedly pledged in recent days not to run a ''quixotic'' or ''scorched earth'' campaign for the nomination and to support whoever wins it; he has explained his hammering of Mr. Kerry as simply pointing out differences in their records.
''We now see that Senator Kerry is not only supporting the Bush agenda on the war,'' Dr. Dean said, ''supporting the Bush agenda on No Child Left Behind, but Senator Kerry apparently also apparently supports the kind of corrupt fund-raising, politically corrupt fund-raising mechanisms, that George Bush has also employed. This is exactly what we don't need in Washington. If we have to become like Republicans in order to beat them, then I think the Democratic Party needs to change fundamentally. And I don't think John Kerry is capable of changing the political culture in Washington.''
Mr. Torricelli, who did not return calls for comment, gave $50,000 from his Senate campaign fund to a secretive group called Americans for Jobs, Health Care and Progressive Values, which ran a television advertisement in December that showed a close-up of Osama bin Laden and questioned Dr. Dean's ability to compete with Mr. Bush on foreign policy. Though Mr. Torricelli has no formal role in the Kerry campaign, he has solicited donations on its behalf and met with its fund-raisers.
''The link is unassailable,'' Dr. Dean asserted at a news conference here on Wednesday, adding that Mr. Torricelli ''raised money from the same donors'' to support Mr. Kerry and the anti-Dean group.
Dr. Dean refused to answer a question later about how he knew the donors to both efforts were the same; Jay Carson, his spokesman, said he could not name specific people who had contributed to both, but ''the point is that it's the same cabal of Washington establishment insiders who are working to destroy Governor Dean's campaign.''
Dr. Dean's comments came as he received the endorsement of Local 212 of the American Federation of Teachers, representing 1,700 workers at the Milwaukee Area Technical College. The chapter gave its backing despite the one-million-member national union's support of Mr. Kerry.
At one point, Dr. Dean accidentally referred to his rival as ''President Kerry.'' He caught himself and fairly spat, ''President Kerry, please, spare us.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
