Last month, Chris Wingert was awarded the Hermann Trophy as the top player in college soccer, having led St. John's to the N.C.A.A. championship game against Indiana.
On Tuesday night, Wingert found himself in the far harsher environment of international soccer, playing before 60,000 Mexican fans at Jalisco Stadium. He was just another inexperienced defender on a United States team with a vulnerable back line that was exploited repeatedly. A 4-0 rout by Mexico will keep the Americans out of the 2004 Summer Olympics in Athens.
''Devastating for us,'' was how Wingert described the defeat of the under-23 national team. ''Embarrassing, I guess.''
In truth, the score could have been worse if Mexico had more efficiently finished its chances, especially with the Americans playing a man short for the final 15 minutes after defender Nat Borchers received a second yellow card.
It was going to take a perfect game to defeat Mexico before a throbbing home crowd in the Olympic qualifying tournament. But the United States got far less than perfection, particularly from the callow back line. The Americans conceded 10 goals in four matches, and few teams that are so porous at the back survive at the international level.
For the first time since 1980, the United States did not qualify for the Olympics. The soccer team will join the United States baseball team in its absence from the Summer Games. Both had been considered medal candidates.
''Not playing in the Olympics is definitely a huge disappointment for our team and our country,'' the 21-year-old Wingert said.
The failure stings in particular because the United States has established itself as perhaps the dominant soccer nation in the North American, Central American and Caribbean region, and has routinely qualified for important international competitions at the youth and senior levels.
The defeat Tuesday underscored the concern that many of the young United States players are not getting the same daily professional competition as their Mexican counterparts, Coach Glenn Myernick said.
This is a familiar complaint and is growing louder. Myernick pointed out that a number of his under-23 players are backups in Major League Soccer, which lacks reserve teams, a staple in many countries. Coaches grouse that players who are not starters get little chance to improve because they cannot get sufficient playing time.
''Why do we bring kids out of college if we're not going to provide them with a competitive environment?'' Myernick said Wednesday.
A player like Wingert runs the risk of stagnating if he sits on the bench next season for the Columbus Crew, which drafted him last month.
''We have players playing international soccer that aren't getting enough time with their club soccer,'' Myernick said. ''That's a reality with our system that we have to address and find a way to improve.''
He noted the case of the under-23 defender Zak Whitbread, who plays with the reserve team of Liverpool in the English Premier League. The daily competition Whitbread receives is comparable to that of any of the American players in M.L.S., Myernick said, adding that Liverpool's reserve roster is worth nearly $30 million.
''Those people are playing for their places every day,'' Myernick said. ''They're not playing 4 v. 4 plus one the day after the first team plays in M.L.S. just to have something to do.''
Whitbread started at left back in the first match of the Olympic qualifying tournament, but he hurt his leg. Of the other potential team members, defensive midfielder Ricardo Clark of the MetroStars sustained a pretournament injury and defender Oguchi Onyewu could not gain release from his Belgian club.
This left the Americans to face Mexico with a defense with two college players -- Wingert of St. John's and Chad Marshall of Stanford -- along with Ricky Lewis, primarily a reserve with the Los Angeles Galaxy, and Borchers, who started most of last season for the Colorado Rapids after a teammate was injured.
Wingert's inexperience at left back was evident in the 26th minute, when the Mexican captain, Diego Martínez, launched a cross from the right flank onto the head of his teammate Rafael Marquez Lugo for a point-blank goal. A minute later, Martínez was left unmarked again, and he lifted a cross that floated into the upper left corner.
''Chris is on a big learning curve, going from college soccer to now trying play as a pro and playing a tournament of this magnitude,'' Myernick said, referring to the speed and quick transition of the international game. ''I think he needs to be much more of a proactive defender instead of being maybe such a reactive defender, but that will all come with time. I think he's going to be fine.''
Wingert will get another chance to start on Thursday, when the United States plays Honduras for third place. He said he enjoyed playing before 60,000 fans, taking exception, however, to the chants of ''Osama! Osama!'' by Mexico supporters.
''It's inappropriate,'' Wingert said. ''It's a shame it comes to that, especially when so many people from this country are dying to get into our country, literally. We support them, buy a ton of their products, keep their businesses going; we buy, I think, more products from them than the rest of the world combined. It's kind of a shame they're going to do that.''
SOCCER
