'It's a Living,' A Play in One Act
Scene I. A passageway between 55th and 56th Streets near City Center. MICHAEL NOURI -- a handsome, graying actor in his 50's who is about to open in the Encores! production of ''Can-Can'' with PATTI LUPONE -- is walking with Reporter.
Reporter: So what's your big number?
Michael: ''I Am in Love.''
Reporter: That's bigger than ''C'est Magnifique''?
Michael: (Big voice echoing off the ceiling, singing as he walks) ''I am dejected, I am depressed, yet resurrected and sailing the crest.''
Reporter: Wow! What a voice! And I know you aren't miked.
Michael: (Even bigger voice, now dancing) ''What's this elation? Mixed with deflation?'' (Michael, waving his hands like AL JOLSON, dances through the revolving doors and onto the sidewalk, belting ''WHAT EXPLANATION? I AM IN LOOOOVE!''
Scene II. French restaurant, a few minutes later. Michael and Reporter are seated in a corner booth. Michael is having an omelet; Reporter is having a sandwich and fries. Michael is leaning in, very charmingly.
Reporter: I read you're supposed to be in this musical ''CAMILLE CLAUDEL'' coming to Broadway this spring.
Michael: That's what I heard when we were in Connecticut. We had all these excited people, important people -- and then this mysterious silence fell on the production.
FADE OUT, FADE IN
Reporter: You seem to play lots of bad guys. There was ''Dirty Dancing.''
Michael: ''Flashdance.'' I'm not -- what's his name?
Reporter: PATRICK SWAYZE.
Michael: I don't have his wonderful body. I have my own wonderful body. Thank you very much.
Reporter: I'm sorry. It's not as bad as the time I confused AMY TAN with MAXINE HONG KINGSTON and said we were sorry her house had burned down.
Michael: Can I have a piece of your bacon?
Reporter: Take it.
Michael: It goes well with my omelet.
Reporter: So ''Flashdance,'' not ''Dirty Dancing.'' I have a feeling that if you were to drop dead, your obit would lead with that.
Michael: I don't have to drop dead for that to happen. It's the way it is. ''Flashdance'' is Michael Nouri. (His cellphone rings.) This might be a job. This might be ''Camille Claudel.''
FADE OUT, FADE IN
Reporter: What were you saying?
Michael: I'm identified with ''Dirty Dancing.''
Reporter: Why is that?
Michael: Because I wasn't in ''Dirty Dancing.'' You're not paying attention.
Reporter (laughing): Once I was talking to GEORGE BURNS, he was in his late 80's, and I asked him, automatically, about what his sister did. He said, ''She's 86. What do you think, she dances a jig?''
Michael: One of my favorite lines is George Burns when he was asked, ''How's your sex life?'' And he said, ''It's like shooting pool with a rope.''
Reporter: How's your love life?
Michael: My love life? It's fine. It's quiet.
Reporter: Because I read you broke up with somebody you'd had a long-term thing with.
Michael: That was over a year ago. ROMA DOWNEY. She was on ''Touched by an Angel.''
Reporter: And now?
Michael: Work. I've done ''The Practice,'' ''The West Wing.''
Reporter: Wasn't there something else with a ''The''?
Michael: ''The Lyon's Den,'' ROB LOWE's new show. (Michael eats Reporter's fries.)
Reporter: There's really nothing going on with your love life?
Michael: Spit it out, baby. Spit it out. This is as close as we get to tabloid gossip, the G word. (Beat) Ask me the most provocative question you can and I'll dodge it.
Reporter: It's 20 years after ''Dirty Dancing'' and you're still known as that guy from that movie? Why is that? What kind of an actor do you call yourself?
Michael: (Laughing) 'Cause it was ''Flashdance,'' not ''Dirty Dancing.'' (Beat) I'm going to kill you. (Beat) The answer is this. The impact (Beat) of that movie was so huge. It was one of the biggest hits of the 1980's. And when you're in a movie that's that big --
FADE OUT, FADE IN
Michael: I knew I had a passion for music when I was 9, 10 years old.
FADE OUT, FADE IN
Michael: Just before this, I was playing Senator Turner on ''The West Wing.''
Reporter: Is that a recurring role?
Michael: I hope so.
Boldface Names
