WHILE you are wondering who in his right mind would take over the ravaged basketball program at St. John's, what coach of substance would come to a university recently associated more with lap dances than with big dances, remember this: Someone took the head coaching job at Baylor.
Someone quit a secure position and accepted Baylor's last summer, soon after the guts of what had to be the most stomach-turning scandal in college basketball history spilled out across the country in horrifying headlines.
''In sports, you love challenges,'' Scott Drew said from the Baylor campus in Waco, Tex. ''This to me was a challenge worth taking.''
He took the proverbial step up in size, leaving his post as the head coach at Valparaiso, quitting the small Indiana university with the big-time basketball aspirations. Drew left behind his family legacy and went to Baylor for the same reason that virtually assures St. John's a quality coach unless it bungles the search, because one man's calamity is another man's opportunity.
''I would imagine that with the success and reputation that St. John's has had, they'd be able to put a list together of strong candidates who will want to rebuild that program,'' Drew said.
St. John's may now be the worst Division I team in America, but you can bet a year's tuition that there will be no shortage of coaches boxing out for position on the A list. One person with an ear to the college grapevine passed along the information yesterday that Rick Pitino wants to be one of them. Sounded like suspicious industry gossip, but then:
Lincoln High School's Sebastian Telfair is looking and sounding more like an N.B.A. lottery pick than a college recruit, while Pitino has already achieved his primary goals of restoring Louisville to national prominence and of sticking it to his old friends at Kentucky. Based on reputation, it does stand to reason that Mr. Fix-It, a New Yorker, has at least allowed himself a few fleeting thoughts of rebuilding St. John's, filling Madison Square Garden again with red-shirted fans.
Three things college basketball coaches are often on the lookout for: more money than they're earning, a long-term commitment that applies only to the university, and insulation from blame if they don't win. In other words, a setup where you are saint and savior or it's so long, suckers. Nowhere are such jobs more readily available than at colleges dusting off the dirt of dishonor.
To that end, has there ever been a more acute discrediting of a college program than at Baylor, where one player stands accused of murdering another and the coach was caught orchestrating a cover-up? Yet, just 28 days after Patrick Dennehy's body was found following his shooting, for which his teammate Carlton Dotson was charged, 16 days after Coach Dave Bliss resigned in slime and shame, and 10 days after a search committee was formed, 32-year-old Scott Drew arrived in Waco to speak about his mid-America values and his two favorite movies, ''Rocky'' and ''Hoosiers.''
Yes, it was true that he was leaving Indiana, bolting Valparaiso after nine years as an assistant and one 19-11 season as head coach. No problem, for anyone.
His father, Homer, his predecessor for 18 largely successful seasons, was coming out of retirement to continue the proud Drew run that included brother Bryce's heroics in a Gonzaga-like run to the Round of 16 in 1998.
''Most people listen to their parents, but the fact that my dad has been in the profession for so long made it much more valuable,'' Drew said.
Go for the deal reportedly worth almost $3 million over six years, father told son. Don't worry about the three leading scorers who were transferring out, the fringe veterans and walk-ons he was going to inherit, the skepticism he was bound to encounter with a program that, unlike St. John's, has no basketball tradition to fall back on.
Give it a shot, it's a no-lose proposition, and the Valparaiso job or another one like it will be waiting. From one Drew to another, the advice was to scour the world for players, as Scott Drew did at Valparaiso, where he developed a reputation as a keen recruiter of international talent.
''We've got the 14th-rated recruiting class in the country, according to HoopScoop,'' Drew crowed the other day before Baylor (7-15) was walloped by Texas in Waco, 84-58.
''Actually, right now we've got Baylor 15th,'' reported Chris Johnson of HoopScooponline.com, a national scouting service. Among Drew's catches, Johnson said, is a seven-footer from Senegal, a 6-foot-2 guard from Australia and a junior-college transfer. Two touted high school underclassmen -- one a sophomore -- have been flirting with commitments.
Sophomore? That's a subject for another day. If this were about ideology, we would be arguing for universities like Baylor and St. John's to take a sabbatical from basketball, think long and hard about what went wrong. Forget reflection in this transitory sport. Redemption is always as close as the next impact player who will make the students and the alumni go wild.
''I read the article about the standing ovation they gave the St. John's kids in the Garden,'' Drew said. ''That's the kind of support that makes it easier to go to work in the morning.''
At Baylor, he believes, which is no small feat after a summer of unparalleled shame. As bad as things may appear at St. John's, no one died. The team remains in the Big East, Madison Square Garden is still in Midtown Manhattan and the next coach is only a handful of recruits away from cracking HoopScoop's top 20.
Sports of The Times
