The Italian police arrested Sergio Cragnotti, the former chairman of the bankrupt canned-food producer Cirio, on Wednesday in the country's latest effort to fight financial fraud.
Mr. Cragnotti, one of Italy's most prominent businessmen, has been under investigation for about a year. He was detained Wednesday morning at his home in Tuscany and transferred to the Regina Coeli prison in Rome.
The authorities said that Mr. Cragnotti, 64, was suspected of fraudulent bankruptcy tied to the collapse of Cirio, which is in liquidation and has defaulted on 1.1 billion euros ($1.4 billion) in outstanding bonds. Mr. Cragnotti has said that the company's collapse was not related to fraud.
Police also arrested Mr. Cragnotti's son, Andrea, and son-in-law, Filippo Fucile, who is a director of a Cirio unit. In addition, they notified his daughter, Elisabetta, who is married to Mr. Fucile, that she is under investigation. The police prohibited Ms. Cragnotti from owning or running a business, according to a person close to the investigation.
The police also placed Paolo Micolini, a former board member of a Cirio unit, under house arrest. Ettore Quadrani, another former director, was notified on Wednesday that he is under investigation.
In addition to the Cirio executives, Reuters said that 25 bankers were named in the investigation. In the arrest warrant, Reuters reported, prosecutors said the bankruptcy of Cirio resulted from payments made by the investment firm Cragnotti &amp; Partners to certain banking groups.
The arrest of Mr. Cragnotti is the latest in a recent string of actions by judges and the police to combat financial fraud in Italy. Eleven people have been arrested in the investigation of the collapsed dairy company Parmalat, and more than 30 people are under investigation.
In another proceeding, the house arrest of the chief executive and the chairman of Finmatica, a software company, was rescinded on Tuesday in Brescia. The two executives had been under house arrest since late January on suspicion that they made false statements and doctored their financial statements.
In a written explanation of Mr. Cragnotti's arrest, judges cited a risk that he might destroy evidence or perpetrate the same suspected crimes at another company, said a person close to the investigation.
Mr. Cragnotti's lawyer, Giulia Bongiorno, told Bloomberg News, ''I don't see the need to detain him, given that so much time has passed since the default.'' She added, ''He's always made himself available to be heard by the authorities.''
Mr. Cragnotti acquired Cirio in 1994 and expanded in Europe and South America by tapping the bond market. In 1992, he bought control of S.S. Lazio, one of Rome's two soccer clubs, and acquired many star players in a spending spree partly financed by a 1998 share offering, the first by an Italian soccer club.
The new players helped Lazio win the Italian League in 2000. But the costs connected to financing the team led to problems that continue to affect it.
