Gen. Wesley K. Clark made his way out of a hotel ballroom in Memphis on Tuesday night, minutes after he all but conceded that he was pulling out of the race for the Democratic presidential nomination after losing two primaries, when a supporter stopped him and whispered, ''I wish you'd gone to Iowa.''
''So do I,'' General Clark responded. ''It might have made the difference.''
As General Clark ended his bid here on Wednesday, in the same place where he began it with so much fanfare and optimism five months ago, and moved toward what an aide said was a likely endorsement of Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, the decision to skip the Iowa caucuses was but one factor cited by the Clark camp in describing the failure of a campaign that some Democrats thought had seemed destined to succeed.
He did not have enough time. He did not have enough money. He miscalculated the strength of Howard Dean. Saddam Hussein's arrest pulled the rug out from under his attacks on President Bush's Iraq policy.
More than all that, Democrats said, the collapse of General Clark's campaign, after he roared into politics on a rocket of publicity and good wishes from former President Bill Clinton, is the tale of a candidate who never matched the hopes invested in him by Democrats who latched onto their vision of his candidacy last fall.
These Democrats -- veterans of Mr. Clinton's White House, Hollywood fund-raisers and voters despairing of the rest of the field -- saw this articulate man in a uniform as the vehicle to defeat President Bush. It was an assignment that General Clark, a first-time candidate, found impossible to fulfill.
''Expectations on him were unreasonable because he was such an empty vessel -- and everybody put their hopes and desires into this empty vessel,'' said Matt Bennett, who drove from Washington to Little Rock to work as General Clark's communications director.
Mr. Bennett noted that General Clark came into the race without a legislative record or many known positions, allowing people to see in him what they wanted. ''And when he didn't match their hopes and desires, it was hard for everybody,'' he said, ''It was a recipe for disappointment for a certain part of the population, and a recipe for cynicism on a certain part of the media.''
In quitting the race on Wednesday, General Clark, who declined to be interviewed, said he would do what he could to help the Democratic nominee, whoever that is.
''In the end, I'm still a soldier -- not a politician,'' he said. ''And folks, this old soldier will not fade away. Now I'm just going to change my uniform and get out in the field and work.''
General Clark's campaign, and the swiftness with which he rose -- even among voters who said they knew little about his views -- illustrated the extent to which Democrats were seeking a candidate who could win. And it was the swiftness with which Democrats close to the Clintons rushed to General Clark's side that signaled the concern in the Clinton camp at the prospect that Dr. Dean might become the face of the Democratic party.
''His candidacy emerged as the anti-Dean candidacy,'' said Representative Rahm Emanuel of Illinois, the former senior Clinton aide who was one of General Clark's earliest supporters. ''Once Dean was no longer the viable front-runner, it knocked one of General Clark's main strategic moorings out.''
General Clark said Mr. Clinton had encouraged him to run, though the former president and his wife, Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton, both later said they were not endorsing him.
Even as he smiled through the pain of a withdrawal speech, General Clark was described by associates as reeling from a precipitous rise and fall that took him from the cover of national news magazines to a hasty retreat after placing only third in the Virginia and Tennessee primaries on Tuesday.
Before September, Democrats knew General Clark as the NATO commander from Kosovo, as a crisp and intelligent television commentator who appeared on CNN during the war. But they did not, they said, know much about him beyond his telegenic smile, his seductive charm and his uniform.
So many of General Clark's supporters were startled, in the opening days of his campaign, to learn that he voted for Richard M. Nixon and Ronald Reagan and that he ''probably'' would have supported the Iraq war resolution in Congress, notwithstanding his attempt to present himself as an antiwar candidate. They were taken back when a videotape surfaced showing General Clark speaking warmly of President Bush and the Pentagon during a Republican fund-raiser in Little Rock.
Still, General Clark recovered somewhat from this rough start, displaying a fluency on the campaign trail and what Mark Fabiani, one of his advisers, described as an impressive learning curve.
He was a striking figure, Democrats said, on the campaign trail but also sometimes a startling one: A general who would cry at a moment's notice, or physically bunch an American flag around his face in an expression of patriotism. He could captivate a crowd with his emotional and personal appeal.
There were times, though, that his emphasis on the military, and his experience and his wounding in Vietnam seemed more appropriate for a general election audience than Democratic primary voters. His campaign made a strategic decision early on to skip the caucuses in Iowa, in the belief he could not win there, and turn his attention to New Hampshire. The calculation was that Dr. Dean would win in Iowa and have to confront a strong General Clark in New Hampshire.
The decision seemed smart at first, as General Clark -- a celebrity candidate, who had New Hampshire almost to himself -- drew big crowds and rising ratings in the poll. But Dr. Dean placed third in Iowa, and it was Mr. Kerry who came charging into New Hampshire, a development that General Clark's staff had not anticipated.
''Everything was done to be the anti-Dean,'' Mr. Fabiani said. ''And then there was no Dean. You can criticize all kinds of decisions and second-guess, but it's really pretty simple.''
More significant, during what was arguably the most critical stretch of his campaign -- the eight days between the caucuses in Iowa and New Hampshire -- General Clark made a series of mistakes that served as a reminder of the risk many Democrats had taken in attaching themselves to a first-time candidate.
He faltered as he tried to explain his position on abortion, after telling an interviewer in New Hampshire that he would support allowing a woman to have an abortion through the end of the ninth month of her pregnancy. He stood by as the filmmaker Michael Moore called President Bush ''a deserter'' because of questions about whether Mr. Bush had fulfilled his National Guard service, a characterization that even General Clark's advisers said was disrespectful.
''This is someone who had never played baseball in his life, went up and he hit a triple in his first time at bat,'' Chris Lehane, a senior adviser, said of General Clark's candidacy. Asked if the campaign struggled to curtail damage from remarks the candidate made, Mr. Lehane chortled and responded, ''You are a very good observer.''
Mr. Bennett, the communications director, said: ''A human being can not go through the scrutiny of a presidential campaign without making mistakes. The let-down potential was not something that anyone could withstand.''
All this led General Clark to become increasingly reticent in discussing other issues with reporters. And it allowed his opponents -- who frequently noted his prior dalliances with the Republican Party -- to raise questions about his political core.
The campaign was hampered by dissent from the start, particularly between members of a Draft Clark movement that helped draw the general into the race and the professional operatives who quickly came on board.
The tension grew so bad that General Clark enlisted his brother-in-law, Gene Caulfield, to join him on the campaign trail in part to keep the peace. Aides would come and go on the trail. The arc of General Clark's candidacy could be seen in his campaign accounts. General Clark raised $10.3 million during the fourth quarter, narrowing the gap between him and candidates who had been in the race far longer.
But much of the money was spent those same months. After the primaries began, the job got tougher. In the final days, his organization asked staff to go without salaries.
Ultimately, aides said, financing was part of the decision to quit.
''The smart money was not going to be with us,'' said Diana Rogalle, General Clark's finance director. 'That's the cold reality.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE RETIRED GENERAL
