Katja Esson, a German filmmaker who lives in New York, began lurking about the ladies' room on the 8:15 Staten Island ferry to Manhattan in the summer of 2001. Call it location scouting or character casting.
''I thought I was being very subtle and smart,'' recalled Ms. Esson, whose 40-minute film, ''Ferry Tales,'' was nominated for an Academy Award last month. ''I'd ride the ferry, and the women wouldn't notice me.''
Not a chance. A handful of women who rode the 8:15 into Manhattan and assembled in the ferry's powder room shared a tight bond and cast a wary eye on outsiders. Leaving behind their roles as wives and mothers for jobs in accounting, advertising, fund-raising, fashion and social work, they fixed their hair and put on makeup, all the while talking about anything and everything: sex, race, husbands, difficult bosses, rebellious teenage children. If you could not deal with it, then that was your problem, and maybe you just did not belong in that aqua-and-white room with the fluorescent lights and the double mirrors.
That summer Valerie Campbell, a member of the group who always speaks her mind, recalled noticing this ''white woman who had these dreadlocks, and this little camera with her.'' (Ms. Esson had first visited the ladies' room on a tip from a friend who had starred in a music video filmed aboard the ferry.) She said that whenever Ms. Esson left the room, the women seated on stools before the mirror would whisper: ''Who is that weird woman? What do you think she wants?''
And even after Ms. Esson whispered to Ms. Campbell that she would like to make a documentary about the women of the ladies' room, and Ms. Campbell spun around on her stool, shrieking, ''I'm going to be a star,'' they still were not sure what that woman wanted.
Nor was Ms. Esson sure what she would find. ''Women came in with curlers, they'd paint their toenails, shave their legs,'' she said. ''The transformation was incredible. At first I was thinking, 'Cinderella,' 'Working Girl,' women staring at the skyline of Manhattan and making themselves up to be somebody. But I found out there was so much more to that room.''
One of the women, Elizabeth Ferris, who works in administration for New York City Ballet, said: ''It's like a state of suspended animation. It's out of the context of everybody's lives. People can be more honest. You're not talking to your next-door neighbor who knows your husband and kids, or your mother's friend.''
''On the ferry, I'm not Mrs., I'm not Mommy, I'm not Mrs. Hanks Will You Bring Me That Report?'' said Kamillah Hanks, a mother of four who works in public relations.
Last week Ms. Ferris and Ms. Hanks were aboard the 8:15, and the big news in the powder room was not only the Academy Award nomination (''Go all the way!'' cried out one vendor), but Ms. Ferris's newly adopted son from Ukraine.
Not all of the six principals of ''Ferry Tales'' ride the 8:15 every day anymore, but here they were aboard for an interview, talking about a new mascara for $3.99 (Maybelline), complaining about a daughter in the shower for 20 minutes, checking out pictures of 2-year-old Peter, from Ukraine.
''I've seen Liz struggling with the pros and cons of adopting for two years,'' said Rachel Francis, who has three children and works as a therapist in a foster care agency.
Ms. Esson, 38, has worked on music videos and on serious documentaries for German television. She shot 60 hours of video over a 14-month period and weeded out the moments when her subjects performed for the camera, talked in clichés about juggling careers and families, spoke off-the-cuff in ways that would hurt themselves or their families or the other women. ''Ferry Tales,'' set largely aboard the boat, moves quickly but allows each woman to establish an individual voice.
It is one of three films nominated for the Oscar for best short documentary. The others are ''Chernobyl Heart,'' about the effects of radiation on children who lived near the site of the 1986 nuclear accident, and ''Asylum,'' about a Ghanaian woman escaping an arranged marriage and genital cutting and seeking asylum in the United States.
If the women talk openly in the ladies' room, they reveal themselves even more on camera. Ms. Campbell says that when she first moved to Staten Island, she lived in a battered women's shelter with her children. Irma Sindicic moves from talking about how she thought she would be the next Donna Karan (''then reality struck'') to talking about having been molested by an uncle when she was young. Ms. Campbell recalls the morning a woman came in who had just had an abortion and was bleeding profusely. Asked why she was on the boat, she said, ''I just wanted to see somebody I could connect with.''
Toward the end the women talk sparingly and movingly about being aboard the ferry on Sept. 11, 2001, about seeing the second plane hit the south tower of the World Trade Center, about the effect it has had on their lives. (''I always thought I was going to grow old,'' Ms. Ferris said. ''Now I don't know if I have 20 minutes or 20 years.'')
After Sept. 11 ''one woman told me that there was so much emphasis on police and firemen, what about the secretaries, the people who just went to work that day?'' Ms. Esson said. ''You gave us a voice, she told me.''
The film, not currently in theaters, is to be broadcast on HBO this year or next. Could it be a series? ''We think it has enormous potential, and we would love to make that happen,'' said John Hoffman, HBO's supervising producer on ''Ferry Tales.'' But there is no deal yet.
An Academy Award nomination is not what the women of the 8:15 expected when Ms. Esson first entered the ladies' room in 2001. But when they stop to think about it, maybe it should not be that much of a surprise.
''We all knew we had something special here,'' Ms. Sindicic said, ''and it was only a matter of time before someone figured it out.''
