A federal judge cleared the way yesterday for opponents of the planned takeover of the MONY Group to use a tactic that the company had contended was a violation of federal securities law. At the same time, the opponents drew support from an organization whose recommendations are followed by some institutional investors.
The two actions may make it more difficult for MONY, the former Mutual of New York, to win shareholder approval to be acquired by AXA Financial, the large French insurance company. Opponents say the price, which is $31 a share, or about $1.5 billion, is too low. The management of MONY has warned that the company will run into severe operating difficulties if the deal is rejected.
The ruling by Judge Richard J. Holwell of Federal District Court in Manhattan was the first by a judge on a tactic that the Securities and Exchange Commission had informally approved but that MONY believed violated S.E.C. rules.
A Boston hedge fund, Highfields Capital Management, has sent letters to MONY shareholders opposing the merger. At issue is whether it could include copies of the company's proxy ballot. Doing so would make it easier for shareholders to change their vote and oppose the deal at the Feb. 24 shareholder meeting. MONY sued Highfields to prevent it from using the tactic.
Judge Holwell said yesterday that to bar sending out the proxy materials ''can be seen as frustrating the animating spirit that lies at the core'' of the S.E.C. rule in question, which is intended to make it easier for shareholders to communicate without having to mount expensive battles in which they mail out their own proxy ballots.
Another federal judge had issued a temporary restraining order last week, when Judge Holwell was unable to hear the request. He held a hearing on Friday and extended the order pending his decision.
The recommendation that shareholders oppose the merger came from Institutional Shareholder Services, which said the $31 price was unreasonably low and criticized the size of payments that would be made to top officers of MONY.
The managing director of Highfields, Richard L. Grubman, called the court ruling ''a victory for all shareholders'' and praised the Institutional Shareholder Services recommendation.
The chief executive of MONY, Michael I. Roth, said, ''We disagree with I.S.S.'s recommendation and believe that the $31 cash offer represents the best alternative for MONY stockholders.''
He said opponents had ''failed to present any concrete plan to create additional value'' for shareholders, or to propose an alternative transaction.
A MONY spokeswoman, Mary Taylor, said the company was disappointed by the judge's decision.
For the merger to go through, the company needs the approval of a majority of its outstanding shares at the annual meeting. Many MONY shares are held by individual investors, often because they held insurance policies when the company converted from a mutual insurer to a stock company. Both sides agreed that some of these shareholders would not take the time to obtain a new ballot if letters from Highfields and other investors persuaded them to change their minds and vote against the merger.
Thus, the provision of a proxy ballot could be crucial, even though it will be mailed back to the management and Highfields will not have access to reports on how many ballots are being cast for or against the merger, as it would have if it were circulating its own ballot. Doing that would have required a full-scale proxy fight, which would be costly and could not be done in the time remaining before the vote.
MONY shares, which have been trading above the $31 offer price, fell 24 cents yesterday, to $31.15 in trading in New York.
