As it tries to acquire the Walt Disney Company, the Comcast Corporation faces hurdles in Washington that are less legal than political, media analysts said today.
Given the federal courts' steady unraveling of media ownership laws and regulations in the last several years, there is little left that would obstruct the merger, according to telecommunications and media lawyers. Most notably, the decades-old ban on companies owning cable systems and broadcast stations in the same market was struck down by the District of Columbia appeals court in 2002.
''Does the proposed merger violate any laws that are on the books right now?'' said Harold Feld, associate director of the Media Access Project, a public advocacy group that has challenged media deregulation decisions. ''In this case, it is probably no.''
The wild card, experts say, is public sentiment. Over the last year, the issue of media consolidation has evolved from an obscure regulatory matter to a political hot button. Liberal and conservative critics alike have portrayed the giant media conglomerates as villains that stifle debate and are not responsive to local concerns.
Comcast announced its bid for Disney on a day when media ownership was being discussed in two forums: at Congressional hearings on indecency and the baring of Janet Jackson's breast on CBS during the Super Bowl halftime show; and at a hearing in a Philadelphia appeals court, nine blocks from Comcast's headquarters, on a challenge to a 2003 federal regulatory decision to expand the boundaries of media acquisitions.
''They are landing in a very inhospitable climate for a content-distribution combination,'' said Rebecca Arbogast, a media analyst at Legg Mason. ''Plus, it's an election year, and it puts a bit more gas on the fire.''
Even so, Ms. Arbogast said, the precedents of the DirecTV-News Corporation and AOL-Time Warner combinations favor Comcast's eventual success. ''This deal would probably end up being approved,'' she said, but, she added, ''it could take a while.''
Many of the same issues surrounding ownership of both content and distribution arose in the News Corporation-DirecTV merger, Comcast executives said. David Cohen, executive vice president of Comcast, said, ''We think that, given there was a recently approved comparable deal, that will certainly help us on the regulatory and political perspectives.''
A Comcast-Disney merger would need regulatory approval on two fronts. One is an antitrust review, conducted either by the Federal Trade Commission or the Department of Justice. Comcast and media analysts said there was so little direct overlap between the two companies' businesses that a merger would probably not raise any red flags on competition grounds, the way a failed proposal to merge EchoStar and DirecTV did. ''Legally, it's a vertical acquisition,'' Mr. Cohen said.
The second review will be conducted by the Federal Communications Commission on the more nebulous ground of the public interest. What would probably attract the most scrutiny, media analysts said, was the prospect that Comcast, the leading cable operator with 21 million subscribers, would gain control of ABC, one of the five major broadcast networks, and ESPN, one of the most powerful brands in subscriber television. The main concern is likely to be whether Comcast's cable operations would have an advantage over competitors in negotiations over clearance fees for its content businesses.
ESPN is already one of the most expensive nonpremium channels for cable companies to carry. It has drawn criticism for raising rates 20 percent a year over the last several years. For the proposed deal to win approval, media analysts said, Comcast would probably have to offer some assurances that other cable operators would be treated equitably.
Consumer advocacy groups say they hope that news of the proposed merger will highlight the way ownership regulations have eroded over the last eight years.
The ban on cross-ownership of cable and broadcast stations, which dated from the 1970's, was intended to preserve competition in the advertising market along with diversity in local programming. Congress lifted the ban in the 1996 Telecommunications Act, but the F.C.C. kept the cross-ownership rule in its 1998 regulatory review, sparking a challenge from Time Warner Entertainment.
The appeals court ruled against the F.C.C., calling the rule ''flimsy'' and a ''hopeless cause.'' Instead of sending the matter back to the commission for a new determination, the court invalidated the ban outright.
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: THE REGULATORS
