Pressure to maintain safe transmission facilities mounted on Consolidated Edison from all sides yesterday -- from state regulators to a crowd of protesters who gathered with their dogs outside the utility's front door.
The Public Service Commission, the state regulatory body that oversees the utility, said yesterday that Con Ed had 30 days to prove that it did not break the law in connection with the death of Jodie S. Lane. She was electrocuted on Jan. 16 when she stepped on the metal cover of a utility box while walking her dogs in the East Village.
If the utility does not explain itself, the commission says it will sue Con Ed to obtain $250,000 in penalties per violation, or $37.5 million if violations are continuing.
The commission also set a strict timetable for other tasks. By March 19, the utility must finish testing all possible sources of stray voltage and by April 19, Con Ed must submit a comprehensive plan for dealing with the problem of stray voltage.
At the same time, Con Ed faced an angry crowd of almost 100 protesters, some with their dogs draped in sandwich boards. They marched to the company's headquarters at 10 Irving Place yesterday afternoon for a rally with union representatives and city officials.
''Their negligence is criminal and has been for years,'' Councilwoman Margarita López, who represents the Lower East Side, yelled into a megaphone as she gestured at the company's front door. ''We have to ensure that when the attention shifts, the problem is corrected once and for all.''
Ms. López pressed the case for yearly checks on all Con Ed equipment, with the results provided to the City Council.
Starting at Tompkins Square, the protesters carried signs reading ''I Want to Feel Safe'' and ''I Remember Jodie Lane'' as they wound their way to 11th Street near First Avenue, where they stopped to place a wreath at the site of Ms. Lane's death.
The group -- a diverse gathering that included Jimmy, a Con Ed worker, and Bitsy Stephens, a 34-year old art therapist, carrying her 3-year-old Shih Tzu -- bowed their heads in silence.
The march was organized by the Jodie Lane Project, a coalition of community groups whose Web site maps electrical hazards throughout the city as they are reported by citizens.
''Con Ed is not going to make us go away,'' said Gunnar Hellekson, one of the protest organizers.
In response, Con Ed issued a statement that said: ''We will continue to fully cooperate with the Public Service Commission. We are implementing short- and long-term preventative programs to further minimize the risk of a tragedy like this ever happening again.''
The company reiterated its condolences for Ms. Lane's death and pointed out that it had already finished checking all its 250,000 service box and manhole covers.
The Council will hold a public hearing today to allow the public to testify about Con Ed's performance and to pressure the utility into communicating better about potential hazards.
Utility representatives will meet with state lawmakers and union officials in Albany tomorrow over accusations of slackened inspection policies and ignored warnings of dangers before Ms. Lane's death.
Correction:  February 13, 2004, Friday  An article yesterday about pressure on Consolidated Edison to improve public safety after the electrocution of a woman on a street in the East Village misstated the location of a public hearing by the State Assembly Energy Committee that is scheduled for 11 a.m. today. It will be in Manhattan (at 250 Broadway, near Murray Street), not in Albany.
