Alan Greenspan, the chairman of the Federal Reserve, gave an upbeat outlook for the economy on Wednesday and signaled that the central bank would keep interest rates low for at least the next few months.
Presenting his semiannual report on monetary policy to a House committee, Mr. Greenspan said that economic growth could reach 5 percent this year, that unemployment would decline slightly and that inflation appeared set to remain very low.
But he also warned about the rapidly rising federal budget deficit, saying that the prospect of big shortfalls for the foreseeable future could lead to higher interest rates in the near future and bigger fiscal problems as the baby boom generation begins to reach retirement age in the next decade.
For investors, Mr. Greenspan offered hints that the Fed was not yet ready to start raising short-term interest rates from their current level of 1 percent.
Taken together, the Fed chairman's relaxed views about inflation and his caution about lingering risks to the economic recovery suggested that the central bank was not about to start raising interest rates in the next few months.
That was good news for President Bush, because it increased the likelihood that the Fed would continue to fuel economic growth with cheap money up through the elections in November.
Financial markets reacted buoyantly. The Dow Jones industrial average jumped 1.2 percent and prices for Treasury notes and bonds surged as investors decided that interest rates would remain low for longer than they had expected. That notion also pushed the dollar down sharply because low rates make yields on United States investments less attractive than those in other countries. The dollar hit a four-week low against the euro and declined against many other currencies.
Though he noted that monetary policy is ''highly accommodative'' and that interest rates will ''eventually need to rise,'' Mr. Greenspan said he saw no threat from inflation, predicting that it would decline this year to about 1.25 percent from 1.4 percent. He reiterated his concerns about the sluggish pace of job creation and about lingering risks to the current economic expansion.
''When the future surprises, history tells us, it often surprises us all,'' Mr. Greenspan said. ''We must, as a consequence, remain alert to risks that could threaten the sustainability of the expansion.''
Mr. Greenspan's testimony came two weeks after the Fed rattled investors by retreating from its previous pledge to keep interest rates low for ''a considerable period.'' Investors interpreted that subtle change in wording as a warning that the Fed might raise rates as early as this summer. But the central bank has been steering for months between its growing confidence about rising economic growth and its continued concern about what Mr. Greenspan calls slack in the economy -- stubbornly high unemployment and a low rate of factory use.
Mr. Greenspan repeated his concern that ''progress on creating jobs has been limited'' and said the economy should be able to have an unemployment rate well below the current level of 5.6 percent without generating inflation.
The Fed chairman also played down other developments that have in the past prompted the central bank to worry about the inflation. He said he was not yet concerned about the steep drop in the value of the dollar against other currencies, saying that the drop had caused only mild increases in the prices of imported goods and even less effect on the overall rise in consumer prices.
He was also sanguine about the rising level of household debt, which has been fueled in part by the lowest interest rates in 46 years. Though household debt has climbed, he said, home equity has increased and low interest rates have kept monthly debt-service requirements at reasonable levels.
''The Federal Reserve can be patient in removing its currency policy accommodation,'' Mr. Greenspan said. And even though the Fed jolted financial markets last month by retreating from its pledge to keep interest rates low for ''a considerable period,'' Mr. Greenspan's remarks on Wednesday suggested that rates were not going to rise soon.
Mr. Greenspan warned about the potential consequences of running big federal budget deficits for the foreseeable future. The Bush administration has predicted that the budget shortfall will hit $521 billion this year and has promised to reduce that number by half within five years.
To the relief of the administration, though, Mr. Greenspan did not criticize the president's plans to make his tax cuts permanent. That would increase the projected deficit by more than $1 trillion over the next 10 years, even if the government virtually freezes discretionary domestic spending.
Mr. Greenspan did not criticize Mr. Bush's budget plan. And because neither Republicans nor Democrats on the House Financial Services Committee asked his opinion about making the tax cuts permanent, he did not volunteer one.
Instead, he repeated his call for Congress to reinstate what are known as pay-go rules that were in force during much of the 1990's and required Congress to offset increases in spending or new tax cuts with either spending cuts elsewhere or tax increases.
In contrast to many officials in the Bush administration, Mr. Greenspan warned that the projected deficits over the next decade could lead to higher interest rates and could also deepen the nation's indebtedness to the rest of the world.
''The imbalances in the federal budgetary situation, unless addressed soon, will pose serious longer-term fiscal difficulties,'' Mr. Greenspan said. ''The longer we wait before addressing these imbalances, the more wrenching the fiscal adjustment ultimately will be.''
Mr. Greenspan warned that the budget deficit was linked to the nation's overall global indebtedness because the United States increasingly depends on foreign investors to finance its borrowing.
The United States' current account deficit -- the broadest measure of the nation's trade deficit and financial transactions with the rest of the world -- is about $500 billion a year.
''To date, the U.S. current-account deficit has been financed with little difficulty,'' Mr. Greenspan said. ''Nonetheless, given the already substantial accumulation of dollar-denominated debt, foreign investors, both private and official, may become less willing to absorb ever growing claims on U.S. residents.''
Many Democrats on the committee, and elsewhere in Congress, accused the Bush administration on Wednesday of encouraging American companies to export jobs overseas through outsourcing.
Democratic lawmakers denounced remarks on Monday by N. Gregory Mankiw, chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, who said that outsourcing was ultimately good for the American economy even if it was disruptive in the short term.
Mr. Greenspan defended Mr. Mankiw, saying he essentially agreed that free trade was good for all countries that participate.
But he was considerably bleaker than the White House about prospects for job creation this year. Mr. Bush predicted earlier this week that the nation would add 2.6 million jobs by the end of the year. Mr. Greenspan said that kind of job growth could occur only if productivity climbed much more slowly than it has for the last year.
