With the memory of nightmare media mergers like AOL Time Warner and Vivendi Universal still lingering, no wonder Comcast avoided the dreaded S-word -- synergy -- to justify its hostile $54 billion takeover bid for Disney.
But if the term is out of favor these days, the concept remains alive and well in the media business. The logic of the Comcast bid is that there are lucrative advantages to melding the Walt Disney Company's media content -- movies, television, music, news and entertainment -- with the distribution network of the nation's largest cable television operator.
''We have a wonderful opportunity,'' Brian L. Roberts, chief executive of Comcast, wrote in his letter to Disney yesterday, ''to create a company that combines distribution and content in a way that is far stronger and more valuable than either Disney or Comcast can be standing alone.''
Still, the strategic bet, and risk, behind Comcast's move was presented in a remarkably low-key, matter-of-fact manner -- and calculatingly so. What Disney most needs, Comcast said, is a healthy dose of the sound fundamentals of business management that Mr. Roberts and his executive team are eager to supply. The ad hominem attack on Michael D. Eisner, Disney's embattled chairman, was obvious but left unstated.
And let no one confuse their proposed deal, Comcast's executives and their advisers went out of their way to emphasize yesterday, with failed mergers like that of America Online with Time Warner and Vivendi's takeover of Universal Studios, both heady attempts to combine media businesses with communications networks.
''This is not AOL or Vivendi,'' said Steven Rattner, a managing principal of the Quadrangle Group, a private investment bank that is advising Comcast. ''This deal is based on the old-fashioned idea that great brands that have been undermanaged can be managed better.'' The recent history of attempts to combine media content and distribution businesses means the Comcast bid for Disney must overcome skepticism among many investors. Going back further, Disney itself bought Capital Cities/ABC in 1995 for $19 billion in a deal that was intended to lift both companies by marrying Disney's studios with ABC's broadcast distribution network. The payoff, most analysts say, has proved elusive.
Recently, Mr. Eisner has said Disney is fine on its own, having no need to make further moves into distribution channels by trying to buy a cable company or satellite TV service.
Comcast is expected to face fierce resistance from Mr. Eisner and the Disney board. Many Wall Street analysts also say that Comcast must raise its bid further if it hopes to prevail.
Still, some industry analysts say the strategic logic behind the Comcast move is sound, and its plan differs markedly from the disappointing deals of recent years. AOL Time Warner and Vivendi Universal, the French media company, were put together during the heights of enthusiasm within many corporate suites that the Internet would quickly revolutionize the distribution of media.
At his news conference in New York, Mr. Roberts made the case for being a sober technophile. His vision of the Internet, it seems, is that the spread of high-speed links that make it easy to stream music and movies online will eventually change the media business.
He pointed out that Comcast, through its cable network, is already the nation's largest high-speed Internet service provider, with five million subscribers, and it is adding new subscribers at the rate of 30,000 a week.
The Internet, Mr. Roberts said, also points to new styles of media consumption. ''The Internet to me shows consumers want to control what they get and when they get it,'' he said.
Video-on-demand services, Mr. Roberts said, are a way for cable television operators to offer people that kind of interactive control. Cable operators have been saying that video-on-demand was around the corner for about a decade now, but Mr. Roberts suggested that claim might finally ring true.
Comcast offers a video-on-demand service to some cable subscribers in Philadelphia, Mr. Roberts said. For a few dollars a pop, subscribers can select from a library of movies whenever they wish, simply by punching a few buttons on the remote. In the Philadelphia trial, Mr. Roberts said, half of the cable subscribers used the video-on-demand service, and those households who did watched an average of 13 movies a month.
Mr. Roberts insists the time is now right to acquire a big media company like Disney, and he expressed confidence that the combination, if it goes through, would succeed. ''It all comes down to people, execution, and not getting ahead of yourself,'' he said.
A deal like the Comcast-Disney combination also has to answer the challenge of simple economics.
Are not media companies better off having many distributors compete for their movies and programming? And isn't a cable operator better off having many media companies competing for access to its network? Why is either a media company or a cable operator better off being locked into a company they own?
Comcast's purchase of Disney would be what economists call vertical integration, buying a related business whose product is used in your distribution system. Such moves, business experts say, make sense in industries with a comparatively small number of bargaining companies, where there is a high risk for those denied access to distribution or supplies.
''Media is a classic example of where vertical integration makes sense,'' said Thomas R. Eisenmann, an assistant professor at the Harvard Business School.
Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation, Mr. Eisenmann said, demonstrates the effective use of the strategy, going back to the 1980's when it began building Fox as a fourth broadcast network. Mr. Murdoch first bought Metromedia television stations, which gave him access to about 25 percent of the metropolitan media markets in the United States, and then he got programming by purchasing Fox Studios.
In Europe and Asia, Mr. Murdoch put together content and distribution assets with Sky satellite networks. His recent acquisition of DirecTV gives him satellite television distribution in the United States.
''News Corporation shows the power of the model,'' Mr. Eisenmann said. ''This could be a great move for Comcast.''
But acquiring Disney also carries considerable risk for Comcast. Mr. Roberts and his team are respected managers, but Disney represents a big step into a risky new field that has often dashed the dreams of outsiders.
''Comcast has a wonderful track record of running cable systems,'' said Jonathan Knee, an adjunct professor at the Columbia University business school who is also a senior managing director of Evercore, a private investment firm. ''But their management doesn't have a track record of managing these kinds of media assets.''
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: THE STRATEGY
