It used to be said of the actress and gadabout Sylvia Miles (actually, she said it of herself) that if a hostess put a potato chip on a window sill, Ms. Miles would appear. Like a lot of wisecracks, this one contained both cruelty and truth. When it comes to social enterprise, Ms. Miles turns out to be a prototypical New Yorker. Or so events of the last week reveal.
Obscured behind the fog of ballyhoo accompanying the gala party for the Time Warner Center was the reality that New Yorkers are willing to put on black tie to attend what amounts to the opening of a mall, provided that the celebrity chef Thomas Keller is bringing the chips.
The Louis Vuitton party on Tuesday had something of the same quality. Either there is more glamour than one had imagined in the opening of a luggage shop or New Yorkers have become an easy crowd.
Either way, the Vuitton party, which also celebrated the company's 150th anniversary, drew such enormous numbers to the new multilevel store in Midtown that even Rudolph Giuliani had trouble wedging himself inside. Mr. Giuliani and his wife, Judith, arrived around 9 p.m. in their chauffeur-driven S.U.V. Security men whisked them past hoi polloi thronging the police barricades. Then the former mayor, whose current aspirations, one had thought, were pitched at a level higher than the party pages of Quest, got wedged in a celebrity logjam.
There in the paparazzi blitz were the following: the hip-hop performer Eve; the De Beers spokesmodel Iman; the ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy'' decorator Thom Filicia; and the divorce-settlement multimillionairess (and, let's not forget, songwriter) Denise Rich.
The strobes flashed, the crowd parted and the Giulianis were escorted to safety deep inside the store, leaving in their wake the actor Jason Lewis, who portrays Samantha's stud muffin on ''Sex and the City'' and who seemed bemused.
''I guess I should ask you a question,'' a foreign journalist said desultorily to Mr. Lewis.
''Sure, O.K.,'' the actor replied.
''What do you think of Louis Vuitton?'' asked the reporter.
''I think that it's a really amazing Italian brand,'' the actor said.
A dozen telephone calls, numerous e-mail messages and a week of conversations with representatives of Anna Nicole Smith, the cable television train wreck, former Playboy model and current TrimSpa spokeswoman, finally yielded a comment about Ms. Smith's guest appearance on the runway of tonight's Heatherette show.
''I love Heatherette,'' Ms. Smith told this reporter through her lawyer. ''I can't wait to walk down the runway and do their show. I am so excited to be back modeling again.''
Take that, Woodward and Bernstein!
Ms. Smith will not be the only marginal celebrity appearing on the Heatherette catwalk, in a show that is aptly organized around a circus theme. Boy George will serve as M.C., and has also contributed several outfits from his new label, Rude. ''We're treating it like Heatherette's menagerie,'' said Traver Rains, who designs Heatherette with Richie Rich. Guests can expect contortionists, Mr. Rains said, showgirls distributing cotton candy and a gorilla on a swing.
The show's title, ''Don't Kiss Mommy'' originated in a friend's Freudian recollection of his mother primping for an evening on the town. ''Every time she was about to go out with her makeup on and her jewels and her gown and her perfume, my friend would go to kiss her goodbye,'' Mr. Rich said. ''And he would have, like, peanut butter on his hands, and she would say: 'Don't kiss Mommy. Mommy's going to the circus.'' Tragically, Mommy died when Mr. Rich's friend was a child. ''This show is about the opposite of that,'' explained Mr. Rich, whose fall 2004 show seeks to extend the design range of a label known for ripped shirts. ''We're all about fun,'' the designer said. ''Go ahead and kiss mommy. Who cares?''
The shape and height of a shoe are indispensable to the creation of a woman's character, Stefania Ricci said Tuesday. Ms. Ricci is the director of the Salvatore Ferragamo Museum in Florence, and she was in town during Fashion Week to inaugurate a small exhibition titled ''A Love Affair With Shoes'' at a gallery in the company's Fifth Avenue flagship store.
The characters Ms. Ricci had in mind were theatrical creations, but the observation has applications to real life, as any woman can testify. Marilyn Monroe's sexy, helpless, forward-pitching teeter was largely a result of her footwear. She ordered the same four-and-a-half-inch heels from Ferragamo for years. Marilyn in flats would have been another person. She would have been Hope Lange.
''A Love Affair with Shoes'' is dedicated to the actresses whom Mr. Ferragamo shod. There were plenty of them. A small-town cobbler who fled the poverty of rural Italy for Hollywood in the 1920's, Mr. Ferragamo became the shoemaker to the movie elite and, eventually, one of the progenitors of global luxury branding. ''I love feet,'' he wrote in his biography, ''Shoemaker of Dreams'' (1957). ''They talk to me.''
They also have a lot to say to anyone who takes the time to visit the Ferragamo store, where a choice selection of footwear once worn by celebrities is accompanied by text panels printed with even riper recollections from Mr. Ferragamo's memoir. One learns that Audrey Hepburn had a long slim foot ''in perfect proportion to her height,'' that the shoe-addicted Eva Peron had ''the wildness of the Andes in her feet and the wildness of extravagance in her demands'' and that there were few things in life that Lauren Bacall preferred to ''a gay mule with Turkish toes.''
Now you know.
FASHION DIARY
