President Bush on Wednesday proposed a seven-point plan to make it far more difficult to sell nuclear equipment on the black market, declaring that the ease with which North Korea, Iran and Libya received help from a Pakistani scientist showed that the United States must ''prevent governments from developing nuclear weapons under false pretenses.''
Speaking at the National Defense University, Mr. Bush described the network created by Abdul Qadeer Khan, a founder of Pakistan's nuclear program, more fully than any American official has in public. In doing so, the president broke years of official silence about a man who American intelligence agencies determined years ago was one of the world's most successful traffickers in nuclear technology.
''There is a consensus among nations that proliferation cannot be tolerated,'' Mr. Bush said in the half-hour speech, his most detailed yet about proliferation challenges. ''Yet this consensus means little unless it is translated into action. Every civilized nation has a stake in preventing the spread of weapons of mass destruction.''
But a crucial part of the seven-point plan led some critics to complain that Mr. Bush had not gone far enough. The president stopped well short of calling for an end to all trade in fissionable material -- enriched uranium or reprocessed plutonium -- saying his plan would only limit such shipments ''to any state that does not already possess full-scale, functioning enrichment and reprocessing plants.''
Those carefully chosen words would make Iran's current activities illegal, as well as North Korea's -- provided the administration can persuade the country to dismantle its two nuclear weapons projects.
But his proposal leaves room for multibillion dollar fuel-reprocessing operations in many developed nations in Europe -- and nonnuclear states like Japan -- that supply nuclear power plants.
Several experts said they feared that the dual standard could undercut Mr. Bush's ability to sell his proposals among the members of the International Atomic Energy Agency, many of whom have long resented what they view as an effort by the five original nuclear weapons states -- the United States, Russia, China, Britain and France -- to extend their monopoly. Israel, Pakistan and India also have nuclear weapons capability, and North Korea is widely believed to possess several weapons.
Mr. Bush proposed a significant expansion of his Proliferation Security Initiative, a program to share intelligence among more than a dozen nations to intercept nuclear, biological and chemical weapons shipments -- an operation that scored a major victory in October when it intercepted parts that Dr. Khan's network was sending to Libya. On Wednesday, the president said he wanted to ''take direct action against proliferation networks,'' and he issued a warning akin to the one he has sent to terrorists.
''We will find the middlemen, the supplier and the buyers,'' he vowed, adding later, ''We will find you and we're not going to rest until you are stopped.''
Mr. Bush renewed a call for the United Nations Security Council to require all states to criminalize nuclear weapons proliferation -- but he made no demand that Pakistan join the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty or allow international inspectors into the country. Pakistan's president, Pervez Musharraf, said last week as he pardoned Dr. Khan that he would never submit to international control over Pakistan's weapons program.
Mr. Bush, in one of his vaguer proposals, called for an expansion of legislation to retrain weapons scientists, saying the Nunn-Lugar program should be expanded from the former Soviet states to countries like Libya and Iraq.
Former Senator Sam Nunn, one of the legislation's authors, said on Wednesday evening that Mr. Bush ''never mentioned resources'' in his speech, noting that the government now spends $600 million to $800 million a year on the program, an amount he considers insufficient.
''The president said the terrorists are racing ahead'' in their effort to obtain nuclear materials, Mr. Nunn said. ''But we are walking.''
Mr. Bush also said that starting next year he wanted to make sure no country shipped nuclear equipment to any nation that had not signed the ''additional protocol'' to the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty. That protocol gives expanded rights to the International Atomic Energy Agency, the United Nations' nuclear watchdog, to inspect a country's nuclear facilities.
Among those that have not yet adopted the protocol is the United States, and Mr. Bush called on the Senate to ratify it. It was a largely symbolic gesture because the United States is already a declared nuclear weapons state.
