The Massachusetts legislature defeated two constitutional amendments on Wednesday that were designed to ban same-sex marriage by overriding a state court's decision that would have made Massachusetts the first state to establish gay marriage.
In a highly charged constitutional convention that last nearly six hours, legislators narrowly rejected an amendment that would define marriage solely as a union between a man and a woman. Then, by a slightly wider margin, they defeated what had been billed as a compromise amendment: one that would have defined marriage as a heterosexual institution but would also have allowed same-sex couples to form civil unions.
The votes were not, however, the last word on the issue of gay marriage here. The convention will reconvene on Thursday, and lawmakers plan to consider other possible amendments, including two that resemble the ones rejected.
One of them, establishing marriage for heterosexual couples and civil unions for same-sex couples, might have a better chance of passing because it was being put forward by an ally of the House speaker, Thomas M. Finneran, who had sponsored the first amendment on Wednesday and had opposed the compromise amendment, which failed 104 to 94.
On the other hand, because the amendment that would only establish marriage as a heterosexual union failed by just two votes, 100 to 98, a new effort at a similar amendment might have a shot at success.
''We are as divided as the people of Massachusetts,'' Mr. Finneran said Wednesday night, declining to indicate what position he would take at the convention on Thursday. ''We're as divided as the nation. On this; we're doing the best we can.''
The issue of gay marriage had been scheduled for months to come before the constitutional convention on Wednesday, but it gained urgency last week after the state's highest court ruled 4 to 3 in favor of same-sex marriages beginning May 17.
Many lawmakers objected to the court's decision, either because they oppose gay marriage in principle or because they believe the definition of marriage should be left to the legislature and the voters, not to a court.
As a result, many sought to amend the state's Constitution to restrict the institution of marriage to heterosexual couples. Others wanted to extend rights and benefits to same-sex couples.
No amendment could take effect until November 2006 at the earliest because it would have to pass a second constitutional convention in two years and then be approved in a public referendum before becoming part of the Constitution.
Under the civil-unions compromise that was rejected, any gay couples married in Massachusetts would be stripped of their licenses and considered part of a civil union.
In a restive and sometimes raucous atmosphere, 159 members of the House of Representatives and 39 members of the Senate spent hours giving emotional speeches and planning strategy in clusters on the floor of the ornate statehouse chamber.
Repeatedly, the presiding officer of the convention, the Senate president, Robert E. Travaglini, admonished colleagues to quiet down.
''The chair would ask those members who are involved in conversations to either dramatically tone it down or take it outside,'' Mr. Travaglini said.
Legislators on all sides of the issue spoke with vehemence and passion, reeling off quotes from Thomas Jefferson, Abraham Lincoln, John F. Kennedy and John Adams, who helped write the Massachusetts Constitution in 1780.
''I feel that this is a civil rights issue and I feel that we should only amend the constitution when we add rights for individuals,'' said Representative Kathi-Anne Reinstein, a Democratic supporter of gay marriage who argued against both amendments. ''I also feel, Who cares? Who cares if they should get married? Who am I to tell to law-abiding and consenting adults who they can and cannot love and who they elect to spend the rest of their lives with?''
Senator Dianne Wilkerson, a Democrat whose constituents include the plaintiffs in the case heard by the Supreme Judicial Court, teared up as she likened the struggle for gay marriage to civil rights struggle she experienced growing up black in Arkansas.
''I know the pain of being less than equal,'' Ms. Wilkerson said, ''and I cannot and I will not impose that on anyone else.''
Representative Marie J. Parente, another Democrat, argued in favor of defining marriage as a heterosexual institution, saying, ''Mother Nature left her blueprint behind and she left it in nature, with a man and a woman. I didn't create that DNA, Mother Nature did. Mother Nature used that patent to populate the world.''
Senator Brian P. Lees, a Republican who sponsored the amendment that included civil unions, said it was ''a good compromise'' because ''we are making sure that people have a right to vote and be heard'' both on the definition of marriage and on civil unions.
Gov. Mitt Romney, a Republican who opposes civil unions and favored the amendment that dealt only with heterosexual marriage, said Wednesday night he was ''working with legislators who I think I can have influence with'' in hopes of swaying them to his view. Only 29 legislators are Republican, but given the close votes, Mr. Romney's lobbying could make a difference.
If gay marriage is allowed in Massachusetts, federal lawsuits would probably follow as gay couples sought recognition in other states and by the federal government. While marriages performed in one state are normally recognized in others, 38 states and the federal government have approved laws or amendments barring the recognition of gay marriage.
In Boston today, the chaotic atmosphere inside the chamber was matched by a deluge of advocates on both sides of the issue. About 3,700 demonstrators and spectators swarmed the statehouse. Some chanted loudly; others sang or prayed. Another 1,000 people rallied, argued and even danced outside on Beacon Street.
