When the battleship New Jersey was formally welcomed to its permanent berth along the Delaware River here on a bright October day in 2001, it was billed as a ship-turned-museum that would promote maritime history, excite veterans and military buffs and provide a much-needed boost to downtrodden Camden.
But after winning a competition with Bayonne to become home to the ship, Camden is finding that keeping the New Jersey afloat financially may be harder than getting it here in the first place.
The Battleship New Jersey Memorial and Museum operated on a $1.2 million deficit in 2003, its directors said recently. About 192,000 people visited the ship last year, compared with the year before, when about 218,000 went aboard to examine the Navy's most decorated battleship. The budget problems last fall forced the Home Port Alliance, the nonprofit organization that runs the battleship tours and museum, to lay off 12 of its 90 workers.
And because the cold weather this winter has kept many tourists away, officials decided to reduce access to the ship to four days a week -- Friday through Monday -- until March 1.
The majestic 45,000-ton vessel, about 3 football fields long, 108 feet wide and 11 stories high, has legions of fans. Its return to New Jersey, across the river from the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, where it was built in 1942, was an emotional event for the tens of thousands of sailors and officers who served on it during three major wars and other battles.
But its problems are a reminder that not every retired Navy ship can rival the Intrepid in New York as a tourist attraction.
Jeff Nilsson, executive director of the Historic Naval Ships Association, said that there were about 122 retired military ships on display throughout the nation and that attendance for them varied. The Intrepid had about 650,000 visitors in 2002, while the frigate Constellation in Baltimore had about 100,000. How each one fares as a tourist attraction varies depending on the ship's size, its place in military history, its current location and the strength of the organization running it, he said.
As a museum and memorial, the New Jersey is not in danger of going under financially, its directors said, but even its supporters admit these are rough times for the fledgling operation.
''It's unfortunate that it's not getting the visitors,'' said State Assemblyman Joseph Azzolina, a retired Navy captain who served on the New Jersey in the 1980's. ''But it's a great ship, and they're doing a great job with it.''
Many of those involved with the battleship say the museum and memorial is merely experiencing the growing pains of any new attraction. Legislators are trying to secure state funding for the ship, and museum directors are working to attract more private financing and to come up with more ideas to raise revenue.
''I don't think it's any different than anybody expected,'' said Assemblyman Louis Greenwald, a Camden County Democrat who is trying to persuade other legislators to help the museum with a state grant of $1 million or more. ''It's difficult for any entity or museum to be self-sustaining, especially at first.''
The New Jersey was one of four Iowa-Class battleships constructed during World War II. With hulls more than a foot thick, the battleships were built to ''keep floating and keep fighting.'' Workers at the Philadelphia Naval Shipyard, in a competitive mood because many of them lived in the state for which the ship would be named, made sure the New Jersey was almost four inches longer than the other Iowa battleships.
The New Jersey is equipped with nine 16-inch guns that could fire shells weighing as much as a Volkswagen Beetle up to 23 miles. During its first 19 months on active duty in the Pacific during World War II, the ship steamed more than 200,000 miles and shot down 20 enemy aircraft, including five in one day.
The New Jersey also took part in the Korean War and the Vietnam War and last saw active duty in 1983 in the Mediterranean off Beirut before being decommissioned in 1990.
The Navy chose to let the ship retire here rather than in Bayonne because of what they saw as Camden's growing waterfront cultural and tourist attractions. Indeed, local leaders saw the ship as a major player in the renaissance of a depressed city. In the last few years, developers have turned Camden's waterfront into a place more families want to visit. Besides the battleship, there are Campbell's Field, home to the minor league Camden Riversharks; the Tweeter Center, an open-air concert stage; and the New Jersey State Aquarium, which is about to be privatized and expanded to double its size.
A cable car system is being constructed that will carry people between Philadelphia and Camden's waterfront, and the former RCA Victor building near the waterfront is being turned into 341 luxury loft apartments.
But while the aquarium, for example, continues to be a big family draw, with about a half million visitors a year, the battleship had fewer than half as many last year.
Mr. Nilsson said the battleship's low attendance so early in its development was not that worrisome.
''Is this unusual? No, not at all,'' he said. ''Forget that it's a museum or a ship. The first three years of any business are going to be rough.''
But others say that retired warships can face severe problems as tourist attractions.
''You're trying to keep up something that the Navy got rid of because they couldn't keep it up,'' said Jack Green, a public affairs officer at the Naval Historical Center in Washington. ''It's a lot of work and expense to keep up a ship. You no longer have 2,000 sailors on your work force to holystone the wooden decks,'' he said, referring to the need to keep the decks polished.
Troy Collins, the Home Port Alliance's executive director, said that while attendance for the ship's tours might be down, its other revenue producers performed well last year. The ship had a 25 percent increase in attendance at special events, receptions and other ceremonies booked onboard and overnight encampments, which are open to Scout groups, he said.
The alliance also plans to attract more visitors this year by adding a Navy Seahawk seaplane motion simulator that can seat 13 people and a self-guided tour route with more interactive displays, he said.
Mr. Collins and the board of directors know that one big challenge is to raise more money for operating costs. Utilities alone cost $360,000 a year, he said. And the ship will need to set aside even more by building an endowment for future expenses, such as the day not too many years from now when the battleship will have to be dry-docked for major maintenance.
''It's no different than what happens with most new museums,'' Mr. Collins said. ''This is the toughest period that we'll ever have. The early days of juggling have caught up with us, and we haven't solidified our future. We're trying to get ourselves funds to keep us going through July.''
Mr. Collins said the battleship's endowment should be $3 million to $4 million. That means beginning a campaign now to find donors, including corporate sponsors and foundations. Its supporters say the state also needs to help out this year, especially after a $7.2 million grant that they had been counting on last year did not come through because of the state budget crisis.''We don't want to be dependent on anybody's money for long,'' Mr. Collins said. ''But we'll need five to seven years to build up a base to become independent.''
