A military defense lawyer assigned to defend one of the prisoners held at Guant치namo Bay, Cuba, said on Wednesday that his client was a driver for Osama bin Laden but was not a member of Al Qaeda or the Taliban -- or guilty of any crime.
The lawyer, Lt. Cmdr. Charles Swift, who represents Salim Ahmed Hamdan, a 34-year-old Yemeni who may be one of the first to be put on trial before a military commission, said he met with his client over the last two weekends in a special holding area at Guant치namo.
''He freely admits that he was employed by Osama bin Laden,'' Commander Swift said. ''His job was driving agricultural workers on bin Laden's farm and sometimes driving Osama himself.''
But Commander Swift said: ''He is not a member of Al Qaeda and not a member of the Taliban and is not a terrorist. He denies all of those things.''
Commander Swift said Mr. Hamdan was in Afghanistan trying to get to Tajikistan to fight against the government on behalf of Muslims. When he could not get there, he found a job on Mr. bin Laden's property near Kandahar in Afghanistan. After the turmoil following the attacks of Sept. 11, 2001, he borrowed a car to take his pregnant wife and daughter to safety in Pakistan. Upon his return, Commander Swift said, he was arrested by Afghan forces allied with the United States.
The lawyer said that for at least two months Mr. Hamdan has been kept in a segregation unit reserved for possible defendants in military tribunals. Commander Swift said that his client was in good physical shape but that ''spiritually, segregation has been extremely hard on him.''
As the Pentagon moves closer to conducting military tribunals for some Guant치namo detainees, it has also begun to transfer some back to their home countries for release or prosecution by local authorities. On Wednesday, Secretary of State Colin L. Powell said one of the Guant치namo prisoners, Hamed Abderrahman Ahmed, would soon be sent back to his native Spain.
State Department officials said the prisoner would be subject to prosecution by the Spanish authorities.
Also on Wednesday, the Pentagon said it would allow Jose Padilla, an American citizen who is being detained as an enemy combatant in a Navy brig in Charleston, S.C., on suspicion of being a terrorist, access to his lawyers for the first time.
The Pentagon contended that it was not required to allow the lawyers to see Mr. Padilla, but would do so as a matter of discretion, because it would not compromise the national security or interfere with intelligence collection from Mr. Padilla.
Mr. Padilla, a former Chicago gang member who has been accused of plotting with Qaeda operatives overseas to explode a radioactive dirty bomb in the United States, has been held in military custody without being charged or being able to see a lawyer since June 2002.
A divided panel of the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit, in New York, ruled last December that President Bush lacked the authority to indefinitely detain an American citizen like Mr. Padilla, who was arrested on American soil, by simply declaring him an enemy combatant.
The Bush administration is seeking an expedited appeal of that ruling before the Supreme Court. In a brief filed Wednesday, the Justice Department suggested that the justices need not rule on the matter of access to counsel because the question was now effectively moot.
Andrew G. Patel, one of Mr. Padilla's lawyers, said he learned of the decision on Wednesday from a military official and was also told of the conditions under which such a meeting could be held.
Mr. Patel said he and his co-counsel, Donna R. Newman, would have to agree, for example, to have their meeting monitored by a military officer.
''It would not be an attorney-client privileged conversation by any definition that I'm aware of,'' Mr. Patel said.
But he added: ''We will go see this guy. We have to.''
He also said that his client had not been seen by anyone outside the Defense Department for 20 months and that ''it's essential that he knows there are people who are fighting to contest the legality of his detention.''
The Pentagon has already allowed another American citizen being held as an enemy combatant, Yasser Esam Hamdi, to be seen by a lawyer. Mr. Hamdi's case is scheduled to be heard by the Supreme Court in April.
