At least once a week since Jan. 19, John Kerry has gone to bed to the sound of cheering crowds and television anchors declaring him the one thing politicians want above all else to be: the winner. But every winner needs a loser or two to give his victories meaning, and Mr. Kerry's splintered opposition has so far probably helped him more than it has hurt.
Conventional wisdom might hold that now is the time for Democrats to rally around Mr. Kerry, and thousands are. Yet so long as Mr. Kerry faces even nominal intramural opposition, President Bush's advisers worry that they will have a harder time getting equal attention for their political message, and Mr. Kerry's rivals seem to keep undercutting each other, not him.
In Tennessee on Tuesday, for example, the combined vote for Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and retired Gen. Wesley K. Clark exceeded Mr. Kerry's own winning 42 percent by 8 points, suggesting that he might have been more vulnerable there to a single son of the South than a pair.
So the prospect of continued combat with Mr. Edwards and former Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont -- while potentially annoying and distracting in terms of time, money and message -- may be far from Mr. Kerry's worst nightmare. ''Hopefully, we can do this every Tuesday,'' one senior Kerry adviser said with a chuckle on Wednesday.
''I think, frankly, it's good for Kerry,'' said Doug Schoen, a Democratic pollster not allied with any camp this year. ''It keeps him in the news, it keeps him dominant, and as long as there's the appearance of a contest, it gives him a victory each week, and even if it's simulated drama, the focus is on him. I think that creates momentum for him, and I don't think either Edwards or Dean appears to have any chance of blunting his surge. I don't see any downside.''
Mr. Schoen added: ''If this all went away, I think people would start focusing to a much greater degree on 'Who's John Kerry,' which is by definition a more difficult question to handle.''
Dr. Dean's attacks on Mr. Kerry -- on Wednesday he accused him of supporting ''politically corrupt fund-raising mechanisms'' and described him as being ''so much like a Republican'' -- now sound so harsh as to risk backfiring.
Mr. Edwards, whether by virtue of his vice-presidential ambitions or the dogged optimism he believes has worked for him all year, has refrained from sharp criticism of his own. Mr. Kerry can, and does, now look beyond both his rivals to President Bush in November, while Mr. Bush cannot quite yet look only to him.
Presumably, one well-placed phone call from Mr. Kerry's intermediaries, with the right mix of threat and promise, could help persuade Mr. Edwards it was time to fold his tent, but there have been no signs of such overtures.
''There may be an effort like that, but not at our behest,'' one Kerry adviser said. At this point, Dr. Dean seems inclined to pursue his candidacy as long as possible, so Mr. Kerry may have to keep taking whatever the doctor dishes out.
Mr. Kerry's advisers acknowledge that, so far, the combination of the cluttered Democratic field and his own serial success has worked to his advantage. He has won 12 of 14 primary and caucus contests, something like one-quarter of the convention delegates needed for the nomination, and seems all but unstoppable by historical standards. But now, the aides say, the risks of a continued contest have the potential to begin outweighing the benefits.
''This isn't a 100 percenter one way or the other,'' one adviser said. ''There are some real benefits that come from the kind of night we had last night, a strong victory and the fact that we're doing it, thus far, across all voter groups and now in the South. But the longer we continue the process of picking a nominee, it's taking money, resources and time, and I think we're in a stronger position if we're able to focus, going forward, on the future.''
Another Kerry strategist said: ''I think everybody's of two minds. Both arguments are there. The truth is at the end of the day, we have nothing to do with it, so it doesn't pay a lot for us to keep speculating on what's best. We just have to win as many primaries and delegates as we can.''
Even as Mr. Kerry remains focused on that task, his aides are beginning to look ahead. While he will not be able to match Mr. Bush's expected spending, he has started new fund-raising efforts. Those include a concert by Carole King in Beverly Hills, Calif., on Thursday, at which some former backers of Mr. Edwards and Representative Richard A. Gephardt will now be writing checks for Mr. Kerry. And because Mr. Kerry chose not to accept public financing, there is no legal limit on what he can raise and spend.
As of Dec. 31, the Democratic National Committee had more than $10 million on hand that it can begin spending to support the party's eventual nominee, and other independent groups are raising tens of millions of dollars that can be spent to criticize Mr. Bush and the Republicans.
The endorsements keep rolling in as well. On Wednesday, the Alliance for Economic Justice, which has 19 member unions that advocate universal health care, job creation and other matters, voted to back Mr. Kerry.
Jenny Backus, a Democratic strategist not aligned with any candidate, said that ''prolonged competition keeps the calendar relevant and on the front page, so it will help the candidate who wins these primaries generate media and front-page coverage'' in what would otherwise be a political dead-zone, and in turn ''look strong and victorious.''
Mr. Kerry might also benefit from the competition in another way. He has been at his best this political season when battling back from being far behind Dr. Dean in the polls, and he still lacks some of the strengths that come through adversity: an ample airing of his weaknesses as a candidate, a testing of his temperament when under sharp attack, a thorough examination of a political personality that has sometimes left even his ideological allies cold in the past. To the degree that he still has to fight, even slightly, for the prize he has sought so long, he may be sharper and better, and inoculated against future attacks.
And as long as Mr. Kerry is able to stand up and claim victory over somebody somewhere every seven days, it delays Mr. Bush's ability to start getting his own message out, either through the pulpit of the presidency, or the still-coiled spring of his own campaign, one of the president's political advisers said the other day. That has not stopped Mr. Bush's surrogates from beginning to outline the kind of attacks they would make on Mr. Kerry, but it has the effect of keeping the president himself somewhat in check.
''First of all, he's not the nominee,'' Mr. Bush said of Mr. Kerry on ''Meet the Press'' on Sunday, when the moderator, Tim Russert, asked about the prospect of a contest between two Yale men.
For Mr. Kerry, a dragged-out contest, however superficial, is not without risks. It could become psychologically and physically wearing; it could cut into his fund-raising for a general election; he might yet stumble in some unforeseen and unforeseeable way. And even by the end of the huge bicoastal primaries in New York and California and Ohio on March 2 -- by which time more than half of all convention delegates will have been allocated -- Mr. Kerry will still almost certainly not have ironclad commitments from the 2,161 delegates needed to nominate.
It is that reality that keeps Mr. Edwards, who finished behind Representative Dennis J. Kucinich in Washington and Maine, and Dr. Dean, who has yet to win any contest, in the race against all the odds. It must also keep Mr. Kerry and his aides awake a bit on even the best election nights this winter.
''As long as we have races, we have work to do to try and win them,'' one Kerry adviser said. ''And that's what we're going to do.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: POLITICAL MEMO
