HERE were my plans for a recent Sunday afternoon: bake cornbread to take to a party, take the dog for a hike and finish reading ''Mystic River'' in an attempt to fill in the jarring plot holes in the movie adaptation of same.
I could have done it all, too, except for one problem: I made the mistake of going online ''for a minute'' to buy airline tickets.
An hour later, I was ready to scream. Repeated attempts to buy $1,458 worth of tickets on a poorly designed airline reservations site got me nothing but messages like this: ''Please fill out the form below and click the submit button to complete the transaction.''
Unfortunately there was no ''form below'' on the page, just a vast wasteland of white space.
As an experienced online shopper, I should have done the sane thing: abort the purchase and swear off the Web site forever.
But I was desperate to get to the cornbread. So I phoned.
Perhaps the customer service representative sensed my vulnerability. The predicament was my fault -- or perhaps my credit card provider's -- but not the airline's problem, she said. She seemed quite sure.
At that point, a sane shopper gives her $1,458 to a different airline. But at that moment the dog came over, with his leash. He looked at me.
So into the receiver I said, ''O.K., if I book on the phone, will you still give me the $10-per-roundtrip-ticket discount I would have gotten for booking online?''
''No,'' she said. ''There is a form below, at the bottom of that page. You have to scroll down to see it.''
She seemed quite sure about that, too. And since I was dying to find out why the wife of the ''Mystic River'' character played by Kevin Bacon had left him, I went through the tedious booking process yet again only to arrive at the same page of white, white, white, no-form-below space. And guess what else was not on the screen?
A scroll bar.
I have a good reason for bringing up this story, although I know it comes as no surprise to hear that airline incompetence -- whether it's on the phone, online or standing face to face with a person at a counter -- can be a bleak and frustrating experience. After all, airlines have recently earned lower customer satisfaction rankings than the average retailer, according to the University of Michigan's quarterly American Customer Satisfaction Index, which measures performance in a broad range of categories.
(For the record, a spokesman for the airline later told me he was ''shocked'' by my story, adding, ''We pride ourselves in excelling in customer service.'')
What's interesting about my experience was that in the end I aborted the purchase not because of the airline site's inability to complete a simple transaction, but because the person who answered the toll-free line was not nice to me.
Blame the Internet for my biases. The more I shop online, the more tolerant I become of technical glitches -- nothing surprises me anymore -- even as my expectations for customer service increase. If the site doesn't work, fine. Just hold my hand and walk me through it.
But this medium that enables me to hunt down the most esoteric bit of information in seconds by entering a word in a keyword search box also has made me impatient with any retailer who doesn't try to make my shopping experience just as painless.
I'm a cliché, as usual. Lots of other online shoppers have reached the same conclusion, which is why a site like Planetfeedback.com -- where shoppers can with a few clicks send an e-mail complaint, compliment, suggestion or question directly to a company -- sent 67,000 e-mails to 15,000 companies last year. Shoppers can elect to post their comments publicly at the site, as well.
''About 80 percent of the companies respond to the complaints, some within an hour,'' said Sue MacDonald, a spokeswoman for Intelliseek, the technology company that owns the site. ''We use the site as a learning lab to do marketing technology, and we have found that people like the idea of getting on very quickly to send a comment -- it also could be a suggestion, a question or a compliment -- to a company and then getting a response.''
Shoppers' increasing customer-service expectations led Lauren Freedman, a consultant who conducts an annual ''mystery shopping study,'' to identify and assess the customer service criteria that separate the best online retailers from the worst.
''We found that a lot of people try to cut corners on the Internet, because customer service is expensive,'' said Ms. Freedman, who heads the E-tailing Group in Chicago. ''They think, oh, it's online, it's self-service. But that's a mistake. Online, people need help more, not less, and the human element is something that can be really a great differentiator for a brand.''
In the E-tailing Group study, shoppers purchase random items from 100 online retailers -- the merchandise falls into categories like apparel, pet supplies and gifts -- and then return the purchases either online or to stores.
Ranking retailers by such criteria as whether they have a toll-free phone number, how quickly they answered e-mail questions and whether those responses were personalized, the study rates 12 retailers as ''best-of-breed.'' In last year's study, conducted during the fourth quarter, that group included Ann Taylor, CompUSA, Crate &amp; Barrel, Crutchfield, JC Penney, J. Crew, Lands' End, Men's Warehouse, Orvis, Petco, Powell's and RedEnvelope.
The fact that RedEnvelope made the list despite having big problems fulfilling holiday orders demonstrates how important each customer-service encounter can be. ''It's ironic that they scored so well, but the way it works is we randomly pick a product and the product we picked was one they had in stock,'' Ms. Freedman said. ''Every single shopping experience is individual, and every shopper will judge you on that single experience.''
Me included. A few days after not spending $1,458 on airline tickets, I had difficulties navigating Restoration Hardware's site. The nature of the problem was different, and more important, so was the company's response. On the phone, no fewer than three customer service representatives were nice to me, apologizing repeatedly for the delay in processing my order and commiserating with me over the mix-up in canceling a back-ordered item. So I forgave the company for all the glitches.
(Stephanie Garcia, Restoration Hardware's director for e-commerce, later told me the problem was that my order had been placed when the company was taking physical inventory. ''We actually had a hacker get into the site after the holidays as well, and we were trying to clean up the mess and weren't physically able to put a message on the site saying we were in the middle of inventory and not updating the inventory in real time,'' Ms. Garcia said. ''We're really sorry.'')
Restoration Hardware's site is far from perfect. But if the back-ordered lamp I tried to cancel three times turns up on my doorstep after all, at this point I'll just laugh about it.
Then I'll return it to the nearest store and probably buy something else, if the sales clerk who handles the return is nice to me.
ONLINE SHOPPER E-mail: Slatalla@nytimes.com
