The Vodafone Group, the world's largest cellular telephone operator, is preparing to make an offer worth as much as $35 billion for AT&amp;T Wireless, executives close to Vodafone said last night.
While Vodafone has not made a final decision on whether to proceed with a bid, its preparations come as the company is near an agreement on how it would unravel its stake in Verizon Wireless should it prove successful in acquiring AT&amp;T Wireless. While Vodafone and Verizon Communications, the largest regional phone company in the United States, have yet to reach a final deal on the joint venture, executives close to the talks said the two sides were near an agreement on a price that Verizon would pay for Vodafone's stake. Vodafone's 45 percent share of Verizon Wireless is estimated to be worth $20 billion to $26 billion.
Vodafone's chief executive, Arun Sarin, is planning to present the company's offer for AT&amp;T Wireless to board members in a conference call before the deadline for bids tomorrow.
Vodafone's decision to prepare a bid signals that the British company is now betting its American future on AT&amp;T Wireless, reversing a long relationship with Verizon that Vodafone has in the past praised. If Vodafone loses out in the bidding for AT&amp;T Wireless, the company's pact with Verizon would remain. But that would damage Vodafone's credibility with investors since it has argued over the years that Verizon Wireless was the best bet in the American market.
Still, the executives cautioned that a final decision to bid had yet to be made, and that the offer could be abandoned. The company could also postpone an offer, they said, and jump into the auction later.
As part of the negotiations between Vodafone and Verizon, the two companies are discussing the possibility of making the taxes on the transaction less onerous by swapping Verizon's stake in Omintel, Vodafone's Italian wireless unit.
AT&amp;T Wireless, the nation's third- largest mobile phone company, has set a deadline of tomorrow for bids. If Vodafone goes ahead with its plan, there will be at least two bids, with Cingular having said publicly it intends to place an offer.
Cingular has already made a nonbinding bid of about $30 billion, or $11 a share. Executives close to Cingular suggested that they would make a ''significantly'' higher offer tomorrow. Vodafone is considering making an offer of at least $12 a share, and possibly more than $12.50 a share, executives close to the company said. Shares of AT&amp;T Wireless, which have risen 44 percent this year, closed yesterday at $11.50, up 25 cents.
AT&amp;T Wireless's board is preparing to meet Saturday to review the bids.
The decision by Vodafone to at least ready a bid comes amid a raging debate within the company over whether to participate in the auction. Investors have registered their displeasure in recent weeks, sending shares of Vodafone lower in trading in London and New York.
Vodafone does not have operational control of Verizon Wireless, and analysts have said that Vodafone may want greater control of an asset based in the United States.
In addition, the networks operated by Vodafone and AT&amp;T Wireless are based on the same underlying technology, setting up possible economies of scale.
On the other hand, Vodafone's returns could be greatly diluted in the short term if it spends tens of billions of dollars in an acquisition.
Phil Cusick, an analyst with Bear Stearns, said Vodafone is evidently banking on the fact that owning a wireless company in the growing United States market will pay dividends in the long run. ''If you look five years out, it's a good decision,'' he said.
Cingular Wireless, which is owned jointly by Bell South and SBC, has made a slightly different case to shareholders as to why it ought to acquire AT&amp;T Wireless. Executives close to the auction have said Cingular expects to save $10 billion to $15 billion in the coming years by merging operations with AT&amp;T Wireless.
The savings would come from merging operations and redundant back-office functions, like billing and marketing.
Cingular officials have said they are extremely determined to win the auction, suggesting a potential bidding war between it and Vodafone.
Little could be more welcome to AT&amp;T Wireless, which has been overshadowed by Verizon, and by its own problems. Last year, AT&amp;T Wireless suffered from technical and customer-care problems, including difficulty logging new customers on to its network.
