EUROPEAN companies, worried about the costs and restrictions of complying with the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, are mounting a drive to make it easier for them to stop complying with United States securities laws.
In a letter to William H. Donaldson, the chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, 11 organizations saying they represented 100,000 European companies, including more than 100 whose securities are traded in the United States, asked for changes that would make it easier for them to stop being registered with the S.E.C.
The letter was made public Wednesday.
While some European companies are ''quite satisfied with their experience in the U.S. market,'' others have concluded that the costs are not worth the benefits, said the letter, which was signed by business leaders including Alain Joly, the president of the European Association for Listed Companies and the chairman of the supervisory board of Air Liquide, a company that has chosen not to list on a United States exchange.
Edward F. Greene, a partner in the London office of Cleary, Gottlieb, Steen &amp; Hamilton, who prepared a proposal for changes in United States rules for the European companies, said, ''There is a feeling of, 'Why do you want to have a U.S. listing?'''
''The costs of Sarbanes-Oxley have been substantial,'' he said. ''The hidden sleeper has been the upcoming attestation of internal controls. It really is a substantial effect on costs and audit fees.''
The rule he referred to, which will affect foreign companies starting in 2005, requires corporate executives to certify that internal financial controls are adequate and requires outside auditors to certify that the management's conclusions are accurate. Companies have complained that this will raise audit fees substantially.
Mr. Greene, a former S.E.C. general counsel, said that many companies were also concerned about a ban on company loans to executives. That provision was included in Sarbanes-Oxley when it was passed in 2002 in the aftermath of the Enron and WorldCom scandals, each of which involved loans to executives.
Under current law, a company that wants to sell securities to the public in the United States, or to list securities on a market there, such as the New York Stock Exchange or the Nasdaq, must reconcile its financial statements to United States accounting rules and comply with American securities laws, including Sarbanes-Oxley.
A company that no longer values a United States listing can easily delist from the exchange, Mr. Greene said. But it remains subject to the securities laws unless it can show that it has fewer than 300 American investors. To do that, it must conduct research to determine who its actual shareholders are, regardless of whether those holders bought the shares in America or overseas. That is a difficult standard to meet, and even if it is met, the company might have to resume complying with the American rules in a later year if the number goes back above 300.
So the European company associations have proposed that European concerns be able to drop their registration if they delist and show that less than 5 percent of their total share volume is in the United States. That would cover many prominent European companies, including some that trade in substantial volume in New York. For example, hundreds of thousands of shares of Deutsche Telekom, the German telephone company, are traded each day on the Big Board. But that volume is dwarfed by its volume in Germany.
The proposal by the European companies would not apply to Japanese or other overseas companies because it assumes the European companies would follow new international accounting standards, as they are expected to do beginning in 2005, although some European companies are resisting the international rule on accounting for derivatives. The companies would have to provide English translations of the financial statements they filed at home, but would not need to adjust them when American rules would produce different numbers.
An S.E.C. spokesman in Washington declined to comment on the letter. But the proposal is likely to run into some opposition in America, since it would be seen as a step on the road to acceptance of international standards as being equivalent to American ones.
European companies that have listed in the United States have done so in some cases to be able to use stock to acquire American companies, or to gain access to American capital markets. But many have found that American institutional investors are willing to buy shares overseas, wherever the most liquidity is. And companies that are not listed in the United States can sell securities there in private offerings, under an S.E.C. rule known as 144A, so long as the buyers are institutional investors.
''As a result,'' the letter said, ''many of our member companies with U.S. listed securities find that they have no greater access to the U.S. market than other companies whose securities are listed only in Europe.''
Market Place
