Your Celebrity Idol
Do you have a favorite celebrity with whom you feel you share a special bond? Would you be surprised to hear how many people do?
At celebritystudy.com, British psychologists are collecting data on the roles that celebrities play in our lives, for better or worse. ''This is a largely unexplored area of research, except for a small bit of stuff on stalking,'' said Adrian North, a member of the Celebrity Research Group at the University of Leicester, which created the survey. ''We want to find out more about celebrity worship, from the mundane to the extreme. What are people connecting to?''
It's hard to argue with the idea that a powerful cult of celebrity is coursing through our culture. In a precursor to the Web site survey, the research group polled young Britons on whom they admired. The result was a celebrity-laden list topped by the soccer star David Beckham.
A visitor to celebritystudy.com is asked to complete one of eight different versions of a 10-minute questionnaire. All versions begin with a ''celebrity attitude scale'' that measures your psychological relationship with the celebrity you have selected as your favorite. The second half of the survey is variable. You might be asked about your relationship with your partner, your body image or even your musical preferences.
Dr. North said the researchers had also reached out to various ''special interest groups,'' like the fan sites of specific actors and sites that cater to those under 18. ''One thing we want to study is how celebrity worship changes as we age,'' he explained. ''For instance, do adults do a better job of distinguishing between celebrities and heroes?''
Creature of the Day
Many creatures live inside the head of Andrew Bell -- at least 750 and counting, as a matter of fact.
Every day for two years Mr. Bell, a Brooklyn-based computer artist, has revealed a new creature at his Web site, creaturesinmyhead.com. The creatures are typically hand-drawn illustrations in black ink with captions. They are similar in style -- more impish than monstrous -- yet each seems an individual.
Where do they come from? ''I don't know,'' Mr. Bell said, though the creatures share an angst-ridden squishiness that suggests a universe similar to our own.
The site has a devoted following and receives about 2,000 visitors a day, many of whom rate the creatures on a scale of 1 to 10 and submit caption suggestions. The archive page lists the top-rated creatures. (No.1 is a squat, rounded figure with a prominent underbite that incongruously threatens: ''I will destroy you.'') Mr. Bell said he is more likely to repeat captions inadvertently than elements in his drawings.
While the daily schedule is draining, ''it has increased my creative energy by a lot,'' he said. ''I spent years learning how to use software to express myself, so it's nice putting pen to paper.'' On the site's message board, there are frequent calls for Mr. Bell to animate his creations, but he has not yet found the time. He does hope, however, to start a line of ''urban vinyl'' toys based on the creatures.
Ramblers Unite
A year ago, Evan Prodromou and Michele Ann Jenkins were traveling in Thailand with plans to visit a small guest house on a remote island only to discover it had been closed for a year. The travel guide they were using was badly out of date.
''That's when we decided that what travelers need is a constantly updated guidebook,'' Ms. Jenkins said. ''The best model seemed the Net. But how do you take the best of the Net -- the community and the interactivity -- and turn it into a travel guide?'' It's hard to print out a discussion board to bring with you.
Their answer was to start www.wikitravel.org last July. In just six months, the site has grown to include more than 1,100 destination guides worldwide, as well as phrase books and itineraries.
The site uses an increasingly popular Web software technology called Wiki that allows for collaborative writing and editing. Anyone can go online to contribute to the site or edit it. While this may seem to give troublemakers free rein, the collaborative nature of the site means that inappropriate content is quickly found and deleted (like attempts to politicize the Israel entry).
The site also makes clear that personal reminiscences should not be included in articles. ''This isn't 'The Story of My Summer Vacation,''' Mr. Prodromou explained. What you will find is items written not just by tourists, but also by residents, whom Ms. Jenkins calls ''travelers in their own towns.''
Indeed, Ted O'Neill, an English instructor in Tokyo, has assigned his students the task of covering the city for Wikitravel. ''I've been really surprised about how much the students learned about their own hometown,'' he said by e-mail.
On the Radar
The strangely beautiful digiquaria.com is an ''aquarium of digital life forms'' inspired by real water creatures. Mythological deities from all cultures are being collected in one database at godchecker.com. Hope they get along. The Pasta-Log Project (www.stefo.net) catalogs one young Italian's daily intake. Mangia!
E-mail: online@nytimes.com
Online Diary
