The Rangers defeat the Devils so rarely these days that their 3-1 victory at Continental Arena on Wednesday night was like a reappearance by Halley's comet.
There was the much-maligned Mike Dunham, steady enough in the Rangers' goal to turn aside 28 of the 29 shots he faced. There was the much-maligned defenseman Tom Poti, scoring the game's first goal on a power play, sparking his team to a 3-0 lead.
And there were the much-maligned Rangers, notching their first victory over the Devils since Oct. 17, 2001, and their first victory here since March 31, 2001.
This was only the third time in the teams' last 37 meetings that the Rangers won. Not only that, but the Rangers snapped an 11-game streak without a victory against the Devils (0-6-5). The Devils were 21-1-13-1 against the Rangers since Feb. 17, 1997, including 15-1-3-0 at Continental Arena.
The Devils, the defending Stanley Cup champions, have now lost three consecutive games and four of their last six. Over their three-game losing streak, the Devils have been outscored by 11-2.
And for the first time, the Devils have lost three consecutive games in regulation under Pat Burns, who is in his second season as coach.
''The rope is not hanging at home,'' Burns said. ''And I'm not going to throw myself off the chair.''
The Rangers, meanwhile, had skidded into the All-Star Game break at 2-8-2-0, and they were playing so poorly that Glen Sather, their coach and general manager, had explored trading for a goaltender to take over for Dunham.
But Dunham played like a No. 1 goalie Wednesday night.
''I just felt relaxed and calm out there,'' said Dunham, who broke into the National Hockey League as Martin Brodeur's backup, and is now 2-8-3 against the Devils over his career. Dunham's overall record this season is 13-19-6. His only other victory over the Devils came in his first game against them, Jan. 30, 1999, after Nashville had taken him from the Devils in the expansion draft.
''I want him to play well,'' Sather said. ''I'm trying to get him to play well.''
Of any discussions he had about acquiring another goaltender, Sather said, ''That's part of the game.''
So are injuries. Along with Poti, who had missed the last two games with a bad back, the Rangers also welcomed defenseman Greg de Vries back to the lineup. De Vries had been out since Jan. 8 with a knee injury and had missed 15 games.
Left wing Dan LaCouture, who had missed 14 of the last 16 games with a concussion, also returned, scoring his first goal since Jan. 3, on a wraparound at the right post at 4 minutes 2 seconds of the second period. That gave the Rangers a 3-0 lead.
Poti opened the scoring 13:32 into the game when he launched a one-timer from the right point past Brodeur, who was screened by his former teammate and good friend Bobby Holik. Poti's goal came with one second remaining on a power play that was awarded to the Rangers when Jamie Langenbrunner was whistled for goaltender interference. Langenbrunner's penalty negated what would have been a power-play goal by Devils defenseman Brian Rafalski.
So instead of trailing by 1-0, the Rangers led by 1-0. And when defenseman Boris Mironov beat the clock to score with what replays showed was four-tenths of a second remaining in the period, the Rangers took a 2-0 lead into the first intermission.
At 14:29 of the second period, nearly 12 1/2 minutes after LaCouture had made it 3-0, Turner Stevenson followed his own shot to beat Mironov to a rebound and chip the puck over Dunham. It made the score 3-1 and kept intact a streak: the Rangers have not shut out the Devils since Jan. 12, 1997.
Afterward, Holik, who had not won against his former team since signing with the Rangers in July 2002 after 10 seasons in New Jersey, was asked if this victory could be viewed as a start.
''A start to what?'' he said.
SLAP SHOTS
Because of concussions, the Devils were without their captain, SCOTT STEVENS, for the 16th consecutive game, and the Rangers were without their most dominating player, ERIC LINDROS, for the fifth consecutive game. Of Stevens, LOU LAMORIELLO, the Devils' general manager, said: ''He's feeling better. It's a time process.'' Of Stevens's return, Lamoriello said, ''Hopefully, it's in the near future.'' . . . The Devils' 43-year-old center, IGOR LARIONOV, the N.H.L.'s oldest player, was a healthy scratch for the second consecutive game. Larionov has been a healthy scratch for four of the last five games. . . . Lamoriello said he was pleased to see that plans were moving ahead for an arena to be built in Newark.
HOCKEY
