The Coca-Cola Company said yesterday that its fourth-quarter earnings fell slightly because of restructuring costs associated with streamlining its North American business. The decline had been widely expected by Wall Street analysts. But even without the $197 million restructuring charge, which depressed earnings by 8 cents a share, the company's results were disappointing, analysts said.
For the fourth quarter, net income fell 0.3 percent, to $927 million, or 38 cents a share, from $930 million, or 38 cents a share in the quarter a year earlier. Excluding the charge, the results beat analysts' expectations by a penny, according to Thomson First Call. Revenue rose 7.9 percent, to $5.18 billion from $4.8 billion
Coke executives announced in December that the company would report lackluster fourth-quarter earnings and take a charge to cover a reorganization that combined several operating units and eliminated more than 1,000 jobs.
The volume of Coke products sold increased 3 percent in the fourth quarter from the quarter a year ago. Noncarbonated beverages were responsible for much of the growth, the company said. Diet Coke and Vanilla Coke helped to raise profits.
Operating income grew 2 percent.
The biggest benefits to the bottom line were favorable currency exchange rates and a lower-than-expected tax rate, analysts said.
''I appreciate that they're focusing more on value and not so much on volume, but at the end of the day, to get the value you're going to need the volume,'' said Bonnie Herzog, a beverage analyst at Smith Barney.
Coke executives focused yesterday on yearly earnings results, which rose by 43 percent largely because of write-downs in 2002. Total volume increased 4 percent, with most of the growth occurring in international markets, where Coke makes more than 80 percent of its profits.
''We were able to deliver these record results despite a pretty tough year that really tested us in some ways because of unexpected challenges that came along,'' Steven J. Heyer, the president and chief operating officer, said.
Mr. Heyer said the company had overcome several challenges in its domestic and international markets including accusations of pesticide-laced Coke products in India and a decline in sales in Asia because of fears related to the SARS virus.
''We are now seeing a recovery and are balancing and delivering growth across our countries, our brands and our packages,'' he said.
Shares of Coke fell 37 cents yesterday, to $51.80.
