Long Island, where post-World War II suburbia was born, is in a midlife crisis and battling some disturbing social and economic trends that provide a window into issues that suburbs around the nation may face, according to a 15-month study sponsored by a nonprofit group.
Average pay from Long Island employers has dropped in recent years, little land is left to develop, taxes are high, cars are multiplying faster than people, commuting times are longer and people are being priced out of the housing market, the report said. And an increasing minority population is coinciding with persistent segregation.
Perhaps most striking is that a region long synonymous with families and children is losing part of its younger generation, and the median age of residents is steadily rising. In the 1990's, the number of people age 18 to 34 shrank by 143,184, or 20 percent, in Nassau and Suffolk Counties, the census showed.
That age group also declined nationwide, reflecting the ''baby bust'' that followed the baby boom. But the island's drop was five times the national decrease of 4 percent.
The report, titled Long Island Index 2004: Coming Together for Long Island's Future, analyzes the region's strengths and problems and sets goals for improvement. The Rauch Foundation of Garden City sponsored the study in a joint project with an array of government, civic, business and labor groups. Similar efforts are under way in Boston, Chicago and Silicon Valley.
Long Island, where Levittown sprang from potato fields as an instant community, is now ''the nation's first mature suburb,'' the report said. ''Long Island is a case study in how do we reinvent the suburbs,'' said the study's director, Carrie Meek Gallagher. ''Anecdotally, similar dynamics are happening in housing, the economy and transportation around Boston. It's almost post-suburbia. What do we do now?''
The foundation's president, Dr. Nancy Rauch Douzinas, said, ''We're hoping this will be a real tool for action.'' County Executives Thomas R. Suozzi of Nassau and Steve Levy of Suffolk are to speak at the report's presentation today.
With 2.8 million people -- more than the populations in 19 states -- 1 million jobs and a $112 billion annual economy, Long Island remains a premier suburb. Its assets include highly rated schools, health care, parks, beaches and shopping and an educated work force, high employment, low crime and access to New York City.
But the report found ''a growing disparity by income, race and ethnicity that is clear in current housing, educational and health indicators.''
The study called the ''brain drain'' on the island alarming. ''The region is exporting its most valuable product -- its talented young people,'' the report said.
A survey of young adults found that 53 percent were considering moving out, citing the high cost of living, especially soaring housing prices and burdensome taxes.
As the young have left and Levittown-era pioneers have lingered into retirement, the island's median age has steadily risen. Now 29 percent of the population is older than 50.
The sizzling real estate market may be a bonanza for sellers, but a third of Long Islanders spend more than 30 percent of their income on housing, the report said.
In 1999 the median home price was about 2.5 times the median annual income. By last year, the median price had jumped to four times the median income in Suffolk and nearly 4.5 in Nassau.
While the median home price, at $363,700, is comparable to those in other New York suburbs, the report said the scarcity of apartments resulted in ''some of the highest rents in the metropolitan region.''
As for new housing, government and developers will have to be inventive because ''there is very little undeveloped land left on Long Island that is not protected parkland,'' the report said. About 70 percent of the island is developed -- nearly 90 percent in Nassau. By contrast, the report said that suburbs north of the city and in northern New Jersey are about 40 percent developed.
Despite the fabled luxury of the Gold Coast and the elite Hamptons, the report said that 154,000 Long Islanders, or 5.5 percent, live below the poverty line, and many others are coping with dwindling income.
From 1990 to 2003, the island lost 29,000 technology manufacturing jobs as most of the remaining aerospace industry -- once the local economic engine -- vanished. Still, there was a net gain of 80,500 jobs, led by an expansion of 34,000 jobs in health care.
The catch was that the new jobs generally paid less. Average pay on Long Island peaked in 2000 at $42,875, and during the recession, it gradually slipped 6 percent to $40,329 last year.
The Long Island paycheck premium is also shrinking, the report said. In 1993 Long Island workers earned an average of $39,385 a year, compared with the national average of $34,272, a difference of $5,113, or about 15 percent. Last year the local average was $40,329, while the national average was $38,636, a difference of only about 5 percent.
Demographics are taking on new hues. The number of nonwhite residents increased from 16 percent of the population in 1990 to 24 percent in 2000. Hispanics are now the largest minority, making up 10 percent of the population, up from 6 percent in 1990. Next are blacks at 8 percent.
But the races mostly remain in separate neighborhoods. ''Long Island is one of the most racially segregated suburban regions in the nation,'' the report said.
Immigrants are changing the island, where 196,255 of them moved between 1995 and 2002, the study said. Domestic migration in those years was led by 122,000 people from Queens and Brooklyn.
Mass transportation is limited, and, as any local resident can attest, traffic is fierce. Ninety-four percent of households have at least one car; two-thirds have two or more. ''From 1980 to 2000, the number of motor vehicles grew by 19 percent, more than three times the rate of population growth,'' the report said.
Commutes are longer, too. In the 1990's, the number of workers commuting less than 30 minutes to work declined by nearly 50,000, the census showed. The number of people with longer commutes increased, especially those whose commutes took more than 90 minutes.
The government that oversees Long Island is large, cumbersome and costly, the report found. ''Jurisdictional fragmentation'' characterizes the hodgepodge of two counties, 13 towns, two cities, 95 villages, 128 school systems and hundreds of other special districts for libraries, fire departments and other services, the report said.
Together those governments employ 195,000 workers, more than any industry. Their workers' average pay is a fifth higher than the national average for government workers, a cost born by local taxpayers.
''Long Island is at a tipping point, facing serious challenges,'' Dr. Douzinas said, adding that she was optimistic that solutions would be found.
