Those who struggle to rise from beginner to the intermediate level have four choices. They can simply play, hoping for gradual improvement. They can study books on the game. They can take formal lessons. Or, best of all, they can take playing lessons, partnering a professional who carefully explains the finer points at the end of a session.
The last of these is beyond the budget of many, but there is an occasional opportunity. The Greater New York Bridge Association has an annual pro-am game in which each pro plays with an am having fewer than 50 masterpoints. It took place Friday at the New York Helmsley Hotel in Manhattan, and the diagramed deal provided a playing problem that the pros would have solved routinely, but that the ams, all sitting South, found difficult.
The ideal contract hinges on the method of scoring. In rubber bridge or team play, three no-trump by North, with nine top tricks, would be perfect. But that is not a practical proposition, and in any event this was matchpoint duplicate, where overtricks were material. The bidding shown was normal, landing South in four hearts.
After a spade lead, there were nine top tricks and a chance of a 10th in each minor suit. A pro would recognize a familiar situation: drawing trump must wait until dummy's diamonds have been established. So South must win the opening spade lead and attack diamonds immediately. The diamond ace is followed by a diamond to the king, and a diamond is ruffed high, with West showing out. A trump to dummy is followed by another diamond ruff with a high trump.
The last diamond in dummy is now established, so the declarer can draw the remaining trumps, ending in the dummy. A spade is discarded on the winning diamond, and South has 10 tricks. He would have made 11 or even 12, if things had gone better. The diamonds could split evenly, and he might score a club trick at the finish by leading toward the king-jack.
In one section of the pro-am only one declarer was successful. He was Andrew Lilia, who has been playing the game for less than a year, and he went on to win the overall title with Adam Wildavsky as his pro. Finishing second were Joe Grue, a young pro, and Jonathan Segal.
BRIDGE
