Scientists say they have discovered the world's oldest known insect fossil, a 400-million-year-old set of minuscule jaws that have been lying unrecognized for nearly a century in a drawer at the Natural History Museum in London.
The finding, being published today in the journal Nature, pushes the date for the appearance of insects, one of the most successful life-forms on earth, 10 million to 20 million years back in the fossil record. And it suggests that insects were among the first animals to live on land.
The authors also argue that these ancient insects flew. If true, it would mean that flight -- one of life's most important and vigorously investigated evolutionary innovations -- evolved much earlier than suspected, 70 million years before the oldest known fossilized insect wing. Scientists say the finding would put insects, already recognized as the earliest animal fliers, up in the air a good 170 million years before anything else, even flying dinosaurs.
''We were at the museum to look at another famous insect fossil, one that everyone's been discussing for the past 80 years,'' said Dr. David Grimaldi, a curator of entomology at the American Museum of Natural History, who wrote the paper along with Dr. Michael S. Engel, a paleoentomologist at the University of Kansas.
But the two could not resist examining the other fragment stored in the same drawer, a curious bit of fossil that had long ago been dismissed as being of little interest. Dr. Grimaldi said, ''We looked at each other and said, 'Holy moley!' ''
Dr. William Shear, a paleobiologist at Hampden-Sydney College in Virginia who was a discoverer of what had once been considered the oldest insect fossils, said of the new claim, ''It's a very convincing case.''
Perhaps other scientists can be forgiven for having missed the significance of this fossil, named Rhyniognatha early in the last century. Its jaws measure less than one two-hundred-fiftieth of an inch across. Embedded in a partly translucent crystalline rock, known as chert, from Rhynie, Scotland, such fossils can be seen clearly only when the chert is cut with diamond saws, polished and then examined under a powerful microscope.
Under bright light and high magnification, the jaw fragments show several telltale features, including sockets forming part of a hingelike mechanism that clearly identifies them as mouth parts of a true insect.
But this oldest-known insect fossil is not a member of the most primitive lineage of insects. Instead the authors say, based on the stoutness and subtler features of these jaws, which look like the tips of two tiny bird wings, Rhyniognatha is part of a lineage of more advanced insects.
''So that means that everything that diversified prior to that must have been older than that fossil,'' Dr. Engel said.
If so, it would push the origin of insects back into the dim shadows of the Silurian period, more than 400 million years ago, when plants were just edging up onto land, followed by the first animals.
Because the jaws appear to place the fossil species among lineages of insects that exhibit well-developed wings, the authors expressed confidence that Rhyniognatha could fly. But Dr. Shear said it could be possible for such jaws to evolve without flight.
While the results are very suggestive of flight, Dr. Shear said, the study lacks a ''smoking wing.''
So until Rhyniognatha's tiny body is found in the Scottish chert or other ancient fliers are uncovered, scientists are likely to continue debating the date of the origin of animal flight.
