On the last day of testimony in Kirk Kerkorian's fraud lawsuit against DaimlerChrysler, the company's expert witness described the $36 billion combination that created the company as a ''godsend'' for Chrysler shareholders, including Mr. Kerkorian.
''This merger was a godsend for Chrysler, and this was the best thing that happened to Chrysler,'' said Daniel Fischel, a business and law professor at the University of Chicago. Professor Fischel rejected opposing testimony from experts like William Silber, a professor at the Stern School of Business at New York University, who said the failure of Chrysler's directors to negotiate a higher premium for shareholders amounted to a ''present'' for Daimler.
In 2000, Mr. Kerkorian, who had owned 13.8 percent of Chrysler's shares, sued DaimlerChrysler and its chairman, Jürgen Schrempp, contending that the deal was deceptively described as a merger of equals instead of an acquisition of Chrysler and that it deprived him of the premium he would have demanded under an outright takeover.
The Tracinda Corporation, Mr. Kerkorian's investment company, is seeking $1.2 billion in damages, which it says is the difference between the 28 percent premium it received and the 54 percent premium it says would have been appropriate in an acquisition.
But Professor Fischel disputed that contention. ''Who would have paid it? No one else came forward.''
He said the 28 percent was a ''large and significant premium,'' and that Chrysler shareholders had actually been protected by the merger because without DaimlerChrysler income to bolster earnings, the former Chrysler shareholders could have ended up owning a bankrupt company.
Professor Fischel said that when he applied his methodology to the analyses of Tracinda's experts, he found them to be ''fundamentally flawed and that Tracinda would not have received a higher premium if the DaimlerChrysler transaction had been characterized'' as an acquisition rather than a merger of equals.
Judge Joseph Farnan Jr. of Federal District Court instructed both sides to submit summary arguments in writing.
A spokesman for DaimlerChrysler estimated that it would be June before post-trial filings and motions were completed.
