Cynthia McKay was in business for more than a decade before her food basket company received a dreaded Better Business Bureau complaint in 2003. She assigned the blame, in part, to her sometimes overzealous plan to go global.
Le Gourmet Gift Basket Inc., which has 510 franchises, including 25 outside the United States, expanded into Hong Kong in 2002. The initial experience was no picnic for Ms. McKay, the chief executive. Last year, a customer ordered a basket to be sent to an American worker who had been transferred to China. So, Ms. McKay had her Hong Kong franchise make up a basket and send it to the homesick expatriate -- but she underestimated the cultural divide. The client had ordered an American-themed basket but the basket delivered contained pickled octopus and rice cakes instead of smoked salmon and potato chips.
''The client came back to me, threatened a lawsuit and went to the Better Business Bureau,'' said Ms. McKay, whose company is based in Castle Rock, Colo. ''Even though my contract with the franchisee says they are responsible for their own behavior, good will was involved.'' Ms. McKay mailed another basket overnight at a cost of $160 and sent a letter of apology to the customer. The complaint, the company's only one so far, was subsequently resolved.
For all the cultural misunderstandings and challenges ranging from currency fluctuations to language barriers that she has encountered since expanding abroad, Ms. McKay says she has no regrets. After moving first into New Zealand in 1999 and then into Australia, Canada and Hong Kong, her company is projecting $90,000 in international revenue this year. Her company has its sights on South Africa, the Philippines, Thailand and eventually Saudi Arabia, as well as Europe.
Big franchise players like McDonald's and Dunkin' Donuts have long seen the world as a business opportunity, but an increasing number of smaller franchise companies are now sharing this vision. Last year, 56 percent of franchise operators were in markets outside the United States, up from 46 percent in 2000, according to a survey of its 810 members by the International Franchise Association. ''Much of that growth is attributed to the small and mid-sized firms,'' said Marcel Portman, the group's vice president for global development.
Experts say the main factors driving the trend are the Internet, the improved technology that allows a company to do satellite conferencing and produce low-cost training videos for foreign franchisees, a saturated domestic franchise market, growing international acceptance of franchising and a surge in international franchise shows.
''Two years ago we asked, 'Where is our future?' and we realized it was international,'' said Bill Powers, vice president and chief operating officer of Realty Executives International, a residential real estate franchise company based in Phoenix. It has franchises in Thailand, South Africa, Australia, Israel, Canada and Mexico. The company, he said, is close to running out of regions at home.
Smaller franchise companies should tread warily, however. Mr. Portman recites a catalog of pitfalls involving cultural hurdles, economic uncertainty (including the core question of whether local consumers will pay for the product), foreign-exchange instability, the difficulty of checking the financial backgrounds of potential franchisees and obstacles to securing intellectual property rights in countries with weak trademark laws. ''Or maybe someone already trademarked your name or concept and is waiting for you to come down and pay for it,'' he said. ''This is known as trademark piracy.''
But large or small, American companies can find it tough to sell their franchise concepts abroad, especially in countries where English is not spoken and in those with unfamiliar laws and customs. In such places, recruiting competent local franchisees is crucial. ''I tell my clients, especially those that have never gone overseas, to make more than one visit if you want to develop a market,'' said William Le Sante, the managing director of franchising consultancy for Le Sante International, a consulting firm in Miami. ''You might get off a plane and say, 'Oh my gosh, this is not our market.' ''
Mr. Le Sante offered an example of a fast-food company based in the United States that ran into trouble in Latin America by giving its international partner a free hand in the selection of locations, products and a distributor for its outlets. The partner signed leases the operation could not afford, resulting in a big financial loss to the company and damage to its image in its new market.
Gary Salomon, chief executive of Fastsigns International Inc., a company based in Carrollton, Tex., that makes signs and graphics for businesses, says he made the mistake more than once of expanding abroad without sending in an advance team to investigate conditions. In Colombia, for example, the company ''had problems with security, political stability and a motivated working class that was reasonably well educated.'' The company left Colombia in 1996.
And while he has remained in other Latin American countries, both Mexico and Argentina have been plagued by currency devaluations and economic turmoil, he said. And Brazil, though it has a large middle class and a strong work ethic, is saddled with ''tremendous inflationary problems and currency stability issues,'' he said.
Even Europe can throw a curveball at entrepreneurs in the United States. Initially, Fastsigns had difficulty with some British franchisees who balked at making aggressive sales pitches, Mr. Salomon said. ''It's not the personality of a Brit,'' he said. But the company sent an operations team and continues to hold training sessions in Britain to make sure the local owners stay on track.
Fastsigns has 65 international franchises and aims to have 120 within three years, with most of the growth coming in Britain, Australia and Canada.
For all the perils of venturing into unknown territory, there can be pleasant surprises. When Partyland Inc. of Plymouth Meeting, Pa., went into Saudi Arabia in 1998, the company worried that consumers in that conservative Islamic society would not be receptive to its Barbie-theme party goods, said Kevin Pike, the company's assistant vice president franchise services. But the Barbie products sold well, as did whoopee cushions. Balloons are a staple; a Saudi prince recently ordered 4,000 of them at a Partyland store for his daughter's birthday. The company now has two stores in Saudi Arabia and two in Kuwait.
Partyland, which has 350 units in 20 countries, has had to tweak its format to take account of local circumstances. To beat the exorbitant rents in Singapore, the company created boutique-style shops rather than use the usual warehouse design. In tropical St. Lucia, the company permitted tile floors as well as the standard carpeting.
Many companies, including Fastsigns and Partyland, use what they call master developers or master franchisers when they enter a country. These entities, which act as middlemen between the company and the franchisees, are invaluable for their understanding of the local customs, but they do not come cheap.
Ms. McKay, a former lawyer, decided to do it all on her own, figuring any mistakes she made early on would cost her less than a master developer's fees. And she has learned from those mistakes. A prospective franchisee in the Philippines wanted to include a local meat pastry called siopao in the company's gift baskets. With the memory of the pickled-octopus fiasco in Hong Kong fresh in her mind, Ms. McKay knew the last thing she needed was a newspaper story about food poisoning linked to her company.
''I was trying to explain to them that we don't transport meat or anything perishable,'' she said. ''I could just see it: 'We killed three people with tainted meat.'''
SMALL BUSINESS
