IN the late 1990's, as personal computers were becoming as common in many American households as televisions and cordless phones, the toy industry quickly embraced technologies like microprocessors, optical sensors and audio synthesizers. But some parents complained that child's play was becoming anything but. Toys and games, they said, were becoming too difficult to set up, charge up and play.
This year, toymakers are increasingly seizing on a strategy embraced already by their consumer electronics counterparts: use smarter technology to make products as simple and easy to enjoy as marbles and jump ropes. This shift in the $31.9 billion toy industry (including the $11.2 billion video-game sector) will be evident at the 101st Annual American International Toy Fair, which opens on Sunday in New York.
''In a mature industry, manufacturers are looking for that specific edge that will get their products chosen over someone else's,'' said Michael Redmond, a senior industry analyst for the NPD Group. Incorporating sophisticated but easy-to-use technology into toys and children's games is more and more important in gaining an edge, he said -- particularly given a 3 percent decline in toy sales (excluding games) last year in the United States.
The results of that strategy will soon be apparent on retail shelves. Expect to see plush animals and toy action figures that sing or respond directly to television programs without any need for special transceivers and tangles of wire; a video game whose main character seamlessly responds to thousands of words and phrases spoken by players; and a hybrid game system from Japan that lets players wield real tennis rackets and baseball bats against virtual opponents on their TV sets.
This crop of toys and games, which should begin appearing as early as this spring, uses technology to lower barriers that may have made some playthings almost too complicated, too geeky, for average consumers. Toy and game makers say that consumers want the learning curve to be little more than a speed bump.
''Right out of the package the technology adds to the play value,'' said Thomas P. Conley, president of the Toy Industry Association, which represents 85 percent of the toymakers in the United States. ''What we've got to remember is that all of this is trying to enhance the play value for the child, so the child can enjoy the toy longer.''
Mr. Conley said that at least 70 percent of the toys being shown at this year's Toy Fair use microchips. ''That number grows every single year,'' he added. ''The chip technology keeps getting better and better, so the toys are able to do more and have more features and still come in at those magic price points that retailers like.''
For example, Thinkway is expanding the wildly popular cyberworld of Neopets with a line of interactive Neopet toys that are not only voice-activated but are also engineered to detect a player's mood and respond like a real pet. Bandai America has its own interactive doll, Berry Talkin' Apple Dumplin', that says more than 60 words and phrases but ''learns'' to recombine them in new ways the more a child talks to the doll. And LeapFrog is introducing technology-enhanced learning toys that incorporate functions like handwriting recognition and software that enables children to enter their homework problems into a hand-held device and get help by way of improved microprocessing.
Advanced microchip technology is also permitting some familiar devices to act more toylike as their makers reach for younger consumers.
The latest product from Wildseed, a software company based in Kirkland, Wash., that makes interactive accessories for cellphones, is a line of shells that snap on and off special wireless phones from Wildseed that are expected to cost less than $100. The shells, called SmartSkins, contain a microchip that personalizes a phone, instantly loading it with digital music, video clips, pictures, wallpaper, games, special ring tones and more without the need for lengthy downloads or tedious typing on tiny wireless handset keypads. The shells are expected to cost $25 to $50.
''Technology for technology's sake? The typical parent sees through that,'' said Kevin Curran, general manager of Fisher-Price Friends, which produces toys based on characters like Elmo on ''Sesame Street'' and Blue from ''Blue's Clues.'' ''You really have to tap into children's play patterns. If the technology doesn't reinforce the play pattern, then it becomes superfluous.''
At Toy Fair -- an event open only to the industry, with more than 1,500 toy and children's entertainment companies unveiling their latest products -- Fisher-Price is showing, among other products, InteracTV. Mr. Curran describes it as a $40 ''learning platform'' that lets children play and learn with television characters through special DVD's and a simple remote-control panel.
The brightly colored plastic panel uses infrared sensors and touch-screen technology that wirelessly ''speaks'' to any standard DVD player with the touch of a child's finger -- even if the child does not point the panel at the DVD player.
Children as young as 3 can use InteracTV to play along, answering questions and solving problems, with familiar television characters like Dora the Explorer and SpongeBob SquarePants, Mr. Curran said.
A child watching Dora on everyday television could shout answers to questions posed on the air. But with a DVD made for InteracTV, the child can enter answers and get immediate feedback in the characters' voices.
The lightweight control panel can store multiple remote-control codes that let children use it with a number of different DVD players, including one at home, and perhaps another in the car or at a grandparent's house, Mr. Curran added.
In another effort to capitalize on children's viewing habits, Mattel Entertainment is releasing a new Barbie DVD and videotape, the fourth in a series for the fashion-doll-turned-thespian, with a computer-animated Barbie starring in ''The Princess and the Pauper.''
The production's innovation will take place not on the screen, however, but in the living room. One of the characters, a sweet-natured cat named Serafina, will be sold as a $40 plush toy stuffed with digital technology that will let it move (wag its tail and purr, for instance) and sing along with parts of the story when prompted by the video.
Julia Jensen, a spokeswoman for Mattel, said that a watermark technology sends signals from the film to the toy cat through a wireless transmitter that looks like a small jewelry box.
''Consumers are not interested in the complex side of any of this,'' Ms. Jensen said. ''We've talked to mothers and know that as they see everything around them getting easier to use, they want their children's toys as easy and seamless, too.''
In the same vein, Mattel and Warner Brothers Animation have teamed up to produce a series of Batman toys -- a hand-held communicator, action figure and Batmobile -- that will use a wireless technology called video-encoded invisible light to respond to minute pixel changes embedded in a new animated television series.
The series, ''The Batman,'' which is to begin in the fall on Kids' WB and the Cartoon Network, is based on the comic-book legend who morphed into a TV and a movie hero but will feature a younger version of the character, with sleeker, more high-tech gizmos than those seen even in the movies, Warner executives said.
Jim Wagner, senior vice president for marketing at Mattel, said the wireless signals would be undetectable to viewers, but not to the Mattel toys made to sense and respond to them.
Mr. Wagner said that the Batmobile, for instance, the most expensive of the interactive toys at $52, can be prompted to turn on its lights, deploy its fins and make sounds as if its motor is running, all by receiving signals from the television screen.
Even video games, long since harnessed to the family television set, are getting a make-it-easier makeover.
Next month, Konami Digital Entertainment America plans to release Lifeline, developed by Sony Computer Entertainment Japan for the Sony PlayStation 2 console. Konami spokesmen say the game is the first fully voice-activated action-adventure video game.
Most of the action is controlled by a player speaking through a headset to a virtual woman named Rio, a survivor of a mysterious explosion aboard a space station hotel orbiting the earth. Rio can understand 5,000 words and about 100,000 phrases, said Robert Goff, a Konami product manager.
The game, already a major hit in Japan, appeals to hard-core gamers, said Mr. Goff, but also to those intimidated by a video game pad's array of buttons. ''It's a pretty hard thing to learn,'' he said of a game controller, although ''many of us have grown up with it.''
Lifeline's voice recognition virtually eliminates the need for a game controller as players direct Rio through the ruined space station, solving problems and fighting menacing creatures.
In a typical sequence, a player directs Rio to enter a guest room to search for clues to explain the fates of its missing inhabitants. After a player tells Rio to retrieve and open a book there, the character soon comes under attack by a swarm of creepy aliens.
When the player shouts, ''Shoot, head!'' Rio fires her weapon at the creature's head. ''Dodge to the right!'' and she complies. ''Shoot stomach!'' and Rio does.
''It's a more intuitive way to interact with someone,'' Mr. Goff said of controlling action by telling a character what to do with a voice command rather than using a joystick, buttons and triggers. ''Imagine voice activation coming in to football video games. You could call audibles, call man-to-man, zone defenses. Every game could benefit.''
Game designers at the SSD Company in Kusatsu, Japan, had a similar thought but took a different route in eliminating the game controller from its video games, its engineers said recently. Their solution is XaviX (pronounced ZAH-vicks), a game system that marries conventional video game technology with toy baseballs, bats, tennis rackets and bowling balls embedded with wireless sensors.
Someone playing a XaviX game -- tennis, for instance -- inserts the game cartridge into an $80 XaviX set-top box connected to a television set. Rather than a game controller, the player picks up a special toy racket, squares off in front of the television and swings, smacking a virtual ball that reacts almost like a real one on the screen. The virtual spectators cheer, depending on the level of play; the score is kept; and the real human players often work up a real sweat, said Andre Job, vice president for marketing at the TSC Group, which helped develop XaviX for the American market.
''I think the key thing for kids and adults, no matter the form of entertainment, is that they want simplicity,'' Mr. Job said. ''They want to spend their time playing and enjoying the experience instead of spending enormous amounts of time with complexities, wondering how a thing works.''
On the Road Again  A Scooter Maker Shifts Into Four-Wheel Mode
RAZOR USA, the company whose shiny aluminum scooters on little polyurethane wheels began dotting sidewalks four years ago, has developed a new form of transportation as recreation: a battery-powered go-cart called Ground Force.
The vehicle, a frame of steel tubing with low-profile cast-aluminum wheels and solid rubber tires, is aimed at riders age 10 and older, so long as they can fit in the go-cart's junior-size seat. (The maximum rider weight is 220 pounds.)
And unlike Razor's most popular scooters, the Ground Force, which is about 38 inches long and 25 inches wide, is not collapsible for easy carrying. It is clearly more vehicle than youth fashion accessory.
''We said to ourselves, 'Let's take a play pattern that is inherent in almost every kid, which is racing and driving, and let's take that older, faster technology and reinvent it and provide it as a toy to kids,''' said Katherine Mahoney, the vice president for marketing at Razor USA, which is based in Cerritos, Calif. The company plans to exhibit the go-cart at the Toy Fair in New York next week.
While the go-cart is to be sold as a $250 toy, Ms. Mahoney noted that it is a serious enough vehicle to include shoulder and lap safety belts and a safety flag. The Ground Force has a top speed of 12 miles per hour and has an aviator-style steering wheel and hand-controlled brakes and accelerator.
The carts are to go on sale in early June in automobile parts and supply stores like Pep Boys. Shortly thereafter they are expected to reach major toy stores, including Toys ''R'' Us, and be sold online, Ms. Mahoney said.
The battery-powered motor can provide more than 45 minutes of continuous drive time between charges, which take four to six hours.
Michel Marriott
