On Oct. 17, before any evidence had been presented in the murder trials of Lee Malvo and John Muhammad, an actor playing Mr. Malvo appeared on television. In sequences that looked like documentary clips, he made terrorist demands and loaded the trunk of a car with guns. ''Everything but pulling the trigger,'' says David Erickson, who wrote ''D.C. Sniper: 23 Days of Fear'' for the USA Network. ''It was clear what he was doing.''
This genre, which includes ''D.C. Sniper'' as well as tomorrow night's ''Perfect Husband: The Laci Peterson Story,'' which Mr. Erickson also wrote for USA, might be called preconviction docudrama. Beginning with ''The Billionaire Boys' Club,'' which appeared on NBC in 1987, these movies have borrowed the broad audience for crime news, using real names, dead-ringer actors and staged news sequences to tell the story of a criminal defendant before he has stood trial.
Though not actionable as long as their fictional propositions are borne out in convictions, the movies seem to defy the presumption of innocence. They raise ethical questions that make even the people who work on them uneasy. And they also threaten to influence potential jurors.
Preconviction docudramas get excellent publicity in the form of front-page headlines, but they are scheduled to coincide with the trials of their main characters. ''D.C. Sniper'' drew 3.6 million viewers, a good showing for USA. Mr. Muhammad gave opening statements in his own trial before a Virginia jury four days later, on Oct. 21. ''The Perfect Husband,'' which appears while preliminary hearings in the Scott Peterson double-murder case are under way, is expected to do even better tomorrow night.
Since these movies sometimes play like audio-visual presentations for the prosecution, a network's lawyers must meticulously vet them. Might they constitute libel? Possibly, it turns out. But only if they get the facts wrong. ''A false accusation that a named individual is a murderer certainly could be libelous,'' Floyd Abrams, the constitutional lawyer, said in an e-mail interview. For this reason, he contends, ''They had better be right.''
''Right'' in this context means right about big things like the guilt or innocence of a central character. As for lesser matters -- the glint in an eye, the inflection of a line, even the number of times a defendant visits a crime scene -- all this is left to poetic license. If someone is found guilty of murder, after all, it's unlikely he'll sue for defamation. Convicts like Mr. Malvo and Mr. Muhammad may even find that they're libel-proof: what they did is deemed so wrong that they no longer have any good reputation worth protecting.
Although television has long played fact-fiction shell games, preconviction films are distinguished by their own mischief with the truth. Crashed out on tight deadlines, they are presented to take advantage of a claustrophobic news cycle. As a result their plots and dialogue are drawn not from history or biography but from on-the-fly interviews, partial news transcripts and even the speculations of pundits on opinion shows.
Such was the case with ''Perfect Husband,'' which did not obtain the cooperation of any of the people close to the Scott Peterson murder case, most of whom had been barred from talking about the case by the courts.
So with key facts in question, with the central figures gagged and with no authoritative book to base a script on, how does a screenwriter write a story like this -- and fast? Mr. Erickson says it's not easy. The task combines journalism, collating document, sidestepping libel and traditional screenwriting.
''The perception was that the family obviously would not want to be involved in the movie,'' he said. ''I don't know who made the decision early on.'' For major plot points in his script, therefore, Mr. Erickson relied on the news. ''There are beats that everyone saw on television that you have to have: when the bodies are found, when the DNA matches, when Scott is found with the goatee.''
All these beats, or units of drama, are staged in ''The Perfect Husband.''
''I downloaded every article off The Modesto Bee,'' Mr. Erickson recalled, referring to the newspaper in the California hometown of Scott Peterson and his wife, Laci, who was pregnant at the time of her death. Without identifying himself as either a reporter or a screenwriter, Mr. Erickson spoke to residents of the area. ''We spoke to a waitress at one restaurant,'' he says. ''And she impressed me. She said, 'Damn him if he did it, and damn us if he didn't.' ''
Mr. Erickson realized he could create drama around this conflict, leaving open the dicey question of Mr. Peterson's guilt or innocence. This came as a relief to Mr. Erickson, who had been anxious about the convictions implicit in the script of ''D.C. Sniper.'' ''It was easier ethically to write this movie,'' he said.
He invented two characters, Kate and Tommy Vignatti (Sarah Joy Brown and David Denman) through which he could voice opposing views of Scott's predicament. Broadly speaking Kate, who is affronted by Scott's lies about adultery and other matters, argues, ''Damn him.'' Tommy, determined to give his friend the benefit of the doubt, argues, ''Damn us.'' As Mr. Erickson says: ''The conflict becomes between husband and wife. How can you believe Scott did that? How can you believe he didn't?''
Mr. Erickson is on to something, and he succeeds in creating suspense. By personifying both the intuitive case for Mr. Peterson's guilt and the constitutional case for the presumption of his innocence, Mr. Erickson manages to allegorize the conflict behind the production of his own movie. The movie is self-conscious on this score; it goes so far as to criticize the media's haste to convict defendants before they've been tried. As Scott (Dean Cain) says in the movie, ''The press has a victim. They want a villain now.''
As morally nuanced as the movie is, however -- and the portrayal of Tommy and Kate is curbed by the movie's obligation to the story's public ''beats'' -- it's still tawdry. It's certainly not news, as it's scripted and acted, but it's not movie-making either. Mr. Cain has a difficult, almost laughable, task as an actor: he must play a widower who is either a murderer or a man falsely accused of murder without being given any direction about which he is. While an actor playing a fictional character attends closely to motivations, Mr. Cain could not presume to know what Scott was thinking lest the film seem biased.
Mr. Cain's performance, therefore, is little more than a poker face. The direction is cautious, too, as Scott is alternately lighted to look like a good guy, then streaked by Venetian-blind shadows, as befits a film noir crook. ''Unbiased'' is a dubious achievement for a fiction film.
As bankable as a movie like ''The Perfect Husband'' may be and however technically legal, few people seem confident about the genre. Mr. Erickson, speaking about ''D.C. Sniper,'' said: ''That movie was what I believed, but it doesn't matter what I believed. Is that my place? To make assumptions before the jury has a chance to do so? My answer is, pose those same questions to the talk shows.''
Mr. Abrams, for his part, insists on the legality of a movie like ''Perfect Husband.'' To enjoin the broadcast, he said, would violate the First Amendment. ''To assure fair trials we don't limit speech but seek to assure the selection of fair jurors who have not been contaminated by pretrial publicity. We do that by permitting intense and probing questioning of prospective jurors to assure that nothing interferes with their ability to judge fairly.
Still, even John Kelley, the communications director for USA, hesitated when discussing the moral status of ''The Perfect Husband,'' dwelling on the question of whether it crossed into something like indecency. ''I understand where the line is,'' he said. ''Frankly I'm not sure what makes this movie on the correct side of it.''
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK
