Ohio State running back Maurice Clarett cleared one of the final hurdles in his quest to enter the N.F.L. draft, when a federal judge yesterday declined the league's request for a stay of her decision that Clarett and other underclassmen are eligible for the draft.
The league will appeal the decision on the stay to the United States Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit. If the appeals court grants the stay before the draft begins on April 24, Clarett will not be included.
But Clarett will now formally enter the draft, his lawyer, Alan C. Milstein, said yesterday. Milstein is confident that Clarett is taking little risk in declaring now -- and forfeiting his remaining college eligibility -- because Milstein said he thought there was little chance the appeals court would grant the N.F.L. a stay.
''Once they didn't get a stay from the district judge, there's almost no chance of getting a stay,'' Milstein said.
Judge Shira A. Scheindlin, in turning down the request for a stay, ruled that the league would not suffer irreparable harm if Clarett and other underclassmen were allowed into the draft. Last week, Scheindlin ruled that the league's age requirement -- that players may not enter the draft until three years after their high school class graduates -- was a violation of antitrust law.
Jeff Pash, the N.F.L.'s executive vice president, said in a statement yesterday that the league would continue to press an appeal. ''We continue to believe that last week's ruling is legally erroneous and not in the best interests of the N.F.L., college football, or professional and college players,'' Pash said. ''We are a long way from a final decision.''
In its request for a stay, the league expressed concern that underclassmen, who have until March 1 to enter the draft, might overtrain or begin to use steroids to improve their standing in the draft. Scheindlin said in her ruling yesterday that the concern ''makes no sense.''
''It is extremely unlikely that younger players will overtrain or turn to steroid use in the period between now and the end of the month,'' she said.
The league will seek a stay from the appeals court so the current draft rules remain intact until the appeal is decided. The appeal is unlikely to be decided before April.
''If a stay is granted, Clarett will miss the 2004 draft,'' Scheindlin said. ''He will not be eligible to play in the N.F.L. until the 2005 draft, when he would have been eligible under the current rule. If the stay is granted, Clarett will have effectively lost his lawsuit.''
PRO FOOTBALL
