Secretary General Kofi Annan on Wednesday scheduled a third day of critical talks for Thursday with Greek and Turkish Cypriot leaders to overcome objections to his terms for ending the 30-year division of Cyprus.
The talks between the Turkish Cypriot leader, Rauf Denktash, his Greek Cypriot counterpart, Tassos Papadopoulos, and Mr. Annan are intended to produce a commitment to press for an agreement next month for submission to an island-wide referendum in April so Cyprus can join the expanding European Union on May 1 as a reunited state.
The rival camps broke off conversations Tuesday and Wednesday without comment. Both reportedly had differences with details of Mr. Annan's mediation, but United Nations diplomats said they were hopeful of achieving a breakthrough.
A round of reunification talks last year produced a United Nations-brokered formula for a single federated state but it collapsed in March after Mr. Denktash refused to put it to a vote of his people.
The failure was a particularly frustrating one for Mr. Annan and United Nations diplomats, who thought they had finally found a path to solving one of the most intractable international disputes. Whereas Mr. Annan often plays the role of enabler or conciliator, in the Cyprus talks he has invested considerable personal capital in setting himself up as the final arbiter.
A week ago, Mr. Annan invited the two sides to New York after being encouraged by Turkey to believe that a last push might now succeed. Unless a pact is agreed, only the Greek Cypriot government will be entitled to enter the soon-to-be 25-nation European Union.
Turkey is eager to avoid that outcome, since it could scuttle its own deep-seated interest in becoming a member of the European Union in the future. Its regional rival, Greece, has been a member since 1981.
The division of Cyprus has bedeviled the relationship of Turkey, a member of NATO, with many traditional allies at a time when it is seeking to become the first Muslim nation to join Europe.
A European ambassador, speaking not for attribution, said failure to strike a deal would spell the end of Turkey's hopes ''for a long time.'' He said, ''It would mean that the Green Line dividing Cyprus would become fixed as the eastern border of Europe.''
Cyprus has been split into Greek Cypriot-controlled and Turkish-occupied sides since Turkey seized the northern third of the island in 1974 after a pro-Greek coup aimed at unifying the island with Greece. The breakaway state, called the Turkish Republic of North Cyprus, is recognized only by Turkey, which keeps 30,000 troops there.
Recep Tayyip Erdogan, Turkey's prime minister, has put pressure on Mr. Denktash to drop his objections and has confided to Mr. Annan that the powerful Turkish military would now agree to a settlement.
The Anatolian state news agency quoted Mr. Erdogan saying that while there could be no question of removing Mr. Denktash as the chief negotiator, ''If you only say 'I', you will not conclude the negotiations.''
''We have handed him a road map,'' the prime minister was quoted as saying, ''but we will see how loyal he will stay to this road map.''
The United States is a strong backer of Turkey's effort to join the European Union, and the Bush administration has pressed both sides in the Cyprus dispute to cooperate with Mr. Annan.
