It started almost casually last fall, with F.B.I. agents leaving business cards under doors around the White House, politely calling for appointments and even meeting some officials, without any lawyers present, over a few beers at a nearby bar.
But the investigation into who at the White House leaked the name of an undercover C.I.A. officer has become much more intense in the last few weeks. Some administration officials have been summoned for confrontational interviews. Current and former members of the White House's communications and foreign policy teams have hired lawyers. At least a handful of White House aides have had to appear before a federal grand jury.
At the White House, the topic is rarely discussed openly among those who have already been drawn into the investigation and those who think they may be, people who have been questioned in the case said. The result, they said, is an information vacuum that is being filled to some extent by fear of what current or former colleagues may be telling investigators.
Some officials now find themselves in a bind borne of the potentially huge political stakes of the case. Since the investigation began in September, President Bush has said repeatedly that he wants to get to the bottom of the matter and that he has directed everyone on his staff to cooperate fully. Some lawyers involved in the case said White House officials were now trapped between that direction from the president and legal advice that they aggressively assert their own rights.
So although White House officials have publicly pledged to help investigators, there is some resistance just beneath the surface. Some people who have spoken with investigators say they have refused to sign statements that would waive any promise of confidentiality they received from reporters. The effort to obtain the statements is apparently intended to deprive journalists who wrote about the leak an ability, if questioned or subpoenaed, to cite the need to protect anonymous sources.
Some people questioned in the case say they have also declined to sign agreements that they will not disclose any information about their encounters with investigators.
At a White House that has largely avoided scandal -- and one that has been distinguished by remarkable internal cohesion -- the escalating investigation has brought unusual personal stress and the uncertainties that afflict anyone caught up in a full-scale criminal inquiry.
Some White House officials, concerned about what the investigation might mean for themselves or their bosses, have been pumping reporters for information about what they know. Others, so far untouched by the investigation, are sighing with relief.
But like any institution caught up in a criminal inquiry, this one appears intent on getting on with business as usual, and avoiding the spectacle of colleagues' turning on colleagues, even as investigators turn up the pressure.
''The mood is concern, not worry,'' said one Republican with close ties to the White House. ''It's attention, not fear. And so far it hasn't caused any dysfunctional relationships to crop up.''
The investigation has already spread through much of the White House. Among those who have been interviewed by the F.B.I. are Karl Rove, the president's senior adviser, and powerful behind-the-scenes figures like I. Lewis Libby, Vice President Dick Cheney's chief of staff. Those who have trooped in to answer questions from the grand jury include Scott McClellan, Mr. Bush's press secretary; Claire Buchan, a deputy press secretary; Mary Matalin, a former top adviser to Mr. Cheney; and Adam Levine, a former White House communications aide.
Investigators appear to be amassing as much information as they can about how the White House press and political operations work and asking those they question about specific conversations with other White House aides and with reporters.
The goal of the inquiry is to determine who told the syndicated columnist Robert Novak that Valerie Plame, the wife of former Ambassador Joseph C. Wilson IV, was an undercover C.I.A. officer. In a column that appeared in The Washington Post on July 14, Mr. Novak attributed the information to two ''senior administration officials.'' Disclosure of an undercover officer's identity can be a crime.
The case has heated up since December, when Attorney General John Ashcroft removed himself from it and the Justice Department put the matter in the hands of Patrick J. Fitzgerald, the United States attorney in Chicago. Soon afterward, some administration officials were summoned to interviews at an office building a few blocks from the White House that is customarily used for investigations of national security breaches.
There, a two-member team of prosecutors, referring to specific e-mail messages, notes and phone calls, started asking tough, confrontational questions about the leak and who might have been behind it. Then came the grand jury, where as usual witnesses must answer questions without a lawyer present, not knowing what their colleagues have testified.
White House Memo
