ONE of the biggest design statements in Mimi and Barry Krall's new house, in Bartlett, Ill., is the striking staircase curving up through their two-story foyer, just inside the leaded-glass front door.
With handrails that end provocatively in curled-back volutes at the bottom, the staircase, in a dark-cherry stain, stands out sharply against the pale floors and walls. ''It's a solid look,'' Mr. Krall said.
It's also a solid look-but-don't touch. Since the Kralls moved into the house last July, they have rarely used their big, fancy front stairs. They don't need to, because they have a second stairway, a simple set of carpeted steps at the back of the house.
''There are no rules, but we use the back staircase 95 percent of the time,'' said Mr. Krall, 45, a Jiffy Lube franchise owner. The front staircase simply sits there, sparkling and unused, like Wedgwood china while everyone eats off the Mikasa.
What used to be called the servant stairs are back, but the servants are nowhere in sight (not usually, anyway). Alongside modern amenities packed into new houses, such as cabling fit for a Verizon data center, tankless water heaters and ovens that chill and then bake, the low-tech idea of a second stairway has begun taking hold among trading-up home buyers. Another set appeals, for example, to parents stressed for any way to save time, however minor. And then there are those who want to keep children away from good furniture and carpets.
From the Kralls' kitchen, where the parents and their two children, Dan, 20, and Jennifer, 16, usually hang out, the back stairs offer a shortcut: three hops up and a right turn to 10 more steps puts them on the second floor of their 5,000-square-foot house.
''My wife has always looked for a house with two staircases, so when she found this, I mean, that was it,'' Mr. Krall said.
While most people who buy houses with second stairways cite the efficiencies and privacy they afford, Mrs. Krall simply wanted romance. ''It always reminded me of the old Victorian homes, just from movies that I saw,'' she said. Indeed, second stairs were big in the Victorian era, when many middle-class families had the benefit of cheap immigrant help around the house, said Virginia McAlester, an architectural historian in Dallas and an author of ''A Field Guide to American Houses'' (Knopf, 1984).
Living standards changed dramatically in the United States after World War I, she said, but second stairs could still be found in many new houses as late as the 1930's. The next big building boom came after World War II, in the 1950's: ''The ranch house was the end of the back stair,'' Ms. McAlester said, ''because it was the end of all stairs.''
If today's versions of second stairs do not exactly fulfill their original Victorian purpose, they at least support the Victorian desire, still viable among most Americans who own houses, to have a sedate parlor, and perhaps a dining room, that is purely for admiring, except on special occasions.
''We have always had a beautiful living room and dining room,'' Mr. Krall said, ''and everybody goes to the kitchen, even on holidays -- other than opening presents.''
One reason for this living pattern may be a practical housekeeping matter: stairs at the back of the house help keep the front showcase-ready, as the real estate agents like to say, and confine a family's looser corporeal impulses, such as putting feet up on furniture and eating Doritos, to the family room and the breakfast nook.
Another reason may relate to a middle-class desire for reassurance that life's perquisites are intact and safely on display.
''It's about separating the public space from the private space,'' said Pauline Saliga, executive director of the Society of Architectural Historians in Chicago. ''And that's what it was in the 19th century and before.''
Back stairs began to return to plans for new houses in the early 1990's, builders say, and the idea has gained momentum only in the past five years.
The National Association of Home Builders has no specific data on the number of new houses with second stairs, but several custom builders said that half to all of their new-house plans include them.
At the International Builders' Show in Las Vegas last month, a demonstration house by Georgia Pacific, a building products company, casually included an auxiliary stairway from its kitchen area to the second floor.
By now, the second stairway has become virtually compulsory for people buying custom-built houses of a certain size.
''When you start getting into the bigger homes, it starts becoming a necessity,'' said Bryan Cleveland, a vice president of Dartmoor Homes in Hoffman Estates, Ill., which developed the Kralls' subdivision, 30 miles west of Chicago. ''If you're looking at 4,000 square feet, it starts to be a long walk to the front staircase.''
The average American house in 2003 had about 2,200 square feet of finished space, according to the Home Builders Association, and about 37 percent measured more than 2,400 square feet. Yet, the size of houses containing a second stairway has gradually shrunk in recent years, so that now houses of fewer than 3,000 square feet often have two routes to the second level.
Toll Brothers, a home-building company operating in 21 states, designs houses as small as 2,500 square feet with two stairways, said Cory DeSpain, a senior vice president. The re-emergence of second stairs is ''really a customer-driven type of thing,'' he said.
If some customers badly want extra stairs, others are more ambivalent. Sidney Wiggins and his wife, Janet, bought a house with two stairs in a Toll Brothers subdivision outside Leesburg, Va., two years ago. ''The fact that the house had two stairways was not a selling point,'' Mr. Wiggins said, ''though we do find that it comes in handy.''
Jim Walker, a custom builder in Glen Allen, Va., suggested that second stairs are more of a supply-side phenomenon, a feature pushed by some builders onto buyers who do not want to miss an only chance at making life easier. ''No more than 20 percent of the people come through here and say, 'I want them,''' said Mr. Walker, who includes back stairs in about half of his company's house plans.
''Frequently, the staircases aren't more than 20 feet apart,'' Mr. Walker said. Besides, back stairs can eat up 250 to 300 square feet of a house and typically cost at least several thousand dollars. ''It's an expensive use of space,'' he said.
But it is a great talking point for the marketing folks.
Hayden Homes, a builder in St. Louis, mentions the back stairway just after the front staircase and right before the gourmet kitchen in its promotional material for its Bellerive model, which comes in five different styles, including Country French and Country Manor.
One buyer of the Bellerive, Rustin Raleigh, 33, of Lake Saint Louis, Mo., said the second stairway was no more negotiable than the triple-crown moldings and the jumbo brick on the exterior of the new house that he and his wife, Marty, moved into in early December.
''It was an absolute necessity for my wife,'' given 4,800 square feet to manage, Mr. Raleigh said. ''We did a wrought-iron stair, quite formal, on the front stairs, and the back stairs just kind of shoot right down to the kitchen,'' he said. ''We regretted not getting it in our last house.''
By the time most prosperous home buyers find themselves moving on up, as it were, they have thought of nearly everything they could possibly want or need. More frequently, that includes two sets of stairs.
Dan Schneider, 49, and his wife Becky, also 49, spent years taking house tours and compiling wish lists -- for reclaimed historic brick, for Vermont slate shingles -- before they planned the custom-built house they moved to in Annandale, Va., last May. They specified a back stairway in oak, without carpet.
''We use it two-thirds of the time,'' Mr. Schneider. ''With a larger floor plan, it makes sense to have two stairs, because they serve different parts of the house. At the top, they almost meet.''
The back stairs seem to suit the details of their daily routine in ways they could not do without. ''I'm anxious to get to the coffee pot,'' Mr. Schneider said.
The second stairway ''becomes a private staircase from the kitchen and the family part of the house to the bedrooms,'' leaving guests to use the more formal way to go upstairs, said Mr. Schneider's builder, Jeff Carpenter, of Monticello Homes in Fairfax Station, Va.
Mr. Carpenter, who builds three to six houses a year, added that one high-end contemporary he is building has a private stairway leading directly to the master-bedroom suite.
Beyond practicality, second stairs are proving to be one more way to incorporate additional luxury into the lives of those who thought they had everything.
The amenity of a second stairway amuses Beth Gledhill. An information systems manager for I.B.M., she moved with her husband, Norman Toth, to a new house in Stormville, N.Y., in October. It was the model house in a newly developed area where the couple had been hoping to move.
''We just stumbled across this,'' she said of the 4,000-square-foot house. Ms. Gledhill's second stairway is a slightly subdued version of the grander staircase in the foyer, with white balusters and a medium stain on the oak rails. ''I didn't specifically buy the house because it had a back stair,'' she said.
''Logistically, does this house need a second stair?'' she added. ''No.'' She said that the main staircase was convenient enough from anywhere in the house.'' ''It didn't even cross my mind that I wanted or needed a second stair.''
Now, builders say, it is crossing some buyers' minds that they can live without the first stairway by the front door.
''We're also noticing stairs being removed from the foyers and buyers going back to a 'great hall' look,'' said Mary Schroeder, president of Miller Homes in Brookfield, Wis., which builds five to seven houses a year. Stairs in an entrance hall are ''really sort of clunky,'' Ms. Schroeder said. 'They're a little overpowering in a lot of cases.''
Mr. Walker, the custom builder in Virginia, said, ''A nicely turned-out stair is really quite pretty.'' But, he added, ''We've seen as much interest in removing them from the front of the house entirely.''
