An undermanned St. John's team was once more overwhelmed, this time by West Virginia, 86-52, on Wednesday night. The defeat came hours after the Rev. Donald J. Harrington, the president of St. John's, sought to reassure students on the university's Queens campus that remarks he had made to the news media about the scandal involving St. John's basketball players were not racially motivated.
Late Tuesday, as part of an e-mail message to the St. John's community condemning the incident, which followed the Feb. 4 game at Pitt, and vowing that a similar embarrassment would not happen again, Harrington acknowledged that his earlier comments were troubling to some.
''The realization that my words have brought pain and uncertainty to some of our students has brought me far greater sadness than the incident itself,'' he wrote in the e-mail message.
''I regret deeply and apologize to all of you who have been offended.''
The energy that the eight remaining Red Storm players displayed on Sunday in losing to Boston College in front of a supportive home crowd at Madison Square Garden was nowhere to be found here Wednesday night.
St. John's (5-16, 0-10 Big East) fell behind by 41-22 at halftime. Daryll Hill led the Red Storm with 21 points, but West Virginia (13-8, 5-5) had five players in double figures and hardly seemed to miss Coach John Beilein, who was out because of back spasms.
The St. John's campus remained troubled on Wednesday despite the swift actions taken against the players involved in last week's incident. Grady Reynolds was expelled, Elijah Ingram withdrew from the university rather than submit to a disciplinary hearing and Abe Keita was removed from the basketball team and suspended from school for a year. Three other players received suspensions from the team.
Much of the anger on campus was directed at Harrington's initial comments.
Harrington spent much of Wednesday meeting with student leaders individually as well as in groups. He met with more than 200 students in a 1-hour-15-minute session that focused on the incident involving the basketball players, campus unity and his own remarks.
''They perceived it as a racial comment, yes,'' said a St. John's spokesman, Jody Fisher. ''It goes without saying that it wasn't intended to be.''
In a series of interviews on Saturday, Harrington blamed the ''culture'' of the men's basketball team for the incident last Wednesday in Pittsburgh, where six players took a woman they had met in a strip club back to the team hotel.
The woman, who first told the police she had been raped, has been charged with making fictitious reports to law enforcement, prostitution and criminal theft by extortion.
''Obviously, I'm not speaking about ethnic or religion or whatever,'' Harrington said on Saturday. ''But for something like this to happen, there has to be a sense to somebody that this is acceptable.''
All six players involved are black.
The eight remaining members of the St. John's basketball team said after the game here Wednesday night that they were not offended by Harrington's initial remarks and that he had met with them in their locker room before the Boston College game to explain his comments.
''He made it very clear that what he was saying was not racial,'' said Kyle Cuffe, one of the players.
Back on campus, there were varying views.
''I really do feel that it's a race thing,'' Marcel Duplan, a sophomore, said of Harrington's comments in an interview Wednesday.
Lindsey Altino, a junior, said, ''I think he needs to apologize because that is not the culture of basketball if he is referring to African-Americans playing it.''
But others said they believed Harrington's remarks were misconstrued.
''It's more of the culture of the sports world today at the highest level like big-time Division I basketball like St. John's is and the N.B.A.,'' said Drew Jackson, a senior who plays right field on the Red Storm baseball team. ''It filters down to the colleges and I think that's what he meant more than a race-related thing.''
Fabrice Armand, president of student government at St. John's, said that before the meeting with Harrington on Wednesday, students were angry and confused by the embarrassment the players brought to the university and by Harrington's response.
''No one really knew what he meant,'' said Armand, a senior from Queens. ''But Father clearly said what he meant by culture was an attitude or mentality of the basketball team and not about race. I think everyone was very satisfied with his explanation.''
Armand said that as a result of the meetings, committees will be formed with student, faculty and administrative representation for campus discussions.
He said the student body is not upset with the four scholarship players and four walk-ons who will finish out the Red Storm's season, only with those players involved in the incident.
''We support those guys and will stay behind them because they are playing their hearts and guts out,'' Armand said of the remaining team members.
''St. John's has a lot of tradition and pride, and that's what those guys are playing for.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
