By the time the acrid wisps of smoke reached his nostrils, it was too late for Benjamin Emmanuel to save anything except himself.
The schoolbooks he used to prepare French lessons for his students would turn to ash. So would the law books that each cost a quarter of his monthly salary, a sum he gladly paid to study a profession that might pay him better.
''I lost everything, even my neckties,'' he said, fingering the empty space in his shirt collar. ''We tried to put out the fire with buckets, but there wasn't enough time.''
Mr. Emmanuel's house, which was set on fire Tuesday by a roving band of militiamen loyal to President Jean-Bertrand Aristide, according to witnesses, was one of dozens of houses and businesses burned in this city in the past three days.
The fires, according to leaders of a growing opposition movement here, are part of an all-out effort by the police and militias aligned with the Aristide government to remain in control of the city by terrorizing government opponents into submission.
The police here deny setting the fires and say armed Aristide opponents are trying to overrun their precincts and destabilize the city.
''They are the ones attacking us,'' said one young policeman from the capital, Port-au-Prince, who is stationed here. ''We are under siege.''
While uprisings rage in a dozen cities, the struggle to remain in control of Cap Haitien is perhaps the most important challenge the government has faced so far.
With opposition forces in control of the northern coastal city Gonaïves, they have effectively sliced the country in two, blocking the road from the capital to Cap Haitien. Several towns near Cap Haitien have also fallen under opposition control, tightening the noose around the city.
Cap Haitien has been without electricity since Sunday, residents said, and with no trucks delivering fuel, the pumps at most gasoline stations are dry. Those who did have gas doled it out in drips to mobs wielding jerry cans and buckets.
Relief agencies, unable to deliver supplies to rural areas that are now in the hands of government opponents, worried that if the road stayed closed for much longer children in nearby villages could starve.
''We are in a very bad situation,'' said Andrea Bagnoli, head of the United Nations World Food Program in Cap Haitien. ''If we cannot deliver food soon, the people we are feeding will run out in less than a week.''
After several days of violent confrontations and streets blocked by barricades of flaming cars and tires, Cap Haitien was relatively tranquil Wednesday. Tuesday's barricades were mere char on the street, loose coils of filament from spent tires and smoldering heaps of garbage.
Police officers here said that they were now firmly in control of the town, and that reinforcements had arrived, though they refused to say how many. Few officers roamed the streets, and those who were on patrol stuck close to their police stations.
In other cities, the police continued to struggle against opposition militias. In Saint-Marc, which the government said it had retaken, gun battles broke out between government forces and opposition members in a slum that is home to several opposition leaders, radio reports said.
But holding on to Cap Haitien was a top priority, for political and historic reasons. Cap Haitien, besides being the nation's second-largest city, is a potent symbol of Haitian liberation. Slaves who toiled in plantations around Cap Haitien began the revolt in 1791 that ultimately led to the defeat of Napoleon's imperial army.
It is also a stronghold of opposition support, said Frandley Denis Julien, leader of Citizens' Initiative. His group, which is based here, led a march of thousands last November that began antigovernment demonstrations that ultimately led to the current crisis.
''The government has orchestrated a violent repression of political opposition here because of our strength,'' Mr. Julien said.
As the afternoon faded, many residents worried about what new violence might bring.
''They already shot up my restaurant,'' said Phillipe Zephir, who owns a nightclub and restaurant called La Kay. ''I am scared that tonight they will return to burn it to the ground.''
Political strife has gripped Haiti since a disputed parliamentary election in 2000. With opposition groups unwilling to participate in elections that were supposed to take place last year, the Parliament session expired last month, leaving Mr. Aristide free to rule essentially by decree. Opposition groups have demanded that he leave office.
The uprisings began a week ago in Gonaïves, which is now controlled by a band of anti-Aristide militants. Once ardent supporters of the president, they were part of a militia group called the Cannibal Army. During the uprising, 14 policemen and militiamen were killed by opposition militia, according to radio reports, and on Wednesday, militiamen burned an Aristide militant to death, according to The Associated Press.
Inspired by the Gonaïves uprising, Mr. Aristide's opponents across the country have attacked police stations in their towns. The country's meager police force, believed to number only 5,000, is poorly paid and demoralized. Government officials said Tuesday that some police officers simply abandoned their posts out of fear.
Robert Maguire, director of the international affairs program at Trinity College in Washington and an expert on Haitian politics, said the crisis was as grave as any Mr. Aristide had faced. With a tiny police force and no army, the country is ill equipped to deal with insurrection.
''The situation could be quite fragile,'' Dr. Maguire said. ''How long are the police going to be able to deal with this situation? They have been in the streets for months. Now they are being shot at. They are demoralized. Their leadership is weak. I don't know how long they can hold.''
Speaking with reporters for the first time since the uprising began, Mr. Aristide called those who have risen up against him ''terrorists'' and said he would not resign.
''We will not tolerate any type of violence coming from anyone,'' The A.P. quoted him as saying.
Correction:  February 13, 2004, Friday  An article yesterday about political strife in Haiti misspelled the given name of a restaurateur in Cap Haitien who voiced fear that his business would be destroyed by clashes there. He is Philippe Zephir, not Phillipe.
