In an audacious bid that could once again reshape the entertainment landscape, the Comcast Corporation, the largest cable operator in the United States, made an unsolicited $54.1 billion takeover offer yesterday for the Walt Disney Company.
If successful, the deal would create the largest media company in the world, leaping past Time Warner and Rupert Murdoch's News Corporation by combining Comcast's distribution channel to over 21 million cable subscribers with Disney's collection of film and television properties. Disney's holdings include the ABC television network, ESPN and other cable networks, the Disney and Miramax movie studios, and Disney theme parks around the world.
The Comcast bid is expected to ignite a takeover fight, as Disney and Michael D. Eisner, its chief executive, seek to keep the company independent, and it could inspire other suitors to emerge.
Comcast is an upstart compared with the storied Disney entertainment giant. Founded by Ralph Roberts in 1963 with the purchase of a cable franchise in Tupelo, Miss., Comcast is two-thirds the size of Disney in revenue and besides its cable systems owns or controls just a few entertainment properties, like the cable channels E!, the Golf Channel and the Outdoor Life Network.
But Brian L. Roberts, the current chief executive and the founder's son, has made no secret of his desire to add entertainment programming to the company's cable systems. Last year Comcast showed interest in acquiring the movie and television assets of Vivendi Universal before they were sold to General Electric.
By contrast, Mr. Eisner has said he believes that branching into cable or satellite delivery systems would divert Disney from its strengths as a creator of entertainment.
Disney yesterday responded publicly to Comcast by saying its board would consider the proposal. But behind the scenes, Disney scrambled to mount a defense, hiring investment bankers and plotting strategy to block a deal. Hoping to blunt the effect of Comcast's offer, Disney moved up its announcement of its quarterly earnings before Comcast's news conference began, reporting markedly improved results.
The high-pressure negotiating tactic came on the day that Disney welcomed about a hundred research analysts and institutional investors to Walt Disney World for two days of meetings and mingling with Mr. Eisner and other senior Disney executives. Mr. Eisner, Disney executives and board members have been on a charm offensive of sorts in recent weeks, traveling around the country meeting with investors and corporate governance experts as they battle an insurrection led by Roy E. Disney, a former Disney director and a nephew of Walt Disney, who has accused Mr. Eisner of mismanaging the company, extinguishing its creative spark and driving away talented executives.
They have also had to deal with last month's unraveling of Disney's 13-year partnership with Pixar Animation Studios, the creator of some of Disney's biggest hits, like ''Finding Nemo'' and ''Toy Story.''
At a crowded news conference in New York, Mr. Roberts of Comcast said he had approached Mr. Eisner on Monday about a merger of the companies, but that Mr. Eisner, without consulting Disney's board, had told him, ''It was not of immediate interest to put this together.''
''Given this,'' Mr. Roberts wrote in a letter to Disney's board yesterday, ''the only way for us to proceed is to make a public proposal directly to you and your board.''
But Comcast's initial bid may not be enough to draw Disney to the bargaining table, investors and analysts said. The all-stock offer values Disney's shares at $26.47 apiece, just a 10 percent premium over Disney's closing price of $24.08 on Tuesday. Disney's shares jumped 14.6 percent yesterday, to $27.60, above the initial value of Comcast's offer.
Investors said they expected that Comcast might have to raise its offer if it was going to win over Disney shareholders and gain control.
Investors may also be wary of a deal because of the perilous history of many previous media mergers. The recent combinations of AOL and Time Warner and of Vivendi S.A. and the Seagram Company have proved disastrous for shareholders. And while Mr. Roberts is widely praised as a skilled manager of Comcast's cable empire, he remains an untested leader in the much more finicky world of managing creative talent and shaping the kind of programming that drives Disney.
Any deal would also face regulatory scrutiny because of concerns that more media consolidation could lead to higher costs for consumers.
''I don't know if Comcast will get Disney or not, it's a hostile bid,'' Michael K. Powell, chairman of the Federal Communications Commission, said in response to a question from Senator John McCain in testimony yesterday before the Senate Commerce Committee. ''A merger of that magnitude will undoubtedly go through the finest filter at the commission as is possible, I assure you.''
Several antitrust lawyers said that the deal would probably be approved because the businesses complement one another rather than compete.
Still, several public advocacy groups derided the deal yesterday.
''It's clear that Brian Roberts knows no limits to his media ownership ambitions,'' said Jeff Chester, the executive director of the Center for Digital Democracy, an advocacy group. ''That Comcast would make the announcement the same day that a federal court of appeals in Philadelphia is holding a crucial hearing on new F.C.C. media ownership policies suggests that they are out of touch with how millions of Americans -- who opposed the recent ownership changes -- feel about further media consolidation.''
Comcast's hostile approach to Disney closely mirrors the company's successful effort to acquire AT&amp;T's cable operations in 2001. At that time, Comcast made an unsolicited offer to AT&amp;T after being refused a chance to negotiate. AT&amp;T was under intense pressure from investors to raise its lagging stock price and Comcast's offer pushed AT&amp;T's board to put the cable operations up for sale. Comcast eventually paid $50 billion, and it propelled the company to a lead among cable operators.
Mr. Roberts is gambling that his company's offer will prompt Disney's board to engage in negotiations, to keep restive shareholders in line and perhaps to offer a possible solution to the persistent question of who would succeed Mr. Eisner.
''He's taking advantage of external events, the problems with Pixar, Stanley and Roy,'' said Christopher Dixon, an independent media analyst, referring to Stanley P. Gold, a former Disney director who has joined with Mr. Disney to campaign against Mr. Eisner. ''It's an absolute perfect time to go in and gain potential investors' support given the perception of how Disney is doing in the marketplace.''
Mr. Dixon, who is attending the analyst conference in Orlando, said he talked with Mr. Eisner; Robert A. Iger, the president of Disney; and board members at a party Wednesday night, and they said they were taking the offer under advisement.
Mr. Roberts, he added, ''is putting enormous pressure on the board.'' Indeed, Mr. Eisner's position may be somewhat vulnerable. Despite beating back the board revolt led by Mr. Disney and improving the company's financials and stock price after years of poor performance, Mr. Eisner stumbled again earlier this month when Pixar, the digital production company led by Apple Computer's chief executive, Stephen P. Jobs, ended the partnership, which provided Disney a distribution fee and half of the profits of Pixar's movies. Mr. Jobs said he abandoned negotiations, in part, because he could not get along with Mr. Eisner.
It remains unclear whether Comcast will make a truly hostile takeover bid and urge Disney shareholders to tender their shares. Disney has no so-called poison pill to help it block such an attempt. In fact, any Disney shareholder has the right to call a vote to oust the company's board, a tactic Comcast could take advantage of if it was unable to reach a friendly agreement.
As part of their campaign, Mr. Disney and Mr. Gold have waged a grass-roots campaign to have shareholders withhold their votes for Mr. Eisner and three other directors at the company's annual meeting in March, which is being held in Philadelphia, where Comcast is based.
But Mr. Eisner and other Disney executives have fought back in recent weeks, visiting more than 40 institutional investors, analysts and governance experts in an attempt to garner support.
Disney and its board have long been criticized for the company's corporate governance practices. The board has been accused of being too cozy and of making excessive payments to top executives, for example, when it paid $100 million in severance to Michael Ovitz, the company's ousted president. There have also been complaints that Disney has balked at coming up with a succession plan for Mr. Eisner. Disney in recent months has instituted new board practices to address these concerns, and during their visits to investors Mr. Eisner and others have said they have begun an intensive process to groom a successor.
Comcast's governance practices have not been immune from criticism either. Roberts family members have special shares that give them a 33 percent voting stake in the company while their financial interest is less than 2 percent. Disney could make the Robertses' controlling stake a reason to reject the offer.
This is not the first time Disney has been considered as a merger candidate. In August 2002, Disney's stock price hit a closing low of $13.77 and many on Wall Street speculated that a rival could try to swoop in and buy Disney at a discount. But at the time, several other larger media companies like Time Warner were having troubles of their own, and it looked as if no one could afford to buy the company or could overcome the many regulatory hurdles.
That may still be the case for many. Although Time Warner has begun to rebound from its merger with AOL and has whittled down its debt, analysts said it had a difficult time persuading its board to pull off another major deal just after its own merger debacle.
Viacom, which owns CBS, Paramount Studios and cable channels like MTV but no cable operations, and G.E., which owns NBC and recently agreed to acquire Vivendi's entertainment assets, are other possible bidders, especially as they watch competitors like News Corporation gobble up distribution arms like satellite TV. But both would probably have a hard time winning regulatory approval for such a deal without having to shed an enormous number of assets. And G.E. and Viacom, unlike Time Warner, have avoided buying into the infrastructure of distribution like cable companies and Internet providers, preferring to focus on creating entertainment and news programming.
Other cable or satellite operators, like Cox Communications and EchoStar Communications, do not appear to have enough firepower.
If the deal between Comcast and Disney goes through, it could provoke a rash of deals between other content and distribution companies.
Under the terms of Comcast's offer, the company would exchange 0.78 of a share of Comcast Class A common stock for each Disney share. Comcast would also assume $11.9 billion of Disney's debt.
For the quarter, Disney reported net income of $688 million, or 33 cents a diluted share, soundly beating analysts' estimates. This compared with $36 million, or 2 cents, a year earlier.
While investors bid up Disney's stock price, Wall Street had its usual reaction to the acquiring party's gambit. Comcast stock fell 8 percent.
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: THE OVERVIEW
