In the highlight of yesterday's testimony in the Martha Stewart trial, jurors listened to a tape recording of an interview investigators conducted with Ms. Stewart's co-defendant, Peter E. Bacanovic, in which he gave a version of her stock sale at odds with the one Douglas Faneuil, Mr. Bacanovic's former assistant, gave the court last week. It also differed in some details from the version Ms. Stewart herself gave to investigators.
The interview, held on Feb. 13, 2002, involved lawyers from the Securities and Exchange Commission in New York asking Mr. Bacanovic, then a Merrill Lynch stockbroker, about his dealings with ImClone.
His clients included Ms. Stewart, as well as Dr. Waksal, the founder of ImClone, and several Waksal family members, as well as Bart Pasternak, a Connecticut doctor who sold shares as well. Dr. Pasternak's former wife, Mariana, was traveling with Ms. Stewart on the day Ms. Stewart sold her shares.
On the tape, Mr. Bacanovic sounded somewhat hesitant in some of his answers, although on others he was emphatic. He described learning that ImClone's price had dropped to about $60 a share while he was on vacation in Miami Beach on Dec. 27, 2001. His reaction, he said, was that he had to ''call Martha Stewart and apprise her of the stock price.''
The two of them had agreed, on Dec. 20, that she would sell if the price fell to $60, Mr. Bacanovic said in the tape, adding, ''Of course, she never thought it would.''
That price target was reached after considerable negotiating on his part, he added, since Ms. Stewart did not really want to sell the shares and believed that they might go up since ImClone was working on an important cancer drug.
Mr. Bacanovic also said Ms. Stewart did not put in an automatic order to sell. He described her as someone who liked to know when her sales went through, and said he told her, ''We'll watch the stock for you.''
Mr. Faneuil has testified that he called Ms. Stewart at Mr. Bacanovic's direction after receiving numerous sell orders from Samuel D. Waksal, chief executive of ImClone at the time, as well as other family members. Mr. Faneuil said Mr. Bacanovic ordered him to tell Ms. Stewart what was going on, and that she asked the price and then sold her shares.
Mr. Faneuil also testified that Mr. Bacanovic first told him that the sale was done to offset gains from other trades, and then revised the explanation, saying it was a result of an agreement to sell if the share price fell below $60.
On the tape, Mr. Bacanovic was asked whether he discussed the government's investigation into ImClone trading that began in early January 2002 with Ms. Stewart when they met for a lunch at a restaurant on Ninth Avenue that month.
Mr. Bacanovic said he did not, although he did say that he had told her about an internal Merrill Lynch inquiry centered on ImClone. He also denied telling her anything about any trades that Dr. Waksal was trying to make the same day Ms. Stewart sold her shares.
''I did not get to be a first vice president at Merrill Lynch by discussing other people's business and being indiscreet,'' he told investigators on the tape.
When Mr. Bacanovic learned from Mr. Faneuil on Dec. 27 that ImClone's price had fallen to $60, he said on the tape, he immediately remembered his discussion with Ms. Stewart and tried to call her. ''I just had this conversation, and this is someone who gets irascible,'' he said. ''I thought, so much for this vacation.''
Some of his answers conflicted with answers to similar questions given by Ms. Stewart at an interview on Feb. 4, 2002. She told investigators that she had spoken to Mr. Bacanovic on Dec. 27 about selling her ImClone shares and that he told her the price. Mr. Bacanovic said he did not speak to her between Dec. 24 and early January.
He told investigators that his relationship with Ms. Stewart was a personal one ''with business added to it,'' and detailed her fondness for ImClone stock.
Mr. Bacanovic said the pension fund of employees at her company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, had included thousands of shares of ImClone, bought for 50 cents to $3 a share. But he said that the company's chief financial officer had grown concerned that the fund was too heavily concentrated in ImClone, which other witnesses have called a volatile stock.
In the fall 2001, just before a tender offer from Bristol-Myers Squibb, Mr. Bacanovic said he sold off the pension fund's ImClone holdings for about $62 a share. That left some ImClone shares in Ms. Stewart's personal account at Merrill Lynch.
''Many of my clients invest in certain companies because of loyalty and friendship,'' he told the S.E.C. investigators on the tape. Apparently, Ms. Stewart was one of them, at least when it came to ImClone. ''She thought she was investing in someone that she knew.''
