An Israeli Army raid in Gaza City before dawn on Wednesday and a second raid in the southern Gaza Strip ignited some of the fiercest fighting in months here, leaving 15 Palestinians dead and about 50 injured, according to the two sides.
Israel's prime minister, Ariel Sharon, said last week that he was considering plans to withdraw most of the 7,500 Israeli settlers from the Gaza Strip. But Israel pressed ahead with military action in the area, declaring that the raids on Wednesday were a response to sustained Palestinian rocket and mortar fire from Gaza.
Some Palestinians and Israelis have predicted that Israel is likely to step up operations in Gaza before any Israeli withdrawal, so that a pullout would not be interpreted as a sign of weakness.
''We warned last week that there would be an Israeli escalation,'' said Muhammad al-Hindi, a leader of Islamic Jihad, which has carried out many suicide bombings against Israel.
Israeli raids into densely packed Gaza City, the most populous Palestinian city, inevitably draw heavy fire from Palestinian gunmen, and Wednesday's operation was no exception.
Israeli troops reached the eastern outskirts of Gaza City shortly after 4 a.m. in search of Palestinian cells that had been firing rockets and mortars, the military said.
But Palestinian gunmen and police officers, many of them hiding behind graffiti-covered walls, soon began shooting at the Israeli tanks, and the gun battles carried on until midday.
Despite the danger, many young unarmed Palestinians took to the streets to set up burning tire barricades, or simply to watch.
At one point, a small boy bent down in the middle of a street filled with gunfire. A Palestinian militant raced to the boy, scooping him up by his backpack and carrying him to relative safety.
During the turmoil a moderate earthquake shook the region shortly after 10 a.m. The quake caused no serious damage or injuries. But fearing the collapse of buildings, another wave of Palestinians ran into the streets while the Israeli operation was still under way.
''If the Palestinian Authority were to take the necessary measures to put an end, once and for all, to this terror, then these army actions would not be necessary,'' said David Baker, an official in Mr. Sharon's office.
The Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, speaking in Rome, said, ''We think these killings have to end if the peace process is to continue.'' He urged the United States and other sponsors of the current Middle East peace plan to intervene.
All of the Palestinian dead in Gaza City were male, ages 17 to 34, according to Shifa Hospital. Most belonged to Palestinian factions and had taken part in the fighting, the Israeli military and Palestinian groups said.
Two Palestinian policemen were among those killed, and many of those injured were civilians, Palestinians said.
The most prominent Palestinian to die in the fighting was Hani Abu Skhaila, a senior figure in Hamas who was deeply involved in organizing the rocket fire directed at Israel, according to the Israeli military.
Israel said the Palestinian security forces suspected Mr. Skhaila of involvement in the bombing of a United States diplomatic convoy in Gaza that killed three American security guards on Oct. 15. The American Embassy and Palestinian security officials declined to comment on the allegation.
The Israelis also killed a 17-year-old gunman, Muhammad Hilles, the son of Ahmed Hilles, the Gaza chief of Yasir Arafat's Fatah movement. Only hours after his death, a tent was set up outside the family home, and it quickly filled with hundreds of mourners, while Mr. Hilles recounted the final morning of his son's life.
''He made me breakfast and then he left without saying anything,'' Mr. Hilles said. The fighting was raging nearby, but Mr. Hilles said he had not asked his son where he was going.
''I felt he was going with his gun to defend his home,'' Mr. Hilles said. ''No force in the world could stop him when there's an incursion.''
A few blocks away, the large two-story house of the Hassanain family was in ruins, with a large crowd gathered around. Imakram Hassanain, the family matriarch, walked amid the shattered cinder blocks, an incongruous smile on her face.
Troops charged into the home before 5 a.m. and placed the men and women in separate rooms, Mrs. Hassanain said. The soldiers then handcuffed and took away her husband, Farouk, 59, and three of their five sons. Their sixth son, Ashraf, 26, was killed while battling Israeli troops nearby, she said.
Israel said it had demolished the house with explosives after a search turned up grenades, ammunition rounds and materials for making bombs.
Asked why she was smiling, Ms. Hassanain replied: ''Because my son always dreamed of becoming a martyr. He will always be among the living.''
Israeli armored vehicles also entered the southern Gaza town of Rafah in search of suspected tunnels used for weapons smuggling. The soldiers came under heavy fire, and shot back, the military said. Three Palestinians were killed, according to Al Najar Hospital.
Hamas issued a statement in Gaza City calling for more ''martyrdom attacks,'' its term for suicide bombings.
Israel says Hamas is the main group behind the persistent mortar and rocket fire at Jewish settlements in the Gaza Strip and communities just outside Gaza's boundary fence.
