When under attack, Michael D. Eisner, chief executive of the Walt Disney Company, can be counted on for a tried-and-true response: a tenacious counterattack.
In his 19 years running Disney, Mr. Eisner, 61, has made his battles personal. Jeffrey Katzenberg, once a trusted deputy, became a ''midget'' in Mr. Eisner's words after he left Disney. When Roy Disney -- the company's living tie to its legendary founder -- became discontent, Mr. Eisner marginalized him, and company executives spread the word that Mr. Disney was in over his head.
On Wednesday, the battling Mr. Eisner was little in evidence. He looked somber when he welcomed analysts to a Florida meeting. Rather than engage his guests, he offered a wave. But few Disney watchers expressed doubt that the gloves would soon come off as Mr. Eisner readies a response to the Comcast Corporation's unsolicited bid.
''I think he's a fighter,'' said Graef Crystal, who advised the Disney board on Mr. Eisner's compensation in the 1980's and 1990's. ''He's probably deciding which wine bottle to break the head off of to go after Comcast. And not a bottle of Bordeaux. A cheap California wine will do very well for that purpose. He's a very powerful personality, very domineering.''
More often than not, Mr. Eisner has been successful in his battles -- though he has never faced a challenge as formidable as the unsolicited Comcast bid. Here, too, some analysts expect a personal clash. One of Comcast's senior executives, Steve Burke, was a leading deputy at Disney, one of a string of managers who left the company with little love for Mr. Eisner. And Comcast's chief executive, Brian L. Roberts, has been every bit as determined as Mr. Eisner to build his company into a media powerhouse. [Page C1.]
Hollywood executives said that Mr. Eisner was bracing for a takeover bid by Comcast, given the cable company's ambitions. But he has had much to distract him lately -- including Mr. Disney's campaign to stir shareholder discontent and the move by Pixar Animation Studios to find another distributor for its hit animated films.
Besides Comcast's bid, Mr. Eisner was hit Wednesday with the news that Institutional Shareholder Services, a research group that advises big holders on proxy votes, was recommending that investors withhold their votes for Mr. Eisner's re-election to the Disney board at the company's annual meeting next month.
The group derided his close relationships with board members and argued for separating the roles of chairman and chief executive. Disney responded with a statement saying that the group's conclusions regarding Mr. Eisner were unjustified.
The critique could gird Mr. Eisner's critics on Wall Street. ''One thing that works against Disney is they have very little defense mechanism here,'' said Brad Ruderman, an investment fund manager in Beverly Hills, Calif. ''They don't have a succession plan. There's very, very little to fight this with respect to the large shareholders. They will vote for the highest bidder. What will Disney do to fend this off?''
Mr. Eisner has overcome many threats in the past, sometimes consolidating his leadership by making gestures toward change.
Not long ago, critics emboldened by the post-Enron spirit of reform were calling Disney's board one of the least independent in corporate America. Mr. Eisner hired a leading governance expert and put int place a plan that retired some of the board's friendliest members, including the actor Sidney Poitier and the architect Robert A.M. Stern. He went on a charm offensive, wooing analysts and investors at a series of meetings around the country.
But the overhaul also removed one of his most outspoken critics, Andrea L. Van de Kamp, and reduced the size of the board to 13 members from 17.
At the same time, Mr. Eisner sidelined Mr. Disney, excluding him from major meetings of the company's animation division, which he nominally headed. The freeze-out ultimately spurred Mr. Disney and his long-time adviser, the lawyer Stanley P. Gold, to quit the Disney board and start their campaign for Mr. Eisner's removal.
Earlier, Mr. Eisner sought to discredit Mr. Katzenberg, who, disappointed at being passed over for the company's No. 2 job, left Disney in 1994 and ended up suing the company, claiming he was owed money for his successes running the animation division.
During the trial, Mr. Eisner's side asserted that many of Mr. Katzenberg's projects had been money losers and painted him as a malcontent. On the witness stand, Mr. Eisner acknowledged having disparaged Mr. Katzenberg as a ''midget'' in a conversation with a biographer. Mr. Katzenberg was widely credited with reviving animation at Disney -- his tenure included releases like ''The Little Mermaid,'' ''Beauty and the Beast,'' ''Aladdin'' and ''The Lion King'' -- and with proposing the company's lucrative purchase of Miramax Films.
Mr. Eisner, a towering six-foot-three, has long been one of Hollywood's most powerful men. After a stint as an executive at ABC, he moved to Paramount under his former ABC boss, Barry Diller, and the two men built Paramount into a top studio in the late 1970's and early 1980's.
With Disney badly in need of revitalization, Roy Disney brought Mr. Eisner to the company in 1984. For close to 15 years, Mr. Eisner engineered Disney's dynamic growth, as annual profits rose from $291 million to $1.85 billion and the stock soared 3,598 percent.
Through those years, Disney not only revived its animation franchise but expanded its theme parks, created a retail merchandise business and became a live-action hit factory. Mr. Eisner himself became enormously wealthy in the process, exercising Disney stock options worth some $850 million. Mr. Eisner received salary of $1 million in 2003 and a stock bonus valued at $6.25 million, according to the company's annual report.
But in the latter half of the 1990's, his magic seemed to fade, as Mr. Eisner led Disney into a series of expensive acquisitions that failed to return consistent profits.
Disney bought ABC for $19 billion in 1996, and though the network's operating profits climbed to $1 billion in 2000, it has been a drain lately, losing $36 million last year.
Disney has lost about $1.6 billion on Internet ventures, including the Go.com portal. In 2001, Mr. Eisner paid $3 billion in cash and assumed $2.2 billion in debt for the Fox Family Worldwide, which was rebranded ABC Family but has yet to develop much of an identity, or an audience.
The board of Disney on Wednesday asked Mr. Eisner and his advisers to analyze Comcast's bid. However the number-crunching turns out, it seems clear that Mr. Eisner will be fighting for his own survival, analysts said.
''If Comcast gets it, it's hard to see that the Disney management structure stays intact,'' said Tom Wolzien, a senior media analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein.
Joe Roth, a former Disney studio chief, said he spoke to Mr. Eisner on Monday, just ahead of the gathering at Walt Disney World in Orlando, Fla. ''He was a little apprehensive,'' Mr. Roth said. ''He was very focused on the analysts' meeting.''
Now, with more than mere analysts on his mind, Mr. Eisner should not be counted out, Mr. Roth said.
''I would never bet against him, ever,'' he said. ''I'd never bet against his ability to survive, never.''
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: THE CHIEF EXECUTIVE
