OF all the symbolic designs at the World Trade Center site -- the Wedge of Light, the 1,776-foot skyscraper, the birdlike PATH terminal -- the most straightforward seemed to be the idea of pool-filled voids that would demarcate the outlines of the twin towers.
But at ground zero, nothing is ever quite what it seems to be. And it appears that the voids will be smaller than the tower footprints they are supposed to represent.
It turns out that the ganglia of underground infrastructure may make it impossible to construct voids whose boundaries correspond exactly to the tower perimeters. Getting in the way are visitors' ramps, underground circulation spaces, service roads, the PATH electrical substation and the platform of the No. 1 and 9 subway lines.
The architects and planners of the World Trade Center memorial are now trying to figure out how closely they can align concept with reality.
''That's an issue I've been struggling with,'' said Michael Arad, who is designing the memorial with the landscape architect Peter Walker, working with officials of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation. ''I really think the footprints are the significant artifact of the site. To find a way of honoring it is my intention.
''I don't know that a literal tracing of the footprint is necessarily the only way to do it,'' Mr. Arad said in an interview yesterday. ''What looks like a single square at the plaza level has many different layers of uses and programs.''
Kevin M. Rampe, the president of the development corporation, said that when the design was finished, ''the structures will be aligned with the footprints.'' By structure, however, he meant not just the voids, but the L-shaped ramps that frame them. Visitors would descend within the towers' outlines to the space below ground where victims' names would be inscribed and unidentified remains interred.
Depending on the width of the ramps and underground circulation areas, the openings at plaza level might be reduced from 210-foot squares (the dimension of the original towers) to 200-foot squares or even 190-foot squares. This area would be 9 percent to 18 percent less than the towers occupied. That might not be exactly what the public, or the relatives of those who died, had in mind when they first saw the winning design, ''Reflecting Absence.''
And the possibility that the voids would differ from the tower outlines did not seem to have been raised among or with the jurors before they selected the plan last month.
''It was implicit that they would have matched the footprints,'' said one juror, who agreed to be interviewed yesterday on the condition of anonymity. ''We actually didn't know nor, quite honestly, did we ever discuss it, at least in full jury meetings.''
The juror said: ''This is a very, very sensitive issue for family members and I don't want them to walk away thinking that jury members knew about this. The jury was notified of this by the L.M.D.C. well after the fact and well after we selected Arad.''
A spokeswoman for the development corporation, Joanna Rose, said: ''Immediately on learning that this was an issue we were going to be grappling with, we informed the jury. We believe it's critical to delineate the original footprints.''
Jack Lynch, whose son Michael, a firefighter, perished in the south tower, said the outlines at plaza level ought to replicate the structural outlines 70 feet below.
''It's very important to me that the dimensions of the towers be properly delineated,'' he said. ''To do any less, I think, would not be telling the story. People who come years from now will have no idea what the original dimensions were.''
''They say they can't do it because of the infrastructure,'' Mr. Lynch said. ''With the engineering capabilities in today's sophisticated world, that's not a plausible reason.''
Tom Rogèr, whose daughter Jean was a flight attendant aboard the jetliner that crashed into the north tower, said he was not surprised to hear that there might be a discrepancy between the voids and the footprints. As an executive with the Gilbane Building Company, he is familiar with structural complexity.
''Knowing how these things work, I would more likely expect they could be off 10 feet either way and no one would be the wiser,'' Mr. Rogèr said.
But even if their locations did not exactly correspond to the originals, he said, ''The size of the voids, symbolically, should represent the size of the footprints.''
Anthony Gardner, whose brother Harvey Joseph Gardner III worked in the north tower, said any representation of the footprints at plaza level ought to recreate the 45-degree angles, known as chamfered corners, that distinguished the towers.
The key logistical obstacles to matching the sizes were identified by Andrew Winters, the director of planning, design and development for a the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation.
Immediately south of the south tower footprint is the electric substation serving the PATH terminal. A ramp constructed outside this footprint might interfere.
THE northeast corner of the south tower footprint is only about 25 feet from the downtown platform of the Cortlandt Street station on the 1 and 9 subway lines. That creates a choke point of two lanes in the network of underground roadways.
''It's as narrow as it can be and still function properly,'' Mr. Winters said.
The deeper of the two pools within the south void might come too close to an area set aside at one end of the PATH mezzanine for safe refuge in case of emergency.
Immediately north of the north tower footprint would run the concourse linking the PATH terminal and Battery Park City. If a ramp were constructed outside the footprint, it might interfere with this concourse, depending on the elevation.
''This is real and difficult and contentious,'' Mr. Arad said. ''I would hope to be able to maintain a meaningful relationship between the footprints and the voids. That's part of what's been keeping me busy in the past month.''
BLOCKS
