LIVING organisms do a fine job of growing crystals, like the ones that make up abalone shells, for example. But there are lots of other inorganic materials, including those that make up semiconductors, that living things haven't gotten around to producing.
That may change, though, with some help from a tiny benign virus and a professor at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Taking over where nature left off, the professor, Angela M. Belcher, has induced the virus to produce, at last count, roughly 30 inorganic materials with semiconducting or magnetic properties.
''We have forced organisms to grow some of the technologically interesting materials that nature hasn't had the opportunity yet to work with,'' said Dr. Belcher, an associate professor of materials science.
Now she and her team report in the journal Science that they have selectively altered the DNA in their viruses to generate a variety of tiny wires made of magnetic and semiconducting materials.
Such wires may one day be part of the extremely small circuitry in the next generation of ever-shrinking high-speed electronic components. ''It's amazing,'' she said. ''Not only does the virus make this nice semiconductor wire at room temperature, but all the crystals are aligned.''
The shape of the new wires offers not only beauty but utility as well, said William S. Rees Jr., director of the Molecular Design Institute at the Georgia Institute of Technology and currently on leave at the Department of Homeland Security in Washington. ''The entire field of nanoelectronics depends upon the ability to mass produce cost-effective components,'' he said, ''and she has opened the door to this.''
Most nanowires currently tend to be less than uniform in shape, he said, but Dr. Belcher has produced highly regular forms. ''Hers are all the same diameters and length,'' he said. ''It's similar to grass growing in your front lawn when it's well manicured and each blade is the same height.''
Dr. Belcher's team uses the virus as a temporary scaffolding on which the crystals grow. The viruses are first altered by the insertion of a few amino acid chains, called peptides, so that they attract a particular material like zinc sulfide or cadmium sulfide. As the material starts to form a crystal on the virus, Dr. Belcher adds elemental components of zinc sulfide or cadmium sulfide in a solution, and the crystals grow into individual nanowires. Then the virus is baked away.
It is all a matter of affinity, molecular recognition and genetic programming, Dr. Belcher said. ''We programmed the virus to grow a particular material at a particular length,'' she said. ''Then we burned off the virus and were left with single-crystal semiconductor wires.''
''Viruses are nice stuff to work with,'' she said, but she and her colleagues are starting to use the technique with other organisms, too.
Thomas N. Theis, director of physical sciences at I.B.M. Research in Hawthorne, N.Y., describes Dr. Belcher's work as part of a relentless drive toward miniaturization of complex electronic structures, and predicts that it will have a big impact. ''This kind of chemistry could revolutionize many manufacturing processes by making them less expensive,'' he said.
Dr. Belcher has jointly founded a company, Semzyme, with Evelyn L. Hu, a professor of electrical engineering at the University of California at Santa Barbara, to try to bring the technology to the marketplace.
Dr. Belcher started her research into this method for making nanowires in early 2000, when she took a library of viruses that were identical except for one DNA insert coded for the production of a random peptide. She wanted to see whether, by virtue of the peptides they produced, some of those viruses would attract and bind with semiconducting materials.
Most had no effect and were discarded. When they did find a promising virus, copies of it were made by inserting it into a living bacterial cell. ''Then we had a population of a virus with some affinity to a semiconductor,'' she said.
The group tested for attraction under increasingly stringent conditions, replicating successful candidates again and again.
The procedure gradually grew more streamlined. ''By now it only takes us two weeks,'' Dr. Belcher said.
That accomplished, she began using the viruses to create nanowires. The process is independent of the virus used. ''This is actually a genetic tool kit for growing and organizing nanowires for these semiconducting and magnetic materials,'' Dr. Belcher said.
Dr. Belcher pointed out that the self-assembling her materials did was quite different from the dreaded self-replication so often evoked by foes of nanotechnology. ''These materials don't replicate themselves,'' she said. They can be programmed only to assemble in a particular place in a particular shape.
In the future, Dr. Belcher hopes to work her way through the entire periodic table, making materials that are not only self-assembling but self-healing, too. ''You design a circuit, and if there's a break, it can heal itself,'' she said.
WHAT'S NEXT E-mail: Eisenberg@nytimes.com
