Less than two months after he stealthily captured New York magazine, Bruce Wasserstein, the Wall Street financier, came up with another surprise yesterday, hiring Adam Moss, an assistant managing editor at The New York Times, to be its new editor.
Mr. Wasserstein, whose other media properties include The American Lawyer and The Deal, won a spirited auction for New York in December with a bid of $55 million.
When the deal was completed last month, the new ownership said no immediate changes were planned. But the arrival of Mr. Moss, a former editor of The New York Times Magazine and 7 Days, forces out Caroline Miller, who has been editor for more than seven years.
''Since we bought the magazine, Adam has been almost universally recommended to us as the fantasy hire,'' Mr. Wasserstein said. ''So we are thrilled to be able to execute that.''
Mr. Moss, 46, said he decided over the weekend to leave The Times, where he has worked for 12 years. New York, the prototype of the modern city magazine, has a weekly circulation of 442,000, but has struggled financially in the last few years.
Mr. Moss, a long-time magazine editor who has worked at Esquire and Rolling Stone, said he was convinced that Mr. Wasserstein and Anup Bagaria, the chief executive of New York Media Holdings, understand the need to invest substantially in New York.
''After a long dinner with Anup and a meeting with Bruce in which we talked about the magazine, I found myself persuaded that they had the will and desire to make a great magazine,'' he said.
Mr. Moss joined The Times in 1991 as a consulting editor, working on the development and redesign of various sections of the paper. He was appointed editorial director of the magazine in 1993 and became its editor in 1998. Last August, he was named assistant managing editor for features.
Ms. Miller, noting that her seven-year tenure was ''an eternity in magazine years,'' said, ''One of my missions has been to make sure the magazine ended up in good hands, and I think that Adam is an excellent choice.''
Bill Keller, executive editor of The Times, said that Mr. Moss has been a significant asset at The Times, helping to recast the newspaper's cultural and style coverage and assisting in the search for a new editor for The Times Book Review.
''When you are at a point where you want to re-invent something, Adam is a great guy to have at the table,'' Mr. Keller said. ''I will miss the stimulation of having him around.''
His new assignment is something of a return engagement for Mr. Moss. He was the founding editor of 7 Days, a New York weekly magazine created in the late 1980's that lasted about two years before closing. Founded in 1968, New York magazine has a significant literary tradition, featuring writers like Tom Wolfe, Nicholas Pileggi and Nora Ephron.
More recently, it has confronted increased competition and a slump in advertising.
According to documents circulated to potential buyers, the magazine made less than $1 million on revenue of $43.6 million last year.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS
