State investigators have partly suspended Medicaid and Medicare subsidies to a nursing home in Queens where a woman died last week after she was found on the roof of the home, the state Department of Health said yesterday.
The department said in a statement that the Bishop Charles Waldo MacLean Episcopal Nursing Home had ''widespread lapses in policies and protocols to prevent residents from wandering within the facility'' and leaving the building.
The suspension of Medicaid and Medicare financing affects only new patients, not current residents. The violations must be corrected before payments are reinstated, the department said.
A spokeswoman for the nursing home, Melissa M. Krantz, said the nursing home had been working with officials from the department and had already addressed many of the its concerns. She said the nursing home was on schedule to have all the changes working in time for another department review in mid-March.
''We are following the Department of Health plan of correction and we will abide by that plan,'' Ms. Krantz said. ''They will come back and see that we did in fact implement the program and that it is working.'' The sanction comes one week after Lillie Gardner, a resident at the home who had Alzheimer's disease, died from exposure after spending hours on the nursing home's roof. Ms. Gardner's family has blamed what they said was the nursing home's negligence.
The action was the result of a preliminary inquiry in which state investigators spent seven days at the nursing home monitoring its activities. The nursing home has placed a nursing assistant on the top floor of the building, where Ms. Gardner lived, to keep residents from entering the stairways, Ms. Krantz said. A security guard now watches the back entrance to the building, and the staff has been provided with a list of all the residents with illnesses that could cause forgetfulness, she said.
In addition, Ms. Krantz added, the nursing home will install a special tracking system that will sound an alarm when a patient designated as forgetful leaves the building.
