It would be the largest media company in America, created after a highly valued company with little involvement in media content sought to buy a media company that was larger, but not nearly as loved by Wall Street.
That is one way to look at Comcast's offer to buy Disney in an all-stock transaction.
The combined company, with almost $47 billion in annual revenue, would surpass Time Warner Inc. as the No. 1 media conglomerate. Time Warner's revenue last year was $39.6 billion.
Time Warner grew so large because of its own merger, in which it was taken over by America Online in 2001. That deal gave AOL subscribers the majority of the company even though their business contributed a minority of the revenues.
That deal, of course, went down as one of the worst mergers in history. AOL's stock had been inflated by the Internet bubble, and after the bubble's collapse the share price of the combined AOL Time Warner plunged. Anger over the deal was so intense within the company that AOL executives were eventually driven out of the top jobs and AOL was removed from the company name.
Comcast is not AOL. But it does have a following on Wall Street. Its shares, after suffering in the bear market, rose sharply last year, as did Disney's. But over a longer period, Comcast has done much better. Before yesterday, when news of the offer sent Comcast shares down and Disney shares up, Comcast Class A shares were trading at more than twice the price they fetched at the end of 1997, while Disney shares were down 27 percent over that same period.
Both companies reported financial results yesterday, Comcast showed $18.3 billion in annual revenue, while Disney's revenue in calendar 2003 was $28.4 billion, more than 50 percent higher than Comcast's.
But while Disney does a lot more business, Wall Street values it a lot less. Its total market capitalization when the offer was announced was $48.5 billion, or less than twice annual revenue. By contrast, Comcast was valued at $77 billion, or more than four times revenue. That makes it possible for Comcast to consider taking over the bigger company while leaving its shareholders with a majority stake in a merged enterprise.
Even better from Comcast's point of view, Disney is a less leveraged company. Comcast's bond rating might rise if it pulls off this deal as an all-stock transaction, as it wants to do.
One reason Comcast is viewed as attractive these days is its rapidly growing high-speed Internet business, which has been prospering as dial-up lines -- the business that AOL dominated -- have begun to lose market share. High-speed Internet supplied $2.3 billion of revenue for Comcast in 2003, up 52 percent from 2002.
By contrast, content -- the stuff that media customers actually see -- is a very small part of Comcast now. It offers cable channels like the E! Entertainment and Style networks and the Golf Channel, but total revenue from that segment came to just $885 million.
Disney is a content giant, with its movie studios as well as ABC Television and ESPN. A few years ago, Wall Street leaned toward the view that content would be king in the new media world, and Disney was a very hot stock.
But lately investors have been inclined to think that the winners may be the ones that can get at customer dollars first.
Many investors hope that cable companies will be able to win not only the Internet wars but also capture a growing share of telephone business. By that theory, those who provide content will have to take what the cable companies are willing to pay for their product.
Whether or not that forecast works out in the end, it has affected valuations now. And that gives Comcast a valuable currency in its stock as it seeks to pull off a David vs. Goliath takeover.
BIDDING FOR DISNEY: THE INVESTORS
