The National Hockey League is seriously thinking about limiting the space in which Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur can chase a puck. As far as Brodeur is concerned, the league might as well saw his stick in half.
Brodeur is widely acknowledged to be the best puck-handling goaltender in the league. His ability to handle a loose puck behind the goal and instantly dig the Devils out of trouble has been an important part of the team's success.
But N.H.L. general managers believe more goals would mean more exciting games. So on Tuesday they proposed making goaltenders wear 10-inch-wide pads instead of 12-inch pads and to prohibit goaltenders from playing the puck behind the goal line.
Brodeur said he could deal with slimmer pads, although he is convinced that some goaltenders -- he did not name them -- would suddenly find thicker pads to wear.
''It's just the nature of things -- they're trying to beat the system,'' Brodeur said Wednesday after the Devils lost to the Rangers, 3-1.
Stick-handling, he said, is another matter. He is no longer one of the only goaltenders to handle a stick well. He cited Dallas's Marty Turco and the Islanders' Rick DiPietro for their ability to roam behind the net for a loose puck. So he does not feel picked on.
''When I was young, I felt I played the puck more,'' Brodeur said. ''Now that I'm giving up goals, I don't want to play the puck as much as I used to.''
And yet, to make it illegal for Brodeur to roam behind the goal is to remove the tubes of pastel acrylics from his paint box.
''The league, right now, looks like it's in a stage where they don't know what they're doing,'' Brodeur said after a 4-1 loss on Tuesday to the Philadelphia Flyers.
It is not as if Brodeur spends much time back there, anyway. Brodeur went behind his net only twice in the first period on Wednesday, one more time than Rangers goaltender Mike Dunham.
''I thought the rules were in right away,'' Brodeur said with a playful smile. ''I was thinking about it, so I was practicing it. I play the puck, but Mike Dunham did it today as much as me.''
In each case, Brodeur shoved the puck away from the goal before a charging Rangers player had a chance to get it. During a Rangers power play in the third period, Brodeur went behind his goal, gathered in the puck and fired an outlet pass up the ice.
When asked how the rules changes would affect Brodeur's game, Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer smiled and said, ''Well, he'd have more energy to stop shots.''
Niedermayer added: ''I think at times it really stops the forecheckers, but it's a matter of making the play after that. But it's true: when he stops the puck and can get it up the ice, we can take control in their zone.''
Devils General Manager Lou Lamoriello, who participated in the meeting at which the changes were proposed, stopped far short of criticizing the league in an interview Wednesday, but he also made it clear he did not favor limiting a goaltender's ability to play the puck.
''They thought by less handling of the puck in certain areas would create more forechecking, but I certainly don't agree with that,'' he said.
Asked if the proposed rules change was directed at Brodeur, Lamoriello replied: ''I would hope not. There's no one who plays the puck better than he does, and I would think there would be some thought in people's minds of that. But he was not singled out.''
Besides, Lamoriello said, the proposal was one of many made by the general managers to increase scoring. An average of five goals is scored in an N.H.L. game, a decrease of 2.5 goals a game in the last 15 years.
The proposals, Lamoriello said, are not guaranteed to become rules next season. The N.H.L. Board of Governors will vote on the proposals next summer.
''You have to see the whole picture to see what's good,'' Lamoriello said.
His ability to play the puck was not so much in question Wednesday as his ability to stop the puck from going in. But Brodeur's job could get more difficult if the N.H.L. decides to limit his creativity beginning next season.
''I believe Marty will certainly adjust and do the things that need to be done,'' Lamoriello said. ''I'm not here to defend him. He will adjust if need be.''
HOCKEY
