Lawrence J. Ellison, chief executive of the Oracle Corporation, said on Wednesday that he was confident Oracle would succeed in its $9.4 billion takeover offer for PeopleSoft despite the recommendation by Justice Department staff lawyers that the proposed deal be blocked.
''We think we will be able to buy PeopleSoft," Mr. Ellison said to investors at a Merrill Lynch conference in Santa Monica, Calif.
''PeopleSoft has engaged in a very long and laborious lobbying effort with the Justice Department to persuade them that there are in fact antitrust problems with the merger of these companies," he said. "That is, if you're defining the market extremely narrowly. We don't think that those arguments will prevail in the end."
Justice Department lawyers on Tuesday sent their recommendation to block a deal to R. Hewitt Pate, assistant attorney general in charge of the antitrust division, who is expected to issue a final decision by March 2.
Antitrust experts said on Wednesday that in the vast majority of cases, the assistant attorney general takes the advice of his staff. ''By the time it gets to the assistant attorney general, it's been well vetted,'' said Thomas Brislin, an antitrust lawyer with Coudert Brothers in New York.
As part of the review of an Oracle-PeopleSoft deal, Justice Department lawyers interviewed software customers, reviewed documents from both companies, and took depositions from Mr. Ellison and other Oracle executives.
If Mr. Pate agrees with the recommendation, the department is expected to file a lawsuit to stop a deal. Mr. Ellison said last month that he would urge Oracle's board to fight any Justice Department suit to block a deal.
On Wall Street, PeopleSoft's stock fell 19 cents in heavy trading on Wednesday, closing at $21.50, Oracle was up 31 cents to $13.70.
Mr. Brislin said Oracle might now try to negotiate an agreement with the Justice Department to move out of certain businesses to make a takeover more acceptable to regulators. But that might prove hard, he added, because Oracle sells its business software to customers in integrated packages rather than as separate components. PeopleSoft also markets its products in software suites.
''This is the kind of market where it may be difficult to create a viable divestiture,'' said Charles Biggio, an antitrust attorney with Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &amp; Feld. ''It may be too difficult to carve out some assets and give them to another company who could compete.''
Some state governments and universities have opposed a deal on the grounds that an Oracle takeover of PeopleSoft would be anticompetitive and threaten investments they have made in PeopleSoft's business software, which they use to manage personnel, payroll and inventory.
Mr. Ellison has in recent months pledged to provide continuing service and support for PeopleSoft software, but many large customers are not convinced that their investments would be protected.
The attorney general of Connecticut has sued to block the takeover, and officials in a consortium of other states have indicated that they oppose it as well.
TECHNOLOGY
