A day after being trounced in two Southern primaries, Senator John Edwards urged Wisconsin voters on Wednesday not to write him off and declared that he would appeal to a broader swath of voters than John Kerry in a general election campaign against President Bush.
''This campaign to bring about change is working with independents and voters that people have to get in order to win the general election,'' Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, said in a news conference aboard his campaign plane, ''which is why I am the strongest candidate against George Bush in the fall.''
Mr. Edwards failed to make headway in his native South against Mr. Kerry on Tuesday, coming in a distant second in Tennessee and Virginia. But on Wednesday the senator began an effort to emerge as the only viable alternative to Mr. Kerry in Wisconsin, which votes on Tuesday. Howard Dean is also making a stand in the state.
''I think the voters of Wisconsin are going to prove what they've proven over and over again, '' Mr. Edwards told a rally in Janesville, where 150 people filled a community hall, ''which is you want to see the candidates, you want to hear the candidates, you want to hear what they've got to say and you're going to make your own independent decision on who to vote for. Am I right about that?''
Mr. Edwards turned his attention squarely to trade, an issue his advisers believe is a weakness for Mr. Kerry in this state buffeted by the loss of manufacturing jobs.
But Mr. Edwards did not point out that Mr. Kerry voted for the North American Free Trade Agreement and did not mention any rival by name. The closest he came was in declaring his opposition to the Bush administration's plans for a free trade agreement with Australia.
''I am against the Australian free trade agreement,'' he said at the rally, ''and I call on all candidates running for president to say the same thing.''
His resistance to drawing sharp contrasts with the front-runner is helping fuel growing talk among Democrats that Mr. Edwards's campaign is turning into one for vice president.
Mr. Edwards, who first drew attention in Iowa with his refusal to attack his rivals, insisted he would not change his style and said he believed that voters would figure out the differences by examining the candidates' positions. He said he was ''absolutely not'' concerned by perceptions that he was seeking the No. 2 spot.
''My campaign is based on a positive, optimistic vision of change,'' Mr. Edwards said in his news conference, ''and when I talk about these things, I am going to talk about them in the context of what it is that makes me the strongest candidate against George Bush.''
The campaign sent reporters copies of an article from the online magazine Slate that challenged the idea that Mr. Kerry stood a better chance of defeating Mr. Bush in November.
Mr. Edwards subtly altered his argument about his appeal to the South, this time emphasizing a general-election appeal.
''I am the only candidate in the race, certainly now, who has any kind record of being able to win a general election in a Southern state,'' he said, referring to his 1998 victory in the North Carolina Senate race over an incumbent Republican.
Mr. Edwards said he believed he would benefit from Gen. Wesley K. Clark's withdrawal from the presidential race and emerge as the most viable alternative to Mr. Kerry. His aides also argue that the Massachusetts senator will start to wither under the closer scrutiny that comes with being the front-runner.
The Edwards campaign is looking toward a debate on Sunday in Milwaukee to provide the opportunity for Mr. Edwards to go up against Mr. Kerry in a forum with fewer candidates than previous debates.
Mr. Edwards showed no sign of slowing his campaign. He toured Wisconsin by plane, conducted interviews with members of the local news media and began running television commercials on Monday. One focuses on his roots in rural America; the other promotes his view of the need to renegotiate trade pacts.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
