Preliminary offers for Hollinger International's most valuable assets, the publications in the Telegraph Group, are due by Thursday afternoon to the investment bank Lazard Brothers.
As of Wednesday night, the publications -- the conservative-leaning Daily Telegraph, The Sunday Telegraph and The Spectator magazine -- had attracted several bidders. They included Richard Desmond, owner of the Express newspaper chain here; Terry Smith, founder of the brokerage firm Collins Stewart Tullett; and the private equity firm Candover Investments.
Two other private equity firms, Hicks, Muse, Tate &amp; Furst and 3i, are not submitting preliminary bids, people close to the firms said. Two others, the private equity firm Apax Partners and the Daily Mail and General Trust, which owns The Daily Mail, the popular British tabloid, would not comment.
No potential buyers would reveal the amount of their bids, but assets of The Telegraph have been valued at £400 million to £600 million ($749 million to $1.12 billion). It would not be realistic to offer hard numbers, bidders say, because the preliminary bids are based on limited financial information.
Media experts, private equity investors and even the bidders say Thursday's bids are the first step in what will be a long process, if indeed there is ever a deal at all.
First, there is the legal wrangling. Hollinger's board and its largest shareholder, Conrad M. Black, will meet next week in a Delaware court, where each side has filed suit seeking control of the company and its assets. In January, Lord Black made a tentative deal to sell his 78 percent voting rights in Hollinger to the British investors David and Frederick Barclay, owners of Press Holdings International. The Barclay brothers are eager to retain control of the papers.
Hoping to raise money, Hollinger's board is eager to sell them, and has challenged the legality of Mr. Black's tentative deal.
Reports of discussions between the Barclays and the Hollinger board to try to resolve the situation are false, a person who was briefed by Press Holdings said.
Then there is the question of what The Telegraph's assets are worth. Lazard has provided would-be bidders with only the most perfunctory of numbers, like revenues and cash flow. Only buyers deemed acceptable by the bank and the Hollinger board will get to look through the books, bidders say. That could take weeks or months.
As of Wednesday evening, Mr. Desmond had submitted a bid, but Mr. Smith of Collins Stewart was waiting until Thursday, representatives for the two said. Potential bidders have until 5 p.m. London time.
