HIGHLIGHTS
CENSORING OSCAR -- The specter of censorship of the Academy Awards broadcast by ABC on Feb. 29 has been raised by Frank Pierson, the president of the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, in a letter to its membership, according to a Reuters-Hollywood Reporter report. Referring to the five-minute tape delay being imposed by ABC on the Oscars broadcast in the aftermath of the Janet Jackson breast-baring incident during the CBS Super Bowl broadcast, Mr. Pierson wrote that ''even a very brief tape delay introduces a form of censorship into a broadcast -- not direct governmental control, but it means that a network representative is in effect guessing at what a government might tolerate, which can be even worse.'' Last week, while conceding that the tape delay decision rested with ABC, the academy's governors refused to endorse it.
ITALIAN REACTION TO MEL GIBSON'S FILM -- Two leading Italian newspapers heaped scorn yesterday on the Mel Gibson film ''The Passion of the Christ'' after it was screened on Tuesday in California, Agence France-Presse reported. ''The scenes are so cruel that many spectators had to turn away or close their eyes,'' said Corriere della Serra. La Repubblica said that the film recounted the final hours of Jesus ''with the sensitivity of a heavyweight boxer.'' Both newspapers complained that the film supported an inference of Jewish guilt in the death of Jesus, a view expunged from Roman Catholic doctrine in 1965. The film is to open on Feb. 25, Ash Wednesday.
LOS ANGELES: A 'BUTTERFLY' PREMIERE -- Tonight, just five days short of the 100th anniversary of the world premiere of Puccini's ''Madama Butterfly'' at La Scala in Milan on Feb. 17, 1904, a production by Robert Wilson will have its United States premiere at the Los Angeles Opera. First seen in Paris in 1993, this production, with austere staging and a set constructed of natural materials -- wood and stone -- emphasizes the Japanese atmosphere of the tale of a young Japanese woman whose trust and love are betrayed by a young American naval officer. Conducted by Kent Nagano, the music director of the Los Angeles Opera, ''Madama Butterfly'' will run in repertory through March 14 with the production of ''Die Frau Ohne Schatten'' designed by David Hockney.
WHITNEY HOUSTON, KREMLIN BOUND -- The pop diva Whitney Houston, left, following a trail blazed last year by Mariah Carey, will play two concerts for a Kremlin crowd two days after performing in St. Petersburg, Russia, at the start of a tour of Europe and Asia. Citing Russian news reports, Agence France-Presse said top seats at the Kremlin would be priced at $1,300, nearly 10 times the average monthly wage in Russia.
VALENTINE OFFERINGS -- Valentine's Day brings music and song to Avery Fisher Hall and the 92nd Street Y. The calendar's most romantic occasion arrives a day early at Avery Fisher Hall, where the singer and pianist Shirley Horn and the jazz pianist Ahmad Jamal headline Jazz at Lincoln Center's ''May the Music Never End: An Evening With Shirley Horn and Ahmad Jamal'' at 8 p.m. tomorrow. At the 92nd Street Y, songs like ''I Only Have Eyes for You'' and ''That's Amore'' will be on the program when Mary Cleere Haran and her guest, Margaret Whiting, pay tribute to the composer Harry Warren in the programs, parts of the Y's Lyrics and Lyricists series. Performances of ''Harry Warren: There Will Never Be Another You'' are scheduled for 8 p.m. Saturday, 2:30 p.m. and 8 on Sunday and 2 p.m. and 8 on Monday.
FOOTLIGHTS
Bob Dylan's life will be the subject of a feature film, Agence France-Presse reported yesterday. The biography of the singer-songwriter is to be directed by Todd Haynes, who was nominated for an Oscar for best original screenplay last year for his 2002 film ''Far From Heaven.'' A Paramount Studios spokeswoman said, ''Paramount has struck a deal with two production companies for a film about Bob Dylan.'' The working title is ''I'm Not There: Suppositions on a Film Concerning Dylan.'' The spokeswoman said Mr. Dylan, 62, would not appear in the film. . . . Catherine Zeta-Jones will join Julia Roberts in the cast of ''Ocean's 12,'' the sequel to the 2001 film ''Ocean's 11,'' The Associated Press reported. The sequel, to begin filming on April 12, will reunite George Clooney, Brad Pitt, Matt Damon and Andy Garcia from the earlier cast. . . . Colin Farrell, 27, on location in Thailand, where he is filming the story of Alexander the Great, is back in action after injuring a foot when he slipped and fell on the stairway of his hotel in Bangkok over the weekend, The Associated Press reported. The news agency, citing Susan Patricola, his publicist in Los Angeles, said he was fitted with a cast and released from a hospital and was back on the set for the final days of filming with Angelina Jolie, Anthony Hopkins and Jared Leto.
