Yesterday, Michael Kors woke up.
Obviously, he has been waking up every day of his life and smelling the coffee and doing whatever else a man does to remind himself that he is still alive. But on Wednesday, in the tents at Bryant Park, Mr. Kors woke up to the fact that he can occupy a much bigger place in American fashion and not merely the same small space he has been sleepwalking through for the last few seasons. This was a terrific collection, filled with energy and the right sort of allusions to contemporary life and individual pieces that create a look on demand.
Mr. Kors's company is now owned by the investors Lawrence Stroll and Silas Chou, who are also attempting to revive Asprey. And what a few hundred million dollars will do for a designer's sense of freedom, his confidence in himself. Mr. Kors opened the show with Carmen Kass in a fox bolero and a chocolate-brown jersey dress with big goggle sunglasses. Carly Simon was clearly the inspiration for the floppy hats and paisley halter dresses swinging with silk fringe, but for once Mr. Kors didn't get bogged down in a theme. Indeed, you had the sense that he was doing things he wanted to do all along: miniskirts with superlong fringe at the hem, a poncho in lilac mink, a black jersey mini laced up the front with chain, a shearling coat in lavender.
Well, why not? American sportswear needs to be goosed with a little outrage. And Mr. Kors, more than most designers this week, showed how to get the mix of luxury and boho camp right.
For a moment on Tuesday night, it looked as if Narciso Rodriguez wasn't going to deviate from his signature style: the immaculate, high-collared coats and the sexy dresses coursed with seams. Then he started to open things up. Out came a long, rippling skirt in black jersey worn with a taut, athletic-looking vest and a sheer white T-shirt, followed by a pale yellow coat in a vaguely hourglass shape with powder-blue stilettos. For one tight-fitting sheath, he combined stretch nude satin with panels of ruffles that resembled a honeycomb.
But it was his liberal use of ruffles and soft jersey layers, in powdery shades of pink and blue, that gave his style air and a more lively feeling of play. As Mr. Rodriguez said afterward, ''It was a little bit of rumba and a little bit of football.''
Sarah Jessica Parker, who gave a post-show dinner for Mr. Rodriguez at Per Se -- where the guests ate standing in the kitchen, American style, and lingered until after midnight -- praised the designer's sense of restraint amid the Latin flourishes. ''I told him, 'You're so not a showoff,' '' she said. ''That's what I love about him -- his modesty.''
Vera Wang's loose bolero jackets and layered chiffon tops scattered with gold sequins at the hem showed the influence of Rochas and of Marc Jacobs's last collection for Louis Vuitton. But it was a lovely collection, strong in its unpredictable use of color, like chartreuse blended with brown and gold, displaying a woman's eye for modern dressing. Tulle came gathered in sun-ray pleats over matching silk, and bias-cut dresses had tiny bits of fraying at the seams to suggest a less done-up look. And Ms. Wang's details were also playful. She gave a fringe of silvery beads to the waist and hem of a long, liquid gown and tossed gold paillettes on another evening dress. The dangling beads looked like animated swizzle sticks in tall glasses, the paillettes like money. They were New York references, big-league references. And Ms. Wang let herself play them up with feminine moxie.
The inspiration for the Sebastian Pons show on Tuesday was the 15th-century journey of Spanish explorers to the New World -- a large undertaking, both times. While brocaded conquistador tunics and tapestry aprons would look out of place today -- but no more than a group of actors in a period film would on their lunch break at Katz's Delicatessen -- you could see that Mr. Pons had approached this idea of blending civilizations seriously. Passionately, even. He had craftsmen in his native Majorca paint fabrics, and he used Spanish linen and trimmings, and they looked fine as dresses embroidered with colorful pinwheels or as a black damask dress with crinkly white ruff. The clothes were at their best, though, when Mr. Pons bent his theme to suit the proportions of modern life, turning what might have been a round ornate Majorcan tablecloth into a swingy, cape-back top and a lambskin throw rug into a lush bolero.
''You can get those rugs at Costco,'' an editor said admiringly.
Anticipating the desires of free-spending young people (Ed Burstell, the general manager of Henri Bendel, says his store has customers who shop every 21 days) is the business of brands like Marc by Marc Jacobs and Generra, designed by Tony Melillo. Layering was the story at Marc, as Mr. Jacobs sent out a print cotton blouse and cream Henley shirt under a flouncy dress and freely mixed an aqua striped pullover with a smocked black velvet dress and white ribbed tights. But it wasn't exactly a new story.
Mr. Melillo seemed more attuned to the 21-day customer, who expects something new even if it's only a camel minicoat with epaulets and a pinched, elasticized back or an Empire-waist mini in black lace with a deep purple car coat. And by putting his clothes on a lot of young New Yorkers, like Lydia Hearst and the teenage daughters of Keith Richards and Patti Hanson -- and evoking the atmosphere of Richard Avedon's photograph of members of Warhol's Factory -- Mr. Melillo completely avoided the problem of trying to make a fashion show look real, not to mention cool.
Oh, if the same could only be said for John Varvatos. His show yesterday, which included women's clothes for the first time, had all the pep of a winter fly bouncing listlessly off the windowpanes. You need more than tony fabrics and somber colors rendered as coats and tasteful separates to get a woman's attention. Roberto Menichetti, the former Burberry designer who now has his own label, also likes those low-key sand-and-slate tones, perfect for blending into the sidewalk, if that's what you want. His easy-to-blend clothes project a love of sport, but at the prospect of slipping into a leather evening gown, you can't help wondering if the man understands a woman's body, or New York?
