The National Assembly adopted a sweeping anticrime law on Wednesday, giving prosecutors and the police new power to fight organized crime, and introducing American-style plea bargaining for the first time in French history.
The law, passed in a 340-to-173 vote, follows an election pledge by President Jacques Chirac to make fighting crime a priority. But it is opposed by most French legal associations, and the Socialist opposition in the assembly filed a challenge to its constitutionality.
The law will take effect as soon as President Chirac and his Council of Ministers declare it valid, which is expected soon.
Among the hundreds of revisions to the penal code, the law will extend from two to four days the period in which suspects can be detained and questioned without charges against them.
It will also give police greater powers for surveillance and allow them to pay informers. A registry of sex offenders will be made available to investigators, the police, judges and some potential employers.
Hours before the vote, hundreds of criminal defense lawyers converged on the assembly to protest, chanting, ''Justice nowhere, police everywhere!'' Thousands more went on strike throughout France, the third time lawyers have gone on strike in nearly three decades.
''This law suddenly invades the privacy that we fought for since the French Revolution,'' said Nicole Milhaud, who has practiced law for 37 years. ''It has opened the door to the abuse of power by the police. It has taken power from the judges and handed it to the prosecutors, whose job is to convict.''
In Paris and Strasbourg lawyers placed wreathes to mark what they called ''the death of the presumption of innocence.''
In a news conference shortly before the vote, François Hollande, the head of the Socialist Party, said that passage of this ''intolerable'' law would mark Wednesday as ''a black day for French justice and the rule of law.''
The exceptional powers for the police and prosecutors are aimed at organized crime activities, but opponents are concerned that it will encompass petty crime as well.
Faced with a surge in violent crime in France and evidence of groups with links to terrorism, Mr. Chirac's center-right government swept into office in 2002 with promises to crack down on crime.
Since Justice Minister Dominique Perben outlined the overhaul last April, he has defended it as the best way to modernize the legal system and combat sophisticated and dangerous criminal networks.
But opponents see the law as a political tactic to help neutralize the far-right National Front party of Jean-Marie Le Pen, who challenged Mr. Chirac for the presidency and continues to criticize the government for being soft on crime.
The new law is certain to bolster Mr. Chirac's anticrime platform a month before crucial regional elections in which his government hopes to prevent a surge by the National Front.
The most contentious part of the law is the plea-bargaining clause. Mr. Perben says the clause is essential to reducing the caseloads clogging the courts and to help obtain corroborating evidence from defendants. But critics say it will expose the accused to pressure from police and prosecutors.
