ONE morning last fall, Steve Badanes woke up at his fiancée's house here, on Whidbey Island, and started his chores. He had already finished building a trellis out of sections of television transmission towers, and he had put a new floor in an Airstream trailer they use as guest quarters. But there were still tables to be built, and lights to be strung up. And it all had to be done before 3 p.m., because that's when he and Linda Beaumont were going to be married.
Mr. Badanes removed his tool belt with a half hour to spare, he said. His hair was still damp from the shower when the two of them slipped into the woods to exchange vows before a judge. Then they joined their 200 guests. That wedding was a triumph, not least because he is 60 and she is 53 and it was the first marriage for both. More significantly, they were getting married at the end of a process that can tear couples apart -- the designing and building of a house. The immaculate metal-clad structure is the happy ending to a long and rambling love story.
For more than two decades, Mr. Badanes lived as a nomad. Half designer, half construction worker, he crisscrossed the country as part of Jersey Devil, a small group of architects who embraced the concept of design-build in the late 1960's and never let go. Living on job sites, sleeping in trailers and tents, they built a dozen houses, and became cult figures in the architecture world, known for their unbowed countercultural idealism and funky, ecologically oriented structures.
Michael Sorkin, the New York architect and critic, said: ''They kept the faith. They showed that practicing architecture is not just a matter of the mind, but something you do with your own hands.'' The Hill House, an earth-covered building sculptured into the top of a hill near San Francisco, earned them their first major attention. It was completed in 1979, after two hard years of construction. The Hoagie House, which they finished in 1987 in northern Virginia, took three years. In the early 1990's, Jersey Devil built an elegant stairway at Seaside, the architectural-trophy town in Florida.
''Their work has a wonderful sense of site, lapidary craftsmanship and just enough whimsy,'' said Mr. Sorkin, who wrote the introduction to ''Devil's Workshop: 25 Years of Jersey Devil Architecture'' (Princeton Architectural Press, 1997).
Mr. Badanes was not all about work. ''His stated position was that, as the single guy, his responsibility was to have the fun for all of us,'' said John Ringel, a partner in Jersey Devil. ''Getting married was never something we saw as a possibility for him.''
After Seaside, though, Mr. Badanes, who was about to turn 50, began taking an active interest in health insurance -- he had never had any. So he was on his way to a teaching job in San Diego when his truck filled with smoke. He jackknifed his trailer and the whole thing went up in flames. To make matters worse, the job fell through. ''I had to rethink my place on the planet,'' Mr. Badanes said. ''Since I no longer had one.''
Hundreds of miles away, Ms. Beaumont was also rethinking her place on the planet. She was a Seattle painter who also supported herself by doing ornate, bejeweled tile work. If you ever find yourself in the singer Belinda Carlisle's kitchen, look for the broken plates built into the floor, as if there had just been a fight.
After spending most of her life in Seattle, Ms. Beaumont felt squeezed by the city's booming economy. ''In the 1980's, I'd had these incredible lofts,'' Ms. Beaumont said. ''By the 1990's, I was in a shoe box.''
With modest savings, she was considering buying a slender five-acre lot on Whidbey Island, 30 miles north of Seattle, where her mother had a cottage. The cedar-filled island had qualities Seattle once had in abundance. It was quiet, affordable and unpretentious. But she had concerns about packing up permanently for the country.
In 1994, Mr. Badanes, fleeing the San Diego fiasco, had moved to Seattle to teach design-build at the University of Washington. He wanted to share the Jersey Devil philosophy. Students, he believed, should go out and build in public spaces.
One of Mr. Badanes's friends thought he and Ms. Beaumont should meet. It took months, but eventually they went on a date, and hit it off enough that skinny-dipping in Lake Washington seemed like a good idea. Which it was, until a Seattle police officer arrived with his flashlight and requested that they put their clothes on.
On a subsequent outing, Mr. Badanes took Ms. Beaumont to see the Fremont Troll, a Seattle project he helped build in 1990. It was a comic public-art piece, a giant concrete beast crushing a Volkswagen Beetle.
They started camping on the Whidbey land Ms. Beaumont had bought for a little over $70,000 and dreaming of what they could build. ''Part of me wanted it to stay untouched,'' Ms. Beaumont said. ''At the time, that was all I could afford anyway.''
They cleared brush; they planted a garden; they put in a septic tank. By 1997, Mr. Badanes was drawing up plans for a studio near the road for Ms. Beaumont.
Even stripped to the bone though, the studio was going to be expensive. As long as she was spending money she did not have, she might as well spend more money she did not have and build a genuine house, something at the top of the property. Her mother guaranteed a bank loan, for what Ms. Beaumont hoped would be a $130,000 house, and the deal was done.
''Except for one thing,'' Ms. Beaumont said. ''I fired Steve.'' Well, not exactly fired, because that would mean that she had hired him. ''I knew what I wanted, so I didn't need him to design it for me,'' she said.
Ms. Beaumont was, Mr. Badanes said, ''what you might call a difficult client.'' He counseled a southern exposure for ''maximum solar heat gain,'' he said. She preferred something slightly off the north-south axis. He relented. ''You get to my age, it gets pretty easy to give in,'' Mr. Badanes said. ''I'm not sure I was always like that.''
A local professional was hired to draft plans. Mr. Badanes recruited a former student from the University of Washington to build it, and Ms. Beaumont was general contractor.
Construction began in 1999, and Ms. Beaumont moved in about two years later, although the final cost ran close to $200,000, Ms. Beaumont moved in about two years later. Mr. Badanes still keeps a small house of his own in the city.
The 2,200-square-foot house is essentially a box on top of a box, with wings. The downstairs serves as kitchen and living area, flanked by a covered patio on one side and a carport on the other. The second level is Ms. Beaumont's art studio, which has ample windows looking into the trees. There is a small bedroom in one wing and an office in the other; both have porches.
Defying conventional wisdom, Ms. Beaumont put the bathroom on the first floor, downstairs from the bedroom. ''When I lived in lofts, the toilet wasn't even in the apartment, it was down the hall,'' she said.
The entire structure is covered in Zincalume, a recycled steel that sells for about a dollar a square foot, and Mr. Badanes said, is ''made mostly from ground-up cars.'' This not only gives the house an elegant, silvery glow, it is a cinch to clean. Before the wedding, the couple paid $100 to have the whole house pressure-washed.
The house does bear the Steve Badanes influence. ''On my own, I would have gone for something wilder,'' she said.
Mr. Badanes, who occasionally (and lovingly) refers to his wife as ''a space pig,'' argued that the huge upstairs studio would be hard to heat. To keep costs low and options open, he also advised postponing expensive features like the skylight and the tall windows. She dug her heels in. ''Linda had a precise vision,'' he said, ''and she was impatient about making it be that way.''
The metal cladding matches the aluminum shells of the two Airstream trailers Mr. Badanes keeps on the property. (He also has a 1950's Holiday House trailer parked there.) Mr. Badanes, who loves his trailers the way a former ballplayer treasures his old mitt, wanted to fit them under the overhangs on each side. ''Like a hen with her two eggs,'' he said. ''We could hook up the plumbing and everything.''
But Ms. Beaumont would not go for it. She did like the idea of the trailers as guest quarters -- at a distance from the house.
Mr. Badanes has left lots of unadorned cement board inside the house for Ms. Beaumont to fill in with tiles -- if her art career ever slows down. In recent years, she has become a sought-after public artist. For the Safeco Field ball park, she collaborated on a huge chandelier of baseball bats, and she is just now completing an elaborate glass installation at the Seattle-Tacoma Airport.
Mr. Badanes has finished playgrounds and community gardens with his students. And any money he makes for speaking on the lecture circuit, he said, is going toward improvements on the house. He wants their collaborative process to go on indefinitely.
''We've able to confront each other's phobias and weaknesses, and that is the best thing you can do for a relationship,'' he said. ''Plus we get a really nice house out of it.''
House Proud
