Despite his denials, the Roman Catholic bishop of Long Island shielded priests accused of child sex abuse when he served as the second-highest prelate in the Boston diocese, a child-protection advocate against abuse contended on Wednesday.
The advocate, Laura A. Ahearn, said her findings on Bishop William F. Murphy included new information based on a review of thousands of court records. ''He played a role in orchestrating the largest cover-up of child sex abuse in our nation's history,'' she said.
Bishop Murphy has steadfastly denied wrongdoing. A spokesman said that because the bishop had not seen Ms. Ahearn's charges, he could not comment on their specifics.
The bishop should be removed because of what he did in Boston and because he lied about it, Ms. Ahearn said at a news conference. She is the founder and director of Parents for Megan's Law, a national group based here that seeks to protect children.
Based on his record, she said, the bishop should not be entrusted with overseeing some 200,000 children in parochial schools, churches and other Catholic programs on Long Island. Ms. Ahearn, who is herself a Catholic, urged parishioners to press for the bishop's departure by withholding donations to his annual fund-raising drive
For more than a year, Ms. Ahearn served as an adviser on abuse issues to Mr. Murphy after he became bishop of the Diocese of Rockville Centre, which covers Nassau and Suffolk Counties, in 2001.
Bishop Murphy has denied playing any role in sex-abuse issues when he served as the vicar general, or chief deputy, to Cardinal Bernard Law in Boston, saying that another church official was assigned to handle such cases. Revelations of repeated abuses there led to a state attorney's report and the cardinal's resignation.
But Ms. Ahearn said that the records show that Bishop Murphy was in fact the custodian of the abuse complaints in Boston, referred to as ''the Murphy files,'' and that he became directly involved in a number of cases. Among his actions, she said that he:
$(6$)Helped create a service to place accused priests in new assignments, and put a priest in charge who was himself accused of abuse.
$(6$)Assigned an accused priest to a new parish with the handwritten directive: ''Let him serve.'' The diocese had already paid $35,000 to settle a complaint against him.
$(6$)Allowed an accused priest to go unsupervised, resulting in complaints of new abuses and lawsuits.
$(6$)Disputed a therapist's assessment of the danger posed by one accused priest and opposed another therapist's recommendation about another accused priest.
$(6$)Allowed transfers to Canada and Australia for an accused priest, enabling him to elude investigations by prosecutors and a social service agency.
$(6$)Reassigned two accused priests to new parishes without restrictions on their contacts with children.
$(6$)Reassigned other accused priests to nonparish posts, like hospitals and nursing homes, without restricting contact with young people who might be volunteers or visitors, or restricting the priests' off-duty activities. One such priest had 13 complaints, admitted assaulting a 12-year-old 50 times, and cost the diocese $500,000 in settlements.
$(6$)Worked with a bishop in Wisconsin to try to stop complainants from filing criminal charges against a priest by asking him to apologize. He pleaded guilty to one charge.
$(6$)Denied on a federal form that there were issues involving a priest despite warnings in that priest's file that ''he fools around with kids'' and had ''possible over-involvement with boys.''
$(6$)Proposed a United Nations post for an accused priest who was being defrocked.
Ms. Ahearn will outline her charges Thursday night at a meeting of Voice of the Faithful, a lay group that has called for Bishop Murphy to resign, at the Unitarian Universalist Congregation in Manhasset. The group's co-chairman, Dan Bartley, called her findings ''devastating.''
The diocese issued a statement saying: ''Even after a lengthy inquiry by the attorney general in Boston, no one has ever established that Bishop Murphy engaged in any wrongful conduct during his tenure as vicar general in Boston.''
A 2003 report by the Massachusetts attorney general said that Bishop Murphy ''took some positive steps'' but that he declined to report cases to law enforcement.
