Intel scientists will announce on Thursday that they have built a prototype of a silicon chip that can switch light on and off like electricity, blurring the line between computing and communications and bringing sweeping changes to the way digital information and entertainment are delivered.
For the first time, Intel researchers said, they have shown that ultra-high-speed fiber optic equipment can be produced at the equivalent of low-cost personal computer industry prices. Industry executives said the advance could lead to commercial products by the end of the decade.
As the costs of communicating in cyberspace falls, the researchers said, existing barriers to creating fundamentally new kinds of digital machines capable of far greater performance, and not limited by physical distance, should disappear.
The advance, described in a paper to be published Thursday in the journal Nature, suggests that Intel, as the world's largest chip maker, is on the verge of developing the technology to move into lucrative new telecommunications markets.
''Before there were two worlds, computing and communications,'' said Alan Huang, a former Bell Labs physicist who founded Terabit, an optical networking company in Menlo Park, Calif. ''Now they will be the same, and we will have powerful computers everywhere.''
The advance, scientists and industry executives said, should free computer designers to think about the systems they create in new ways, making it possible to conceive of machines that are not situated in a single physical place. It will also make possible a new class of computing applications to transmit high-definition video to homes hundreds or even thousands of times as fast as over today's Internet.
One potential application, Mr. Huang said, would be an interactive digital television system allowing viewers to watch a sports event from several angles, moving the point-of-view at will while the game is being played. With only a limited number of digital cameras, it might be possible to synthesize a virtual movable ''seat'' anyplace in the stadium. Such a feature now exists in video games, but is far beyond the capacity of today's digital TV systems.
Building laser communications into conventional computer chips also points to effective solutions to the so-called ''last mile'' challenge of delivering digital information from the Internet to homes and offices -- creating extremely fast, low-cost computer networks and significantly lowering the barriers to knitting together powerful servers and supercomputers based on multiple processors.
Intel said the technical advance, in which the researchers use a component made from pure silicon to send data at speeds more than 50 times as fast as the previous record, is the first step toward building low-cost networks that will move data on light waves seamlessly between chips and computers and across large digital communications systems.
''This opens up whole new areas for Intel,'' said Mario Paniccia, a 37-year-old Intel physicist who started the previously secret research program to explore the possibility of using standard semiconductor parts to build optical networks.
The chip that Intel has built is the prototype of a high-speed transistor-like device to encode data onto a light beam that the company has refined to send more than two billion bits a second of digital information. The device, called an optical modulator, makes it possible to switch a tiny laser beam on and off and direct it into an ultra-thin glass fiber.
Although the technical report in Nature focuses on the device, that is only one component of a communications system that Intel says that it will demonstrate at its annual developer conference here next week -- transmitting a movie in high-definition video over a five-mile coil of fiber optic cable.
''If Intel and other semiconductor technology companies can develop silicon optically as successfully as they have electronically, then silicon is certainly set to grow in stature as an optical material,'' Graham Reed, a physicist at the University of Surrey in England, wrote in a commentary on the Intel paper that was also published in the journal. Dr. Reed is the holder of the previous 20-megabit silicon optical switching speed record that Intel shattered.
With this breakthrough, Intel researchers said, they have shown that it should be possible to build optical fiber communications systems using their conventional chip-making process without resorting to either the exotic materials or hand-assembly techniques that are now the standard in the fiber optic networking industry.
The secret of Intel's success has been its ability to drive the price of computing down by relentlessly squeezing more transistors onto each new generation of silicon chips. Now it hopes to transform the world of data networking by placing it on the manufacturing cost curve known as Moore's Law, after its co-founder, Gordon Moore, who correctly predicted that chips would double in capacity roughly every two years while their prices continued to fall.
''In the past you've needed esoteric materials'' that did not fit in anything smaller than a matchbox, said Richard Doherty, president of Envisioneering, a computer industry consulting firm in Seaford, N.Y. ''Now we're going down by a factor of 10,000 in fabrication size. The economics of this have just fallen faster than any communications breakthrough under my watch.''
Intel executives agreed that the technology will cause communications costs to drop sharply. Paul S. Otellini, the president of Intel, said on Wednesday: ''Think of it either bringing us a tenfold decrease in costs of existing communications, or 10 times the bandwidth for the same cost. It is yet another step in the path to convergence we have been discussing for the past few years.''
Physicists cautioned that despite the impressive achievement, Intel still has to prove that it can further increase the speed and lower the power requirements before it can move ahead with a commercial product.
''I think scaling is something we'll all be interested to see if Intel can deliver,'' said David Miller, director of the Solid State and Photonics Laboratory at Stanford University.
Intel executives said they were confident that they could advance performance tenfold, making it possible to synchronize the speed for moving data across large-scale communications systems and achieving seamless connections in the next five years.
''The lines running in and out of chips are becoming the bottleneck,'' Dr. Miller said. ''As we start scaling up the information capacity of broadband networks, we run into a basic problem with electrical wiring. In the future, we will be able to use optics at all levels of electronic systems.''
The roots of the technology came from an unexpected corner of Intel. Dr. Paniccia worked for a number of years in its testing division, where a small group of engineers built a machine that scanned a laser beam over the back surface of a computer chip, much the way a cathode ray tube is scanned back and forth to create a television image.
The laser image made it possible to watch single transistors to determine if they were switching on and off at the precisely correct times, and also to ''tune'' microprocessors, sharply speeding them up by correcting timing errors.
He decided that it would be possible to build light switches directly from standard Intel silicon and make them switch as fast as electronic transistors.
Experts said the Intel researchers appear to have achieved one of the rare performance increases known in the industry as ''powers of 10,'' or exponential change, that has the potential to remake the modern computing world.
''There is a big difference between 10 megabits and one gigabit,'' Terabit's Dr. Huang said, noting that the advance should ultimately make it possible to create computers that ''will be everywhere that you are.''
''People have been trying for this forever,'' he added. ''You wouldn't believe how many articles I've read saying we might do this some day.''
TECHNOLOGY
