Continuing its special season, St. Joseph's enjoyed another special night Wednesday.
Before a capacity crowd of 3,200 passionate fans at cozy Alumni Memorial Fieldhouse, the third-ranked Hawks improved their record to 21-0 by defeating Dayton, 81-67.
The victory kept St. Joseph's dream of an unbeaten season alive, led by its stellar backcourt of Jameer Nelson, a 5-foot-11 senior point guard, and Delonte West, a 6-4 junior shooting guard.
St. Joseph's and Stanford are the only unbeaten teams in Division I. The last time that two Division I men's teams reached 20-0 was in 1980-81, when Virginia and Oregon State made it. Virginia lost at 23-0, while Oregon State reached 26-0 before losing.
The Hawks say they believe they can keep their streak intact. This was one of their toughest games, against a Dayton team (19-4) that was riding a nine-game winning streak. This was the first time in Atlantic 10 history that teams with 9-0 conference records had met.
The Hawks took control in the second half, when West scored 18 of his game-high 24 points.
The unbeaten streak and the exciting play of Nelson have captured the imagination of Hawk Hill, the nickname for the St. Joseph's campus. The 21-game winning streak is the longest in team history, and students and alumni are daring to dream of the Final Four and perhaps a national championship.
The Hawks have six regular-season games left, followed by the Atlantic 10 tournament. But the Hawks are scheduled to play only one more team in the regular season with a winning record -- Rhode Island, which it faces twice, including here on Saturday.
The last Division I men's team to go unbeaten through the regular season was Nevada-Las Vegas, which went 30-0 in 1990-91 but lost in the Final Four to Duke and finished 34-1. The last team to finish undefeated in the regular season and win the N.C.A.A. tournament was Indiana, which finished 32-0 in 1975-76.
Nelson considered entering the N.B.A. draft after last season, but he decided to return for his senior year, a decision that set the tone for this season. With his quickness, passing ability and reliable outside touch, he is considered by many to be the nation's top point guard.
Nelson did not have one of his best games Wednesday, but he still had 16 points and 7 assists while making 6 of 13 shots.
Nelson and West seem to have a sixth sense when it comes to reading each other. With Nelson drawing so much attention, West is a master at finding open spots on the floor and has clever moves that enable him to take his defender off the dribble.
Dayton, led by forward Keith Waleskowski with 20 points, made it a competitive game, outrebounding St. Joseph's, 37-30, and scoring many of its second-half baskets after offensive rebounds. That exposed perhaps St. Joseph's biggest weakness -- its lack of physical frontcourt players.
But Nelson and West control a game's tempo so well and the Hawks are so difficult to defend, that they are clearly difficult to beat.
''We just want to stick to our game plan and do what we do,'' West said. ''We don't have our noses in the air. The day that you don't bring it all, either in practice or in the games, could be the day that you lose.''
The Hawks led at halftime, 36-25, even though Nelson missed his first five shots from the field. While Nelson gets most of the attention, St. Joseph's is not a one-man team. Eight Hawks scored in the first half, and St. Joseph's tenacious man-to-man defense never allowed Dayton to find an offensive rhythm. Dayton shot 37.7 percent for the game, compared with 53.8 percent for St. Joseph's.
Against a lesser team, the Flyers might have prevailed, but to win this game, they needed a near-perfect effort.
Marques Bennett had a strong first half for Dayton, making three 3-pointers for 9 points, and the Flyers closed to 6 points early in the second half. But that was when Nelson and West really went to work.
As if the Hawks needed any incentive, Coach Phil Martelli picked up a technical foul while arguing a second-half foul with 7 minutes 32 seconds remaining and St. Joseph's leading by 11 points.
After Ramod Marshall (16 points) made both technical foul shots, the Hawks went on a 12-2 run to ensure the victory. Tyrone Barley, a backcourt reserve, had a big game for the Hawks with 16 points as the Hawks recorded their 12th victory this season by 10 or more points.
As the game drew to a close, fans in the St. Joseph's student section began chanting ''Undefeated! Undefeated!'' After this game, the Hawks still were.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
