DO not adjust your set. It won't do any good.
The rooms before you look just as they were meant to. And should you think them fantasies tacked together from cloth, rickrack and glue gun with an eye to stealing the limelight at the latest designer show house, think again. These are grand rooms in grand houses that did not come into being cheaply, simply or haphazardly. Months of painstaking craft and hundreds of thousands of dollars went into their creation. Nearly every centimeter of cloth and carpet is hand-loomed; the upholstery is custom-made; the marquetry woodwork and furniture -- if it is not antique -- is fashioned by master carpenters.
If there was ever proof that design is a living, breathing animal full of foibles, it is in the alarmingly exuberant, cartoon-traditional design work of William Diamond and Anthony Baratta. Their practice, which has thumbed its nose at almost every popular design trend and maxim for 23 years, is a study in survival. And if their firm embodies any design philosophy at all, it is ''To each his own.''
But as the age of inconspicuous consumption, when the greatest thing a house could aspire to was that it not look ''done,'' loses its modest luster, the design world is coming to appreciate, however guardedly, the method in their madness.
As designers return to color and pattern, the pair's fearless mixing of all manner of hue and motif has begun to look, well, not completely insane. And as the infatuation with new materials is increasingly offset with an appreciation of handiwork, Diamond and Baratta's revival of moribund crafts is winning them respect. Any given job might entail custom-designed tiles, quilts, needlepoint, tracery, hooked rugs and scotch plaid, for starters.
For 18 years, Lois D. Chernin, a hand weaver in Otego, N.Y., has custom-woven so much fabric for Diamond and Baratta that she works for virtually no one else. And their use of old-fashioned braided rugs (custom-made to look like 1960's Kenneth Noland target paintings) has reinvigorated Country Braid House, the New Hampshire company that makes them. The volume of elaborate English, French and American cabinetry, furniture and paneling they commission from Paul Flammang, a woodworker in Essex, Conn., puts them among the craft's staunchest supporters.
But the pair have also honed another craft -- the art of getting published -- that has not endeared them to their peers. ''They publish constantly, constantly, constantly,'' moaned Mayer Rus, the design editor of House &amp; Garden, which has published the pair constantly.
They are ubiquitous in the pages of shelter magazines, always hungry for arresting images. But this very visibility has sometimes led to the dismissal of their work as showy theatrics aimed at publicity.
''Do people really live like that?'' is the question often heard about Diamond and Baratta projects. Their clients, however, answer affirmatively and emphatically. Far from shrinking violets with an inability to say no, the clients seem self-reliant and colorful themselves, with little thought as to whether they are fashionable or not, and often insisting that the florid designs they live in are, above all else, comfortable.
''We wanted a home that any place you went to, any room you entered, you could sit down and start having a good time,'' said Cyndy Fish, who hired the designers in 2001 to renovate and decorate the 16,000-square-foot house in Massachusetts in which she lives with her husband and three children. For one room -- perhaps the most outré in the house -- the designers adopted a folksy heart theme and sent it through a kaleidoscope. A custom-designed rug was braided and hooked for the floor, a patchwork-calico fabric was made for the sofas, blue-and-white heart tiles were made in Delft for the fireplace and the cloth valances above the curtains were trimmed with red hearts. It's as if Holly Hobbie died and went to heaven.
If this is not your idea of comfort, you are not alone. The most common metaphor for the Diamond and Baratta style is not a cozy glass of Scotch but a big dose of LSD. Certainly, comfort was not why the curators of the Cooper-Hewitt National Design Museum's triennial invited the pair to be part of the exhibition, the only decorators chosen.
''Colonial revival on acid,'' said Donald Albrecht, one of the show's curators. What interested him about the pair, he said, was their way of bringing moribund, innocuous or clichéd design elements back to life with a jolt of electricity.
For the three vignettes the designers concocted for the triennial, representing the 18th, 19th and 20th centuries, they incorporated carpets with the museum's own building imagined as a Colonial house, another carpet in black with a Wedgwood cameo motif, walls hung with a Diamond and Baratta fabric of a Victorian silhouette print, and a country-kitchen-style braided rug made to look like a 1960's black-and-white target painting. (The original scheme the pair had proposed had been so colorful that the Cooper-Hewitt rejected it.)
''Their work really shows that idea that so many architects have, that everything in design is a forward torpedo, is flawed,'' Mr. Albrecht said.
''Decorators really see everything as rethinking and recycling the past,'' he added. ''These guys are all about reviving historic forms in a stylish, mod way that's very knowing and witty.''
Fine for a museum show; when it comes to actual homes, others are more skeptical. ''The first couple of jobs I saw, I was intrigued by the quality of dementia,'' Mr. Rus said. ''But I was equally intrigued by the notion that a client would really live like that.''
Their style, he said, is a sword that cuts both ways. ''It can be bravura decorating, superdramatic and splashy, but the downside is that working a single motif over and over again, in carpets and fabrics and inlays -- well, it's a slippery slope to a pit of kitsch.''
He added, ''I have to give it to them, though -- the insane attention to detail, their ability to do their own thing and ignore whatever passes for good taste. I'd rather look at some polychromatic fantasy than another beige interior with a Jean-Michel Frank chair.''
Several families who hired Diamond and Baratta -- their work often goes beyond decoration to the architecture, construction and landscaping of large-scale houses -- have said that precious as it may seem at a glance, the style is easier to live with, especially for a family, than a lot of traditional decorating that tries to straddle casual and formal.
One client, who asked that his name not be used, for reasons of privacy, commissioned the firm in 1999 to build and decorate an 18,000-square-foot stone house in Scarsdale, N.Y. -- not, from the sound of it, what you would call casual.
''It's pretty large and filled with antiques,'' the client said. ''But it's not a formal environment. They recognized, 'Look, we've got two golden retrievers and four teenager boys, we obviously need a house we can live in.' ''
For the client's office and study, they designed an overscale checkerboard carpet with chess pieces scattered across it; needlepoint pillows were made into giant playing cards.
''The whole thing is supposed to be fun,'' the client said. ''It's not supposed to be, 'come see my museum.' ''
Their manic decorating, complete with overscale furniture and clashing patterns, is in its own way an homage to the classic 1940's American comfort of Dorothy Draper. However, turning up the volume, as they do, upsets the more formal aspects, as though the playful spirit of the family room had taken over the rest of the house.
''It's grand, but it's very comfortable,'' said Anne Niciforo, whose large house in Darien, Conn., has a large living room painted the same bright, deep turquoise as her eyes -- a far cry from the pale neutrals most people would think of for the space. The sofas, she pointed out, are extra-large to accommodate her tall husband and his friends, who watch football in the room. ''A giant could sleep on them,'' she said.
Her friends, Ms. Niciforo said, ''are blown away when they see it.''
''They love it,'' she added, but ''people are still intimidated by color. I don't see any of my peers doing anything like this.''
But even as design changes, and the Diamond and Baratta look comes within the range of reason, their renegade instinct endures. They know their style is not mainstream today, that it is not going to be tomorrow, and they are glad of it.
For his part, Mr. Diamond says he sees the other side. ''I know other designers see it and say 'Ugh, who could live like that?' '' he said. ''I wear a lot of gray and oatmeal and white oxford shirts. Could I be a more boring dresser? I don't wear color, so I understand how people could think I could never live in anything like that. It's so much safer that way, and no one will ever say you have bad taste. I understand all that.''
''Look, I love great modesty and simplicity for myself,'' he added. ''But nothing turns me on more than visual beauty -- that's my greatest pleasure in life, it's orgasmic for me. And some of my clients feel like they're getting something like that.''
So every day is a holiday? In the gray depths of winter, even an explosion of color looks inviting.
At the very least, one might try a throw pillow.
