The attempt by Comcast, the nation's largest cable company, to take over the fabled entertainment empire built by Walt Disney and Mickey Mouse is far from a completed deal. But it's not too early for federal regulators to stop distracting themselves with small-change debates over the sanctity of the Super Bowl halftime show and focus on remaking the nation's policy on media companies for the 21st century. Comcast should have to work harder to woo federal regulators on this $54.1 billion deal than to persuade Disney shareholders to permit the takeover.
It is too soon to offer a final judgment on the merger, but it raises serious concerns about the excessive concentration of media content and distribution channels in one corporation. Comcast will have difficulty countering legitimate fears that marrying the nation's largest cable system with the ABC broadcasting network, with cable networks like ESPN and with movie studios could undermine the competitive marketplace of ideas so crucial to democracy.
The Federal Communications Commission's longstanding rules on media ownership were meant to guard against such threatening combinations. The perceived danger was that the gatekeepers for your television screen could be in a position to dictate information and entertainment choices. So for decades the federal government barred any company from owning more than one broadcast network and barred networks from owning cable systems, or too many stations, either nationally or in a single market. Networks were also barred from owning Hollywood studios or from otherwise creating too much of their programming. Now, a vast majority of Americans watch television via cable or satellite services, and many of these rules have properly been eliminated or relaxed. Disney first acquired ABC's parent company in the mid-1990's as a result of these regulatory changes.
The F.C.C. created a political backlash against ''big media'' last year when it sought to loosen limits on a broadcast network's ability to own its affiliates. Much of the uproar was orchestrated by local station owners satisfied with the status quo. In truth, whether ABC owns its affiliate in Toledo or Tucson is no longer the pressing public concern it once was. It certainly pales in comparison with whether Time Warner, the nation's second-largest cable operator, behind Comcast, is in a position to shut out or discriminate against channels that compete against its own. The Comcast takeover bid makes a resolution of this issue more urgent.
Neither the F.C.C. nor the Congress -- which currently seem more consumed by Janet Jackson's ''wardrobe malfunction'' than by serious matters of public policy -- has shown much appetite for creating new rules to address such dangers in an altered media landscape. The cable industry, the most powerful programming gatekeeper these days, does not face many of the same types of constraints once faced by broadcasters.
Federal regulators could block the Comcast-Disney deal in the absence of any new rules by vaguely declaring it against the ''public interest,'' but the public should be able to rely on a more explicit legal protection of media diversity. Comcast's proposed takeover of Disney, which would take the combined control of content and distribution into unchartered waters, should prompt a thorough debate on the proper limits for media consolidation.
