THE Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences never gives awards to commercials. Even so, when ABC broadcasts the 76th annual presentation of the Oscars on Sunday, Feb. 29, the commercials will probably get much more attention than usual.
The reason, of course, is the continuing uproar over what took place during the CBS broadcast of Super Bowl XXXVIII on Feb. 1. The complaints that pitches for brands like Bud Light, Charmin, Cialis, Lay's, Levitra and Sierra Mist were almost as tasteless as the antics of the performers in the halftime show have led to renewed calls for more careful consideration of the content of commercials -- particularly during so-called big-event television programs like the presentations of the Academy Awards, the Grammy Awards and the Super Bowl, watched by tens of millions of viewers of all ages.
Yet critics need not worry that the Oscar show will bring back any offending Super Bowl ad characters like the flatulent horse, crotch-biting dog or exhibitionist kilt-wearer, much less the advice to seek ''immediate medical help'' for ''erections lasting longer than four hours.'' That is because ABC, which has broadcast the Academy Awards ceremonies annually since 1976, and the motion picture academy separately scrutinize the commercials scheduled to run during the show -- from scripts and story boards through finished tapes -- and no spot can run unless both agree it conforms to their taste and acceptability standards.
''This is the only event to my knowledge'' for which the commercials undergo two such separate screenings, Geri Wang, senior vice president for ABC prime-time sales in New York, said yesterday.
''We have our regular broadcast standards and practices we adhere to, and the Academy has its own set of standards,'' she added. ''As a result, we rarely have a problem.''
Among the stipulations in addition to avoiding questionable content are several intended to ensure a level playing field for all the movie studios that are Academy members. Among them: no commercials promoting films from any studio and no commercials in which Oscar nominees or presenters appear as endorsers.
For instance, let's say that Jerry Seinfeld decides to make a movie and it is such a huge hit, he is nominated for Best Actor. The show could not carry a spot promoting the film nor an American Express commercial featuring Mr. Seinfeld.
Ms. Wang discussed the issue of commercial content as ABC, a unit of the Walt Disney Company, released a list of the advertisers that have agreed to be sponsors of the Oscar broadcast. (The hostile takeover bid from the Comcast Corporation for Disney did not deter ABC from its release of the list, as perhaps the network followed the advice offered by the title of a series it once broadcast: ''Life Goes On.'')
There are more than a dozen companies buying commercial time in the Oscar program, the list shows, at a record price estimated at $1.5 million for each 30-second spot. Many sponsors are returning from previous years, among them the America Online division of Time Warner, Anheuser-Busch, Eastman Kodak, General Motors, Hewlett-Packard, Home Depot, MasterCard, McDonald's, J.C. Penney, PepsiCo, Procter &amp; Gamble, Charles Schwab and Washington Mutual. The newcomers include Allstate Insurance.
''We're convinced that big television events are a great place for us to unveil new advertising,'' said Dave DeCecco, a spokesman in Purchase, N.Y., for the Pepsi-Cola North America unit of PepsiCo. ''You can't underestimate the water-cooler factor,'' he added, referring to the value of the morning-after discussions of the commercials.
Pepsi-Cola North America plans to introduce a revamped campaign for Diet Pepsi, Mr. DeCecco said, carrying the theme ''It's the diet cola,'' replacing ''Think young, drink young,'' introduced during the Academy Awards show in 2002.
There will also be commercials for the flagship Pepsi-Cola brand, he added, that are part of the recently introduced campaign carrying the theme ''It's the cola.'' The Diet Pepsi and Pepsi-Cola spots are created by BBDO Worldwide in New York, part of the Omnicom Group.
There will be no commercials for Sierra Mist, Mr. DeCecco said. It was that brand that was featured in the spot about the kilt-wearer, also by BBDO New York, which raised eyebrows during the Super Bowl for its provocative content.
Anheuser-Busch, which ran several commercials in questionable taste during the Super Bowl, including the Bud Light spots featuring the horse and the dog, is ''in the process of determining which spots will be aired during the broadcast,'' the company, based in St. Louis, said in a statement. In past years, when Anheuser-Busch sponsored both the Super Bowl and the Oscars, the company did not repeat Bud Light Super Bowl spots critics labeled crass or vulgar during the Academy Awards.
''As in past years, our standards are always high for this broadcast,'' said Olivia Cohen-Cutler, senior vice president for broadcast standards and practices at ABC in New York, reflecting ''the show in which the commercials are going and the audience to which the show is broadcast.''
Advertisers and agencies ''know that this is a double-pronged review process,'' she added, which may be why there have been few instances of commercials submitted to either the network or the academy that are rejected outright or need to be changed before they can appear.
Still, ''as with every big event,'' Ms. Cohen-Cutler said, a member of her staff will be at the ABC office on the afternoon of Feb. 29, ''through the last moments something could possibly come in'' from an agency or advertiser wanting to make changes to an already approved commercial.
ABC sold out the available commercial time for the broadcast in September. That is despite the show's rescheduling, to appear about a month earlier, and the disappointing ratings for the 2003 broadcast, attributed partly to Iraqi war jitters.
''This is a new year, with a fresh set of great films,'' Ms. Wang said, adding: ''The Academy Awards is typically the biggest entertainment special of the year. That broad, fast reach continues to be network television's strength.''
There is even ''a list of clients waiting to get on the Academy Awards,'' Ms. Wang said. There are three advertisers on the list, she added, declining to identify them.
Though the Super Bowl brouhaha seems to be having no effect on the commercials, it is affecting the broadcast itself. ABC is for the first time instituting a five-second tape delay, despite objections by the Academy that, in the words of Frank Pierson, the president, it ''introduces a form of censorship.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
