THE architectural score in Minneapolis right now is standing at 2-1. Two international architectural superstars, the Frenchman Jean Nouvel and the Pritzker-Prize-winning Swiss team of Herzog &amp; de Meuron, have gotten commissions there, Mr. Nouvel for a new Guthrie Theater and Herzog &amp; de Meuron for an addition to the Walker Art Center. But Ralph Rapson, a local architect who designed the original Guthrie, built in 1963, will see his work torn down.
Jacques Herzog and Pierre de Meuron have designed a 130,000-square-foot expansion of the Walker Art Center, with embossed aluminum mesh panels and asymmetrical windows. It will open sometime next year, holding a 385-seat performance space, a Wolfgang Puck restaurant, new galleries and a screening room.
In 2006, Mr. Nouvel's Guthrie Theater complex will open, and it will overlook the Mississippi River, with a stainless steel cylindrical facade like a silo. The new Guthrie, with 285,000 square feet, will have three theaters, including one with a thrust stage, in homage to the original Guthrie.
But the original Guthrie, with 80,000 square feet, adjacent to the Walker Art Center, is considered doomed. The theater by Mr. Rapson, now 89, was considered an innovative experiment when it opened with asymmetrical seating and a thrust stage. ''Naturally, I'm not at all pleased with the notion of destroying a perfectly good and solid building,'' Mr. Rapson said. He said he believes it could still be used by smaller music and dance companies.
The acting company connected to it, however, will not mourn its passing. James Morrison, the director of communications at the Guthrie, said that the old building is ''sinking into the ground.''
''And it costs $5 million a year just to keep the doors open,'' he added.
Kathy Halbreich, the director of Walker Art Center, the landlord of the old Guthrie, said, ''The building no longer has the architectural distinction it once had; it has nobody to operate it. And it has no capital.''
Nevertheless, the building has fans. Richard Moe, the president of the National Trust for Historic Preservation in Washington, placed it on the group's 2002 list of America's 11 Most Endangered Historic Places. ''We think it's significant because of the role that it played in the development of regional repertory theater,'' he said, ''the fact it was designed by Ralph Rapson, and that it incorporated the thrust stage concept.''
Paul Metsa, a Minneapolis guitarist, has gathered 3,000 signatures on a petition to save the Guthrie. ''It's not torn down yet,'' he said. ''Our position is to save the Guthrie as a performing arts center for the community.''
But even John Cowles, a founder of the Guthrie, supports tearing it down and turning its space back to the Walker. ''The building is not in good shape,'' he said. Besides, he said, the Guthrie ''has never been about architecture -- it has always been about theater.''
