Fort Greene is close enough that it could have happened here. In a coffee shop called Tillie's of Brooklyn, thick with lattes and laptops, a professor says she was surprised by city leaders' quick criticism of an officer who shot and killed an unarmed teenager on a rooftop in nearby Bedford-Stuyvesant. The way the police commissioner found fault with the shooting so soon suggests they seem to be taking it seriously.
But in the courtyard of the Walt Whitman Houses, a man's surprise is laced with cynicism: sure, it seems unfair that the police officer may take the fall for the shooting, but then again, it is about time someone in uniform did.
At the 1880's red brick station house of the 88th Precinct on Classon Avenue, police officers watched their boss's actions with shocked outrage. When Raymond W. Kelly, the commissioner they had come to trust and admire, said the shooting seemed to be unjustified, just hours after it occurred, their loyalties swung to the police officer with the same tough beat as their own. ''They don't put themselves in our shoes,'' one officer said. ''They don't know those rooftops in those neighborhoods.''
The 88th precinct in Brooklyn rests on the western edge of the 79th, where the shooting occurred, close enough to spend a bit of every morning in its shadow. The dividing line between them is invisible, porous, the two neighborhoods sharing the same sweeps of race, background and rich heritages, the same drop in violence and improvement in relations between the races, the same low-slung topography of housing projects, the same culture of apartment rooftops as backyards, thoroughfares and crime scenes.
And so Saturday's shooting resonates deeply here, and this is as good a place as any to judge the city's perception of the shooting and the official response to it: the police commissioner's remarks, the mayor's visit with the dead teenager's family, the announcement by the Brooklyn district attorney's office that it will move quickly with charges.
A day in Fort Greene found that reaction from the parallel worlds of the police and the people they protect is not as clear-cut as might be expected. To be sure, many residents applauded the response and many officers attacked it, but some residents predict that the police officer will get a raw deal, and some officers think the criticism of the shooting is appropriate. While finding no absolute consensus, interviews did show a widespread awareness of the case, and surprising and candid reactions. Among both those who wear dark blue uniforms and those who do not, there is a suspicion that at least a touch of political calculation and public relations was behind the quick response.
Before dawn Saturday, Timothy Stansbury Jr., 19, and some friends were returning to a party in the Louis Armstrong Houses via the project's roof. They were about to step through a doorway to the roof when two officers on patrol opened the door. Witnesses said that before a word was exchanged, Officer Richard S. Neri Jr. fatally shot Mr. Stansbury in the chest.
Yesterday, several officers spoke on the condition that their names would not be published. Although officers are often reluctant to discuss current news of their department with reporters, those who spoke were unusually vocal and seemed comfortable expressing their views. ''How can you come out and say it's an unjust shooting when you don't know all the facts?'' one asked.
The consensus among officers is that Mr. Kelly moved to quickly mollify the family of Mr. Stansbury and to head off retaliatory unrest in the neighborhood. Many officers said the strategy was unnecessary and that the family and the surrounding community have more patience and are more interested in letting the facts come out in due time than city officials have given them credit for.
''He should have waited until everything came out,'' said a woman who has been an officer for 20 years. ''It doesn't matter if he waited another day. The family is still going to be upset.''
Another veteran officer said he could sympathize with Officer Neri, having himself fatally shot a suspect and waited for the routine investigation, although far from the spotlight that is on Saturday's shooting.
''If it was a civilian who shot somebody, we would have to do a whole investigation before we jump up and say, 'He did it, he's guilty.' It seems like a poor housing cop doesn't get that courtesy,'' the officer said. ''The only thing you ask your bosses to do is back you. You get into a situation where you're more of a politician than a policeman.''
Officer Neri has been criticized for opening the door with his pistol unholstered, although Mr. Kelly has been careful to defend the right of officers to use their own judgment to determine when to draw their guns.
Things are different on the roofs, officers say. ''If you feel like you're in danger, you've got to take the precautions necessary,'' one officer said. ''You ever hear how they cut out pit bulls' vocal cords so you can't hear them coming? Anybody could be up there.''
But one officer stood by the commissioner. ''Past commissioners and mayors would have defended the cops or put the community on hold for the outcome of the whole situation,'' he said. ''It's not that the suspect is black and I'm black. It's that I'm a human being, and the commissioner's actions were appropriate.''
Among a dozen or so civilians stopped in Fort Greene Park, on the cold streets and in the courtyards of the housing projects, or cornered in coffee shops, only a few -- those who had just moved to the city or just returned from trips -- professed to be unaware of the shooting or too poorly informed to form an opinion.
Across a broad swath of social, economic and racial perspectives, people said they were surprised by the city's response, particularly by Mr. Kelly's decision to say the shooting appeared to be unjustified.
"A major change from the past," said Melvin Irby, 43, a social worker.
With the surprise, however, came skepticism. ''They're going to make an example out of him,'' said Divine Thomas, 37. But be that as it may, he said, the official actions taken against Officer Neri so far -- assignment to desk duty and loss of gun and badge -- were not enough. ''You put him on modified desk duty, hot cup of coffee, you do your thing from here,'' Mr. Thomas said. ''You toss the poor people a bone: 'We're doing something about this.'''
In Tillie's, Kim Felsenthal, 36, an adjunct professor at St. Joseph's College, suspected political motivations. ''They either quickly defend the officers or they quickly say they're wrong,'' she said. ''It makes me question what's going on behind it.''
Django Atkinson, 29, a waiter, said officials appeared to be rushing. He said he was not sure what to make of the swift pace, though, and suggested that one possibility was that officials were sincerely convinced that Officer Neri was in the wrong.
Even among those who said that an example was being made of Officer Neri, little sympathy could be found for him. ''It's just wild that things can happen like this to this day," said Ralph Richardson, 34, a filmmaker in Fort Greene. ''At least somebody's doing something about it, unlike the Giuliani response.''
Dennis Luces, two years younger, was less optimistic. ''That cop's going to get railroaded, regardless,'' he said outside the Walt Whitman Houses. ''Ain't really nothing going to change. It's a small drop in the bucket, and when the sun shines it's going to dry that drop up.''
