IN 1997, when my marriage was ending, I thought a lot about a story by Andre Dubus (père) that chronicled a man's adjustment to his divorce. Although he has acquired a new lover, his children are all he really cares about. But his apartment is small and dreary, so when they get together he mostly takes them out. Which is why, on a chilly winter's night he prolongs the too-brief visit with a long talk in his car. The next morning, the inside of the windshield is iced. And as he scrapes it clean, he realizes that ''the gray ice curling and falling from the glass was the frozen breath of his children.''
That heartbreaking moment was not close to my reality. For one thing, I was not a father. But my wife had two children from a previous marriage, and I had been their stepfather for a dozen years. Unconditional love, that sappy cliché, was exactly what I felt for them: perhaps precisely because they did not carry any of my genetic coding, I found them clever beyond description, adorable beyond measure. So when my wife and I separated, I was sufficiently committed to preserving my close relationship with my stepchildren that I moved from our co-op on Central Park West to a studio around the corner.
We left it to lawyers to work out the financial part of the divorce. All we had to do -- and our lawyers were clear we had to do this ourselves -- was divide our marital property.
Easier said than done.
The common wisdom at moments like this is ''get on with your life.'' By which people mean: ''Leave everything to your wife. Start fresh.''
On a practical level, I could not do this because I'd been writing about décor and design long enough to know that replacing my share of our furniture, art and tchotchkes would cost a great deal more than it had in 1986. Back then, I had flown to London, where my wife was then living, with $3,000 in cash. In three days, it bought a venerable mahogany breakfront, a Biedermeier table and armchair, a painted screen faded dark as a Rembrandt, a folding card table so well used the green felt was ripped and a bunch of antique table lamps. Once we were settled in New York, we acquired a couch, silver side tables with mirrored mercury-silver tops, a George Smith coffee table and a wonderfully worn Oriental rug. Add a Duane Michals photo and some English watercolors, and we were talking about a significant collection of stuff.
It was, however, the sentimental value that mattered more. The end of any marriage is painful, and I spent my share of evenings playing Nick Drake and Leonard Cohen dirges. But most of my memories of our marriage were sunny. For me, those 12 years were about a big love story, the writing of seven books by my wife and three books and innumerable magazine articles by me, and, most of all, the creation -- with the enlightened cooperation of the children's father -- of a functional blended family that shared summer houses and spent holidays together.
I do not believe there's such a thing as closure. I think one's history is a life companion. My wife and I might be getting divorced, but I was not divorcing the children. As much as possible, I wanted to march into the future with them or, because they were both away at school when their mother and I separated, with the things that they had used and cherished.
In 2000, when my divorce was final, I married Karen Collins, bought a classic six in Carnegie Hill and hired an interior designer, Alexa Hampton, who took over the family business after the death of her father. This choice was not casual. I had not only written about Mark Hampton but had also studied the way he and his wife, Duane, raised their daughters.
In 1987, Mr. Hampton had designed bookcases for us as a wedding gift. My former wife had no need of them. To me, these bookcases were talismans of a long friendship with the Hamptons. That they were not quite right for their future home in our guest room did not matter. Ms. Hampton understood immediately that this project was an exercise in sentimentality and tactfully approved the placement of the bookcases. Indeed, she generously approved most of our recycling ideas.
The rolls of blue-and-white striped Laura Ashley wallpaper left over from the children's bathroom? Fine for the master bath, Ms. Hampton said. A British library green for my study, to mirror my old work space? Sure. The wine-red couch as a centerpiece for the living room? Yes, even that would do.
Karen and I quickly finished off that room with a faded Oriental rug, a pair of antique French leather reading chairs and some wonderfully nicked pedestals, then moved on to purchases that really gave us pleasure: the start of a modest art collection. Together with small items gleaned on trips abroad, the result could not be happier -- the past as background.
Well-meaning friends asked Karen if she minded the presence of the past or having to live with another woman's taste. In fact, she does not; my ex-wife has great taste. And Karen had the not inconsiderable satisfaction of choosing most of what makes our home a relaxed blend of 19th-century English style and 20th-century art.
But most of all, Karen was pleased by my continuing commitment to the kids -- so pleased that she briefly took my feelings for them more seriously than I did. One day she was trying to bring order to my stepson's boyhood desk, where I write. After wiping off some red crayon streaks, she turned her attention to the center drawer, where she found pooled red blotches. She was about to wash them away when she thought: ''Wait! This is the past.'' True, but unimportant: it was fake Halloween blood, circa 1992.
Our efforts to merge past and present were rewarded the first time my stepchildren came for dinner. The wallpaper, the furniture, the pictures on the tables -- it's not our way to speak our feelings directly, but no one needed to say anything. The room just felt good.
There was only one incomplete note. In the guest bedroom was a large Charlie Mackesy watercolor of a blond boy and girl running on a beach, tugging on a kite, as a small brown dog runs alongside; behind them, a little girl is struggling to catch up. It was my present to my former wife in 1988 and richly metaphorical: my stepchildren and my stepson's cairn terrier, followed by the child she and I had wanted but could never afford. I understood completely her willingness to let me have it.
And now Karen and I have a 22-month-old daughter, and the guest room -- and the watercolor -- are hers. Occasionally, my stepdaughter baby-sits. And when my stepson was home from college last fall, he watched me play with the baby on the bed, just as I used to roughhouse with him.
There's no name for these relationships. There does not need to be. Affinity suffices.
CLOSE TO HOME
