Gov. John G. Rowland has invited all 71 Republicans in the legislature to his residence on the eve of his annual State of the State Address next week, but several members said on Wednesday that the invitation was inappropriate and that they would not attend, citing the current legislative inquiry that could lead to the governor's impeachment.
The governor, a Republican who was elected to a third term in 2002, generally invites only a small group of Republican legislators to brief them on the annual address, but this was the first time he had invited all of them, several ranking lawmakers said. Robert M. Ward, the House minority leader, said to do so just as a bipartisan impeachment committee is convening would create an appearance inconsistent with the neutrality the legislators need for that task.
Representative Ward, who does not plan to attend the meeting on Tuesday evening, said he had asked the governor's staff to hold the meeting at the State House instead.?? He did so after discussing the issue with some 50 fellow Republicans at a caucus meeting on Monday, and has not had a response, he said.
Dean Pagani, a spokesman for Mr. Rowland, said the meeting, a briefing on the budget, was still scheduled at the governor's residence.
''It's their decision to attend or not and the governor respects that,'' Mr. Pagani said. ''But the fact is that they will all have to work with the governor over the next several months.''
Mr. Pagani said some lawmakers would attend the meeting, but it was not yet clear how many. Several Republican legislators said few of their colleagues were likely to attend.
''We discussed this, and I don't know if anybody is going to go,'' said Kevin Witkos, a House Republican who attended the caucus meeting on Monday and does not plan to attend. Mr. Witkos has called on the governor to resign.
''I haven't received this kind of call from the governor in nine years,'' said George L. Gunther, a state senator who has also said the governor should resign. ''He hasn't done this before, and to do it now, it isn't too bright. It's highly inappropriate.'' There are 15 Republicans in the Senate, including 11 who have called on the governor to resign, and 56 in the House. Republicans are in the minority in both the 36-member Senate and the 151-member House.
Robert L. Genuario, a Republican state senator, said he planned to attend the meeting, and cited his need to discuss the budget as a ranking member of the Senate Appropriations Committee. But he added, ''Maybe it would have been more appropriate for the governor to invite everybody over before he had to learn some lessons.''
Many of the governor's invitations went out on Monday, the same day the House voted unanimously to create a committee that will decide whether to recommend his impeachment. The committee's first meeting is scheduled to take place Friday morning. The State of the State address is scheduled for Wednesday.
The impeachment investigation was first proposed last month, after Mr. Rowland admitted that he had lied about getting free work and gifts at his private cottage in Litchfield from state aides and contractors.
