WHEN Daniel Russo and Monique Chang-Russo decided they wanted a wireless home network for their Manhattan apartment, they called in an expert: their cable guy.
''I'm a little nervous about doing it myself,'' Mr. Russo said. So when Time Warner Cable, which provides his high-speed Internet service, began offering installation and support of wireless home networking for a few dollars extra in monthly charges, Mr. Russo was game. Although he had twice installed wired home networks on his own, both times it had cost him hours of frustration, and he wasn't sure he could guard a wireless system against security breaches.
A director of finance for Rainbow Media -- a subsidiary of a different cable provider, Cablevision, which does not offer service in his area -- Mr. Russo, 40, does not fancy himself a techie. ''Computers have gotten too sophisticated at this point,'' he said as he and Ms. Chang-Russo, his wife, a trainer in the information technology department of Sotheby's, awaited the cable truck on a recent rainy morning. ''I'll leave it to the engineers.''
Soon Luis Elias, a technician for Time Warner Cable of New York, was moving smoothly through their one-bedroom apartment in Stuyvesant Town, installing an external modem integrated with a wireless router, inserting a card in the couple's laptop, equipping the desktop PC with a U.S.B. adapter and checking security encryption.
Twenty minutes later, the 850-square-foot apartment was a cozy but -- according to the cable technician -- secure Wi-Fi area, where Ms. Chang-Russo could tote the laptop into the kitchen to browse Food Network recipes while her husband banked online on the bedroom PC. Marveling, Mr. Russo pronounced himself a ''former do-it-yourselfer.''
Mr. Russo has joined a growing number of consumers who need help linking multiple computers or other devices to a single broadband connection. And Time Warner Cable is one of several broadband companies that, along with retailers, have started installing and supporting home networks in the last year or two.
Time Warner's networking installation service, Wireless Road Runner, was introduced a year ago in Austin, Tex., and is now available in most Time Warner Cable markets, according to Mark Harrad, a company spokesman. He said that 50,000 of Time Warner's three million high-speed data customers pay an extra monthly charge, usually $10 to $15, for networks installed by his company.
Leaving installation to a broadband provider can have drawbacks. To simplify installation and limit service calls, some providers -- including RCN and many Time Warner Cable divisions -- usually set up configurations that connect multiple computers to the Internet simultaneously but do not allow them to share files, or peripherals like printers. Moreover, there may be a limit to the number of computers that can use the network -- and non-Windows machines may be incompatible with the equipment.
By contrast, a confident do-it-yourselfer could put in a system allowing music, photos and documents to be swapped on an arsenal of computers, and printers and other peripherals to be shared, with no extra monthly fees for the high-speed Internet connection.
But with more than 22 million broadband subscribers in the country, according to various estimates, and with two-computer families proliferating, experts note that the yen for networking has spread beyond technophiles to the masses, including some who initially bought routers only to return them or ditch them in a closet. Some consumers gladly settle for less than full-blown networking in exchange for professional installation.
What is more, some cable companies install home networks that do allow sharing of files. Along with new higher-speed connections, Comcast Cable Communications has been providing installation of wired and wireless home networks as part of several packages it plans to offer in all markets by the end of March.
For $53 monthly, about $10 more than broadband service without network installation, Comcast cable TV subscribers can get installation and support of a network connecting up to five computers. Set-up charges for the installation typically start at $200 for two computers, although steep discounts may be offered, and there is an additional monthly charge of $5 for networking equipment if it is leased rather than bought. Networks installed by Comcast allow sharing of files and peripherals, as well as enhanced speeds, ''because advanced users are pushing and pulling a lot of photos and images,'' said Greg Butz, a senior vice president for marketing and business development at the company.
Another cable company, Cox Communications, charges $10 monthly for network troubleshooting, but customers can opt out of this support arrangement after one year. Installation typically costs $300 for a wired network and $250 for wireless, for connecting two PC's; up to two more can be connected for an additional charge of $50 each.
Critics charge that cable companies have little basis for the added $10 to $15 monthly charges. ''They want to extract more money for each computer connected,'' said Michael Coe, a spokesman for SBC, the telecommunications company serving much of the Midwest, Southwest and California. He said SBC provided options for professional installation of equipment for its high-speed digital subscriber line service, known as D.S.L., including home networking, at no extra monthly cost.
But he added that in an effort to limit ''truck rolls,'' SBC offered consumers a combined modem-router-firewall made by 2Wire, usually $50 to $80, for self-installation of a network connecting up to 10 computers with full sharing capabilities. About 2,000 are sold daily, and returns are rare because ''we make it really simple,'' Mr. Coe said.
Verizon, too, steers customers toward self-installation, selling a Linksys router for networking its D.S.L. service. ''We can talk you through it,'' said Briana Gowing, a spokeswoman, adding that customers are free to purchase equipment elsewhere and seek help from the manufacturers.
Meanwhile, however, some leading electronics retailers have begun arranging installation of home networking equipment to increase sales of a group of products that have suddenly entered mainstream consciousness.
In July, Best Buy began offering installation of home networking equipment -- wireless only -- at its 600 stores. ''We are allowing customers who may not be too technically savvy to enjoy the lifestyle,'' said Josh Will, Best Buy's team leader for computer peripherals. ''They would have been way too intimidated'' to set up networks themselves, he said.
He added that the installation, which typically costs $149 for connecting two PC's (the equipment is sold separately) had brought in a ''wider demographic'' of customers, including more women, while stanching returns.
Circuit City offers installation of wired or wireless home networks, usually charging $200 for two computers, said a spokesman, Steve Mullen. Staples offers installation of wireless networks, but only in certain regions: a spokeswoman, Julie Mittelman, said the service was available at 150 stores in New York and New England. Staples charges $100 to connect two devices and $150 for up to four, and extra fees when computer troubleshooting is needed.
''In the future, perhaps, we'll be back to do-it-yourself -- you'll just plug it in,'' said Ralph Brown, a senior vice president for broadband access at Cable Labs, a research and development organization financed by the cable industry. But for now, he said, networking ''is technology that got ahead of the average consumer.''
Pricing  Wi-Fi Wizards At Your Service
Several major cable companies offer installation and maintenance of wireless home networks in many areas. (Others, including Cablevision and Charter Communications, do not yet do so.) Services offered, including limits on the number of devices that can be networked, may vary by region.
COMCAST -- Offers wired and wireless networking for up to five devices; capable of sharing files and peripherals. Service, including broadband access, is $53 monthly, plus $5 monthly for lease of equipment if not purchased. Set-up fees generally start at $200 for two computers.
COX -- Offers wired and wireless networking for up to four devices. Service is an extra $10 monthly, required for one year only; set-up charges are generally $300 wireless or $250 wired for two computers and $50 for each additional one. Networks can be configured to share files and peripherals.
RCN -- Offers wired and wireless networks for up to four devices, for an extra $10 to $15 monthly; set-up charges start at $50 for two computers. No configuration for sharing files and peripherals.
TIME WARNER CABLE -- Installs wireless networks; also provides installation and support for some wired networks but does not market them. Service is generally an extra $10 to $15 monthly over usual broadband charges; set-up charges vary by division. In general, networks can include five devices, but configuration for sharing files and peripherals is not offered in many areas.
