Nassau County's financially ailing health care agency needs to lay off more workers, drop its specialized services and strip down its hospital to stave off financial collapse, county officials said on Wednesday.
Unless prompt action is taken, the agency ''will collapse of its own weight when it runs out of cash in the next 12 to 18 months,'' according to a consultant's report that will be released on Thursday. The report, which has already been endorsed by County Executive Thomas R. Suozzi, also calls for doubling the use of the county's seven community health centers and closing its massive nursing home, moving its patients elsewhere.
In endorsing the report's findings, Mr. Suozzi said in an interview: ''The important thing that comes out of it is, we need the hospital, but we need to dramatically change its mission. It's not going to be a world-class teaching hospital that provides every single service, but instead we want it to be one of the best community hospitals in the nation.''
The plan, which would require state and local legislative approval, is expected to spark debate among health care advocates, health agency officials, union leaders and public officials.
Richard B. Turan, the president of the agency, the Nassau Health Care Corporation, called the proposals thoughtful. ''If some of their recommendations can help us maintain a viable health care corporation, then we want to follow the recommendations and work with the county to do that.''
The agency runs the 631-bed Nassau University Medical Center in a 19-story tower in East Meadow, Long Island's tallest building. The agency also operates the state's largest nursing home, the 889-bed A. Holly Patterson Geriatric Center in Uniondale. And it has a network of health centers and provides health care to county jail inmates.
The plan was drafted by George Kalkines of Manatt Phelps Phillips, a Manhattan law firm specializing in hospitals and health care.
The proposal calls for cutting 296 to 450 more jobs, beyond the recent layoffs already imposed by the agency, which has about 4,000 workers. The plan would have the medical center give up its costly but little-used specialties, like heart surgery, and convert into a general-care community hospital.
Under the plan, the agency would also demolish the nursing home and sell that 63-acre property for $30 million to $70 million. The patients could be parceled out to other nursing homes. Alternatively, 450 to 680 beds could be moved to the medical center, housed mostly in three floors that have stood vacant since the tower's construction some three decades ago. Some beds might be housed in new structures to be built near the tower.
The agency's board, now nominated by various officials and appointed by the governor, would be restructured to become entirely county-appointed. The consultant also urged refinancing of the agency's $256 million debt to save money and renegotiating its contracts with the county.
The agency would continue its historic mission of serving poor and uninsured patients, a major cause of its deficits.
Nassau spun off its health care operations four years ago as a public benefit corporation with high hopes of freeing it from government procedures, giving it more flexibility and incentive to compete like other hospitals.
Although the agency has cut costs and increased revenues, it -- and other hospitals as well -- have suffered from tightened state and federal aid and cost-cutting by the health insurance industry. Westchester's health care agency is facing even bigger deficits than Nassau's, and New York City Health and Hospitals Corporation is having trouble as well.
Nassau officials worry about the agency because of its financial repercussions. The county subsidizes the agency's operations and also backs the bonds for its debt. The county, which is recovering from its own fiscal crisis, sees the agency's deficits and possible bankruptcy as a major pitfall.
''By virtually any measure, N.H.C.C. today stands on the brink of financial collapse,'' said the consultant's report. ''This restructuring is critical if N.H.C.C. is to continue to fulfill its essential role in meeting the health needs of the residents of Nassau County, particularly the medically indigent, by becoming a first-class community hospital, without adding to the financial burden of Nassau County and its taxpayers.''
The agency's original financing in 1999 produced $82 million to pay the county for the health care properties, a move that critics said was merely a bailout for the county's own deficit at the time. The financing also yielded $135 million for the agency, but its deficits have eaten up $100 million, and the remaining reserve is steadily dwindling.
Many of the proposed changes would save money or raise revenue. Eliminating specialized services would reduce costs. Moving nursing home beds to the medical center would enable consolidated food service and laundry operations. Nursing home beds based at the hospital would be entitled to higher reimbursements. Under the regulations, patient visits to the community clinics generate higher reimbursements than visits to the medical center itself, so the plan calls for shifting patients to the clinics.
The chairman of the County Legislature's Health Committee, Jeffrey Toback, praised the report and said the interested parties ''need to work together for what I trust will be the rebirth of this hospital.''
