THE buzz from the baseball dinner in New York last Sunday was about how charming A-Rod was.
Alex Rodriguez, the newly named captain of the Texas Rangers, who was introduced as the American League's most valuable player, promptly delivered a sweet little monologue about living in New York as a 4-year-old and sitting on his mother's knee, watching ''Kiner's Korner.''
Captain A-Rod, who lives in Miami now, did everything but sing the theme song ''Meet the Mets,'' which was immortalized by Jane Jarvis. You got the feeling he knew every verse by heart. He is no naïf. He could have been trying to remind the city of his birth about what could have been.
The Mets' ownership had to squirm a bit inside at the bungled possibility of Alex Rodriguez as captain of the latter-day Metropolitans.
But there is an even worse nightmare for the Mets, if you want to indulge in pure talk-show-radio, conversation-with-the-man-in-the-moon fantasy:
The Yankees, finding themselves without a third baseman, somehow jigger their finances, make up some package that is frankly beyond my imagination and trade for A-Rod, who would be more than thrilled to rip the ''C'' off his mental uniform and switch to third base next to his old pal Derek Jeter.
It's undoubtedly not going to happen, particularly since the players union would not let A-Rod restructure his contract to go to Boston, which is the only reason he is still in Texas, let us not forget.
In New York, fans know George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, has the moxie to constantly think about upgrading his product.
Aaron Boone's knee went left when the rest of him went right in a pickup basketball game. The Yankees do not have a third baseman. They must have a third baseman. In New York, we have been conditioned to think big, just like the Boss.
Thinking big is what baseball fans do as they wait for the snow to melt, the Super Bowl to transpire, all those new winter-sport coaches to settle in. As we count down the seconds toward the first drippy rubber suit of spring training, baseball fans everywhere are feeling a mix of expectation and deprivation.
The Dodgers, once the most secure franchise in baseball, may be sold by a man from Australia to a man from Boston. The Dodgers, as we knew them, hardly exist. The Expos are in limbo. The Brewers are for sale, years after they should have been. Contraction looms. Pete Rose lingers. And in New York, baseball fans are betwixt and between. The Yankees do not seem like the Yankees, with three of their top starters gone. David Wells wore out his welcome, but Steinbrenner undervalued Andy Pettitte to the point that Pettitte went to Houston, followed by his buddy Roger Clemens. (Clemens is stung by criticism for unretiring? The poor dear. Is he giving back the presents? Is he reimbursing the fans in Florida for their flashbulbs?)
Will the new characters fit in? Will people remember how Don Zimmer sassed the Boss while quitting? Joe Torre seems to be struggling to hide his disdain for the Boss. And now there is a huge opening at third base. Stay tuned.
The real New York void is out in Queens, where the Mets are still hurting from not landing A-Rod after the 2000 season. True, he exhibited some reticence during the World Series, but that was only a negotiating tactic. It took $252 million for 10 years to keep him from a destiny with the team of his youth.
He was practically sitting cross-legged outside the Willets Point elevated station with a sign on his lap: ''Will Work for Nostalgia.'' And the Mets blew it because of dysfunction among the Doubleday camp, the Wilpon camp, the Valentine camp and the Phillips camp. (Remember Steve Phillips?)
In recent years, the Mets have taken a huge hit on Mo Vaughn, now saying that he is retired, and they have frittered time and stolen bases because of a lack of leadership at the top over the Mike Piazza frolics.
The Mets are dominated by players who will not be playing first base regularly this summer. Then there is Vladimir Guerrero, who always looked like one of the best right fielders in baseball, but the Mets apparently floated rumors about his physical condition and made him a lowball offer. Right field for the Mets sounds like stale 2003 pretzels sold at 2004 prices. The new Matsui had better be good, pursuing his dreams of making it big in North America. Alex Rodriguez once had more specific dreams -- wearing blue and orange and appearing on ''Kiner's Korner.''
A-Rod is quite capable of coming up with a New York riff just to mess with our minds. He once told the Seattle fans that money was not an issue, then he left for a contract that may not be duplicated for a long time. But Captain A-Rod is also bright, mature, appealing and talented. Just hearing him stand up at the dais and free-associate about the city of his birth was enough to add to winter blues that can only be alleviated by the first foul ball of spring.
Sports of The Times
