The newspaper holding company Hollinger International has rejected a proposal by the Barclay brothers of Britain to buy the entire company, according to a document filed yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission by the brothers' company, Press Holdings International.
The Barclays, who have already reached a tentative deal with the former chairman, Conrad M. Black, to buy his controlling stake in Hollinger International for a price analysts estimate at $17.60 a share, said they had proposed buying all other shares for $18 each.
Last night, though, Hollinger International issued a statement saying that the initial offer was never firm and that in subsequent conversations with Hollinger's senior financial adviser, one brother, Sir Frederic Barclay, said he was no longer interested in the $18-a-share offer.
Earlier in the day, word of the offer sent Hollinger International's shares up nearly 13 percent, to $16.71, as investors anticipated further bidding for the company. More than four million shares changed hands on the New York Stock Exchange, high volume for a stock that generally trades several hundred thousand shares a day.
And after Hollinger International released its new statement, some media experts said they still thought that the Barclays' expression of interest was a positive sign that the company's shares could ultimately fetch $18 or more each.
Bert Denton of Providence Capital, an informal adviser to Hollinger International shareholders, said: "It appears that Lazard is confident that it can generate a sale of Hollinger International assets for more than $18 a share. Otherwise, Lazard would have taken the $18-a-share indication of interest from the Barclays more seriously.'' Lazard is the investment banking firm that has been retained to sell Hollinger International assets.
Even when the news came out early in the day that the Barclays were interested in acquiring all of Hollinger International -- whose principal assets include The Daily Telegraph, The Chicago Sun-Times and The Jerusalem Post -- the offer was vague enough to leave some analysts wondering what the true terms were.
Press Holdings' document said it would be ''willing to consider offering to acquire all of the common shares at $18 a share, provided that the board of directors of Hollinger International would be willing to support such a transaction.''
The senior financial adviser to Hollinger International, to whom the proposal was made, responded by saying that the board was not interested at that price level, according to the document.
Before Hollinger's new stance last night, Laura Jereski, an analyst with the investment firm Tweedy Browne, a Hollinger International shareholder, had asked, ''What does the bid actually mean?'' She noted that a special committee of the company, organized to investigate questionable payments to Lord Black, had sued him and other parties to recover $200 million in questionable fees.
Ms. Jereski said that among the things still unclear about the Press Holdings offer was whether the proposal was conditioned on Hollinger International's dropping that lawsuit and the quest for the $200 million.
In spite all of yesterday's wrangling between the Barclays and Hollinger International, the company seems headed toward a sale.
But Jan Loeb, who follows Hollinger International for Jefferies &amp; Company, said he remained skeptical that an auction of individual assets could work because a sale of either The Daily Telegraph or The Chicago Sun-Times would result in enormous capital gains taxes.
Yet Hollinger International's investment banker, Lazard, is said to be working on a strategy that might avoid heavy taxes, even if the properties were sold piecemeal.
There are roughly 87 million shares of Hollinger International outstanding. Lord Black effectively controls 11 million common shares, as well as 14 million supervoting shares. His stake is held through Ravelston Management, a private company that owns 78 percent of Hollinger Inc., a publicly traded company that owns the controlling stake in Hollinger International.
Under terms of the Barclay brothers' deal with Lord Black, they would buy Hollinger Inc. for $326 million, plus the assumption of about $160 million of debt.
Their proposal for the rest of Hollinger International was valued at $1.1 billion for the equity and the assumption of about $465 million in debt. Together, their deal with Lord Black and their spurned offer would put a takeover value for Hollinger International around $2 billion.
The various issues between Lord Black and Hollinger International appeared to be heading toward a trial in Delaware Chancery Court, overseen by the court's vice chancellor, Leo Strine Jr. People close to the case said a trial was tentatively scheduled to begin on Feb. 18.
Separately, Hollinger International had sued in Delaware Chancery Court to stop the Barclays by adopting a so-called poison-pill provision that would significantly dilute the brothers' holdings in the company if they acquired Lord Black's stake. Hollinger International had also sought to remove bylaw changes that Lord Black tried to make, which would dissolve a variety of board committees and give him veto power over any asset sales of more than $1 million.
The Barclay brothers' offer in the Black deal would expire on March 6.
A February trial date would mean that the Delaware court could actually stop the transaction if it upheld Hollinger International's poison-pill provision. Mr. Denton, the adviser to Hollinger International's institutional shareholders, said, ''Lord Black now has to decide whether he wants to fight a big public battle in Delaware court or to settle.''
