Democratic leaders expressed relief Wednesday at the emergence of John Kerry as the leader of the party's presidential field, after his twin victories over Howard Dean. But they voiced concern about the potential electoral liabilities of Mr. Kerry, a candidate who remains unknown in much of the country.
In the interviews, party leaders described the Democratic nomination battle as hardly decided, even after Mr. Kerry decisively defeated Dr. Dean here and in Iowa. While many said Dr. Dean's hopes had been seriously diminished by the losses, they noted Mr. Kerry's own difficulties as a candidate this year, and said Senator John Edwards of North Carolina remained in a strong position to step in should Mr. Kerry falter again, particularly as the race moves south.
Still, the evident relief among some Democratic leaders was testimony to their concern about what had once seemed the near-inevitability that Dr. Dean would be the party's standard-bearer in November. That concern had markedly grown in recent days, after his third-place finish in Iowa and the raucous concession speech he delivered that night.
''To the extent to which there is an establishment, it wants what the Democratic primary voters want: the strongest candidate in the fall,'' said Senator Evan Bayh of Indiana. ''I think the consensus is that John will be a more formidable candidate than Howard.''
A Southern Democratic state chairman, who would not allow his name to be used, said, ''There's been a big sigh of relief,'' while a national Democratic strategist said: ''It has been a sea change. People were worried.''
Across the nation, Democratic leaders were again taking stock of Mr. Kerry, a candidate many had written off just a month ago. And some expressed concern that the White House would, as advertised, seek to discredit him by presenting him as a Northeastern liberal ideologue, and questioned whether he could improve his often awkward campaign style.
''I think he forcefully has to address the stereotype that his opponents will try to put on him: that he is, quote-unquote, a Massachusetts liberal,'' Mr. Bayh said. ''He's got to address that.''
May Scheve Reardon, the Democratic Party leader in Missouri, said there were questions how well a Democrat from Massachusetts would sell to a Midwest electorate. Her state is the site of a primary on Tuesday, which Mr. Kerry has made a priority, and will be a closely fought battlefield in the general election.
''We have to figure out if he's right for a Midwest state like Missouri, and whether he can beat George Bush,'' she said. ''He has a very statesmanlike stature. But it's a very conservative state here. We will have to see how some of his votes will play here.
Yet in a sign of how much the electoral landscape has shifted again, several Democrats said Mr. Kerry -- and possibly Mr. Edwards -- now looked strong as general-election candidates when compared with Dr. Dean. Their remarks came before Dr. Dean fired his campaign manager and installed a senior aide to Al Gore in his place.
Art Torres, the California state Democratic chairman, said he thought Mr. Kerry would be ''terrific as a nominee.''
''Dean is a tougher sell,'' Mr. Torres said. ''Not because of who he is and who he represents, but because he's perceived as being an angry man.''
In Florida, Scott Maddox, the state Democratic chairman, offered a similar view as he compared Mr. Kerry's prospects in his state with those of Dr. Dean.
''Florida will be the battleground state in the election,'' Mr. Maddox said, ''and I think John Kerry can absolutely carry the state of Florida. The thing with Dean is he seems -- his persona -- is more liberal. I don't think he's as liberal as they make him out to be, but the question is could he shake the moniker.''
On Capitol Hill, the sense of excitement surrounding Mr. Kerry's back-to-back wins was palpable among Democrats, who are clearly eager to put the divisive primary season behind them. Many lawmakers -- some of whom had been privately despondent about Dr. Dean's rise in the polls last year -- were finally sounding as though they truly believed they could take on Mr. Bush and win.
''I think what's happened is there's an excitement that we could actually win the presidency, and there's a good feeling that Kerry could do it or that Edwards could do it,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer of New York.
Senator Joseph R. Biden Jr. of Delaware, reflecting the view of many Democrats, said the race was far from over, but added, ''I think he's clearly the strongest candidate, the guy most likely to beat Bush.''
In the course of the day, there was little mention of the other two major Democrats in the race: Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who came in fifth in New Hampshire, and Gen. Wesley K. Clark of Arkansas, who came in third after spending nearly a month campaigning nonstop in the state.
But Ron Oliver, the Democratic chairman from Arkansas, General Clark's home state, said he did not believe that Mr. Kerry's prospects had been significantly improved by his back-to-back victories and said Mr. Kerry would be vulnerable in the South because of his stand on such issues as gun control.
One of the key primaries or caucuses on Tuesday is in South Carolina, and Mr. Oliver predicted that either General Clark or Mr. Edwards would do best there.
''He's won two states so far, but they've been small states pretty far removed from people in the South,'' Mr. Oliver said. ''We don't have that much in common with people in Iowa and New Hampshire. Next Tuesday will be a better test; it's going to be a better cross section and variety of states and voters.''
Among the challenges Mr. Kerry clearly faces is simply getting known in much of the country; his decision to focus all his attention in Iowa meant that he has been all but invisible in crucial states like South Carolina and Ohio.
''I can't remember the last time Kerry was in Ohio,'' said Dennis White, the Democratic chairman in Ohio, where the primary is March 2. Some Democratic leaders said Mr. Kerry would have to be prepared to respond to attacks on his Congressional voting record by the White House and his Democratic opponents.
''I think we understand the case people would make against John Kerry: a 20-year voting record that some would characterize as liberal,'' said Chris Gates, the Colorado Democratic chairman.
Other Democrats argued that Mr. Kerry's campaign style had improved during the course of this campaign, and that he had been able to withstand any attacks rival Democrats threw at him.
Joe Erwin, the Democratic leader in South Carolina, said: ''Kerry is proving to be very strong. You know the way baseball players get in a groove? It just looks like his whole team is in a groove right now.''
And Senator Ron Wyden, Democrat of Oregon, said Mr. Kerry offered ''a textbook case of putting together his campaign since those dark days in Iowa,'' adding, ''People literally had put his candidacy in the grave and he brought it back.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: DEMOCRATS
