Verizon Wireless confirmed yesterday that it had added 1.5 million new subscribers in the fourth quarter, outpacing its rivals as new rules allowed consumers to keep their phone numbers when switching mobile carriers. But the impact of so-called number portability appears to have been less significant than was projected by some companies and many industry analysts.
Only about one million people have switched carriers, said Roger Entner, an analyst with the Yankee Group, a market research firm. That total is far below analysts' expectations, which had ranged up to almost nine million.
Although there are no firm figures on exactly how many subscribers switched services, the top beneficiaries -- based on the number of new subscribers -- appear to have been Verizon Wireless and T-Mobile, which earlier this week said it added about one million subscribers in the fourth quarter. Cingular Wireless added 628,000, Sprint around 391,000, and AT&amp;T Wireless 128,000.
Nextel said it planned to release its figures in the second or third week of February. Earlier this year, it said it would add at least 2.2 million subscribers in 2003, but did not specify its gains for the fourth quarter.
The fact that all companies gained subscribers illustrates the growth of the industry. Meantime, the relative strength of the various providers is very much in line with projections from wireless industry analysts.
Going into the fourth quarter, several analysts said that Verizon Wireless had done a good job of differentiating itself as providing the most reliable service, while T-Mobile successfully defined itself as the lowest-price competitor.
''This is predominately a big marketing victory'' for the two companies, Mr. Entner said, but he added that the reputation of Verizon Wireless for reliable service has been earned because the company has built a reliable network.
Verizon Wireless, which is owned 55 percent by Verizon and 45 percent by Vodafone, plans to announce its fourth quarter earnings today, and will publicly disclose its subscriber additions.
But a spokeswoman for Verizon Wireless, Nancy Stark, confirmed that the company added 1.5 million subscribers -- a figure that was alluded to in an earnings filing made yesterday by Vodafone.
The addition of 1.5 million subscribers by Verizon Wireless represents the company's largest quarterly growth ever but it is not out of line with the company's recent pattern. In the second quarter of 2003, the company added 1.3 million subscribers, Ms. Stark said, and in the third quarter it added 1.4 million subscribers.
Mr. Entner said, ''They're consistently outperforming their competitors.''
The news comes as the wireless industry may be poised for consolidation. AT&amp;T Wireless is up for sale, and the company has set a date of Feb. 13 for prospective bidders to make an offer. Chief among the companies expressing interest in acquiring AT&amp;T Wireless is Cingular Wireless, but others that have been mentioned as suitors are Vodafone, NTT DoCoMo and Nextel.
TECHNOLOGY
