A panel of top Bloomberg administration officials, including the police commissioner and the schools chancellor, portrayed the public school discipline system yesterday as still in disarray despite an intense push by City Hall to fix the problems and crack down on the most dangerous schools.
Among the problems the officials acknowledged under tough questioning by the City Council was that the Police Department remains unable to provide city education officials with school crime data on a timely basis.
At some points, the officials, including Deputy Mayor Dennis M. Walcott, Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein and Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly, gave contradicting testimony. At other points during the joint hearing of the Council's Public Safety and Education Committees, they could not answer basic questions, like how many troubled students are enrolled in special programs called New Beginnings centers.
Mr. Kelly, for example, testified that a new school safety task force of 150 police officers, announced earlier this month by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, started work on Tuesday. Chancellor Klein, in testimony following the police commissioner, said the task force would not start work until next month. After the hearing, Mr. Klein said: ''They are up and running. It's ahead of schedule, actually, so I'm learning something here.''
But it was the administration's admission that computerized police data cannot be effectively sent to the Education Department that gripped the attention of many city lawmakers, including the Council Speaker, Gifford Miller, who presided over the hearings, and Eva S. Moskowitz, the chairwoman of the Education Committee, who asked why safety data for individual schools was not readily available.
''We don't have the information technology,'' Commissioner Kelly said. ''We at the Police Department simply don't have the technology to make a list to do that now.'' He added: ''Even producing it on a monthly basis is a real challenge for us.''
Chancellor Klein said the Education Department would publicize the data if it had access to it. ''We need to get school-based data and then we would be happy to transmit,'' he said. ''That's one of the issues that we are working on.''
Deputy Mayor Walcott, Commissioner Kelly and Chancellor Klein were joined at the witness table by the city's criminal justice coordinator, John Feinblatt, as well as the chief executive for school safety, Benjamin Tucker; the commander of the Police Department's school safety division, Assistant Chief Gerald Nelson; and Lester W. Young Jr., the top education official in charge of student support services, including discipline.
Administration officials conceded that they had failed to prepare an annual report that is required under the agreement that gave the Police Department the primary authority for school safety in 1998.In their testimony, the officials said the administration had made great strides since early December when Mr. Bloomberg acknowledged that his reorganization of the school system had caused a breakdown in the disciplinary process, including long delays in suspending and removing violent students from the schools.
They said overall crime in the schools had declined sharply in recent years and said the problem was largely limited to a small percentage of troubled schools. Mr. Feinblatt said that about 15 percent of middle and high schools account for about half of all safety incidents, and that two-thirds of the city's schools had no safety problems at all.
Mr. Walcott said new after-school suspension centers and off-site suspension centers had been established. And the administration's crackdown on a dozen of the city's most dangerous schools had already shown results, he said, with the average number of daily safety incidents declining 37 percent in one week's time and the number of daily arrests declining 30 percent.
''But,'' Mr. Walcott said, ''we won't stop until the work is done completely.''
In responding to lawmakers' questions, the officials offered a glimpse of how bad things were before the mayor demanded action. They said that between Dec. 5 and Jan. 5, the city had cleared a backlog of as many as 900 cases of suspended students awaiting disciplinary hearings.
Officials said that to clear the backlog, they had opened suspension centers in each borough, instead of using just one citywide office and they doubled the number of suspension hearing officers and hired a director.
