Topper or No?
Q. I want to grow French frisée in my New Hampshire garden but have read that the plant must be caged all season. Can you explain?
A. Though the wild curls of frisée (curly endive) suggest a little confinement might not hurt, it is likely that ''cage all season'' is a mistranslation. Growers in Europe do use special covers but they only enclose the centers of the plants, and only for the week or so before harvest.
Without sunlight, the frisée becomes less bitter and more tender. And because covered leaves cannot make chlorophyll, they turn from green to pale yellow. The technical term for the process is blanching.
''If you go to the South of France, you see fields full of plants with little hats. It's like a sea of pointed Frisbees,'' said Eliot Coleman, the author of ''Four Season Harvest'' (Chelsea Green Publishing Company, 1999) who is a salad crop expert.
Mr. Coleman's frisée does not require millinery because he grows Bianca Riccia, a naturally pale, mild variety specially bred for close planting. With this one, you do not wait for it to make heads. You just keep harvesting the leaves as soon as they are 3 or 4 inches long, so production starts sooner and lasts longer.
If you want to grow the classic kind, try Neos or Très Fine Maraîchère, which are supposedly self-blanching, or go whole hat and put covers on for the last four or five days. Baskets or heavy-duty paper plates will do.
Bianca Riccia and Neos are sold by Johnny's Selected Seeds, (207) 861-3901 or www.johnnyseeds.com. Très Fine Maraîchère is sold by John Scheepers, (860) 567-6086 or www.kitchengardenseeds.com.
Digging Out
Q. We have shrubs and perennials next to an area where we park our cars. My husband flings all the snow he shovels right on top of them. Will this damage the plants?
A. Large numbers of downy flakes can overburden evergreens, but similar quantities of the same seldom bother deciduous shrubs, even when the flakes arrive in a blizzard of flinging. Rocklike chunks of ice-laden slush are another story. Brittle plants like tree peonies can easily be broken. And snow with road salt in it should not be spread in flower beds.
There isn't much you can do now. Next spring, think about moving the plants back far enough to allow for snow clearing.
To Live Long and Prosper
Q. I have a 16-year-old pear tree and a six-year-old apple tree. How long will they live and bear fruit? Will the end be sudden or gradual?
A. The end will be gradual if the trees stay healthy. They will continue to bear fruit as long as they have pollinators nearby, though they will bear more if they are well cared for (sharpen those pruners!). Life span depends on what kinds of trees you have. Dwarf apples and pears are usually good for only 20 years or so. Standard trees can make it all the way to 100, though their gradual decline will start at age 50 or 60.
Garden Q &amp; A
