Missouri awoke on Wednesday morning to discover that it was having an election.
Suddenly, the state's best-known politicians were racing to dole out endorsements. Campaign commercials hit the airwaves. Three presidential candidates themselves showed up in this state, for the first time in many voters' memories.
''To be honest, I just heard we were having the election here,'' Karen Chase, a hairdresser, acknowledged shyly on Wednesday, as her clients and co-workers at D.J.'s Hair Place in the St. Louis Hills neighborhood nodded along. The salon talk lately had been of the frozen, snowy weather, Ms. Chase said, not a primary election -- at least not one anywhere near here.
''Nobody really said anything,'' Ms. Chase said. ''I didn't even know when it was.''
Actually, Missouri's primary has long been scheduled for next Tuesday, but the candidates -- and voters, too, it seems -- had mostly ignored it because Representative Richard A. Gephardt, a local son, was viewed as such a sure winner. But Mr. Gephardt dropped out a week ago, bequeathing to his state what amounts to an election campaign on speed. What took place over months in Iowa and New Hampshire is now being crammed into a couple of days here.
In the five-day campaign ahead, some political operatives are predicting a full-scale blitz on Missouri's more than 5.5 million people: direct mail, e-mail messages, commercials, telephone calls and an overwhelming crush of national media coverage. On Wednesday, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and the Rev. Al Sharpton made stops here, and state Democratic officials have made last-minute arrangements for what they hope will be a debate among all the candidates here next Monday night.
Six other states are also holding primaries or caucuses on Tuesday, but Missouri's has special appeal for candidates -- 74 pledged delegates to the Democratic National Convention, the largest number of the bunch.
What is more, all the candidates have cause to think they have a chance here. A recent poll by The Kansas City Star and KMBC, a television station, showed Mr. Kerry far ahead of his rivals, with 25 percent of those surveyed supporting him, but the big winner here turned out to be no one yet. Thirty-five percent of the people in the poll, completed on Sunday, said they were undecided.
''This all certainly did catch Missourians off guard,'' former Senator Jean Carnahan, whose family legacy in politics carries weight among Democrats, said in an interview. ''At the grocery store and at the hairdresser, people are not paying attention yet.''
But that, said Mayor Francis Slay of St. Louis, is shifting by the minute. ''This is going to be the shortest campaign in the history of Missouri,'' Mr. Slay said. ''But I've got to tell you, by next Tuesday, anybody who watches TV, who listens to the radio, who reads the newspaper, is going to know.''
Much of the attention in the coming days is expected to focus on Kansas City and St. Louis, the state's most populous cities and its strongholds for Democrats. All this in a state unaccustomed to particular attention during presidential primary years. Missouri used to hold its primaries later in the season, often after the pack of presidential candidates was already culled. This is the first year the state's primary has been held so early in the season.
But May Scheve Reardon, chairwoman of the state's Democratic Party, said she feared that the promised blitz of attention might not be as big or as intense as promised, given the other states also in contention next week and a distinct lack of time.
''I wonder if it's more hype than reality,'' she said. ''My thought is that it's really important for them to take the time here, not just to run through town but to take the time to really talk to people. If you can win here, you can win anywhere.''
History has borne that out for a state that seems uniquely able to reflect the nation's mix of rural and urban, rich and poor. Since 1904, Missouri has mirrored the nation when it comes to picking a president. Only once has the state gone for someone the nation did not; in 1956, Missouri chose Adlai E. Stevenson over Dwight D. Eisenhower.
Since last week when Mr. Gephardt left the campaign, some have implored him to offer his advice. But he has not given an endorsement, nor does he plan to before the primary, his spokesman, Erik Smith, said.
''He wants people in Missouri to make up their own minds,'' Mr. Smith said.
Mr. Gephardt's name will remain on the ballot because he dropped out too late to have it removed.
But the scramble is on to grab other Democratic political leaders here, most of whom once backed Mr. Gephardt. Over the past week, Mrs. Carnahan said she had received calls from all the major candidates. And state leaders have begun handing out their blessings, many going to Mr. Kerry or Mr. Edwards.
On Wednesday, Mrs. Carnahan publicly endorsed Mr. Kerry, as has Mayor Slay, former Senator Thomas F. Eagleton and a list of others. Among those backing Mr. Edwards are Representative Ike Skelton and Lt. Gov. Joe Maxwell.
With little time left, this fight is building rapidly. On the south side of St. Louis, in an unmarked room in a dark community center, Mr. Kerry's campaign opened a makeshift office on Monday. The phones were installed on Tuesday. On Wednesday, they rang on and on.
''We need to do in a day what we would normally do for months here,'' said Kim Molstre, Mr. Kerry's new Missouri spokeswoman. Ms. Molstre worked for Mr. Gephardt until last week, when, like so many of his former operatives, she was courted by another campaign.
The challenge now, she said, is twofold: not just urging people to support a certain candidate, but first, convincing people that an election really is about to take place.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: MISSOURI
