TEN minutes outside the red clay walls of this 950-year-old city, an asphalt avenue abruptly gives way to rutted dirt. Dusty goats saunter by, and a date palm grows inconveniently in the middle of the narrow road like a giant feather duster. Houses hunker down amid hills of cactus. Don't be fooled by the apparent desolation. Here in the Palmeraie, a date-palm forest of nearly 30,000 acres that has become a blue-chip suburb, is the latest evidence that a new generation of designers is teaching old Marrakesh new tricks.
At the end of the unprepossessing trail is a sprawling two-story house built 18 months ago by Meryanne Loum-Martin, a designer and hotelier, and her husband, Dr. Gary J. Martin, an ethnobiologist. The honey-yellow concrete building exhibits none of the Ali Baba hallmarks popularly associated with this part of the world. No plump banquettes line the walls like upholstered bales of hay. There is not one square inch of the kaleidoscopic tile work known as zellij. No multicolored glass lanterns light the rooms. And no window is screened by mashrabiya, the wood fretwork historically used to keep women out of sight. Instead the house, which its owners call Dar Ilane, or Millet House, illustrates the latest step in the evolution of the Moroccan interior: an increasingly refined melding of Western modernity and North African tradition.
Building on a movement that began in the 1970's with the lean-look interiors of Jacqueline Foissac, a Marrakesh decorator, designers here are increasingly bypassing the dust-catching haute harem look in favor of airy décors that repackage Moorish artistry in unconventional ways. Behind this shifting of gears is immigration, said Susan Sully, the author of ''New Moroccan Style'' (Clarkson Potter, 2003).
The book highlights the work of more than two dozen designers, photographers and other tastemakers who have gained prominence here in recent years. Like Ms. Loum-Martin, who was born in Ivory Coast to a Senegalese father and a French West Indian mother, most are foreign-born: Belgian, French, Algerian, Italian, German, English and American. The high priest of Moroccan interiors, Bill Willis, is from Tennessee, of all places. He arrived in the late 1960's and is the undisputed maestro of grand Arab-chic homes for part-time Marrakchis like Yves Saint Laurent and Bernard-Henri Lévy, the French philosopher. ''It's inevitable that someone from the outside sees things anew,'' Ms. Sully said.
Ms. Loum-Martin's living room, for instance, contains little more than moody plum and green Thai silk curtains and modern paintings by African artists. At one end of the 39-foot-long space, low-slung iron chairs upholstered in hefty Senegalese cotton gather around woven-reed daybeds used as coffee tables; at the other are a pair of bone-inlaid cedar sofas. That is quite enough furniture for Ms. Loum-Martin, who described her style as the half-written page. ''People have a tendency to want to clutter their rooms right away, but I'd rather have rooms that allow me to get cluttered over time,'' she said.
Restraint doesn't mean lack of invention, though. Part private home, part boutique hotel (the 16-acre property includes a guest villa that the designer often rents out to travelers), the place is a laboratory of bright ideas. The chandeliers in her dining room, for instance, are copper sink basins, suspended upside down from industrial-strength cable; an electrical socket stoppers each drain. Roughly braided whisk brooms have been transmuted into curtain tassels, and Somali bone-and-brass bracelets are incorporated into a copper candelabrum. And when Ms. Loum-Martin needs a striped fabric, she has solid-color materials cut up, recombined and sewn together. ''I'd rather make a stripe than buy one,'' she said. ''I can't help customizing things.''
Though she studied architecture for two years at the École des Beaux-Arts in Paris (until the math requirements ''defeated me''), she eventually followed in the footsteps of her father, Seyni Loum, and worked in Paris as a corporate lawyer. But it wasn't long before she was questioning her decision: at heart, she still wanted to design houses. Further undermining her resolve was a trip to Mexico in 1986, where she met Dr. Martin, a Fulbright fellow living in Oaxaca and working on his doctorate. A marathon runner with an expertise in jungle flora, Dr. Martin was funky, not faubourg. ''He wasn't like any of the men I knew back home,'' Ms. Loum-Martin said. ''Gary didn't have this programmed life ahead of him.''
By the early 1990's, they were married and living in Paris, with two small children, Edward, now 13, and Thaïs, 10. It was not an ideal location. ''It's a great place if you're single and independently wealthy,'' said Dr. Martin, 45, a self-described ''backwoods botanist'' from Lansing, Mich., who is uncomfortable with air kisses and cocktail chatter. ''When you have kids,'' he said, ''you need a different lifestyle,'' though not necessarily the one he grew up with: ''For me, Michigan had a lack of adventure, a lack of incident.''
Though Ms. Loum-Martin has family roots in Paris, she was raised in Ghana, England, France and the Soviet Union. ''I've been a minority wherever I've lived,'' she said with a shrug.
The footloose couple eventually found a sufficiently laid-back but suitably exotic hometown in Marrakesh, which they had often visited on holidays. This city, population about 750,000, is inexpensive by Western standards. It is also within a few hours' flying time of Europe. (When not studying plants in Borneo or the Amazon rain forest, Dr. Martin lectures on anthropology at the University of Kent in Canterbury, England.)
Best of all, Marrakesh is rife with artisans willing to make anything Ms. Loum-Martin can invent, like a copper chandelier in the shape of cow horns. In partnership with her father, Ms. Loum-Martin soon renovated a rundown 1930's ryad, or courtyard house, at the center of town and transformed it into Ryad Tamsna (www.tamsna.com), a two-story emporium where visitors can lunch, see the work of emerging regional artists and fashion designers, and buy the sinewy iron furniture that has become Ms. Loum-Martin's specialty, each piece perforated with geometric cutouts that recall the patterns of African textiles. Since they moved here permanently in 1996, she and Dr. Martin have branched out, like many entrepreneurial expatriates, renting luxury guesthouses to travelers.
The creative process has not been effortless. The difficulties, Ms. Loum-Martin said, have nothing to do with abruptly shifting her focus from torts to tadelakt, a low-sheen waxed plaster used widely here for walls and floors. It has more to do with the occasionally stubborn nature of local craftsmanship. She recently designed an iron table and asked that its surface be composed of sea-green tiles rather than the usual dozen or more colors. What she got was better -- at least, that was what the artisan told her when he delivered it. ''I sent it back without looking at it,'' Ms. Loum-Martin said. Eventually she got a table in the mode she prefers: a vernacular vocabulary customized in an unconventional way.
The architecture of Dar Ilane is a departure from the norm, too. Morocco's building tradition is what Ms. Loum-Martin calls ''the architecture of exclusion.'' For centuries, houses have been centered on an interior courtyard garden and equipped with windows that are few and small, to conserve heat in winter and ward off sun in summer. By contrast, Dar Ilane's oiled-cedar windows are wall-size expanses of glass that blur the divisions between indoor and out. ''The garden is my realm, and the rooms are Meryanne's realm, but the mixing of the two is important,'' Dr. Martin said.
An advocate of what he calls ''edible landscapes,'' he fills flower beds with the spiky gray-green foliage of artichokes rather than the tea roses that are as common here as steaming glasses of sweet mint tea. His lusty thickets of date palms, olive trees and chest-high rosemary also soften the house's majestic scale. At 2,100 square feet, not including verandas and a flat roof with views of the snow-capped Atlas Mountains, Dar Ilane is about 200 square feet smaller than the average American home. The impression it gives, however, is palatial. Inspired by the generous volumes of a friend's 19th-century apartment in Paris, Ms. Loum-Martin had the ground-floor ceilings built 17 feet high. Grand, yes, but sensible. After all, heat rises: summers here can reach more than 105 degrees. The couple have no desire for air-conditioning, but they aren't ruling out central heat. Though it was 70 degrees outside on a recent afternoon, indoors Ms. Loum-Martin was wearing a couple of sweaters and a light scarf.
What may come as a surprise to some visitors to Dar Ilane and the guesthouse at the far side of its garden are the subtle reminders that Morocco -- a culturally Arab land only eight miles across the Strait of Gibraltar from Spain -- is an African country. The latest generation of Moroccan designers is increasingly conscious of this geography, reaching out, at least aesthetically, to the rest of the continent. One wall of Ms. Loum-Martin's entrance hall is a constellation of humble artifacts that serve as a geographical key: rough-hewn North African household tools, a painting of Central African rhinos, a Moroccan couscous bowl, a carved Berber window frame and a scrap of fabric from Senegal.
''Everything is connected here: Africa, the Middle East, Europe,'' said the designer, striding past a flea-market French Art Deco table that sits on a woven straw-and-leather rug from Mauritania. ''Morocco is African, and so am I. But each of us has had a lot of outside influences.''
DESIGN DISPATCH
