Pakistani officials said Wednesday that their investigation into the sale of the nation's nuclear technology to Iran had now focused on Abdul Qadeer Khan, the father of Pakistan's atomic bomb, and that a ''security ring'' had been set up around his house five days ago to keep him from leaving the country.
But it was unclear whether the government had the political will, to bring charges against the widely revered scientist.
In Washington, senior administration officials said that the investigations under way in Pakistan were beginning to tie together a number of nuclear programs and that soon American officials would be able to draw conclusions about the black market that fueled all those efforts. They were apparently referring to programs in Iran, North Korea and Libya, all of which dealt with Pakistani scientists.
The Bush administration is engaged in a delicate series of exchanges with Pakistan, encouraging the investigation of Dr. Khan and a handful of his closest aides for giving data obtained from Libya as it turns over nuclear designs and parts, and helping identify middlemen who sold parts for uranium enrichment and other technologies.
But the White House says it is simply aiding Pakistan, not leading the investigation, making it clear that Pakistan's president, Gen. Pervez Musharraf, is in control. General Musharraf has been strongly criticized for doing America's bidding in the investigation.
In Islamabad, a senior official said, ''All these investigations are pointing toward Dr. A. Q. Khan. But who provided what to whom, this is very difficult to establish.''
The investigation has led to the discovery of a nuclear smuggling network that one official called this week ''a hydra-headed monster with its tentacles all over the world.''
Pakistani investigators are trying to trace the origins and history of ''large amounts'' of money found in a series of bank accounts spread across the Persian Gulf region. The bank accounts, they say, were used by middlemen from Germany, the Netherlands, South Africa, Sri Lanka and other countries who Iranian officials say sold them nuclear hardware and centrifuge designs in the late 1980's and early 1990's.
Accounts in Dubai and other Persian Gulf locations believed to be controlled by Dr. Khan have also been found. Investigators are trying to determine whether Dr. Khan controlled some or all of the accounts.
Payments from Iran, they said, were at some point apparently funneled through a third party.
''It's very difficult to track money,'' the senior official said. ''We have some leads and these leads are credible. People are pointing fingers at certain individuals.''
Dr. Khan's annual salary as the head of the Khan Research Laboratories was $2,000 a month at the most, an official said. But the scientist purchased numerous houses in Pakistan and lived lavishly. A senior official said that whether the hardware came from Pakistan is still being investigated. But he said there were ''strong indications'' that Dr. Khan sold the design for the centrifuges that ended up in Iran.
The official said that investigators widened their inquiry two weeks ago after receiving information from Libya that Pakistanis may have provided nuclear technology to Libya though middlemen based in Dubai.
A senior intelligence official said intelligence agencies had noticed that Dr. Khan was amassing wealth but had chosen to look the other way.
Dr. Khan did not respond to a call on Wednesday requesting comment.
Pakistani officials say they began their inquiry in November after Iranian officials told United Nations inspectors that they had received nuclear hardware and information from middlemen with ties to Pakistanis. General Musharraf has said ''some individuals'' appeared to have sold nuclear technology for personal gain, and he has promised to punish them.
Eleven employees of Khan Research Laboratories -- Pakistan's nuclear weapons producing facility -- had been detained for questioning since November. Officials said Wednesday that seven employees -- four scientists, who are close allies of Dr. Khan, and three retired military officials involved in security at the labs -- were still in detention.
Dr. Khan has been repeatedly questioned but not detained.
The government, which is dominated by the military, has questioned no senior military officials who were in power at the time.
Relatives of the detained scientists and an array of Pakistani analysts have questioned how any scientist -- including Dr. Khan -- could remove hardware from the country without the knowledge of the army, which closely monitored the nuclear program. Relatives say the scientists are being scapegoated, while senior military officials go unpunished.
Dr. Khan was accused of stealing a centrifuge design from a European company in the early 1970's. After returning to Pakistan, he ran a clandestine effort to buy the components needed to build thousands of precision centrifuges, which are used to produce highly enriched uranium, a key ingredient in a nuclear bomb.
The senior government official said there was no indication that Dr. Khan had sold the technology to pay for Pakistan's nuclear program.
--------------------
Bail for Suspect
WASHINGTON, Jan. 28, (Reuters) -- A federal judge on Wednesday granted bail to Asher Karni, 50, an Israeli citizen accused by the United States government of conspiring to send 200 American-made nuclear weapons detonators to Pakistan, dealing a setback to prosecutors who argued he might try to flee.
Judge Thomas Hogan said Mr. Karni must remain in home detention at the Hebrew Sheltering Home in nearby Silver Spring, Md., and wear a monitoring device.
In addition to the $75,000 bond posted on his behalf by another individual, Mr. Karni also must commit $100,000 of his own money, he said.
