Wearing a black wool cap and a 10 o'clock shadow, Claudio Edber had just finished scooping, blowing and scraping almost a foot of snow from his front steps, his driveway and car. He looked really tired. Not just of snow removal, but of winter, particularly this winter.
''It's too long,'' he said in a low growl. ''It started too early and I don't know when it's going to end. The cold is deadly.''
While Mr. Edber has become as much a suburbanite as his neighbors in Westchester, with a neat Dutch colonial and two young children, he is the first to admit that he left his body temperature behind in his native Argentina.
Still, across the New York suburbs, where many places received 10 to 14 inches of snow, most everyone seemed on Wednesday to bemoan what is shaping up as one of the severest stretches of winter weather in memory. The unfortunate footnote, of course, is that it's not even February.
While many city dwellers can saunter down sidewalks that someone else had to shovel and travel in subways removed from the endless chill, in the suburbs another big snowstorm meant another morning shoveling the driveway (or paying the guy with the plow), fishtailing on slushy side streets, and dreading the next fuel bill. At the Corner Nook Cafe in downtown White Plains, a little chalkboard seemed to say it all: 52 days till spring.
According to Jeff Warner, a meteorologist at Pennsylvania State University, the snowfall was evenly spread across the suburbs, with Bloomingdale, N.J., receiving 12.2 inches; Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y., 10 inches; and Stamford, Conn., 11 inches. Dix Hills, on Long Island, recorded one of the biggest totals, 14.6 inches.
There were hundreds of spinouts, fender-benders and other car accidents in the region, but none were fatal, law-enforcement officials said. For the most part, with the snow tapering off just in time for the morning rush, the trains kept running.
New Jersey Transit came through the storm with no problems, but the Long Island Rail Road reported systemwide delays that averaged 14 minutes. In addition, service was suspended for almost two hours, starting at noon, between Jamaica and Flatbush Avenue because of smoke in the tunnel. Brian P. Dolan, an L.I.R.R. spokesman, did not know if the cause was related to the snow.
The Metro-North Railroad, which decided to run on a Sunday schedule, reported a train breakdown in New Canaan, Conn., just after 7 a.m. Passengers on board were forced to wait an hour for the train to be pushed to Stamford. In all, 102 trains were late.
On Long Island, businesses experienced a run on winter paraphernalia like ice scrapers, windshield washer fluid, electric heaters and rock salt. Indeed, locating a bag of rock salt had the aura of a modest lottery triumph. Christopher Griese, an architect in Sag Harbor, drove to five or six different places before finding a 10-pound bag at a gas station, which he proceeded to use up.
Some tried to keep the weather in perspective. Leaning on a wooden cane next to half-buried parking meters and benches piled with snow, Edward Wethervee waited for a bus to take him to the Veterans Affairs hospital in West Haven, Conn.
Mr. Wethervee, 83, a lifelong New Haven resident and a World War II veteran, said he was not impressed with the snow this winter. ''I remember when it used to snow before Thanksgiving,'' he said. He also said he remembered when cars did not have snow tires, and the streets went unplowed so horses could get traction.
And, of course, with snow days stretching across the region, there were many happy awakenings. When Daniel Yaroshefsky, 13, of Hastings-on-Hudson, looked at his bedroom clock and saw that it was 8 a.m., he realized his mother had not awakened him for school and that it must have snowed. He went back to sleep until 10:38.
Still, even for many children, the snow and chill had lost its luster.
In Tarrytown, the Fassa sisters, ages 4, 7 and 10, ventured into their snowy backyard until 10-year-old Layla said her feet got ''all red and cold'' and 7-year-old Mina tripped on a rock and bumped her knee.
Then they moved inside for a perfect winter-weary craft project: making rag dolls.
