The Federal Reserve's announcement yesterday that it had withdrawn its promise to keep short-term interest rates low ''for a considerable period'' shocked both the stock and bond markets, with the three major stock indexes dropping more than 1.3 percent and the yield on the 10-year Treasury note shooting up sharply.
With its announcement, Fed policy makers took away what had been a security blanket for investors: a promise to keep the benchmark interest rate low as the economy picked up steam. That pledge was made in August, when members of the Federal Open Market Committee added these words to a statement after their meeting: ''The committee believes that policy accommodation can be maintained for a considerable period.''
That promise was repeated as the economy grew, and it helped to keep longer-term rates low. As recently as last week, the 10-year Treasury yield was below 4 percent, more than half a percentage point lower than it was in September.
After yesterday's bond sell-off, the yield was back up to 4.20 percent. This surge came even though the Fed left its benchmark rate, the federal funds rate, at 1 percent. But it is not yet clear to investors precisely what the policy makers now intend. While committee members abandoned the ''considerable period'' language, they replaced it with a promise to be ''patient'' with any move to raise its short-term interest rate benchmark.
In the confusion yesterday, the selling of stocks and bonds seemed to show that some investors thought an interest rate increase could come sooner than expected. Investors also appeared to think that an increase could come soon enough to rescue the sinking dollar, which rose more than 1 percent against the euro after the Fed's 2:15 p.m. announcement.
Still, many analysts argued yesterday that the change in Fed policy -- made in a statement concluding its two-day meeting on interest rates -- was much less significant than it first appeared and was not a sign that the Fed would be raising its benchmark interest rate anytime soon. Economists at several Wall Street firms said the announcement did not affect their forecasts for the timing of a Fed rate increase, which range from this spring to sometime in 2005.
David J. Greenlaw, chief United States fixed-income economist at Morgan Stanley, said the biggest news was the timing of the announcement, which came when Fed officials had to know it was not expected and could therefore spark a sell-off of bonds and stocks. The Fed usually orchestrates its policy moves carefully, with public hints ahead of time.
Mr. Greenlaw suggested that Fed officials might be getting worried about the extent of the rebound in the financial markets, with the Dow Jones industrial average up as much as 8 percent since Dec. 9, the date of the last meeting of policy makers, and interest rates lower.
''There is more evidence of exuberance in the financial markets,'' Mr. Greenlaw said.
But until the intention of Fed policy makers is made clear, the stock and bond markets could become much more volatile as investors try to interpret the impact of new economic data.
For example, if an employment report due out next week shows strong job growth in January, it could spark a big sell-off in bonds, pushing yields higher, and may even worry stock investors. This is because without the Fed's security blanket, each bit of stronger data could be seen as another step toward a rate increase, which could slow or even stall the stock market rally.
A report on the growth of the economy in the fourth quarter, due out tomorrow, could also worry investors if it is very strong. The consensus forecast is for growth of as much as 5 percent at an annual rate.
The most significant immediate effect of this new signal from the Fed is that it will be much harder for Treasury, home mortgage and corporate interest rates to continue to drift lower.
The yield on the 10-year Treasury note fell to as low as 3.96 percent last week, from 4.38 percent on Jan. 2. The average national rate on a 30-year fixed-rate mortgage fell to 5.64 percent on Jan. 22 from 6.02 percent on Dec. 5, according to Freddie Mac.
Robert J. Barbera, chief economist at ITG/Hoenig, said some strategists have predicted that longer-term interest rates could fall even further in the near term. But the Fed change, he said, ''makes that story much more difficult.''
Bill Dudley, chief United States economist at Goldman Sachs, played down the importance of today's shift.
''It is not as big a change as people think. The data is really what drives the Fed,'' he said. ''I don't think the Fed's fundamental thinking has changed,'' and that means, he added, that with inflation low, rates can remain unchanged for some time.
Goldman is forecasting that the Fed will not raise interest rates until the middle of 2005, a forecast that remains unchanged, Mr. Dudley said.
Mr. Greenlaw of Morgan Stanley said he was not changing his prediction that a rate increase will come in August. But, he said, ''if I were predicting no rate hike in 2004, I would be nervous now.''
Market Place
