The Melburnians who snapped up tickets months ago for the Australian Open women's semifinals must have liked their chances of seeing the Belgians Justine Henin-Hardenne and Kim Clijsters in action. The surprise came with the Belgians' opposition Thursday. There was not a Willliams sister or Jennifer Capriati or Amélie Mauresmo in sight, not even a rising Russian with a wicked forehand or a modeling contract.
Instead, the women blocking the Belgians' by-now-customary path to a Grand Slam singles final were Fabiola Zuluaga of Colombia and Patty Schnyder of Switzerland, neither of whom had reached this phase of a major event before.
But the surprises ended there, and it was no surprise that they ended in a hurry. Although the 32nd-seeded Zuluaga played aggressively and conducted herself respectably -- remaining polite despite two rotten line calls against her early in the first set -- she never posed a serious threat to the No. 1-seeded Henin-Hardenne, losing, 6-2, 6-2, in 1 hour 16 minutes.
Although the 22nd-seeded Schnyder has a languid, left-handed game that can cause top players occasional fits, she was able to push the second-seeded Clijsters only in the second set of their semifinal, serving unsuccessfully for it at 5-4 before losing the match in a lopsided tie breaker, 6-2, 7-6 (2).
The predictable outcome of Thursday's backhands and forehands was the latest all-Belgian final. Henin-Hardenne beat Clijsters in last year's French Open and United States Open finals. Neither Henin-Hardenne nor Clijsters has won here, however, and their match on Saturday will also determine who leaves Melbourne with the No. 1 ranking.
''Maybe people get used to it now, and it's normal that we are in the final,'' Henin-Hardenne said. ''But for myself, the feeling is still as great as it was for the first time, because we have to be conscious that it's great.''
It has been a superb nine months for Henin-Hardenne, who, at a shade below 5 feet 6 inches, towers above none of her opponents but stands above them all in the world ranking. And she will be the favorite to become the Australian Open champion, too, in light of Clijsters's previous difficulties against her in major finals and also in light of Clijsters's lingering left ankle sprain.
''It's not going to get any better than what it's been,'' Clijsters said. ''I'll need to sit down and think about it after the Australian Open and think about what the doctors are saying. But I can't make it any worse, so that's the good news.''
Schnyder was not the only Swiss player in the semifinals. Roger Federer reached that stage for the first time here with a relatively straightforward 7-5, 6-4, 5-7, 6-3 victory over No. 8-seeded David Nalbandian on Wednesday night. In the semifinals, Federer will face third-seeded Juan Carlos Ferrero of Spain, and if Federer manages to win, he will become the latest man to be ranked No. 1. ''We'll see,'' Federer said. ''I can't say much and I don't want to, because I'm focused on this tournament, on winning this tournament. No. 1 is secondary right now.''
It was the right comment to make, but this will be only his second Grand Slam semifinal and Federer has experienced plenty of disappointment in these tournaments.
Last year's Wimbledon was an exception, as he sailed through his semifinal against Andy Roddick and the final against Mark Philippoussis without the loss of a set. That performance and his equally aesthetic victory at the Tennis Masters Cup in Houston in November should give him a deep reservoir of confidence. ''I know I definitely have the game to raise to the occasion,'' Federer said. ''I've showed it in the past. It was the same with the Masters. When it got important, I played well.''
That has not usually been the case in his matches against Nalbandian. For all Federer's free-flowing talent, he lost his first five matches on the men's tour against Nalbandian, a rugged Argentine, including fourth-round matches at last year's Australian and United States Opens.
But Federer solved the Nalbandian riddle in Houston, and although he struggled more often to find his range in this match, he found it when he needed it most. In the opening set, he fell behind by 15-40 on his serve at 5-5 and responded with four consecutive aces.
Ferrero, despite a strained groin, delivered enough blows from the baseline to avoid a marathon against unseeded Hicham Arazi of Morocco with a 6-1, 7-6 (6), 7-6 (5) victory that featured plenty of lung-expanding rallies and a few plot twists.
The other men's semifinal matches the defending champion Andre Agassi and Marat Safin. All four men's semifinalists have won Grand Slam singles titles, a rare occurrence in this age of relative parity. The last time it happened was at the 1995 United States Open.
TENNIS
