Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain has given an impressive demonstration of how good governance can also be smart politics. Yesterday, an independent judicial inquiry fully exonerated his administration, refuting charges that it knowingly manipulated intelligence about Iraqi weapons and that it compounded the pressures that led a government scientist, Dr. David Kelly, to kill himself.
The independent inquiry, led by a senior judge, Lord Hutton, was commissioned promptly after Mr. Kelly's suicide and Mr. Blair gave it full cooperation. Its report leaves him substantially vindicated, even though the reporting of British intelligence agencies on Iraq now appears to have been disastrously inaccurate. Lord Hutton also found that the BBC committed grave journalistic and management errors in broadcasting charges last spring that the government had deliberately embellished intelligence findings to strengthen its case for war. Dr. Kelly was later identified as a source for that report, which has since been discredited.
The Hutton inquiry further found that the contents of the Iraq dossier that Mr. Blair made public in September 2002 were fully consistent with the information available to British intelligence agencies at that time and that no claims then known to be false or unreliable were included. It concluded that the government's role in making Dr. Kelly's name public was, in most respects, reasonable and responsible. After the Hutton report was made public, the BBC apologized for some of its reporting and its chairman, Gavyn Davies, resigned.
The Hutton report was Chapter 2 in one of the most politically perilous weeks of Mr. Blair's almost seven years as prime minister. On Tuesday, he barely contained a revolt among Labor members of Parliament over his plan for sharply increasing the share of university costs British students must pay and letting some schools charge more than others. Mr. Blair scheduled that vote one day ahead of the Hutton report in the hope of swaying the maximum number of Labor rebels to his side. That ploy proved successful, showing once again that Mr. Blair is the most tactically deft leader the Labor Party has ever had. He has won two successive general-election landslides and prevailed in every major parliamentary test.
Mr. Blair should not let this week's victories blind him to the fact that the British public is still uneasy about the tense occupation of Iraq, troubled by his uncritical support of inept American diplomacy before the war and concerned with the broader intelligence failures that brought a vast overestimation of Iraq's unconventional weapons threat. Establishing that the British government did not lie is not the same as showing that it proceeded wisely or even competently in this area. Further investigation is needed to answer those questions.
Much of the Labor Party remains restive over Mr. Blair's relentless assault on traditional party positions like taxpayer financed educational equality. While he still clearly commands the loyalty of most Labor parliamentarians, his hold over the party's rank and file has been badly strained. Winning back that support will require more than brilliant tactics. More carefully grounded policies will also be needed.
Testing Two Leaders
