Prosecutors in Queens suggested yesterday that a city correction officer killed her father in 2001 so she could seize the family's million-dollar fortune.
The officer, Renee Dasque, 38, ''had $1 million worth of motive'' to kill her father, Jacques Dasque, 63, Assistant District Attorney David Guy said in State Supreme Court in Queens.
Prosecutors charge that Ms. Dasque hogtied her father in their Rosedale, Queens, house in the early morning of July 8, 2001, and beat him to death with a metal pipe. They say she tried pinning the crime on her son's father, Bobby Vickers, and then on her half-sister, Jeanine Dasque, who was also assaulted.
Mr. Guy, the prosecutor, said that if necessary, ''the defendant intended to eliminate every member of her family'' -- her parents and three siblings -- to get the family fortune.
Ms. Dasque's lawyer, Michael L. Fishman, dismissed this as ''an inference upon an inference,'' and called it preposterous to suggest that Ms. Dasque thought she could murder her way to an inheritance.
Ms. Dasque, who is charged with murder, attempted murder and assault, could face a life sentence.
Soon after the 2001 incident, Jeanine Dasque identified her sister as the person who attacked her and Mr. Dasque. Prosecutors had hoped Jeanine Dasque would be their star witness in the trial, which began this month. But in August, Jeanine Dasque, 33, hanged herself with an extension cord in a motel room in Rockville Centre, N.Y.
Mr. Fishman originally hoped that entries from Jeanine Dasque's diaries would point to her as Mr. Dasque's killer.
According to the entries, Jeanine was the ''ugly duckling'' in the family and hated her father because he favored Renee. But prosecutors contended that a handwriting expert would easily show that the entries were not written by Jeanine, and that they might have been written by Renee to frame Jeanine as the killer.
Mr. Guy has argued that Renee Dasque carefully planned her father's killing, even writing out a ''shopping list'' of the things she would need for the murder, including the length of rope she is accused of using to hogtie him. She also made detailed lists of Mr. Dasque's assets. They included a savings account, a life insurance policy, two houses in Queens and part ownership of a house in Florida.
Mr. Fishman counters that Ms. Dasque made the lists to prepare for routine household chores, and that she wrote the list of assets during a family meeting in which the family finances were outlined by Mr. Dasque, a retired hospital technician who did not have a will.
Ms. Dasque is currently being held at Rikers Island, where she used to work as a correction officer. She went on medical leave in the spring of 2001.
In court yesterday, a police sergeant testified that he handled pieces of wallboard taken from the crime scene, now entered as evidence. Mr. Fishman said the wall fragments had threatening messages to Ms. Dasque scrawled upon them -- including the phrases ''You'll never see your son again'' and ''I tasted your step-daddy's blood'' -- indicating that Mr. Vickers might have written them. Prosecutors said they were a lame attempt to frame Mr. Vickers.
