The Treasury moved yesterday to make it more difficult for large corporations to hide abusive tax-avoidance transactions. For the first time in decades, it proposed new rules governing the differences between the profits that companies report to shareholders and the (usually smaller) figures they report on their tax returns.
Treasury and Internal Revenue Service officials said the proposed changes should cut down on the number of tax audits of corporations whose returns turn out to be acceptable as filed. Deborah M. Nolan, the I.R.S. commissioner who oversees large business tax returns, said that the changes would ''enable us to focus our compliance resources on returns and issues that need to be examined, and avoid those that do not.''
Under existing rules, companies may use different time periods and different geographic definitions in their reports to shareholders than they use on tax returns, making the two sets of figures difficult to compare and reconcile; the new rules would require uniform reporting.
In addition, the 80,570 American companies with assets of $10 million or more would be required to use a new form for tax returns covering years ending Dec. 31 or later. The proposed rules are to be published today in The Federal Register.
Pamela Olson, the departing Treasury assistant secretary for tax policy, said the changes ''will make differences between financial-accounting net income and taxable income more transparent,'' and help focus auditors on the most dubious transactions.
In interviews over the last three months, seven I.R.S. corporate auditors have complained of being pressured to close audits quickly and to ignore major discrepancies. I.R.S. management says it is trying to speed up the audit and appeal process for corporate returns, resolving disputed cases in a few years at most; past cases have sometimes dragged on for decades. The rules changes proposed yesterday were announced after negotiations with representatives of corporate taxpayers, who have lobbied for quicker, more focused audits.
Timothy J. McCormally, executive director of the Tax Executives Institute, whose members are the senior tax executives at large corporations, said that ''the idea of putting in a more rational and analytical framework is excellent.''
Mr. McCormally said that a crucial issue would be how quickly companies can adjust their accounting and tax software for the new rules. If the rules are not in place by November, he said, it may be necessary to push back the effective date.
