ALONG with the changes wrought by gadgets in political campaign coverage has come the question of just how much stuff to carry around. Many reporters are finding that the more equipment they can merge the better, and the less to lose. This makes a device like the Handspring Treo 600, a combination telephone, keyboard, organizer, digital camera, MP3 player and more, very appealing. Newer and faster do not always mean lighter or more streamlined.
Just peek inside the 40-pound bag that Deborah Apton, a 25-year-old producer for ABC News, carries as she follows the campaign of Gen. Wesley K. Clark.
Some reporters have bought into the notion of convergence, carrying a cellphone that includes phone lists and an ability to send instant messages. But that practice is not widespread.
Ms. Apton has a BlackBerry for her e-mail, which she checks even while driving. She carries a cellphone, an extra cellphone battery and cellphone chargers that work with a wall outlet or in the car.
Her wireless laptop is outfitted with the Avid editing system, a program that enables her to plug her video camera into her laptop, transfer the video via FireWire and edit the pictures. She can then feed the material to New York. She carries blank discs in case her computer dies, so that she can use a computer in a hotel business center.
Her digital video camera is a Sony PD-150. The camera takes pictures that are sharp enough to appear on air, although most wind up in an archive.
''I use the camera as a supplement to notes,'' she said. ''I don't need to feed the hungry beast of cable news. The camera is good for spontaneous press conferences, for color behind the scenes. I'll always have it with me to whip out at a moment's notice if something happens, but I rely on my notebook and tape recorder a lot more.''
There is still more in her backpack: extra digital videotape, headphones for listening to the camera sound, an earpiece for her cellphone, a battery charger for the camera, a power cord for her laptop, an Ethernet cable, wireless microphones for the camera (''I can mike up the general at a moment's notice'') and a digital tape recorder. At the bottom of the bag is a pager, an unused, obsolete item in the age of the BlackBerry and cellphone. ''They made me get it,'' Ms. Apton said, ''but no one's ever paged me.''
Then there are comfort items, including a personal digital camera she uses to send pictures to her family, and often a portable DVD player and an MP3 player. She burns CD's on her computer to make mixes of music by Morphine, the Dave Matthews Band and Coldplay.
Ms. Apton said that although she was well equipped, the idea of traveling was different from the reality. ''I went into this thinking there would be wired airports and wired hotels, but then I got to Little Rock,'' she said of General Clark's home base. When she entered a Starbucks in search of a wireless Internet connection, she said, ''they looked at me like I had four heads.''
KATHARINE Q. SEELYE
