As the next step in the ongoing saga of the hapless Tampa Bay Devil Rays, a New York investor has purchased a majority interest in the club without wresting control from its managing partner, Vincent Naimoli.
Baseball officials and a person involved with the five primary partners who are selling their shares of the club confirmed yesterday that a group headed by Stuart Sternberg has agreed to buy 77 percent of the Devil Rays. Naimoli, the long-embattled operator of the highly unsuccessful franchise, owns about 15 percent.
Efforts to reach Sternberg by telephone were unsuccessful, but baseball officials and investment experts questioned his decision to assume a majority share of the club but allow Naimoli to continue to operate the Devil Rays.
Sternberg, 44, is unknown to Major League Baseball. A former executive of the options-trading firm of Spear, Leeds and Kellogg, which Goldman Sachs bought on Sept. 11, 2000, for a reported $6.5 billion, Sternberg does not have an option to buy out Naimoli and become the team's managing partner, a baseball official said.
In their six seasons, the Devil Rays have never won 70 games, and their attendance at Tropicana Field in St. Petersburg, Fla., has declined in each season since the first, from 2,261,158 in 1998 to 1,058,622 last year.
Last season, the Devil Rays also had the majors' lowest payroll, $23.3 million, and the only average salary, $776,775, under $1 million. Forbes Magazine last year valued the Devil Rays at $145 million, 28th among the majors' 30 teams, considerably down from a $225 million value in 1999.
The five partners Sternberg is buying out have wanted to shed their shares because of animosity with Naimoli.
Nearly three years ago, the dispute among the owners reached its nadir, and the partners believed they had succeeded in ousting Naimoli. But Commissioner Bud Selig sent in John McHale Jr. to run the team on a daily basis, and Naimoli survived as managing partner. Now Sternberg has signed a letter of intent to buy the shares of Robert Basham, president of Outback Steakhouse of Florida, Inc.; Chris Sullivan, his Outback partner; and the Florida businessmen R. Mark Bostick, William Griffin and Daniel Doyle Sr.
BASEBALL: NOTEBOOK
