The Taxi and Limousine Commission yesterday proposed a 26 percent increase in fares, which, if passed, would be the first cab fare increase in eight years.
The proposal will now have to be voted upon by the commission's board, and it could go into effect as early in April if it is approved.
The proposal would raise the base fare to $2.50 from $2, and increase the charge for each fifth of a mile to 40 cents from 30 cents. Drivers had sought an increase as high as 50 percent, saying costs had risen sharply since the last increase, in 1996.
Public hearings on the proposal will be held in March, and the commission's nine-member board will then vote. The last time the commission proposed an increase, in 2001, the board voted it down. But this time, there appears to be consensus among the members of the board that some type of increase is necessary, especially in light of the city's plans to raise tens of millions of dollars by selling 900 new taxicab medallions, which could increase competition for fares.
''My sense is it will be responded to favorably,'' said Elliot G. Sander, a former city transportation commissioner who is a board member. ''But I think the commission is looking forward to the public comment period.''
In addition, the commission's proposal calls for:
Changing the waiting-time charge to 40 cents for every 120 seconds, from 30 cents for every 90 seconds.
Increasing the flat rate from Manhattan to John F. Kennedy Airport to $45 from $35.
Increasing the surcharge for a trip from Manhattan to Newark Liberty International Airport to $15 from $10.
Eliminating the 50-cent night surcharge from 8 p.m. to 6 a.m. and replacing it with a $1 evening rush surcharge from 4 p.m. to 8 p.m.
Under the proposal, the average fare of 2.6 miles, with five minutes of waiting time factored in, would rise to $8.45, and $9.45 in rush hours, from $6.85.
The commission also released plans for a series of service improvements to accompany the fare increase, including requiring all cabs to accept debit and credit cards, installing Global Positioning Systems in vehicles to help drivers navigate and allow passengers to track their routes, improving partitions in vehicles and setting up group ride stands around the city to allow riders to pay less to go to common destinations.
The proposal represents the culmination of a heated debate over the last year on how a fare increase might be organized. Taxi drivers have been complaining that an increase is long overdue. Many drivers say that it has become increasingly difficult for them to make a living.
The New York Taxi Workers Alliance, an advocacy group for drivers, filed a proposal with the commission for a 50 percent increase, while the Metropolitan Taxicab Board of Trade, an industry group that represents fleet owners, suggested a 23 percent fare increase.
A report issued last month on a proposal to increase the number of cabs on the road for the first time in nearly 70 years suggested that a 25 percent increase would be needed to offset fears that the market could become glutted and drive medallion prices down.
Bhairavi Desai, the chief organizer for the taxi workers' alliance, called the proposal a ''good start'' yesterday.
''It's good to see an administration think about drivers' needs,'' she said in a telephone interview.
But she also criticized certain parts of the proposal, including the elimination of the night surcharge, which she said would result in fewer drivers' being willing to work overnight.
What was not officially released yesterday, however, were details on how much lease caps, the amount that fleet owners can charge drivers to lease their vehicles, will go up.
Industry officials had been urging a corresponding 23 percent increase in the lease caps, saying their operating expenses had gone up significantly over the last eight years as well.
The proposal that the commission has been circulating among industry groups includes only a 3.4 percent increase on the lease cap, or $50 per week.
''If this proposal is adopted by the T.L.C., taxi owners will receive a mere 3.4 percent increase in revenue, despite a 37 percent increase in their operating costs over the last eight years,'' Michael Woloz, a spokesman for the Metropolitan Taxicab Board of Trade, said in a statement.
At the same time, he pointed out, they are being asked to implement service improvements that will cost about $1,500 per car.
Correction:  January 30, 2004, Friday  An article yesterday about a proposed increase in New York City taxi fares referred incorrectly to the flat rate for Kennedy Airport, which would increase to $45 from $35. It is for trips from the airport; there is no flat rate for the trip from Manhattan.
