Senator John Kerry expected the endorsement of a prominent African-American congressman in the fight for South Carolina and has vowed to local political leaders that he will not abandon the South in the fall should he become the Democratic presidential nominee.
The state, one of the Feb. 3 primary and caucus states, poses one of the first tests of whether Mr. Kerry, a son of New England, can have broad national appeal. Just a few days ago, he sent shivers through Democratic officials in this state when he said at a town-hall-style meeting at Dartmouth College in New Hampshire this week that it was a ''mistake'' to think that a Democrat would lose if he skipped the South.
''Everybody always makes the mistake of looking South,'' Mr. Kerry had said in response to a question. ''Al Gore proved he could have been president of the United States without winning one Southern state, including his own.''
Whether a Democrat can win in November without some support in the South is hotly debated.
Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, who has staked his candidacy on winning here, where he was born, has called such a strategy risky at best.
Dick Harpootlian, the former chairman of the state's Democratic Party, said ''there is no question'' that the Kerry campaign was ''looking for different scenarios on how you put the pieces together'' for the nomination and the general election.
But Mr. Harpootlian and Senator Ernest F. Hollings, the state's senior senator who endorsed Mr. Kerry last week, both said in interviews that Mr. Kerry had assured them he would not write off the state this week or the South in the fall.
''No way,'' Mr. Hollings said. ''I wouldn't be for him if he was going to do that.''
Mr. Kerry is to run commercials highlighting his Vietnam experience, has ramped up his organization and is expecting the endorsement on Thursday of the state's most prominent black official, Representative James E. Clyburn, who had backed Representative Richard A. Gephardt.
South Carolina's primary is considered the gateway to the South. The state also has a more diverse population than Iowa or New Hampshire. Depending on turnout, as much as 50 percent of the primary electorate is expected to be African-American.
Yet while all the candidates are scheduled to attend a debate on Thursday night in Greenville, S.C., the state's role suddenly diminished in importance after Mr. Gephardt, of Missouri, dropped out of the race and that state's delegates were left up for grabs. Even the Rev. Al Sharpton, who has had South Carolina to himself for the last few days, has rushed off to St. Louis.
''It's all falling apart,'' said Bill Moore, a political scientist at the College of Charleston, of the state's erstwhile prominence. ''It's kind of like the race here is being left by default to John Edwards, so a victory here won't look like much.''
Roger Salazar, an Edwards spokesman, said he did not buy the argument that South Carolina had diminished in importance. ''Anyone who says that must not be confident about how they're going to place,'' Mr. Salazar said.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark threw into doubt his commitment to campaigning here when his airplane from New Hampshire was about to touch down here Tuesday night, only to be diverted to Oklahoma. His aides blamed a mechanical problem and aviation rules that would have prevented the crew from flying off first thing in the morning, but officials here interpreted it as a sign of confusion within the campaign and an implicit acknowledgment that General Clark could not compete here with Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry.
''That was a serious error on Clark's part,'' Mr. Harpootlian said. ''He has basically ceded the state to Edwards, so that makes South Carolina a two-man race between Kerry and Edwards. If Kerry wins here, he's the nominee.''
Officials here said the black vote was split. Mr. Sharpton, who has barely competed on the ground anywhere else, has visited South Carolina more than any of the other candidates, spending most of his time in black churches. He is also running radio commercials with endorsements from Russell Simmons, the hip-hop impresario, and Johnny Cochran, the criminal lawyer, whose commercial puts Mr. Sharpton in the same category with icons like the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Rosa Parks and Robert F. Kennedy.
''A lot of the black vote will be with Sharpton, and a lot will be with Clyburn and Kerry,'' Mr. Hollings said. ''But Edwards has been very clever, with his ads and with his work -- he's put a lot of people in the field -- and he's got the majority of them right now.''
With Mr. Edwards staking the future of his candidacy on South Carolina, Mr. Kerry faces a strategic dilemma here. If he invests heavily and loses, he could intensify the concern that he would not play well in the South. On the other hand, if he does not invest heavily here and loses to Mr. Edwards, the Edwards candidacy could pick up steam as other Southern states start to vote.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: SOUTH CAROLINA
