Eight months after Attorney General John Ashcroft hailed the government's partial victory in a trial against an accused terror cell based in Detroit, the convictions of three men are in doubt amid growing turmoil within the offices of the federal prosecutor and the F.B.I. here.
In recent weeks, both the Justice Department and the Federal Bureau of Investigation have begun inquiries into the handling of terrorism-related cases in the region. The prosecutor in the most prominent case has been removed, and the head of the F.B.I.'s office in Detroit has been temporarily recalled to Washington. The developments were reported this week by The Detroit News.
The names of government informants have also been leaked to the news media. One informant, an Arab man in his 30's, said in a recent interview with The New York Times that the prosecutor's office had clashed with the F.B.I. over how he was used and that he feared for his life after his name had been leaked. Officials said the F.B.I. was investigating the handling of the informant and possible misconduct by an agent.
The main case brought by federal prosecutors involved four men accused of forming a terrorist cell and hatching a variety of plots.
The men had a crude sketch that prosecutors said matched an American airbase in Turkey used to patrol Iraq's no-fly zone, as well as videotape of the MGM Grand in Las Vegas and The New York Times headquarters, and audiotapes advocating jihad. Two of the men were convicted last June of terrorism charges, and a third was convicted of document fraud. The fourth was acquitted.
But in the months since the trial ended, the government agencies involved with the case have been racked by turmoil.
In September, Richard G. Convertino, the assistant United States attorney who led the government's case, was removed from it and the Justice Department began an internal investigation into his conduct. The accusations against Mr. Convertino include that he reduced the sentences of informants without approval from more senior prosecutors and tried to get confidential information about a defense witness in the terror case from a pretrial services officer. Mr. Convertino said the accusations had no merit.
The details of the inquiry were leaked this month to The Detroit Free Press, and published along with the names of the informants.
New prosecutors conceded in a hearing last month that evidence had been withheld that should have been turned over to the defense, principally a letter from a cellmate of the government's star witness, suggesting that the witness had lied.
The federal judge handling the case, Gerald E. Rosen, said at the hearing that the new evidence ''should have been turned over, there's no question in the court's mind.''
Judge Rosen has ordered a scouring of the case file. Sentencing has been delayed while he considers a defense motion for a new trial.
The judge also admonished Mr. Ashcroft last month for violating an order barring discussion of the case.
Mr. Convertino said in a telephone interview last week that fighting within the Justice Department and with the F.B.I. threatened to undermine the case and had led the department to accuse him wrongly of misconduct.
''The office is in disarray, and it's rudderless,'' he said of the Justice Department division in southeastern Michigan.
Mr. Convertino said the letter that was withheld, which also accused the Bush family of being drug dealers, was not credible and was written by a man facing capital murder charges and trying to make a deal with prosecutors. He also said that he took up the matter with Keith Corbett, his supervisor and co-counsel on the case and that Mr. Corbett agreed the letter did not have to be given to the defense. Mr. Corbett was also removed from the case.
Mr. Convertino contends that the internal investigation into his conduct is in retaliation for his testifying in September about terrorism issues before the Senate Finance Committee. He was removed from the case within days of being subpoenaed.
''I was very vocal internally during the investigative stage, during the pretrial and trial phases, with the lack of support and resources, the micromanaging by Washington, and the total lack of cooperation and intense territorial infighting within the department and with other agencies,'' Mr. Convertino said. ''They kept saying, in their words, that I was off the reservation.''
For months, Senator Charles E. Grassley, the Iowa Republican who is chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, has been writing letters to Mr. Ashcroft seeking assurance that Mr. Convertino would not face retaliation because of his testimony.
Last week, Mr. Grassley said, ''It's amazing that the very people within the Justice Department accusing this employee of unethical conduct appear themselves to be committing unethical acts.''
Mr. Convertino remains on the Justice Department's payroll, but is temporarily working as a consultant on terrorism financing for the Senate Finance Committee.
Neither the Justice Department nor the office of Jeffrey G. Collins, the United States attorney for the Eastern District of Michigan, would say if it was investigating how an active internal inquiry, and the name of an informant, had been leaked or comment on any aspect of the case.
Releasing information on active Justice Department inquiries violates the department's internal policies and federal regulations.
Lawyers for the men convicted in the case say the evidence that was withheld could have helped exonerate their clients.
''I think there were a lot of questionable things done in the case by the prosecution,'' said Leroy Soles, a lawyer for one of the men.
The informant who spoke to The New York Times said he was told that his identity would not be disclosed.
''I've slept in my truck two nights in a row,'' he said. ''I'm afraid for my life. They promised that my identity would not be exposed. I wish it was a dream.''
The informant has since fled the country.
James Thomas, another defense lawyer, said of the withheld evidence, ''Hopefully, with the government's search of the file, we'll be able to show there are further things out there that will show Mr. Convertino's misconduct.''
But Joseph M. Finnigan, who retired last October after more than three decades at the F.B.I. and the last 16 as the head of the organized-crime unit in Detroit, said of Mr. Convertino: ''In my opinion he is a great prosecutor and a man of integrity. It's obvious that somebody is out to get him.''
Correction:  February 4, 2004, Wednesday  A picture last Wednesday showing Richard G. Convertino and Keith Corbett, federal prosecutors in Detroit, with an article about federal inquiries into the handling of terrorism cases in the Detroit area, carried an erroneous credit. It was by The Detroit Metro Times. (There is no Detroit Metro News.)
