Israeli troops in armored vehicles charged into an industrial zone on the southern outskirts of Gaza City early Wednesday and fought gun battles that killed eight Palestinians, including militants and civilians, the two sides said.
The fighting was some of the most intense in recent weeks and came as visiting American diplomats met the Palestinian prime minister, Ahmed Qurei, to try to breathe life into the moribund Middle East peace plan.
''This crime shows bad intentions from the Israelis while the American envoy is here to take such aggression against the Palestinian people,'' Mr. Qurei said in the West Bank city of Ramallah.
Despite the firefights, which lasted several hours, there was no indication that a major prisoner exchange set for Thursday would be disrupted. Israel is to release more than 400 Arab prisoners, while the Lebanese guerrilla group Hezbollah is to hand over a kidnapped Israeli businessman and the remains of three Israeli soldiers.
The businessman, Elhanan Tannenbaum, was shown on Hezbollah's television channel, Al Manar, and the video was rebroadcast in Israel.
''The treatment I received was good, I would add, even very good,'' Mr. Tannenbaum, who appeared to be in good health, said in Hebrew in a taped interview. ''I was given food on time and was treated medically on time.''
Israeli troops raid Palestinians cities and towns almost daily in search of militants, but such operations in Gaza City, the largest Palestinian city, are relatively rare.
Israel said it had sent its forces into the industrial zone because Palestinian factions had been firing mortars and shooting from the area at the isolated Jewish settlement of Netzarim, a little over a mile away.
Palestinians have fired more than 100 mortars at Netzarim in the last two months, the Israeli Army said. The mortars, which are highly inaccurate, have caused damage but few casualties.
Israeli tanks and armored personnel carriers based at Netzarim rumbled into Gaza City around 4:30 a.m., according to Palestinian security forces in the area.
Palestinian gunmen, some masked, took to the streets, and sustained gun battles broke out. The Palestinians also fired rocket-propelled grenades and antitank missiles, Israel's military said, adding that no soldiers had been hurt.
Islamic Jihad, a Palestinian faction that has carried out many suicide bombings and other attacks against Israel, said four of its men had been killed.
The Israeli military confirmed that its troops had hit a number of armed Palestinians.
''Our goal is to restrict the movement of these terrorists and target the ones who threaten our security,'' an Israeli commander, identified as a lieutenant colonel named Udi, told Israel radio. ''I can't refer to specific numbers today. However, I can confirm we killed terrorists.''
The Israeli military said it was not aware of civilian casualties.
But Shifa Hospital in Gaza City reported four additional deaths, and Palestinians described them as workers in the industrial zone. Also, five Palestinians were hurt, including a rescue worker, the hospital said.
Muhammad Badawi said his son Sami, 15, went to work as usual at 6:30 a.m., unaware of the fighting. Sami reached his factory, which makes canisters for natural gas. But when the electricity went out, the workers were told to go home.
On his way back, Sami was hit by a bullet and died of his wounds, Mr. Badawi said at a small mosque where a funeral service was being held. ''He was just trying to help the family,'' said Mr. Badawi, 43, and a father of nine. ''He was not involved in the fighting.''
Gaza City is a stronghold for the most extreme Palestinian factions, Islamic Jihad and Hamas. But Israeli military officers have said the sprawling city is a difficult place to operate, and the army has been cautious about staging incursions.
Palestinians, meanwhile, said the timing of the raid could undermine the latest diplomatic effort.
Senior Egyptian officials met Palestinian leaders on Tuesday, and two American envoys, John Wolf and David F. Satterfield, visited Mr. Qurei on Wednesday.
Mr. Qurei said he had called on the Americans to help arrange a meeting with Prime Minister Ariel Sharon. Mr. Qurei has been in office nearly four months, but the two prime ministers have yet to meet.
One sign of progress is the return of uniformed Palestinian police officers to West Bank cities. They have been almost invisible since Israel began large-scale incursions almost two years ago. Before Wednesday, Israeli forces generally treated any Palestinian carrying a weapon, and any uniformed officer, as a combatant. Palestinian security officers often took part in attacks on Israelis, the Israeli Army says.
Palestinian security chiefs said their officers in West Bank cities now had permission from Israel to wear uniforms and carry registered sidearms, after several months of negotiations that were sealed in a meeting on Tuesday between top security officers from both sides.
In the last two years, as almost all institutions of the governing Palestinian Authority began to crumble, gunmen presenting themselves as freedom fighters took to extorting money from business owners or taking hostages for ransom money. In Jenin gunmen kidnapped the local governor; in Nablus they burned several of the governor's cars.
The Palestinian Authority has come under growing pressure to address the mounting lawlessness. On Sunday the Palestinian parliament rebuked Mr. Qurei's government, accusing it of failing to stem ''deterioration in the security situation.'' A report approved by the lawmakers cited ''killing, theft, attacks and the absence of law.''
Brig. Gen. Muhammad Salah, commander of police in the central West Bank, said 600 of the 900 officers in the Ramallah area were on patrol on Wednesday.
As he stood outside the Interior Ministry, coordinating his forces with a walkie-talkie in one hand and a mobile phone in the other, he said he was still asking his men not to carry weapons.
''We don't want to give any excuse for the Israelis to invade the city,'' he said.
