Howard Dean was taking questions from a crowd of New Hampshire voters the other day when a young man asked him, ''Governor Dean, can I pray for you?''
Dr. Dean, the Democratic presidential candidate and former governor of Vermont, responded that he could use all the prayers he could get. Whereupon the young man immediately began a dialogue with the Almighty.
''Oh, I didn't know you meant right now!'' Dr. Dean interjected, before telling him to go ahead.
As bizarre campaign moments go, this one was brief and not really all that bizarre. But Mike Roselli, a producer for CNN, thought it was worth alerting his bosses in case they needed fresh tape of Dr. Dean.
So Mr. Roselli quickly punched an e-mail message into his BlackBerry. He titled it ''Pray For Me,'' concisely recounted the incident and concluded: ''The prayer includes a plea to God asking him to cure Dean's cold.'' It ended: ''Amen. Live NBC Feed. 12:47:22.''
With the time code, CNN could find the comment, which was being filmed by a pooled crew from NBC. Mr. Roselli, a campaign veteran, thought the prayer was more interesting than some of the material being beamed from CNN producers who were following other candidates (''Candidate X drinks a chocolate milkshake!'') but conceded that he had sent it partly because he could. And he worried that someone else might.
''Four years ago, I wouldn't have called that in until the event was over,'' he said. ''But there's more competition now, 24 hours a day.''
A deadline every minute, once the preserve of the wire services, is now the motto for most of the press corps, from print reporters with newspaper Web sites to still photographers, cable producers and bloggers. The news cycle has condensed into one endless loop, and with it has come a endless stream of technology to accommodate it, or fuel it, since it is hard to say which came first.
Campaign reporters, like war correspondents, are not necessarily gadget geeks. But the rapacious 24-hour news cycle has forced them onto the cutting edge to do their jobs better -- or at least faster. The equipment is even altering the shape of the correspondent's day, which now includes scrolling in the morning through The Note, an online political briefing from ABC News, and checking one another's Web sites at night, trying all the while to get a jump on everyone else.
The great leaps forward for print reporters in this campaign cycle are wireless laptops and digital tape recorders with software that allows them to download a candidate's speech immediately onto the laptops as an audio file. For television reporters, it is the ubiquitous hand-held minicam, which blurs the line between home video and politically revealing moments, like those captured by Alexandra Pelosi in ''Journeys With George,'' her movie of George W. Bush shot with a hand-held camera during the 2000 campaign.
Certain accessories are also a must. Many reporters have discarded their bricklike power adapters for a versatile, much cooler-looking and more functional one that lets them charge their laptops on an airplane or in the cigarette lighter of a car. And there is no need to carry around floppy discs or CD's, when they can use a flash memory stick the size of a finger to transfer data from one computer to another. To reduce the load, reporters might also bring along a stringy portable Palm charger instead of the clunky cradle.
Add these to the standard arsenal of cellphones, BlackBerries and palmtops, and reporters have few excuses for why an editor can't find them, why they can't meet a deadline or why they have no idea what's happening on Mars.
To Web-crazed gadget geeks, these items are yesterday's news. But for many reporters, such supersonic portable gear simply isn't necessary. Only when they get into the competition of the campaign bubble do they realize what they have been missing.
The digital tape recorder that produces audio files has become essential for reporters trying to keep track of multiple speeches and bang out an article before flying off to another location.
With the audio software, up comes an image of a tape recorder on the computer screen. ''It's so easy to play, rewind and play a quote over and over until you've got it,'' said Glen Johnson of The Boston Globe, who has been following Dr. Dean and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts.
Mr. Johnson said his Sony digital recorder solved two problems. ''It's got a much longer capacity than the standard reel-to-reel recorder, with up to five hours,'' he said. ''And I can archive and organize all the speeches and permanently keep everything that's said on the trail without having to lug around a bunch of tapes and be out on the road without the tape I want.''
He can also e-mail the audio files back to The Globe, which can put the sound bite on its Web site.
With an air card -- a modem using a cellular connection -- a reporter can file from the bus itself, without worrying about finding a phone line (or missing the bus).
If the reporter's news organization has not paid the $80 per month for air-card service, wireless service is often provided by Nathan Naylor, a 36-year-old entrepreneur and former press aide to Vice President Al Gore. During the Gore campaign in 2000, Mr. Naylor was responsible for making sure that phone lines and power cords were in place for the traveling press corps. When those lines were missing, he said, he was besieged.
After the 2000 campaign, he went to work for Senator Harry Reid, Democrat of Nevada. Both the terrorist attacks of 9/11, when cellphone lines were jammed, and the subsequent anthrax scare, which forced Mr. Reid into ancillary quarters, prompted Mr. Naylor to brainstorm about how to maintain communications during emergencies. The result is an oasis of mobile Internet access that he calls Soapbox. He advertises it as a way to ''get in the bubble,'' although its great advantage for reporters is that it allows them to reach outside the bubble.
Mr. Naylor essentially hops from campaign event to campaign event, locating or arranging connections from which he can create portable Internet hot spots. On Jan. 19, the night of the Iowa caucuses, he set up his Soapbox and sold high-speed Internet access to more than 150 reporters sitting with their computers in the Polk County Convention Center in Des Moines. (Most used Wi-Fi cards to connect wirelessly to the Soapbox, but those with Ethernet cables could plug in as well.) He also planted auxiliary boxes at the caucus-night parties held around town by four candidates -- Mr. Kerry, Dr. Dean, Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri. A reporter could get access at all five spots for $100; installing phone lines at each site would have cost five times as much.
Reporters who in 2000 faulted Mr. Naylor for their limited ability to file from the Gore campaign now praise him for enabling them to file faster from practically anywhere. And there are fewer fights in the filing centers over the always-limited number of phone lines.
But there is a drawback. Because reporters can now file around the clock without a hard phone line, campaigns have reduced the filing time that they build into a candidate's schedule. This has also reduced the need for a filing center, an often-intense place that campaigns would set up at least once a day with phone lines and power outlets for the traveling press corps.
For reporters, filing time in the filing center was relatively sacred. It was a chance to sit still, hook up with the home office, check e-mail, focus, and usually eat. But on a bad news day for a candidate, the campaign handlers might restrict that time.
''Sometimes, campaigns would limit the time you had for filing so they could control the amount of research you did and who you talked to,'' said Mr. Johnson of The Globe. With wireless Internet access, ''we're free from that shackle,'' he said. ''The wireless card works in 75 percent to 80 percent of the places where we are. You don't have to work within the parameters of the filing center.''
Mr. Naylor agreed. ''This rewrites the rule book of the little chess game that the media and the campaigns play, and it tilts the advantage more toward the reporters,'' he said. ''A campaign operative can't use a filing center or a phone cord to limit your access to what's happening in the world.''
Wireless access is also important because campaigns rely heavily on e-mail to send out schedules, schedule changes and statements, not to mention attacks on their opponents. And Wi-Fi has created a new sport: surreptitiously seeing how long your computer maintains its signal as the plane gains altitude. ''The peak is about 6,000 feet,'' Mr. Johnson said.
Not every reporter, to be sure, is enamored of what technology has wrought. Jules Witcover, 76, a columnist for The Baltimore Sun, who covered his first campaign in 1960 by handing his copy to a Western Union boy, said he prefers to stick with the basics. He writes on a laptop. He confesses he carries a cellphone, but has told his editors that it doesn't accept incoming calls; in truth, he just doesn't answer it. And he uses a tape recorder because he realized some years ago that note-taking can be fairly unreliable.
But he does not like what the proliferation of gadgets has done to journalism, or to journalists. ''Technology has impinged on reporting,'' he said. He said that candidates used to schmooze with reporters on the plane because they could pick whom they wanted to talk with and others would respect their privacy. Now, he said, if a candidate comes back, everybody gathers around. And with boom microphones and discreet recording gear and phones that can secretly take pictures and transmit them instantly, the candidate cannot relax.
''Rather than take a chance, they don't do it,'' Mr. Witcover said. ''It has eroded the relationship that you could build up with a candidate.''
Beyond that, he said, even a long bus ride at night is no fun anymore because most people are on their cellphones -- and always on deadline.
