The main street of Lecong is a five-mile Vegas-like stretch of gaudy showrooms and exhibition centers, factories and cavernous warehouses, leather suppliers and timber yards, all dedicated to making and selling furniture.
Until a decade ago, this town, in Guangdong Province in southern China, was mostly rice paddies and sugarcane fields. Now Lecong, which promotes itself as the ''furniture capital of the world,'' is a sales hub for the province's booming furniture industry, with 3,500 furniture stores and wholesalers representing many of the 6,000 or so furniture factories in the surrounding Pearl River delta region.
Much of the growth has come from exports. In the last eight years, China's total furniture exports grew about 30 percent annually, to about $7.3 billion last year, and more than half of the exports came from Guangdong.
But the boom that transformed Lecong has now drawn Chinese-based manufacturers into the biggest antidumping case ever brought against a Chinese industry by American manufacturers.
On Jan. 9, the United States International Trade Commission authorized a full inquiry into complaints by American furniture manufacturers that Chinese competitors are imperiling the American industry by selling wooden bedroom furniture in the United States below its fair market cost. If the inquiry finds against them, the Chinese-based manufacturers will face punishingly high tariffs on their $1 billion trade to the United States.
The case is the latest symptom of growing American distress about the influx of Chinese-made goods and the evaporation of domestic manufacturing jobs -- issues especially potent in a presidential election year.
This trade dispute and others that are looming this year over Chinese imports of shrimp, chemicals, tissue paper and semiconductors may become lightning rods for public disquiet and industry lobbying, trade experts say.
China's wooden furniture trade embodies many of the complexities of China's growth as an assembly deck for many of America's goods.
For a start, most of the owners of the factories in the dispute are from Taiwan, with smaller numbers from Hong Kong and the mainland itself. Like many multinationals, they shifted production in the last decade to Shenzhen and Dongguan, sprawling industrial zones that are close to Lecong, where an abundance of low-wage laborers from China's countryside work long hours in the many factories.
Up to 90 percent of the 135 companies initially under investigation have owners from Taiwan, according to Chen Chiu, who is chairman of the Taipei-based Taiwan furniture makers' association and owner of the Homedeco Worldwide factory in Dongguan.
''We're here because it's good business, and we sell to America because it's good business,'' he said. ''We're not going to drop a stone on our own foot by not making a profit.''
Low labor costs, combined with improved skills and design, were central to the Chinese-based manufacturers' export growth, Mr. Chen said.
The American manufacturers pressing for export restrictions, however, say there is another cause for their woes. ''It's not a labor advantage,'' said Doug Bassett, a spokesman for the American Furniture Manufacturers Committee for Legal Trade, the lobbying group that filed the antidumping petition with the International Trade Commission. ''It's these other illegal subsidies that make a difference.''
He said the competitors benefited unfairly from China's currency controls, which prevent the yuan from rising in value against the dollar to reflect China's trade surplus, as well as illicit government subsidies and soft bank loans prohibited under World Trade Organization and United States rules.
Chinese wooden furniture imports have ''exploded'' in the last five years, Mr. Bassett said, and American makers' sales and profits have shrunk.
The Vaughan-Bassett Furniture Company of Galax, Va., a longtime family-owned company where he is a vice president, closed a bedroom furniture factory in 2002, cutting 250 jobs.
Since 2001, the United States has lost 34,000 jobs in wooden furniture manufacturing, about a third of the previous total, according to Department of Labor statistics.
To stop the influx, the group that Mr. Bassett represents is demanding tariffs of up to 440 percent on China's bedroom furniture exports. That is the furniture product affected the most by the recent swell in Chinese imports, he added. Other less complex furniture, like dining room tables, has been dominated by imports for many years.
''It's a matter of survival,'' Mr. Bassett said in a recent telephone interview. ''At the rate bedroom shipments are growing and U.S. production is shrinking, within five years there'll be very little manufacturing here.''
In Lecong, furniture manufacturers and merchants seem bemused by the claim that their freewheeling, overwhelmingly privately owned business is cosseted by either state subsidies or special loans.
Zhou Jie, a manager for Sunlink Furniture, a sales and distribution company, said China, with its cheap, disciplined workers, was a natural home for labor-intensive jobs like wood carving and polishing. His company represents several wooden furniture exporters, he said, pointing to the sophistication of their finished products.
''They're much cheaper than American-made tables, but the prices are reasonable based on costs,'' he said, patting a carved oak table. ''In the U.S. you'd have to pay a blue-collar worker, say, at least $2,000 a month for this kind of work, but here you can get the same for $100.''
Just as most owners of China's wooden furniture factories do not come from mainland China, neither do the raw materials. In fact, manufacturers and wood importers said the disputed furniture was often made of wood shipped from the United States.
Sales of American hardwood lumber to China have grown sixfold in the last five years, reaching a value of $84 million in 2002, according to United States Agriculture Department statistics. About two-thirds of that is used in making furniture, most of which is re-exported back to the United States, according to Matthew Brady, a Beijing-based representative of the American timber industry.
Mr. Chen, the factory owner from Taiwan, said: ''We import nearly all our wood from the United States, because that's what customers there want. So if they take away our trade, they'll also be taking away America's own exports. Production won't go back there.''
Wooden furniture is only a tiny part of China's $140 billion of imports to the United States. But it is part of an overall rise in Chinese imports that has galvanized American industry groups and trade unions, and haunted politicians.
''If China continues to stonewall about this, it will be at their peril and they'll be caught in the cross-fire of a presidential election campaign,'' said Representative F. James Sensenbrenner Jr., Republican of Wisconsin, in a recent interview in Beijing. He cited a recent article in The Milwaukee Journal Sentinel about a seven-generation furniture factory that shifted its production to Shenzhen.
Unless China's huge trade deficit with the United States ''can be addressed in the eyes of voters, it will be one of the three or four biggest issues in the campaign,'' he said.
His warning was echoed in bipartisan calls from 4 senators and 27 representatives urging the Commerce Department and President Bush to support the American furniture manufacturers' case.
The dispute has highlighted a rift between beleaguered American manufacturers and import-dependent retailers. A coalition of 60 American furniture retailers, including the Bombay Company and Crate and Barrel, warned that their sales would be hurt by protective tariffs against cheaper Chinese imports.
American importers and Chinese exporters now face what may be yearlong investigations from the International Trade Commission and the Commerce Department that are likely to deter new orders.
Though special tariffs, if imposed, might stem the flow of wooden beds, dressers and the like from China, ultimately they might not lift the pressures on American manufacturers. Company officials here predicted that production would move to another country with cheap labor.
''If we can't work in China we'll go somewhere else -- Vietnam, Malaysia, Indonesia -- but the same furniture will still end up in America,'' said Mr. Chen, the Taiwanese furniture manufacturer.
