The Monday after Christmas Adam D. Weinberg, the new director of the Whitney Museum of American Art, sent his staff the following e-mail message: ''I am happy to announce that we are planning to start a free, in-house yoga program for the staff very soon! We have engaged a wonderful yoga instructor whom I know, and she is helping us organize this program.''
While some curators quietly snickered, the response was more than anyone expected. About a quarter of the staff of some 200 signed up.
''I don't want to be thought of as a New Age director,'' Mr. Weinberg said when he heard his message had become fodder for art world jokes. ''I was trying to come up with things that were recreational and beneficial to the staff.''
The Whitney seems healthy enough, with lines of visitors snaking around the landmark Marcel Breuer building on Madison Avenue at 75th Street to see its retrospective of the hot painter John Currin, drawings of Arshile Gorky and self-portraits by Lucas Samaras, all organized during the tenure of Mr. Weinberg's predecessor, Maxwell L. Anderson.
After more than a decade of crises and turmoil -- four directors in 14 years, along with relentless criticism ranging from the content and presentation of its exhibitions to its recently aborted $200 million expansion plans -- the Whitney has entered what Mr. Weinberg said was a ''period of healing.'' And while he said he did not want to appear to be a ''New Age director,'' curators say his two favorite words are holistic and synergy.
Mr. Nice Guy may be his outward persona: a jovial character with tousled brown hair, bushy beard and thick glasses. But during a series of interviews, Mr. Weinberg, 49, hinted at some tough changes to come.
''Clearly I want to be a healer, but in the next few weeks and months there will be some changes that are sure to cause some consternation,'' he said. ''There will be new people coming in.'' And some well-respected curators on their way out.
On Monday he dismissed Marla Prather, who joined the museum in 1999 as curator of postwar art after running the department of 20th-century art at the National Gallery in Washington. Ms. Prather has been on leave caring for a seriously ill child.
''I want to restructure the curators, and I thought it was better for her, to do it before she came back, so she wouldn't get involved in projects and then pulled from them,'' Mr. Weinberg said yesterday. ''It was a judgment call intended to respect her dignity and professionalism.'' Ms. Prather declined to comment.
News of her dismissal sent shock waves through the New York museum world because Ms. Prather was one of the Whitney's few seasoned curators with a solid grounding in art history. For years the institution has been criticized for being too quick to embrace the new. During Mr. Anderson's tenure many on the board said they felt he was more interested in the Internet and academics than in art.
''We wanted someone who is passionate about art, which Adam is,'' said Brooke Garber Neidich, a trustee who was on the search committee. ''He's like everyone's nice brother. I know that sounds wrong in this world, but he's not a wimp. Try to find someone who has something nasty to say about him.''
Like anyone who rises to power, Mr. Weinberg has his detractors, although none would speak for attribution. The judgments boiled down to three: that he is overly ambitious; that he purposely left the Whitney so he could come back and run it some day; and that he will play it safe in programming, shying away from the kind of risk-taking exhibitions mounted in the 90's during David A. Ross's tenure. The reference was to shows like ''Black Male: Representations of Masculinity in Contemporary American Art,'' and another devoted to the photographs of Richard Avedon. Both provided Whitney critics with lots of ammunition.
One reason Mr. Weinberg was chosen was that he was a known quantity. He had worked at the Whitney twice before, most recently as a senior curator. Many items on his agenda reflect problem areas that have concerned the board in recent years, several trustees said. When his appointment was announced, Leonard A. Lauder, the museum's chairman said, ''We were looking for someone who understood the key mission of the Whitney: to champion American art and living artists.''
Mr. Weinberg, who was director of the Addison Gallery of American Art at Phillips Academy in Andover, Mass., since 1999, estimates that about half the staff has changed since he left the Whitney. He has also returned at a time when all museums are grappling with budget cuts, falling attendance since Sept. 11 and rising operating costs.
''Coming back to the Whitney is like seeing an old friend you knew well but haven't seen for many years,'' he said. ''There's lots of past history, and you spend time trying to figure out how they've changed.''
Perhaps the most significant change was in the Whitney's curatorial structure, which was dramatically altered by Mr. Anderson, who was director for five tumultuous years before resigning under fire in May. One of his first acts in 1998 was to create what he called portfolios for each of the curators, assigning them to specialized areas organized chronologically. It was an unpopular move, and several top curators resigned.
Mr. Weinberg said the curatorial staff was one of the first areas he planned to change. ''It was divided by chronology and media. It's silly to limit curators that way.''
Programming is another priority, he said. ''I want to generate more shows,'' he said. ''We are taking show after show from other places. We can't be a kunsthalle,'' a museum without a collection of its own.
Finding ways to bring the performing arts to the Whitney is another project. This fall for a retrospective of the artist Romare Bearden organized by the National Gallery of Art, for example, Mr. Weinberg is considering a series of jazz performances at the museum since that artist was influenced by jazz themes. And for an exhibition of work by Isamu Noguchi organized by the Whitney and the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden in Washington, he would like to see some kind of dance component because of that sculptor's long collaboration with Martha Graham.
A year after its founding in 1931, the Whitney Museum established its Biennial, the giant survey of contemporary art the art world loves to hate. This year's Biennial, which opens on March 11, was already far along by the time Mr. Weinberg got to the museum. It is being organized by three Whitney curators as opposed to one curator two years ago. ''It serves as a forum about what's going on in contemporary art,'' he said. ''Not simply what's included but the gaps -- what's been left out.''
Chrissie Iles, the museum's curator for film and video and one of the Biennial's three organizers, calls her new boss a ''curator's director.''
''He understands the mechanics of making an exhibition from an insider's point of view because he's done it,'' she said. ''And for an institution as small as the Whitney, that's important. He's also a good listener. He's a people person.''
One area that remains to be addressed is the need for expansion of the museum. Although he is well aware of the museum's space constraints, Mr. Weinberg said for now he was focusing on getting the museum in order and getting a strong schedule of exhibitions in the works. In the museum world the results of these efforts will take time. ''I already have two to three years of shows on the schedule, many good ones,'' he said. ''But the full sense of what I'm doing won't be felt for three years.''
