At Abraham Lincoln High School in Brooklyn, the bathrooms are so bad that students have been known to use the toilets at Coney Island Hospital, down the road. At the High School for Health Professions and Human Services in Manhattan, leaky bathroom ceilings prompt students to head for McDonald's, or hold out for hours.
''I just try to wait till I get home,'' said Diola Castillo, 16, a junior at the health professions and human services school.
Dirty bathrooms, broken toilets, faulty stall doors and a dearth of toilet paper are not new problems in New York City's 1,200 public schools. But they persist, said Eva S. Moskowitz, chairwoman of the City Council Education Committee. Ms. Moskowitz said dirty, broken bathrooms have been a recurring theme in her frequent conversations with parents throughout the five boroughs.
''Whether I'm doing a town hall in Cypress Hills, Brooklyn, or whether I'm doing it on Staten Island, parents come up to me and say, 'Can you get the toilets fixed?''' Ms. Moskowitz said. ''I feel that I don't even get to, often, the topics of curriculum or the challenges of math instruction, because we're talking about bathrooms. It's not only the toilets not flushing. It's toilet paper, it's soap, it's paper towels.''
Ms. Moskowitz knows firsthand that the problem is longstanding. When she was a student at Stuyvesant High School,
she would run across East 16th Street to use the bathroom at Beth Israel Medical Center.
But some parents say the problem seems to be worse this year, perhaps because of crowding. ''Too many kids,'' said Jamella Bhairo,  president of the PTA at the health professions school, which is housed in the old Stuyvesant building with two other schools. A bathroom is outside the gym in the basement of the school, Ms. Castillo said, but the only stall has no door.
Consequently, she said, ''You don't use that bathroom.''
Another bathroom is attached to the girls' locker room, but the floor always seems to be wet from leaky toilets and sinks, she said. Those who brave it tend to emerge with wrinkled noses, Ms. Castillo said. Bathrooms on the second and third floors contain some acceptable toilets and others that leak.''The water drips on you, and that's nasty,'' Ms. Castillo said. Education officials agreed that some bathrooms are below par and noted that the mayor's proposed $13.1 billion five-year capital plan for education includes more than $29 million for bathroom renovations. But the plan relies on billions on extra dollars from the state budget.
''New York City's children deserve nothing less than a clean and safe school,'' Michele McManus, a spokeswoman for the city Department of Education, said. But noting delays in fixing bathroom problems, some parents say the very nature of nature calling is that certain things cannot wait.
When the PTA at Middle School 51, in Park Slope, started meeting this year, bathroom-related issues were at the top of the agenda, said Karen Curlee,  co-president of the group.
The school's 950 students are limited to bathrooms on the first floor and in the gym. The rest have been bolted shut because of what Ms. Curlee said she had been told were security concerns and plumbing problems.
''The plumbing situation can't be fixed except by going through this very rigorous hoop-jumping situation,'' she said. ''We suggested we just bring in a private plumber. They said you cannot,'' she said of school officials.
Joseph Norton, co-president of the PTA at Lincoln, says bathrooms supplies have been more plentiful  since October, when parents met with the principal. Still, conditions are far from perfect, he said.
''It's filthy, sometimes smelly,'' Mr. Norton said. ''They claim the kids mess the bathroom up, that they take the paper towels and throw them against the wall. That was one claim they made as to why there aren't any paper towels in the bathroom. But water rises to its level. If you treat these kids like animals, they behave like animals.''
Marie Mastrosimone, president of the PTA at Queens Vocational and Technical High School, was one parent who alerted Ms. Moskowitz to her concerns. Contacted by telephone, Mrs. Mastrosimone said the school had too few bathrooms. When she asked one of her sons about their condition, he said he did not know because he did not use the bathrooms. ''They're corroded,'' he explained.
