A suicide bomber driving an ambulance blew himself up Wednesday morning in downtown Baghdad, shearing the facade off a hotel, killing at least 3 people and wounding more than 15.
The bomber was driving more than 100 miles an hour when he swerved around a concrete barrier, dodged a blast of gunfire from policemen and detonated the explosion at the Shaheen Hotel about 7 a.m., Iraqi police officials said.
''We saw him, we shot at him, but it was too late,'' said Sgt. Thaer Abdullah of the Diplomatic Protective Services, an Iraqi security agency with offices across the street from the hotel, where many foreign contractors stay. ''He was driving so fast.''
The blast ripped a wide gash in the street in front of the hotel and showered car parts over a several-block radius. Bed sheets from ravaged hotel rooms were twisted around trees and telephone wires. Burst pipes gushed water over the rubble.
Within minutes, American soldiers sealed off the area and helped carry away the casualties.
The Iraqi police said one of the dead was a South African working for a British firm. His body lay under a blanket as American soldiers pushed back an angry crowd.
[An explosion struck an Iraqi security patrol in Baquba, 40 miles north of Baghdad, early Thursday, and witnesses said they believed there were many casualties, Reuters reported. There were no other details on Thursday morning.]
As in many recent attacks, most of the injured on Wednesday were Iraqis, this time newly minted officers of the Diplomatic Protective Services. Iraqi police officials said it was just as likely that the security agency was the target of the bombing as the fancy, three-story hotel 100 feet away. But they also pointed out that the interim minister of labor and social affairs, Sami Izara al-Majoun, was staying at the hotel.
''This will not end until the Americans leave,'' shouted Zenab Abdul Hussein, an office worker at the security services. ''They blame Iraqis for the violence. They must blame themselves.''
None of the wounded Iraqi security officers had helmets or flak jackets.
''Why is it Americans have all these things? And our boys have nothing?'' Ms. Hussein said, pointing to two American soldiers wearing body armor.
Some of the wounded were taken to the Ibn al-Nafis Hospital, nearby.
There, in a room with a bald concrete floor, a father looked down at his son, a guard with the security service.
''My dear, what's wrong with you?'' the father asked.
His son, wounded in the neck and chest, looked up from his hospital bed and blinked. The father started to cry. A nurse quietly led him away.
The attack was the most destructive bombing in Baghdad since a 1,000-pound truck bomb exploded on Jan. 18 at the front gate of the fortified compound housing the headquarters of the military occupation forces in Iraq, killing at least 25. It followed several days of attacks against American soldiers, civilians and Iraqi security services around the country.
In another hotel a mile and a half away, hundreds of Iraqi civic leaders gathered for a town-hall session on democracy sponsored by the American occupation powers and the American-appointed Iraqi Governing Council.
The Palestine Hotel, where the civic leaders met for about four hours, the target of insurgent attacks in recent months, is now heavily defended.
After hearing speeches by council members and representatives of the Baghdad city government, the participants sat down in groups at small tables to discuss topics like the decentralization of power in a federal system, the role of women, and other issues facing the country.
''We must give women 25 percent of the seats in local city councils,'' declared one member of the audience when his turn came before the microphones. ''And the men must demand rights for women, too.''
Elsewhere, delegates held mini-news conferences on security, the guerrilla war, crime, how to hold free elections and the role that the United Nations could play in bringing Iraq to its feet.
Also on Wednesday, L. Paul Bremer III, the civilian administrator of the occupation, issued a short statement saying that the United States would take a tough approach toward Kurdish groups opposed to the Turkish government that have used Iraq as a refuge.
''The Kurdistan Workers' Party and its aliases, the Kurdistan Freedom and Democracy Congress and the Kurdistan People's Congress, are terrorist organizations and have been designated as such under U.S. law,'' Mr. Bremer said. ''The Coalition Provisional Authority, coalition forces and Iraqi security forces will treat'' the groups ''as terrorists.''
The statement also said, ''There is no place for terrorism or terrorist organizations in the new Iraq.''
