Everyone in the crowd at Madison Square Garden last night could see Jason Doig coming at Eric Lindros. Everyone but Lindros, that is.
Midway through the second period of the Rangers' embarrassing and costly 2-1 loss to the lowly Washington Capitals, with Lindros's coaches and teammates yelling in vain for Lindros to look up and look out, Doig flattened Lindros in front of the Rangers' bench with a jarring open-ice hit.
After the next face-off, Lindros felt well enough to fight Doig. Lindros emerged from the penalty box to take his next shift, but he did not feel well when he came back to the bench. And by the time the third period had started, he was found to have sustained another concussion.
Lindros, 30, has now sustained eight documented concussions over his career. He will be re-evaluated by the Rangers today.
The loss of Lindros, whom Mark Messier has referred to this season as the team's emotional leader, could not have come at a worse time for the Rangers, who are in danger of failing to qualify for the playoffs for the seventh consecutive season.
Last night's loss was the Rangers' fifth in six games, and they trail the Islanders by 5 points for the conference's eighth and final playoff spot.
And now the Rangers are again without Lindros, who has already missed 12 games this season because of eye and chest injuries, and the flu.
After last night's defeat, Glen Sather, the Rangers' president, general manager and coach, said that the team's medical staff had spoken to Dr. Karen Johnston, the concussion specialist based in Montreal, who has examined Lindros several times. Lindros was examined at the Garden last night by Dr. Andrew Feldman and Dr. Ron Preston.
''These things are hard to judge,'' Sather said. ''By Dr. Johnston's over-the-phone diagnosis after speaking to our doctors, they don't think it's that severe. But we'll have a better idea tomorrow.''
For more than a month, the 6-foot-5, 237-pound Lindros had been playing his most dominant hockey since he sustained his seventh concussion on Dec. 28, 2001, at San Jose.
Lindros was obtained from the Philadelphia Flyers in August 2001, after he missed a season because of a concussion (from a hit by the Devils' Scott Stevens in the Eastern Conference finals) and then a contract dispute.
He was hit last night as he carried the puck through the neutral zone with his head down. With his left shoulder, Doig, a big, physical defenseman, caught Lindros flush in the chest and perhaps the chin as Lindros was bent over the ice, playing the puck. Lindros's head whiplashed back from the force of the hit, which Sather said he thought was clean.
''He's a big target out there,'' Doig said of Lindros, who was not available for comment afterward. ''And he has a history of coming through the neutral zone with his head down. There's no doubt in my mind that it was a clean hit. He had the puck in his possession. His head was down.''
Angered that Doig, a former Rangers defenseman, who did not play with Lindros in New York, had steamrolled him, and perhaps that no penalty had been called, Lindros went straight for Doig after the face-off.
''They had every right to send somebody after me,'' Doig said. ''Eric decided to take things into his own hands. I give him a lot of respect for that.''
Lindros clearly outmuscled Doig, ripped Doig's helmet off and did not allow Doig to land a punch before Lindros wrestled him to the ice. The crowd went wild as Lindros skated to the penalty box. But he did not emerge from the dressing room for the third period.
''When he came off the ice after the first shift when he got out of the penalty box, he said he saw some stars, some white flashes,'' Sather said.
Lately, Lindros has taken matters into his own hands on the ice. Last week, he broke the cheekbone of Joe Thornton, the Boston Bruins' captain, in a fight. How long Lindros will be out is anybody's guess.
''It's going to be at least 48 hours,'' Sather said. ''There's no sense guessing with something like this.''
What is clear is that the Rangers remain in trouble. Since obtaining the All-Star right wing Jaromir Jagr from the Capitals last Friday, the Rangers have lost two of three games. Sather said he felt Jagr looked a little nervous playing against his former teammates. Jagr said he was not. In any case, the Rangers were left reeling from a night of bad news.
SLAP SHOTS
JEFF HALPERN and TRENT WHITFIELD scored for the Capitals, who won for the first time in seven road games. MARTIN RUCINSKY got the Rangers' goal. . . . The Washington Capitals' owner, TED LEONSIS, was suspended for a week, and the team was fined $100,000 by the National Hockey League for a scuffle Leonsis had with a season-ticket holder after a loss to Philadelphia on Sunday. The fan had hoisted a sign mocking Leonsis.
HOCKEY
