Fifteen years after the Exxon Valdez spilled 11 million gallons of crude oil into the Prince William Sound in Alaska, a federal judge yesterday imposed punitive damages of $4.5 billion on the Exxon Mobil Corporation. With interest, the total punitive award amounts to about $6.75 billion, according to lawyers for the 32,000 fishermen and residents who brought the suit in 1989.
Yesterday's decision was the third attempt by Judge H. Russel Holland, a federal district judge in Anchorage, to impose a punitive award that the federal appeals court in San Francisco would uphold. The United States Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit vacated awards of $5 billion and $4 billion, not including interest, as too large.
Lawyers for the plaintiffs said the trial court's decision meant the litigation was almost over.
''This is the closing chapter at the trial court level,'' said David W. Oesting, a lawyer at Davis Wright Tremaine in Anchorage.
Tom Cirigliano, a spokesman for Exxon Mobil, said the company expected the appeals court to reduce the award.
''The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals has twice vacated Judge Holland's decisions in this matter,'' he said. The latest decision, he added, ''will require us once again to appeal an order that is entirely inconsistent with the law.''
A jury returned the $5 billion punitive award in 1994. Judge Holland upheld it in 1995, saying that it was not ''grossly excessive.'' In yesterday's decision, he called the number breathtaking but said the court's task was not to determine ''whether the jury 'got it right' '' but rather to ask whether the award was fundamentally unfair to the defendant.
In 2001, the appeals court held that award was too high and ''must be reduced.'' In 2002, Judge Holland did reduce it, to $4 billion, although he noted that he thought a $5 billion award was justified.
Last year, the appeals court vacated that smaller award, too. It did not say whether it was too high or too low but asked Judge Holland to reconsider in light of a recent ruling on punitive damages by the United States Supreme Court.
In yesterday's decision, Judge Holland again asserted that a $5 billion award was justified but imposed an intermediate amount, of $4.5 billion.
In an 82-page decision, Judge Holland defended the amount as necessary to achieve the purposes of punitive damages, which he said were retribution and deterrence.
He said the most important question was ''the degree of reprehensibility'' of Exxon's conduct. Judge Holland wrote that the impact of the spill could not be overstated, in contrast to recent Supreme Court punitive damages cases involving insurance disputes and selling repainted cars.
''The social fabric of Prince William Sound and Lower Cook Inlet was torn apart,'' he wrote. The spill ''disrupted the lives (and livelihood) of thousands of claimants and their families for years.''
''Exxon cannot escape the fact,'' he added, ''that it knew that it was allowing a relapsed alcoholic to operate a fully loaded, crude oil tanker in and out of Prince William Sound, a body of water which Exxon knew to be highly valuable for its fishery resources which Exxon knew, or should have known, were relied on by subsistence fishermen.''
The captain of the Exxon Valdez, Joseph J. Hazelwood, was drinking on the night of the spill. He was convicted of negligently discharging oil, a misdemeanor.
The central question in many recent punitive damages cases has been the appropriate ratio between compensatory damages, which are meant to make plaintiffs whole, and punitive damages, which are meant to punish the defendant.
The parties disputed the amount to be used in the comparison. Exxon argued that the appropriate compensatory amount was $20 million to $383 million; the plaintiffs said the correct amount was $513 million. Judge Holland accepted the larger.
As a consequence, he wrote, the 9.74-to-1 ratio between compensatory damages and even a $5 billion punitive award was appropriate under the Supreme Court's recent ruling.
Judge Holland rejected a suggestion by the appeals court that the costs already paid by Exxon to clean the spill, which exceeded $2 billion, may be enough to deter it and other companies from similar conduct.
Calling the appeals court's economic analysis appropriate ''in the abstract or academic world,'' Judge Holland wrote that ''in the real world, Exxon and its officials and managers do not work this way.''
''We are dealing with,'' he wrote, ''reckless corporate officials.''
The judge gave no reason for the number he settled on, $4.5 billion, other than saying it was ''the means of resolving the conflict between its conclusions and the directions of the court of appeals.''
