Profit at the Sony Corporation fell 26 percent in the October to December quarter, hurt by restructuring costs, a stronger yen and declining revenue in the movie and video game divisions.
Sony's profit of 92.6 billion yen ($874 million) in the quarter was, however, larger than expected, in part because of improved sales of home electronics during the holiday shopping season. Sales over all rose 0.7 percent, to a quarterly record of 2.32 trillion yen ($21.9 billion).
Sony, the world's second-largest electronics maker, also raised its profit goal for the financial year ending in March by 10 percent, to 55 billion yen ($519 million), because of the yen's decline against the euro. The company did not alter its revenue goal of 7.4 trillion yen or its operating profit forecast of 100 billion yen.
While the declines in revenue from PlayStation 2 consoles and movies were expected, the recovery in home electronics sales was encouraging for investors. Sony, which generates more than 60 percent of its sales from audio-visual equipment and other electronics, has been hurt by low-cost competitors and a lack of hit products.
Sony's performance, while far from robust, suggested that the company's biggest worries had eased. For the first time in three years, sales of electronics grew by more than 10 percent in every major region in the world.
''Our year-end performance was stronger than expected,'' Sony's chief financial officer, Takao Yuhara, said. ''What is important is that we continue to perform well in the coming quarters and remain on a growth trend.''
Based on holiday sales, Sony appears to be catching Matsushita Electric Industrial, Sharp and other Japanese companies that were quicker to jump into the market for DVD recorders, flat-screen televisions and other products for the home.
Sony's share of the market for DVD recorders in Japan, for instance, got a big push from the introduction of two DVD recorders, including the PSX, which is part DVD recorder and part game console.
While the company can breathe easier with the improved outlook for electronics, it must still contain expenses to compete with more cost-effective rivals. Last October, Sony unveiled a plan to eliminate 20,000 jobs and cut $3 billion in production costs.
Mr. Yuhara said the cost-cutting effort, called Transformation 60, is moving faster than anticipated. The number of workers taking the company's offer to retire has exceeded expectations, and, as a result, the company plans to spend 150 billion yen ($1.4 billion) on restructuring this fiscal year, 7 percent more than forecast.
Investors, many of whom dumped Sony's shares last year when it missed its financial goals, are slowly returning. Sony's shares have increased about 12 percent since November on hopes for a turnaround, expectations that now appear justified.
''Sony's shares have hit bottom,'' said Yuji Fujimori, an analyst at Goldman Sachs in Tokyo who recently raised Sony's rating to outperform. ''There are still risks for the company, including the foreign exchange rate, but the real risk is in not owning Sony shares.''
Swings in exchange rates, though significant, are only one problem. Sony's ability to charge more for its products than its competitors has eroded in recent years. The company has had to discount its PlayStation 2 game console, for instance, contributing to a 4.5 percent decline in sales in the quarter. Also, makers of digital still cameras, flat-panel screens and other products have been cutting prices, forcing Sony to follow suit.
Sony's movie studio has also had trouble keeping pace with its record run in 2002. Recent releases like ''The Missing'' and ''In the Cut'' have done poorly at the box office and have fallen far short of previous hits like ''Spider-Man'' and ''Men in Black II.'' Profits from the movie unit fell 82 percent in the quarter.
