Would writers, were they not writers, find work only as cabdrivers -- and angry cabdrivers at that? Can the written word somehow soften the sinews of Big Capital?
Novelists and authors were urged to ponder such imponderables as the World Economic Forum here, normally the place for the globe's power brokers, sought to expand its complement of foreign and economic policy makers by inviting writers like the South African Nobel laureate Nadine Gordimer and the American Paul Theroux.
For some, there was the whisper of another question: Were the authors, brought here by a program called Arts and Culture in Davos, merely acting as a diversion as big business schmoozed with big government in this temple of economic globalization? In these uncertain times, when the forum even devoted a session to debating conspiracy theories, who can tell?
For years now the World Economic Forum -- five days of discussions and workshops, secret talks and public pronouncements -- has been lambasted by its critics as a gathering that sets the capitalist agenda for an unsuspecting planet.
At this year's meeting, which ended on Sunday, that image was offset by the presence not only of Ms. Gordimer and Mr. Theroux, but also of Kazuo Ishiguro, the author of ''The Remains of the Day''; the best-selling Brazilian writer Paolo Coelho; the Indian novelist Amitav Ghosh; and the journalist Samantha Power, author of '' 'A Problem from Hell': America and the Age of Genocide.''
''They bring additional depth, new depth,'' said Jose Maria Figueres, a former president of Costa Rica who now works for the forum, which helps some writers with their travel and accommodation but does not, forum officials say, pay an honorarium.
In return the writers are expected to face the public at panel debates and power dinners to expound on subjects like remembering and forgetting.
''It fits into the very important dimension of having them present as participants, not as something outside,'' Mr. Figueres said.
''This is not a little cultural add-on,'' said Homi K. Bhabha, a professor at Harvard, as he served as host for a panel of writers. ''I think we should be engaged.''
For several years the principal literary sword-bearer here has been Mr. Coelho, who said he believed that the writers ''defuse this conspiracy theory about Davos, this idea that people conspire against the world.'' But what brought the other authors here?
''There's no such thing as being a writer, and that's the be-all and end-all,'' Ms. Gordimer said. ''I'm also a citizen, a human being, and I have social responsibilities. I'm here to learn how the world is being run and see what I regard as the biggest problem, the gap between rich and poor.''
But more than that, she said, the writers' presence might help mold the contours of a material world bereft of sentiment or memory: ''There's a feeling that the past is the past, and we start from zero. But the past largely forms the present, and from there one looks at the future. And the writer's imagination encompasses this role.''
Mr. Theroux, known for mining the globe for adventures, said of authors, including himself: ''Writers don't get out a lot. This is a total novelty, spending whole days talking with other people.'' And, as he pointed out, it was not as if they were the first writers to be associated with Davos: Thomas Mann chose it as the setting for his classic ''Magic Mountain,'' published in 1924.
Eighty years on, globalization has brought different preoccupations.
''We are two worlds,'' Mr. Ghosh said. ''One of these worlds, the world which controls power, actually has enormous impact on this other world where people are completely helpless against what they are up against. The issue is how to write about this invisible world.''
Ms. Power spoke of other demons. ''What gets me up in the morning is exposing the world of death,'' she said. ''I focus on the largest number of preventable deaths.''
Not Mr. Theroux. ''I write to be happy,'' he said. ''I write for joy.'' Mind you, he went on, writers should not be expected to have answers to the world's problems and should not be seen as anything but dysfunctional people who would probably be very angry cabdrivers if they were deprived of the opportunity to write. ''If you are happy and balanced, why would you be a writer?'' he asked.
At the forum, the great issues were tempered by a variety of distractions. There were, for instance, an evening with magicians offering to levitate people and a talk by the British mountaineer Sir Christian Bonington, whose achievements include conquering Mount Everest. The South African jazz musician Hugh Masekela played into the early hours at a huge party to celebrate his country's first 10 years of democracy. So just where did the writers fit in?
''It seemed to me that we were touching on some very fundamental questions with some very practical questions,'' Mr. Ishiguro said. ''I think there's a real place for that kind of thing. But our writers' panel would be more along the line of the magicians: a way of relaxing if you have had a hard day listening to people talking about terrorism or banking.''
