When the 2004 Biennial opens this spring, the often controversial survey of contemporary art will extend well beyond the walls of the Whitney Museum of American Art. There will be art from one end of Central Park to the other, including grotesque sculptures of werewolf heads, a ferocious life-size tiger, a bronze bust of Michael Jackson and a 50-foot-tall inflatable pink rubber ketchup bottle topped with a snowmanlike head.
In addition to these temporary exhibits, there will be performances and artists' participatory projects. By the time the Biennial closes at the end of May, the public will have had a chance to see nine installations by seven artists, from 60th to 110th Street.
The notion of using Central Park as part of the Biennial first came up two years ago when the Whitney asked the Public Art Fund, a nonprofit group that presents art projects around the city, to commission works for the park. Because putting art there has been frowned upon by those who believe Central Park is a work of art in itself, the Public Art Fund asked five artists to come up with works that would not offend but rather respect the landscape. By far the most radical was a 50-foot stainless steel tree just east of the Sheep Meadow. This year the tiptoeing is over.
''These works are very closely aligned to the kind of art you will see at the Biennial itself,'' said Tom Eccles, director of the Public Art Fund, who has collaborated with the three Whitney curators in charge of this year's Biennial: Chrissie Iles, Shamim M. Momin and Debra Singer. ''It gives us a moment to try out new things and be a bit more experimental.''
All the works were approved by the Parks and Recreation Department, the Central Park Conservancy and the mayor's office. Bloomberg, the media company of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, has sponsored the project.
''The 2002 Public Art Fund component of the Whitney Biennial was an amazing success for New York City,'' said Patricia E. Harris, the deputy mayor for administration. ''This year's outdoor component is particularly exciting because the works of art will stimulate the northern end of Central Park and bring more visitors during a slower time of year.''
Using art as an attraction to get people into the park during the bleak winter months is important to the mayor's office, which has given its blessing for the artists Christo and Jeanne-Claude to festoon 23 miles of the park's walkways with billowing saffron-colored fabric in February next year.
Some of the works that are part of the Biennial have been specially commissioned for their sites in the park, while others were conceived independently. The projects will open in two phases. The first group, opening March 10, includes sculptural works by emerging artists like Olav Westphalen, Liz Craft and David Altmejd. There will also be monumental sculptures by Paul McCarthy, one of today's more influential artists.
The second phase will begin on April 16 with ''Three-Day Weekend,'' as David Muller, an installation artist and painter from Los Angeles, calls his roving group exhibition. For this one Mr. Muller has asked eight artists to bring paintings and video installations, which will be on view at the Arsenal Gallery for three days, from April 16 through April 18.
On April 17 the installation artist Eli Sudbrack, a k a Assume Vivid Astro Focus, will create a 147-foot-long, psychedelic discolike printed vinyl roller rink near the band shell at East 72nd Street. Other events that day include an afternoon performance by the Los Angeles band Los Super Elegantes.
Also on April 17 the Japanese artist Yayoi Kusama will install hundreds of mirrored balls in the Conservatory Waters just steps from the Alice in Wonderland statue, where Ms. Kusama staged one of her 1960's body-art happenings.
