Watch any football game, and you see some variation of it, as a box that dances between corners of the television screen or as a strip across the top. They are the urgent town criers of televised sports -- agile, multihued graphics that display scores, down and distance, the quarter, time remaining and flags thrown, a field goal's length, a touchdown scored or a coach's challenge.
They are unavoidable, and that's the idea: the score is never more than a few seconds away and can be read in a crowded, noisy pub where the announcers are inaudible. The graphics inform but also clutter the now quaint concept of a clean screen. A box or a bar screen may be simultaneously joined by a scroll or a graphic at the bottom. The eyes couldn't get a better workout if they were in a Pilates class.
''You want to be prominent enough without overpowering the screen and to make it as small as possible without being obtrusive,'' said Sean McManus, the president of CBS Sports, which is carrying the Super Bowl on Sunday.
Of the four networks that carry the National Football League, CBS, ABC and ESPN use a corner box, while the box that Fox first used in 1994 has morphed into the bar.
They are not static or dull. ABC's is the minimalist, more throwback than futuristic; CBS's is more aggressive but does not announce its presence as overtly as the FoxBar (formerly the FoxBox). ABC's is, by fractions, the smallest, and Fred Gaudelli, the producer of ''Monday Night Football,'' said that its size was intended to make it utilitarian.
''I try to make it as nondistracting as possible,'' he said, ''to provide the basic information you need at home to follow the game. I just don't like it to be too busy.'' He added that John Madden and Al Michaels needed graphics that accentuated but did not compete with their commentary.
The boxes specialize in north-south and lateral movement, the graphic equivalent of Barry Sanders. CBS's basic blue square gives temporary birth to graphics that drop below to give down and distance or display a ragged yellow FLAG sign, which will flip to say, for example, ENCROACHMENT.
The box expands sideways to reveal a red Timeouts graphic, which expands outward, in yellow, to show the number of timeouts left for each team. It will also reveal the number of plays, yardage gained and time expended in a drive.
ABC's angular, mostly yellow box features a drop-down graphic for a penalty that reads FLAG with an arrow pointed both ways. When the referee says who committed the infraction, the first display changes to the team, with the arrow pointed in its field direction.
The FoxBar is the most restless being, with different colors for each team (a season-long attempt to squeeze some often-incomprehensible team logos into the narrow graphic was abandoned for the playoffs), pulsing light and HANGTIME, TOUCHDOWN, FIELD GOAL, CHALLENGE or CURRENT DRIVE graphics that take over the space usually devoted to the time, period and N.F.L. playoff logo.
The FoxBox became the FoxBar as a result of the network's acquisition of Nascar rights. A constant display of pertinent race statistics across the top of the screen became Fox's production mantra, and it was quickly adapted for its N.F.L. and Major League Baseball telecasts.
Gary Hartley, senior vice president and creative director of Fox Sports, said that the quantity of information had not changed much in the translation from the box to the bar, but that the increased animation and color made it look busier.
''It's subjective,'' he said. ''How flashy do you want to be and how much production value do you want to put into it? The N.F.L. is all about glitz. You want to join in the celebration of a touchdown by flashing it on screen.''
Contrary to the contention by critics, like Gaudelli, that the bar blocks action, Fox's research found that if it covered anything it was a fringe of fans atop the standard wide-angle shot of the field, Hartley said. Some of the research involved simply covering the top of the screen with a strip of tape.
Gaudelli says that whatever the ABC box lacks is made up by statistical graphics that are shown in the lower third of the screen.
Unlike the box, the bar does not shift from the top left to the top right of the screen. But the box could block forward action if it were not situated behind the offense.
Is there a score bar in CBS's future? Will it surprise viewers on Sunday as Fox did when it unveiled its FoxBox in a 1994 preseason game? No.
''It's a matter of taste, not about the amount of information on screen,'' McManus said. ''We think this works best.''
The graphic he would most like to see within the box on Sunday would show two letters: OT.
TV SPORTS
