The former chief of Gov. George E. Pataki's security detail went to unusual lengths to monitor the progress of a federal investigation into whether Mr. Pataki's 1994 campaign had promised parole in return for large contributions from inmates' families, law enforcement officials said on Wednesday.
The security chief, Col. Daniel Wiese of the New York State Police, invoked his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination before a federal grand jury investigating reports of paroles being sold, according to a lawyer involved in the investigation, who insisted on anonymity.
It remains unclear whether Colonel Wiese became involved on his own or at the direction of someone else. It is also not known why Colonel Wiese, a close friend of Mr. Pataki, refused to answer questions before the grand jury or what prosecutors were trying to learn from him. The grand jury testimony is sealed, and Colonel Weise was not charged with any crime.
Colonel Wiese, who is now the director of corporate security and inspector general at the State Power Authority, did not return calls from a reporter on Tuesday and Wednesday.
The first report of Colonel Wiese's actions appeared in The Village Voice on Tuesday.
Current and former law enforcement officials, speaking on condition of anonymity, said Colonel Wiese, whose job was to oversee the governor's bodyguards, sought to become involved with the investigation from the moment campaign officials were first questioned by New York City detectives in September 1997.
Once he learned of the visit, Colonel Wiese tried to monitor the progress of the investigation, insisting on updates from the city police and demanding that one of his men be assigned to the investigative team, these law enforcement officials said. Federal prosecutors later took over the investigation, froze the State Police out, and instructed the city police to stop communicating with Colonel Wiese, one of the officials said.
Lisa Dewald Stoll, Mr. Pataki's communications director, declined to comment when asked if the governor had asked his security chief to get involved in the investigation. Nor would she say if the governor was aware that Colonel Wiese may have tried to monitor the inquiry. She termed the report in The Village Voice an inaccurate attempt to smear Colonel Wiese's reputation.
''Colonel Wiese is a respected law enforcement officer of 25 years and a man of integrity, as attested to by top law enforcement officials,'' Ms. Stoll said.
Three state parole officials were convicted on charges of perjury and misleading investigators in connection with the case, and a Republican fund-raiser, Yung Soo Yoo, was convicted on an obstruction of justice charge in July 2000. No one was convicted of bribery stemming from the selling of paroles, and Mr. Pataki was not implicated at the trials.
Colonel Wiese was not only Mr. Pataki's chief bodyguard for eight years but also a member of the governor's inner circle. He retired from the State Police in April last year and was immediately appointed to his $160,000-a-year post as inspector general at the Power Authority, which the governor controls.
