In choosing Roy Neel to oversee his presidential campaign, Howard Dean has selected a Washington insider known for organizational skills and close ties to Al Gore.
In a conference call with reporters Wednesday night, Dr. Dean said Mr. Neel, succeeding Joe Trippi, would immediately move to the campaign's headquarters, in Burlington, Vt., to become its chief executive. ''Roy brings enormous experience both in management and national politics,'' the candidate said, adding, ''I felt we've needed a strong organizational force in the office.''
He said Mr. Neel would centralize decision-making in Burlington but would not be dictating to the field offices.
Friends of Mr. Neel, 59, said he would most likely serve as a calming, adult influence in the tumultuous, youth-oriented campaign and might help steer Dr. Dean back to the more moderate approach he took as governor of Vermont, although the candidate himself said the selection was not meant to send a signal about the campaign's direction.
Mr. Neel, a longtime friend of Mr. Gore from Tennessee, served as his vice-presidential chief of staff for the first six months of 1993, then became President Bill Clinton's deputy chief of staff for another six. He quit when, as he recounted later, he felt that he was neglecting his family, and became president of the United States Telephone Association, where he lobbied for independent telephone companies including the Baby Bells.
Dr. Dean rejected a suggestion Wednesday night that Mr. Neel's history as a corporate lobbyist could pose a problem for the candidate's outsider image; he said Mr. Neel was not a lobbyist now.
Mr. Neel last worked in presidential politics in 1988, for Mr. Gore. He was not active in the presidential campaign of 2000, although before the election that year, Mr. Gore put him in charge of planning for a Gore transition to the presidency. The two are so close that Mr. Gore entrusted Mr. Neel with organizing the memorial service for Mr. Gore's father.
Mr. Neel helped arrange Mr. Gore's endorsement of Dr. Dean in December and shortly thereafter became a senior Dean adviser. Now his quick ascendancy to the top of the campaign has raised speculation about how deeply Mr. Gore has been involved in the Dean candidacy behind the scenes.
Dr. Dean said Mr. Gore had not suggested that Mr. Neel run the campaign. But he dropped out of the conference call before he could be asked about Mr. Gore's role and whether he expected the former vice president to become more visible for him.
Elaine C. Kamarck, who worked on policy issues for the 2000 Gore campaign and with Mr. Neel on Mr. Gore's transition team, said of the Dean campaign's new chief: ''He's got a good sense of presidential demeanor, and what he brings is what Dean needs: he needs a way to convince people that he is presidential in order to combat Kerry on the electability issue.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: TURNOVER
