In a few days, NASA's two rovers on Mars may actually be roving.
One rover, the Spirit, disabled by a software glitch last week, could resume its explorations early next week, mission managers said Wednesday at a news conference here at the National Aeronautics and Space Administration's Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
On Wednesday, the Spirit successfully communicated via its high-speed antenna and sent back a photograph, the first since the malfunction, showing its instrument arm pressed up against the rock nicknamed Adirondack. The rover was in the middle of experiments on Adirondack when the troubles began.
''Everything is right where we left it,'' said Dr. Mark Adler, a mission manager.
The deployment of the other rover, the Opportunity, which landed early on Sunday Eastern time, continues smoothly. As early as this Sunday, it could start moving from its landing site.
Scientists continue to marvel at the small, shallow crater they see around the Opportunity. For now, the chocolate-brown soil and the outcropping of bedrock about 25 feet away offer far more intriguing questions than answers.
The soil appears to be covered by dark gravel and pebbles. But in places where the rover's air bags bounced during its landing, the surface is a more vivid red and almost completely smooth, the pebbles and gravel seemingly vanished into thin Martian air.
Some science team members like Dr. Matthew Golombek believe that the gravel is still there, just out of sight.
''When the air bags were pressed against them, they actually drove those pebbles into that dust,'' Dr. Golombek said. ''That's my bias.''
Dr. James F. Bell III, a professor of astronomy at Cornell and the lead scientist for the panoramic camera, said that some layers of exposed bedrock looked like a conglomerate of similar pebbles and grains and that they might fall loose as the rocks erode.
A second theory is that the pebbles are clods of dust and that the force of the air bag pressing down simply pulverized them.
In several places, the seams of the air bags left sharply defined impressions, like those of a beach ball.
''These marks are telling us something about the physical properties of the material,'' Dr. Bell said.
The scientists still do not know exactly where the Opportunity is. They know it is in a shallow crater about 20 yards wide, but photographs taken by the spacecraft as it neared the surface showed several craters about that size.
The rim of the crater obscures most of the surrounding landscape, and in spots where the rim is low enough to reveal the horizon beyond, no landmarks are visible.
''You can see in the distance how smooth and flat it is,'' Dr. Golombek said.
When the Spirit suddenly fell silent on Jan. 21, mission controllers initially feared that a catastrophic failure in its power system, antenna or heating systems might have killed the rover entirely. The problem now appears to be a fixable flaw in the computer programming that controls part of the rover's memory.
That memory, known as flash memory, which handles information after the power is turned off, serves the same role as the hard disk in a personal computer.
''If we're on the right track, we would hope to, at the earliest, be back to doing science early next week,'' Jennifer Trosper, a mission manager, said.
On Tuesday, NASA named the three hills seen in the distance at the Spirit's landing site after the crew members of Apollo 1 -- Virgil I. Grissom, Edward H. White 2nd and Roger B. Chaffee -- who were killed in a fire that broke out during a test on the launching pad at Cape Canaveral on Jan. 27, 1967.
