Jaber A. Elbaneh, the last member of a group of Yemeni-American men from Lackawanna, N.Y., who attended a Qaeda training camp in the spring and summer of 2001, has been taken into custody in Yemen, officials there and in the United States say.
The officials said Mr. Elbaneh was being held by Yemeni authorities, but would give no details of his arrest.
Six men from Lackawanna pleaded guilty last year to aiding a terrorist organization by attending the camp, in Afghanistan, and were sentenced to prison terms of up to 10 years. But Mr. Elbaneh never returned from Afghanistan, and last fall the United States government offered a reward of up to $5 million for information leading to his arrest.
The six men who pleaded guilty have told investigators that they went to Afghanistan because they had become convinced that as Muslims, they were obligated to prepare to defend their religion. Four of the six left the camp before completing the training and, through their lawyers, have denied being members of Al Qaeda. One of these four, Sahim Alwan, said in an interview last year that Mr. Elbaneh had told him that he was prepared to die for the cause of defending Islam.
Negotiations between Yemeni and United States officials concerning the possibility of Mr. Elbaneh's extradition are under way, American officials said.
In all, eight men from Lackawanna, near Buffalo, traveled to Afghanistan and, during the summer of 2002, became the target of an intensive investigation.
The eighth was Kamal Derwish, a native of Lackawanna who grew up in Saudi Arabia and recruited the other men to attend the Qaeda camp. Mr. Derwish was killed in Yemen in November 2002 when a missile launched from a United States drone destroyed a vehicle carrying him and others suspected of being Qaeda figures.
Another person described as a recruiter in the Lackawanna case, Juma al-Dosari, a Saudi citizen, is in custody at the United States detention center at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba. Mr. Dosari, who federal investigators say helped Mr. Derwish in persuading the other Lackawanna men to travel to Afghanistan, left the United States to fight there shortly after 9/11. He was apprehended on the Pakistani border in November 2001.
Law enforcement officials said the Justice Department and the Pentagon were discussing whether Mr. Dosari's case would be handled as a criminal matter in the civilian courts, or by military tribunal.
