As a youngster of varied talents, Tedy Bruschi had to choose between a life as a football player and a life as a jazz musician. Not a bad choice for a boy.
Each offered the opportunity to travel. Each allowed for artistic expression, be it riffing in a smoky bar or dancing through the end zone after a touchdown. But football had one advantage that music did not.
''I couldn't use my saxophone to hit anybody,'' said Bruschi, a New England Patriots linebacker and former band member at Roseville High School in Sacramento, ''so I sort of liked the helmet better.''
Bruschi, as much as any Patriots defender, is a player whose intellect, skill and passion have made him a perfect fit in New England's multifaceted scheme, which asks its players to think quickly and move swiftly.
In Bruschi's third Super Bowl, there is even more focus than usual on him because of the right leg injury he sustained in the American Football Conference championship game against Indianapolis. It has limited his preparation leading up to Super Bowl XXXVIII against the Carolina Panthers on Sunday at Reliant Stadium.
On Wednesday, Coach Bill Belichick listed the 30-year-old Bruschi as probable to play Sunday, which translates to a 75 percent chance of his playing. To hear Bruschi tell it, however, 75 percent seems low.
''It's going to take a lot to hold me out of this game,'' he said. ''This is the biggest game of my career.''
If any team has proven it can survive injuries, it is New England, which used 42 starters and still pounded out a 16-2 record, including a 14-game winning streak that is still breathing.
Bruschi, a defensive captain, started every game and compiled 137 tackles in the regular season. (Only safety Rodney Harrison, with 140, had more.)
And in one of those streaks that combines all of the attributes of a game breaker, Bruschi became the first player in N.F.L. history to return four consecutive interceptions for a touchdown. The final two came in victories this season over Philadelphia and Miami.
''Sometimes it's tough to compete with him,'' Patriots linebacker Mike Vrabel said, ''because it seems like every time he gets an interception, he scores a touchdown. I'd have to play offense for me to get a touchdown.''
Vrabel said he and Bruschi continually challenged each other to get better, throwing down gauntlets, then racing each other to the football.
''Justice would have been served if he had made the Pro Bowl this year,'' Vrabel said. ''But he is no less of a player just because he didn't. He's heralded among the guys on the team. When you can garner the respect of the teammates and coaches, then with players like Tedy and I, that's all you need.''
Playing for Bill Parcells, who drafted him for the Patriots in 1996; Pete Carroll, who shepherded his early growth; and now Belichick has given Bruschi an apprenticeship with three defensive-minded coaches.
In his eight seasons, Bruschi has lined up at every linebacker position. In his early days with the Patriots, he was a cannonball on special teams.
''In terms of my career, I'm just a guy that will play wherever Coach Belichick asks me to play,'' said Bruschi, who is 6 feet 1 inch and weighs 247 pounds. ''This week, this year, next year, it may be a different position, but I'll play it. I've always been an interchangeable part of Coach Belichick's schemes. He's always put me in a position where I can play.''
Of Bruschi, defensive lineman Richard Seymour said, ''I've never seen a guy practice as hard as he does in two-a-days in training camp, so it doesn't surprise me what he does on game days.''
Bruschi said a strong mind was the most important attribute for succeeding under Belichick, but he also said a long season of studying and preparing could take its toll. To balance his life, Bruschi picks up an alto saxophone three times a week and tunes into other parts of his creative self.
Sore or not, he lets his fingers dance all over the keys, sometimes while listening to the magic of John Coltrane, Grover Washington Jr. or Kirk Whalum.
Sometimes when Bruschi plays, his mind drifts to his high school years, when he was such a good athlete that The Sacramento Bee ranked him No. 1 on its list of the Sacramento area's 100 best high school football players ever.
''Roseville is always on my mind -- in the front of my mind,'' said Bruschi, who recently ordered new shirts from his high school to wear.
Bruschi's love of music is becoming widely known. Two years ago, he performed on his saxophone as part of a quintet at Symphony Hall in Boston to benefit the Longy School of Music.
In addition to learning to play the tenor and soprano saxophones, Bruschi has tried to bring some variety to the Patriots' locker-room stereo.
''He's always playing that stuff,'' Seymour said.
Linebacker Willie McGinest said of Bruschi, ''I've never heard him play the saxophone, but we're going to tease him about it now that you told us.''
PRO FOOTBALL
