China began killing tens of thousands of birds in three provinces Wednesday to curtail the spread of the deadly avian influenza, while Asian government officials holding an emergency meeting in Bangkok pledged better cooperation and openness, partly in response to criticism that the initial outbreak was mishandled.
The strongest criticism has been leveled at Thailand, where officials have been accused of initially covering up the presence of the influenza to protect the chicken exporting industry. On Wednesday, the Thai prime minister, Thaksin Shinawatra, conceded that errors were made, and his spokesman predicted that some officials would be fired.
The spokesman, Jakrapob Penkair, suggested that state and provincial officials had failed to notify government leaders when the presence of the deadly H5N1 strain of type A flu virus was first detected. Thailand first publicly acknowledged the presence of the disease last Friday.
''Right now, we find that there was a lot of confusion concerning what kind of information and data to report upstairs,'' Mr. Jakrapob told The Associated Press.
So far, the flu virus has been confirmed in 11 people, 8 of whom have died, according to the World Health Organization. Officials have traced the human infections to direct contact with birds. In addition, infected birds have been discovered across Asia, prompting officials from Vietnam to Japan to order the cull of millions of chickens and other fowl.
China, thought by some experts to be the possible source of the influenza, confirmed the existence of flu in birds on Tuesday, though officials say China has yet to confirm any human cases. On Wednesday, state media and news agencies reported that tens of thousands of birds were killed in three provinces.
With Asian nations still nervously hoping to avoid another outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome, of SARS, the emergence of the bird flu has prompted widespread public anxiety. On Wednesday, regional government officials and health experts held an emergency meeting in Bangkok to formulate a regional response to a virus believed to be spread by migratory birds.
In a statement released after the conference, the Asian governments pledged to create a regional veterinary surveillance network and to ''promote rapid, transparent and accurate exchange of information and provide early warning.''
The statement also noted that travel restrictions were unnecessary because there was no evidence that the disease was transmitting from human to human but instead involved people who had come in close contact with infected birds. Health experts noted that if the disease were to mutate and cause humans to transmit the flu, the consequences could be dire.
Such a potential threat has prompted swift action by Asian nations, including various bans on imported chickens.
In Taiwan, the authorities asked thousands of farmers to be vaccinated against the virus. Health officials were reportedly distributing doses of flu vaccines to poultry and hog farmers. Government health officials said the strain of influenza found in Taiwan was less virulent, though an estimated 55,000 chickens were slaughtered as a precaution.
Meanwhile, a British weekly, New Scientist, cited unnamed health experts saying that the current influenza probably began in southern China a year ago, possibly as an unintended consequence of a vaccination campaign by poultry farmers hoping to prevent outbreaks.
The article said farmers used an inactivated H5N1 virus as a vaccine, a well-meaning but potentially flawed decision that might have caused genetic flaws that possibly could have allowed some birds to carry the influenza without showing symptoms.
