All Lurita Doan had to do was sign on the bottom line. It was early 2000, and Ms. Doan, who had founded New Technology Management 10 years earlier, had just been offered what some entrepreneurs in her field might consider the opportunity of a lifetime: a $22 million contract to supply hardware to the government.
The deal would have propelled her Reston, Va., company, with $14 million in revenue, into the big leagues and would have validated the sweat equity and 20-hour days that Ms. Doan had endured while building her business from scratch.
''I took a pass,'' Ms. Doan said.
And she has never regretted it. Just four years later, Ms. Doan's company is widely recognized as the leader in border surveillance technology, with 150 employees, hundreds of subcontractors and $212 million in annual contracts. It is the prime contractor for the Department of Homeland Security, providing and installing border surveillance systems in 35 land and sea ports of entry in the United States.
On any given day, there are 50 or more New Technology Management technicians working along the nation's borders. The company's technology includes secure wireless systems that border patrols can use to get access to law enforcement data to run background checks on suspect individuals. Crucial information that previously was rarely shared with border patrols, like an individual's arrest record, can now be checked instantly using the technology.
Ms. Doan credits the company's success to her never having wavered from her original business mantra: Stay focused on what you're good at, even if it means turning down lucrative offers.
''We've never been about selling hardware,'' she said. ''We're a very service-oriented organization. If we went down that path, churning and burning technology, we would lose our edge.''
That has been the guiding principle for Ms. Doan since she founded the company in 1990. A Vassar College graduate with a degree in Renaissance literature, Ms. Doan cut her teeth in the technology field by spending four years at Unisys as a technician working on Unix operating systems. But after she gave birth to her first daughter, she realized that she wanted something more.
''I wanted her to see me as someone who is directing her own destiny,'' Ms. Doan said.
Though she had no formal business experience, Ms. Doan comes from three generations of business owners. Her great-grandmother supported her family by selling pralines, her grandmother owned a business school and some rental properties and her father had his own insurance company. ''Having grown up around entrepreneurs, you have some basic understanding of what it takes to be successful,'' Ms. Doan said.
Not that it was easy. In the early years, she worked alone, often changing her title when meeting with clients to match the topic of their negotiations. Sometimes she was a senior systems manager; other times she was a chief executive.
''I did everything from working on site with a customer to doing the books to writing bids to do the business,'' she said. Most of her early customers were associations in the Washington area who needed data resurrected from their mainframe computers.
At first, revenue was so sparse she could not afford to take the subway and walked everywhere she went. Then, after struggling for three years, she got her first big break when she was a week overdue with her second child. A government contractor in Norfolk, Va., called to ask if she could help install Unix on some Navy aircraft carriers. She hesitated only for a moment. ''I said, 'Look, I'm really pregnant, so don't make me drive all of the way out to the hinterlands if you don't plan to use my services.' ''
The prospect put her on hold for about 20 minutes, she said, then told her the job was hers. She went to the site and spent 48 hours installing the system, then went to the hospital to have her baby.
The client ended up giving her a second and larger contract, worth $2.5 million. ''He told me, 'Any woman willing to delay labor and childbirth until she can get a solution in place is going to go the distance for us,''' she recalled.
In 1993, after sealing that deal, she hired four employees and began to search for even more challenging projects. In 1997, she got a call from the United States Customs Service, asking her to bid on a project to install digital cameras and other surveillance technology in Douglas, Ariz. The contract was worth only $17,000, but Ms. Doan said, it played to her company's strengths. And when she found out her bid was the only one, she realized she had found a niche where her company could be a major player.
As the company grew, Ms. Doan said she began turning down deals that did not mesh with the company's core competencies. ''As a small business, you have to fiercely conserve your resources,'' she said.
Andy Birol, president of Birol Growth Consulting, which is near Cleveland in Solon, Ohio, says Ms. Doan's strategy is a sound one. ''She understands that it's far better to be highly compelling to a few people than to be somewhat compelling to a lot of people,'' he said.
By the time of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, she had been actively engaged in the design and integration of border security and surveillance systems for four years, and New Technology Management quickly became a leading supplier to the Army, Air Force, United States Immigration and Naturalization Service, and other government entities, including the Department of Homeland Security.
Stacy Wright, director of the Thunder Mountain Evaluation Center in Fort Huachuca, Ariz., an equipment testing and evaluation center for the government, has been subcontracting work to New Technology Management for more than 10 years. ''I'm in such a specialized niche, it's hard to find technical people who understand my business,'' she said. ''Ms. Doan has those kind of people.''
Tim Peters, director of operations for New Technology Management's branch in Sierra Vista, Ariz., said he was attracted to Ms. Doan's company because it ''was clearly ahead of the curve'' in its area of expertise. ''She promotes an environment where we can invest in and test technologies in the very early stages,'' Mr. Peters said of his boss, ''so we can stay out in front instead of waiting for something to come online.''
A big moment for the company came on the Friday afternoon before Labor Day last fall. A customs official called Ms. Doan, she said, and practically begged her to send a team of technicians to the two-mile-long Ambassador Bridge that connects Detroit and Windsor, Ontario. President Bush was scheduled to meet Jean Chrétien, the prime minister of Canada, on the bridge the following Tuesday to demonstrate a new secure wireless technology that United States Customs had installed there. But the technology was not working properly and the people in charge of the event were frantic.
Within hours, dozens of Ms. Doan's employees were flying to Detroit and after landing there, they worked through three consecutive nights to install antennas atop the bridge. They had the system running at midnight on Labor Day, eight hours before the president's arrival. One technician was so excited that the team was able to fix the problem that he taped a New Technology Management business card to the bridge before he headed back home.
''You can't imagine how proud they were,'' Ms. Doan said.
SMALL BUSINESS
