As federal investigators pore through records they have subpoenaed about Gov. John G. Rowland's personal finances, one name will no doubt be familiar: Shared Technologies Cellular.
The company, now defunct, one of a handful of mostly small, speculative stocks that Mr. Rowland has reported owning while governor, is well known to prosecutors because of civil complaints and a government investigation into its hard-charging chairman, Anthony D. Autorino.
To some, Mr. Autorino is a hometown hero who made millions in telecommunications, created jobs in Hartford and became a major benefactor to civic causes. To others, he is a sullied street fighter whose deals have sometimes left banks and others holding the bag. Despite his history of run-ins with banking regulators and the loss of nearly $25 million in state funds invested in another company he ran in the early 1990's, Mr. Rowland gave him a leading role in the revitalization of downtown Hartford in 1997. The same year, in his annual disclosure filings with the state, Mr. Rowland first reported owning at least $5,000 worth of stock in a company that his aides now say was Shared Technologies Cellular.
Mr. Autorino went on not only to help draft a blueprint for Hartford redevelopment, but also to profit from a piece of it himself, through the state's decision in 1999, supported by the governor, to move a college into a building being developed by Mr. Autorino. Mr. Rowland, meanwhile, may have sold all or some of his stock in Mr. Autorino's company that year, as it did not appear on his later financial statements.
How much Mr. Rowland invested, and how much money was made or lost, is not clear because disclosure forms only require naming investments valued at $5,000 or more. His office declined to comment or explain what led him to invest and whether he ever discussed it with Mr. Autorino.
Reached on Monday, Mr. Autorino said he had few answers. ''Beats me,'' he said. ''This is the first I've heard'' that the governor owned shares in one of his enterprises.
Mr. Rowland's investment in Mr. Autorino's company is similar in some ways to previous instances now under scrutiny where his personal finances involved people doing business with his administration. Details about his investments were also among those records recently subpoenaed by the United States attorney's office.
Records show that Mr. Rowland and his wife, Patricia, have owned the occasional Connecticut blue-chip like UST, which they owned together, and U.S. Surgical, which he owned by himself. More than not, though, they favor companies with less name recognition, like Micro Warehouse in Norwalk, Conn.; General DataComm Industries in Middlebury, Conn.; and Edulink in Beverly Hills, Calif.
Given that the governor was making $78,000-a-year -- until last year, when his salary was raised to $150,000 -- and given his steep family obligations as a divorced father of three, the selection of stocks are more speculative than what is typically recommended.
As stocks go, Shared Technologies Cellular was always a runt. Its two main businesses were selling prepaid cellular phones to people with bad credit and renting mobile phones to people on the road. And while management had high hopes that prepaid phones would take off as they had in Europe, revenues peaked at $33 million in 2000. The stock climbed from the low single digits in 1997 to a high of $17 a share in April 1999 on speculation that it would benefit from a deal with WorldCom. When it did not, the stock tanked, and the company filed for bankruptcy in 2001.
''A man that doesn't have much money, why would he go buy Shared Technologies Cellular?'' asked Jeffrey Steiner, a wealthy investor who once controlled several seats on the board of Mr. Autorino's larger company, Shared Technologies Fairchild. Mr. Steiner also owned shares in the cellular company, but was better cushioned to take that gamble. Were his circumstances different, he said, Shared Technologies Cellular is ''the last thing I would buy.''
The annual statements of financial interests that Mr. Rowland files with the state provide few clues about his thinking. Though they show he never had more than a handful of individual stocks in his portfolio, Mr. Rowland reported owning thousands of dollars of stock in Shared Technologies Inc. in each of the years from 1997 to 1999. In fact, that company began operating under a different name, Shared Technologies Fairchild, as of 1996, and the governor's aides now say what he really owned was Shared Technologies Cellular, a subsidiary spun off in 1995. Mr. Autorino ran both companies.
Shared Technologies Inc. began by selling one-stop telecommunications services to tenants in office buildings where it had contracts. The company's largest investor, Mr. Steiner, pressed the company to put itself up for sale shortly after merging his own company into Mr. Autorino's in 1996. Shareholders eventually got $15 a share in cash in a 1998 sale, more than their shares had ever realized.
Mr. Autorino received at least $20 million for his stake, according to the proxy statement. William DiBella, his longtime business partner and a former Senate majority leader in Connecticut, received just over $1 million. Jo McKenzie, a close confidante of the Rowland family whose late husband had once worked for Mr. Autorino at United Technologies, was on the Shared Technologies Inc. board since 1991. She walked away with $368,000. After the sale, Mr. Autorino focused more of his attention on the cellular company. Though its own corporate filings warned that it was a ''highly speculative'' venture, people who got involved in it say they hoped it would ape the parent company's success. ''Tony had been very successful, and he was being touted as a smart guy in the telecom business, and I knew a lot of people who bought stock just because of Autorino,'' Mr. DiBella said in a phone interview. ''It was the buzz.''
In a phone interview, Mr. Autorino said he thought he first met Mr. Rowland when he ran for governor the first time, unsuccessfully, in 1990. Mr. Autorino said he considered Mr. and Mrs. Rowland ''close friends.'' Certainly, the few times Mr. Rowland has addressed Mr. Autorino's business dealings publicly, the governor has been supportive. Back in August 1999, when some people questioned whether the state ought to move the college into Mr. Autorino's building in light of his long-festering battle with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, Mr. Rowland said he was unconcerned. ''Everyone gets their day in court,'' he told The Associated Press. ''If he has problems with the F.D.I.C., as most developers do, we'll see what happens.''
What happened was not pretty, even if Mr. Autorino chalked it up as ''the one I've won.''
The F.D.I.C. had multiple lawsuits pending against Mr. Autorino over defaulted loans. Then, in June 1999, when he failed to pay a promissory note, it discovered that back in 1993 Mr. Autorino had Shared Technologies Inc. reissue to him stock certificates that had been pledged as collateral on loans. Though the shares had only modest value when Mr. Autorino originally put them up as collateral, he collected nearly $10 million by tendering the replacement certificates to the company that bought Shared Technologies Fairchild in 1998.
The F.D.I.C. referred the matter to the United States attorney's office, and Mr. Autorino was indicted last January of charges of trying to defraud the government.
In May, the case was dismissed by a federal judge, who concluded that the agency had civil remedies and therefore was not harmed in the way described in the indictment. Prosecutors have appealed.
Mr. Autorino declined to comment, other than to say ''there was principle involved.''
His lawyer, Stanley A. Twardy Jr., said that Mr. Autorino may have been confused about where his shares were back in 1993, when he signed an affidavit declaring that the old ones were lost or missing. ''His explanation was he made a mistake,'' Mr. Twardy said, ''and the bottom line is the government did not lose a penny.''
Mr. Autorino concedes that the same cannot be said for the State of Connecticut, which backed his ill-fated buyout of Colt's Manufacturing Company in 1990. Partly because the gunmaker's Connecticut roots run deep, the state poured $25 million of state pension money into the deal in what was described as a bid to save jobs.
Nearly all of it was written off when the company filed for bankruptcy two years later. About $210,000 of the state's money was also paid to Shared Technologies Inc. at the closing, when Mr. Autorino found it necessary to have Colt's repay his telecom company for expenses and interest -- incurred during the planning stages of the purchase. Asked about it, Mr. Autorino said that expenses were legitimate. ''It was all audited, and there was not one penny that went into my pocket,'' he said. ''So if it rankled somebody, good.''
