So a little snow fell.
All right, more than a little -- 10.3 inches in Central Park. That was hardly a record, but the city seemed to react as if it were. Schools closed. The United Nations shut down. Hundreds of airline flights were canceled. Even the Martha Stewart trial was called off for the day.
And as people watched soap operas or dozed through an unexpectedly lazy day, some scratched their heads and wondered what had happened to the city that never sleeps, that never stops. There was not, they said, that much snow outside.
''I think we wimped out,'' said Carol Peligian, an artist who lives in Manhattan and went to her studio in Long Island City, Queens, the same as always. ''We're getting soft. We're less hardy. If it seems just a bit too inconvenient, people opt out. I'm not a cold-weather girl, I don't love the snow, but if the subways are running, why not go on and go to work? I think we're overreacting to everything. Or maybe we're just tired and think we need an extra day off.''
On a day when the sky was the dullish color of a pewter plate and the weak sun never managed to brighten the slush at the nearest corner, New York dug out from yet another snowstorm. Snow accumulations in the city since December have totaled 37.1 inches, already making 2003-04 the fifth snowiest winter on record.
This storm, a fast-moving line of snow that Tim Morrin of the National Weather Service called ''a classic nor'easter,'' began as commuters were straggling home on Tuesday and continued until after they were due back at work yesterday. Two inches an hour fell in some parts of the New York metropolitan region, and northeastern New Jersey was hit hardest. The heaviest accumulation, 12.2 inches, was reported in Bloomingdale, in Passaic County, while Elmwood Park, in Bergen County, was covered under 11 inches. So were Stamford and Cos Cob, Conn.
Of the 10.3 inches recorded in Central Park, the amount that fell on Tuesday was 6 inches, half an inch less than the record for Jan. 27, set in 1894. But the 5 inches measured on Tuesday at Newark Liberty International Airport set a record there, the Weather Service said, easily topping the 1.9 inches recorded in 1963.
On major highways leading into the city, traffic slipped and slid, and the shoulders were lined with cars that gave out or whose drivers gave up. The storm was blamed for dozens of traffic accidents. The Associated Press said that two people died near Buffalo in a collision involving a tractor-trailer, and at least a dozen cars were caught in a pileup near Concord, N.Y. No one was injured.
The Sanitation Department, already $1 million over the $20 million budgeted for snow removal in 2003-2004 before the storm began, put 2,500 Sanitation Department workers on 12-hour shifts and sent them into the streets with 2,000 salt spreaders, snowplows and garbage trucks with plows lashed to the front.
''Anything that can have a plow attached to it that's movable, we had out,'' said Kathy Dawkins, a spokeswoman for the department. She said she had no estimates yet on what the department had spent.
Some residents woke up to the scraping noises in the street and figured that yesterday would be just another day.
Jeffrey Banks, a men's wear designer, said he arrived for an 8:30 a.m. meeting in the Condé Nast Building in Times Square, only to discover that it had been canceled.
''I didn't have trouble getting there,'' he said, ''and I think New Yorkers pull through. You have something you have to go to, you get there, weather be damned, which is why I thought everybody else would be there, too.''
There were New Yorkers who said, in effect: Ten inches of snow? No big deal.But there were those who said the city's routines had changed, that it had become less of a 24/7 kind of place, and that closing the schools reflected that.
''What's happened is a very real cosmic shift in the attitude of New York, and that is, much to the disappointment of 'The Apprentice' and Donald Trump, that business is not paramount,'' said Robbie Vorhaus, a communications strategist. ''What is paramount is concern and caution, not the old neurotic, fear-based caution, but a real, powerful, positive, caring caution that says, 'We don't know what the streets are going to be like, but they're not going to be good.'''
Yesterday was the city school system's first snow day since March 5, 2001, when Rudolph W. Giuliani was mayor and Harold O. Levy was chancellor. Yesterday was believed to have been only the third time since 1982 that schoolchildren were told the day before that they were getting a snow day.
Explaining the decision, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg cited the city's experience on Jan. 15, when the schools stayed open as 2 to 5 inches of snow fell and the temperature in Central Park dropped as low as 5 degrees. ''Last time, when we didn't close the schools, we had a 60 percent absentee rate,'' he said. ''You're not doing a lot of teaching, and we had a very high number of teachers who couldn't make it in that day.''
Schools Chancellor Joel I. Klein also said he had no second thoughts about calling off classes. ''All of the reports were clear,'' he said. ''Our families need to be prepared. You have got to make the tough decisions. We made the right one.''
But some parents, looking after children whose must-do activities for the day went from reading and writing to sledding and snowball throwing, were not so sure.
''I think the kids should definitely have gone to school,'' said Jennifer Hopkins of Brooklyn, who has two girls at Public School 154 and a 6-month-old daughter. ''It's hard to be cooped up in the house with all of them.''
Correction:  February 3, 2004, Tuesday  A front-page article on Thursday about the snowstorm in New York City referred imprecisely to this winter's standing in snowfall records. While it is the fifth snowiest through January, with 37.1 inches, it is not already the fifth snowiest winter over all; it is currently the 32nd.
