The first campaign staff members for Senator John Kerry did not set up shop in North Dakota until last Friday, putting him months behind Howard Dean and Gen. Wesley K. Clark, whose campaigns have been working the state since the fall.
But no one here seems able to say whether, in the end, that late start will really make any difference.
This is only the second time North Dakota has tried to play a crucial role in the early weeks of a presidential primary season. In 2000, the state switched from holding primaries in June to a quasicaucus system in March involving secret ballots at party-sponsored locations. But by the time those caucuses were held, turnout was low because Al Gore had already locked up the nomination.
How low was it? Try 2,000 voters -- in the entire state.
That was the reason party leaders decided to ignore their state's brutal winter weather and move the caucuses even earlier this year, joining the cluster of seven states voting on Tuesday. But with 96 caucus sites scattered across 70,704 square miles, many voters will need to drive an hour or more, and do so during a particularly fierce arctic spell.
How cold is it? Try 14 degrees below zero on Wednesday afternoon in Fargo. Figuring in wind chill, that's 40 below, with forecasters predicting only marginally higher temperatures by Tuesday.
''This has never really been done before,'' said John Marshall, state director for the Clark campaign. ''We're dealing with a universe no one knows about.''
Without question, North Dakota is Tuesday's half-forgotten stepsister. Only 22 delegates are at stake, compared with 74 in Missouri and 64 in Arizona. As a result, of the seven active Democratic presidential candidates, only three have even bothered to visit: General Clark and Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, came twice and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio once.
Senator Kerry, of Massachusetts, plans his first trip on Sunday. Representatives for Dr. Dean and General Clark said Wednesday that they hoped their candidates would make another visit before the caucuses, but that there were no firm plans.
In the meantime, Mr. Kerry's campaign is hoping that his victories in Iowa and New Hampshire will trump the groundwork that General Clark and Dr. Dean have laid.
General Clark has been particularly active. His has been the only campaign running television advertisements, though Mr. Kerry plans some this week. The general's campaign is also the only one to have sent mass mailings. And he was the only candidate to attend the state Democrat Party's Jefferson-Jackson dinner in early January, earning him a spot as the keynote speaker, to the consternation of the Dean campaign.
Dr. Dean has relied on a volunteer network of young people going door to door and dropping leaflets. But the Dakota winters can be brutal.
''We had people call in today and say they just couldn't go door to door,'' said Berrett Gall, who runs Dr. Dean's Fargo office. ''It's hard to blame them when it's 20 below.''
Delaware  Election Bellwether, But Not in Primaries
In 12 of the past 13 presidential elections, Delaware voters picked the winner. But as a primary state, its record is mixed, sometimes making a winner of the candidate who simply showed up more often than the others, as Steve Forbes did in 1996.
If that is the case this year, Mr. Lieberman might produce his best showing of the campaign year, capturing Delaware's 15 delegates. In addition to eight visits by Mr. Lieberman and members of his family and early advertising on radio, he has won the endorsement of major state Democrats, including Senator Tom Carper and two up-and-coming ones, Lt. Gov. John Carney and Jack Markell, the state treasurer.
Even so, Mr. Lieberman is hardly a sure bet. He faces a potential threat from the momentum generated by Mr. Kerry after victories in Iowa and New Hampshire and perhaps others from Dr. Dean and General Clark, whose campaign organizations have been working Delaware for several months.
''The biggest challenge for Lieberman is the big bounce from the victories by Kerry,'' said Joseph Pika, a professor of political science at the University of Delaware. ''I'm not so sure Lieberman's organization can do enough to overcome Kerry.''
Adding another element of uncertainty to Delaware is the lack of a state media market. Voters get their political commercials from television stations in Philadelphia, Baltimore and Salisbury, Md., which puts a premium on the kind of retail politicking that is so necessary in Iowa and New Hampshire.
That could work to Mr. Lieberman's advantage. Most of the other candidates do not plan to visit the state this week.
New Mexico  A Possible Done Deal Changes After Iowa
For much of the early primary season, Dr. Dean and General Clark appeared to be the leading contenders in a state that moved its primary from June to have its 26 delegates become more meaningful in the nomination process. But Mr. Kerry's recent success could upend those expectations. ''Iowa totally shocked us,'' said Brian Monaghan, the state party chairman. ''We never imagined Iowa happening like that. It looked like Dean was a done deal here'' with the amount of money he was spending.
Mr. Monaghan said the Dean campaign had advertised on television before anyone else and recently sent 95,000 pieces of mail to voters.
''So it looked like he had a very powerful organization, with more people and more offices,'' Mr. Monaghan said. ''But now we don't know. It's a really tough question.'' A recent poll by The Albuquerque Journal showed a large number of undecided voters, which polling experts attribute to the nature of the primary. The election is sponsored by the party, not the state, which means voters are casting only a presidential choice.
Past primaries have included state and local elections, making them attractive to New Mexico's Hispanic and American Indian voters who prefer casting ballots, he said, when more offices are at stake.
Oklahoma  Battle of Southerners To Claim Southwest
Even if many Oklahomans do not consider themselves to be Southerners, Mr. Edwards and General Clark seem to think they are. Mr. Edwards, from North Carolina, and General Clark, from Arkansas, have expended enormous resources in recent months to hold steady leads over the other Democrats in the field. Mr. Edwards has made 13 visits, more than any other contender; General Clark has stopped in a half-dozen times.
In contrast, Mr. Kerry made no appearances in the state before his victories in Iowa and New Hampshire. Nor had he opened a campaign office or set up much of a statewide ground organization.
Now, fueled by his recent success, Mr. Kerry began television advertising on Wednesday and plans a campaign appearance on Saturday, all to close a gap that has held steady since before the New Hampshire primary, showing his support to be in the high teens, with General Clark at 30 percent and Mr. Edwards in the low 20's.
But for Mr. Kerry, the efforts this week to claim Oklahoma's 40 delegates may be too little too late.
Jay Parmley, executive director of the Oklahoma Democratic Party, said General Clark and Mr. Edwards remained the primary's clear favorites, while Mr. Kerry and Dr. Dean could well see their votes suppressed by their absence.
Dr. Dean had an organization at work in the fall and even made several campaign appearances, Mr. Parmley said. But he has not visited since, leaving his supporters to wonder if he has given up on the state. They could be right. Dr. Dean is not planning to visit this week.
''Dean had a good ground game, and his people worked hard,'' Mr. Parmley said. ''But he hasn't been here since October and he's not coming this week. That's a big mistake.''
Jim Davis, a professor of political science at Oklahoma State University, predicted a race would come down to General Clark and Mr. Edwards, each benefiting from the rural and conservative nature of the state, and in General Clark's case, a large population of military voters.
That is, ''unless Kerry comes in and plays on his war record and the Big Mo,'' Mr. Davis said. ''Maybe he wouldn't win, but he'd beat Dean.''
Arizona  Taking It Seriously, Staying Undecided
While the race in Arizona once appeared as an all-but-certain showdown between Mr. Kerry and General Clark, now no bet would be safe, said Paul Hegarty, executive director of the state Democratic Party. The last statewide poll, taken by The Arizona Republic between the Iowa caucuses and the New Hampshire primary, showed about a third of the voters to be undecided.
''Arizona is still wide open,'' Mr. Hegarty said. ''Anybody could take this race.''
He said the high degree of uncertainty reflected a growing sense among Arizona Democrats that this primary season was as important as any in recent history and that choosing the right candidate to oppose President Bush was critical. Mr. Bush has visited Arizona six times in the past 15 months.
With 55 delegates at stake, all the top Democrats have invested heavily in the state with money and organization. Mr. Hegarty said the leaders were bunched so closely that sustained exposure in the state would make the biggest difference, especially among the large number of military voters who may be torn between General Clark and Mr. Kerry, a Vietnam veteran.
''This is one state that no candidate has an excuse not to win,'' Mr. Hegarty said. ''They've all been here many times since 2002, all have fulltime staffs and all but Edwards have offices.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: BATTLEGROUNDS
