Twenty years after the Super Bowl first became as big a day for advertising as it is for professional football, Madison Avenue is gearing up for what looks to be a cheerier, somewhat sillier and certainly more expensive version of the annual midwinter festival of commercialism.
The Ad Bowl within Super Bowl XXXVIII, to be broadcast on Sunday by CBS, will be infused with oversize servings of ingredients like humor, schmaltz, special effects and anthropomorphic animals.
Instead of the Budweiser horses bowing in the direction of ground zero as in 2002, a donkey will be shown dreaming of becoming a Clydesdale. And rather than Pepsi-Cola's sweet nostalgia of two years ago when Britney Spears danced and sang her way through the decades, the brand's newest commercial will serenade 16 teenagers sued by the recording industry for illegal file sharing with ''I Fought the Law (and the Law Won).''
For the privilege of appearing during the Super Bowl, companies including Anheuser-Busch, FedEx, General Motors, I.B.M., Monster Worldwide and Procter &amp; Gamble are paying an average of $2.3 million for a 30-second commercial, up from $2.1 million last year. But CBS will have no trouble selling out the commercial time for the game, even though the growing cost of a spot has drastically outpaced the inflation rate over the years. The game is almost always the most-watched television program of the year, expected to be viewed this year entirely or in part by a projected 130 million Americans. And in an era of shrinking TV ratings for the networks, the erosion of viewership in important categories like men ages 18 to 34 and the growing disdain for commercials as annoyances to be zapped, the Super Bowl is perhaps the only program with an audience that looks forward to seeing the commercials.
Just as in 1984, when Apple Computer and the Chiat/Day agency kicked off the tradition of spectacular, splashy spots made especially for the game, almost all of the 40 or so commercials to be shown by CBS will be new to viewers.
Not only will there be a battle between two erectile-dysfunction drugs, Cialis and Levitra, the Super Bowl will also bring a credit card competition, between MasterCard and Visa; a film fight among the Walt Disney, Sony Pictures, Universal and Warner Brothers movie studios; and an automotive altercation among brands like Cadillac, Chevrolet, Dodge and Mitsubishi.
And Apple is returning to the Super Bowl, in a partnership with the Pepsi-Cola division of PepsiCo, to give away iTunes music downloads.
The tone of recent years -- the dourness of the dot.com bust, the post-9/11 patriotism and the pre-Iraq- war jitters of last year -- will be lightened. Last year, viewers saw a federal antidrug commercial linking drug use and terrorism. On Sunday, they will watch the false teeth fly as an elderly couple wrestle over a bag of Lay's potato chips.
The perkier Super Bowl mostly reflects opinion polls showing an upturn in the national mood as well as data indicating what may finally be the arrival of the long-awaited economic recovery.
The appeal of advertising in the Super Bowl comes from reaching attentive consumers, who are of increasingly important value, marketers say, as the television landscape undergoes wrenching alterations. That has led advertisers to begin questioning their decades-long love affair with what has been the biggest, most important advertising medium.
''At the affluent end of the market, our customers have so many media choices, like the Internet, DVD's and 500 channels,'' said Mark LaNeve, general manager at the Cadillac division of General Motors in Detroit. ''But they take time out of their lives for 'big event' television like the Super Bowl, one of the few properties that exist today where people are still actually watching the commercials.''
Cadillac will be in the game for the third year in a row, Mr. LaNeve said, with an elaborate new spot by Chemistri in Troy, Mich., part of the Publicis Groupe, using special effects to show four 2004 models making waves, literally and figuratively.
''It would be incredibly inefficient if you did all your media buying this way,'' Mr. LaNeve said, referring to the price of a spot on Sunday, ''and every year we ask if the Super Bowl makes sense.''
''So far,'' he added, ''it has.''
Those advantages, marketers say, outweigh daunting concerns like Mr. LaNeve's over the rising cost to appear in the game or to produce the glitzy Super Bowl spots, which can total in the hundreds of thousands of dollars.
For Super Bowl I, in 1967, a 30-second spot cost about $42,000, or $239,167 in today's dollars, adjusted for inflation, according to Advertising Age. For Super Bowl XVIII in 1984, when Apple made ad history with a spot called ''1984'' that introduced the Macintosh PC, 30 seconds of ad time cost about $450,000 (or $833,584 in current dollars). This year, CBS will bring in an estimated $138 million for the game.
''When you're spending $2.3 million, you have to get more than just something to talk about in your boardroom or at a cocktail party,'' said Robert Passikoff, president of Brand Keys in New York, a brand and customer-loyalty research consultant.
''The question is not the audience, because you know you're getting the audience, so it's a matter of what you're doing to build sales and positive brand imagery,'' Mr. Passikoff said. ''It's a venue that works well for some advertisers and not for others.''
Also, many agencies find it difficult to produce commercials that can stand out amidst the cacophonous frenzy of selling that totals an eye-numbing 30 minutes during a typical Super Bowl. That results in substandard also-ran ads, which finish embarrassingly low in the many postgame surveys and polls of favorite, memorable spots like the USA Today Ad Meter. Among those derided for their bottom-dwelling last year: spots for Subway, Yahoo HotJobs and Gallery Furniture.
''The bar keeps getting much higher each year,'' said Steven Addis, chief executive of Addis in Berkeley, Calif., a brand strategy and design agency. ''Your commercial better be great,'' he added. ''It drives me crazy when people put on junk; they're better off not being on.''
Leonard Blum, vice president for sales and marketing at the Icos Corporation in Bothell, Wash., said, ''The goal isn't merely to entertain or generate a commercial people say they like.'' ''The goal is a commercial that will stick in people's minds, intrigue them, stand out by being uplifting, warm, emotional.''
Icos, with Eli Lilly &amp; Company, will run a new commercial to introduce Cialis, their prescription drug for erectile dysfunction.
''We like very much starting this way, in a venue associated with competition,'' Mr. Blum said of the Cialis spot, by Grey Worldwide in New York, part of the Grey Global Group. ''If the three erectile-dysfunction medications are profiled side by side by side, we're confident patients will appreciate Cialis's advantages.''
Another new drug in the category, Levitra, sold by Bayer and GlaxoSmithKline, will help make that comparison easier by running two new spots during the game, by the Quantum Group in Parsippany, N.J., part of WPP. (Viagra, the category leader, from Pfizer, is not scheduled to buy a commercial.)
''You're very thoughtful about the commercial you run because there are two games going on, the football game and the commercial game,'' said Abby F. Kohnstamm, senior vice president for marketing at International Business Machines in Armonk, N.Y. The I.B.M. spot, by Ogilvy &amp; Mather Worldwide in New York, part of the WPP Group, presents Muhammad Ali with an inquisitive child meant to represent the Linux open source operating system.
''Our commercial,'' she added, ''is a commercial for the Super Bowl,'' when viewers anticipate ''great spots.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
