It became easy to understand why the Royal Danish Ballet is such a beloved company when a troupe called Principals and Soloists of the ballet performed on Sunday afternoon at Brooklyn Center for the Performing Arts at Brooklyn College. These dancers filled the stage with choreographic sunshine.
The full Royal Danish Ballet, directed by Frank Andersen, appeared earlier this month in Washington. But this little group of its leading dancers, under Peter Bo Bendixen's direction, is giving performances of its own and can be seen again tonight at the New Jersey Performing Arts Center in Newark. Whatever the weather may be like outside, it will be spring inside the theater.
In Copenhagen the Royal Danish Ballet offers an eclectic repertory. But the major reason it delights audiences elsewhere is the choreography of August Bournonville (1805-1879), a great exponent of Danish Romanticism who developed an unusually vivacious style. The excerpts from his ballets that Mr. Bendixen's well-coached dancers offered proved delicious choreographic tidbits.
The pas de trois from ''Conservatory'' transported viewers back to a 19th-century dancing school. Its prize pupils were played by Caroline Cavallo and Claire Still, who moved with grace and delicacy, and the gallant Mads Blangstrup.
Bournonville's choreography for both ''Conservatory'' and the pas de deux from ''Flower Festival in Genzano,'' which was danced by Diana Cuni and Kristoffer Sakurai, abounded with light jumps. Bournonville favored such traditional ballet steps as the entrechat, a crisscrossing of the legs in the air, and the rond de jambe, a circular movement of the leg on the ground or in the air. As a result, his choreography appears inherently lively, and it was buoyantly danced.
A flirtatious pas de deux from ''William Tell,'' charmingly interpreted by Amy Watson and Thomas Lund, recalled robust folk dancing. At times the dancers were required to move in unison. Here and in similar passages in other ballets, Bournonville conveyed a sense of men and women united in harmony and equality.
As the elfin title character in a scene from ''La Sylphide,'' Ms. Cavallo skimmed across the stage, pursued by Nikolaj Hübbe, a Danish-trained principal dancer of the New York City Ballet who was appearing as a guest artist. Mr. Hübbe danced boldly, but a few steps looked unnecessarily rough-hewn.
The last of the afternoon's Bournonville selections was the pas de six and the tarantella from the third act of ''Napoli.'' This suite does indeed begin with six dancers. But dancer after dancer soon enters. At last there were 13 people on the Brooklyn stage, all bounding merrily.
Frequently in ''Napoli'' Bournonville has groups leap forward with arms extended in what resembles a welcoming gesture. His ballets often welcome audiences into realms of joy.
In addition to Bournonville, the program, to recorded music, included two contemporary ballets by the British choreographer Tim Rushton. The mysterious ''Nomade,'' to Arvo Part, began as a procession of spectral figures and then became an enigmatic pas de deux for Tina Hojlund and Mr. Blangstrup.
In Mr. Rushton's ''Triplex,'' to Bach, Ms. Cuni, Mr. Sakurai and Nikolai Hansen twisted their arms around their bodies and over their heads as if having animated gestural conversations. Despite an excess of coy wiggles in the finale, this was an amiable romp.
DANCE REVIEW
