Consider the giant bullfrog, but better from a distance. Vile tempered, toothy, carnivorous and the size of a medium pizza at adulthood, it bites hard enough to dent a broomstick. It has been known to lunch on rinkhals, a cousin of the cobra. It has attacked lions and even elephants when provoked. Kermit would disown it.
Briony Denny loves them. To the side of her brick split-level about 40 minutes outside Johannesburg, she has fashioned a narrow strip of wetland. After a heavy downpour, she tramps about in her black flip-flops, hoping one will make a rare appearance from its usual habitat a foot and a half to three feet underground.
This week, she caught three of them with a fishing net and allowed Caroline Yetman, a doctoral student in zoology at the University of Pretoria, to cut them open in the name of science. Under Ms. Yetman's direction, a veterinarian here inserted tiny transmitters under the frogs' skins in an effort to discover more about their natural habitat.
In the land of prowling cheetahs, submerged hippos and leaping antelopes, the giant bullfrog does not attract much notice. No khaki-clad tourists cruise in open Jeeps, hoping to spot one through binoculars.
South Africans in the poor northern provinces tend to view them as dinner. Richer South Africans notice them only when they show up in their swimming pools or squashed under the wheels of their cars. Even encyclopedias of frogs tend to focus instead on the exceedingly ugly African clawed frog or the mammoth goliath of Zaire, as big as a small cat.
Those are frog naïfs. ''Among people who follow frogs, it is a very interesting species,'' said Clayton Cook, a zoologist who has studied the bullfrog for 13 years. ''The goliath's only claim to fame is that it is a large frog. It doesn't have any of the character or behavior of the giant bullfrog.''
Only now that it is listed here as a ''near threatened'' species is the bullfrog gaining more attention. A tiny band of enthusiasts is trying to save it from the onslaught of houses and highways that have wiped out much of its habitat in prime breeding areas around Johannesburg and Pretoria.
A close look shows why the frog fascinates them. It can weigh up to four and a half pounds. It spends most of its life span of 35 to 40 years underground. In the dry season, it burrows under the mud, secreting mucous and shedding layers of skin until it has formed a hard cocoon, leaving an opening only for its nostrils. It can survive up to seven years like that, Mr. Cook said.
When enough rain falls to moisten and split the cocoon, the bullfrog surfaces, usually once a year around November, to eat and mate. Suddenly it is transformed from the frog kingdom's version of a couch potato to a kung fu fighter.
The biggest males stake out their mating territory and issue a low-pitched whooping sound to attract the females. The smaller males hang around the periphery, hoping to get lucky. ''They try to get anything that comes past,'' Mr. Cook said.
Contested, a big male can turn lethal, tossing its competitor into the air and tearing out huge chunks of skin with his sharp teeth.
Once the eggs are fertilized, the biggest males transform again from fierce studs to devoted dads. The females vanish and the males stand guard for several weeks as the eggs hatch and the tadpoles develop. That sets them apart from most frogs. ''It is very unusual for a frog to perform parental care,'' Ms. Yetman said.
If the water in the shallow pond becomes too warm, or a tadpole gets stranded, Mr. Cook said, the father frog will dig a channel to cooler or deeper water.
Clever, it would seem. But that same bullfrog can mount challenges that defy all logic. Mr. Cook said one giant bullfrog was videotaped in Botswana in the early 1970's trying to hold off a lion from a shallow pool. The lion allowed the frog to lunge madly for an hour, then got bored and squashed it, Mr. Cook said.
Still, when a giant bullfrog male was put in a tank with a venonous rinkhals snake with 17 baby snakes in a South African park, the bullfrog managed to devour all the youngsters -- and, by some accounts, the mother too.
All that bravery vanishes when a giant bullfrog is kept in captivity. Turned into a pet, as it is sometimes in the United States, it becomes simply another frog, only bigger.
That distresses frog-lovers like Ms. Denny. Her standards are high, even for an experiment. When Ms. Yetman's initial plan on how to outfit 10 frogs with transmitters fell through, and she had to organize another on the spot, Ms. Denny threatened to take her frogs home.
''You are not just going to mess them around and waste their time, are you?'' she demanded outside a veterinary clinic where the operations was initially scheduled. ''We have traumatized these poor frogs,'' she said, with feeling. ''I feel like I have let them down.''
But the next day, she watched with delight as her three bullfrogs, transmitting perfectly, were released into three-foot-high reeds in a wetland protected by a school.
''My frogs will be very happy here,'' she said, shoeless and soaked to the waist.
Midrand Journal
