Muhsin Muhammad squinted into the television lights and remembered how he thought those lights would always be there, tracing his whole career.
He was a rookie receiver for the Carolina Panthers then, in 1996, traipsing through his first season as if it were a field of daisies. The team, in only its second year as an expansion franchise, won 12 regular-season games, smothered the Dallas Cowboys in a home playoff game, lost in a frigid conference championship game at Green Bay, but felt more elation than disappointment.
''I thought it was going to be that easy,'' Muhammad said. ''It was like: 'O.K., we're going to win the Super Bowl next year. We're this good now, next year we'll be even better.' ''
Instead, Muhammad and the Panthers became a modern fable, the team that flew too close to the sun. The flames engulfed the next six seasons, bringing despair, waves of disappointments and real tragedies, more than seemed possible for one team in one unassuming city, a litany that included two murder trials, the fall of a franchise quarterback, crushing losing streaks and cancer diagnoses that started to feel like a curse.
''It is remarkable, that's all you can say,'' Muhammad said.
The unlikely end to those six star-crossed years will come when the Panthers play the New England Patriots on Sunday in Super Bowl XXXVIII at Reliant Stadium. The rebuilding started after a rock-bottom 1-15 season in 2001, when the Panthers hired General Manager Marty Hurney and lured Coach John Fox from the Giants, used their resulting high draft picks wisely and made a renewed effort to sign trouble-free players and deal with off-field issues quickly and sternly.
The final game of that 2001 season, a loss to, of all teams, the Patriots, came in front of 21,070 fans at Ericsson Stadium in Charlotte, N.C., and some of the fans wore paper bags on their heads. It was backlash in a city that had once ushered in its expansion team with a rally that packed downtown. Now, with the team reconstructed out of the ashes of 2001, the fans are back. A pep rally last Friday drew more than 50,000 people in the middle of a workday.
''To see and live the whole process has been a rich experience,'' Muhammad said.
He is not only one of two players who remain from the heady 1996 season, he was in the middle of all that followed. He saw the self-destruction of quarterback Kerry Collins, testified in two murder trials and endured the 1-15 season.
The downfall began in training camp in 1997, only months after that National Football Conference championship appearance, when Collins, the franchise's first draft choice, uttered a racist comment to some black teammates, including Muhammad, while they were celebrating the final night of training camp. It set off a year of internal turmoil, and in 1998, Collins was released.
In November 1999, Panthers receiver Rae Carruth was arrested for conspiracy to commit murder in the drive-by shooting death of his pregnant girlfriend, Cherica Adams. Before dying, she implicated Carruth in notes to a nurse. After a manhunt, the police found Carruth hiding in the trunk of a car off a Tennessee highway. He is serving a sentence of at least 18 years, a verdict that was upheld by an appeals court last summer.
In July 2000, Fred Lane, then the Panthers' career leading rusher and one of the team's most popular players despite his trade to the Colts two months earlier, was fatally shot in his doorway by his wife, Deidra, who later pleaded guilty to manslaughter and was sentenced last fall to nearly eight years in prison.
The team hit its on-field low in 2001, losing the final 15 games of the season to go 1-15. Many of the Panthers, despite all the other tragedies, said this week that they considered that record the franchise's low point.
But 2002 brought more fallout. The Panthers released their starting right tackle, Chris Terry, at midseason, after he failed to appear in court to face a charge of assaulting his wife. A week later, receiver Steve Smith was arrested for assault after punching Anthony Bright, a practice squad player, during a team meeting. Smith was suspended for a game and was ordered by the court to complete anger management counseling.
''Life is not a bed of roses,'' said the Panthers' owner, Jerry Richardson, who waged a successful battle with prostate cancer in 1996 and whose son Jon, who runs the football stadium in Charlotte, has fought malignant thymomas since 2000.
Jerry Richardson often summons troubled players to his house for a talking-to. ''One of the things that has made this team so strong is that we've had to deal with some difficult situations,'' he said. ''I've never beaten myself up over bad things that have happened because life's difficult. My life shouldn't be made any easier than anybody else.''
Still, by any standards, the Panthers have suffered inordinately. Carruth was the first active N.F.L. player charged with murder. Lane was a beloved teammate to many of the Panthers, who still struggle with his death.
And this season began with the wrenching news that the team's linebackers coach, Sam Mills, who also played for the original Panthers and is honored by the team with a statue outside the team's home field, is fighting intestinal cancer. Days before the diagnosis, linebacker Mark Fields told his teammates that he had Hodgkin's disease.
Their fight has helped galvanize this season's team. With all they have been through, the players could not think of any other way to handle it.
''With this football team, it's more than X's and O's,'' said safety Mike Minter, who has been with the Panthers for all of their nine seasons. ''We care about each other personally. We care about each other off the field. That's why when a tragedy like that happens, you can come closer together. We were already talking about that type of stuff. We're already talking about life-and-death situations. It just gives you an opportunity to reflect on what we've been talking about.''
Mills stayed in Charlotte for his latest chemotherapy treatment on Wednesday, before traveling here to coach in the Super Bowl. Fields, who is also finishing his chemo treatments, will be on the sideline as well.
Collins's story had its own heart-rending dip and happy ending. After he left the Panthers, he was cut by another team, the Saints. He struggled with an alcohol problem that led to an arrest for drunken driving. Then he resurrected his career with the Giants. He made it to the Super Bowl in the 2000 season, even sooner than the Panthers.
Now Collins is at his off-season home in North Carolina, his wife, Brooke, about to give birth to their first child, reflecting a bit on his own trials as well as the Panthers'. He said the expectations as Carolina's first quarterback were too much for him to bear at that age. He faltered under them.
''I think everything happens for a reason,'' Collins said. ''I learned a lot of lessons. Everyone did. I don't look back on those days with any bitterness. They went through a lot, too. They were a new franchise, so they learned a lot by trial and error. They have things back on track.''
And Muhammad is still here, remarkably, staring into the lights he thought would never leave. He has testified in two trials, for Carruth and against Deidra Lane. He kept earning a roster spot, even through the 1-15 debacle. He made it to the Super Bowl, just a lot later than he expected.
Collins will watch the game from home. Carruth, who declined to be interviewed for this article, is in prison. Lane still lingers in the hearts of many of his teammates.
''I think it makes it even that much sweeter,'' said Muhammad, who recently read a magazine article rekindling Lane's story. ''It just brought back a lot of old memories when Fred was here and there were a lot of things this team went through and this organization went through. For us to be in the position we are in, we are blessed and we are happy.''
PRO FOOTBALL  Correction:  January 30, 2004, Friday  A sports article yesterday tracing the Carolina Panthers' path to the Super Bowl misstated the number of years the safety Mike Minter has played for the team. This is his eighth year, not his ninth.
