Surprise, Barbara! This Party's for You!
It is a measure of MEREDITH VIEIRA, her husband, RICHARD M. COHEN, and their children, BEN, GABRIEL and LILY, that the party they held for Mr. Cohen's new book was, like the book's subject, sweetness and light, grit and vinegar.
Mr. Cohen's book, titled ''Blindsided: Lifting a Life Above Illness: A Reluctant Memoir,'' is an account of his recent treatments for colon cancer as well as his 30-year struggle with multiple sclerosis, which, among other ailments, has blinded him in one eye. During those decades, Mr. Cohen has had a thriving career as a television journalist and producer, courted and married Ms. Vieira, and helped raise their family.
On Tuesday night, hosts of ''The View'' -- JOY BEHAR, STAR JONES and ELISABETH HASSELBECK -- as well as other friends and family gathered at Docks Oyster Bar on the Upper West Side to celebrate Mr. Cohen's book.
Everyone milled around until BARBARA WALTERS, primus inter pares on ''The View,'' arrived. The speeches could begin. Up first, Ms. Vieira said her husband had written a courageous book allowing that ''he can be a jerk, no doubt about it, but he has the ability to be completely honest and open about himself.''
Then, JANE FRIEDMAN, chief executive officer of HarperCollins, said the couple planned to appear on CHARLIE ROSE and on CNN as well as in People magazine.
A clearing of the throat from the audience. ''Excuse me!'' Ms. Walters shouted. Wasn't Ms. Friedman forgetting Ms. Walters's exclusive interview with the couple on ''20/20'' tomorrow night at 10 o'clock?
Ms. Friedman sputtered good naturedly, ''You didn't let me get to it!'' And Ms. Vieira hollered, ''Surprise, Barbara! This party's for you!''
Then Ms. Vieira talked about being interviewed by her boss for national television and how it was like an ''out-of-body thing, where I was floating above myself and going, 'Geez, she's good!' ''
The children spoke. ''I know,'' said Gabriel, 12, looking at his father, ''how hard you've worked in the past year and I just want to say I'm really proud to be your son.'' Many ahs, much applause, some sniffles and tears threatening to spread.
Lily, almost 11, glanced around the room and felt mischievous. ''Well,'' she said, ''I think it's really cool that Dad wrote a book and it's like, I'm really happy for him, but he's still really ugly.'' Oh, that Cohen family.
Mr. Cohen, frail and walking with a cane, gave a brief speech, thanking his family and friends. In summary, he said, ''If each of you could buy 760 books, I'd be O.K.''
Laughter, cheers.
Our Boldface correspondent buttonholed Ms. Walters as she bolted for the door.
How about Ms. Vieira taking over ''20/20'' now that Ms. Walters plans to leave in September?
''I think Meredith's plate is full,'' Ms. Walters tersely replied. Maybe not. Would Ms. Vieira like to take over ''20/20''?
Ms. Vieira, also the host of ''Who Wants to Be a Millionaire,'' responded, ''I never say no to any opportunities, as you can tell from my weird career,'' adding, ''A part of me really misses news.''
Yogi Berra Wrestles With English, and Wins
A Mount Olympus of baseball Boldface Names descended on Tuesday night for the Baseball Assistance Team dinner, which raises money for needy players and their families.
BOBBY THOMSON, RALPH BRANCA, JUAN MARICHAL, BROOKS ROBINSON, GRAIG NETTLES and BOB GIBSON were among the legends at the Marriott Marquis Hotel.
But it was WHITEY FORD, the Hall of Famer, who contributed to baseball lore that night by adding to the canon of YOGI BERRA, the most eminent of the baseball philosophes.
DON MATTINGLY, Mr. Berra and Mr. Ford were at an Old Timers Day at Yankee Stadium and the scoreboard flashed a list of prominent people in baseball who could not attend the game because they had passed away.
The trio walked off the field, and Mr. Berra turned to the others and said, ''Boy, I hope I never see my name up there.''
with Paula Schwartz and Joe Brescia
Boldface Names
