A double take is understandable. It's not every day a lesbian of such eclectic attributes -- Kelli Carpenter O'Donnell meshes Sharon Stone-esque platinum punk chic with peachy keen Southern belle manners -- sinks into a leather chair beneath a theater poster featuring a male with unmistakable cleavage, and a titillating title, ''Taboo, '' then calmly dissects her life and partnership with the beleaguered celebrity she calls ''Ro.'' As in Rosie O'Donnell, of talk show, comedy, courtroom, theater, film and, starting with a July cruise to the Bahamas, travel service repute. In a shared business venture, Rosie and Kelli O'Donnell are promoting R Family Vacations, which caters to a gay and lesbian clientele -- and their offspring.
It's an idea whose time has come; at least Ms. Carpenter O'Donnell, 36, who plays bad cop to Rosie's good cop when it comes to disciplining their brood of four, hopes so. A documentary on the trip is planned. Reservations, at $899 per adult passenger, are flowing in. Ms. Carpenter O'Donnell's marketing degree, and expertise, is being tested daily; if she could sell Pepsi, Coke and Kellogg's cereal, vacations with a New Age social conscience should be a breeze. No frown lines mar her pretty face.
She primly crosses her black-booted feet and smiles the unmistakably pearly smile of, yes, a dentist's daughter. Daddy taped dental floss to the steering wheel of her car each morning to remind her to floss before school and was none too pleased to discover her sexual orientation after sneaking a peek in her diary when she was 16. After she departed Louisiana for Southern Methodist University, her parents also enrolled her in a three-year workshop aimed at deprogramming her homosexuality. (Didn't work.)
Whew, there's a mouthful of backdrop info. Anyway, it's Leigh Bowery's cleavage in that disruptive poster, and Boy George looks pretty much the same in Rosie's ''Taboo,'' the Broadway musical that infamously sucked in her entire $10 million investment, semi-bombed, and is scheduled to close in 10 days: ''I think it's been a labor of love and an expensive learning experience for her, but like my mama says, you just pick yourself up by your bootstraps and keep on walking,'' says Ms. Carpenter O'Donnell.
And that's not Rosie's only business imbroglio. Both were rattled -- Kelli dropped nine pounds -- last fall while Rosie fought a $100 million lawsuit filed by her former business partners at Gruner &amp; Jahr USA Publishing, the publisher of her magazine, Rosie, now defunct; the trial ended Nov. 12, with damages yet to be decided. Their year-old daughter, Vivi (Kelli was impregnated by an anonymous sperm donor) took her first steps while they were stuck in court. Denied spousal privilege, Kelli endured a deposition and had to turn over private correspondence Rosie had written to her as she and the publisher battled for creative control of the magazine. Ugly.
The perceived privacy invasion provoked her participation in the gay marriage dialogue. ''Before we went to trial, I always kind of wondered why gays wanted to be married,'' says Ms. Carpenter O'Donnell, who legally changed her name in December 2002, the better to sign off on parenting paperwork for the kids. ''But we clearly lost a right, and the fact that they could humiliate us with something so private became a rallying point for me. Call it legal union or coupling or whatever, but it baffles me that some people are so against us having that right.''
Besides creating their version of a six-member nuclear family, she and Rosie are, for the first time, in business together, with R Family Vacations. ''There's something empowering about being with your own, quote-unquote, people. It's an important validation I believe our kids need to experience, that they aren't the only ones with two mommies or two daddies. But everybody, grandparents and friends and relatives, straight or gay, is welcome. To me, it's the way I wish the world was like.''
The first cruise departs New York in July. If it succeeds, they intend to offer ski, safari and other vacations. Rosie will emcee the entertainment. Kelli's parents and married sister are coming, as are Rosie's two best high school pals.
Meantime, the O'Donnell with the steadier temperament and the marketing knack -- she was the marketing director at Nickelodeon when they met -- will keep to the sidelines. These days she works from an office in Nyack, just down the street from their farmhouse, cooks dinner five nights a week, and gets the kids off to school in the morning. Rosie, a night owl, picks them up after school. They employ nannies, but no live-in help; they tried it, but she says it felt like living with a chaperone. Too crowded.
''I never wanted to be famous,'' she says, relaxing in this borrowed office at her partner's Midtown firm, One Canvas Productions, ''and growing up gay in Baton Rouge, if I could have been invisible, I probably would have preferred it. I'm not the funny one in this couple, and I have no interest in her turf. If she was as manic in private as she is in public, it would give me a headache, but she's not. She's smart, and a little bit dark. I wouldn't want to be with somebody who's just like me. I believe that in each couple, there's a gardener and a flower. I'm definitely the gardener, keeping things on track, and Ro takes great pride in being the flower.''
When a secretary breaks in over an intercom, Ms. Carpenter O'Donnell says she's in a meeting and can't be disturbed. ''But Rosie needs you,'' the voice implores. ''See?'' says Ms. Carpenter, whisking out the door in gardener mode. ''Don't worry, I'll take care of this and be right back.'' She does. And she is.
PUBLIC LIVES
