Time Warner said yesterday that it returned to a profit in the fourth quarter, reversing a loss in the period a year earlier, on the strength of its film and cable businesses, but its America Online unit continued to struggle.
Even though AOL has been dropped from the company's name, the results for the quarter and full year make it clear that Time Warner's ability to stabilize the troubled division will play a large part in determining the company's performance in 2004.
For the fourth quarter, Time Warner posted net income of $638 million, or 14 cents a share, in contrast to a loss of $44.9 billion, or $10.04 a share, in the period a year earlier. Revenue rose 6.3 percent, to $10.9 billion from $10.25 billion.
The results in last year's quarter included a $44 billion write-down related to America Online. Excluding that write-down and other one-time items, operating income before depreciation and amortization in the latest period declined 2 percent, to $2.4 billion. All the figures exclude the results of the Warner Music Group, which the company has agreed to sell to an investor group led by Edgar Bronfman Jr.
For the full year, the durable magic of ''The Lord of the Rings'' helped Time Warner finish with its first annual profit since it merged with AOL in 2001. Operating income in 2003, before interest, taxes, depreciation and amortization, rose to $8.5 billion on revenue of $39.6 billion.
Shares of Time Warner fell 85 cents, or 4.5 percent, to $17.96, on a day when the market was down over all.
At the beginning of last year, Richard D. Parsons, chairman and chief executive of Time Warner, said that 2003 was going to be a ''reset year'' for the company, which stumbled badly after merging with AOL. That transaction and subsequent performance left the company with a debt of $25.8 billion at the end of 2002. The company announced a two-year plan to bring its debt below $20 billion, an objective that will be reached a year early when it completes the sale of its music group in the coming weeks for $2.6 billion.
''Our fourth-quarter results were in line with our expectations,'' Mr. Parsons told analysts. ''And we achieved all of our full-year financial objectives.''
One highlight for the quarter was the film division, bolstered by ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King,'' which has generated $875 million worldwide at the box office so far. Revenue rose 17 percent, to $3.38 billion, while operating income rose 6 percent, to $341 million.
With its debt reduction complete, Mr. Parsons suggested that the company had moved from being the hunted to a hunter, although he declined to be specific about any potential areas of acquisitions.
The company has been investing significantly in its existing properties, including advertising heavily in the last quarter of the year to promote the latest version of the America Online software. Still, revenue at the unit fell 7 percent, to $2.2 billion, in the latest quarter and it lost 400,000 subscribers. AOL now has 24.3 million subscribers in the United States, down 2.2 million over all in the last year.
''One of the biggest concerns continues to be the loss of subscribers at AOL,'' said Jessica Reif Cohen, an analyst at Merrill Lynch. ''But the underlying trends at the company are good. They have restructured their balance sheet a year ahead of schedule and have the flexibility to go shopping or invest in their business.''
Mr. Parsons said that the company continued to believe that the growth of broadband customers and careful management of costs at AOL would help the unit increase its profits. But AOL will have to pedal fast just to stay in place. Broadband has been catching on -- the service added 400,000 customers in the last quarter -- but that only fills half the hole left behind by the departure of 800,000 dial-up customers. And because customers who get access to the Internet through broadband connections generally subscribe to AOL services at lower rates, keeping revenue steady will be difficult.
At the company's cable division, revenue rose 9 percent in the quarter, to $2 billion, while operating income improved to $377 million. Advertising revenues were down 30 percent in 2003, while subscription revenue rose 13 percent for the full year, driven in part by growth in high-speed data and digital video services. Company executives acknowledged that the cable division was being pressed by satellite services in various markets but said that they expected Internet-based phone service to help fend off the threat. The company expects to make the service available in 6 local cable systems by the end of the first quarter and in all 31 by the end of the year.
At Time Inc., the publishing unit, revenue rose 3 percent in the fourth quarter, but operating income fell 11 percent, to $261 million, in part because of the loss associated with selling Time Life, the unit's record club division. And while revenue at the company's networks, which include Turner, HBO and WB, were up 4 percent, to $2.2 billion, operating income fell 11 percent, to $545 million.
''There are really two companies now: Time Warner and AOL,'' said John Tinker of Blaylock &amp; Partners. ''Time Warner is doing great. Publishing is a little disappointing and movies will be up against tough numbers next year because they did so spectacularly this year, but Time Warner is back.
''But we are hitting a moment of truth with AOL, where the company really is going to be testing whether they can come up with the kind of content that people are willing to pay a premium for.''
The earnings announcement was a remarkable contrast to last year's event, where analysts learned that the company was going to take a $44 billion charge to adjust for the loss of value in AOL. Mr. Parsons found himself defending a company that had very little credibility with analysts or the investing public, and he was cautious in promising what the company could deliver.
''He and the rest of top management have had to crawl through every piece of the business, and I think it shows,'' said Tom Wolzien, an analyst at Sanford C. Bernstein &amp; Company. ''They have solved the debt problems and have the basic Time Warner businesses running well. The focus has to be on AOL, which still has the potential to jack up this business with growth. Otherwise, it will continue to be a mature, slow-growth media company.''
