The head of NASA has told a United States senator that he stands by his decision to cancel any space shuttle mission to extend the life of the Hubble Space Telescope.
The official, Sean O'Keefe, the administrator of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, was replying to a request from Senator Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrat of Maryland. He said in a letter to her that his decision to cancel a human service mission to the telescope would stand because he considered the risk too high for astronauts.
Mr. O'Keeffe has canceled a scheduled mission to refurbish the telescope to keep it operating until 2010 or later.
The administrator said his decision was based not on budget considerations, but on concerns that such a shuttle mission placed astronauts at added risk.
Ms. Mikulski, whose state is the home of two major Hubble service institutions, the Space Telescope Science Institute in Baltimore and NASA's Goddard Space Flight Center, asked Mr. O'Keefe to reconsider. The senator, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Appropriations subcommittee that oversees the space agency, also called for it to appoint an independent panel of experts to review the merits of a service mission to the telescope.
In a Jan. 26 letter to Ms. Mikulski, a copy of which was provided to The New York Times, Mr. O'Keefe said he would stand by his decision. He also said he would not appoint a panel to review it.
''In the end, I cannot delegate my ultimate responsibility for decisions related to the safety of human spaceflight to any panel of experts, no matter how distinguished,'' he wrote.
Ms. Mikulski's office declined to comment on the letter.
Glenn Mahone, a spokesman for the space agency, said Mr. O'Keefe stood by his remarks in the letter but had agreed to meet with the senator to discuss the issue.
When space shuttles, grounded since the Feb. 1 loss of the Columbia and its crew, start flying again, all missions are to be to the International Space Station. To comply with safety recommendations from the board that investigated the Columbia accident, NASA has decided to use the space station for observing shuttles for possible damage and to serve as a haven for crews if an orbiter must be abandoned in an emergency.
In his letter, Mr. O'Keefe restated his contention that a Hubble mission would require new and unique procedures that, taken individually, were surmountable but that in the aggregate were risks significantly higher than a shuttle mission to the space station. The total risk, he said, ''I have determined is too high.''
Mr. O'Keefe said the telescope should continue to operate until 2007 or 2008, and he challenged its operators to find ways to keep it going until a replacement instrument was launched.
