AMONG the last things you might expect to find in Astoria, Queens, a few blocks from the Greek grocery shops, Italian salumeria and Mexican-Iranian supermarkets, are two young French women in what looks like an outtake from an Eric Rohmer movie, up to their elbows in expensive French textile paints, painting fabrics that will end up on runways for Carolina Herrera and Catherine Malandrino during Fashion Week in New York.
The women, Astrid de Saint Anthost, 31, founder of Le Studio Anthost, and her associate, Vanessa Morel, 28, have also done couture work for Bill Blass and Vera Wang. Ms. de Saint Anthost, who lived in Paris before coming to New York in 1997, worked with Atelier Dynale, a small couture fabric house, on collections for Dior, Givenchy and Jean Paul Gaultier.
Le Studio Anthost's latest enthusiasm is home design. It has created fabrics for Robert Couturier, the decorator, and for other designers. There is also an expanding line of products like place mats and painted fabric by the yard, available at Baltzell, a store in Philadelphia. The studio will create, on commission, original designs.
''I'm not interested in clothes,'' said Ms. de Saint Anthost, when asked why she was segueing into décor. (She appeared to have the Frenchwoman's innate ability to wear a sweater and scarf to maximum effect, and she was working in a black leather apron.) ''With fashion, the imagination cannot go as wild as with a design,'' she said. ''Everything has to be soft with fashion. Everything. But for interior design, you can play with texture.'' She and Ms. Morel are experimenting with sand, glue and leaves, after a recent trip they took to Mexico. Pictures of the holiday, including photos of them in bikinis painting fabric outdoors in exotic locales, paper one wall of the studio like a scrapbook. ''We brought a suitcase with all the paint,'' Ms. Morel said.
There are also pictures of Jean-Paul Belmondo marrying Catherine Deneuve, Van Gogh's cherry blossoms and Gaston Lagaffe, a comic book character popular in France.
The studio, a squat ground-floor space near a procession of colossal concrete train trestles, could be a beach shack on the Côte d'Azur. Ms. de Saint Anthost, who is Parisian, and Ms. Morel, who is Niçoise, paint at a large worktable beneath a web of clotheslines with fabric clothespinned to them like drying maillots. There is a tin shower tub in one corner, with explosions of paint in it, where the silk-screens for printing patterns are washed. Ms. de Saint Anthost and Ms. Morel also paint freehand, block-print with scrap wood, etch velvet with acid and emboss silk with a soldering iron.
The studio's gray copying machine, where they super-size photos for patterns, looks like a Jackson Pollock. The computer is crowned, like a Latin American saint, with silk flowers.
Ms. de Saint Anthost studied at Atelier de Sèvres in Paris, an art academy, but was discouraged from pursuing art because she was told she couldn't draw.
Pas de problème, as the French say.
''I started painting with fabric,'' Ms. de Saint Anthost recalled without regret. ''Fabric is alive. It moves. You can play with the light, with the sun, with the shadows. A painting is flat. A painting doesn't move.''
Working with Atelier Dynale, Ms. de Saint Anthost, who has an American passport (her mother is Texan), resolved to start her own business and moved to New York, where she felt the venture would be easier.
Ms. de Saint Anthost and her husband, Salvatore Farruggia, an air-conditioning engineer whom she met here, also live in Astoria, two subway stops from the studio.
''I worked for one year in the living room, then my husband kicked me out,'' Ms. de Saint Anthost said. Mr. Farruggia is the cook in the family, Ms. de Saint Anthost explained on a short trip to their apartment, and by the looks of his kitchen, not interested in chaos in the service of art.
Le Studio Anthost is not cheap. Its couture work is couture, not ready-to-wear, and not accidentally.
''We are not mass production; not at all,'' Ms. de Saint Anthost said firmly. The fabric for a dress, with a one-of-a-kind design by the studio, can cost over $5,000, with ease.
It is the price, and hopefully the pleasure, of originality. In the world of décor, the studio's work continues a small but valuable tradition of artists who have left their artistic mark with designs on fabric. They include Leslie Tillett and D. D. Tillett, husband and wife, whose work in the 1950's and 60's decorated the homes of William and Babe Paley, Jacqueline Kennedy Onassis and others. Fashion designers and interior decorators create their edge with artisans like Ms. de Saint Anthost.
''It's very strong, like fashion fabrics,'' Mr. Couturier, the decorator, said of Ms. de Saint Anthost's work. ''It's an interesting take, when used in interior design.''
Still, Ms. de Saint Anthost's chosen career is not without risk. She said that she nearly closed last year because of an outstanding payment of $26,000 for a dress for Bill Blass. Hervé Pierre Braillard, the designer who commissioned the work, was fired with Lars Nilsson, the company's head designer, shortly after the presentation of the fall collection for 2003, leaving a verbal commitment to Ms. de Saint Anthost in the breach. She was eventually paid $18,000, a figure she agreed to, a company spokeswoman said.
The studio's items for the home are intended to offer a more comfortable range of services and products, and prices. A set of four place mats is $140 at Baltzell (www.baltzelldesign.com).
The studio charges $600 to create a design that will be executed by silk-screen. Depending on the size of the screen and frame, which is determined by the size of the pattern, constructing the silk-screen will cost $200 or $1,600. Ms. de Saint Anthost's couture clients provide the fabrics. They are tested for compatibility with various paints to ensure that cleaning will not destroy the art. That research and any changes to the designs are billed additionally at $80 an hour. (The silk-screen remains archived, its use exclusive to the client who commissioned it.)
What that money might buy could be a wet-looking burst of ocher, part sea creature, part Roman candle, stamped by Ms. Morel with a sponge. Or a lichen magnified from a book of black and white botanical photographs and infused like tea with small blossoms of color.
There is no one in the studio to say no to Ms. de Saint Anthost or Ms. Morel, and it seems unlikely that they say no to each other. Ms. Morel is an only child, and Ms. de Saint Anthost is the youngest of five, ''a little bit the 'black duck,' '' she said of her place in the family.
She recalled her teacher at art school telling her, apropos of her visual skills: ''You have nothing to do. You should go into language, communications.''
It was the best possible advice to ignore.
