Scott Stringer is suddenly a winner. As a state assemblyman from Manhattan, Mr. Stringer is not normally one of the state's higher-profile politicians. But he happens to be the first elected official in the state to endorse Senator John Kerry. Which makes him look very smart. Today.
Not long ago, Mr. Stringer endured the snickers and condolences of his friends and colleagues for having put his early money on what surely seemed like the wrong horse. But now Mr. Stringer is riding a wave that has not only turned the national campaign for the Democratic nomination for president on its head, but has also transformed presidential politics in New York.
Suddenly, many of those dozens of politicians who wagered on Howard Dean are sounding a bit defensive. Those who threw their support to Mr. Kerry of Massachusetts and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina are sounding a bit more assured. And suddenly many people contend that the New York primary, on March 2, might well matter in the race to select a Democratic candidate to run against President Bush in November.
''Look, the signs get more and more clear that the New York primary could make a real difference,'' said Senator Charles E. Schumer, Democrat of New York, who has not endorsed any of the candidates. ''It looks like there is not going to be a quick victory -- next Tuesday could prove me wrong -- but it looks like this is going to go on for a while. That means that New York should play a prominent role.''
The change in the campaign profile, with each of the top-tier candidates insisting he is still viable, means that New York voters can count on seeing more campaigning here than had been expected. Aides to some of the candidates are saying that Super Tuesday, the day of the New York primary, will be the dividing line between life and death in the quest for the Democratic nomination.
''I think New York will become a very big battleground,'' said Ethan Geto, New York State director for Dr. Dean's campaign. ''No one is going to run the table. It's going to be a contest for delegates.''
New York's primary is on the same day Democratic voters caucus in Minnesota and go to the polls in California, Connecticut, Georgia, Maryland, Massachusetts, Ohio, Rhode Island and Vermont. In all of the races before that day, candidates will have divvied up 895 delegates. Then, on that one day, 1,151 delegates are at stake, with California having the most, 370, and New York the second-most, 236. A candidate needs 2,162 delegates to win the nomination.
But even with its huge number of delegates, Super Tuesday -- with New York in tow -- appears to be losing some power this election season.
During the last primary season, in 2000, there were no Democratic contests between New Hampshire and Super Tuesday. But this year, hoping that a consensus candidate would emerge sooner, Democratic leaders moved 19 state contests into the gap. The new calendar, combined with what initially looked like an unstoppable Dean express, had many people thinking that, at best, New York would be a rubber stamp for a pre-ordained front-runner.
But now struggling Democratic candidates may look to New York and California for salvation, and Mr. Kerry may hope for confirmation.
While Dr. Dean hopes to get a boost from the 70,000 volunteers Mr. Geto says the campaign has recruited in New York, Mr. Kerry and his relatively small band of New York followers are planning a more aggressive effort than they had earlier.
Mr. Edwards's supporters say he is planning a number of personal appearances, while Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator Joseph I. Lieberman may to try to hang on, hoping that the support they have in New York will help rejuvenate their prospects.
''I think it's evident now that March 2 is the most likely date for everything to be sorted out,'' said Councilman Bill DeBlasio of Brooklyn, one of the first to back Mr. Edwards' candidacy and one of the few elected officials from New York City to do so. ''I think it will become very competitive,'' he said. ''We are going have a huge Edwards effort in New York.''
Whether New Yorkers can expect a barrage of television and radio commercials and direct mail depends on how much money the candidates have coming into that round of the race. The Dean camp plans to have its volunteer troops go door-to-door to promote him and get out the vote, a technique that will also be important to the other campaigns.Local officials who threw their support behind a candidate will also be out front pressing their case.
In addition to making New York a potentially important primary state, the changing dynamic has highlighted some of the more parochial realities of presidential politicking.
Many officials have lined up behind presidential contenders, and while each said the choice was based on a sincere feeling that a particular candidate was the best, the choice often was as much about the official's own political needs, strategists and elected officials said.
Thomas Manton, for example, chairman of the Queens Democratic Party, threw his support behind Dr. Dean and brought along many city, state and federal officials, despite some grumbling among some rank-and-file party members in his area. But even if Dr. Dean does not win the nomination, Mr. Manton and his colleagues still have won the gratitude of some powerful labor unions, a key calculation in their decision, political observers said.
''Certainly the labor piece came into play,'' said Michael Reich, spokesman for the Queens party. But, he added: ''Tom was impressed with Dr. Dean, bringing new blood in, using the Internet. We looked at it as he was showing the passion needed to win. That is what we were looking for.''
For officials like Mr. Stringer, it could also mean the difference between attending the Democratic National Convention in Boston this summer as a delegate or having to jockey for a free pass..
When voters go to the polls in New York, they will not only be asked to choose their candidate, but will also to help select some of the individual delegates who will go to the convention. Ultimately, however, what matters most in terms of picking a candidate is the vote total at the top of the ticket. Although only Dr. Dean and Mr. Edwards collected enough signatures to get delegate candidates on the ballot in every Congressional district, the state party will eventually assign delegates to candidates based on their vote totals.
New York serves another purpose as well: with its diverse population, multiple media outlets, deep pockets for contributions and passion for politics, New York provides the ultimate political proving ground for Democrats.
''New Yorkers detect a phony better than anyone,'' said Josh Wachs, chief operating officer of the Democratic National Committee.
