They are stiff, broken down and out of rhythm. Allan Houston's knees and the Knicks' offense are connected in misery at the moment.
Houston and his teammates took some time to recuperate Wednesday at practice, when Coach Lenny Wilkens had the Knicks spend nearly three hours walking through their plays, adding new sets and reviewing basketball basics.
That gave Keith Van Horn time to rest his sprained left shoulder, and with another day of practice on Thursday, it gave the Knicks a chance to slow the pace.
''It was more of a clinical day,'' Houston said. ''Sometimes you have to take a day like this to really break it down and look at your options.''
Houston is reviewing his medical options as well as his mistakes on the court. His right knee -- which he had arthroscopic surgery on last June -- is still hurting. His left knee might be more sore, he said, because of overcompensating.
Houston is kicking himself for returning after four months of rehabilitation to play the final two games in training camp last October. ''I can always look back now and wish I wouldn't have, but I think I just came back too soon,'' he said.
Houston's options include sitting out games to let the knee heal or continuing to play through the pain. He is expected to play against the Celtics on Friday at Boston.
''When I think about it and talk to the trainers, we have never let it get to that point where you feel good, but let's still let it heal some more,'' Houston said. ''That has never been an option. Now, I may have to think about that.''
Houston is doing a lot of thinking, which may be his problem, he admitted. He is hesitating when shooting and is completely out of sync.
Since the first half of a game against the Bulls on Jan. 17, when Houston scored 23 points, he has struggled. In the second half, his knee stiffened and he shot 1 for 10. In the five games since, he has shot only 36.8 percent and averaged 12.8 points, down from his team-leading average of 19.5.
''I've had good weeks and bad weeks,'' Houston said. ''This has been one of the toughest because you don't know how it's going to feel.''
He would consider sitting out a stretch before the All-Star Game break in mid-February. ''I'm not going to be so stubborn and say, 'No, I'm not sitting out that many games,' '' he said.
Against the Spurs on Tuesday, Houston shot 2 for 13 and scored 7 points in 30 minutes. His teammates were not much better, and the team shot 36 percent over all.
Since scoring more than 100 points in four straight games, the Knicks have averaged 80.2 points in their last five.
Van Horn has not been a consistent contributor in the last week, either. He said Wednesday that his shoulder was still stiff. ''I'm going to wait until tomorrow to see if it's better, and I might get an M.R.I.,'' he said.
With Van Horn questionable for Friday's game against Boston, Shandon Anderson may play more than he has recently, behind Penny Hardaway in the rotation.
Anderson missed Saturday's game against Miami with a migraine. Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president, sent Anderson for an M.R.I. exam on Tuesday; it was negative. Because Thomas has been actively seeking to trade Anderson, he wanted to put him on the injured list, according to a person with knowledge of the Knicks' thinking.
But Anderson, who had played 543 games before Wilkens snapped his streak last week by not inserting him into a game against Atlanta, does not want to be placed on injured reserve, according to the person. Anderson walked off the practice court Wednesday before he could be asked to comment.
In the six games Anderson started when Houston was injured, he averaged 21 points, and the Knicks went 2-4. ''We played great when I was out a couple times,'' Houston said.
''The reason we did that, we played the game the way it should be played. We have plenty of guys who can score.''
PRO BASKETBALL
