PRODUCTS that can transmit video, audio and other digital media throughout the house were everywhere at the annual Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas this month. But most of them are either not yet on the market or rather expensive.
Yet it turns out that you don't have to wait for -- or pay for -- cutting-edge products to send signals from a digital video recorder, satellite dish, cable receiver or DVD player to television sets or stereos throughout the house. Products are available right now for about $100 or less that can do the job.
The devices, called video senders, were initially designed to let people share VCR's and, later, DVD players. Those products are now so inexpensive that for most people it is hardly worth the trouble to share one between two TV's. It's easier to just buy another VCR or DVD player.
But the proliferation of more expensive digital entertainment devices, which often require a monthly service charge as well, is creating a new market for video senders.
The digital video recorder is a great candidate for sharing. For example, TiVo owners who want a second unit TiVo for another TV would have to pay at least $149 for the device plus another $12.95 a month for TiVo's interactive programming service. But a video sender will let you share an existing TiVo with a second TV. Similarly, a video sender would let you share a single cable or satellite TV box with another television, saving on purchase or rental costs and monthly fees.
Video senders consist of a transmitter and a receiver. The transmitter is connected to the video and audio outputs (typically RCA jacks) of the device that's sending out the signal while the receiver, plugs into RCA jacks or the antenna input on the remote TV.
I use a Leapfrog LF-30S ($75) from Terk Technologies of Commack, N.Y. (www.terk.com), to share the signal from a TiVo and a satellite dish hooked up to a TV in my living room with a second TV in an upstairs bedroom. Most of the time the signal is clear - almost as good as when the TV was connected directly to the TiVo, although sometimes there is a bit of hissing or a clicking sound or interference on the video signal.
Similar products include the $109 Wavecom Sr. from RF-Link Technology (www.rflinktech.com), the Audio/Video Signal Sender ($100) from Radio Shack www.radioshack.com and the Wireless VideoSender ($88) from X10 (www.x10.com). Most say they have a range of about 150 feet, although that can vary from house to house.
Most video senders also let you control the video source from the remote location with a regular remote control. Aim your remote at the receiver, and the remote's infrared signals are picked up and relayed back to the transmitter, where they are emitted and picked up by the recorder or cable or satellite box. (Proper positioning of the transmitter is important, though, so the infrared signals will be picked up by the set-top box or player.)
And most senders are expandable. For instance, by adding an additional Leapfrog receiver ($50), I was able to share my satellite TV with a TV in the kitchen.
Video senders do have some drawbacks. Most transmit at a frequency of 2.4 gigahertz, which is also used by Wi-Fi networks and many cordless phones. Microwave ovens can also interfere with 2.4 gigahertz signals, as I discovered while watching TV one evening while my son was reheating pizza. The signals can pass through walls and floors but can sometimes be blocked by construction materials.
Not all 2.4-gigahertz devices will necessarily cause interference. Our wireless computer network coexists with our video sender unless I am online on my laptop in the same room as the TV set. Even then, the interference is intermittent and minor. The microwave oven can severely disrupt the signal, but only while the oven is in use. Interference from 2.4-gigahertz cordless phones varies, depending on the phone and its proximity to the video sender.
Most video senders have multiple transmission channels so you can try to find one that reduces or eliminates interference. Multiple channels also allow you to set up more than one video sender -- one to link your digital video recorder to two TV's, for example, and another to link the cable box to the TV's.
The other drawback becomes apparent when one person wants to watch one program on the main TV while another wants to watch something else on the remote unit. The vast majority of video components put out only one signal at a time (even if they have two tuners), so the person watching the remote TV must watch the program that's on the main set. My wife and I sometimes get into a remote control battle if I'm trying to watch one show in the living room while she wants to watch something else upstairs.
This also means that anyone watching the remote TV can monitor what is being played on the main set. If I tune in late at night from the bedroom, I can track what my son is watching on the downstairs TV when he should be in bed.
One way to avoid interference is to buy a video sender that uses wires instead of a radio link. Terk's Leapfrog HomeNetwork system (model LF-10S) sends signals through your home's telephone wiring. The transmitter and receiver connect to your TV and audio/video source just as Terk's wireless system does, but you must also connect both ends to a phone jack in your home that's on the same line. The signals travel through the phone wires without interfering with regular calls, and you can use a remote control. Terk has stopped manufacturing that unit but it is still available for less than $100 through some online retailers.
Of course, not all your digital entertainment media comes from a set-top box or a DVD player: increasingly, people are storing music, photos and even movies on their personal computers. Several products are designed to allow you to see and listen to that material from TV's and stereos throughout the house.
X10, for example, offers the Lola Wireless TV-Music System, which lets you navigate through your computer's MP3 files from a remote TV. You can listen to the music through the TV or a connected home audio system. At its core, Lola ($42) is a 2.4-gigahertz wireless video and audio sender, but it includes software and a remote control that allows you to remotely send PC audio files. The basic version, however, only works with Windows PC's that have a composite video or S-video connector. For more typical PC's, X-10 offers the $100 Lola Wireless VGA system, which works with any PC with a standard VGA display connector.
If you have a home network, particularly a wireless one, you have additional options (although they are more costly). SoundBlaster Wireless Music from Creative Technology (www.creative.com) is a $220 device that uses either a standard (802.11b) or higher-speed (802.11g) Wi-Fi network to transmit music from a PC to a remote audio system or a set of powered speakers. However, instead of having to control your PC from a TV, the SoundBlaster product comes with a remote control with a liquid crystal display screen that lets you select songs directly from the remote.
The Wireless-B Media Adapter from Linksys (www.linksys.com) enables PC users with an 802.11b wireless network to listen to music on a remote stereo and view digital photos on a remote TV. The device ($150) connects to the TV and stereo with standard cables. No additional hardware is needed to connect to the PC. You can use the included remote control and your TV to select songs and display photographs.
The $200 Prismiq MediaPlayer (www.prismiq.com) lets Windows PC owners use a home TV and audio system to view streaming video and digital movies as well as hear digital music and Internet radio from their computers. They can also view digital photos. As a bonus, it enables you to use your TV to go online to browse the Web, check e-mail or exchange instant messages. The device connects to either a wired or wireless home network.
Most of these products are made by relatively small manufacturers. But electronics industry giants are getting into the act, as evidenced by all the buzz at the Consumer Electronics Show about the future of the home PC as ''media center.'' Philips, for example, announced at the show that a new product for connecting a PC and TV, the Streamium SL400i Wireless Multimedia Link, would be available in February. Even Microsoft says it will offer products for wireless entertainment networks.
But with a video sender, you can have a wireless entertainment network right now, on the cheap.
BASICS
