If you get him going, Matan Harel, a 17-year-old senior at Stuyvesant High School in Manhattan, will talk your ear off about little blobs with tails. His obsession with the topic may explain why he was among the 40 students from 14 states and the District of Columbia announced yesterday as finalists for the prestigious Intel Science Talent Search, which presents an award often called the junior Nobel Prize.
The finalists, who each received $5,000 and a laptop computer, will travel to Washington from March 11 to 16 to compete for $530,000 in scholarships. New York State, with 18 finalists, did especially well in the competition again. One third, or 850, of the total number of finalists in the competition's history have been from the state. ''This is certainly a testimony to the excellence of science education in New York and to the dedication of New York teachers and administrators,'' said Wendy Hawkins, director of education for Intel, in a statement of congratulations.
In Washington, the finalists will present their projects at the National Academy of Sciences to a panel of 12 judges who will rank them based on visual display, sophistication of research, innovation in conclusions and the students' knowledge of various topics within their respective field, said Tami Casey, an Intel spokeswoman. Mr. Harel, whose project studied the irregular movement of cells called fibroblasts, continues a long tradition of scientific achievement at Stuyvesant. For the second year in a row, the high school had the most semifinalists in the country, finishing with 19. ''I didn't even expect to make it to the semifinal round, much less the final,'' he said.
''Some cells move with a tail, but a fibroblast moves by stretching a tip of its outer membrane in one direction and then dragging the rest of its body behind it,'' he said. ''It's totally unreal.''
Another finalist, Neha Chauhan, a 17-year-old senior at Susan E. Wagner High School on Staten Island, studied Alzheimer's disease and whether chemical compounds in foods like green vegetables and green tea could delay the onset of the disease. She took an interest in the topic as a sophomore after learning that there were more than 15,000 people on Staten Island suffering from the disease, she said. ''It became a bit of an obsession for me, actually.'' Last year she founded a national group, Teens for Alzheimer's Awareness, to educate the public. She is headed to Harvard next year.
A complete list of the finalists and descriptions of their projects is on the Web at http://www.sciserv.org/sts/63sts/finalists.asp.
These are the finalists from New York and Connecticut:
Jennifer Anne D'Ascoli, Academy of the Holy Names, Albany; Silas Isaac Richelson and Jayne Frances Wolfson, Byram Hills High School, Armonk; Shaye Perry Storm, Midwood High School, Brooklyn; Craig Louis Auster, Carmel High School, Carmel; Allyson Molly Goldberg, Croton-Harmon High School, Croton-on-Hudson; Bruce David Halperin and Felicia Yuen-Lee Yen, Half Hollow Hills High School East, Dix Hills; Eduard Reznik and Kevin Yibo Wang, Ward Melville High School, East Setauket; Katherine Hartman, Guilderland Central High School, Guilderland Center; Maria Lynn Michta, Sachem North High School, Lake Ronkonkoma; Elizabeth Rose Heller, Nanuet High School, Nanuet; Matan Harel, Stuyvesant High School, New York; Neha Chauhan, Susan E. Wagner High School, Staten Island; Daniel Chimin Choi, Syosset High School, Syosset; Simeon Charles McMillan, Uniondale High School, Uniondale; Rohini Subhadra Rau-Murthy, Yorktown High School, Yorktown Heights. Connecticut also had a finalist: Lisa Doreen Glukhovsky, New Milford High School, New Milford.
