The Rev. Al Sharpton is showing South Carolina voters a new kind of presidential campaign -- candidate as circuit preacher. He has been racing around the Carolina Midlands for months, delivering Sunday sermons from dozens of pulpits, working this state's politically crucial assemblage of faithful Christians who also happen to be fervid Democrats and proud African-Americans.
And he is hardly alone. In a screeching about-face from the contests in Iowa and New Hampshire, with their almost entirely white electorates, the South Carolina primary on Tuesday will feature black voters front and center. They are expected to make up nearly half the vote, and they are more than ready to be wooed.
With the early states' blanched preliminaries out of the way, the sense of blacks' empowerment here is palpable. They know they are key to North Carolina Senator John Edwards's make-or-break stand here in his birth state. They smiled inwardly when a newspaper in the state Capitol announced that the primary's pivotal voting bloc would be neither Nascar dads nor soccer moms but Older Black Women.
''Oh, yeah, extremely powerful,'' said Ike Williams, a ranking black political strategist. Mr. Williams should know; he was first hooked on politics 56 years ago as a 12-year-old enlisted by Mary Lee Davis, a devout churchgoer and demanding civil rights activist in his ghetto neighborhood. ''Do the math,'' he said. ''Go into any black church on a Sunday, and 60 to 75 percent of the people will be African-American women.''
For all of Mr. Sharpton's preachments and prayers, the black vote is hardly shaping up as monolithic. It is expected to be spread thoughtfully among several choices. The reigning African-American, Congressman James Clyburn, quickly endorsed the New Hampshire victor, Senator John Kerry. The state's gospel-music stations resound this week with the gravelly voice of Charles Rangel, a leader of the Congressional Black Caucus from New York. He is soliciting votes for the floundering campaign of Gen. Wesley Clark.
Black politicians say that of course they want to impact the primary field. But even more, they want to signal to the rest of the nation that America's black community is well organized and furiously determined to deliver payback for the Florida vote-counting debacle of 2000.
''This isn't Jesse Jackson running in '88,'' said John Rickenbacker, an African-American leader and Edwards supporter who is chairman of the Orangeburg County Council. ''That was historical, showing we could run and belonged on the national stage. Now we see more choices and we're talking accountability on a variety of issues.''
Thirty years ago, Mr. Rickenbacker helped elect the first local black to the Statehouse since Reconstruction. Now blacks control most elective offices across the county from a growing middle-class base in which the politics are increasingly sophisticated. Mr. Rickenbacker and Mr. Williams thank Mr. Sharpton for stirring fresh political spirit from the old pulpits. But they're betting on Senator Edwards in the primary. They rate him a son of the modern South who is showing promise up North, and they like his poor-roots personal saga that cuts across racial and regional lines.
The early Northern campaigns deprived Senator Edwards of a lot of pulpit time, and he carefully chose Orangeburg and the black campus of South Carolina State University as his first campaign stop the morning after New Hampshire. Mr. Rickenbacker and Mr. Williams are well aware that this state may be the last stand for the senator's presidential campaign. But no matter who wins, they are proud that their primary represents the first significant word from the nation's black electorate. ''If you get the level of excitation high enough and not do too much damage in the process,'' said Mr. Williams, ''it would be not that much trouble to do it in November.''
Editorial Observer
