For two weeks in a row, Senator John Kerry has demonstrated broad support among Democratic voters across economic, ideological and demographic lines.
Surveys of voters entering the Iowa caucuses on Jan. 19 and leaving polling places in New Hampshire on Tuesday showed that Mr. Kerry did better than his rivals for the Democratic presidential nomination in practically every voter category: among men, women, the young, the old, Catholics, Protestants, rich, poor, those with advanced degrees, those with only a high school diploma, voters who consider themselves fairly liberal and those who say they are moderate or conservative.
Even when his opponents made specific appeals to voter groups -- as Howard Dean did with those under 30 and those who opposed the Iraq war, for example -- they were generally unable to do any better than Mr. Kerry, and sometimes did worse.
In New Hampshire, Democrats from union households and those with veterans in the family favored Mr. Kerry, the junior senator from neighboring Massachusetts. So did voters who have a gun in their homes.
Mr. Kerry's strongest support here was among the one in five voters who said the most important factor in making their choice was whether the candidate could defeat President Bush in November. More than three out five voters who felt this way voted for him.
If Mr. Kerry can sustain this broad-based support as the campaign spreads across the country this week, he will lock up the nomination in a matter of weeks.
But Democrats in Iowa and New Hampshire are not necessarily typical. They do not live in large urban areas, for instance, and there were too few members of minority groups for the surveys to measure meaningfully which candidates can appeal to African-Americans, Hispanic-Americans and Asian-Americans.
In addition, in the multicandidate contests, Mr. Kerry did not win as much as 40 percent of the vote in either state. The surveys in both contests showed that the voters were much more concerned about health care and the economy than about terrorism and Iraq.
The surveys were conducted by Edison Media Research and Mitofsky International for a pool of the five television networks and The Associated Press.
In most instances, the other candidates did not finish ahead of Mr. Kerry even among groups of voters to whom they had tailored their campaigns.
For example, Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, made special appeals to younger voters. In New Hampshire, he and Mr. Kerry each received about one-third of the votes from those under 30. In Iowa, Mr. Kerry received 35 percent of these votes and Dr. Dean 25 percent.
Mr. Kerry also did better than Dr. Dean among the Democratic voters here and in Iowa who disapprove of the decision to go to war in Iraq, the 7 in 10 in New Hampshire who favor giving gay couples the same legal rights as married couples and the half of the voters here who said they were angry at the Bush administration.
Three of the main elements of Dr. Dean's stump speech and television advertisements here were his early opposition to the war, his signing of legislation allowing gay men and lesbians to form civil unions in Vermont and his attacks on President Bush.
Overwhelmingly, the voters in both states objected to the war in Iraq, and 4 in 10 in New Hampshire said they disapproved ''strongly.'' But Mr. Kerry, who voted to give the president the authority to go to war, won more support among these voters than Dr. Dean did.
About 4 New Hampshire voters in 10 said Dr. Dean, who led polls here for months before slipping into second place after the Iowa caucuses, lacked the temperament to be a successful president.
The turnout of more than 210,000 voters was a record for a Democratic primary in New Hampshire. More than half of those surveyed here said they had chosen a candidate in the week before the election. Twice as many of these people who decided late went for Mr. Kerry as for Dr. Dean.
Dr. Dean did receive more votes here than Mr. Kerry among some categories of voters. He got nearly half the vote, far more than any other candidate, from the less than 10 percent of all voters who said the most important quality in a candidate was his ability to ''shake things up in Washington.''
About half of the Democratic voters here called themselves liberals. Dr. Dean finished ahead of Mr. Kerry among the 15 percent who consider themselves ''very liberal.'' Mr. Kerry did better among the others, who said they were ''somewhat liberal.''
And among the 90 percent of voters who favor repealing at least some of President Bush's tax cuts, Dr. Dean won a small plurality of the one-third who want to repeal the cuts entirely, and Mr. Kerry won a large plurality of those who want to cancel only the tax cuts of the wealthy.
Dr. Dean is the only candidate remaining in the Democratic field who advocates repealing the relatively small portion of the Bush tax measures that lower the taxes of the middle class, like tax credits for families with children and reduced taxes for some married couples with two incomes.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE VOTERS
