MORE than half a billion people will tune in to the Super Bowl on Sunday, watching on all sorts of monitors: monochrome and color, small and big, thick and thin. But all those screens will have a shortcoming in common: they will deliver a picture in merely two dimensions.
So while that $5,000 high-definition plasma set might let you count the whiskers beneath the players' eye black, it won't fully convey a visceral sense of the teams' power and agility, or of watching a 220-pound man run 40 yards right in front of you in 4.5 seconds.
To get the true feel of the game, you have to be on the sidelines, seeing in three dimensions. That is what Steve Schklair, the chief executive of Cobalt Entertainment, and Steve Andrich, the vice president for cinematography at NFL Films, are aiming to deliver.
Using the latest video technology, Mr. Schklair, Mr. Andrich and their crew are trying to capture the sideline experience (except for the smell) in three dimensions for projection on a Imax screen as large as 80 feet by 120 feet. Their hope is to produce a film next year that could well be titled ''In the Trenches: The N.F.L. 3-D Imax Experience.''
But there is a long way to go, and for all the digital wizardry involved, the road has not been smooth.
For one thing, shooting in 3-D requires two cameras, their lenses sometimes as close together as a pair of eyes. Conventional Imax cameras can weigh 100 pounds or more and require time-consuming film changes for every three minutes shot. And when high-definition video cameras have been used in the past for 3-D Imax, their lenses have been fixed at a invariable distance apart, limiting the range in which 3-D images retain their depth.
So for Mr. Schklair, whose company specializes in 3-D work, shooting a football game presents a challenge of a new order: designing a camera system mobile and flexible enough to capture the unscripted action on the field.
Earlier this month in a warehouse in Burbank, Calif., Mr. Schklair and a dozen technicians were working feverishly to complete just such a system, which he calls 3ality.
''The public has always thought of 3-D as a gimmick,'' he said. ''But this isn't going to be like some theme park where something hits you in the face every 30 seconds, because that makes your eyes tired. That's why these 3-D rides in theme parks are 10, 15 minutes long at the most. This is about putting the viewer actually on the sidelines of an N.F.L. game. This is about realism, not gimmicks.''
The first test of the new system came on Jan. 18 when the Philadelphia Eagles faced off against the visiting Carolina Panthers for a berth in the Super Bowl. The results left something to be desired.
Looking for all the world like some kind of futuristic military device, the system attracted a small crowd of gawkers as it was wheeled onto the field more than four hours before game time.
The wheels had not been part of the plan. At around 9:30 the evening before, the harness system that was supposed to allow ''hand-held'' operation of the roughly 70-pound unit essentially collapsed. As a backup, the system was mounted on a tripod and dolly. Either way, the system is a bit more cumbersome than conventional film or video cameras, requiring not only a cameraman but at least three other technicians trailing behind.
The harness failure was a setback, but in some ways it was also the entire point of the exercise. The Philadelphia game was to be a shakedown cruise in preparation for filming the Super Bowl in Houston.
''Look, folks, as long as we can just show that this system can get usable game footage, this game will be a success,'' Mr. Andrich told crew members on the sideline before the opening kickoff.
This Sunday, of course, the hurdle will be set much higher.
NFL Films, a part of the National Football League, has been gathering awards for its cinematography since the 1960's. But in repeated discussions since the early 1990's about shooting in Imax format or with various 3-D systems, the company had always said no. Among other issues, the cameras were too bulky to get close to the field without possibly hurting a player, and without compromising the cinematic intimacy that has long been a hallmark of NFL Films.
''These sorts of projects have been pitched to us for 10 years, but the equipment was never there,'' Steve Sabol, the president of NFL Films, said in a telephone interview. ''It was big and bulky and it was dangerous to put on the sidelines. It was cost-prohibitive, too.''
''But the technology has gotten to the point now where we feel we can give this a shot, and it's exciting to do things that have never been done before,'' he added. ''We've always looked at a football game in terms of layers. Television brings you one layer. We like to bring you another layer, and we feel that with this big-screen format we can peel back yet another layer.''
In an offhand way, credit for the new project belongs to George Clinton, the funk music guru. In October 2002, John Modell, son of Art Modell, the owner of the Baltimore Ravens, went to one of Mr. Clinton's concerts in Los Angeles to catch up with an old friend named Jon Shapiro.
Mr. Modell had recently designed the technical systems at the Ravens' new stadium. With his brother Peter, Mr. Shapiro had recently produced an Imax concert film called ''All Access.''
''We were just catching up on what we had been doing, and all of a sudden we looked at each other and it was one of these simultaneous 'aha' moments and we both said, 'N.F.L. Imax,''' said Mr. Shapiro, a partner at a production company called Ideal Entertainment.
Meanwhile, Mr. Schklair -- who is not only a 3-D and special-effects expert but also a football fan -- had been toying with concepts for a mobile 3-D system that would use high-definition video cameras rather than bulky film. Such a system could be used for live events, he reasoned.
The Shapiro brothers knew Mr. Schklair through the Imax world. With his N.F.L. background, Mr. Modell could get to Mr. Sabol and NFL Films.
All they needed was a system that worked and met Mr. Andrich's exacting requirements.
Last year at the season-ending Pro Bowl, the team tried a system that recorded directly to huge hard-drive arrays. It turned out that recording was the easy part. ''The problem was that when we got into postproduction and tried to edit, now we were dealing with terabytes of data and it was very unwieldy,'' Mr. Modell said.
Instead, the 3ality system records to some of the same Sony digital tape recorders that George Lucas has used in his recent ''Star Wars'' projects. To create a visually pleasing 3-D effect that does not strain the eyes, Mr. Schklair's technical team has developed custom software and hardware to control the finely calibrated motors needed to precisely align the digital cameras.
Most of the high-tech issues seem to have been worked out. As Mr. Schklair's team has shuttled from Burbank to Philadelphia back to Burbank and now to Houston over the last two weeks, the biggest problem has been a low-tech one: the physical harnesses that are needed to make the camera system truly mobile.
When Mr. Andrich of NFL Films first saw the new 3ality rig about a week before the Philadelphia game, he said that the system, then 50 pounds, was too front-heavy for effective maneuvering. So Mr. Schklair added about 20 pounds of counterweight to the back.
The night before the Philadelphia game, however, it became clear that the system's existing harness system could not handle the weight, forcing 3ality onto the tripod and dolly.
Another wrinkle awaited them in Philadelphia: the Fox network was trying a rival hand-held digital 3-D system developed by the director James Cameron and Vincent Pace, a pioneer in underwater cinematography. The Cameron-Pace system lacks some of the technical flexibility of Mr. Schklair's unit, but it is lighter and more portable. While the NFL Films team watched stone-faced from the sidelines, the Fox crew raced onto the field in Philadelphia to shoot the players up close during the pregame introductions.
''Steve has been doing 3-D for a long time and we are relatively new to this, but we bring a different set of capabilities,'' Mr. Pace said in a telephone interview last week. ''We have a different approach than Steve's, but what we're seeing is good for 3-D across the board.''
When Mr. Schklair's team got back to Burbank early last week, it was literally back to the drawing board. Months ago, Mr. Schklair had decided that the 3ality project could not afford to use mounting equipment from Steadicam, a proven system that enables a harness-mounted camera to remain stable even as its operator moves around. The 3ality system has been developed on a relatively small budget of about $500,000, Mr. Schklair said. Steadicam components can cost tens of thousands.
Last week, however, he decided that he couldn't afford not to use Steadicam. Custom parts were machined over the weekend and delivered to Burbank on Monday. On Monday night, Tom Foley, an NFL Films technical director, ruled that the new harness system would be safe to use on the sidelines in Houston. Most of the crew and gear arrived in Houston on Tuesday, and they are scheduled to start shooting interviews in 3-D today before recording the game on Sunday.
''It's been hairy as heck, but we have a pretty good history of delivering really front-edge projects on ridiculous schedules,'' Mr. Schklair said in a telephone interview yesterday, adding that he has been getting about four hours of sleep a night for the last month. ''We're confident this is going to work.''
The plan is to use the scenes shot in Philadelphia and Houston to make a short trailer or preview. (Polarized 3-D glasses are generally used to view the polished product, which is usually projected onto a screen. It will be many years before consumer televisions display 3-D images.)
NFL Films hopes that the league will use the trailer over the summer to interest corporate sponsors and mainstream film studios in the project, with an eye toward shooting a feature-length 3-D Imax film over the course of next season. Such a film could be released around the start of the 2005 season.
''Our goal with the film is pretty simple: to show football like it's never been seen before,'' Peter Shapiro, another partner in Ideal Entertainment, said in a telephone interview. ''When you combine the biggest sporting event in the world with the best sports filmmakers of the last 40 years and the most advanced 3-D technology in the world, you should have something very cool.''
Correction:  February 3, 2004, Tuesday  An article in Circuits last Thursday about plans for a 3-D Imax movie by NFL Films included an erroneous identification from the filmmakers for the camera-stabilization gear they are using. It is the PRO Camera Stabilizing System by GPI. (Steadicam is a rival system.)
Correction:  February 9, 2004, Monday  An article in Circuits on Jan. 29 about plans for a 3-D Imax movie by NFL Films included an overstated estimate from the National Football League for the Super Bowl's television audience. The league says projections of half a billion or more were for the number of people to whom television coverage would be available -- not those actually tuning in to the game, an audience it estimates at 250 million worldwide.
