As Frank Gehry peered out a window of the Art Gallery of Ontario overlooking snowy Dundas Street the other day, his mood grew sentimental. He recalled visiting his grandmother down the block in a house that still stands. He remembered his bar mitzvah at a nearby synagogue. His thoughts drifted to the day he visited this very museum with his mother when he was 8. A watercolor seascape painted by John Marin had struck him in particular, he said.
That walk in the gallery changed his life, Mr. Gehry said, putting him on the road to becoming one of the world's pre-eminent architects.
''I realized there was such a thing as a museum and such a thing as art, and it was something I wanted to get involved with,'' he said.
He added, ''I'm not a tree hugger or a building hugger, but I do love this neighborhood.''
On Wednesday Mr. Gehry, who is 74 and now based in Los Angeles, went back to his childhood neighborhood around Grange Park as a conquering hero, unveiling his ambitious plans to refashion the Art Gallery of Ontario, North America's 10th-largest art museum, before an adoring crowd of art lovers and government and business leaders.
Toronto is a city with a variety of theater companies and world-class opera and ballet. But it still has a reputation for being dreary in comparison with Montreal and Vancouver. City leaders are hoping that Mr. Gehry's first major project in Toronto, where he was born, will help change the city's image the way his Guggenheim Museum raised the profile of the industrial Basque city of Bilbao in Spain. Toronto art columnists are excitedly writing about a hoped-for ''Bilbao effect.'' The groundbreaking is scheduled for early next year, and construction is expected to be completed in late 2007. The cost is estimated at $195 million.
Mr. Gehry's design includes a frontal promenade covered by a tilted 60-foot-high glass window the length of two football fields. There will be multistory light blue titanium walls intended to fade into the sky and turn gold on cloudy days. A grand glass roof will cover the museum's central Walker Court. And a giant winged spiral staircase made of Douglas fir will double as a piece of interior sculpture that soars into the court's glass ceiling. In his presentation on Wednesday Mr. Gehry said he purposely kept the staircase narrow, predicting it could foster romance between museumgoers as they pass on the stairs in a place of beauty.
The redesign will expand the museum's exhibition space by 40 percent to make room for 2,000 newly donated pieces from the eclectic private collection of Kenneth Thomson, the publishing magnate. They include Peter Paul Rubens's monumental painting ''The Massacre of the Innocents'' and works by Canadian artists like Tom Thomson, Paul Kane, Cornelius Krieghoff and Lawren Harris. The new collection will add to the 36,000 works already held by the museum, which is particularly strong in modern sculpture, European paintings and Inuit and modern Canadian art.
The reconstruction is meant to transform the Art Gallery of Ontario from an austere building into a much more striking and transparent one. Pedestrians will be able to walk on Dundas Street, a major thoroughfare, and peek into a sculpture terrace that will include works by Rodin, Henry Moore and Michael Snow. Inside, visitors will be able to circulate more easily. New large, windowed galleries will also offer views of the mature trees in Grange Park, one of downtown Toronto's most beautiful, integrating the museum viewing experience into the surrounding Victorian neighborhood.
But because Mr. Gehry is remodeling a structure rather than designing a new one, his Toronto project is not likely to stir the architecture world in quite the way his Bilbao museum and his Walt Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles have.
''It's a little bit much to assume that I will remodel a building that has already been remodeled before and that will change Toronto,'' Mr. Gehry said, smiling.
The project comes at a time when Toronto is recreating almost its entire cultural infrastructure. The Royal Ontario Museum, Canada's largest natural history museum, is making a bid for international stardom by constructing an angular crystalline structure designed by Daniel Libeskind to house six giant new galleries along Bloor Street. The Canadian Opera Company has broken ground on a new opera house downtown, and the National Ballet School and Gardiner Museum of Ceramic Art are expanding.
Sharing Grange Park with the Art Gallery of Ontario, the Ontario College of Art and Design is being rebuilt by the renowned British architect Will Alsop in the form of a flying black-and-white ceramic tile ''tabletop'' supported by brightly colored metal girders.
''This is the opportunity for the city to take a great step forward to declare that art matters here and that the creative life is part of what makes Toronto a livable and ambitious city,'' said Matthew Teitelbaum, director of the Art Gallery of Ontario.
Officials at the Art Gallery of Ontario hope the expansion will help reverse a spate of bad fortune. The outbreak of SARS in Toronto last year reduced tourism so much that gallery admissions plummeted, forcing the museum to cut its budget and staff. Most embarrassing was the recent theft of five 18th-century carved ivory sculptures, valued at more than $1.2 million, on loan to the gallery from Mr. Thomson.
Mr. Teitelbaum said he hoped that the Thomson donation and the Gehry redesign would attract more donations and make the gallery a more attractive partner for other museums interested in sharing knowledge and exhibitions.
But for Mr. Gehry the remodeling of the gallery is as much about his personal passions and his return home. ''It's about my mother,'' he said, ''her relationship to the arts, about her teaching me stuff that was beautiful.''
