Aventis said on Wednesday that its supervisory board had unanimously rejected a $60 billion takeover offer from a French pharmaceutical rival, Sanofi-Synthélabo, saying ''this bid is not in the best interest of Aventis shareholders and employees.''
The statement, endorsing the decision by Aventis management to spurn the offer on Monday, indicated that the company's main shareholders were willing to stay pat, at least for now. And while talk continues to swirl that Sanofi will eventually raise its bid, executives close to Sanofi said it was too early to think of such a move. In an interview in the daily Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung, Jean-François Dehecq, the chairman of Sanofi, declined to say whether his company would sweeten its bid, saying ''we have just made a good offer.''
The Aventis board met for several hours in Paris on Wednesday.
One important member of the board who voted to reject the Sanofi offer was Seham A. Razzouqi, investment manager for Aventis's largest shareholder, the Kuwait Petroleum Corporation, which has a 13.5 percent stake. One of the 16 directors did not attend Wednesday's meeting, Aventis said, but it did not identify the board member.
Still, some Aventis shareholders are optimistic that a higher bid will come.
''The business issues behind this deal are rational,'' said Paul Ehrlichman, head of international and global equities for Brandywine Asset Management, which owns 500,000 shares of Aventis. Mr. Ehrlichman said he believed that the Sanofi offer for Aventis was ''a little low but not a lot.''
Mr. Ehrlichman said that a deal between Aventis and Sanofi would help solve both companies' problems. ''Sanofi had this complex share structure that was going to unravel, and Aventis had a problem with growth and productivity of their R&amp;D,'' he said. ''It's a powerful combination.''
The value of the offer has dropped since Sanofi made it on Monday. Sanofi has offered five of its shares and 69 euros in cash for every six shares of Aventis. That offer was valued at 59.63 euros a share, or a premium of nearly 4 percent over Aventis's closing stock price on Friday. Since then, Sanofi's stock price has dropped, and its offer now values Aventis at 57.78 euros a share, based on Wednesday's close.
Investors clearly think a higher bid is a possibility. Shares of Aventis closed at 60.50 euros in trading on the Paris bourse on Wednesday. Sanofi shares also rose. They closed up 1.2 percent at 55.55 euros.
If Sanofi's stock price continues to rise, it could close the gap between the expectations of Aventis's shareholders and the original offering price, without Sanofi's needing to make any changes to its bid.
Sanofi executives and advisers plan to spend the remainder of the week meeting with Aventis shareholders to try to convince them that the deal makes sense.
