A suicide car bomber slammed his taxi into a British peacekeepers' vehicle in Kabul on Wednesday, blowing himself up and killing one soldier and wounding four others, the commander of the peacekeeping force said. One Afghan civilian -- a 14-year-old boy -- was killed and three others were wounded in the blast, local police and hospital officials said.
The commander, Lt. Gen. Götz F. E. Gliemeroth of Germany, said the taxi overtook two British Land Rovers and exploded as it crashed into the lead vehicle. Initial investigations indicated that the taxi was carrying 200 pounds of explosives, he said.
The attack was the second suicide attack on the NATO-led International Security Assistance Force in two days. A Canadian soldier was killed and three others were wounded Tuesday when a man blew himself up beside their open jeep in western Kabul. That attack also killed an Afghan civilian and wounded eight bystanders. General Gliemeroth said there were strong similarities that appeared to link the two attacks.
A spokesman for the Taliban movement took responsibility for the Tuesday attack in a telephone call to The Associate Press, identifying the suicide bomber and saying more attacks would take place until the American-led coalition left Afghanistan.
Kabul was full of rumors that more attacks were being planned ahead of a religious holiday beginning this weekend. An Afghan intelligence official said there was information that five potential suicide bombers had arrived recently.
The police here in the southern city of Kandahar foiled a bomb attack when they searched an Afghan man and found a tank shell, primed to explode, in a box strapped to the back of his bicycle, said the deputy police chief of Kandahar, Gen. Mohammed Salim Ehsas.
The British soldiers who came under attack were leaving town at midmorning along the main eastern highway where peacekeepers and United Nations workers are based.
A yellow Kabul taxi driving at a high speed crashed into the lead British vehicle, said a witness, Mir Aqa, 24, a policeman guarding a United Nations office nearby.
Col. Mirza Mohammed, the head of the criminal police in District 9 of Kabul, who was also nearby, found five injured soldiers thrown from their vehicle. One was badly burned and died later.
Three others were seriously injured, he said, and an Afghan translator with them also received minor injuries. The taxi was shredded into small pieces.
Six American soldiers of the coalition force involved in counterterrorism have also been wounded in two incidents since Monday, a United States military spokesman said. Three were wounded in a roadside explosion in the east on Monday, and three others were wounded in a clash with suspected Taliban fighters in the southeast on Tuesday.
