There was a time, not that long ago, when it would have been nigh impossible to be in the Paris subway without meeting, in the trains or stations, a haggard-looking woman picking up a few centimes trying to sing ''Non, Je Ne Regrette Rien.''
No one on the train had to be told about the song or the sad women trying to sing it: they were the city's poor, and it was their theme, as it had once been the signature of Édith Piaf, one of France's greatest musical talents and a woman who was herself a creature of Paris's meanest streets.
The Métro still has its panhandling musicians, but those downtrodden women no longer appear. I had almost forgotten them until I walked into ''Piaf, la Môme de Paris,'' a nostalgic homage to the singer at Paris's ornate city hall, the Hôtel de Ville. The exhibition coincides with the 40th anniversary of her death at 47 in October 1963.
The show was packed on the two days I took it in. Most of the crowd was elderly, people who remembered her from the radio, from television and from frequent accountsin the sensational press of the lurid details of her personal life.
But there were plenty of young people at the show, listening intently as some of her most famous records -- ''Mon Légionnaire,'' ''La Vie en Rose,'' ''L'Accordéoniste -- played. They pored over some of her letters and gazed at the remarkable collection of photos. There were street scenes from the 1930's, Paris during the German occupation and especially Piaf with friends and lovers: Charles Aznavour, Yves Montand, Jean Cocteau and one of the great loves of her life, the boxer Marcel Cerdan, who was killed in 1949 in an airplane crash in the Azores on his way to meet her in New York.
It is appropriate that the city of Paris mounted this show, which runs through January. Throughout her life Piaf wanted to be remembered as a child of Paris. When she died on the Côte d'Azur, her body was brought back here secretly, so it would appear that she had died here, too.
She was born on Oct. 19, 1915, in Belleville, one of the poorest, toughest Paris neighborhoods. She was probably born in a local hospital, but the myth she preferred had her born on a policeman's cloak under a street lamp on the rue de Belleville. Her mother, Annetta Maillard, was a drifter and sometime singer in the streets and local cafes.
Her father, Alphonse Gassion, was a street juggler and contortionist who, besides his name, gave Édith her early training in performing for coins in the streets and alleys of Belleville and Menilmontant, the adjoining slum that had produced Maurice Chevalier among other performers. Édith's name was supposedly inspired by Edith Cavell, a British nurse shot by the Germans for helping prisoners of war escape.
Her mother disappeared when Édith was 2, and her father sent the child to live with his mother, who ran a brothel near Rouen. The girl apparently enjoyed being mothered by the prostitutes. Madame Billy later said that it was her girls who had taught Piaf poise and good manners. Later, when she became famous, Piaf rented the entire top floor of Madame Billy's -- which was one of Paris's most notorious ''maisons closes,'' or luxurious brothels -- and lived there during much of World War II.
But as a teenager in Paris Édith had befriended Simone Berteaut, a girl from Menilmontant two years younger than she. They sang in the streets, sleeping wherever they could, often in basements, and became lifelong friends. After Édith's death, Simone wrote a largely fictional book about their lives together and claimed, falsely, that they were half-sisters.
A brief affair when Édith was 17, produced a child, a girl, who died of meningitis less than two years later. During those apprentice years, Édith Gassion tried several names to enhance her image. She was, variously, Mademoiselle Édith, Tania, Huguette Helia and Denise Jaye.
Singing on a street corner one day in October 1935, Édith attracted the attention of Louis Leplée, the owner of a popular night club called Gerny's on the Rue Pierre Charron. He engaged her and because, at 4 feet 8 inches tall and weighing about 80 pounds, she reminded him of a bird, he called her Piaf, or sparrow in Parisian argot. He billed her as La Môme, môme meaning kid, the Piaf Kid; later she became best known as ''the little sparrow.''
Gerny's was a show business hangout and La Môme Piaf was soon recording, appearing in other clubs and on the radio. Then, in 1936, Leplée was murdered. Implicated briefly, Édith was soon cleared. But Paris tabloids had a field day with the story, and for a time she could not get club dates. Then she met Raymond Asso, an adventurer and writer, who took her under his wing and wrote some of her most memorable early songs, including ''Mon Légionnaire'' and ''Mon Amant de la Coloniale,'' both of which became hit records. Soon she was an attraction at the top Paris music halls,eventually jettisoning La Môme and becoming simply Piaf.
During the war she performed several times at prisoner of war camps in Germany and was instrumental in helping a number of prisoners escape, aid that later saved her from any charges of collaboration.
Her first engagement in New York, in 1947 in a Broadway theater, was a disaster. She was packing her bags when a newspaper article by the critic Virgil Thomson took the American public to task for not recognizing how special this singer from France actually was.
A new contract was signed, and Piaf moved into a nightclub, the Versailles. A triumphant opening night turned an eight-day engagement into eight weeks and a relationship with the Versailles that endured until 1955. New York was also the city where she had met Cerdan, the boxer, and her great love.
She was waiting for him in New York when his plane went down. Scheduled to sing at the Versailles that night, she refused to cancel. When the audience, aware of Cerdan's death, rose and applauded her entrance, she said: ''No, there must be no applause for me this evening. I am singing for Marcel Cerdan and him alone.'' Some of her many letters to him are on display at the Hôtel de Ville.
Fame came early to Piaf, and so did an entourage of hangers-on, small-time show people who fawned over her and lived off her. She also maintained relationships with many men, as collaborators, lovers, protégés or combinations of all three.
If fame came early, so did pain and tragedy. Never robust, she was prone to illnesses that she invariably chose to ignore. The more famous she became, the more she became dependent on drugs. She drank heavily and slept little.
Still she managed to get herself onstage night after night. Near the end, she could be vague and disoriented during performances. Her last tour, months before her death, was grotesque, so evident were her illness and pain. And yet she played to packed houses.
''She was never so adored as when she was almost dead,'' Mr. Aznavour said. ''French audiences love the goût de malheur,'' they love to savor unhappiness.
He was too harsh. Looking back over the compelling bits and pieces of Piaf's life assembled here, one can conclude that French audiences have a taste for courage, too.
