The cartons of cigarettes carried familiar brand names like Marlboro and Marlboro Lights, and would fetch as much as $70 each in New York City.
But in reality, federal officials charged Wednesday, many of the cigarettes were counterfeits, made in Asia for as little as $2 a carton and then smuggled into the United States.
In what they described as a major dent in the multibillion-dollar black market in tobacco products, officials on Wednesday arrested 10 people in five states who the authorities said had been running the biggest tobacco import smuggling ring in American history. The defendants are accused of smuggling more than 100 million cigarettes into the United States.
Among the prime destinations of the black-market cigarettes, officials said, were Los Angeles, western Texas and New York State, including an unidentified Indian reservation in upstate New York.
The victims, officials said, were not only the tobacco companies whose products were counterfeited but also the federal government, which estimates that cigarette smuggling costs it more than a billion dollars a year in lost fees and revenue, and New York, California and Texas, which together were cheated out of at least $8 million.
The smugglers operated ''a vast criminal conspiracy'' and ''sought to exploit the U.S. economy'' by evading taxes and duty fees, said Michael T. Dougherty, who oversees immigration and customs enforcement operations for the Department of Homeland Security.
Federal officials identified the leader of the ring as Jorge Abraham, 34, of Sunland Park, N.M., who is charged in a 92-count indictment with conspiracy to smuggle cigarettes, wire fraud, money laundering and other offenses. Nine other people, in New York, Texas, Florida and California, were also arrested, and officials said an undisclosed number had been charged in indictments that remain under seal.
If convicted, Mr. Abraham faces not only a prison term but also fines and restitution of about $30 million and forfeiture of his $545,000 house in New Mexico. A telephone call to his lawyer on Wednesday was not returned.
Lou Garthe, who oversees tobacco enforcement at the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, said a three-year investigation had found that traffickers under Mr. Abraham's direction had used two main methods to smuggle cigarettes, in a scheme that began in 2000 or earlier.
In some cases, Mr. Garthe said, they bought low-grade cigarettes in China, Thailand and elsewhere, smuggled the cartons into the United States as boxes of toys or plastic products, and sold them on the black market as brand-name cigarettes. In other cases, he said, they imported authentic brand-name cigarettes into American ports but evaded taxes and duty fees by falsely declaring that the products were bound for Mexico.
Federal officials said that in the course of the investigation, they seized $18.1 million worth of counterfeit and brand-name cigarettes bound for the black market.
