Virtual Cemetery Visits
How do you define fame? Is it censorship to erase nasty notes left on virtual graves? Should dead pets be commemorated in the same database as dead humans?
Jim Tipton started with a simple idea in 1995: to catalog the burial places of the famous. Since then, his site, findagrave.com, has become a major genealogical resource listing five million graves of both the famous and the obscure. Volunteers add burial records at the rate of 4,000 a day. But as the site has grown, Mr. Tipton has faced some touchy issues.
''Deciding who is famous is tricky,'' he said. ''How do you tell someone whose father was a war hero that they don't make the cut?'' Mr. Tipton tries to draw a distinction between importance and fame. He is remorsefully selective (only about 5,000 graves at the site are categorized as famous) and is considering adding a rating system that will allow site visitors to decide the matter.
Graves of the non-famous, however, are the emotional core of the site. Mr. Tipton's goal is to mimic an actual cemetery visit, so users can leave notes and ''virtual flowers'' on a grave record (thousands of such flowers are placed daily). Mr. Tipton had to institute a review system to prevent what he calls ''virtual-flower abuse,'' or the posting of negative comments about the dead, however, and he does not allow notes to be left at some graves, like Hitler's.
The site appears to fill an important commemorative function in addition to its research benefits. James Seidelman, a volunteer who has added nearly 40,000 names and 7,000 grave photos to the site, was recently asked by a woman in Australia to make a photograph of her grandfather's grave in Los Angeles and post it. ''She doubts she will ever get to L.A. to visit it, but now she has a visual of the cemetery and the grave,'' he said by e-mail.
Haunted by a Song
In May 2002, Michelle Harlan developed an ''innocent obsession'': she had to identify a song she'd heard in a Mitsubishi TV commercial.
After scouring the Web, she eventually found an answer (for the record, the song was ''Breathe'' by the French electronic music trio Télépopmusik). She chronicled her search on her Web log, quidnunc.org, inspiring others to relate similar quests. The posts evolved into a discussion forum at her site called ''As Heard on TV,'' and then into a separate site, adtunes.com, last spring.
''I think most people have experienced getting a song stuck in their heads that they've heard on TV,'' said Jon C. Allen, a co-founder of the site who, like Ms. Harlan, is a graphic designer in Los Angeles. Adtunes.com features forums devoted to music used in TV shows, films, and video games, but the most active discussion is about commercials.
One premise of Adtunes is that commercials are a primary way people discover new music. ''Chances are you'll hear new music in a commercial before FM radio,'' Mr. Allen said. Ms. Harlan said that while some companies make it difficult to track down the music used in their ads, others play up their role as musical tastemakers.
''Volkswagen has a whole area of its Web site devoted to the music from its commercials,'' she said. ''They probably got tired of getting e-mails from people like me.''
'We Are the Web'
Do Internet users in different countries approach the online world differently, or do they have more in common with one another than with the non-user next door?
One of the first research efforts to compare Internet use internationally has found striking commonalities from country to country as well as a few head-scratching anomalies.
The World Internet Project (www.worldinternetproject.net), conducted by the University of California at Los Angeles, surveyed people in 14 nations, including Britain, China, Japan, Spain and the United States.
In all the countries surveyed, television viewing is lower among Net users than non-users. ''This is a huge change in behavior we are just starting to explore,'' said Jeffrey Cole, director of the U.C.L.A. Center for Communication Policy. In the United States, for instance, users watch 5.2 fewer hours of television per week than non-users. The study also found that Internet users in all of the countries surveyed spend more time than non-users on social activities.
Yet the gender gap online varies widely by country. In the United States, only a few points separate the percentage of men and women who use the Net (73.1 percent of men, versus 69 percent of women), yet nearly twice as many men as women use the Internet in Italy (41.7 percent to 21.5 percent).
''The disparities in how people from different countries view the credibility of information on the Net are also striking,'' Mr. Cole said. Such differences may arise in part from traditional differences in the nations' media and culture. Users in Korea have the highest level of trust in online information, while Swedes are the least trusting.
In the United States, ''credibility is dropping year to year,'' Mr. Cole said. The reason, he added: ''Experience.''
On the Radar
Do politicians bend the facts?, a nonpartisan site created by the Annenberg Public Policy Center of the University of Pennsylvania, factcheck.org, parses political speeches in search of truth -- or fiction. Perhaps the best-known bus shelter in the world can be found on the Scottish island of Unst (www.unstbusshelter.shetland.co.uk). A savvy new group Web log about women and technology is at misbehaving.net.
Online Diary
