''What is Jack Paar really like?'' The question was so persistently asked that for a time it became a sort of national catchphrase, and it dogged Jack for years. No one has ever answered it to anyone's satisfaction and I will not (sorry) be the exception.
Jack Paar, who died on Tuesday at 85, was an immense talent. He appeared to be uninfluenced. His delivery of material was like that of no one who came before. He was a genius as a monologuist, and I'm not sure anyone has revealed that he did his monologue without cue cards or prompter. He selected the material he wanted and then wrote it out for himself with a fountain pen, and he had it. This is unheard of.
He had looks and brains and talent, but so do many people. But you never hear anyone say, ''He's a Jack Paar type.'' Mercurial may come closest to describing that unique makeup that was Jack's personality. He was smart, sentimental, witty, irritable, loyal, insecure, infuriating, hilarious, neurotic and totally entertaining.
I once asked the British critic Kenneth Tynan why no matter who was on the screen with him, you watched Jack. He replied, ''You can't look away for fear of missing a live nervous breakdown on your home screen.''
Jack was repeatedly ridiculed for his crying. He did cry now and then. Although it was plain to me that it was genuine, not everyone enjoyed it. At a party just before Johnny took over the ''Tonight'' show, I heard someone say, ''If Carson is on that show 10 years [!], he will never shed a single tear.''
Someone else responded, ''For which I will be profoundly grateful to him.''
Could Jack ad-lib or was it all written? the unwashed would ask. One night Jack said backstage: ''Watch this, kid. When fat Jack Leonard comes out, I'm just going to freeze him out with silence.''
Jack did, and after Leonard had exhausted his one-liners to no reply, in panic he seized on a fact.
Leonard: ''You know, my wife is an acrobat.''
Paar: ''She'd have to be.''
(Pandemonium.)
There were moments with Jack that I have yet to puzzle out. When I was dropping off my material for the ''Tonight'' show on Jack's desk one day, he looked up and said, ''Hey, kid, you haven't given me anything I could use in weeks.''
Shattered, I pointed out some of my recent lines that he had used, to no avail.
''Oh, and go a little easy on the fag jokes, O.K.?'' he asked.
''I didn't know I had written any fag jokes, Jack.''
''Just go easy on 'em, O.K.?''
''Sure,'' I said, stupefied. I told one of the older writers, and he said: ''That's just Jack. He's forgotten it already.'' That sort of thing took some getting used to. The rewards made it worth it.
He gave me the best advice I ever got. I asked him what the secret was in doing such a show.
''Don't make it an interview, kid,'' he said. ''Make it a conversation. Interviews have clipboards.''
Jack envied education. He once asked, ''What's the magazine?'' I had a copy of, of all things, The Partisan Review under my arm. ''Have you finished it?''
''Yes,'' I said, lying.
''Leave it off.''
The next day he told me what he thought of an article on Marilyn Monroe titled ''Marilyn and the Law of Negative Compensation,'' or some such pretentious title. He then analyzed the article so impressively that I had to reread it.
''She was a nice girl'' he said. I didn't know then that they were in a film together.
The next thing Jack relieved me of was my copy of The Observer of London. Hearing him say on the air, ''I just read in The Observer . . .'' made me proud of my, um, student.
The bad part of this schooling envy of Jack's was that he would sometimes abase himself before guests who hadn't a scintilla of his wit or native intelligence.
Every time I thought I now knew Jack, something would prove the contrary.
One memorable night I shared the hotel elevator with a Who's Who of Hollywood. Eager to score points with Jack, then my new boss, I rushed to his door and pounded. The room was dark, and he was half-dressed, had a bottle of wine and was watching the show. And his hairpiece was askew. Oblivious to the degree to which I was not welcome, I blurted: ''Judy Garland, Cary Grant, Jack Benny . . . are at a party right upstairs. I knew you'd want to know.''
The only part of the ensuing tirade that I recall included the repeated use of an expletive and ''Don't tell 'em where I am! I'd rather die!'' The door was closed energetically.
I survived.
What have we lost? A giant of the entertainment industry whose foibles and neuroses were probably far more fun for us than they were for him.
I asked Jack once, ''What's the formula for how to handle things when you don't like a guest?''
He said: ''You think of it as what you would do in real life. Smile, be nice and then suddenly kick 'em under the table.''
An Appreciation Dick Cavett was a writer for Jack Paar and later helped to revolutionize the late-night talk show.
