Shares of Biogen, the biotechnology company, changed hands at an average price of $38.71 with one minute left in the trading session on the Nasdaq stock market on Nov. 12. Then, in the final five seconds, a series of small orders flooded the market, sending the stock up 1 percent.
Sharp swings like this in Nasdaq stocks at the end of the day's trading have raised concerns at the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation. Worried that the volatile prices are unreliable, the company is planning to announce that it will soon start using American Stock Exchange closing prices for some Nasdaq stocks when it compiles daily movements in its widely followed S.&amp;P. 500-stock index.
''It's clear there are times when there are a lot of concerns about prices on Nasdaq,'' said David M. Blitzer, chief investment strategist at Standard &amp; Poor's. ''Our big concern is the close. I think it offers a real opportunity for mischief.''
The Nasdaq stock market has scored some coups recently by luring companies like Hewlett-Packard, the Walgreen Company and the Charles Schwab Corporation to list shares for trading there as well as on the New York Stock Exchange. Still, extreme volatility at the day's end on Nasdaq poses problems for big investors.
Those people who need a firm price on big trades at the end of the day to keep their portfolios in line with the index may be unable to do so in the Nasdaq market. And investors worry that someone who wants to manipulate a stock's price higher at the close, for example, could send in a series of small buy orders that exceed the number of shares for sale, a practice called spraying the market.
The pilot program planned by Standard &amp; Poor's, a unit of McGraw Hill, will begin with a dozen stocks. The number of stocks in the program will increase, Mr. Blitzer said, if the American Stock Exchange process works well. There are 74 stocks in the S.&amp;P. 500 index that trade on Nasdaq; they include Microsoft, Intel, Dell and Amgen.
Mr. Blitzer said he would also evaluate a new system that Nasdaq officials hope will address investor concerns about its closing process; it is expected to begin at the end of March.
Stocks trade differently if their primary market is the Nasdaq, which is completely electronic, rather than exchanges like the New York Stock Exchange and the American Stock Exchange, where specialists physically handle trades on a floor. Because prices in Nasdaq stocks are determined by many different traders whose far-flung desks are connected electronically, there is no central site to set a price that reflects supply and demand from all investors at the open or close of trading. As a result, there can be multiple prices within the same second in Nasdaq stocks at the close.
Stocks that trade on exchange floors, by contrast, have closing prices that are determined by the pairing of investor orders by specialists charged with executing trades. The American Stock Exchange, which is now owned by NASD but is in talks to be sold, has traded Nasdaq stocks on its floor since August 2002.
According to traders on equity and derivative desks, big fluctuations in shares at the close of trading are much more common in Nasdaq stocks than they are in Big Board shares. ''There are 426 stocks in the index that do not trade on Nasdaq, and we don't hear concerns from investors about those that are closed on the New York,'' Mr. Blitzer said.
Officials at the Nasdaq stock market have contended over the years that their electronic trading system is superior to the ages-old process on the exchanges that require human intervention to fulfill investor orders. After the regulatory investigations into improper trading by specialists on the New York Stock Exchange, Nasdaq has become especially aggressive in trying to convince investors and public companies that its system is preferable.
The move by Standard &amp; Poor's, however, indicates that some investors find the Nasdaq system to have serious flaws. And S.&amp;P.'s choice of the American Stock Exchange for the closing price on Nasdaq stocks in its index will give that exchange a boost, as traders in search of stable markets may send their orders there and take lucrative trading volume away from Nasdaq.
''Nasdaq has never had and never addressed a market-clearing open and close, meaning that a price is set that satisfies all market orders on the close or open,'' said the manager of an index arbitrage trading desk at a major Wall Street firm who spoke on the condition that he not be identified. ''If I need to sell one million shares of Microsoft on the close, there is no mechanism in that market to get that price except to go to a dealer to guarantee that price. And I perceive Nasdaq dealers as less willing to take risk.''
A reliable closing price is necessary for buyers and sellers of any stock, of course. But being able to execute large orders at the closing price is crucial for managers of stock index funds because that is the price at which investors must buy or sell fund shares. Now, though, the official closing price on Nasdaq could be on a small order of, say, 100 shares. Unless fund managers get a brokerage firm to guarantee that their much larger orders will be completed at the closing price, they can be unable to execute those trades. If their trades are not done at the official closing price, their fund's shares will diverge from the S.&amp;P. index, not mimic its moves, as investors expect such funds to do.
Traders say that brokerage firms are hesitant to guarantee closing prices on Nasdaq in part because of the extreme moves sometimes seen in that market at the close. Consider the events of Oct. 31, when Zebra Technology, a maker of barcode and label printers, was added to the S.&amp;P. 400 midcap index and removed from the S.&amp;P. 600, a small- stock index. In the last five seconds of that day's trading, the company's shares moved in a range of $1.90, or approximately 3 percent of its closing price. Some 800 orders for 100 shares of Zebra caused the swing; the stock typically trades about half a million shares a day.
Even shares of Microsoft, one of Nasdaq's most heavily traded stocks, can move significantly at the close. On June 20, in the last five seconds of trading, the difference between Microsoft's high and low price was 31 cents, or more than 1 percent of its $26.32 close.
Traders say extreme swings at the close in Nasdaq stocks may be a result of investors trying to manipulate prices. Sending in a series of small orders at the close, as may have occurred in Zebra, can push the price up or down temporarily. One large order entered at the close can have the same effect.
Adena T. Friedman, head of strategy at Nasdaq, conceded that its opening and closing procedures needed to be improved and pointed to the changes planned in March.
''What we are creating is the opportunity for buyers and sellers to come together to determine a single price at the close,'' Ms. Friedman said. The process, she explained, will allow market participants to submit orders to Nasdaq to be executed on the close. Ten minutes before the close, Nasdaq officials will publish imbalances in stocks, giving traders the ability to submit orders to offset those imbalances. This is similar to closing procedures on the Big Board and the American Stock Exchange.
Mr. Blitzer said that Standard &amp; Poor's would wait to see if Nasdaq's new process eliminates volatility. ''In some sense this is a question of how markets should be structured and that's not our concern,'' he said. ''We got into it because from time to time, we'll get a lot of calls from clients. We do feel a lot of investors are concerned.''
Correction:  January 30, 2004, Friday  An article and a picture caption in Business Day yesterday about plans by the Standard &amp; Poor's Corporation to use American Stock Exchange closing prices for some Nasdaq stocks when it compiles its 500-stock index misstated the title of David M. Blitzer, an S.&amp; P. executive. He is chairman of the company's index committee, not its chief investment strategist.
