At the Sugarbush Resort in central Vermont, which opened 45 years ago this winter, a celebrated history yields pride and a predicament.
Every serious skier has heard of Sugarbush, once known as Mascara Mountain, the Aspen of the East in the 1960's and 70's. It was a place of designers, designer clothing and Kennedy offspring, a pop culture scene almost -- but not quite -- as unstinted as the skiing terrain.
But somewhere along the way, while other Vermont ski areas broadened their market share with skillful promotion, Sugarbush fell off the radar.
''A lot of people will come up and say: 'Oh, Sugarbush! That's my favorite mountain,' '' Molly Mahar, director of marketing, said last week. ''And then they'll add, 'I haven't been there in 20 years.' ''
There is no simple answer to how the legend and allure of Sugarbush went from something people experienced to something they reminisced about. Certainly, it has nothing to do with what the mountain has to offer, not with refurbished lifts and snow-making, a sprawling 115 trails across two widely diverse peaks -- all of it in the heart of a genuine Vermont hill and dale community.
It is true that Sugarbush is a bit farther away from most metropolitan areas, a 70-minute drive north of Killington, for example, but so are other ski areas, like Stowe and Smuggler's Notch.
More subtly, there were missteps that clouded the Sugarbush brand. For several years, Sugarbush was the odd commodity under the aegis of the mammoth American Skiing Company, which already owned other New England areas it worked hard to promote: Killington, as well as Sugarloaf and Sunday River in Maine.
''Morale was really down at Sugarbush, there was no plan to revive the place and I was worried for it,'' said Win Smith, a longtime Sugarbush patron who until two years ago was also the chief executive of Merrill Lynch International.
In 2001, Smith headed a threesome of investors who bought the resort. Smith, 54, has set about remaking this mainstay of Eastern skiing with a distinctive, anti-big-resort vision. Spurning expansive development, something Smith called ''minicities on mountains,'' he will instead pursue a niche market focused on winter enthusiasts seeking an authentic Vermont experience.
''The product is a fabulous mountain and a Mad River Valley environment that lowered my blood pressure by 20 points every time I drove into it,'' he said. ''We will keep everything in character. There is still no street light in the valley, no McDonald's, no Burger King. We do not want to compete against Killington or Stratton. We don't have to have one million skiers to be profitable. We can do it with 350,000 skiers.''
So far, Smith's most impressive accomplishment may have been his ability to assuage Vermont environmentalists, as he swiftly won permits for the linchpin of Sugarbush's overhaul, the 140-room Lodge at Lincoln Peak. Sugarbush's base lodging options have lagged behind competitors for decades.
It is the only large lodging development Smith plans, and when Smith used an old-fashioned team of horses to clear timber from the construction site -- and preserved the maple trees for use in the lodge -- he had more credibility with the locals. When it came time to replace an old double chairlift accessing Sugarbush's superior advanced terrain, Smith rejected the impulse to install a four-person lift to maximize skiing and riding traffic. Instead, the take-your-time pace on the renowned Castle Rock trails will remain unchanged beneath a new double chairlift.
''American Skiing Company did a lot of nice things here, about $20 million in improvements,'' said Smith, who first skied in the Mad River Valley as a New England college student in 1970. ''But you can't get along in this valley operating as a corporation. People here don't want to be employees, they want to be partners.
''Using the horses, we didn't have to cut a road for a tractor-trailer, and the horses could maneuver around the remaining trees. It was antiquated but effective.''
The lodge, which is scheduled to open in the fall of 2005, is a luxurious ski-in, ski-out development shaped into the mountain with all the upscale amenities, like a spa, wine cellar and heated underground parking. Smith knows it will not be built without bulldozers, but he feels his other efforts to minimize impact on the area have earned a level of trust.
Smith has turned back the clock in other ways. The new ski school directors are longtime Sugarbush residents: the two-time Alpine Olympian Doug Lewis and the extreme skier John Egan. Fittingly, they have instituted a less-is-more philosophy of instruction.
''We don't line people up in the morning and tell them what they're going to learn today,'' said Lewis, whose smiling countenance on a local morning television show -- his wife, Kelly, is the co-host -- is fast becoming the engaging new face of Sugarbush. ''What we do is ask them what they would like to learn today. Make it fun.''
Last fall, to celebrate Sugarbush's 45th anniversary, much of the old gang from the Mascara Mountain days returned for a weekend party. They talked about the days when Sugarbush vacationers graced national magazine covers, the embodiment of a newly popular American sport in the midst of a cultural boom.
''You could feel the energy,'' Smith said. ''It is more understated now, intentionally so. But there is a soul of the valley. We are preserving the authenticity, the character of a special place. And it is worth preserving.''
THE SKI REPORT
