LAST week I decided it was time to undertake a thorough accounting of my assets.
I imagine that for some people, this might require stressful activities like poring over monthly brokerage reports, engaging in heartfelt conversations with financial advisers or even balancing a year's worth of bank statements.
But my circumstances are different. To tally my wealth, all I had to do was rummage through the junk drawer in the kitchen. There I found:
Three Borders gift cards, of indeterminate age and value.
One Saks gift card, attached to a note that said the card was worth $100.
One Blockbuster gift card for $5, on which someone had long ago written ''Happy Birthday.''
A scribbled reminder to myself about a $50 electronic gift certificate from Amazon.com that my sister-in-law (thanks, Dana!) had sent.
I was worth at least $155 in unclaimed merchandise. Or put another way, I had gotten my fair share of the record $45 billion that the National Retail Foundation estimated shoppers spent last year on gift cards.
But what good was it doing me? I hadn't set foot in a Saks since I moved from New York in 2002. I'd probably forget to spend the $50 credit at Amazon.com. As for the Blockbuster card, I would rather change a flat tire beside the highway in the rain than endure the lackluster selection and long checkout lines in our local store.
The situation put me at risk of being among the 10 percent of recipients that Consumer Reports last month reported never redeem their gift cards. The only possible solution was to seek help online.
At two new Internet sites called swapagift.com and certificateswap.com, both founded just in time to take advantage of the spike in gift-card sales after the holiday season, I could sell unused gift cards and then pocket the money or exchange them for other cards that I would be more likely to use.
I had heard about the sites, which charge a fee, because one of them, Certificateswap.com, had been getting a lot of news coverage in the weeks since it started operating. In fact, Cameron Johnson, the company's 19-year-old founder (a college student described as a ''whiz kid'' in at least one newspaper article) told me last week that he already was seeking venture capital to expand the business.
''Venture capital for a Web site? The last time I heard talk like that was in the 90's before the economy crashed,'' I said. ''And the last person I heard described as a whiz kid was Doogie Howser.''
''With an Internet business, it's all timing, timing, timing,'' Mr. Johnson said. He has been capitalizing on good timing since he was 12 years old, when, he said, he earned $50,000 selling Beanie Babies.
Although his site and SwapAGift.com offer slightly different services, both owe their inspiration to www.ebay.com, which has long trafficked in unwanted gift cards. When I checked last week, eBay had a total of 3,160 items combined listed under the descriptions ''gift cards,'' ''gift certificates'' and ''gift coupons.''
In contrast, last week CertificateSwap.com had about 500 cards for sale, including many that Mr. Cameron listed himself to increase the selection. At SwapAGift.com, about 100 cards were listed for sale or swap; the site's owner, Mike Kelly, said his goal is to increase listings to as many as 1,000 by the end of 2004.
The idea behind the sites is that both buyer and seller benefit. The cards, which otherwise might lie forgotten in a kitchen junk drawer, generally sell at a discount off face value, creating an incentive for a buyer.
Would the sites work for me? The first step was to ascertain the value of my mystery cards.
This in theory sounded easy. But in fact it took nearly half an hour to learn that my four cards from Borders and Blockbuster were probably worth less than $6.
First, a toll-free phone call to Borders. Of my three cards, one had an unused balance of $3.54, one a balance of $2.27 and the third had been redeemed for its full $25 value during an online purchase in January 2003.
The total of $5.81 didn't seem worth selling, since all the sites charge service or listing fees. Since Borders only allows the use of a single gift card per online purchase, I instead put them in my wallet to use the next time I went to a Borders store, where I could use both for a single purchase.
The Blockbuster card proved a problem. A phone call to the toll-free number on the card reached a recorded message that said the company was unable to check the balance at this time. ''Please visit the nearest Blockbuster for the current status of your card,'' the recording said. Then the machine disconnected me with an annoying buzz perhaps meant to inspire flashbacks of the typical Blockbuster experience.
Fine print on the Blockbuster card said that after 24 months of non-use, a $2-a-month service fee would be charged on the $5 balance. I had no idea how old the card was. I threw it away.
The next step was to determine how to get the most value from my remaining assets, the certificate from Amazon.com and the Saks card.
At Certificateswap.com, sellers are required to discount cards and certificates by at least 3 percent; the most I could get for the Amazon.com certificate was $48.50 and for the Saks card, $97. Plus, the site charges a fee of 7.5 percent of the sale price, plus an additional $2 fee for processing a Paypal payment to the seller -- or $2.75 for processing and mailing a payment by check. (Sellers can avoid processing fees by using the proceeds to buy other gift cards on the site.)
At SwapAGift.com, a seller pays $3.99 to list a card for 90 days, and the site leaves it up to the seller to determine how much of a discount to offer off face value. Sellers and buyers communicate directly with each other to complete the transaction, so there are no processing fees.
At eBay, listing fees range from 30 cents to $3.30 depending on the price of the item. If I listed my gift cards with a starting price of zero and no reserve, I would only pay 30 cents per listing. But without a reserve, I would have to settle for the highest bid. If I instead set a starting price of, say, $30 (for the Amazon.com gift certificate) and $60 (the one from Saks), the listing fees would be $1.10 and $2.20 respectively.
A quick search of recent sales on eBay yielded the information that in January nine other $100 Saks cards had sold for prices ranging from $74 to $84, plus shipping charges. Some sellers charged as much as $5 to ''ship'' a gift card to a buyer.
My conclusion? This could turn out to be a very complicated and tedious process for an undertaking that in the end would net me well under $150. (I hadn't even started contemplating the work of mailing the cards to the buyers.)
I solved part of the problem by spending the Amazon.com certificate before I forgot about it. That took about two minutes. Then I put the Saks card in my wallet next to the Borders card.
Then I vowed to clean out my bulging wallet. Someday.
ONLINE SHOPPER E-mail: Slatalla@nytimes.com
