He was the first person out of the locker room and the first person on the team bus after the Packers' season ended. In his first public remarks since the Packers lost to the Eagles in a National Football Conference playoff game almost three weeks ago, quarterback Brett Favre said Wednesday that he feels that his time is running out for another shot at his second Super Bowl title.
''With each game I play, with each season I play, I'm running out of chances,'' Favre said. ''This will be 14 years coming up. I can say I've been fortunate to win a Super Bowl. But you're never guaranteed next year. You're never guaranteed the next game. You have to seize the opportunity when it's there in front of you.''
Favre was in town to receive an award for his stirring performance against Oakland in a Monday night game one day after his father, Irv, died. Favre will not stick around to watch the Super Bowl. He will not watch it, and said he can barely remember which year the Packers won the title because it seems so long ago.
(It was the 1997 Super Bowl, in which the Packers defeated the Patriots, 35-21.)
Favre said that he plans to return for his 14th season, but the sting of the Packers' loss to the Eagles, 20-17, in overtime is still fresh.
Favre felt that the Packers had a better chance to advance to the Super Bowl this season than they did last season, when they lost to the Atlanta Falcons, 27-7, in a wild-card playoff game.
The day after the Packers' loss, Favre packed up a few things and returned home to Mississippi, then went to watch his daughter's basketball game. Favre acknowledged that he avoided reporters.
''I felt at that time I didn't have a lot of good things to say,'' he said. ''I didn't have a lot of things to say, period. There was a point in that game when I felt this is it for us. Up until they kicked the field goal, I thought it was ours. It was a shock to me.''
Patriots Move Indoors
The Patriots have moved their practice site this week to the Houston Texans' indoor practice facility, adjacent to Reliant Stadium. The Patriots began the week practicing outside at Rice University, but the field was mushy after it rained last weekend. If it rains in Houston on Thursday or Friday, the Panthers will also practice at the Texans' facility.
Belichick Likes the Kleckos
Patriots Coach Bill Belichick believes the former Jet Joe Klecko had the best power rush he has seen. Klecko never made it the Super Bowl in his playing career, but he will arrive in Houston Thursday to watch his son, Dan -- a rookie defensive lineman for the Patriots -- in his first Super Bowl. Dan Klecko was inactive for the American Football Conference championship game against the Colts and he may not see much time on the field this Sunday. But his father has been plying him with advice this week.
''He's been telling me to enjoy it and take it all in because he never made it to this game,'' Dan Klecko said.
He has played middle and outside linebacker, defensive end, defensive tackle, fullback and special teams this season. ''The more I am able to do, the more I can stay around,'' Klecko said.
PRO FOOTBALL: NOTEBOOK
