HIGHLIGHTS
HALLE BERRY'S MISHAP -- Catwoman may be fantastic, but Halle Berry, left, is only human. Ms. Berry, starring in ''Catwoman'' as the masterly cat burglar based on the comic book character who beguiles and bedevils Batman, made a trip to a hospital in Vancouver, British Columbia, after running into a piece of the set during production, The Associated Press reported. ''She had to maneuver past a piece of equipment, a set piece, and she didn't quite run past it, but she's just fine,'' Joe Everett, a spokesman for the production, said. ''She was taken to the hospital Saturday night, treated and released, and was at work again Monday morning.'' Ms. Berry, 37, who won an Academy Award as best actress for her performance in the 2001 film ''Monster's Ball,'' broke an arm last year during the filming of ''Gothika'' and injured an eye on the set of the 2002 James Bond film ''Die Another Day.''
STOCKHOLM: BACK FROM ABBA -- Breaking 17 years of recording silence, the reclusive Agnetha Faltskog, 53, once a member of the Swedish pop sensation Abba, has signed with Warner Music Scandinavia for a new album, Reuters reported yesterday. The company said it would release the recording, ''My Coloring Book,'' in the spring. Ms. Faltskog achieved fame in the 1970's in Abba with Bjorn Ulvaeus, Benny Andersson and Annifrid Lyngstad. After hits like ''Dancing Queen'' and ''Waterloo,'' the quartet disbanded in 1982. Ms. Faltskog's last album, ''I Stand Alone,'' was released in 1987.
PARIS: 21st-CENTURY LITERATURE -- A new novel from the land of Zola, Flaubert, Hugo and Proust lays claim to being the first written in the abbreviated slang used for cellular phone-text messages. The French novel, ''Pa Sage a TaBa'' -- translated by Agence France-Presse from French jargon to mean ''Not Wise to Smoke,'' is the work of Phil Marso. He calls its antismoking message a public service to youngsters and says that 12- to 15-year-olds are the foremost users of S.M.S., the short message system. The book uses the French equivalents of such English terms as L.O.L. for laugh out loud and D8 for date. And, yes, for the uninitiated, the novel's appendix provides a lexicon.
ATHENS: 'CHAINSAW' UPROAR -- It's not the blood. It's not the violence. What has outraged psychiatrists in Athens is the Greek-language title of the remake of the cult horror film ''The Texas Chainsaw Massacre.'' In Greece the film is called ''The Schizophrenic Chainsaw Killer,'' Reuters reported. In a joint statement issued yesterday, leaders of three psychiatric groups said: ''The title has no relation to the English title. The protagonist of the movie is not suffering from schizophrenia, and so it is insulting and demeaning to those suffering from it. The Greek title reproduces the stereotype that everyone suffering from schizophrenia is violent and dangerous.'' The leader of one group said the distributor had agreed to run a disclaimer that the killer, Leatherface, is not schizophrenic.
PUBLISHING: MIKE GALLAGHER'S BOOK -- A book by Mike Gallagher, the popular conservative radio talk show host, is to be published early next year by William Morrow, an imprint of HarperCollins Publishers. Titled ''Surrounded by Idiots: Fighting Liberal Lunacy in America,'' the book will address what Mr. Gallagher said is ''the frustration and anger we feel about the way liberals have attempted to hijack core American values like family and decency, and how the tide is turning.''
FOOTNOTES
Citing an impending delay in the arrival of sets and costumes for its production of John Neumeier's ''Nijinsky,'' the Hamburg Ballet has cut one performance from its scheduled appearance next month at City Center. Instead of performing Feb. 19 through 22, the run is to start Feb. 20. . . . The drummer Sherrie Maricle and her all-woman Diva Jazz Orchestra will join Skitch Henderson and the New York Pops in ''Swinging With the Orchestra,'' a salute to the swing era, at 8 p.m. tomorrow at Carnegie Hall.
