The Federal Reserve left short-term interest rates at just 1 percent on Wednesday, the lowest level since 1958, but it jolted markets by retreating from its open-ended pledge to keep rates low for ''a considerable period.''
Though subtle, the Fed's change in language after its two-day policy meeting surprised many economists because it suggested that the central bank might raise rates before the end of the year.
Prices on Treasury securities dropped, stocks declined and the dollar jumped in reaction to the news, though the markets recovered in part as analysts parsed the Fed's language in greater detail. The most significant near-term change from this new signal is that it will be much harder for home mortgage, corporate and Treasury interest rates to continue to edge lower. [Page C1.]
By shifting its language, the Fed gains a bit more latitude in the timing of any rate increase, in case it detects any signs that the economy is at risk of overheating.
A close reading of the statement by the Fed suggested that its chairman, Alan Greenspan, remains unlikely to push for higher interest rates for several more months. As it has before, the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets monetary policy, reiterated its view that inflation remains low and that the economy still has a considerable amount of ''slack'' in the form of relatively high unemployment and large amounts of unused factory capacity.
''With inflation quite low and resource-use slack, the committee believes that it can be patient in removing its policy accommodation,'' the central bank said in its statement after the meeting.
The distinction between keeping rates low for a ''considerable period'' and being ''patient'' is in many ways a nuance, but investors have interpreted the Fed's statements for the last several months as a promise that it would not raise rates until further notice.
For many investors, the Fed's statement on Wednesday was tantamount to being served notice.
''Chairman Greenspan does not make changes unless he thinks there is good reason to do so,'' said Michael Prell, a former chief of research at the Federal Reserve. ''Even though the difference between 'patient' and a 'considerable period' might sound like a superficial difference, they must have thought this would communicate news to the marketplace.''
The Fed statement is not necessarily bad news for President Bush, even though it increases the possibility of higher interest rates soon before elections in November. Economists remain split between those who expect Mr. Greenspan to start tightening policy this summer and those who expect him to wait until early next year. Any changes in interest rates take several months to have a tangible effect on business activity and employment.
Over the last few weeks, many longtime Fed watchers became convinced that the central bank would make no changes in its language. Last month, the Fed startled markets by declaring that the risks of ''an unwelcome fall in inflation'' had diminished significantly and were almost equal to the risk of a unwanted rise in prices.
But the Fed retained its promise to keep rates low for ''a considerable period,'' a move that led many analysts to conclude that the Fed could afford to adopt a wait-and-see stance.
Many economists were surprised and perplexed by the shift in language.
Robert V. DiClemente, a senior economist at Citigroup, said the Fed caught investors ''flat footed'' with its change in emphasis.
Ian C. Shepherdson, an economist at High Frequency Economics, said the Fed had ''blind-sided the markets'' but done so with so much ambiguity that its statement could be read in several different ways.
Lawrence H. Meyer, a former Fed governor, noted that the central bank shifted from past declarations about ''remaining accommodative'' to the more chilling formulation about ''removing accommodation.''
''This is an important change in body language,'' Mr. Meyer said. ''The change in the language almost certainly carries a change in the message.''
The Fed's shift may have more to do with its struggle over communications than with an imminent change in monetary policy. After reducing the federal funds rate on overnight loans between banks to just 1 percent last summer, the Federal Reserve sought to reassure corporations and investors that it would keep rates low longer than it might have during past recoveries.
But many Fed officials have been uncomfortable with the promise to keep rates low for ''a considerable period,'' because the central bank has traditionally avoided making even implicit commitments about future policy.
Mr. Greenspan recently organized a special committee to re-examine how it communicates policy to the public, and Fed officials have tried to clarify their commitment by linking changes in policy to signs of accelerating inflation and a pickup in the job market.
William C. Dudley, chief United States economist at Goldman Sachs, said the Fed's statement on Wednesday was more about language than substance.
''We were clearly surprised,'' Mr. Dudley acknowledged. But he said the Fed continued to emphasize the same concerns it has for the last several months -- inflation that is almost uncomfortably low and ''slack'' in the economy.
''We think nothing fundamentally has changed,'' Mr. Dudley said. ''The Fed thinks inflation is too low and it wants inflation to go up.''
Mr. DiClemente of Citigroup agreed, though Citigroup recently moved up its own prediction of when the central bank would start to raise rates to late this summer from early next year.
''People have been arguing that the Fed was behind the curve,'' Mr. DiClemente said. But he added, ''We still have some hurdles before there can be any tightening.''
Richard Yamarone, chief economist at Argus Research in New York City, said Mr. Greenspan and the other Fed governors might have wanted to modify their language before getting any closer to the presidential elections. The Fed typically tries to avoid policy changes soon before elections, for fear of being accused of interfering in the political process.
''It would have been much more explosive if they had done this closer to the elections,'' Mr. Yamarone said.
The Fed's announcement came just two days before the government is scheduled to release its initial estimate of economic growth in the fourth quarter of 2003, and most economists are predicting that the economy grew at a strong annualized rate of 4.5 percent and possibly as high as 5 percent. Though slower than the torrid pace of the third quarter, that would still be much faster than many people had expected just a few months ago.
After its policy-setting meeting last month, the Open Market Committee created a buzz in financial markets by declaring that the chances of an ''unwelcome fall in inflation'' had diminished and were almost equal to the risks of a rise in prices.
Since then, economists have been startled by initial reports showing that job creation came to a halt in December and that ''core'' inflation -- excluding the volatile food and energy sectors -- climbed at an annual rate of barely 1 percent in December. And on Wednesday, new data showed that orders for durable goods last month were much lower than had been expected.
''The rate of inflation is extremely low, arguably lower than they would like to see it,'' said Joshua Feinman, chief economist at Deutsche Asset Management in New York. ''Combined with the notion that the economy still has some degree of slack in the labor and capital markets, that makes them a little uncomfortable.''
