A senior British judge on Wednesday cleared Prime Minister Tony Blair and his government of any deliberate attempt to deceive the British public over the threat from Iraq mentioned in a September 2002 intelligence dossier.
The judge, Lord Hutton, then castigated the BBC for sloppy, inaccurate reporting and ''defective'' editorial supervision in asserting that Mr. Blair and his aides exaggerated the case for war in Iraq.
In the long-awaited 740-page report, Lord Hutton called ''unfounded'' the assertion -- reported by the BBC on May 29 -- that government officials had used intelligence they ''probably knew'' was wrong.
After Lord Hutton read his conclusions from the bench in the Royal Courts of Justice, the chairman of the BBC's board of governors, Gavyn Davies, resigned in the face of one of the worst journalistic debacles in the 78-year history of the network. ''The Beeb,'' as it is known, operates a worldwide broadcasting empire and has set standards for editorial integrity over decades. Many of its journalists were astonished by Lord Hutton's rebuke.
After Mr. Blair narrowly escaped defeat on Tuesday by rebels in his own Labor Party in a fight over university tuition fees, Lord Hutton's findings provided a welcome and personal vindication for the prime minister, whose government seemed to be teetering from internal clashes over ideology, Iraq and leadership style. Though Mr. Blair was seen as gaining strength from the Hutton verdict, political experts still wondered how much further he would be able to take his party, given the continuing rebellion within its ranks and the corrosive effects of his close alliance with President Bush on Iraq.
The network's board of governors was set to meet Thursday to consider further steps in response to Lord Hutton's findings. Greg Dyke, the BBC's editor in chief, issued a recorded statement saying the broadcaster had already admitted that ''certain key allegations'' of the May report by its defense correspondent, Andrew Gilligan, ''were wrong, and we apologized for them.''
But he added that ''at no time'' did the network accuse Mr. Blair of lying, and he insisted that ''the public in a modern democracy has a right to be made aware'' of the serious concerns that were expressed to the BBC by Dr. David Kelly, the government weapons scientist who was the source for Mr. Gilligan's report.
Lord Hutton said he had drawn his mandate narrowly, so as not to enter the debate over the failure by American and British forces to find chemical, biological or other unconventional weapons in Iraq. It was the putative presence of those weapons, highlighted in Mr. Blair's 2002 intelligence dossier, that created a strong public impression that Mr. Hussein represented a threat that had to be removed.
Recent comments by David A. Kay, who led the American search for Iraq's unconventional weapons, have cast further doubt on the reliability of prewar intelligence assessments. Dr. Kay, the former head of the Iraq Survey Group, said he could find no evidence that Iraq had either stockpiles of the weapons or programs to produce them.
Lord Hutton vindicated British intelligence, saying he was satisfied that the contents of the dossier ''were consistent with the intelligence available'' to the Joint Intelligence Committee that advises Mr. Blair. But he added that he could not rule out the possibility that intelligence chiefs were influenced ''subconsciously'' by the prime minister's desire to have a strongly worded report to back the case for war.
The suicide of Dr. Kelly last July set off the political crisis and the inquiry by Lord Hutton, but the judge said no one in the government or the news media was to blame or could have foreseen the tragedy of his death. But he criticize the Ministry of Defense, where Dr. Kelly was employed, for not communicating clearly with him about a high-level decision to make his name public.
Dr. Kelly expressed his private doubts about the reliability of some intelligence findings on Iraq to Mr. Gilligan and another BBC reporter. That put him uncomfortably in the middle of the clash between the government and the network over the credibility of the BBC's reporting, the truthfulness of intelligence findings and Mr. Blair's statements about them.
Lord Hutton allowed in his report that it was possible to say that Mr. Blair had ''sexed up'' the intelligence findings, as long as the meaning was that the final dossier ''made the case against Saddam Hussein as strong as the intelligence in it permitted.''
But if the meaning was that the intelligence was ''embellished'' with items ''known or believed to be false or unreliable,'' then Lord Hutton said, ''I consider that the allegation was unfounded.''
In his resignation statement on Wednesday night, Mr. Davies, the BBC chairman, seemed to challenge Lord Hutton's impartiality, asking how he could reconcile his ''bald conclusions'' with some of the evidence presented during his extensive hearings last summer.
In those hearings, for instance, Sir Richard Billing Dearlove, the chief of the Secret Intelligence Service known as MI6, testified that ''it is a valid criticism'' to say that Mr. Blair's dossier improperly indicated that British forces were under threat from Iraqi chemical and biological weapons that could be deployed within 45 minutes.
That claimed threat dominated newspaper coverage, and the claim was one source of Dr. Kelly's reservations about how the dossier was being assembled under the political supervision of Alastair Campbell, then Mr. Blair's spokesman.
Moreover, the British intelligence view that Mr. Hussein was ''prepared to use chemical and biological weapons if he believes his regime is under threat'' was changed at the behest of Mr. Blair's chief of staff, Jonathan Powell, to remove the caveat ''if he was attacked.'' When the final dossier emerged, it said Mr. Hussein ''is willing to use chemical and biological weapons,'' a phrase that represented a far more threatening view of the former Iraqi leader.
Mr. Blair appeared in the House of Commons immediately after Lord Hutton concluded his televised remarks. He said six months of accusations that his government distorted intelligence in taking the country to war ''is itself the real lie -- I simply ask that those who made it and repeated it withdraw it.''
But the leader of the opposition, Michael Howard, refused Mr. Blair's at times indignant demand for an apology. Instead, Mr. Howard said his Conservative Party accepted Lord Hutton's conclusions, but still wanted an independent inquiry into why no unconventional weapons were found by American and British forces entering Iraq.
Lord Hutton's findings were a strong vindication for Mr. Blair, current and former government officials said in interviews.
''Obviously, in the short term, Blair is greatly strengthened by the report because it eliminates accusations of bad faith and impropriety,'' said Sir Malcolm Rifkind, a former foreign secretary. ''But don't forget that Hutton did not deal with the far more important question that the country has been grappling with: should we have gone to war in the first place and should the intelligence agencies be used for this purpose?''
