For Joy Persaud, 49, of East New York, Brooklyn, the trouble starts when she hears a noise in her head. In those moments, no matter where she is, she sits on the floor, arms crossed, and waits for a seizure. Ms. Persaud has epilepsy, and three to five times a week the seizures come. Though this has been her life for five years, she remains fearless and upbeat. In the summertime, she has cookouts every week for her neighbors.
''I like things done to me in the proper way and I do it back,'' Ms. Persaud said. ''And because of that I think the blessings come to me.''
Still, as the blessings have come, so have the battles. Thirteen years ago, Ms. Persaud met and fell in love with a man named Joseph Nord. It was a love affair that began during a traffic jam in Manhattan. Horns were blown, curses were uttered, but Mr. Nord was not offended by Ms. Persaud's ranting. ''He looked at me and laughed,'' she recalled. ''And he gave me his phone number.''
Ms. Persaud, embarrassed by her overreaction, called Mr. Nord. And by the end of the conversation, Mr. Nord not only had an apology but also a date. They became a couple and had a daughter, Melenna. A few years later, they decided to have another child. But Mr. Nord never got to know that child, his son Anthony.
When Ms. Persaud was five months pregnant, Mr. Nord went to Haiti to visit his family and never returned. Packed onto a boat with hundreds of others, he drowned when the ship sank, Ms. Persaud said. His body was never recovered.
Shortly after Mr. Nord's disappearance, Ms. Persaud began having slight vibrations in her hands and legs. During her pregnancy, she had had three to four seizures a day. And, after working as a nurse and home health attendant for nearly three decades, Ms. Persaud could no longer work. Her Social Security disability payments amount to $585 a month. Her older son, Terrence, 30, helps with the $1,000 rent and other expenses.
Since retirement, with her medications regulated, her seizures have decreased. But after Anthony was born, Ms. Persaud noticed that he was also having twitching spells. ''We used to call it the jigglebug,'' Melenna, 9, said of her brother's episodes.
One afternoon, when Anthony was 6 months old, he passed out. Doctors diagnosed epilepsy. But like his mother, he is cheerful and full of energy. Though small for his age, 5, he eats well, his mother said, and he bounces around the apartment like a wind-up toy.
Because of her condition, Ms. Persaud has had a home attendant who looks after her seven days a week. The attendant helps Ms. Persaud in the kitchen, takes her out during the day, and consults with Ms. Persaud's doctors during monthly visits. And with the help of a homemaker assigned by the Brooklyn Bureau of Community Service, one of the seven charities supported by The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund, Anthony is looked after during the day.
The homemaker helps with the children's homework and takes them to the park. On the weekends, Terrence helps out around the house and looks after his younger brother and sister. Recently, using $300 from the Neediest Cases Fund, Ms. Persaud was able to buy new winter clothes for Melenna and Anthony.
In spite of Ms. Persaud's unpredictable seizures, she is still very much in command of her home.
As Melenna wandered around the living room, looking at the goldfish and three parrots that are a part of the household, Ms. Persaud reminded her that she had a report due on the Brooklyn Bridge. ''I want a 100,'' Ms. Persaud said. ''That's all I'm asking.'' As for Anthony, a kindergartner, his only lesson that evening was learning that throwing a football in the house was not allowed.
And despite the uncertainties that come with each day, Ms. Persaud says she is content. ''I'm thankful for everything that's happened to me,'' she said. ''I love my home attendants. It's them that hold me together.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $7,548,200.03  Recorded Tuesday: $38,005.00  Total: $7,586,205.03
Last year to date: $8,240,549.04
