THERE is a quiet waiting quality to the winter garden, especially these last few frozen weeks, when boots squeak on the snow and birdbaths are solid ice.
The winter garden is bare bones: rock walls and paths, views to a tree with sculptured branches, a snow-covered fountain or rounded olive pot. When leaves and flowers no longer rule, you can appreciate the warp and weft of the garden: the lacy needles of a chamaecyparis, the rumpled solidity of an Alberta spruce, the blue-gray seedpods of a Siberian iris. A rock wall is not just gray but shades of gray and green, blue, brown, gold, yellow, orange and cream.
Last week, when temperatures were a relatively balmy 20 degrees (and there was no wind), I bundled up to explore three winter gardens. I often thawed out indoors, with a cup of hot coffee, to enjoy the views from the windows.
The garden Joseph Tyree designed for his parents, Kate and Joe Tyree, rolls down to two small, interconnected ponds, ringed by native trees and winterberry arching over a bridge near Mecox Bay, in Bridgehampton, N.Y. The simple cedar house sits about six feet below the street, where it is sheltered from north winds in a pocket of sunlight. A terraced garden for heat-loving plants, like phormiums and agaves, thymes and rosemaries, hunkers down into the slope between house and street, its yellow grasses sticking out of the snow, as fine as hair. A bench, the hint of paths, low stone walls, the few dried seedheads of sedums all seemed caught in suspended animation.
On the other side of the house, a single winterberry, Ilex verticillata, casts its brilliant red berries against white-framed windows. The wooden pergola over the front door is bare but for the winding vines of the kiwis planted by each post.
Such understatement draws the eye down the snowy slope to the ponds, where Mr. Tyree embellished the natives plants. ''The ilex and shad were there,'' Mr. Tyree said. ''I just added to them.''
He planted white birch next to the mottled trunks of the shadblow and black gums on the far side of the pond, where a bench looks back to the house. He planted high-bush blueberry near the mass of winterberry that arches over the curved wooden bridge. He watched bayberry and alders move in, taking out the ornamental grasses his parents planted years before.
In summer, herons and ospreys fish for sunnies and carp in the quiet blue water. But last week, it was solid ice, and the bench was covered with snow.
There is a very different garden in Amagansett, N.Y. It slumbers among the Eastern red cedars that grew on the sandy land long before Erika and Bill Shank built their house there 25 years ago. The silver-stained cedar house rises like a crisp cube out of the scrub, with views in all four directions.
''We started building the garden in 1980, with tiny boxwoods, in one-gallon pots,'' Ms. Shank said, standing on the south side of the house, where those tiny boxwoods have become great domes planted on diagonals, and where star magnolias, their gray buds as soft as pussy willows, frame an old garden bench backed by junipers. ''I love my garden in winter,'' she said, ''when it's stripped down to shapes.''
When the Shanks separated eight years ago, Erika Shank remained, making it her year-round residence. She began editing shrubs and pruning trees. ''It was the most healing factor during our divorce,'' she said. ''I kept a photographic record, and whatever interfered with a view in the picture, I removed.''
She took out a black gum, or Nyssa sylvatica, which she and her husband had planted for its brilliant orange foliage, unaware of how big it would get, 20 feet. With its descending branches, it took up the whole center of the herb garden. Now, in its place is a quiet reflecting pool (frozen at the moment). She took out an arborvitae hedge to allow a view of a blue atlas cedar stretching 30 feet into the sky.
She pruned a dense scrub oak to reveal its dancing branches. When one of two fastigiate oaks by her front door blew down in a hurricane, she watched it right itself, then called an arborist to prune its slender, upright branches. Now, in the stark winter light, these sinuous trees cast eloquent shadows on the silver walls of the cedar house.
''I don't like clutter in my private life,'' Ms. Shank said. ''And I'm trying to take it out of the garden.'' There is a sense of peace in the garden's clean symmetry -- an airy, light feeling of staring through the branches of the espaliered pears, which form a Belgian fence between the herb garden and the poplar grove north of the house.
Ms. Shank keeps the native junipers limbed up to see beneath their branches, but their dense canopy still shelters the robins in winter. She likes to watch them from the second floor. And she can view the garden from her sunroom, where jasmine blooms and tropical gingers, aeonium, cycads and a Meyer lemon wait in pots to go out on the terrace when summer returns.
Last, I visited a formal, terraced garden perched on a wooded ridge behind a 1920's house in Bedford, N.Y. Stephen Sills and James Huniford, the New York design team, bought the 20-acre property 12 years ago, intrigued by the sloping site and by its original owner, Helen Morgenthau Fox, a popular garden writer of her day, who named it High Low Farm.
''She named it for the highs and lows of her life and the highs and lows of her land,'' said Mr. Huniford, who has since read some of her books, including ''Adventures in My Garden'' and ''Garden Cinderella.''
Ms. Fox built one terrace on the slope that runs east of the house. Mr. Sills and Mr. Huniford soon expanded that into a series of terraces and rock walls, stepping down the gentle hill, punctuated by clipped boxwood, blue holly hedges and juniper trained to look like Italian cypress.
To me, it seems a very male place. No frills. The gestures were classical and large -- like four limestone columns topped with urns at the end of the pool terrace -- and well able to stand up to the specimen trees left standing or even the ones moved from the woods into the clearing.
Four Alberta spruce trees, their rumpled shoulders covered with snow, flanked the top of the eight steps leading up to the terrace, which is separated from the house by a circular gravel courtyard with four rounded boxwoods in its center. The entrance to the garden, with its frozen ivy cascading down the wall, its hedge of blue-green holly and the winter jasmine beginning to bloom, was a study in muted colors and variations in texture.
But it was the Alberta spruce trees, guarding the top of the steps like great green bears, that lent an air of powerful mystery to the place and drew me to a wide terrace to look out over a boxwood garden wrapped in burlap. In summer, these beds are filled, alternately, with lavender and white calamint. But now, like the pool covered in snow, they suggested what was to come.
A stone table, topped with a metal sphere, marked the central axis. Beyond that, two stone obelisks flanked steps descending to a lower garden, where two old cherry trees leaned over 16 fat clipped boxwoods, placed foursquare, in a minimalist grid.
In summer, the upper terrace blooms with white hydrangeas and pink climbing roses, but only as grace notes to the greens and grays that dominate here. Last week, these snow-covered shapes were like arrested music -- the curving stone bench with no back, the 20 junipers marching along the top of the pool terrace, the cinnamon-brown vines of the hydrangeas that climb the stone walls. Colors are subtle here: the orange lichen on a stone pot sets off the flesh tones of the five mottled trunks of a nearby kousa dogwood.
Outside the formal terraces, the plantings are utterly simple: great rounded boxwoods, corralled in burlap, huddle beneath a great silver beech. Upright fastigiate oaks, underplanted with yews, rise like Greek columns along the curving drive.
The square white-shingled house, with its French doors and floor-to-ceiling windows, sits lightly in this wood. Wisteria vines wind their way up white wooden trellises attached to walls. But come spring, the wisteria will not be in flower.
''We cut them all back, so they never bloom,'' Mr. Sills said. ''The leaves make the whole house look like a green hedge.''
Imagining such a thing in an icy world is part of the magic of a winter garden.
NATURE
