In one of the most frenzied weeks in franchise history, the Nets endured an ownership change, talk of relocation and a coaching change. It may have been too much for a troubled young player.
Eddie Griffin told a Nets official here Wednesday morning that he was not ready to return to the N.B.A. and flew to his home in Houston to resume therapy. Griffin, who agreed to a contract with the Nets last month, spent much of November and December at the Menninger Clinic in Houston, undergoing treatment for depression and substance abuse.
In only his third week with the Nets, Griffin has left the team for an indefinite period, and in only his third day as the head coach, Lawrence Frank tried to defuse his first crisis.
The Nets have lost a player who was expected to become their first forward off the bench and a person they were emotionally invested in.
Although Griffin had not played in a game yet, he was working his way into shape and expected to be activated on this trip. The Nets signed Griffin, a 6-foot-10 forward, to a minimum contract this month despite obvious warning signs. Griffin, 21, is charged with felony assault and was convicted last week of misdemeanor marijuana possession.
''This threw us all for a curve, but we knew there was a lot of work to be done,'' Frank said. ''Any time you have a problem, it takes time. A wave of the wand won't make it go away. If you don't take care of it now, it will linger. If Eddie were playing and not taking care of his problem, it would be self-destructive. The best thing he could do is what he's doing.''
After blowing out the Philadelphia 76ers in Frank's first game on Tuesday night, the Nets did not arrive in Orlando until 4:30 a.m. They were jarred when Ed Stefanski, the senior vice president for basketball operations, told them before practice that Griffin had left.
In the past, Griffin had several violent encounters with teammates, but several people in the organization said that he did not cause any disruption with the Nets and that no violent or drug-related incident precipitated his departure.
Aaron Williams, the Nets' backup center, said that Griffin was ''more peaceful than anybody.''
The Nets acknowledged, however, that they did not really know him. Griffin is extremely introverted and was buffered by a support system that included a counselor who was with him almost every day. Griffin did not take the team bus to Philadelphia on Monday because of an appointment and arrived Tuesday with Stefanski. He was more animated than usual on the bench, jumping up after dunks.
Teammates said Griffin slept on the flight to Orlando, but shortly after his arrival he sought out Stefanski and said he needed to talk. Stefanski, who recruited Griffin when he was released by the Houston Rockets in December and has traveled with him to court hearings, promised to call him every day during his rehabilitation.
''We knew going in there was a risk involved,'' Stefanski said. ''This is a setback for him. Eddie feels he's not ready, and that shows a lot of courage.''
Griffin was unavailable for comment, but during an interview Friday in Miami he said that he was ready to play and that he felt comfortable with his new teammates. Still, Griffin did not appear to have any close friends in the locker room, was living alone in a hotel and missed his daughter, Amaree, who is with her mother in his house in Houston.
Kenyon Martin, who might have made the most effort to befriend Griffin, said he remained convinced that he ''will be back soon.''
Other teammates are not so sure. Even if Griffin does not play again this season, the Nets must pay him $400,000. They already owe $23 million to Alonzo Mourning, who signed over the summer and left the team in November to have a kidney transplant.
The Nets do not seem too concerned about their own welfare because they still have Rodney Rogers, Brian Scalabrine and Williams as frontline players off the bench. The reserves seemed invigorated in their first game under Frank and should hold onto their roles.
''How much does this really affect our team?'' Richard Jefferson said. ''I'm not saying that in a mean way, but it's not like he was in the rotation yet.''
Griffin has much larger concerns. He is due back in court Feb. 13 to be sentenced for the marijuana conviction and to set a trial date for the felony assault case. Griffin's former girlfriend has accused him of punching her in the face and shooting a gun in her direction at his house in Houston on Oct. 25.
''This isn't any little misdemeanor,'' Jason Kidd said. ''Looking at jail isn't easy. It's not easy to sleep. Nobody can handle that at 21.''
PRO BASKETBALL
