A Yonkers man is being sought in the shooting death of a convicted sex offender who the man thought had molested his 2-year old daughter, the police said.
The victim, Richard Tunley, was found dead from six bullet wounds outside a building on Riverdale Avenue in Yonkers early Monday morning. The killing appeared to be an act of revenge on the part of Joshua Torres, whose daughter Mr. Tunley had baby-sat for the day before, according to the police.
''There are indications that would suggest to us that Tunley was the intended target,'' Yonkers Police Commissioner Robert Taggart said in a statement.
Mr. Tunley, 50, was staying with the 2-year-old and the child's mother, who was his niece. He was changing the child's diaper, putting Vaseline on a diaper rash, when a relative, whom the police did not identify, walked in and began to attack him, other relatives said. The attacker thought Mr. Tunley had molested the child, the police said.
A doctor has determined that the girl had not been raped, a police official said.
''It was all just a misunderstanding,'' said Mary Tunley, another of the victim's nieces. ''When he walked in, instead of asking questions, he just blew up.''
Mr. Tunley then fled the apartment, and the child's father, Mr. Torres, began to look for him. Mr. Torres had not been in the apartment at the time of the attack, the authorities said. ''A group of persons began to search for Mr. Tunley in an effort to engage in some form of retribution,'' the police said in a statement. His body was later found by the police, who are searching for Mr. Torres.
Mr. Tunley was released from a state prison in 2001 after serving two and a half years for the rape of a minor, according to public records and his family. The second son in a family of 14, he had been trying to put his life back together, working odd jobs for family members and successfully overcoming a drug addiction, Ms. Tunley said. ''People are saying, 'Oh, he got what he deserved,''' she said. ''He didn't deserve this. No one deserves this.''
