Maybe one game St. John's guards Elijah Ingram and Daryll Hill will combine the way they were expected to in the preseason. And maybe Grady Reynolds will dominate inside in that same game, and Kyle Cuffe and Abe Keita will play up to their potential.
And maybe on that night, St. John's will win again. But it did not happen last night, just as it has not happened on most nights this season. The Red Storm lost to West Virginia, 73-64, at Alumni Hall, concluding its first losing season on the campus court, where St. John's is now 1-4.
St. John's (4-13) lost its seventh consecutive game, its longest losing streak since the 1918-19 season. The Red Storm moved closer to its worst season, a 12-17 record in 1993-94 under Brian Mahoney that set a team record for losses.
Alumni Hall hardly resembled the bandbox it was in years past, when students and alumni crowded in for a chance to watch St. John's. Last night only 3,923 fans braved the cold and the disappointing season. The legendary coach Lou Carnesecca took his usual seat in the corner of an end zone, but his conversations could almost be overheard from the opposite corner of the nearly silent gym.
The Red Storm, with one coach fired and playing for an interim coach, Kevin Clark, tumbled to 0-7 in the Big East and put another dent in the chances that a conference victory will come this season.
''I think we all stay positive,'' said guard Andre Stanley, who played his last game at Alumni Hall. ''Every game is a new game. You can't think negative and what's the record. Every game you try to win, even if we lose a hundred in a row. You can't get too down.''
West Virginia (11-6, 3-3) is without its leading scorer, the junior guard Drew Schifino, who was removed from the team for undisclosed reasons after a loss to Notre Dame on Jan. 7. But last night it mattered little, with St. John's making enough mistakes to counter Schifino's loss. The Red Storm, plagued by turnovers all season, matched its season high with 21.
One miscue seemed particularly troubling to Clark, who yanked Ingram and Reynolds from the game in the first half after they could not connect on a lob pass.
''I think it should bother them,'' Clark said. ''Obviously it's going to bother me, but the big thing is that it bothers them and we won't repeat it.''
In the first half, St. John's committed 13 turnovers while making only 12 field goals. The mistakes undid 54.5 percent shooting, leaving the Red Storm trailing by 40-31 at the break.
Still, St. John's scrapped back into the game repeatedly in the second half, closing to 48-45 before surrendering consecutive 3-pointers to Patrick Beilein, son of West Virginia Coach John Beilein. St. John's later drew to 58-56, but Beilein drove the lane and scored to keep the Mountaineers safely in front with 7 minutes 58 seconds remaining.
Ingram had 19 points, 13 in the second half, to lead St. John's. But the Mountaineers finished the game by hitting 10 of 12 free throws in the final 4:30 to stretch the lead.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
