Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg has entertained President Bush at his home, and once made the optimistic claim that Mr. Bush could carry New York City in the next election. But that does not mean that Mr. Bloomberg plans to spend his time at the Republican National Convention this summer screaming his support for the president.
Yesterday, during a radio interview on WNYC, a listener who described himself as a Democratic supporter of the mayor who dislikes the president, asked whether Mr. Bloomberg planned to endorse President Bush from the podium at the convention. Mr. Bloomberg did not back away from his support for the president. But he also did not choose the public radio program as a venue for praising Mr. Bush.
''I'm told the mayors traditionally give a welcome speech, and I would be thrilled to do that,'' he said. ''After that, I'm not a particularly political guy. I'll be spending the convention outside with the police to make sure the protesters have the ability to protest but that they don't disrupt the lives of others. I'm going to do what I can to make this city the showcase for the world.''
This was quite different from how Mr. Bloomberg, a Democrat turned Republican who supports nonpartisan elections, characterized his viewpoint of Mr. Bush when he spoke to Republicans on Staten Island last April.
''We're going to have in a year and a half the best convention anybody's ever had right here in New York City,'' he said then. ''And we are going to get George W. Bush re-elected as president of the United States! We are going to carry New York City and New York State. Everybody thinks I'm crazy, but I think we can do it.''
Edward Skyler, the mayor's press secretary, said Mr. Bloomberg fully supports the president but was simply emphasizing that his will be the more minor role among speakers. ''If the RNC invites the mayor to speak, he would be happy to,'' he said, ''but he isn't demanding a prominent role. He just wants to make sure the city hosts a safe convention, takes advantage of the opportunity to pump hundreds of millions of dollars into our economy and shows the world that New York City is back.''
