As if to illustrate the strangeness of the position it found itself in, reporting on the news even as it became the news itself, it was the BBC that broke the story of the resignation of its chairman, Gavyn Davies, late Wednesday afternoon.
The news came as a surprise to the broadcaster's competitors, to the general public and to the employees of the BBC, which had earlier issued a statement saying that no decisions would be announced right away. But Mr. Davies's resignation, and the way it was covered by his own organization as a seismic development following the release of Lord Hutton's report into the events leading to the suicide of a government weapons expert last summer, reflect the central place of the BBC in the political and cultural life of Britain.
Mr. Davies's move by no means signals an end to the fallout for the BBC from the Hutton report. A vast and powerful organization that is financed almost entirely by the annual license fees levied on all of Britain's television owners, the BBC has long tussled with politicians threatened by its influence and aggressive independence.
But never before has the broadcaster been scrutinized as thoroughly and as effectively as it has since May, when one of its reporters, Andrew Gilligan, said in a radio broadcast that Tony Blair's Labor government had embellished the case for war against Iraq by making false assertions in a publicly released intelligence dossier.
The BBC had expected that Lord Hutton's investigation into the death of David A. Kelly, the weapons expert used by Mr. Gilligan as the source of his allegations, would result in a tough report. But it was caught by surprise by the vehemence of Lord Hutton's attacks on its integrity, as well as his near-exoneration of the government.
Huw Edwards, a BBC anchor, said on the air that the report was ''far worse than the BBC had feared.''
In stern and unforgiving language, Lord Hutton said that the central claim of Mr. Gilligan's original broadcast, a two-minute report on May 29, was ''unfounded''; that the editorial oversight over Mr. Gilligan was ''defective''; and that the BBC's board of governors failed to investigate adequately before launching a robust and angry defense of the broadcast.
The criticisms of the governors, who oversee the BBC -- and champion its independence -- comes at a particularly delicate time for the broadcaster, which is seeking a renewal of its government-issued charter in 2006. Many of its critics, including the Conservative Party and legions of journalistic and cultural competitors in the broadcast and print worlds, believe it should lose its self-regulatory status and instead be overseen by an outside agency, as Britain's other broadcasters are.
''It's very fortunate for the BBC that we have a Labor government,'' said Stuart Allan, who teaches journalism at the University of the West of England in Bristol. ''If it was a Conservative one, they would use this as a pretext for privatizing the BBC.''
Advocates of tough, adversarial reporting were also dismayed by Lord Hutton's report, which they fear will have a chilling effect on the news media's ability in general to question the government's motives, particularly on the Iraq war.
''Whatever mistakes were made, government clashes with the state broadcaster are dangerous; there are implications for every journalist,'' wrote Jon Snow, who anchors the 7 p.m. news on the rival Channel 4, a commercial broadcaster, in the e-mail newsletter he sends before his broadcast each evening.
''This is one of the most worrying and difficult days of my broadcasting career,'' Mr. Snow wrote. ''We could find that the death of David Kelly ends up robbing Britain of the best public service broadcaster in the world.''
In the last several months, the BBC has attempted to anticipate Lord Hutton's expected criticisms by announcing various changes in its editorial policies.
Among other things, it has banned reporters and anchors from writing on political and ''contentious'' issues for newspapers and has begun a wholesale review of reporting practices. It plans to announce new reporting guidelines in the next month or two.
Nevertheless, as they considered Lord Hutton's damning conclusions, many former BBC executives interviewed -- on the BBC, more often than not -- said that they felt that Mr. Davies would not be the only BBC figure to go.
Further potential casualties include Mr. Gilligan, who has not been on air for the BBC since the furor began; Greg Dyke, the BBC's combative director general; and Richard Sambrook, the corporation's news director, who vigorously defended Mr. Gilligan's original reporting in the face of a furious and highly emotional attack from Alastair Campbell, then the prime minister's chief spokesman.
Speaking of Mr. Davies, Richard Ayre, a consultant in media ethics and the former deputy chief executive of BBC News, said, ''He had to resign not because of what Andrew Gilligan did, but because of the failure of governance.''
The BBC, he added, ''now has to think really seriously about whether other resignations are required.''
Even as he left, Mr. Davies made an impassioned plea for the BBC's continued independence. The government has said it plans to carefully review every aspect of the BBC -- including the way it is governed, and the fees that finance it -- and its broadcasting rivals are gearing up to make the case during the debate over its charter renewal that the corporation has retained too much of its traditional power in a transformed broadcasting landscape.
''The governors and executive of the BBC are put there to serve the British public and no one else,'' Mr. Davies said in his resignation statement. ''They are able to do this because the constitution of the BBC makes its governance independent of any political or commercial interest, and because the license fee ensures secure funding for five years at a stretch. If these twin pillars are undermined, the whole edifice could come tumbling down.''
