A Long Island man charged in the death of a young woman who was struck by three separate hit-and-run drivers in Queens told his brother that he did not know he had hit the woman, the brother said Wednesday.
According to prosecutors, the man, Raymundo Herrera, 32, of Long Beach, was speeding down Roosevelt Avenue early Jan. 18 when he struck and killed an 18-year-old woman lying in the middle of the street. The woman, Natalie Guzman, had already been hit and injured by two other drivers after she tried to cross the street to buy a bag of potato chips.
Mr. Herrera was arraigned Wednesday night on charges of second-degree manslaughter and first-degree reckless endangerment, more severe charges than he faced when he was arrested at his Long Beach home Tuesday night. His bail was set at $25,000. The police said that they tracked down Mr. Herrera by tracing a license plate recorded by a witness at the scene, and found traces of human remains on the undercarriage of the car he was driving that night, a gray Nissan S.U.V. owned by his brother Casimiro.
On Wednesday afternoon, Casimiro Herrera said his brother was a responsible man who was a chef at a Long Beach restaurant and a doting father who would never knowingly run over a person and drive away without stopping.
''He said he didn't see nothing,'' Casimiro Herrera said during a brief interview at his home in Long Beach before he drove off to see his brother. ''It's not what they say.''
But Ms. Guzman's family members said they doubted the story.
''He didn't know nothing?'' said Ms. Guzman's mother, Miriam Toribio, in a telephone interview. ''I don't believe that. I see accidents, and when somebody's stopping, I go in slow. He needs to explain why he did that.'' She also asked why he didn't stop when other people stopped.
Mr. Herrera, a chef at the Long Beach restaurant Minnesota's Grill &amp; Bar, immigrated from Mexico several years ago and has roots in Long Beach, family members and neighbors said.
He is divorced, but his ex-wife and daughter still live in Long Beach, as does his brother. He lives in a ground-floor apartment in a home at West Park Avenue owned by James Malone, who is also an owner of Minnesota's Grill, people at the restaurant said.
Mr. Herrera lived with another restaurant employee, neighbors said, and largely kept to himself apart from a friendly wave.
''The guys were really nice,'' said Melissa Craig, who lives next door, adding that she often saw Mr. Herrera and his roommate doing yard work and taking care of a boat at the end of a pier outside the home.
Mr. Malone was in Florida on Wednesday and could not be reached, and Mr. Herrera's ex-wife and co-workers would not comment on his situation or discuss him. Mr. Herrera's lawyer, Frank DiKranis, did not return repeated phone calls.
Casimiro Herrera did not provide details on whether his brother had acted differently since the accident last week, or whether he knew the police were looking for him.
The police said Mr. Herrera and a busboy from the restaurant had been out drinking wine and eating tacos together on the night Ms. Guzman was struck and killed.
Ms. Guzman had spent the evening with her friends at a pool hall on Roosevelt Avenue near 111th Street when she stepped across the street around 5:30 a.m. and was struck by one vehicle, then another, which both drove off without stopping, the police said. Ms. Guzman crumpled on the street, and a group of friends and witnesses clustered around her and threw a jacket over her.
The witnesses scattered when Mr. Herrera drove past, prosecutors said.
