Taking his campaign nationwide, Senator John Kerry forecast on Wednesday a grueling contest for the presidency and promised to campaign ''with the same underdog mentality'' that carried him to overwhelming come-from-behind victories in Iowa and New Hampshire.
''We're going in strong,'' Mr. Kerry said while flying here for a rally with supporters in Missouri, one of seven states with the next round of Democratic nominating contests on Tuesday. ''I mean we're going in in pretty decent shape.''
He played down polls that have him near the top of the field almost everywhere he is competing on Feb. 3.
''We've got a lot of work to do,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''We have to get in there, have to fight hard. There'll be fights.''
As his aides worked to project an air of inevitability out of his back-to-back victories, the Massachusetts senator dismissed the idea that his way was clear.
''The test of running for president is a long one, and it's a tough one,'' he said. ''So I expect it to be tough all the way, and I expect to compete with the same underdog mentality, with the same quality of every vote counts. I'm going to fight for every vote, and I'll be at it every day, every minute.''
A day after the New Hampshire primary, the other Democratic hopefuls made their decisions about allocating time and resources for the next round, as they sought a few victories to keep alive their candidacies.
Senator John Edwards returned to South Carolina, the state where he was born and where his aides say he has to win to stay viable, before hopscotching across Oklahoma and Missouri.
''I was born in South Carolina, I have family in South Carolina, I have roots in South Carolina,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''I will not forget what South Carolina is after Feb. 3.''
His campaign took a blow as Representative James E. Clyburn, perhaps the leading Democrat and most influential African-American politician in South Carolina, prepared to endorse Mr. Kerry.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark, who just edged out Mr. Edwards for third in New Hampshire, struck new regional tones as he took his campaign to what he called ''my neighborhood,'' stopping in Oklahoma, New Mexico and Arizona.
''People up there in New Hampshire, they're real good to the neighbors from New England up there,'' he told an audience in Tulsa, Okla., as he sought to minimize his finish.
General Clark, whose father was Jewish and mother Methodist, emphasized his faith, telling an audience that as a child ''I accepted the Lord as my savior.''
''We are a nation that is a nation under God,'' he added. ''We're the most religious country in the world.''
''Like everybody else who's grown up in the South,'' the general said, ''I can quote the Scriptures, and I know what each book says, and I've got my favorites, too.''
Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, who placed fifth in New Hampshire, soldiered on to Oklahoma, saying he expected to find a more receptive audience for his message among moderate and conservative Democrats.
''Voters here in Oklahoma are obviously different than voters in Iowa and New Hampshire,'' he said. They ''have a whole different set of priorities, tend to be more moderate or conservative, tend to be more supportive of the war against Saddam Hussein, tend to agree with me that we're safer with Saddam Hussein in prison than in power.''
It was Mr. Kerry who had victory on his side, and after days of frenetic campaigning, he showed somewhat less urgency on Wednesday morning. After sleeping in his own bed in Boston, he was an hour late to his plane and took time to talk to reporters in the snow before taking off. En route to Missouri, in between relaxing with his guitar in a front-row seat and tossing a football with an aide as photographers raced forward to capture the moment, Mr. Kerry took questions about the New Hampshire but shrank from dissecting his victory.
''I'm focused on Missouri and the other six states, and I'm not looking backward,'' he said.
He also said he would not tailor his appeal to his audiences, who will now include large numbers of African-Americans here and in South Carolina, Hispanics in Arizona and New Mexico and conservative white Democrats in South Carolina and Oklahoma.
''It's the same message,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''I don't like politicians who change their messages. You know, there's a reason I'm running for president. It's because I think we can do a better job of making our nation safer and because I think life is unfair for too many Americans. And we can do better putting people to work, providing health care, fixing our schools, protecting our environment. These are the real things that matter to Americans.''
In Iowa and New Hampshire, Democrats had months to get to know Mr. Kerry and watch him improve on the stump. But in the next group of primary states, he is a virtual stranger and will have little time to introduce himself.
Mr. Kerry, who began running television commercials here and across all six other Feb. 3 primary states on Wednesday, said he was not worried.
''I'm just going to be me,'' he said. ''I got elected lieutenant governor, got elected four times to the Senate, won in Iowa, won in New Hampshire. Something works. I don't know. That's all stuff. I'm just going out here to win votes.''
Indeed, before boarding his plane in Bedford, Mass., Mr. Kerry had piled up sought-after endorsements, beginning with Mr. Clyburn's. Here in St. Louis, he collected the support of former Senator Thomas F. Eagleton and former Senator Jean Carnahan, wife of former Gov. Mel Carnahan, as well as Mayor Francis G. Slay of St. Louis and other local leaders. Gov. Jennifer M. Granholm of Michigan is also expected to endorse him soon.
''This is the Show-Me State, and we're here to show George Bush the door!'' Mr. Kerry told 300 supporters beneath flags and bunting in the student center of St. Louis Community College at Forest Park.
Missouri and South Carolina, two potentially pivotal states on Tuesday, are untested terrain for Mr. Kerry. Like his rivals, he essentially kept out of Missouri until Representative Richard A. Gephardt withdrew from the race last week, and his trip to South Carolina Thursday and Friday will be his first since September. Mr. Kerry is to visit Arizona, Delaware, New Mexico, North Dakota and Oklahoma at least once each before Tuesday.
In Missouri, Mr. Kerry's hastily assembled campaign is being run by Roy Temple, former chief of staff to Mrs. Carnahan and her husband. Mrs. Carnahan was appointed to a two-year term in the Senate after her husband posthumously defeated Senator John Ashcroft in 2000. She lost a special election for the seat in 2002.
''Stand with me,'' Mr. Kerry said, to a roar, ''and we will have an attorney general who is not John Ashcroft.''
Mr. Eagleton, 74, who was briefly George McGovern's running mate in 1972 until it was reported he had undergone electric-shock therapy, harked back to his moment in the limelight before introducing Mr. Kerry, with whom he overlapped in his third and last term in the Senate.
''You hear that thunderous applause?'' Mr. Eagleton asked, exaggerating his warm reception a bit. ''I'd make a hell of a vice president.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
