The first lesson for a beginner explains how to discard a loser on a winner. At the intermediate level, how to discard a loser on a loser is effectively explained. But how about discarding a winner on a loser? How does that happen?
The diagramed deal was played this month at the Tristate Regionals in Rye, N.Y. North and South in a stratified open pairs were two established stars, Mark Feldman and Bill Pollack. They had an uncomfortable auction.
In the old days South would have responded two diamonds to one heart, intending to rebid his suit to show invitational values. In the ultramodern style, two diamonds guarantees a game, without exception, so South had to bid one no-trump. This was forcing and gave North a headache. He could not bid two spades, a strong reverse. He could not bid two hearts, which would promise six cards. So he bid two clubs, which in theory indicated three cards but was the least evil. This could have landed him in a 2-4 fit if his partner's distribution had been 1-4-4-4, but all was well.
The jump to three diamonds was invitational, and North might have passed. He continued to three no-trump, however, judging that his minimum values would be good for that contract. The spade 10 was a significant card, given that the defenders were likely to attack that suit.
West's lead of the spade king was good news for the declarer. He could and did win with the ace, retaining solid protection in the suit. Things got better still when he led a diamond to the king, and West took his ace, a major blunder when South had shown length and strength in the suit.
West shifted to the club ace and continued with the 10 when his partner encouraged with the nine. The lead was in the dummy, and South was looking at this position:
South could count nine tricks, but he wanted an overtrick for matchpoints. Cashing the diamonds would leave him with a faint chance of scoring the heart jack. Leading a spade honor and discarding a club, a standard loser-on-loser, would have worked as it happens, but would have been disastrous if West had a third club.
South therefore tried a surprising winner-on-loser play. He led the spade jack and discarded the diamond deuce. This exchanged a diamond trick for a spade trick, and he was still sure of nine tricks. This put West to the test, and he failed it by returning the spade nine.
This seemed safe, but it was not. South won with dummy's 10, crossed to his heart king and ran his diamond winners. This executed a classic double squeeze: West had to keep his spade guard, East had to keep his club guard, and nobody could protect hearts. South had the overtrick he wanted.
If West had been thinking clearly, he would have shifted to a heart after taking the spade queen or led the diamond nine. This would have thwarted Pollack's squeeze plan.
BRIDGE
