Surging demand for copper and nickel from China's electronics industry and steel makers helped the mining giant BHP Billiton post a 47 percent increase in net profit in the six months ended on Dec. 31, the company said yesterday.
''We continue to find more demand than supply in that marketplace,'' Charles Goodyear, BHP Billiton's chief executive, told analysts in Melbourne, Australia, where the company is based.
Speaking via videoconference link from London, Mr. Goodyear said BHP Billiton, a British-Australian company, was working ''flat out'' to meet Chinese demand, which has sent commodity prices skyrocketing as global stockpiles dwindle.
BHP Billiton's net profits for its fiscal first half, the last six months of 2003, rose to $1.34 billion as sales increased 36 percent to $10.96 billion.
The chief financial officer, Chris Lynch, told analysts that the results were the strongest since Australia's BHP merged with the British mining company Billiton in 2001. He said the company was on target to eliminate $770 million in costs by the middle of next year.
BHP Billiton's shares rose 1.4 percent in Sydney to 12.20 Australian dollars ($9.62), their highest close in six weeks. The company is also listed on the London Stock Exchange.
''They are extremely strong numbers,'' said Craig Parker, an analyst at Standard &amp; Poor's in Melbourne. ''What we're seeing here are the benefits of a diversified portfolio of commodities booming along at the same time.''
The numbers also appeared to validate the promotion of Mr. Goodyear, an American, from chief financial officer to chief executive last January. BHP Billiton's board plucked him from a skiing vacation in Sun Valley, Idaho, to take over when his predecessor made an acrimonious and abrupt departure after six months on the job.
Mr. Goodyear played down the windfall from rising commodity prices in his briefing Thursday, attributing the strong performance to what he said was the consistent execution of the company's strategy, including its development of new sources of supply even when commodity prices were low.
Such investments, he said, had enabled BHP Billiton to raise production as commodity prices recovered. In the first half, the company said, it produced record amounts of iron ore from Western Australia, aluminum from Mozambique and South Africa and diamonds from Canada.
But there was no denying the effect of booming commodity prices in fattening BHP Billiton's profits. Mr. Lynch said that the average price of copper rose 41 percent in the last six months, providing a $250 million pre-tax earnings windfall. BHP Billiton is the majority owner and operator of the world's largest single source of copper, the Escondida mine in the Atacama Desert of Chile.
Yet even as Mr. Goodyear described the overwhelming demand from China for his company's copper, aluminum and iron ore, he also emphasized the growing importance to the company of its oil wells in the Gulf of Mexico.
The Gulf of Mexico is familiar territory to Mr. Goodyear, who was raised in Houston. A graduate of Yale University and the Wharton School of the University of Pennsylvania, he worked at New Orleans-based Freeport McMoRan before joining BHP in 1999 as chief financial officer.
The weakening United States dollar was a drag on BHP Billiton's profits, costing the company $455 million in pretax earnings. Though based in Australia, BHP Billiton earns most of its revenues in American dollars and so reports its financial results in that currency. While most Australian exporters have suffered when converting United States dollars back into Australian dollars, BHP Billiton was hurt by converting its costs in Australian dollars and South African rand back into American dollars.
