The difference between a technically accomplished jazz singer blithely strutting her stuff and a serious jazz artist, who takes the whole enterprise to another level, is exemplified by Tierney Sutton, the Wisconsin-born, California-based singer appearing through March 17 at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel (59 West 44th Street, Manhattan).
The reputation of Ms. Sutton, a 40-year-old blonde who resembles a funky, bohemian Lee Remick, has slowly spread through the release of several albums on Telarc Records; the latest, ''Dancing in the Dark,'' was inspired by the music of Frank Sinatra.
The essential quality of Ms. Sutton's light, pitch-perfect voice is a pure, flutelike sound that can be inflected any number of ways, from a sassy nasality to a deeper, fuller contralto. What is special about her is her lack of exhibitionistic bravado.
Her opening-night performance on Tuesday was a study in artful restraint. In a jet-propelled rendition of ''East of the Sun,'' the lyrics and the scat syllables blended into a running dialogue between the words and the musical abstractions inserted with a playful delicacy.
Here and throughout the performance, Ms. Sutton conveyed a sense of jazz singing as an extension of spiritual meditation in which adherence to an ideal of balance and consistency and, yes, humility took precedence over any technical or emotional grandstanding.
Early in the evening, she explained her ''rules of the road.'' Famous songs could be torn apart and reassembled, while lesser-known ballads were to be presented unadorned, to be savored for their craft.
In the reassembly operations, Ms. Sutton's trio -- the bassist Kevin Axt, the drummer Ray Brinker and the phenomenal pianist Christian Jacob -- created dense, polyrhythmic thickets that overlaid two or more Latin grooves, through which Mr. Jacob's piano solos sprang out and hurtled.
But the quieter moments, in which Ms. Sutton sang brooding versions of two Sinatra-identified wrist-slashers, ''Last Night When We Were Young'' and ''I Could Have Told You,'' accompanied by Mr. Jacob's post-Bill Evans-style piano, were just as revelatory.
CABARET REVIEW  Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  A cabaret review in Weekend on Friday about the jazz singer Tierney Sutton at the Oak Room of the Algonquin Hotel misstated the engagement's closing date. It is March 13, not March 17.
