A kind of Bermuda Triangle has opened right in the heart of the presidential primary season, a warp into which entire states disappear.
Next Tuesday, three states -- Utah, Idaho and Hawaii -- will become the 18th, 19th and 20th to cast votes in the race for the Democratic nomination. But none of the candidates so much as mentioned those contests after the Wisconsin primary this week. The television pundits also seem to have forgotten them.
No candidate has run a television or radio advertisement in any of the states, although Alex Santiago, Hawaii Democratic chairman, says he has been buoyed by sightings of yard signs and bumper stickers, leading him to hope that his state's Democrats remain engaged in the race.
None of the candidates have visited any of the three states in recent months, and not one has a visit firmly scheduled. In fact, two canceled visits in the last few days.
''I thought it was going to turn out differently,'' said Donald Dunn, chairman of the Utah Democratic Party, which moved its primary this year from late March to late February in hopes of attracting more attention.
The neglect is due in part to the number of delegates at stake: only 61 (23 in Utah, 20 in Hawaii and 18 in Idaho), which look like a speed bump on the road to Pikes Peak compared with the 1,151 at stake on Super Tuesday, one week later.
It is also due in part to the fact that none of these three is a so-called swing state, likely to become a general-election battleground. Utah and Idaho have not voted Democratic in a presidential election since Lyndon B. Johnson's victory in 1964, and Utah gave George W. Bush his largest majority in 2000. Hawaii has been just as reliably Democratic over the last three decades, with the exception of Ronald Reagan's re-election in 1984.
In addition, party leaders believe that Feb. 24 all but vanished from the campaign calendar because of a recent perception that Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts had the nomination nearly sewn up. That led his remaining rivals to skip the date and focus on Super Tuesday.
Now Democratic leaders in the three states -- where Mr. Kerry is expected to win -- hope that the strong Wisconsin showing by Senator John Edwards of North Carolina has kept the race sufficiently close that one or more of the candidates will be persuaded to stop by on their way to California or one of the other Super Tuesday states. As the time remaining wanes, though, that possibility appears all the more remote.
Mr. Kerry and former Gov. Howard Dean of Vermont came to this region last year, before the campaigning really got under way. But after that, only Mr. Edwards and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio planned trips before Tuesday's voting, and they only tentatively.
Then, this week, Mr. Kucinich canceled his trip, to Utah on Thursday, so that he could spend more time in California. And Mr. Edwards canceled plans to speak at the Idaho Democratic Party's Jefferson-Jackson dinner on Saturday night in Boise. Jill Ellsworth, coordinator of the Idaho caucuses, said the senator's campaign had told party leaders that he needed to spend that night in Ohio, another of the Super Tuesday states.
''I'm in denial at the moment,'' Ms. Ellsworth said, adding that she hoped Mr. Edwards would change his mind.
The best hope, said Mr. Dunn, the party chairman in Utah, is that Mr. Kerry will stop here, perhaps for a Jefferson-Jackson dinner on Monday. Stephanie Cutter, spokeswoman for Mr. Kerry's campaign, said that he hoped to visit Utah but that there were no firm plans.
Utah Democrats are in a particular pickle because the Republican-controlled Legislature voted not to finance this year's primary, forcing Democrats to organize it and raise $30,000 to pay for it.
''A visit by a major candidate would be helpful, no question about it,'' said Mr. Dunn, who is still raising money to pay for advertisements encouraging Democrats to vote.
Of the three states, Hawaii seems in the best mood about the situation. In the past, noted Mr. Santiago, the party chairman there, the state held its primary on Super Tuesday, and was all but lost amid the attention lavished on the bigger states. Now, though there has been little overt campaigning and no candidate visits, the state party is getting more attention than it did then.
''All of the major candidates have representatives here, and we've been getting a ton of newly registered Democrats, about 1,000 in the last week alone,'' Mr. Santiago said. ''Frankly, it's normal for us not to be visited by the candidates.''
Dan Jones, interim associate director of the Hinckley Institute of Politics at the University of Utah, said the institute had shifted its polling to focus on a race between Mr. Kerry and President Bush, which it sees as all but inevitable.
''We're showing that at the moment, Bush would win Utah, but Kerry wouldn't lose the state by as big a margin as Al Gore did in 2000,'' Mr. Jones said. ''If anything, what I've noticed lately is that Democrats have been energized, even in Utah.''
Party leaders in all three states agreed that even if they continued to be ignored, interest in the race would help swell Democratic ranks.
''I think there's still a great deal of interest in Idaho in changing the guard in Washington,'' Ms. Ellsworth said. ''That, you probably have noticed, is a theme running across America -- among Democrats, at least -- and it's the same here.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE SIDELINES
