International expositions are rare these days, so it is hard to imagine the impact they had in the late 1800's. The Centennial Exhibition in Philadelphia in 1876 inspired America's manufacturers in many areas, none more so than pottery.
Maria Longworth Nichols, the daughter of a wealthy art patron in Cincinnati, was so impressed by the exotic Chinese and Japanese ceramics she saw at the fair that she founded an art pottery studio in 1880. She named it Rookwood Pottery after her parents' country estate and hired chemists, technicians and artists to make and decorate molded Rookwood vases, tiles and decorative wares.
''Mrs. Nichols had a great eye and wasn't bashful about spending money,'' said David Rago, a New Jersey auctioneer who has conducted sales of Rookwood ceramics since 1985.
In his 1893 book ''The Pottery and Porcelain of the United States.'' the pioneering ceramics scholar Edwin AtLee Barber said she was ''possessed of rare and versatile talent'' and ''has produced a great variety of pieces, original in conception, artistic in treatment, and bold in execution.''
Rookwood hired artists from as far away as Japan. Most were trained as easel painters, so they had to adapt their techniques to the rounded form. They signed each piece with their initials and a symbol for the year (flames before 1900; Roman numerals after). The work reflected the prevailing style of the day: Japonisme, Impressionism, Art Nouveau, Art Moderne and Art Deco. As the company advertisements stated, Rookwood was ''an artist's studio, not a factory.''
Rookwood Pottery was soon recognized for its quality: it won prizes and medals at the World's Columbian Exhibition of 1893 in Chicago, the Exposition Universelle of 1900 in Paris and the Pan American Exhibition of 1901 in Buffalo. ''They were at the top of the pyramid in whatever they did, except for Arts and Crafts,'' Mr. Rago said. ''They were a standard bearer for the American art pottery movement.''
The firm was known for its distinctive glazes in sea green, deep blue, ivory and lavender. The glazes were given wonderful names like French Red, Butterfat, Mirror Black, Vellum, Tiger Eye (which had gold flecks) and Mahogany.
''Rookwood Pottery of Cincinnati was the largest and most important of more than 100 art potteries in the United States during the late 19th and early 20th centuries, lasting from 1880 to 1967,'' Nancy E. Owen writes in the catalog for ''Elegant Innovations: American Rookwood Pottery, 1880-1960,'' which is on view at the Philadelphia Museum of Art through March 21.
The Philadelphia show displays about 140 works from the Gerald and Virginia Gordon Collection, which was recently donated to the museum. It spans nearly the entire period of Rookwood production and includes works with naturalistic depictions of floral, marine and feather motifs; vases decorated with images of Native Americans, inspired by ethnographic photographs; landscapes; and Art Deco patterns derived from textiles.
Many of the vases depict flowers: poppies, lilies, cherry blossoms and irises. Some offer bas relief sculptures of human figures or animal forms. A few are monochrome, adaptations of Chinese vases with lustrous sang de boeuf (blood red), celadon or coal black glazes.
The most interesting may be a foot-tall porcelain vase of 1935 by the artists Elizabeth Barrett and John Hamilton Delaney Wareham. Though inspired by ancient Greek painted vases, it is neither red- nor black-figured; here, elegant silhouetted figures in pale gray stride across a waxy white background with a sleek spotted hound.
In its depth, the Gordon collection resembles the single-owner collection of 150 Rookwood pieces that Mr. Rago will auction on March 6. Previews begin on Feb. 28 at David Rago Auctions, 333 North Main Street, Lambertville, N.J. Mr. Rago said the ceramics belonged to Toni Schulman of New York and had been off the market for more than two decades. They include at least 20 objects ''that rank among the best of their kind in Rookwood production,'' he said.
Committed Rookwood collectors often collect nothing else. ''It's like the Roycroft collectors,'' Mr. Rago said, referring to the Mission style furniture made in East Aurora, N.Y., in the early 20th century. ''People who buy Roycroft buy only Roycroft.''
The Gordons began collecting Rookwood in the 1970's. ''My husband always seemed to be able to collect things before they were in vogue,'' Mrs. Gordon said. ''We were living in Virginia and would come to New York to go to the galleries. We went to auctions at David Rago and the Cincinnati Art Galleries. We visited the dealers at the Thieves Market in northern Virginia.'' Mr. Gordon died last year.
For her, Rookwood's appeal was in its diversity. ''Just when you thought you had seen everything, something else would turn up,'' Mrs. Gordon said. ''There is a sameness to other American art potteries, but not to Rookwood.''
Mrs. Gordon grew up in Cincinnati but was not keen about Rookwood until 1971. ''We were exposed to Rookwood Pottery in grade school because our school had Rookwood tile work, but by the late 1940's Rookwood was way past its prime,'' she recalled. ''Rookwood was doing great things in my grandmother's era. At the time my parents were married, a piece of Rookwood was considered a stylish wedding gift.''
In 1971 the Gordons went to Cincinnati to help Mrs. Gordon's parents clear out their house. ''During the course of this endeavor, my mother-in-law asked several times if we thought we were going to find any Rookwood pottery,'' Mr. Gordon wrote in the catalog. ''Unfortunately, we found only one insignificant piece.'' But his interest was piqued, and the Gordons went to the Cincinnati Art Museum to view its collection before returning home. They were hooked. ''It was an excellent time to begin collecting,'' he wrote.
''We didn't have much money,'' Mrs. Gordon said, ''but collecting Rookwood really became our passion.'' Once, a Rookwood vase could be bought for a few thousand dollars. Then, in 1980, Christie's New York had its first sale of European and American art pottery. A 1900 Rookwood vase with a Matthew A. Daly portrait of Chief Hollow Horn Bear, a Sioux warrior in full headdress, went for $32,500.
That same Sioux vase is in Mr. Rago's March 6 sale, estimated at $30,000 to $40,000. The Rago sale also has some framed scenic Rookwood plaques, including one of Yosemite by Edward Diers from 1927, and one painted by Sturgis Laurence in 1903, ''Summer Afternoon, Long Island Sound,'' which depicts a rocky coast with sailboats in the distance.
Doyle New York's single-owner sale of art pottery on Thursday also includes some Rookwood pottery. The viewing begins tomorrow at Doyle, 175 East 87th Street in Manhattan.
ANTIQUES
