WARREN EVANKO was snowmobiling with his family in the Green Mountains of Vermont a few years ago when he spotted what looked like a small ski area occupying its own mountain peak. The trails didn't seem to be part of the sprawling Killington Resort, where Mr. Evanko rented a ski house each winter, and the lone chairlift was empty. When Mr. Evanko asked his snowmobile guide about it, he got a curious answer. ''He told me that it was some rich guy's private ski hill,'' Mr. Evanko recalled.
Intrigued, and dismayed by the increasingly crowded conditions at Killington, Mr. Evanko, a shopping mall developer from Tewksbury, N.J., decided he would try to find out more about the ski area. Driving into the small town of Plymouth, Vt., midway between Killington and the Okemo Mountain Resort, Mr. Evanko stopped at a gas station. He discovered an office not far from the pumps that was serving as the temporary headquarters for the Bear Creek Mountain Club, the ski area he had seen while snowmobiling.
''They told me they were trying to start a country club for skiing,'' Mr. Evanko said. An employee of the club offered to start the lift so that Mr. Evanko and his family could take a few runs. They had Bear Creek's 51 acres of ski terrain all to themselves. ''After that, we were hooked,'' Mr. Evanko said. ''I was ready to sign up. But they didn't even have membership forms yet.''
The Bear Creek Mountain Club, which opened in 2002, is part of a small but flourishing segment of the ski industry: membership ski areas. Some of the clubs operate rudimentary rope tows and charge tiny membership fees. Membership in the Mount Greylock Ski Club in Massachusetts, which has been in existence since 1937, costs $120 a year for a family, but members must volunteer to patrol the mountain, operate the lifts and help stoke the wood-burning stoves that heat the rustic base lodge.
Other clubs, like the HoliMont Ski Area in western New York, have installed modern lifts and snowmaking systems. (Annual membership at HoliMont: $1,200 per family.) Among the most exclusive of the members-only mountains is the Yellowstone Club in Montana, which opened in 2000 and which maintains its own hangar for members' private planes at the airport in nearby Bozeman. It requires that prospective members show evidence of a net worth of at least $3 million and pay a membership deposit of $250,000.
Yellowstone has eight lifts, six of them high-speed quads, and the area gets about 400 inches of snow each year. ''It's spectacular terrain,'' said Whitney Peyton, who manages a commercial real estate firm in Bloomington, Minn., and who joined Yellowstone in 2002 after being recruited by the resort's marketing director, Hank Kashiwa, a television skiing commentator and former Olympic skier.
''The beauty of it is, there's not a lot of folks there,'' Mr. Peyton said. ''You can go there a few days after a snowstorm and still find powder.'' Although the lifts are capable of carrying more than 5,000 skiers an hour, a busy holiday period like Christmas week draws just 300 skiers at Yellowstone.
Annual dues at Yellowstone are $16,000 per family, and members must also buy a building lot or a residence at the 13,400-acre club. ''It's a little bit of a stretch for me,'' Mr. Peyton said, ''but at about the same time we were looking at the club, I had three of my contemporaries pass away. I said, 'Life is not eternal.' ''
Membership ski areas are ''a tiny but visible niche of the industry,'' said Michael Berry, the president of the National Ski Areas Association, a trade group. ''There's an ebb and flow. Sometimes we see a few more get started, but the economics make it difficult to keep them going. This is a capital-intensive business, and it's very influenced by the weather. The membership base has to have the wherewithal to take care of the costs.''
L IKE country clubs, most of the private ski mountains charge an initiation fee and annual dues. (At Bear Creek, the initiation fee for a couple is $13,500, and annual dues of $1,350 cover a winter's worth of skiing.) Members also pay for meals and drinks. Some clubs, like HoliMont and Bear Creek, sell daily lift tickets to nonmembers. Others, like the Yellowstone Club, do not.
Among the most venerable of the members-only ski resorts is the Mount Greylock Ski Club, on a flank of the highest peak in Massachusetts. One of its two rope tows is powered by an old Ford flathead V-8 salvaged from a wreck. The tows don't even have plastic handles; skiers simply grab onto the rope and are tugged up the hill.
''We wear old gloves because the rope tow is wicked on your gloves,'' explained Mary Merselis, a former president of the club.
In the lodge, coffee, tea and cocoa are available on the honor system. ''People generally bring up food -- turkey soup and homemade brownies and hot mulled wine -- and they share it,'' Ms. Merselis said.
Burt Wright, 83, joined the Mount Greylock club in the 1950's, when it had 2,000 members and a waiting list of people eager to join. (There are now only about 150 members.) ''Membership cost $3 a year, and I think that covered both me and my wife,'' he said. Their four sons learned to ski there, and Mr. Wright once headed the volunteer ski patrol.
''Everybody knows everybody,'' he said. ''When I was ski patroller, I knew all the kids, and if I saw somebody doing something dangerous, I'd speak to him by name. If you speak to a kid by name, he takes notice.'' Mr. Wright still skis often at Mount Greylock. On a recent Sunday, he said, the conditions were ''a little bit scratchy,'' but ''there were quite a lot of people -- we had about 50.''
At the smaller clubs, maintenance and upgrades are cooperative projects. Each fall, in Williston, Vt., near Burlington, members show up with pruning shears and clippers to clear brush from the Chapman Hill ski area. This winter, they are hanging floodlights so that they can ski at night.
Dave Bouchard, a fourth-grade teacher at the Williston Central School, was recruited to join the Chapman Hill club when the father of one of his students asked him to help fix the counterweight system for the rope tow. He's now a member, paying annual dues of $30 to Williston Ski Associates, which operates Chapman Hill.
The largest private ski area, in terms of members, is HoliMont in Ellicottville, N.Y., which is in its 40th consecutive year of operation this season. ''It started in 1964 with 13 families,'' said Dave Riley, HoliMont's general manager. ''They were just people who liked to ski.'' The original ski lift at HoliMont was a hay wagon pulled to the top of the mountain by a treaded Sno-Cat. Now, the membership is 1,300 families, almost half of them from Canada.
Several of the country's luxury ski resorts, including Stratton Mountain in Vermont, and Aspen Mountain, Telluride, Beaver Creek Resort and Vail Mountain in Colorado, have recently opened clubs of a different sort: private clubhouses on mountains that are otherwise open to the public. Members of these clubs have access to their own on-mountain restaurants and lodges. But they share the ski trails with nonmembers, since the ski resorts operate primarily on land leased from the Forest Service, which requires that resorts grant equal access to all visitors. The clubhouses themselves are built on private property, and most of the clubs have waiting lists to join.
Members of the Aspen Mountain Club pay an $80,000 initiation fee and annual dues of about $2,500 for the privilege of having lunch in a private cabin atop Aspen Mountain, 11,500 feet above sea level. As a bonus, they get two lifetime ski passes and a locker at the base of the mountain. Members include Don Johnson, Robert Wagner and Jill St. John.
The Stratton Mountain Club, the newest and most elaborate of the bunch, opened last February. Members can park in the underground garage, take an elevator up to the main floor for a continental breakfast, and then head to the locker room, where each locker is outfitted with built-in ski boot heaters that switch on automatically every night. After the day's skiing, the club offers cheese fondue and a jazz quartet. (Terrance Brennan, a club member and Manhattan restaurateur, helped select the cheeses.) A concierge is available to arrange sleigh rides, snowmobile trips and ski lessons. Members can pay extra for a special pass that gives them priority access to the ski lifts.
Members of the Stratton Mountain Club and other clubs say they want a skiing atmosphere that is friendlier, less crowded and less stressful -- and in some cases, they are willing to pay more for it. (At clubs like Chapman Hill and Mount Greylock, the cost is actually much less than a season pass at a commercial ski area.)
During the recent Martin Luther King Jr. holiday weekend, Mr. Evanko was skiing at Bear Creek with his 5-year-old son, Colin, and the son of a friend from New Jersey who had also joined the club. They didn't have to wait to board the two-passenger chairlift that took them to the summit. From the top, they could see Killington Peak, a chain of small lakes and the Calvin Coolidge homestead, where the 30th president was born.
After the children had peeled away, skiing back toward the Evankos' trailside house, Mr. Evanko headed for a narrow and winding old-style New England run called Roller Coaster. ''This is kind of a secret trail for the members,'' he said. It was 3:30 on Sunday afternoon, and there was no one skiing in front of him, and no one chasing him down the hill from behind.
Mr. Evanko had escaped the crowds, for which he seemed grateful. But for some members of the family, that is a mixed blessing. ''To be honest,'' Mr. Evanko said, ''my kids do get excited about holiday weekends on the ski slopes, because then there are actually some people here, and they might see some other kids.''
HAVENS
