The Tokyo String Quartet has come through some difficult patches in recent years, including personnel changes in which the chemistry, interpretive approach and sheer sound weren't quite right. But its performance on Wednesday evening, when the Chamber Music Society of Lincoln Center presented it in Alice Tully Hall, showed the group to be in superb shape. In Mozart and Beethoven quartets, the group's current configuration, which includes only one original member, produced an even richer, more nimble sound than its classic lineup of the late 1970's, when the Tokyo was one of a handful of young ensembles breathing fire into the quartet world.
The quartet has also been devoting more attention to new music lately, and the principal attraction of its concert on Wednesday was the New York premiere of Joan Panetti's ''In a Dark Time, the Eye Begins to See,'' a piano quintet, with the composer at the keyboard. Ms. Panetti's work, inspired by Theodore Roethke's poem of turbulent introspection, was surrounded by Mozart's ''Hunt'' Quartet (K. 458) and Beethoven's ''Razumovsky'' (Op. 59, No. 2), and in that context, it seemed like a craggy outcropping between a pair of gently rolling hills.
That isn't to say that the Mozart and Beethoven performances were uneventful readings of tame works. On the contrary, the fast movements of the Mozart were lively, and the warmth of the ensemble's sound gave its melancholy Adagio an irresistible, enveloping quality. The Beethoven benefited from both sumptuousness and, in the Presto finale, pinpoint articulation, and coming after Ms. Panetti's musical translation of Roethke's spiritual travail, it offered a measure of philosophical solace, an assurance of a supremely ordered universe.
What Ms. Panetti contributed was a 30-minute burst of contemporary anxiety, couched in a chromatic language that at times evoked Schoenberg's early, pre-Serial style. The piano and string writing was perfectly balanced, and conveyed a sense of the keyboard as the searching persona in Roethke's poem, with the strings as the mysterious and often chaotic forces beyond which spiritual truths could be found.
But in a way, Ms. Panetti seems skeptical of the peace that Roethke finds in the final lines, which read: ''A fallen man, I climb out of my fear. / The mind enters itself, and God the mind. / And one is One, free in the tearing wind.'' Here Ms. Panetti gives the quartet a rich, consonant chord, and then demurs, adding a gently clashing patch of piano texture to the closing bars.
MUSIC REVIEW
