Directed by Lynn Hershman Leeson  Not rated, 82 minutes
A minor addition to the tiny genre of feminist science fiction films, ''Teknolust'' is a benign, digital-age Frankenstein story about a mousy genetic research scientist, Rosetta Stone (the stunning Tilda Swinton, struggling to look plain by donning a curly wig and oversize glasses), who uses her own DNA to create three color-coded clones.
The three clones, also played by Ms. Swinton (in more attractive if no more convincing hairpieces), are named after the red, green and blue pixels used to create color on computer screens.
Red-haired Ruby, who dresses in flaming scarlet, is the most active of the three; it is her duty to go out at night and seduce randomly chosen men, taking their, ahem, vital essences back to her siblings, who need the substance to nourish themselves. The blond, childlike Olive, who dresses in green, prefers to stay indoors with the brunette, blue-gowned Marinne, a slightly more prickly personality who likes to watch movies. (Their film library, strangely, is restricted to three public domain titles, including Otto Preminger's ''Man With the Golden Arm.'')
Written and directed by Lynn Hershman Leeson, who guided Ms. Swinton to a more effective performance in the 1998 film ''Conceiving Ada,'' ''Teknolust'' has a lot on its mind but little on the ball when it comes to transforming thematic notions into dramatic concepts. Ruby becomes infatuated with one of her victims, an irritatingly incompetent copy shop employee (O.K., we got it) played by the perpetually twitchy Jeremy Davies. Love, it seems, will help her to become real, like some sort of hormonally charged Pinocchio.
Rosetta, meanwhile, comes under suspicion in a series of mysterious bio-crimes -- all actually committed by Ruby, whose ministrations leave her victims with tiny bar codes imprinted between their eyebrows. Soon a government investigator (James Urbaniak) is on Rosetta's trail, aided by a sexually ambiguous private detective named Dirty Dick and played by the inimitable and increasingly ineluctable Karen Black.
Made with an early version of Sony's 24P high-definition video camera, the film, which opens today in New York, has a foggy look, with ghosting effects whenever the actors make broad gestures. The digital technology gets its big workout in a sequence that puts Ruby, Olive and Marinne in the same frame as they perform a techno dance number for Rosetta's entertainment.
There is potential for entertainment here, but Ms. Leeson's emphatic direction draws much of the fun from the comic elements. Even Ms. Swinton, usually the most restrained and elegant of performers, can be found mugging outrageously as she strains to put over the less-than-convulsive laugh lines.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
