The Norwegian writer and director Bent Hamer's wry, uninflected, deadpan social comedy ''Kitchen Stories'' points as straight and true as a compass fixed on magnetic north. It has the tingly, dry shock of a snootful of sub-zero air. The material, a comic melodrama about conformity, is so minimal that it makes the understatement of a New Yorker cartoon play like the frenetic ''SpongeBob Squarepants.''
Folke (Tomas Norstrom), an expert from Sweden's Home Research Institute, is part of a project to track the domestic habits of Norwegian bachelors. He is in and out of the home of one of the study's subjects, Isak (Joachim Calmeyer), a bizarre codger who pads around his tiny, uncomfortable house in a remote village. Isak turns the tables at night by slipping into his attic and spying on the lonely Folke, who is housed in a trailer on Isak's property.
Mr. Hamer takes what sounds like a constricted and unpromising premise and gets the most out of its modest contradictions. He maximizes the concept through an entrancing visual flair and, eventually, a tiny depth of feeling. He keeps the film compact, and his design scheme of the postwar world in which the movie is set has dash and vigor.
The retro polish of ''Kitchen Stories,'' right down to the pop-shine of the trailers and the matching cars that the Home Research Institute workers drive, comments on the loneliness of utilitarian design. Folke might as well be a vowel floating in a Campbell Soup can.
The director also juxtaposes the melodrama with jolts of comedy that light up the landscape, but the laughs are unsettling because the movie is built on a fault line of discomfort. The stoic freakishness is involving because the film is so fastidious; the stinging brilliance of the colors and Mr. Hamer's skill and discipline almost seem to grow out of a hilariously demented brand of obsessive-compulsive disorder. His painstakingly coordinated scenes and exquisitely timed takes are the filmmaking equivalent of wringing every single use from a paper towel and then folding it before disposal.
(Mr. Hamer's fastidiousness makes him seem like the perfect director for the detached, methodical Steve Martin who emerges in magazine profiles.)
In the meantime Mr. Hamer makes the most of his cast. Folke, perched on his chair like a postmodern, machine-stamped version of Rodin's ''Thinker,'' gazes at his research subject as if his stare would produce results that could change the rotation of the Earth -- or at the very least, the color of its sunsets. Mr. Norstrom is an able straight man. Folke can't be overtly expressive or he'd compete with Isak and the dazzlingly assembled accouterments; he has to be a team player.
It's Mr. Calmeyer's Isak who gets to saunter away with the picture, and Mr. Hamer lets the two actors' early -- and finest -- scenes tick away with the benumbed precision of prime Jacques Tati. Isak can't believe this pinched, severe Swedish goofball is frozen in his kitchen. ''You were neutral observers during the war,'' Isak spits at Folke.
When the icy chasm between them melts, a degree of Chaplinesque pathos stains the director's hand-laid pattern. ''Kitchen Stories,'' which opens today in New York and Los Angeles, is best in its first two-thirds, when the streaks of subdued peculiarity rain down at unexpected moments. The commentary on socialism deeply ingrained in the material -- well, to the extent that anything is deep here -- functions far less painfully when it, too, is benign.
Mr. Hamer's neatness is a rare commodity in comedy, and it makes his gift for staging entrances (also in short supply) stand out even more sharply. When Folke's grand hedonist boss floats into the picture in a huge plane that looks like an aerial predecessor of the Playboy Mansion as conceived for the pages of an old Popular Mechanics magazine, it's quite a jump. The film's ability to soar so high so quickly and keep its wings steady should not be overlooked; comedy is often much too bumpy a flight.
KITCHEN STORIES
Produced, written (in Swedish and Norwegian, with English subtitles) and directed by Bent Hamer; director of photography, Philip Ogaard; edited by Pal Gengenbach; music by Hans Mathisen; production designer, Billy Johansson; released by IFC Films. Running time: 92 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Joachim Calmeyer (Isak), Tomas Norstrom (Folke), Bjorn Floberg (Grant) and Reine Brynolfsson (Malmberg).
FILM REVIEW
