A day after regulators issued their first opinion on the future of third-party interest groups under the new campaign finance law, officials were looking ahead to a larger ruling in the coming months that would specify how these groups can spend unlimited contributions to finance political advertising.
The opinion, issued Wednesday by the Federal Election Commission, said certain so-called 527 committees could continue to use unlimited soft money contributions for some types of advertising, though it narrowed the circumstances under which they can be used.
For instance, an advertisement promoting or supporting a federal candidate can no longer be paid for with soft money. But if it contains references to a federal and a state candidate, it can be financed through a mixture of soft money with hard money, which is regulated and collected in smaller amounts.
Democrats who operate 527 committees said they were optimistic that the opinion would keep them in business.
But the groups acknowledged that their activities could still be restricted when the commission takes up the matter once again in the spring, deciding questions like how they would pay for political commercials and voter mobilization, as well as which types of group would fall under the commission's jurisdiction.
The commission's rulings hold great importance for Democrats, who have embraced these committees as a way to compete against the Republican Party's 2-to-1 fund-raising advantage in the wake of the McCain-Feingold campaign finance legislation, which passed in 2002. A handful are already playing a role in this year's elections, pledging to raise hundreds of millions to run advertisements and turn out voters.
The panel will address 527 committees again in March and is expected to issue a ruling sometime in May, intended to determine more precisely how these committees can operate.
The commission's ruling Wednesday did not cover the entire universe of 527 committees, named after the section of the tax code that created them. It covers only those 527 committees that collect soft money but also register as political committees with the commission and raise hard money contributions.
The commission said these organizations could not use soft money to pay for mail, phone, broadcast or other communications that promote, support, attack or oppose federal candidates by name.
They can, however, use a mixture of hard and soft money to finance communications that mention candidates for both federal and nonfederal office.
Similarly, communications that do not mention a candidate, but make an appeal based on party affiliation or an issue, can also be paid for with a mixture of money.
The commission will make a final ruling this spring, carrying the force of law, which will determine a permissible mix of hard and soft money. The ruling may also determine whether the entire universe of 527 committees, as well as charities and other advocacy groups, are regulated by the commission and therefore come under tougher regulations for raising and spending political money.
''It can be the first step toward barring soft-money expenditures by a vast variety of groups,'' said Jan Witold Baran, a Republican election lawyer.
Some campaign finance experts said on Wednesday that the fate of these committees before the commission could have a strong impact on the integrity of the McCain-Feingold law, determining whether it effectively controls soft money contributions or allows millions into the system.
''If outside groups can raise and spend unlimited amounts of soft money on attack ads and voter mobilization, McCain-Feingold will be severely undermined,'' said Michael Toner, a Republican commissioner. ''These are the single most important issues in the campaign finance system today.''
The commission's advisory opinion on Wednesday drew widely divergent interpretations from Democrats running these organizations and Republicans who have sought to curb their activities.
Many Democrats said the ruling, which was requested by a group of Republicans, was not a knockout punch for the 527's.
''It's a pretty good outcome, under the circumstances,'' one Democratic lawyer said. ''They wanted to put us out of business. What they achieved was an adjustment of the rules.''
Republicans countered that the ruling was far more restrictive than their rivals let on and would severely affect how these committees make use of unlimited contributions.
''Republicans are very united in trying to drive out 527 organizations that seem to overwhelmingly support Democrats,'' Mr. Baran, the Republican election lawyer, said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: FUND-RAISING
