The death of Krzysztof Kieslowski in 1996, at 55, was a great loss to his admirers and to all those who believe, as he did, that film can and should entertain the highest philosophical and artistic ambitions. The man who made the ''Three Colors'' trilogy and the incomparable ''Decalogue'' will not produce any more masterpieces. But a screenplay he wrote in the 1970's has recently been uncovered, and now it has been adapted, by Jerzy Stuhr, into a small and marvelous film called ''The Big Animal.'' Mr. Stuhr, an actor who worked frequently with Kieslowski and who plays the main character in this film, honors his old friend's memory, producing a minor but nonetheless charming footnote to his oeuvre.
Following the model of some of the films in the ''Decalogue,'' ''The Big Animal,'' which opens today in Manhattan, might just as well have been called ''A Short Film About a Camel.'' The beast -- of the two-humped, Bactrian variety, rather than the more familiar Arabian species -- turns up one day in a field outside a small Polish town, where it has been abandoned by a traveling circus.
Adopted by Zygmunt and Marysia Sawicki, a middle-aged, apparently childless couple (Mr. Stuhr and Anna Dymna), the animal cuts a wondrously incongruous figure in the solemn, black-and-white Central European landscape. It walks through the streets and squares with absurd grandeur, the silken fur of its neck giving it a regal bearing belied by its clumsy, flat-footed gait.
When the Sawickis eat dinner at the kitchen table, their companion, standing in the garden outside their modest bungalow, rests his head on the windowsill, regarding them with something that looks like irony. When Zygmunt plays his clarinet -- trying out Arabian tunes in the mistaken belief that they will remind the camel of his homeland -- the animal bellows along, almost in harmony.
But its presence, at first the subject of humor in the town, quickly becomes a source of discord. Zygmunt starts showing up late for his job at the bank and playing his clarinet out of tune at orchestra rehearsal. A photographer wants to exploit the camel for commercial purposes, and local officials insist that the Sawickis must pay an enormous livestock tax. Zygmunt and Marysia find themselves at the center of a civic crisis, and they endure ostracism, hostility and bureaucratic lectures. The camel, one town leader pompously informs Zygmunt, is ''useless to the community.''
Kieslowski wrote ''The Big Animal'' at a fraught, demoralized moment in Poland's history, when the relative optimism of the 1960's thaw had given way to a gray era of repression and disillusionment. Like many works of art that germinated under Communist rule, this film is at once transparently allegorical and teasingly oblique. The camel (played by the charismatic Rubio, of the Zalewski Circus), is a lumbering metaphor: an incarnation of all those things that, however socially useless they may be (and whatever messes they may leave behind), nonetheless give life its joy, its value and its meaning. Things like movies, for example.
THE BIG ANIMAL
Directed by Jerzy Stuhr; written (in Polish, with English subtitles) by Krzysztof Kieslowski, based on the novel by Kazimierz Orlos; director of photography, Pawel Edelman; edited by Elzbieta Kurkowska; music by Abel Korzeniowski; produced by Slawomir Rogowski; released by Milestone Films. At the Anthology Film Archives, 32 Second Avenue, at Second Street, East Village. Running time: 72 minutes. This film is not rated.
WITH: Jerzy Stuhr (Zygmunt Sawicki), Anna Dymna (Marysia Sawicki), Dominika Bednarczyk and Blazej Wojcik (Bank Clerks), Andrzej Franczyk (Bank Manager) and Feliks Szajnert (Drunkard), and Rubio from the Zalewski Circus (Camel.)
FILM REVIEW
