Few people feel in their physical prime in the flabby depths of February. But a visit to ''Movin' Out,'' Twyla Tharp's dance musical set to the songs of Billy Joel, is a guaranteed way to kick up your circulation and make you feel, at least for a couple of hours, as energetic as those leaping, twirling men and women onstage. More than a year after its Broadway opening at the Richard Rodgers Theater, this kinetically told tale of the Vietnam era is in taut, muscular and deeply satisfying shape.
If anything, Ms. Tharp's portrait of a group of friends from suburban Long Island in the 1960's is better than when I first saw it. Its dancers have brought new individual flourishes to their young characters, who painfully come of age through war, drugs and divorce. And there's a newly relaxed expansiveness at work that seems to dissolve entirely the invisible wall between the stage and the audience.
Watching the show again, with Michael Cavanaugh still impeccably delivering the vocals in the style of Mr. Joel, I was freshly struck by how cathartic ''Movin' Out'' is, as its characters fall in and out of love and hate and hope and despair. (Would that everyone could channel frustration with such vigor and precision.)
Ms. Tharp's angular, cliché-bending choreography finds a cubism in fractious friendships (as in the superb pas de trois among the male leads) and a fractured cyclonic force in despair (as in John Selya's breathtakingly danced nervous breakdown).
Unlike your average jukebox musical, this show actually brings out unexpected depths in its composer's work. ''Movin' Out'' elicits an aching loneliness and rage in Mr. Joel's music that you probably weren't aware of if you knew his songs only from the car radio. In any case, the show provides the best vicarious workout in town.
''Movin' Out'' is at the Richard Rodgers Theater, 226 West 46th Street, (212) 307-4100. Performances: Tuesdays, Thursdays and Fridays at 8 p.m.; Wednesdays and Saturdays at 2 and 8 p.m. Sundays at 3 p.m. Tickets: $40 to $100.
Critic's Choice | 'Movin' Out'
