The crime was as ghastly as the most macabre fiction: on an October night in 1997, a 13-year-old New Milford, Conn., girl was abducted, gang-raped, and drowned.
After five years, five men and three women, all in their 20's, were arrested and charged with killing the girl, Maryann Measles, and dumping her body into the Housatonic River.
Yesterday, one of the men became the first to plead guilty in the case.
By pleading guilty to six counts including felony murder, the man, Alan Walter Jr., 25, will not face the death penalty. Prosecutors are expected to seek a life sentence for Mr. Walter, which is 60 years in Connecticut. He also pleaded guilty to kidnapping, conspiracy to commit both kidnapping and sexual assault, and tampering with a witness and evidence. He is scheduled to be sentenced on April 29.
Mr. Walter is one of the hardscrabble group of eight who grew up poor and isolated from New Milford's affluence. Law enforcement officials said Maryann, a troubled seventh grader, was killed both as an act of revenge for having sex with some of the women's boyfriends and to prevent her from testifying that she had had sex with two of the men, both adults who were likely to face statutory rape charges. Maryann told the police about one of the relationships.
One week later, on Oct. 19, 1997, she disappeared from the parking lot of a New Milford supermarket while her mother was shopping in the store. She was driven in a van to a remote area next to the Housatonic River. According to court documents, she was raped and beaten. Court records describe her screams.
Mr. Walter, who demonstrated to the police during the investigation how he had held Ms. Measles's head under water ''to scare her,'' confessed that after she drowned, he removed her from the water and had sex with her.
He and others covered her body with a blanket, wrapped it in chains and electrical tape and dumped it in the river. Her body was found downstream the following July in Lake Lillinonah, a section of the Housatonic.
In October 2002, the police charged eight people in connection with the crime. Deaneric Dupas, of Waterbury, is facing capital felony charges. Three others are scheduled to go to trial in the summer, said David Shepack, the state's attorney in Litchfield County.
Investigators said that in conversations, Mr. Walter initially told them he believed that he deserved a sentence of community service, or perhaps two months in prison. ''Today, some six and a half years after the murder of Maryann Measles, this life sentence for Alan Walter Jr. brings certainty, closure and finality of judgment to both the community and the victim's family,'' Mr. Shepack said in an interview.
Cindi Measles, Maryann's mother and the mother of three other daughters, said she once wanted the defendants sentenced to death. Today she believes Mr. Walter will suffer more if he lives in prison.
''I want him to be raped, beaten and bloody, and never feel safe,'' she said. ''Because no matter what he feels in there, it won't be one-tenth of what my daughter endured.''
