The University of Colorado football program has long been a world apart in this famously idiosyncratic city nestled against the Rocky Mountains. The Buffaloes could be worshiped or reviled, but both in their triumphs and failures, residents say, the team was a distinct and separate subculture behind the well-guarded walls of its sports kingdom on the hill.
In the last few weeks, however, as accusations of rape and alcohol-laced misconduct within the football recruiting program have rippled across the campus and beyond, those walls have begun to crumble, students, faculty members and residents say.
On Thursday, the police here released a new report of another rape accusation, which dates back to 2002 and may involve two football players. It was the sixth case to become public.
On Wednesday, the university's president, Elizabeth Hoffman, put the team's coach, Gary Barnett, on paid leave. The day before, Mr. Barnett had called a former Colorado place-kicker, Katie Hnida, a ''terrible'' player after she accused one of her teammates of raping her in 2000.
Dr. Hoffman reprimanded the coach for the comments. And she said she was equally troubled by a police report in which an unidentified woman accused another Colorado player of rape and said Mr. Barnett had told her he would side with the player ''100 percent'' if she pressed charges.
The Boulder district attorney, Mary Keenan, is still investigating what she has described as ''an understanding'' within the culture of the athletic department that sex would be provided to recruits in their visits to campus. No criminal charges have been filed.
In interviews across the campus and downtown Thursday, some people said they were saddened by the situation and by what it could mean for Boulder and the school. Some women who live across town from the university said the news had only reinforced the vague sense they already had that the rowdy party atmosphere of the campus was on some level hostile toward women.
The school's admissions director, Barbara L. Schneider, said the test of how the events had affected enrollment will come on May 1, when accepted students must send their first checks.
Stacie Conrad, a 20-year-old journalism student, said her mother called her on Wednesday, warning her to stay away from football players. ''She said they're all thugs,'' Ms. Conrad said. ''She was kind of joking, but I'm sure she's somewhat worried.''
Ms. Conrad said that she was not worried at all and that she was in fact optimistic that the publicity and the criminal and university investigations would make the campus an even safer place than she feels it already is. Besides, as she told her mother, she does not even know any football players.
Some people said they believed the school's reputation for raucousness and drinking was what was really coming under the microscope. One downtown restaurant owner, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said that people who lived near the campus had come to resent the carnival atmosphere of its parties.
''They feel they have a right to party, and if they disrupt us, that's our problem,'' the restaurant owner said of the students.
Many women on and off campus said the revelations had reinforced how much their safety lay in their own hands.
''My parents haven't brought it up,'' said Jessica Golterman, 19, a prejournalism major from Orange County, Calif. ''They expect me to be cautious and take care of myself.''
Janine Moderski, who lives across town from the university, said that she had never felt comfortable around the campus and that she felt even less so now. ''It has definitely heightened my awareness,'' said Ms. Moderski, 31, a graduate student in psychotherapy at Naropa University, which is also in Boulder.
In the 2002 case described in the police report released Thursday, alcohol has been described as playing a central role. The woman whose rape accusation was investigated by police told the officers, according to the report, that she had been so drunk that she remembered only being with two men she thought were football players. The woman said that she had woken up the next morning bleeding from her rectum, and that she had found a used condom on her bedroom floor.
The university's response to the scandal is emerging as a source of concern for many members of the community.
At the Women's Resource Center on campus, where men and women regularly gather to discuss the investigations and charges, the center's associate director, Barbara Kulton, said she was very concerned about how the university's leaders are ''framing'' the issue. Administrators, Ms. Kulton said, have said that women have the responsibility for keeping themselves safe on campus.
That may be true, she said, but men also have the responsibility for helping to create a safe environment. ''The onus is still on the women,'' she said.
Other people said there was a debate about whether there was a deeper problem, or if it was simply a matter of some individual people committing misdeeds.
''Whether this is about recruiting practices or the subculture -- that's what a lot of people are talking about,'' said Andrew Violet, 35, who graduated from the university with a degree in cultural anthropology in 1993 and works on campus at the library copy center.
Some said people's reaction to the scandal often depended on how they felt about the football program in the first place.
''People who are fans tend to think it's being blown out of proportion,'' said Thomas E. Eldridge, owner of Tom's Tavern. ''Others said that everybody up there is in denial.''
There was a show of support for Coach Barnett on campus Thursday afternoon, when six former Colorado football players gathered to defend his character and integrity.
''His rules were strictly applied,'' a former player, Scott Nemeth, said, adding that the coach frequently disciplined players.
Elsewhere on campus, people are watching for repercussions.
Applications from out-of-state students are already down about 10 percent this year, said the admissions director, Ms. Schneider, who attributes the decline, at least in part, to the university's designation last year as the nation's No. 1 party school by the Princeton Review.
''I think some parents probably were concerned that they'll pay all this money and their child will get a party education,'' Ms. Schneider said. ''We're still fighting that one.''
One former student, Gail Palmer, who graduated in 1959 and works as a real estate agent in Boulder, said she thought that alumni donations might suffer. ''We'd just overcome the party-school thing, and now this,'' Ms. Palmer said. ''It's definitely going to hurt funding.''
She said she was saddened by continuing bad news about the school she loves. As for her own donations to the school, she said, they probably would not be affected.
Other people are bracing for the questions they fear they may get from potential employers.
Joy Ramirez, who expects to receive her Ph.D. in comparative literature from the university in May, said she was already working up what to say to English department chairmen who might question the quality of her education.
''I'm going to have to formulate some kind of defense to say that this is a reputable institution -- no matter what's going on,'' Ms. Ramirez said.
