It has been 16 months since José Contreras slipped out of the Camino Real Saltillo Hotel in Mexico, bound for the airport in Monterrey and freedom from the Cuban government. Within months, Contreras had signed a four-year, $32 million contract with the Yankees, and he ended his season in the World Series.
''He's got everything,'' Contreras's agent, Jaime Torres, said Wednesday. ''He's got a beautiful home. He's got more money than he ever dreamed. Anything that he wants, he can have now. But he cannot have his wife and two daughters next to him.''
Contreras and the rest of the Yankees' pitchers and catchers practiced at Legends Field on Thursday, the first official workout of spring training. Contreras has a spot in the starting rotation, which he failed to earn last spring, but he is still missing his family. He is popular with teammates and is close to his interpreter, Leo Astacio, but Contreras remains the loneliest Yankee.
''It was a difficult decision that I made, and I thought of the ramifications for my family,'' Contreras said through Astacio. ''But I honestly thought that, by now, they would be here. I didn't think it would be a year and a half without us reunited.''
Contreras's wife, Miriam, and daughters Naylan, 11, and Naylenis, 3, still live in Cuba. He speaks with them daily, and joked Thursday that he needed a new contract to pay for his phone bills.
Contreras is a resident of Nicaragua and has secured visas for his family to enter that country, but he said the Cuban government has refused to grant his family exit visas. The government, he said, told Miriam to try again in five years, and has arrested her twice -- once for suspicion of defecting and once for alleged prostitution. ''I think it's an injustice what they're doing to my family,'' Contreras said. ''Just because I decided to leave, I don't think my family should have to pay for a decision I made and be separated from me.''
An attempt to get a reaction to Contreras's assertions from members of the Cuban Interests Section in Washington was unsuccessful.
Contreras said that when he signed with the Yankees, the team told him it would help bring over his family. Contreras does not know how the Yankees could help, but he did not sound satisfied that they had done all they could. ''If they have done anything, I don't know about it,'' Contreras said. ''No one has spoken to me about it. I don't think they have had any role in this.''
Torres said he planned to be here later in spring training and would ask the Yankees for help. But General Manager Brian Cashman said the Yankees' immigration lawyer, Bob Hill, had determined that the Yankees were powerless.
''It's certainly not a healthy situation,'' Cashman said. ''If there was something we could do, we would have done it already. If the Yankees had the power to make something happen, we would try and make it happen. This is one that we don't legally have jurisdiction over.''
Contreras had reason to be optimistic that his family would be with him by now. Orlando Hernández defected from Cuba in December 1997, and his mother, children and former wife were granted permission to visit him the following October. John Cardinal O'Connor of New York interceded then, sending an emissary to Havana to persuade President Fidel Castro to do a favor for Hernández. Hernández's family was then granted 30-day visas and ultimately allowed to stay in the United States.
''I don't know what influence the Yankees have, but maybe they could become involved,'' Torres said. ''Or maybe other Yankee fans from around New York could help, people of influence, maybe Mr. Rudolph Giuliani, or any Yankee fan who sees that it is unfair what the Cuban government is doing to this young man.''
Contreras went 7-2 with a 3.30 earned run average last season, making nine starts and nine relief appearances and missing more than two months with shoulder problems. It was a disjointed season made worse by the absence of his family.
''When you have a bad day and go home to your wife and, in my case, daughters, that helps you a lot and takes your mind off of it a little bit,'' said Contreras, 32, who has been married almost 16 years. ''But now, if I have a bad day, I go home and I'm by myself. I really have no choice but to think about it. There's no one to distract me or take attention off of my work.''
Contreras said he did not tell his wife he was defecting, and at first, he said, she wondered if he had abandoned her. But Contreras has given money to his family, and he said they are comfortable, with a new house and cars that he will never see in person. ''If I did go back to Cuba, right at the airport, they'd shoot me right in the chest,'' he said.
Still, Contreras said, he never questions his decision to defect. He was once the pride of President Fidel Castro's Cuban national team, dining with Castro socially and earning the nickname Titan of Bronze. But all loyalty has been severed.
''Now that I see how the Cuban government has reacted,'' Contreras said, ''the only thing I would say I regret is not leaving 20 years earlier.''
INSIDE PITCH
The Yankees are doubtful that reliever STEVE KARSAY will be ready for opening day, Manager JOE TORRE said. Karsay had surgery last May to repair a torn rotator cuff, and though he is still limited to fastballs when he throws off a mound, he has had no setbacks in his recovery. . . . ENRIQUE WILSON has the inside track to be the starting second baseman, Torre said, but MIGUEL CAIRO will be seriously considered. The Yankees are not actively exploring trade possibilities. . . . The Yankees, who still have not reissued PAUL O'NEILL's No. 21, have already handed out ROGER CLEMENS's No. 22 to catcher JOE GIRARDI, and ANDY PETTITTE's No. 46 to pitcher DONOVAN OSBORNE. The Yankees have 15 retired numbers. ''We don't have the luxury of holding too many numbers out,'' General Manager BRIAN CASHMAN said. . . . Injured third baseman AARON BOONE, who will probably be released so the Yankees can save $4.8 million, does not have a locker stall at Legends Field. . . . The Yankees said they had sold 99,000 tickets in the four days since the ALEX RODRIGUEZ trade.
BASEBALL
