The most important question to be decided in Iran's parliamentary elections on Friday may be just who, or how many people, actually show up to vote.
Voters hoping for change have lost most of their enthusiasm after more than 2,000 liberal candidates were disqualified last month by the clerics who control most of the political power.
Since then, the reformers have been divided between calls to boycott the vote or to heed appeals by the reformist president, Mohammad Khatami, to cast ballots for substitute candidates and prevent the hard-liners from reclaiming the Parliament.
An additional 1,179 candidates dropped out in protest after the disqualifications. Many of the candidates who have stepped in to run are unfamiliar to wary voters, who appear inclined to stay away.
''How can I vote when I do not feel I can elect somebody freely?'' asked Mohammad Hassan Shateri, 55, the owner of a bookstore in Tehran. ''They want to impose a situation on us, and I see no reason to take part in helping them create it.''
Many city walls that were plastered with election posters in previous elections are almost bare this time.
Text messages circulated anonymously on mobile phones are urging people to shun the vote. ''The ballot boxes are coffins for freedom,'' said one message. ''Let's not participate in the funeral of freedom on Friday.''
Opponents of President Khatami are hoping that conservatives will predominate among those who are motivated to turn out, and are confident that the lack of enthusiasm among in the reform camp will secure their victory.
One such man is Hussein Fadaee, a veteran of the war with Iraq in the 1980's, who is supported by the major pro-clerical group, the Developers of Islamic Iran. The group has promised economic development and more jobs for youths.
''We cannot describe in detail what policies we will pursue,'' Mr. Fadaee said in an interview, ''but we will follow the same model that the city council did.''
Supporters of clerical rule won control of the city council in the municipal election last year after a turnout of just 12 percent of Tehran's eligible voters. The new members abruptly suspended programs they considered un-Islamic.
The new mayor, Mahmoud Ahmadinejad, turned several art galleries into prayer centers during the Islamic holy month of Ramadan and canceled events in cultural centers.
''We believe that freedom should be defined,'' he responded when asked how his group would react to the overwhelming demand for more social freedoms by the country's youth. ''We have to come up with a solution if that freedom is not in accordance with our beliefs and culture.''
On Wednesday, the hard-line judiciary, which is controlled by opponents of President Khatami, shut down two leading newspapers in an effort to silence reformers before Friday's elections. The two dailies, Shargh and Yass-e-No, this week published an open letter from reformist members of Parliament criticizing Iran's supreme religious leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, for his election policies.
The election headquarters of the reformist Islamic Participation Front, led by the president's brother, Mohammad Reza Khatami, was also shut down on Thursday. The party has called for an election boycott.
Many of the candidates who have stepped in to run in place of the banned reformers have not gone out of their way to earn the support of voters. A banner on Enghelab Street pointed to a campaign headquarters for some of them, but neighbors said the office appeared to be a front.
Another such candidate, Mohsen Razian, is refusing to speak to journalists or meet with people. His campaign pamphlet indicated only his name and degree, a Ph.D. in management. Shopkeepers downstairs from his headquarters said they would not vote for him, because he had made no effort to meet them.
Still, not all supporters of change have been forced to give up.
Belgheis Khaloogh is one of the many disabled people the Guardian Council is allowing to run. Unlike most of them, she was not wounded in the war with Iraq.
Sitting in a wheelchair in downtown Tehran, Ms. Khaloogh, 32, who has a Ph.D. in history, has been campaigning on a platform to improve conditions for the more than five million disabled people in Iran.
''Life is like a prison for the handicapped in Iran,'' she said, as two other women in wheelchairs nodded enthusiastically.
Yet even her campaign has been far from easy. Her request to campaign at high schools was turned down by the Education Ministry, even though other candidates were allowed to do so.
Vigilantes shoved her wheelchair and forcibly prevented more than a dozen other candidates from distributing campaign pamphlets outside Tehran University last week. The candidates were told that they were not allowed to campaign in the area.
''We all know what the result of the election will be,'' Ms. Khaloogh said. ''I am using this opportunity to tell people about our problems and tell them we exist in this society too.''
