MOST major airlines offer specials on last-minute international weekend fares on their Web sites, although the restrictions vary wildly.
The most convenient seems to be American (www.aa.com). While some sites require you to select a departure city to find current deals, the American site simply lists all the available offers for the following weekend (or, as with most sites, you can sign up for a weekly e-mail update). Flights must be purchased five days in advance, with departures allowed anytime from Wednesday through Friday and returns from Monday through Wednesday.
At Continental (www.continental.com), the deals are literally last-minute: each Tuesday through Friday you can buy seats for flights that Saturday (with a return on Monday or Tuesday). Continental also has a number of package deals available three hours to seven days ahead of time -- for example, a flight from Los Angeles to Brussels with three nights in a hotel for $652 a person.
Other offers require more cash and foresight -- purchases 14 days or 21 days in advance are common. Northwest (www.nwa.com), for example, is currently offering a New York-to-Tel Aviv flight for $734.
The deals at United (www.united.com) for next weekend require Monday-through-Thursday travel and must be purchased by the end of the day today. US Airways (www.usairways.com) does not have a last-minute international program per se, but it does have a ''Springtime in Europe'' offer that expires today, with several deals (also requiring Monday-through-Thursday travel) still available.
Below are some of the flights being offered for the weekend of Feb. 27. The restrictions noted above apply, and several require a departure on Thursday or a return on Tuesday, March 2.
J. R. ROMANKO
Boston to Manchester, England (US Airways), $207.  Boston to London (American), $207.  Boston to St. Thomas (American), $249.  Chicago to Paris (United), $225.  Chicago to San Juan (American), $259.  Chicago to Rio de Janeiro (United), $399.  Dallas to Frankfurt (American), $299.  Denver to Munich (US Airways), $276.  Miami to Caracas, Venezuela (American), $229.  Miami to São Paulo, Brazil (United), $389.  Philadelphia to London (US Airways), $226.  New York to the Turks and Caicos (American), $169.  New York to Jamaica (American), $249.  New York to Aruba (American), $319  Pittsburgh to Madrid (US Airways), $295.  San Francisco to Amsterdam (US Airways), $310.  Seattle to Mexico City (United), $229.
