Rangers center Eric Lindros, who has been out since Jan. 28, when he sustained the eighth concussion of his career, said yesterday that he was feeling better and would like to play again as soon as possible.
Lindros, who turns 31 on Feb. 28, said in a telephone interview that he planned to travel to Montreal early next week to be re-examined by a concussion specialist, Dr. Karen Johnston.
''I really want to play,'' he said.
Johnston has to clear Lindros before he can begin physical activity. Lindros would need to be cleared yet again before he can resume his playing career.
Lindros said yesterday that he had reached the point where he could almost have ''a pretty full day.'' He said he had been taking frequent walks and did not ''nap a lot'' on most days.
Lindros sounded much more optimistic about his return than he did on Feb. 3, when, on a visit to the Rangers' practice facility in Greenburgh, N.Y., he hinted for the first time that he might retire because of concussions.
''I certainly want to play hockey,'' Lindros said then. ''That being said, it's not for a game or two, because this is getting old and tiresome. It's no fun.''
Should Lindros resume playing before the N.H.L. trading deadline on March 9, it might provide the Rangers with an interesting situation.
Lindros, who has played 39 games this season, is in the final guaranteed season of the contract he signed after he was traded to the Rangers in August 2001. Lindros has a base salary of $3.3 million and receives an additional $80,000 a game (up to 75 games). The Rangers have an option for next season at $10.25 million, which they are unlikely to pick up.
With Lindros's medical history, it is unlikely the Rangers would be able to get much in return if they attempted to trade him.
But because another team would have to pick up only the remainder of Lindros's contract for this season, there might still be a market for him before the trading deadline.
Should Glen Sather, the Rangers' president, general manager and coach, decide to become a seller before the deadline, Lindros would figure to be just one of several Rangers available, joining a list that might include Brian Leetch, Aleksei Kovalev, Petr Nedved, Tom Poti, Martin Rucinsky, Matthew Barnaby, Chris Simon and Boris Mironov.
Lindros said yesterday he was not thinking about the trading deadline.
''I've just thought about getting back to playing hockey,'' he said.
HOCKEY
