Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger likes to say that he can sell just about anything, citing the box office figures for his more dreadful movies like ''Red Sonja'' and ''Last Action Hero.''
But he has taken on a difficult sales job in trying to persuade debt-burdened California voters to approve $15 billion in new long-term borrowing to pay the state's current operating expenses. Recent polls suggest that voters are at best uncertain about the wisdom of adding debt in an era of political and economic malaise.
Mr. Schwarzenegger is traveling the state and appearing in a $10 million advertising campaign urging passage of the bond measure. He has warned of ''Armageddon cuts'' and ''fiscal chaos'' if it fails.
The governor is raising millions of dollars and campaigning as if not only the state's financial health but also his own political future depends on passage.
Mr. Schwarzenegger, a Republican, appeared in Santa Monica on Thursday with the state's senior Democrat, Senator Dianne Feinstein, to urge passage of the bond measure and a companion proposal to forbid such borrowing in the future and to require the state Legislature to enact a balanced budget in all future years. The two measures, known as Propositions 57 and 58, will appear on the March 2 ballot that also includes the Democratic presidential primary candidates.
The newly competitive Democratic race is expected to increase turnout, a mixed blessing for the governor. While state Democratic leaders have endorsed the bond issue, Democratic voters appear more reluctant than Republicans to support it, according to recent polls.
Mr. Schwarzenegger said Thursday that he was fighting an uphill battle and spoke of ''down in the trenches, hand-to-hand combat.'' Senator Feinstein said the measures' failure would create huge budget problems and ''a dark, dark day for California.''
Some analysts say that if Mr. Schwarzenegger cannot win passage of the bond issue, he will lose much of the leverage he wields over a balky Legislature dominated by Democrats. The governor enjoys a healthy 61 percent approval rating as he approaches the 100-day mark in his new administration.
''I think that success on these two ballot measures is crucial to his success in his term as governor,'' said Elizabeth Garrett, director of the Center for the Study of Law and Politics, run jointly by the University of Southern California and the California Institute of Technology. ''He has governed by threat of initiative, the threat of taking his popularity to the people if the Legislature doesn't do his bidding. If he loses, that threat is no longer a credible threat, and it not only spells financial disaster for the state but political disaster for the governor.''
A poll to be released on Friday by the Public Policy Institute of California shows the public split evenly on the bond measure, with 38 percent favoring passage and the same number favoring defeat. Democrats oppose the proposition by 44 percent to 34 percent, while Republicans support it, 45 percent to 33 percent, the poll found.
The large number of undecided voters -- 24 percent -- indicates that a persuasive public campaign could swing the vote in the governor's favor. Mr. Schwarzenegger is planning a statewide television blitz over the next 12 days and a bus tour next weekend to drum up support.
Aides to the governor say that their internal polling shows a higher level of support for the proposals. They said they were confident that a high-profile campaign by the governor and groups from across the political spectrum would ensure success.
The California Democratic Party has endorsed the measures and the state Republican Party is expected to do so at a meeting this weekend. Groups usually at one another's throats -- the Western Growers Association and the United Farm Workers, the Chamber of Commerce and the A.F.L.-C.I.O. -- have lined up behind the proposals.
Conservative groups worry that if the measures fail, the state's bond rating will fall even lower and the governor will be tempted to raise taxes to balance the budget. Liberals fear deep cuts in social services and layoffs of staff employees if voters reject the new borrowing.
There is no organized opposition to the proposals. The two most vocal opponents are Phil Angelides, the liberal Democratic state treasurer, and State Senator Tom McClintock, the conservative Republican who ran for governor last year in the crowded recall field. They have no money to mount a campaign against the measures.
They call the borrowing plan irresponsible and a costly way to solve the state's immediate financial crisis. Mr. McClintock prefers across-the-board spending cuts to balance the budget. Mr. Angelides says Mr. Schwarzenegger should propose a temporary increase in income taxes on the state's wealthiest residents, as two former Republican governors, Pete Wilson and Ronald Reagan, did to deal with similar problems.
''It bothers me that the governor is spending all his political capital to borrow and burden our children with debt,'' said Mr. Angelides, who is a likely candidate for governor in 2006. ''It bothers me that he doesn't have the courage to do what is necessary to move toward a balanced budget and preserve critical programs.''
The governor has raised more than $10 million since taking office in November, most of which will be used to promote the measures. The donations are not subject to limits because they are being used to advocate passage of a ballot initiative rather than a candidate.
State officials are preparing a ''Plan B'' in case the $15 billion bond issue fails. The backup plan includes a smaller debt offering and deep cuts in state spending.
But Mr. Schwarzenegger does not like to talk about the consequences of failure and declined on Thursday to discuss the options for the state if voters reject the ballot measures.
''There is no what-if,'' he said. ''I don't think this way. I only think of victory.''
