The Environmental Protection Agency should be allowed to use data from studies in which humans are intentionally doused with pesticides and other toxic substances, as long as strict scientific and ethical standards are met, a National Academy of Sciences report has concluded.
The report, released on Thursday, was requested by the Bush administration in 2001 after environmental advocacy groups revealed in the late 1990's that companies were testing pesticides on humans.
Michael R. Taylor, a chairman of the academy's scientific panel, said that if human studies would increase the accuracy of the agency's decisions, they should be conducted, ''but only if we have an assurance that the participants of the study will not be harmed.''
The environmental agency initially imposed a moratorium on human pesticide studies, but it later accepted such studies case by case in making decisions on regulating chemicals.
The academy's report lays out criteria for what types of human pesticide studies the environmental agency should be allowed to accept. While initially prompted by pesticides testing, the panel said the recommendations were more broadly directed at all the agency's regulations on toxic substances, including air pollutants and water pollutants.
The report recommended that the agency accept only studies grounded in animal research, indicating that the procedures were safe. The agency should also establish an advisory board to review the studies, it said.
The report also addressed the delicate issue of paying human subjects, recommending that the payments should neither be so high as to entice subjects unduly or so low that only the poor were willing to participate. It also recommended that the environmental agency study whether additional compensation should be given to human subjects injured in studies.
Industry groups, including the one representing pesticide companies, said they were pleased by the panel's findings.
Environmental advocacy groups were critical of the report.
Correction:  February 21, 2004, Saturday  Because of an editing error, an article yesterday about a recommendation that the Environmental Protection Agency be allowed to use data from pesticide tests with humans misstated the way subjects are exposed. They ingest the pesticides -- that is, they are dosed (not doused).
