On the day that Mets pitchers and catchers reported to spring training, the first question posed to the team's general manager was about Alex Rodriguez. So was the second question. And even the third.
Such is the state of the Mets, who are recognized mostly right now because they do not have Rodriguez and they are not the Yankees.
Instead of celebrating the arrival of spring training, the Mets have spent the past week dodging criticism over their failure to sign Rodriguez three years ago and enduring the latest public coronation of their crosstown rivals.
The Mets' executives emerged from their shelter Thursday and in effect defended themselves to a restless fan base that wonders how they let Rodriguez get away and why they did not ante up for Vladimir Guerrero this winter.
Although General Manager Jim Duquette did not offer much response to repeated interrogations about Rodriguez, Jeff Wilpon, the team's executive vice president and chief operating officer, indicated that the club considered trying to pry Rodriguez from the Texas Rangers this winter. But the Mets, who were Rodriguez's favorite team when he was growing up, were apparently reduced to a larger group of also-rans.
''I don't think A-Rod wanted to come here,'' Wilpon said. ''The reports we had were that he wanted to go the Yankees and the Red Sox and that was it.''
As the Mets begin workouts Friday, they tiptoe into a season that nobody wants to call a rebuilding year, but nobody believes will end in a parade, either. Entering the past two seasons, the Mets proclaimed themselves playoff-ready, and then finished in last place. Their outlook is now the opposite. Although they are not talking about the postseason, they cannot fathom bringing up the bottom of the National League East again.
For a baseball team in New York, expectations could not be much lower. The most significant goal for the Mets this season might be to regain their relevance in the metropolitan area. When Duquette was asked whether he believes the Mets will make the playoffs, he said: ''I think that's unrealistic. Meaningful games are a much more reasonable goal until we can make a trade or two.''
He added, ''Our expectations are to be competitive and get to the point where can make a trade or two to get to the playoffs.''
Entering his first spring training as general manager, Duquette is discovering how difficult it is to rebuild a team in the Ruthian shadow of the Yankees, especially with a payroll that has been lopped from about $120 million to about $83 million. In one breath, he preached patience, saying he would not make a move to keep up with the Yankees and insisting the Mets will stick to their plan of stockpiling and developing prospects.
''I'm not worried about perception,'' Duquette said. ''I don't look at it as being in competition with the Yankees at all. I think the Yankees are an island in the game.''
But in the next breath, Duquette said he could strike a deal in spring training, indicating he might bring in as many as three new players before the trading deadline in July and promises to ''be very active on the market.'' He sounded bold and tempered at the same time. In a sense, he might be walking the finest chalk line in baseball.
Though Duquette believes the Mets can contend this season if they make a few well-placed deals, he acknowledges that to acquire key veterans, the club will probably have to move some of its best young talent. Of course, that's how the Mets got into this mess in the first place, mortgaging tomorrow for today.
''We tried the other way and failed at it,'' Wilpon said. ''We picked the wrong guys. Those guys are gone now, and we've got new guys.'' He added: ''I don't think we're one player away. Let's be realistic about it. There are certainly more pieces we can use. And there are more plans ahead to do things.''
As Wilpon spoke, jackhammers raged behind him, a fitting soundtrack for the start of the Mets' spring training. Like their spring home, the Mets are still very much under construction. They need a full-time right fielder, have a vacancy in the starting rotation and could use some more help in the bullpen, despite adding closer Braden Looper.
Like the Yankees, the Mets have two quality shortstops, one of whom will be playing out of position. Neither of the shortstops is named Rodriguez, of course, but Kazuo Matsui and José Reyes give the Mets a tantalizing double-play combination, and center fielder Mike Cameron solidifies the middle of a much-improved defense.
During various rebuilding phases in the past decade, the Mets relied on unknown prospects or aging stars. This time around, they have settled on a mixture they believe will at least be competitive and respectable.
And if nothing else, they already have a new name for their spring training park, which has undergone a $10 million renovation and will now be known as Tradition Field rather than Thomas J. White Stadium.
The moniker is reminiscent of the Yankees' spring stadium, which was named Legends Field to honor the franchise's past greats. The Mets came up with Tradition Field, not so much because of their history and lore, but because a local real estate company that built a nearby community called Town of Tradition offered the team about $150,000.
Given the rising stakes and rising prices of baseball in New York, the Mets need every buck they can get.
INSIDE PITCH
The Mets will put single-game tickets on sale for the 2004 season at Shea Stadium on Sunday at 9 a.m. They can also be purchased by phone at (718) 507-8499, online at www.mets.com and at KeySpan Park in Coney Island, the home of the Class A Brooklyn Cyclones. Season tickets and miniplans for the Cyclones' season, which begins June 22, are now available at KeySpan Park, Monday through Friday from 9 a.m. to 5 p.m., as well as by phone at (718) 449-8497 and online at www.brooklyncyclones.com.
BASEBALL
