In firmly upholding the new restrictions on open-ended campaign donations to federal politicians, the Supreme Court took care to look ahead and caution that ''money, like water, will always find an outlet.'' It took a mere two months. Already, alternative freshets carrying tens of millions of dollars are lapping at the gates of the presidential campaign.
In an attempt to rechannel a path for unregulated donations, Democratic campaign insiders have created new committees dedicated to the particular purpose of defeating President Bush this fall, while insisting that they have no formal ties to the Democratic Party or the party's eventual nominee. They are hoping that this flimsy formulation will allow them to evade restrictions under the McCain-Feingold law. What they are really doing is trying to rehabilitate ''soft money,'' those large, unregulated and politically destructive donations from unions, corporations and individuals that voters had a right to expect were erased by the new law.
These new groups, aptly dubbed ''shadow party'' organizations, need to be quickly and carefully regulated by the Federal Election Commission. Prodded by Republicans, who are eager to maintain President Bush's current advantage in regulated ''hard money'' donations, the commission correctly agreed this week to take on the task of trying to control the shadow organizations. But this is no small task because the commission, which is bipartisan, has a woeful record of fulfilling its charge to serve as a watchdog for campaign finance abuses.
After all, this is the same commission that created the original soft-money loophole that scandalized the nation. The election panel can redeem itself, but it must move quickly. So far, while it has not ducked jurisdiction, it has postponed the most basic decisions on how tough any new controls should be over the shadow groups.
These groups are claiming a right under tax-code exemptions to use large unregulated donations from unions and affluent partisans to finance voter mobilization drives and anti-Bush ad campaigns in crucial battleground states. To the extent they succeed, the Republicans will undoubtedly join in a new soft-money war.
In fashioning new rules, the commission must close this loophole, while at the same time explicitly laying to rest the objections raised by hundreds of nonprofit public-interest groups with tax-exempt status, which fear that the Federal Election Commission may unfairly go after them. The commission should thoroughly vet the shadow groups and their attempts to spend freely in influencing federal elections. In a narrow test case before it, the commission ruled that one such group could spend only limited hard money -- far more difficult to raise than soft -- in attacking or promoting a particular candidate. But the devil will be in the details in the new rules: what soft-and-hard money formulas may be needed, for example, when organizations mix federal and state electioneering? As difficult as these and other issues may be, the election panel needs to provide firm, specific and timely answers. Procrastination would mean only a fresh torrent pouring over the soft-money dam.
