The Nets head into Toronto on Friday night with an 11-game winning streak, matching the longest streak in team history. When the Nets did this last, in the 1982-83 season, the streak was followed by chaos, with the departure of Coach Larry Brown late in the season and a first-round playoff loss.
This season, the Nets put their chaos before the streak, absorbing injuries, absences, near in-house brawls and the dismissal of Coach Byron Scott. It was the removal of Scott and the ascension of Lawrence Frank to head coach that coincided with the streak, 10 of the victories coming since Frank took over.
Now, as the trading deadline passed with the Nets making no moves, the reasons for their success are many. The players point to the continued growth of Kenyon Martin and Richard Jefferson alongside Jason Kidd and a consistent contribution from the bench. But Scott, who was added Thursday to ABC's pregame shows as an analyst, admitted that he has seen what is clear to almost anyone who watches the team -- the Nets are playing harder for Frank than they did for Scott.
''I've heard those things as well, and being on the outside looking in, watching some of the games, now it looks pretty obvious to me now as well, too,'' Scott said Thursday morning on ESPN Radio.
He said that what ''hurts a little bit is the fact you don't feel the guys were playing as hard as they're playing now.''
Frank, when asked about the comment, pointed to the two Eastern Conference championship banners hanging in the team's practice site and said: ''See those banners? They played hard.''
But until he was fired, Scott was confounded by the inconsistent play of the team, riding his players hard over the lapses that surfaced every time that he thought the Nets were coming out of their troubles. He was let go with the team 22-20. Since then, the Nets have clamped down defensively, rebounded with a fury not seen this season and run the offense the way they have when at their best in the last two seasons.
''I think guys are prepared in the sense of understanding what their roles are, being communicated and talked to,'' Kidd said.
He added that ''we're rebounding the ball, and that's always been one spot that if we won games, it's because we rebounded.''
''I don't know if guys are playing harder, but coach is playing a lot of guys, and guys have responded,'' he said.
The Nets won the first 10 games of the streak by at least 10 points, with Wednesday's 98-92 victory over Atlanta the closest score.
In the last 11 games, the Nets have allowed just 83.8 points a game, holding opponents under 40 percent shooting in eight of the games. The offense has improved to 98.4 points a game over that stretch after averaging just 87.5.
''If the team didn't play hard for Byron, we wouldn't have been to the finals twice,'' said the Nets' president, Rod Thorn. ''For whatever reason, we've just been playing better, shooting the ball better, defending better. I can't say it's any one thing. I think by and large our players play very hard all the time. Maybe the energy level isn't quite the same when things aren't going well. I would never say the team didn't play hard for Byron. The success we had with Byron shows that.''
And the success since Scott's departure made it a quiet day at the trading deadline for Thorn.
''The phone wasn't ringing at all,'' Thorn said. ''I think that our team is playing very well. There are three critical areas for our team: to defend, and we're doing that well; playing in the open court as much as possible, and when we defend and rebound we can do that; and to play with energy. That's the key for us. If we do that and get the kind of production we're getting from the bench, we're going to be a tough team to contend with.''
REBOUNDS
LAWRENCE FRANK's clipboard -- autographed now -- and the tie he wore, along with a final statistics sheet, game ticket and program from Wednesday night's victory over Atlanta will be shipped by the Nets to the basketball Hall of Fame in Springfield, Mass. Frank set a record by winning the first 10 games of his N.B.A. coaching career. . . . In 1982-83, when the Nets last won 11 straight, they finished the regular season at 49-33, in third place in the Atlantic Division. But Coach LARRY BROWN left with six games remaining to coach Kansas. BILL BLAIR took over as coach, and the Nets lost to the Knicks, two games to none, in the opening round of the playoffs.
PRO BASKETBALL
