John Neumeier's fascination with Vaslav Nijinsky began in childhood a half-century ago with a chance encounter with Anatole Bourman's ''Tragedy of Nijinsky,'' which he discovered in a neighborhood library. Clearly a precocious child, he found in the overwrought 1936 biography the reassurance he needed that dancers might not be the off-puttingly exotic creatures he had envisioned as he gazed down from theater galleries the few times a year ballet came to his hometown, Milwaukee.
The young Wisconsinite, who would grow up to be an internationally known choreographer and the director of the Hamburg Ballet in Germany, was not fazed by the great Russian dancer's long battle with schizophrenia. Neither was he put off by Nijinsky's mad foray into avant-garde ballet choreography early in the 20th century, work that few dancers of the time could or would perform. Nijinsky had, after all, been a child like him. ''It started so, so simply,'' Mr. Neumeier said in an interview in New York, where the Hamburg Ballet will present his ''Nijinsky'' tonight through Sunday afternoon at City Center. ''It made dance very real to me, something I could enter into.'' He began to collect books and photographs to build what is today one of the great collections of material about Nijinsky.
Choice items in the collection include a plaster cast of Nijinsky's foot, a drawing of Nijinsky by Gustav Klimt and a sculpture by Una Troubridge of Nijinsky in the lead role of his ''Afternoon of a Faun.''
''She drew from life,'' he said of Troubridge's preparation for the sculpture, ''and you feel his presence as a performer very strongly. Klimt's drawing is very rare, and it is striking in its simplicity. This is the man, in a very naked way.''
Mr. Neumeier designed the sets and costumes for the two-part ''Nijinsky'' himself, basing them on original sketches by Léon Bakst and Alexandre Benois, the designers for some of the ballets Nijinsky created or starred in. The score for ''Nijinsky'' includes music by Chopin as well as Rimsky-Korsakov's ''Scheherazade,'' in which Nijinsky danced the Golden Slave.
Chopin was a composer Nijinsky used for ''Marriage With God,'' a 1919 solo he created and performed in the ballroom of a hotel in St. Moritz, Switzerland. But schizophrenia had already claimed him, and from then on he spent much of his life in European mental institutions. Mr. Neumeier's ballet begins with that sad last public appearance and then moves back and forth in time in a manner that he describes as almost stream-of-consciousness, through Nijinsky's glory years as an international ballet star with Serge Diaghilev's Ballets Russes, his troubled childhood and his last years, ending back at the performance in the Swiss hotel.
Mr. Neumeier cautioned, though, that audiences should not search the stage for look-alike versions of Diaghilev, Nijinsky or his wife, Romola. The aim, he said, is ''to make a present tense of Nijinsky.''
A Dancer's Story
The Hamburg Ballet will perform tonight and tomorrow night at 8 and Sunday at 2 p.m. at City Center, 131 West 55th Street in Manhattan, (212) 581-1212. Tickets: $35 to $75.
