President Bush promoted his tax cuts on Thursday at a hastily arranged ''conversation'' on the economy with tax-cut recipients selected by the administration, but at the last minute the White House closed the meeting to journalists.
Mr. Bush later appeared with the recipients standing silently behind him as he told their tax-cut stories on a stage of the Eisenhower Executive Office Building next to the White House.
''Maybe the best way I can make my point to the tax-raisers and spenders here in Washington is to listen to the stories of people like Amy Cofer,'' Mr. Bush said, indicating a pregnant woman who stood behind him for his 24 minutes of remarks. ''She is a mom of two, soon to be a mom of three.''
Ms. Cofer and her husband, Mr. Bush said, had saved $1,700 in taxes in 2003. If Congress did not make his tax cuts permanent, he said, Ms. Cofer's family would suffer.
''It's a new family, a new child coming, doesn't make sense to have this family pay a thousand dollars,'' Mr. Bush said.
It was unclear why the White House did not allow Ms. Cofer or the other recipients to speak for themselves. Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary, would say only that the White House often closed round-table discussions to journalists.
In fact, however, Mr. Bush has had at least three ''conversations'' on the economy in the last three weeks, in New Hampshire, Florida and Pennsylvania, and all were open and lengthy.
The most recent one, in Tampa, Fla., on Monday, also included some recipients who seemed to veer off the point that was most helpful to the White House, which is the theme of how the president's tax cuts have improved their lives. As a result, Mr. Bush had to steer them back to the subject at hand.
Striking the same theme on Thursday, Mr. Bush said Democrats in Congress would raise taxes by their unwillingness to make many of his cuts permanent.
''The Congress giveth, the Congress taketh away,'' he said to a crowd that included numerous White House interns who were told by their superiors to attend at the last minute, to make sure the room was filled.
''See, if Congress doesn't do anything,'' Mr. Bush added, ''there will be tax increases on the American people. That's what that means. When you hear, 'We're going to repeal the Bush tax cuts,' that means tax increases.''
Mr. Bush also said 11 million taxpayers this year would save an average of $1,086 on their 2003 returns,
Mr. Bush's remarks represented the third time in four days he has spoken out about the economy at a time when Democrats have stepped up their attacks on what they call Mr. Bush's dismal economic record. In recent opinion polls, Mr. Bush is trailing the top two Democratic presidential candidates, Senators John Kerry and John Edwards, by double digits, and Republicans are increasingly anxious for the president to begin more overt campaigning.
This week, the White House has tried to regain its balance after N. Gregory Mankiw, the chairman of the White House Council of Economic Advisers, created a furor when he said there were some economic benefits to American jobs moving overseas.
The White House has also sought to tamp down the clamor created when it had to back off a rosy prediction about job gains on Wednesday.
