Charles Cowles Gallery  537 West 24th Street, Chelsea  Through March 6
Cued in part by what he hears on news and talk radio, this longtime maestro of Bay Area Funk makes garrulous paintings, drawings and such that are a steady, cynical burble of often archaic visual imagery laced with writing. Peppered with wordage, rife with visual puns and inventions, taking off in Zen-inspired riffs on the state of the cosmos, and making references to earlier art, they are engaging rebuses whose meanings don't come easy.
What to make of ''Abstraction With Punch No. 2 and the Lesson,'' a very large canvas in which a cleverly drawn black-and-white caricature of a fusty professor lectures a small boy holding a dunce cap? The smug teacher points to a blackboard before them on which is written, among other things, ''Oil + Aggression'' and ''Ronnie Dumbsfeld.'' To the right of this scene is a large Abstract Expressionist section of dense, fiery colors that could represent, maybe, burning issues.
In ''Time as a Daredevil &amp; Two Abstractions,'' a black-and-white scene of a littered battlefield, whose lower right corner is a small, artsy yellow rectangle, shares the canvas with a sinister-looking amputee dressed as a Spanish bullfighter à la Manet, balancing on a stick and a raggedy red cape draped over his arm. The background is gloomy abstraction.
A group of small watercolors hangs on one wall of the gallery, slight sketches that include the obsessive symbols of ampersands and hourglasses that seem stand-ins for the artist's psyche. In one, Paul Revere rides a globe embellished with an hourglass, spreading the news of Al Quaeda. ''One if they land, two if they see . . . to hell with the others, I'm in it for me,'' he sings.
Some 40 years have passed since Mr. Wiley bucked the tide of Ab Ex and Minimalist abstraction to produce his inventive raps, and inevitably the bloom has faded a bit; his work tends to ramble where it once was taut. But his graphic talents remain strong and he still captivates the eye and mind.
GRACE GLUECK
ART IN REVIEW
