ONE day last fall, Andrea Wade, a private investigator in Orlando, Fla., decided she really needed to get away for a weekend, and Miami wasn't far enough. So she headed off for three days -- to Paris.
''I would go back in a heartbeat,'' said Ms. Wade, 37, even though she spent a total of 27 hours traveling on her intercontinental jaunt -- including a two-hour layover in Miami on the flight over, and three extra hours in Chicago after she missed her connecting flight on the way back. ''People go to Orlando for a weekend, so why not go to Paris?''
A growing number of Americans are deciding that when it comes to a weekend away, almost nowhere is too far to go. Forty-eight hours in Tokyo? American Airlines reports that last-minute trips from Kennedy Airport to Narita -- with a fare of about $400 a person for a stay of less than seven days -- are ''very popular.'' And at Site59, a travel packager, sales of last-minute getaways for long weekends in places like Zurich and Madrid jumped 24 percent last year.
Meanwhile, Gate 1 Travel, a Glenside, Pa., travel agency that offers five-night packages to Tel Aviv and four-night trips to Athens, says that 75 percent of its business now comes from shorter bookings, up from 20 percent two years ago.
The far-flung weekends are all part of the ever-shrinking American vacation. People are taking fewer days overall (Americans planned to take 10 percent less vacation time last year than in 2002, according to a survey by Expedia, the online travel site), and they are spending more time on shorter trips. According to a 2003 survey by Harris Interactive and the travel Web site Hotwire, 85 percent of the 2,378 people questioned were planning to take one or more weekend trips, and nearly 40 percent were planning no long trips of a week or more.
For some of these travelers, even the long flights have their own appeal. With no cellphone access, no e-mail and no one from the office able to reach you, the overseas flight has become practically the only place in the modern world where it is still possible to get in a stretch of uninterrupted reading time.
The short-term long-haul boom is also being driven by airlines and online travel sites, which are using last-minute Web offerings to fill empty seats and hotel rooms, often at a steep discount. Last fall, United Airlines began offering about 300 new international trips in its last-minute E-Fare program, including Shanghai and Amsterdam. Expedia now offers international packages -- trips of an average of four days that include airfare and hotel -- to 310 international cities, up from 52 two years ago. Such trips now account for almost half of Expedia's package destinations.
''The quality of the deals is better than it used to be,'' said Jon Douglas, an editor of Smarter Living, an online travel publisher. ''And the breadth of the destinations makes them appealing. It's hard to say no.''
For some travelers, spending a weekend in Rio de Janeiro is an easy way to one-up their friends. After all, Yankelovich Partners, a market research company, says that 42 percent of Americans view traveling for pleasure as a sign of success, up from 38 percent two years ago.
And last-minute weekend trips are also a way to get a taste of luxury on the cheap. Ron Cunningham of San Francisco, the head of finance and accounting for a real estate developer, bought a $300 ticket and flew to Koh Samui, an island with palm-lined beaches off the coast of Thailand, for two and a half days last summer. Because of the cheap airfare and short stay, he was able to check in to the luxurious Royal Meridien Baan Taling Ngam, eat lots of curries and fresh seafood and relax by the infinity pool.
''I don't know if I could afford a week or 10 days,'' said Mr. Cunningham, 34. ''But I could certainly afford a weekend.''
Isn't traveling for 10 hours or more to spend a couple of days in a new city a little crazy? Not for Sharon Adcock, a Los Angeles technology consultant who has gone to Singapore, Vienna and Amsterdam for the weekend. Last fall, she bought a $383 ticket to London for a three-day pub-crawl with some friends. Far from being an inconvenience, the 11-hour flight was a chance to escape.
''I love bringing magazines, watching movies and reading,'' she said. ''I won't be thrilled if the Internet comes onto planes. Now, people can't reach me. The time is mine.''
S OME of the people on these long-haul weekends aren't really after a vacation. They are ''mileage hounds,'' like Bob Ayres, an independent mortgage service provider in Fremont, Calif., who wants to tote up frequent-flier miles cheaply and quickly. ''I usually like to have my feet on the ground for 24 hours,'' said Mr. Ayres, who has gone to Tokyo, London and Zurich, stopping only long enough to have a few meals and see a local tourist attraction. In the last six months of 2003, he amassed 83,000 miles, mostly on weekend trips, earning himself 16 first-class upgrades from American Airlines. He plans to use them to travel around the world -- over a longer period of time.
Of course, short international jaunts are not for everyone. When Tom Parsons, the president of Bestfares.com, a travel consolidator, flew to London from Dallas for three days with his wife, he said he ''hated every minute of it.'' He spent one day recovering and felt exhausted tearing around the city sightseeing and shopping for the next two days. ''I will never do that again,'' Mr. Parsons said.
And what about a short trip to Asia? ''You're going to have to give me a lot of drugs and Xanax to fly 20 hours,'' he said.
Getting the most out of a weekend far away can require some high-level strategizing. Some travelers stay within the Western Hemisphere, only taking trips to, say, Buenos Aires or Rio de Janeiro to minimize crossing time zones and the ensuing jet lag. (The length of the flight is less important.)
Dr. James O'Brien, a sleep specialist in Boston, advises travelers taking short trips to Europe to stay on their home-time clocks as much as possible.
To prepare for a long weekend in Rome last fall, David Jefferson, an environmental health manager from Bedford, Tex., shifted his bedtime an hour later each night starting four nights before the trip. The day he and his wife, Paula, left, he went to sleep at 4 a.m. ''By the time we get to the place, my sleep cycle is halfway there,'' Mr. Jefferson said.
Brian Morfitt has an even simpler strategy. On his three long-weekend trips to Tokyo last year, Mr. Morfitt, a 27-year-old associate at an investment firm from Seattle, simply never shifted to Tokyo time. Instead, he stayed out all night and then slept during the day. ''It's an all-night city,'' he said. ''You pack it full and then sleep on the plane on the way back.''
Charles Stewart, a 35-year-old inventory control manager for a cosmetics company, has frequently traveled from Los Angeles to Latin America for long weekends, and he says getting his friends to come along has been harder than overcoming any jet lag. ''My friends think I'm nuts,'' he said.
But over the Fourth of July holiday weekend last year, he did manage to persuade a couple of them to spend 48 hours in Bangkok with him. ''They said the same thing -- it didn't feel like two days,'' he said. ''You really get a feel for the place. You come back with a great sense of accomplishment. It's a great feeling.''
JOURNEYS
