WITH an ad in Parade magazine on Sunday, the American Heart Association will begin its first-ever paid advertising campaign, a $36 million, three-year effort to raise awareness of heart disease and stroke. The group hopes that writing checks will help deliver its message more effectively compared with donated advertising, which often translates into ''far from prime time.''
With the decision to go commercial, the heart association becomes the latest prominent nonprofit group to buy both media time and creative services. The American Cancer Society made the same decision four years ago and now spends $10 million to $12 million a year on ads.
Research suggests that charitable groups overall have increased their ad outlays recently. Spending by charities increased to $576.5 million in 2003, from $497.7 million in 2002, a gain of 15.8 percent, according to Nielsen Monitor-Plus. By comparison, overall ad spending climbed to $99.7 billion last year from $94.9 billion in 2002, up 5.1 percent.
Nonprofits and advocacy groups face many of the same challenges that confront corporate advertisers, marketing experts said, citing the deluge of come-ons directed at ever-more-splintered audiences.
''It's been common for charities to get donated advertising in the past,'' said Stephen M. Adler, chief executive at JAMI Charity Brands in New York, which helps match nonprofit groups with corporate benefactors. ''But what's happening now is charities are having a harder time reaching their target audience.''
Jerry Della Femina, chairman at Della Femina Rothschild Jeary &amp; Partners in New York, said counting on donated time and space had become a bigger gamble than before. ''Public service announcements basically are unfortunately the beggars of the advertising industry,'' he said. ''The networks put them on at 3:30 in the morning, somewhere between guys selling you knives and guys selling you dumpling makers.''
Specialists in issues and advocacy advertising at the Seattle office of DDB Worldwide, part of the Omnicom Group, say that they, too, have seen changing demands from their nonprofit clients.
''Increasingly, nonprofits are getting more sophisticated,'' said Candy Cox, managing partner. ''They want to play in the very best media in order to communicate their messages.''
At the Advertising Council in New York, which facilitates public service campaigns that use donated services and media, executives acknowledged the limits of donated time but said that many groups had few other options.
''From time to time, some organizations decide to make an investment in paid campaigns to complement their public service campaigns,'' said Peggy Conlon, president and chief executive at the Ad Council. ''It's a perfectly good strategy, but year after year, the donated-media, public-service-advertising model really is the best for nonprofits.''
The heart association's decision to open its purse stemmed from research revealing a decline in brand awareness, said Claire Bassett, a board member at the association in Dallas. ''Everywhere from California to the Northeast to Omaha, Neb., by and large everyone said we have to raise the awareness,'' Ms. Bassett said.
So the group conducted a review for its first agency of record, selecting Campbell-Ewald in Warren, Mich., to create a paid campaign that would include print and broadcast elements directed at both English and Spanish speakers. It bought time on network shows like ''60 Minutes'' and ''Everybody Loves Raymond,'' programs that would be nearly out of the question for public service announcements surviving on donated time.
The association also bought time on cable networks including A&amp;E, Discovery Health and Lifetime. In addition to Parade, print ads will appear in publications including Essence, Ladies' Home Journal, Oprah and Reader's Digest.
Planning the media buy was in some ways more clear-cut than striking the right tone with the content, which is intended to remind consumers that heart disease affects not only men but also women and children, said Jeff Scott, president for integrated account services at Campbell-Ewald, part of the Interpublic Group of Companies.
''We took a look at depicting a world in which the American Heart Association didn't exist,'' Mr. Scott said, describing images of an emergency room filled with poorly trained staff and little or no equipment. ''That was potentially alienating,'' he said.
Instead, the campaign emphasizes real families that have faced heart disease. One ad reads, ''Heart disease affects three kinds of people. Children. Women. Men.'' A somber couple is shown in front of an small empty chair. ''John Godleski died of heart disease,'' the ad continues. ''He was just 2 years old.''
All elements of the campaign encourage consumers to visit the association's Web site or call a special number to take a ''Learn and Live Health Quiz.'' The level of participation in the quiz will help measure the effort's effectiveness, Mr. Scott said.
The heart association did not retain a big-name corporate sponsor to defray costs because it wanted to control the message as completely as possible at this point, but executives did not rule out future corporate involvement.
Outsiders pointed to partnerships between nonprofits and companies as a major source of financing in the future.
For nonprofits with possibly controversial messages to spread, paying for advertising is often the only way to gain wide distribution. That was the case with a new campaign against job discrimination from the Gill Foundation, a group that advocates lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender rights.
''With free media, the best way to get on the air is to make a spot that won't offend anybody,'' said Eric Gutierrez, associate creative director at DDB Seattle, which created the campaign. ''When you're making a spot about something like gay rights, you're probably going to offend somebody.''
Like the heart association work, the Gill Foundation commercials portrays real people, in this case gay Americans who had not previously disclosed their sexual orientation at work, but publicly reveal their orientation in the spots.
One print ad reads, ''For gays and lesbians, America is 14 states that recognize our right to live free from job discrimination, and 36 states that don't.''
It is still possible for public service campaigns to receive exposure in desirable times and venues. An Ad Council study of its campaigns from 1999 through 2002 found that only 30 percent of its public service announcements appeared during the overnight hours.
Then there was a spot appearing during the Super Bowl pregame show this year that raised awareness of H.I.V. But that spot, also created by DDB Seattle, had a little help: the clients behind it were the Henry J. Kaiser Family Foundation and Viacom, owner of CBS, which broadcast the game.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
