The first few moments of ''Ellipse'' conjure up circuses, Jiri Kylian and Martha Graham. But it soon becomes clear that it is best just to relax and go along for a joyous, wildly imaginative ride that is nothing but pure Graeme Murphy.
Mr. Murphy, who choreographed ''Ellipse,'' and his Sydney Dance Company, which performed the new full-evening piece on Tuesday at the Joyce Theater, are cherished in New York for their blithe Aussie humor and the dancers' sleek, supple physicality. ''Ellipse'' is typical Murphy in that it is essentially an un-self-conscious response to music, in this case composed by Matthew Hindson. There are about four and a half formal steps in the piece. But there is never any doubt that this surging, surprisingly poignant spectacle is dance.
The title apparently refers to the loop of silvery tubing that encloses the stage space, turning it into an enclave not only for dancing but also for some powerful implicit emotions and life rituals. The seven sections flow together so smoothly that they, too, are elliptical. Most of all, there is the gaudy, exuberant music. Walt Disney might have listened to the scores in ''Fantasia'' with something very like Mr. Murphy's sense of unbridled play.
Mr. Hindson's score makes a wonderful racket. The score for one dance sounds like a band playing ''Hold That Tiger'' in competition with a wailing siren. The music is shamelessly big and juicily orchestral; then, just as you begin to wonder where the accompanying movie is, Mr. Hindson turns broodingly and sometimes achingly intimate, introducing rattling, whistling, thunking sounds that might come from indigenous Australian instruments. And Mr. Murphy never fails to rise -- or subside meditatively -- to the occasion.
In one ensemble section a woman (Chylie Cooper) is swung and thrown around with a frightening disregard for gravity, but the effect is always lyrical. The complex partnering in ''Ellipse'' looks effortless and instinctual. Bodies do not seem to work to connect. Instead, they appear motivated by some outside force as large as a gathering wave or as small as the floor-strip by which George Balanchine moves the ballerina in arabesque, as if by magic, in ''The Nutcracker.''
Three giant men move through ''Ellipse'' with an undercurrent of sadness, as alone in their world sometimes as Frankenstein's monster. Mr. Murphy draws on the precise physical articulation and intense presence of one of them, Josef Brown, to end the piece. Another, Xue-Jun Wang, fills the stage with quiet, solitary pathos even as he gallantly manipulates his women. Simon Turner is a much sunnier sort, but he looks as if he might charge at the first wave of a red hanky.
Mr. Murphy nearly goes over the top, though wittily, in a hilarious silent-film trio in which a suspiciously innocent-looking, larcenous kewpie (Andrea Briody) is plucked from imaginary railroad tracks by two cowboy pals (Shane Placentino and Gavin Mitford) as a locomotive made up of chugging dancers suddenly appears and bears down on her.
In addition to being terrific fun, ''Ellipse'' is a feast for the eyes. The delicacy of the duets scattered throughout the piece is echoed in the handsome costumes of Akira Isogawa, an Australian fashion designer. Gerard Manion's set design gives ''Ellipse'' a larger physical context, and Damien Cooper's lighting is dramatic but never intrusive.
The good-looking and immensely engaging company included Wakako Asano, Katherine Griffiths, Jason Wilcock, Simone Sault, Christopher Sheriff, Tracey Carrodus, Cassandra Grove, Matthew Shilling, Joshua Consandine and Katie Ripley. ''Ellipse'' will be repeated through Sunday afternoon at the Joyce (175 Eighth Avenue, at 19th Street, Chelsea).
DANCE REVIEW
