A front-office rivalry already exists between Isiah Thomas and Larry Bird, the N.B.A. greats who had differences as players and who may like each other even less as the presidents of competing teams. Another, more friendly rivalry involving Thomas is taking root in the increasingly interesting Eastern Conference.
Joe Dumars, Thomas's backcourt mate on the Detroit Pistons' back-to-back championship teams in 1989 and 1990, bested Thomas yesterday by trading for Rasheed Wallace, the exceptional power forward whom Thomas and the Knicks coveted.
Dumars, last season's executive of the year, stole some of the shine from Thomas, who has positioned himself as a front-runner for this year's award by pulling off three trades in six weeks to revive the Knicks. More important, the trade, which Detroit made without losing any of its top players, could shift the balance of power in the East. On paper at least, the Pistons appear to be better than the two-time defending conference champion Nets and the current leader, Indiana.
''We feel that this is a guy who gives us a chance to make a pretty good run here come playoff time,'' said Dumars, the Pistons' president of basketball operations. ''He's a big-time player. He's a guy that can impact our team. It gives us a real shot to compete at the highest level in the N.B.A. right now.''
In the three-team deal, which was announced shortly before the 3 p.m. trading deadline, Detroit sent center Zeljko Rebraca, guard Bob Sura and a first-round draft pick to Atlanta. (If Milwaukee makes the playoffs, that pick will come from the Bucks.) The Pistons also sent guards Lindsey Hunter, Chucky Atkins and their first-round pick this year to Boston, which moved forward Chris Mills to Atlanta and guard Mike James to Detroit.
By taking on players in the final year of their contracts, Atlanta, which had obtained Wallace from Portland last week, positioned itself to be about $20 million under the salary cap this summer. The Hawks' desire for cap space rather than impact players enabled the Pistons to obtain Wallace, a two-time All-Star, without giving up a starter.
''The fact that we weren't going to have to break up our team to add a guy like this made it somewhat of a no-brainer for us,'' Dumars said.
The Pistons, who have lost their last six games, including one Tuesday against the Knicks, have the third-best record in the East at 34-22. But Donnie Walsh, the president of the Indiana Pacers, where Bird is the president of basketball operations, said Detroit is now the team to beat in the East.
''He's a heck of a player,'' Walsh, whose Pacers are 39-15, said about Wallace. ''It gives them another big man, so I would say this makes them better. But we like our team. We feel like we've got to keep improving to do well in the playoffs. When you get to the playoffs, you've got to beat good teams, and this definitely improves Detroit. But they have to be ready to play us, too. We're still pretty good.''
In a league where size usually wins, Detroit will have the East's most imposing frontcourt tandem in Rasheed Wallace and Ben Wallace. Ben is the league's second-best shot blocker and rebounder, and the 6-foot-11 Rasheed is a capable shot blocker and a solid low-post defender. Rasheed also provides what Ben does not -- offense. Rasheed, who is averaging 17.1 points and 6.6 rebounds this season, has tremendous skills in the low post as well as the ability to make 3-pointers.
The Nets' president, Rod Thorn, whose team swept Detroit in the Eastern Conference finals last season, knows the Pistons will be tougher.
''They were already a very good team, but this makes them an even better team,'' Thorn said. ''To get a player of Wallace's caliber without giving up anything that you can't do without is a real coup.''
Thomas could still acquire Wallace, who will become a free agent after this season. Bill Strickland, Wallace's agent, has said Wallace wants to play for the Knicks, and a person close to Wallace has said Wallace will accept the Knicks' $5 million midlevel exception over more lucrative offers from other teams. Wallace is making $17 million this season.
Dumars said Detroit's intention is to re-sign Wallace, but the chance that he might leave after this season does not dampen their excitement over the deal. Because they were able to move Atkins, the Pistons will be about $10 million below the salary cap this summer if Wallace chooses to go elsewhere.
That would enable them to comfortably re-sign Mehmet Okur, their promising second-year forward/center, without having to pay a luxury tax, and they can use Rasheed Wallace in a sign-and-trade deal. They also have Darko Milicic, a rookie, to fall back on if Wallace leaves.
''We'll make it very clear when he gets here that we'd like to have him here and that we'd like for there to be a long-term relationship,'' Dumars said, referring to Wallace.
Still, for Detroit, this deal was about winning the East and postseason success this year.
Thomas, whom Bird fired as Indiana's coach last summer, had tried desperately to obtain Wallace, but the Knicks did not have enough draft picks or players in the final year of their contracts to appease Atlanta. Despite his disappointment, Thomas called Dumars to congratulate him on the deal.
''I like to see former teammates do well,'' Thomas said. ''I think them getting Rasheed is a great thing. Not only for him and Detroit, but Larry Brown -- he's a personal friend of mine. At least now, there are a couple of teams over here that can challenge Indiana and New Jersey.''
REBOUNDS
The Suns traded TOM GUGLIOTTA to the Jazz yesterday for two injured players -- forward-centers KEON CLARK and BEN HANDLOGTEN. The Jazz also received two conditional first-round draft picks, a 2005 second-round pick and an undisclosed amount of cash. As part of the trade, Phoenix will give up the least favorable of its two first-round picks in this year's draft -- either its own or the selection it got from the Knicks in the Stephon Marbury trade. The second conditional first-round pick also came from the Knicks and is protected through 2010. Gugliotta, who averaged 2.3 points and 1.9 rebounds, is earning $11.6 million in the final year of a six-year contract. . . . The Hornets acquired guard SHAMMOND WILLIAMS from the Magic for center SEAN ROOKS. (AP)
PRO BASKETBALL
