The group that sets the rules for using the country's electric transmission grid never looked in depth at how well its standards were being followed by long-established grid control centers and had particularly poor information about the Midwest, the group's president acknowledged on Thursday.
The group, the North American Electric Reliability Council, voted earlier this month to conduct ''compliance audits'' on all electric transmission operators over the next three years, including the 20 largest, which cover 80 percent of electricity generation, by June 30.
The council, formed by the industry after the 1965 blackout in the Northeast to forestall federal regulation, publishes extensive rules governing operator training, maintenance of power lines and computer surveillance systems. But, David Hilt, the vice president for compliance, said, ''in the past, the audit procedures we've carried forward have primarily been for new entrants, new control areas.''
Council officials said they were chagrined to find that the blackout of last Aug. 14, the largest in American history, was caused by violations of existing rules, including some violations that had previously caused blackouts, like failing to trim trees near power lines. Some of the violations were committed by a relatively new entity, the Midwest Independent Transmission System Operator, of Carmel, Ind., but the problem originated with a utility with a long history, FirstEnergy.
Mr. Hilt and Michehl R. Gent, the president and chief executive of the council, said the group's headquarters, in Princeton, N.J., got reports from regional reliability councils that varied in detail about what violations had been observed.
''We have a good idea in certain regions, and no idea in other regions,'' Mr. Gent said. In the Midwest region that included Ohio, where the Aug. 14 problem began, ''we had no idea at all,'' he said.
In response to the blackout, the council plans to have violations reported to its headquarters and made public after they are verified, but it has not worked out all the details. The council also wants reports on all power-line failures caused by line contact with trees.
