Three months ago, the South African government promised to provide free antiretroviral medication to AIDS victims, planning to supply as many as 1.4 million people within five years.
But only last Friday did the government solicit proposals from pharmaceutical companies that supply the life-prolonging drugs, pushing back the start of treatment for thousands of patients.
A chart in the government's plan, released in November, estimated that as many as 53,000 people would be receiving antiretroviral drugs by the end of March. But the country's health minister, Manto Tshabalala-Msimang, now denies that the government ever promised that the program would begin before April.
Sibani Mngadi, the health minister's spokesman, said the delay was caused by the need to check out clinics where drugs would be dispensed, set up a system to track patients and write training manuals.
''This is a major project,'' he said. ''We need to make sure we do the groundwork. We can't take shortcuts.''
The delay has drawn furious criticism from AIDS activists, who say it may be several months before the government begins to treat patients.
''There is no excuse for the program continuing to be delayed,'' said Nathan Geffen, director of the Treatment Action Campaign. ''The money is there. Everything is ready. All that needs to happen is for the government to purchase the drugs. That has taken way too long.''
South Africa has one of the biggest AIDS epidemics in the world. An estimated five million people are infected with H.I.V. -- about 12 percent of the population. No one knows for certain how many South Africans die of the disease each day, but researchers say estimates range from 600 to nearly twice that.
After years of questioning whether H.I.V. causes AIDS, the government of President Thabo Mbeki announced in mid-November that it would more than triple its AIDS budget to a total of about $1.7 billion over the next three years.
Mr. Geffen said the Health Ministry had at least $14 million on hand that it could use now. He said the provincial government of the Western Cape had demonstrated that it was possible to act more quickly to save lives.
There, 1,800 patients are being treated with antiretroviral drugs at 13 different clinics and hospitals, said Fareed Abdullah, deputy director of the provincial Health Department. In the next year, Mr. Abdullah said, the number of treatment sites should be tripled, with the eventual goal to treat the 5,000 to 10,000 people who need treatment now in Western Cape.
He said the provincial government was sharing the cost with Western donors and building on three years of pilot projects. ''We know which drugs to use, how to buy them, how to keep records, how to employ the staff, the doctors and nurses,'' he said.
But Mr. Mngadi, the Health Ministry spokesman, said South Africa's other eight provinces were not so well equipped. And Dr. Kgosi Letlape, who heads the South African Medical Association, said he did not want to criticize the government's program before it got off the ground.
''We have waited for this for years,'' he said. ''If it takes an extra month to ensure it takes off with no hiccups, I have absolutely no problem with that.''
Critics say the delays are symptomatic of the lack of political will in South Africa to confront AIDS. Mr. Geffen, of the Treatment Action Campaign, said Mr. Mbeki and Ms. Tshabalala-Msimang continued publicly to play down the seriousness of the problem to sow confusion about the disease.
In his State of the Union address earlier this month, Mr. Mbeki mentioned AIDS only once, in passing. In a subsequent television interview, he seemed mystified when an interviewer asked him why.
He said that like his predecessor, Nelson Mandela, he had allowed his vice president to lead the AIDS campaign, adding that South Africa's new treatment program would be better than any other country's.
Then he asked why other diseases, like tuberculosis and diabetes, did not get the same attention. ''What puzzles me is why people don't want to think,'' he said.
The next day, Ms. Tshabalala-Msimang urged journalists to spread the message that olive oil, lemon and garlic would improve the immune systems of AIDS victims. She was also quoted as saying that traditional remedies might replace antiretroviral drugs.
''This is in a long line of absolutely bizarre statements that she has made,'' said Mr. Geffen. ''Her comments on AIDS are just incoherent.''
