Ericsson, the Swedish telecommunications equipment company, on Thursday unveiled a long-awaited plan that would give more voting power to public investors, but would also probably keep control of the company securely in the hands of Swedish investors, particularly the Wallenberg family.
Until now, owners of Ericsson's 655 million Class A shares have owned 4 percent of the stock, but had 97.6 percent of the voting power. Owners of its 1.6 billion Class B shares had 2.4 percent of the votes, because each of those shares had one-thousandth of a vote.
''The current differences in voting rights have been criticized by many Swedish as well as foreign shareholders,'' said Michael Treschow, the chairman of Ericsson's board.
The new proposal would give each Class B share one-tenth of a vote, as opposed to one full vote for each Class A share. But the plan would also double the number of Class A shares. Collectively, those shares would retain 46.9 percent of the vote, and with that the ability to control company elections.
Under the new plan, moreover, holders of the supervoting shares would be compensated for the change in voting rights. They would be given the right to convert Class B shares into the supervoting Class A shares. The majority of those shares are held by Investor A.B., the company controlled by the Wallenberg family, and A.B. Industriv채rden, a Swedish investment company.
If they do not wish to convert, they can sell the conversion rights on the market, and a group of Swedish investors have offered to buy them, Ericsson said.
The 1,000-to-one voting structure was invented by Ivar Krueger, once known as the Swedish match king because he controlled 40 percent of the world's production of matches. He controlled Ericsson at one time but his highly indebted business empire collapsed in the early 1930's after his suicide. The company was rescued then by the Wallenberg family bank and by Handelsbanken, with which Industriv채rden is affiliated. The two banks converted debt into equity and gradually increased their control.
Pressure to do something about the voting structure became intense in 2002, when the company was forced to raise 30 billion Swedish kronor, then worth about $3 billion, through a rights issues. There were complaints from investors who felt that the controlling shareholders did not move rapidly enough to adjust to the downturn in the cellphone market that caused large losses for Ericsson.
The company promised to look for a way to change the voting structure.
Assuming that Investor exercises all its rights to convert shares, its proportion of the vote would fall to 19.4 percent from 38.3 percent, the company said. Industriv채rden's voting power would fall to 13.3 percent from 27.7 percent.
But the two companies would still control a third of the votes between them, making it highly unlikely that any shareholder vote could go against them.
Other major Swedish companies abandoned such lopsided voting systems years ago, but Ericsson defended its system as important to maintaining Swedish control of a company vital to the country's industrial base.
There was little international concern as Ericsson grew rapidly in the late 1990's on the mobile telephone boom. The value of American depositary receipts, each of which is equivalent to 10 Class B shares, peaked in 2000 at $188.36, more than 10 times their value in 1996.
But after the bubble burst, Ericsson began reporting losses and, after 2001, stopped paying dividends, which had been equal for both classes of stock.
The value of the A.D.R.'s fell to a low of $3.40 in late 2002, but has risen rapidly since. On Thursday, the A.D.R.'s were down 37 cents, to $28.57, in Nasdaq trading.
In Swedish trading Thursday, Class A shares fell 0.1 krona, to 22.7 kronor ($3.13), while Class B shares were unchanged at 21 ($2.90).
The company said that a group of investors would offer to buy the rights from those interested in selling them for 1.1 kronor each, about 15 cents at current exchange rates. But that is less than the normal market difference in price of the two types of shares, which may indicate that the rights, which are expected to trade on the Swedish stock exchange, could fetch more on the open market.
Over the last three months, the average margin between the shares has been 1.61 kronor, but it had increased in recent days, and was at 1.7 kronor on Thursday. The company said that its two major holders, Investor and Industriv채rden, would address the issue at their shareholder meetings in March, and would then disclose how many of the rights they planned to exercise, as opposed to sell to other investors.
Assuming the plan is approved at those meetings, it will be submitted for approval to a special meeting of Ericsson shareholders. The company said it would also need approval from Swiss regulators and tax authorities. If all approvals are obtained, the change could take effect in late 2004 or early 2005.
