Federal authorities in Manhattan unsealed an indictment yesterday against six defendants who were charged with conspiring to distribute the drug crystal methamphetamine and filed criminal complaints against two others.
Officials said the crackdown on the drug ring was part of an attempt to stop the flow of crystal methamphetamine, an enormously addictive stimulant commonly known as crystal meth, crank, ice and tina, into the city, where it is a relative newcomer on the drug scene.
Parts of the poor rural heartland and the West Coast have developed into strongholds of crystal meth use. In New York, its use was mainly among patrons of gay clubs in Manhattan, until recently.
David N. Kelley, the United States attorney for the Southern District of New York, said at a news conference in Lower Manhattan yesterday that crystal meth had grown in popularity as a party drug and is presenting new law enforcement and public health challenges.
In the last six months, he said, authorities have made 30 arrests, including those announced yesterday, and have recovered more than $2.5 million worth of crystal meth.
Mr. Kelley said that one dose of crystal meth, which induces euphoria and eases inhibitions, could maintain a user's high for an extended period, making it more powerful and dangerous than an equivalent dose of heroin or cocaine. And health care officials have said that the drug's growing availability is contributing to a rise in unprotected sex, increasing the transmission of H.I.V. and syphilis.
''We hope that there is still time to stem the tide,'' said Anthony P. Placido, the special agent in charge of the federal Drug Enforcement Administration's New York office.
Later, he continued: ''This is the beginning rather than the end of our efforts in this area.''
The indictment included seven counts against Jeffrey D. Watson, 40; John R. Warner, 39; Angel Garcia,37; Joseph Burns, 29; Gregory C. Smith, 42; and Avon Chandler, 32, who are all New York City residents.
The indictment also charged Mr. Watson, Mr. Warner and Mr. Burns with structuring bank deposits to evade bank reporting requirements.
Officials said the indictment was a result of Operation Chelsea Connection, an investigation involving the Internal Revenue Service and the Drug Enforcement Administration. Much of the activity associated with the investigation took place on the west side of Manhattan in the vicinity of Eighth Avenue and 19th Street, hence the name of the operation, Mr. Kelley said.
Each defendant named in the indictment faces a maximum sentence of life in prison and millions of dollars in fines if convicted. All were in custody yesterday except Mr. Smith, who was released on bail.
Two other defendants, Gary Kiss, 42, and James Urinyi, 33, were arrested as part of a separate investigation and were arraigned yesterday. They each face a maximum of 40 years in prison and $2 million fines if convicted, officials said. They were both released on bail.
Mr. Kelley said yesterday that crystal meth is not supplanting other drugs, but is ''really coming to life'' in its new market.
''I think we're coming to it in a very aggressive way,'' Mr. Kelley said, ''and in appropriate time.''
