Directed by Larry Blamire  PG, 89 minutes
It is a curious attribute of camp that it can only be found, not made.
As long as professional camp hunters, like the folks behind the indispensable Something Weird Video series, continue to unearth ineffably odd and inadvertently hilarious films like Doris Wishman's ''Nude on the Moon'' (1962), there isn't much need for contemporary re-creations like ''The Lost Skeleton of Cadavra,'' a gray, unfunny parody of 1950's science fiction films.
Written and directed in black and white by Larry Blamire, who also stars as the pipe-smoking scientist Dr. Paul Armstrong, ''The Lost Skeleton'' opens today in Manhattan, Seattle and Austin, Tex. The film is a pastiche of drive-in cheapies like Roger Corman's 1957 film ''Not of This Earth'' (from which it seems to have inherited the world's least convincing space alien) and Ed Wood's ineluctable ''Plan 9 From Outer Space'' (1959), with its pie-plate flying saucers and oaken dialogue.
The world's leading expert on the exotic element of atmospherium, Dr. Armstrong heads off to the wilderness in search of a fallen meteorite that may contain enough atmospherium to keep him busy for a very long time -- much to the good-natured consternation of his pert, blond wife, played in a 50's print dress by Fay Masterson.
On the way, the Armstrongs run across another academic, Dr. Roger Fleming (Brian Howe), whose interests are more exotic: he is searching for the cave of Cadavra, said by locals to contain a mysterious skeleton that can be brought back to life with a judicious application of -- you guessed it -- atmospherium.
Also in the neighborhood are a pair of visitors, Krobar (Andrew Parks) and Lattis (Susan McConnell), from the distant planet Marva. The aliens have been forced into a crash landing (it was their ship that Dr. Armstrong took for a meteor) after running out of fuel -- the same elusive element, atmospherium, that everyone else is looking for.
The set-up is at once too trite and too complex, requiring an awful lot of screen time to establish a premise that no one is taking seriously. By the time the decks have been cleared for some actual comedy, Mr. Blamire comes up with little more than some recycled ''Coneheads'' material, with the aliens discovering the earthlings' quaint habits (sipping cocktails, for one) and the earthlings slowly dawning to the notion that their guests come from a galaxy far, far away.
Things get a bit livelier when the aliens' pet, a giant mutant who seems to have been assembled from carpet remnants, goes on a rampage and kidnaps the doctor's wife. The classic image -- the lumbering monster with the beautiful blonde passed out in his arms -- stirs a certain primal pleasure. But the question remains: why work so hard to make something deliberately bad, when the world is hardly running a shortage of mediocre movies?
''The Lost Skeleton of Cadavra'' is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested). It contains some mildly suggestive situations.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
