This time, John Daly wants the good times to last. He does not want to wait another eight years for his next victory. He does not want to make headlines for the wrong reasons. He does not want to disappoint the fans who cheer for him so passionately, who were so excited by his emotional victory last Sunday at the Buick Invitational.
Whether Daly can turn his latest comeback into consistency remains to be seen. But Thursday's opening round at the Nissan Open was another positive step. Rallying after a shaky start, Daly made five birdies on the back nine at the Riviera Country Club, turning what could have been a dreary day into another emotional boost.
With a three-under-par 68, Daly was four strokes behind the co-leaders Shaun Micheel and Shigeki Maruyama when play was suspended by darkness, with 10 players on the course.
After not winning a PGA Tour event between the 1995 British Open and the Buick, could Daly win his second tournament in two weeks? It was too early to tell. But it was also foolish to count out a player who has been counted out so many times.
''I wish I had gotten more rest before the tournament, but the last 13 holes I played today felt really good,'' said Daly, still somewhat drained from Sunday. He played in a golf outing Monday in California, another outing Tuesday in Phoenix and in a pro-am Wednesday at Riviera. ''I slept like a baby last night.''
Daly figured to sleep well Thursday night, after his flurry on the back nine rocketed him up the leader board. Making the turn at two over par, Daly birdied Nos. 10, 11 and 12, heating up without warning in typical Daly fashion.
He almost drove the green at the par-4, 315-yard No. 10 to set up a birdie. At the par-5 No. 11, Daly missed the fairway right with his tee shot and was forced to lay up, but he hit a superb approach shot to 8 feet, then made the putt for birdie. Daly closed with birdies at Nos. 17 and 18, after a long walk up the stairs behind the 18th green into the Riviera clubhouse. He was short of breath, but happy.
''I just wish they'd put an escalator by the 18th green,'' Daly, who is about 240 pounds, down from a high of about 280, said.
In possession of a rare combination of power, touch around the greens and a smooth putting stroke, Daly has talent that no one has ever questioned. But many have questioned his lifestyle. He has been treated for alcoholism, he has spent too many nights gambling in casinos and he has the same number of wives (four) as children.
Last summer, Daly's current wife, Sherrie, was indicted in federal court in Mississippi on charges of laundering more than $1.2 million in drug money. She pleaded not guilty and could face 20 years in prison if convicted.
Despite that, Daly has still won five Tour events and two major championships -- the 1991 P.G.A. Championship and the 1995 British Open. And his popularity has never waned. His gallery Thursday was mellow by Daly's standards, but only Tiger Woods, who shot a 72, had more people following him. Many of Daly's peers are rooting for him.
''I know very few people out here who don't like John Daly,'' said Hal Sutton, the United States Ryder Cup captain, who did not rule out the possibility of naming Daly to this year's team if he continues to play well but does not qualify on his own.
Daly, who is sixth on the Tour money list, has plenty of motivation to play well. If he remains in the top 10 on the money list or breaks into the top 50 in the world ranking by the end of the Players Championship in March, he will qualify for the Masters for the first time since 2002.
''That's on my mind every year,'' Daly said.
And after Sunday's victory, Daly is suddenly on many people's minds. Several players stopped by the putting green as Daly warmed up and offered congratulations, including Woods. The two players shook hands and smiled, and Daly said he had learned something about handling success from watching Woods.
''I have scheduled too much in the past,'' Daly said. ''I've watched how Tiger does his schedule. He's fresh in every tournament. I may not play good, but at least I know I'll be fresh.''
Asked if he had heard from any long-lost friends after his victory, Daly smiled and said: ''There's been a lot of people I haven't heard from in a long time. It's funny. God bless them.''
A few minutes later, Daly was headed out of the clubhouse, after another successful day at the course. With Daly, the ride is seldom boring. But this time, he hopes the good times last.
CHIP SHOTS
TIGER WOODS was tied for 77th and will have to work to keep his streak of 116 consecutive made cuts going. Woods has never won at Riviera Country Club in five starts as a professional. . . . JIM FURYK, the reigning United States Open Champion, withdrew from next week's Match Play Championship because of torn cartilage in his left wrist. SHINGO KATAYAMA of Japan will replace Furyk in the 64-player match play event. . . . The defending Nissan Open champion, MIKE WEIR, was one of five players tied for fourth place at five-under-par 66.
GOLF
