WHO -- Linda Perrotta of Manhattan, a lawyer; her husband, Joe, a senior compliance officer with a bank; and their daughter, Jackie, 11  WHAT -- 5-bedroom house  WHERE -- Westhampton, N.Y.
Joe: We found a house that needed a little bit of work and we bought it and started doing some things, personalizing it. We actually doubled the size of the house. Jackie had a small playhouse in the main house, like a dollhouse/playhouse kind of thing. We thought it would be nice to have something outside, a little bigger so that she could fit into it with her friends. So I took on the project of building it myself. All in all it took about six months.
Jackie: It's got a blue carpet, blue walls, white trim. I have a table and chairs. There's a fake plant inside, and there's a loft. I relax and read in it. It's a nice shady place to hang out with your friends.
Linda: When you were 5, what would you do in it?
Jackie: I would dress up.
Linda: There's a little dress-up corner and she had several costumes and dresses. We found an old trunk of grandma's clothes and we set it up with jewelry and hats for her and her friends.
Joe: No one else is allowed in there really, just Jackie and her friends.
Jackie: My friends think it's a really good place to hang out. They have lots of fun in it. They probably wish they had one.
Linda: The playhouse was Joe's idea, but when I heard about it I said, 'Oh, it's every little girl's dream to have a space like that to play in.' Many people have come over just to see it and ask him, 'Would you do one for us?' Or they look at their husbands and say, 'Why can't you do something like this? All you do is play golf.'
As told to Seth Kugel
ON THE MARKET  Information on properties was provided by owners or listing companies.
WHERE -- Pine, Ariz.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $310,000
This log-sided 2,000-square-foot house is in a vacation area surrounded by the Tonto National Forest and popular as a cool summer retreat for residents of Phoenix, about 85 miles away. It has a stone fireplace; vaulted ceilings; two decks, including one with a hot tub; a screened porch; and two bathrooms. There is a raised playhouse in the woods of the two-thirds-acre property; its two decks are built around living pine trees. Agent: Sally Randall, Coldwell Banker Bishop Realty, (800) 325-7174; www.bishoprealty.com.
WHERE -- Jefferson, Ga.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $395,000
This 1916 Arts and Crafts bungalow, on three and a half acres 60 miles northeast of Atlanta, was built in 1916 and has many original details. It is 3,100 square feet and has four and a half bathrooms. The property has exotic plantings, including bamboo; an artificial fish pond with a waterfall; and a raised 10-by-12-foot one-room playhouse with a finished interior. For sale by the owner, K. D. Parker, (706) 713-1204.
WHERE -- Senatobia, Miss.  WHAT -- 4-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $379,000
This two-story brick-sided house is on five wooded acres in a rural area 45 minutes from Memphis and near Sardis Lake in a popular fishing and hunting region. The playhouse in the backyard is on a raised wooden platform and was built by the current owners for their grandchildren. The main house has an entrance courtyard, a large second-floor covered porch, a gas fireplace, bay windows, a sunroom and two and half bathrooms. Broker: Dale Dunigan, United Country TriLakes Realty, (662) 562-5688; www.senatobiamsrealestate.com.
WHERE -- Ellington, Mo.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $119,000
This house in the Ozarks is on 20 acres, a mile and a half from Clearwater Lake in a rural area popular with retirees. It has a detached garage with a one-bedroom, one-bathroom apartment. The main house is a rustic-looking cabin with two decks, central heat and cooling, and two bathrooms. The raised playhouse in the back, about 10 by 8 feet, was built by the current owner and is attached to slides and other play equipment. Broker: Brenda May, United Country Field &amp; Stream Realty, (573) 323-8007; www.unitedcountry.com/vanburenmo.
WHERE -- New London, N.H.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $995,000
This contemporary waterfront house on Lake Pleasant has two wraparound decks overlooking the lake. It has a fieldstone fireplace, central cooling and three bathrooms. The property is a third of an acre and has 162 feet on the lake, a boat slip and a sandy swimming area. Also on the lake is a one-room playhouse with hunter green trim and cedar shingles, like those on the main house. New London is about two hours from Boston. Broker: Michael Bean, Michael Bean Group, (603) 766-1980; www.beangroup.com.
WHERE -- Jim Thorpe, Pa.  WHAT -- 3-bedroom house  HOW MUCH -- $147,900
This raised-ranch house is on one and a quarter acres in the Pleasant Valley West community, 10 minutes from Big Boulder and Jack Frost ski resorts in the Poconos. The house was recently renovated and has a new roof, new kitchen cabinets and two new bathrooms. The two-room playhouse in the back has a front porch and a window. The second room, which has its own entrance, is used as a shed but could easily be turned into another playhouse. Agent: Emma Payne, Pocono Resorts Realty, (888) 832-5207; www.prr1.com.
HAVENS: LIVING HERE
