IT is sad that the exceptional show of Douglas Gordon's work did not come to the Guggenheim Museum in Manhattan last spring, as originally listed in the catalog. Seeing the exhibition at the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden here, its fourth and final stop, makes you wish that the Guggenheim had not only gone ahead with the show but actually moved it forward a year. Why?
Because Mr. Gordon, who was born in Glasgow in 1966, has always tried to make what we might be forgiven for temporarily calling post-9/11 art. That is, he confronts the enormousness of life head-on, by tackling big, old-fashioned themes like love, loss, time, memory, spirituality and the battle between good and evil. Although he does not always succeed, it might have been comforting, not just interesting, to test his various efforts against the backdrop of New York in the dark months after the attacks on the World Trade Center.
It could also have been challenging. Mr. Gordon addresses his traditional themes in relatively new mediums -- especially video and video installation -- while striving to avoid the melodrama, simplicity and entertainment quotient that seem so endemic in these high-tech forms of expression.
He means his work to be accessible, one of the reasons he borrows images from popular movies so regularly. At the Hirshhorn the borrowed movies include full-length projections of ''Psycho,'' ''The Exorcist'' and ''The Song of Bernadette,'' as well as an excerpt from Martin Scorsese's ''Taxi Driver.'' At the same time, his art is spare, unsentimental and structurally complex; it plays with our perceptions of real time and space, often using the relatively controllable time and space of film as a foil.
To have it seen and discussed in New York sometime in 2002 might even have helped to raise the level of artistic discourse about a memorial at ground zero. But what's done is done, even if the what-ifs continue to nag. There are many who still wonder what impact the Eva Hesse retrospective, canceled by the Whitney, might have had on young artists in New York.
Mr. Gordon is the veteran of 11 museum shows in Europe, but this is his first such exposure in the United States. The show originated at the Museum of Contemporary Art in Los Angeles, where it opened on Sept. 16, 2001. It was organized by Russell Ferguson, a former associate curator there who is now deputy director for exhibitions and programs and chief curator at the Hammer Museum of the University of California, Los Angeles. Like Mr. Gordon, Mr. Ferguson is Scottish. At the Hirshhorn the exhibition was installed by Kerry Brougher and Kelly Gordon.
Like some other artists of his generation and many younger ones whom he has no doubt influenced, Mr. Gordon appropriates and manipulates moving images with the same voracity with which the artists of the 1980's snatched still photographs from the culture at large. He also uses films the way that Jasper Johns once used targets and flags: because they are, as Mr. Johns famously put it, ''things the mind already knows.''
Mr. Gordon's sensibility is cool; some have called it ironic, but self-effacing may be a better word. His body and occasionally his face figure in his short videos and photographs. A relatively straightforward example is a photo piece titled ''Monster,'' which shows two images of the artist. In one he is normal; in the other his face is shockingly disfigured. The intensity of the effect is not noticeably reduced by the realization that the artist has simply, but expertly, pulled his face out of shape by using transparent tape. But overall, Mr. Gordon seems far less interested in revealing his own feelings than in orchestrating a new kind of space in which viewers can experience theirs.
Does Mr. Gordon's work take advantage of the glamour and seductiveness of the movies? Absolutely. But it also puts us in touch with movies as both communal and personal memory, as part of the public ethos and yet a source of private fantasy.
At the Hirshhorn, the show's 40 works date from 1993 to 2002 and fill an entire floor of the museum's doughnut-shaped building. The circular, head-to-tail arrangement of the galleries seems tailor made for an artist whose basic strategies include looping (of words and film), reflection and the splitting and doubling of images (and, by implication, souls). In addition to videos, photographs and five video installations, the show includes examples of Mr. Gordon's text works and text installations, which deploy cryptic yet loaded words and messages, on walls or mirrors or as tattoos on bodies recorded in photographs.
Double images are everywhere, and double meanings, too. ''Tattoo (I)'' and ''Tattoo (II)'' are big, stark photographs of the artist's extended arm -- nearly life-size on a blank white ground. The words TRUST ME are tattooed on his shoulder in the formal, vaguely biblical font he favors. In one image the arm reaches down, as if to rescue us; in the other it reaches upward, possibly, Mr. Ferguson points out in his catalog essay, to pull us down, perhaps into hell.
In the installation ''Through a Looking Glass,'' two giant projections of Robert De Niro's 71-second ''You talkin' to me?'' scene from ''Taxi Driver'' face each other in a large space. In the film Mr. De Niro is looking into the camera as if into an unseen mirror, challenging his own reflection. Here his images talk back and forth, the sequences timed to move in and out of sync as they repeat. Thus the exchange moves from soliloquy to slurred echo to confrontational dialogue, but the level of torment, with the sense of a personality in the process of disintegration, remains unchanged.
Mr. Gordon has said in interviews that he is not interested in making objects. But this is not to underestimate the visual force or physical precision of his work. For example, the 12-by-9-inch cover of the show's catalog reproduces a detail of ''Self-Portrait as Kurt Cobain, as Andy Warhol, as Myra Hindley, as Marilyn Monroe''; it is a nearly life-size image that shows the artist in front of a red background wearing a three-day beard and an off-kilter blond wig. The work conflates four variously notorious personalities by reducing them to a single, sloppily evoked attribute. In the show the self-portrait has an added tawdriness: it is actually and appropriately a tiny, black-edged photo-booth snapshot that has been printed (not collaged) on a 30-inch-square sheet of paper.
Objects aside, film seems to be less a medium or a source for Mr. Gordon than a primary material, something that he approaches as a real thing to be tangibly manipulated, physically defined and actively experienced standing in an art gallery, not passively seated in a theater. His most famous work -- known to many, seen by few -- is ''24 Hour Psycho,'' an installation in which Alfred Hitchcock's nerve-stretching thriller is extended to 24 hours, instead of proceeding at the usual speed of 24 frames per second.
The idea is so dazzling that it is easy to assume that seeing the work would be superfluous. Not so. At the Hirshhorn the slow-moving film, projected on a large, free-standing screen in the center of a gallery, has a visual and emotional effect that has nothing to do with ideas. The images are so nearly still that they can be contemplated like a painting; the nasty surprises of the action have been eliminated because it moves like molasses.
It becomes, in many ways, an un-thriller, yet it is almost wrenching. The different tensions and traumas to which each character is subjected -- Janet Leigh's brutal murder, John Gavin's increasingly anguished search, Anthony Perkins's insanity -- are excruciatingly intensified as they stretch into, as is often said of traumatic events, what seems like an eternity. Watching it can feel a little like being strangled.
The sense that emotions are being intensified, excavated from familiar territory, you could say is even stronger in the show's best work, ''Between Darkness and Light (After William Blake).'' In this 1997 installation ''The Song of Bernadette'' (1943) and ''The Exorcist'' (1973) are simultaneously projected on a single free-standing screen at regular speed. The disturbing, contentious whole that is formed as the two films' images, dialogues, action and soundtracks bleed into each other greatly exceeds the sum of their parts.
Their narratives of possession and divided personalities -- one by divine, the other by demonic forces -- are mirror reflections, as are each film's supporting casts of doubters and believers, of virtuous and falsely virtuous people, whose lives are thrown into disarray. But mainly, possession is the form of the work: each movie is literally possessed by the other. Trying to keep track of them may make you feel mildly possessed yourself.
There are other reasons to wish that Mr. Gordon's survey had gone to New York. In many ways his work is the perfect antidote to the opulent excess and self-absorption of Matthew Barney's art, seen in 2003 at the Guggenheim, and to the stylistic recycling of John Currin's relatively conservative paintings at the Whitney Museum of American Art. Mr. Gordon's restraint also contrasts markedly with the sensationalism of many of the Young British Artists. More than any of theirs, his work can trigger an almost giddy optimism about the general state of contemporary art and refresh your confidence in the possibility of artistic progress, even in these postmodern times.
''Douglas Gordon'' is at the Hirshhorn Museum and Sculpture Garden, Smithsonian Institution, Independence Avenue at Seventh Street SW, Washington, (202) 357-2700, through May 9.
ART REVIEW
