Christine Andreas has all the right stuff to be a first-rate cabaret singer. She is a skillful actress with a full-bodied voice. She knows musical theater, from ''My Fair Lady'' (having played Eliza Doolittle in the 20th-anniversary production) to ''The Scarlet Pimpernel'' (in which she originated the role of Marguerite St. Just). With her simple, well-cut black dress and short, slightly spiked black hair, she looks classic and contemporary.
Why, then, did I leave her show at the Cafe Carlyle feeling dissatisfied? It wasn't the songs. Ms. Andreas loves hardy American songbook standards: the luscious melodies of ''Autumn in New York'' and ''In a Sentimental Mood''; the clever lyrics of ''It's Got to Be Love'' and ''Show Me.'' She did very well by ''At the Ballet,'' the confessional monologue from ''A Chorus Line'' in which a dancer recalls how ballet class redeemed the slights and cruelties of childhood. It was urgent yet dreamy.
But if someone had told me that my favorite number of the night would be Mary Chapin Carpenter's ''What if We Went to Italy?,'' I'd have called him a liar. Ms. Carpenter's music has always sounded pleasant, nicely shaped and no more. Ms. Andreas made the song something more: she gave it a sensuous lilt and interpolated a Neapolitan love song.
Most of all, she didn't push. She didn't push her high notes, as she did in so many songs. She does her best singing in her middle range now. Nothing wrong with that; why not bring the arrangements down a few keys?
She didn't push the emotion either, as is her wont. You go to the Cafe Carlyle because everything feels intimate. Ms. Andreas pitches her singing to a much larger room. Too often, as with stage actors who don't adapt to film, the emotions look overcalculated and overwrought.
Take ''The Best Is Yet to Come,'' that brassy love anthem by Cy Coleman and Carolyn Leigh. When she reaches out and mimes snatching a plum to the line ''Out of the tree of life I picked me a plum,'' she gets the gesture right. But it's in our face; it feels show-offy. The best cabaret performers let the audience dream with them, not just through them. I hope Ms. Andreas finds her way to that. It's a kind of modesty that doubles one's power.
CABARET REVIEW
