American theater has always tried to inform or misinform audiences about the immigrants arriving on their shores or the outsiders already in their midst. Vaudeville took the lead. Teams like Harrigan and Hart (who were Irish), Weber and Fields (Jewish) and Williams and Walker (black) humanized and parodied themselves for mass audiences. What they didn't know about other groups they usually made up. But the humor and compassion that come from paying real attention to people who are not like you have been pitifully rare in mainstream theater.
Humor, compassion and daring have more often found a place in solo performance. This form frees gifted artists to change sex, race, age, body type and personality in an instant. It takes great craft and generosity. Sarah Jones has both. You see this in every moment of her new show, ''Bridge &amp; Tunnel,'' which opened last night at 45 Bleecker Street for an open-ended run.
The set is a wall of street art: all big arrows and swatches of bright color. We hear fragments of hip-hop and techno music. (Blake Lethem painted the scene; Chris Meade and DJ Rekha did the sound design.) Welcome to the Bridge &amp; Tunnel Cafe in South Queens for the annual ''I Am a Poet Too'' reading. The host is Mohammed Ali, a genial Pakistani accountant who proudly explains that ''I Am a Poet Too'' stands for ''Immigrant and Multiculturalist American Poets or Enthusiasts Traveling Toward Optimistic Openness.'' Some will read poems; others will just talk.
When Ms. Jones is Mohammed, she dons a sports jacket. Underneath she wears black pants and a black shirt. The tops change; so do accessories. Rashid, a Brooklyn rapper, swaggers on in a fur-trimmed orange parka with matching baseball cap to offer a few words of solidarity: '' 'Cause nowhattamsayin, like, aiight, black people, we got imported, y'all get deported, you feel me?''
Lorraine Levine, as Mohammed says, ''is first poet coming in from Long Island.'' She is old; she hobbles, and her right hand shakes. She calls her protest poem ''No Really, Please Don't Get Up.'' Lorraine started writing in the senior center. Now, even the grandson who cared only for ''Puffy Daddy'' (or was it ''Piddy Diddy''?) respects her.
Lorraine's voice is pure Long Island. Habiba, in her 50's, has a heavy Jordanian accent and wears a hijab, or head covering. One hand holds it decorously in place, the other holds the microphone firmly as she starts to enjoy describing the boy she loved as a teenager and the poem she scribbled passionately on the sleeves of her jilbab. Ms. Jones's ear is flawless. So is her voice. It isn't just accents; it's details of tone, pitch and phrasing. It is knowing speech patterns like ''Ah'' and ''O.K., O.K.'' or the way a nervous teenage girl speeds into high-pitched overdrive.
Ms. Jones is a fine writer, too. She gets the style of each speaker and each poem.
Yahaira, a 15-year-old Dominican, chants:
Distant recollections
of a daffodil at midnight
she knows she ain't got no business in the street
but she makes her own heat to
fend off the cold fronts.
A Vietnamese slam poet proclaims:
This is not a model
Minority poem
It won't fold your shirts
But it may air your dirty laundry.
Each body has a distinct carriage. Because every character is reading before an audience, each stance is doubly complicated. Some seem unconscious of how they look; others are stridently aware of every gesture. An Australian provocateuse in dark glasses recites a ''love poem'' full of excretory images and lines like:
Because you are the human
Equivalent of second-hand smoke
Because you seemed harmless
And are killing me.
She points her toe back as if she were poised to kick someone's guts in; between lines she angles her head from side to side like a vain, angry swan.
Gladys is a young ''poet-performer-playwright-spoken-word artist-actress.'' Every move is a modern-dance undulation, and every pronouncement has grande dame aspirations. We chuckle at her artistic résumé, but two sentences later, Gladys proves her mettle. The career possibilities for people of Jamaican ancestry are few, she explains: ''One is to become secretary of state. Another is to take care of children. Either way, it's the same.'' And the explanation that follows is hilarious and scathing. She ends with a short performance piece that looks like a Jules Feiffer drawing (and could have been a bit longer).
There are somber moments, too. One of the evening's strongest characters is one of the quietest: Juan José, a Mexican laborer who sits motionless in a wheelchair, remembering the wife he lost and the accident that destroyed his body. The jaunty Mohammed may be ''a red-blooded, Allah-fearing Republican,'' but in the wake of 9/11 he also faces a government investigation.
When critics get excited, they get greedy, too. What would Ms. Jones do with fewer characters and longer stories that moved us in stranger, deeper ways? She's 29, and we'll all find out. For now, I want nothing more than the uncanny accuracy with which she portrays the host of immigrants and outsiders who make up this hybrid nation.
BRIDGE &amp; TUNNEL
Written and performed by Sarah Jones; directed by Tony Taccone; conceived by Ms. Jones and Steve Colman; assistant director, Mr. Colman; lighting by Alexander V. Nichols; production manager, David Szlasa; sound by Chris Meade and DJ Rekha; scenic painting, Blake Lethem; technical director, Garin Marschall; stage manager, Annie Brown. Presented by Meryl Streep and the Culture Project, in association with Allan Buchman, Robert Dragotta, Jayson Jackson, Michael Alden, Eric Falkenstein, Marcia Roberts and Tom Wirtshafter. At 45 Bleecker Street, Greenwich Village.
THEATER REVIEW
