Few photographers captured the heady spirit of the Weimar Republic, known for its cultural glitter if not its political success, with the panache of Lotte Jacobi (1896-1990). Many of the artistic and intellectual elite who lived in or passed through Berlin posed for Jacobi before she had to leave Hitler's Germany in 1935, among them the singer Lotte Lenya, the composer Kurt Weill and the film and stage personalities Leni Riefenstahl (before her association with Hitler), Peter Lorre, Emil Jannings and Francis Lederer.
Others included the clown Grock, the artist Käthe Kollwitz, the theologian Martin Buber, the poet and critic Karl Kraus, the conductor Wilhelm Furtwängler, the violinist Yehudi Menuhin, the directors René Clair and Konstantin Stanislavsky and the dancers Rolf Arno and Niura Norskaya.
Perhaps her most memorable photograph from that era and said to be her own favorite picture is a sultry close-up of Lenya in 1928, her eyes and mouth heavily punctuated by stage makeup. In rehearsal for her role as Jenny the prostitute in ''The Threepenny Opera,'' she stares challengingly at the camera, her chin resting on her right arm, a cigarette in her hand. Long gone but not forgotten, Lenya still grabs the spotlight with this portrait in ''Focus on the Soul: The Photographs of Lotte Jacobi'' at the Jewish Museum.
The show of some 80 pieces, from Weimar and other phases of Jacobi's long career, was organized by Kurt J. Sundstrom, associate curator at the Currier Museum of Art in Manchester, N.H., where Jacobi helped build a photography collection and made donations from her own. While Weimar was the most glamorous part of her lens life, there are also important works from Russia, from her professional career in the United States and from the innovative photograms -- abstract pictures made in the darkroom without a camera -- that she produced in her later years.
Jacobi was born to be a photographer and, after a brief flirtation with acting, accepted her destiny. The fourth generation of her family in the profession, she was in her early 30's when she finished her studies and joined her parents and sister at the Atelier Jacobi in Berlin. She was equipped for the job not only by talent but by temperament as well. An emancipated woman with a leftist bent, she had an inquiring approach to the world and a knack for luring subjects to her lens.
Part of that knack, maybe, was that she didn't look at herself as a signature auteur. Her aim was to capture each sitter's individuality, and she said: ''In making portraits, I refuse to photograph myself. My style is the style of the people I photograph.'' One of her more recalcitrant subjects was Lorre (born Ladislav Loewenstein), famous in the late 1920's and early 30's for poisonous screen characters like the child-murderer in Fritz Lang's ''M'' before he moved to Hollywood.
Jacobi had photographed Lorre in dramatic scenes. Now she wanted to make a full portrait. His answer was a terse ''Yes, but only one.'' As recounted by Marion Beckers and Elisabeth Moortgat in their 1998 book, ''Atelier Lotte Jacobi: Berlin, New York,'' he arrived for the sitting in a proper white shirt and tie. She shot him as close up as possible, managing to capture his villainous look but softening it by shooting from above.
The only shot she was allowed, it has turned out to be a classic.
Her interest in modern dance, of which Berlin was a whirlwind center, led her also to make exciting photographs of dancers in action, facilitated by her own quickness and new camera technology. Her speed pictures of the free expressive dance form (Ausdruckstanz) that captivated Germany at the time, movements like ''The Turn,'' a sort of running spin danced by Claire Bauroff (1928), and ''The Jump,'' an exuberant leap performed by Toni van Eyck (1930), set standards for instantaneous photography that hold to this day.
In 1932 Jacobi's leftist sympathies spurred her to do a portrait series of Ernst Thälmann, who ran as the Communist candidate for president that year against Hitler. (Seized in Munich in 1933, he served 11 years in solitary confinement, then was killed at Buchenwald.)
A long trip to the Soviet Union after her portraits of Thälmann resulted in rare and interesting shots of people, street scenes and lifestyles in Moscow and the Central Asian republics of Tajikistan and Uzbekistan, some on view in this show. But on Jacobi's return to Germany, the Nazis were waiting for her with questions about her Soviet trip, her Communist sympathies (although she never joined the party) and her Jewish background.
Expediency dictated that she leave the country right away, but she waited until her father's death in 1935.
Arriving in New York in the middle of the Great Depression, Jacobi opened a studio with her sister Ruth and struggled to find work. The access to theaters she enjoyed in Germany was almost impossible here because of license and contract complications. She had little contact with magazine editors and relied partly on fellow émigrés from Berlin, like Lorre and Max Reinhardt, to send her commissions.
But an important American contact was another fellow émigré, Albert Einstein. She and her family had photographed him in Germany, and the two shared a progressive world outlook. He was receptive to the idea of working with her when, in 1938, Life magazine commissioned a photo essay on him. She made a number of informal photographs of him at his home in Princeton, N.J., in conversations with his students and his assistant, and poring over his books and papers. But Life turned the photographs down on the ground that they were too casual to give a proper picture of Einstein's importance.
Now a photograph she made of Einstein in a rumpled leather jacket, hair askew and looking dreamily into space as he paused from writing formulations in his notebook, is one of Jacobi's most famous images. Shown here, it was published for the first time in 1942 in U.S. Camera magazine at the instigation of Edward Steichen.
Jacobi gravitated toward other worthies who shared her free-thinking views on politics, social welfare and art, producing impressive photographs of Alfred Stieglitz, the photographer, dealer and discoverer of new talent; the dancer Pauline Koner; the journalist Dorothy Thompson (with whom she had a long friendship); and Eleanor Roosevelt wearing a sunny expression. A particularly striking 1952 portrait of the wearied visage of the actor Paul Robeson, hounded by the House Committee on Un-American Activities, strikes a sad note in the show.
In the 1940's Jacobi began to explore the technique of photogenics, in her case expressive abstract images made by drawing with a flashlight on photographic paper. Although the process had been extensively used in the early 20th century by Man Ray and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, she brought to it her own pizazz, producing images suggesting abstract organic forms that owe something to Abstract Expressionism.
Moving to New Hampshire, where her son lived, in 1955, she continued her interest in the forms of nature, taking pictures of snow, water and other phenomena in the countryside. She also remained an active portrait photographer, developing a whole new set of subjects and friends, among them the poets Robert Frost and May Sarton, the ecological activists Helen and Scott Nearing and a fellow lensman, Paul Caponigro. A mentor to younger artists, she opened a gallery in Deering to show their work along with that of more established artists. And she became a forceful ecological and political activist. In short, she was a model of graceful, productive old age.
But for me, the world of Weimar was her strongest métier, and it is a privilege to see here the pictures from it that Jacobi managed to salvage when she left Germany. Alas, the rest of her archives fell victim to the Nazis.
''Focus on the Soul: The Photographs of Lotte Jacobi'' is on view at the Jewish Museum, 1109 Fifth Avenue, at 92nd Street, Manhattan, (212) 423-3200, through April 11.
PHOTOGRAPHY REVIEW
