''Abouna'' was shown as part of last year's New Directors/New Films series. Following are excerpts from A. O. Scott's review, which appeared in The New York Times on April 5; the full text is online at nytimes.com/movies. The film, in Chad Arabic with English subtitles, opens today at the Quad Cinema, 34 West 13th Street, Greenwich Village.
One day Amine (Hamza Moctar Aguid) and his older brother, Tahir (Ahidjo Mahamat Moussa), who live in a small city in Chad near the Cameroon border, decide to skip school and go see a movie. On the screen, they see a man, his face turned away from the camera, who Amine is certain is their vanished father. The boy calls out, ''Papa, look at me,'' and miraculously the man turns around to greet his children, not Tahir and Amine but the two small boys who, a few seconds later, bob into the frame.
This moment, meticulously executed, poignant and gently funny, is typical of ''Abouna'' (''Our Father''), Mahamat Saleh Haroun's second feature film. With a few deceptively simple words and gestures, Mr. Haroun evokes both the flickering spell of cinema and a child's powerful, wistful longing for an absent parent.
Later the boys sneak into the theater and make off with an enormous reel of 35-millimeter film, which they take home and unspool in search of their father's image. This innocent, absurd transgression proves too much for their proud, abandoned mother (Zara Haroun), and she sends them off to an Islamic boarding school in a dusty village, a place of tedium and harsh discipline.
Much that happens in ''Abouna,'' beginning with the father's abrupt departure, is desperately sad. Amine, a dreamy, asthmatic child with big, credulous eyes, is protected from heartbreak by Tahir's lighthearted solicitude. The older boy, who is 15, holds onto his optimism with brave determination.
The movie's theme is responsibility. Having heard his mother complain about their ''irresponsible'' father, Amine wonders what the word means. ''It means just that -- someone who's not responsible,'' Tahir tells him after a frustrating consultation with the dictionary. Amine reasons, ''So our father was not responsible for leaving,'' appearing to take some comfort from the idea.
In a sense he may be right. The father, whose flight into the desert takes place before the credits, seems to have been driven away by unemployment; whether to seek opportunities elsewhere or to escape humiliation is not altogether clear. But Mr. Haroun is not inclined either to cast blame or to make excuses. His interest is primarily in the relationship between the two boys, and on Tahir's chances, in terrible circumstances, of growing from a generous, open-hearted boy into a decent and dependable man.
Mr. Haroun, for his part, is alive to every nuance of feeling and immune to sentimentality. His camera ambles unobtrusively alongside Amine and Tahir, or observes them from a tactful distance, careful not to disturb the rhythm of their play or the protective bubble of their innocence.
That innocence, of course, is fragile and perishable, and ''Abouna'' does not offer any easy reassurance about African childhood. Poignant though it is, the movie is the opposite of depressing. There is too much life in it: in the warm orange glow of its images, shot by Abraham Haile Biru; in the lilt of Diego Mustapha N'Garade's solo guitar score; in the green and ocher landscapes; and above all in the actors' faces, which seem to be illuminated from within.
FILM REVIEW
