At Hollywood studios, behind ''adorable fake Main Street'' facades, the real work of moviemaking goes on: ''treacherous, vicious, back-stabbing, cynical trash recycling,'' as the narrator of Elisabeth Robinson's recent novel puts it. This is clever, but not exactly breaking news. The savage assessment of the movie industry is the least original aspect of Ms. Robinson's book, ''The True and Outstanding Adventures of the Hunt Sisters,'' a hilarious and moving story about a film producer who struggles to get a greenlight for a new ''Don Quixote'' (as the blurbs might read: Robin Williams is Sancho Panza!) while her sister deals with cancer.
''The Hunt Sisters'' is part of a deluge of Hollywood fiction that is the product of the age of infotainment. With everyone from CNN to ''Access Hollywood'' filling us in on the latest movie deals and box-office grosses, the average reader has the flattering illusion of being a show-business insider. Playing to this fantasy, new Hollywood novels focus on behind-the-scenes characters like producers, agents and publicity flacks; the Miramax co-chairman Harvey Weinstein's name is as likely to be dropped as Brad Pitt's.
Most of this fiction is predictably shallow and backbiting -- fun, but shallow and backbiting. At times a literary work goes deeper, grasping what stardom means to us: ''The Hunt Sisters'' and Martha Sherrill's ''My Last Movie Star'' (underappreciated last year, now out in paperback) convey the still-resonant pull of the movies. Yet all are here to remind us, clued-in readers that we are, that Hollywood is even nastier than we thought.
A stream of Hollywood nonfiction -- infotainment books -- feeds into such novels. The journalist Peter Biskind's ''Down and Dirty Pictures: Miramax, Sundance and the Rise of Independent Film'' is an exhaustively reported history, while the screenwriter Joe Eszterhas's ''Hollywood Animal: A Memoir'' is a 736-page self-indulgence. Both are nasty exposés -- and best sellers.
''Down and Dirty Pictures'' debunks the two men most responsible for the new Hollywood of independent films, taking off from their standard images. Robert Redford, as founder of the Sundance Film Festival, is the good angel. Harvey Weinstein is the Luciferian dark angel. In Mr. Biskind's version, both are egomaniacal control freaks.
What stands out, though, is not that Mr. Biskind got ordinarily anonymous sources to go on the record with anti-Miramax or anti-Redford stories. It's the gossipy detail, colorful enough to sound like fiction. In a scene from an unnamed source, we see one of Mr. Weinstein's terrified young assistants backstage at a Democratic fund-raiser trying to shoo Harrison Ford and Jimmy Buffett away from seats she was told to keep open for her boss.
Mr. Eszterhas's memoir traces his devolution from an innocent Cleveland boy to a Hollywood monster: monstrous piles of money, monstrous bile in this score-settling book. We don't care about his ancient feud with the once-all-powerful agent Mike Ovitz. Readers are more likely to remember Mr. Eszterhas's one-night stand with Sharon Stone.
The new wave of Hollywood novels thrives on this kind of name-dropping and snarky detail -- one more cheap thrill from movieland. In Steven Bochco's breezy but bland tale of murder, ''Death by Hollywood,'' the narrator is a screenwriter's agent who goes to lunch at the Grill and glances around at the power tables. ''On any given day you can see the likes of Barry Diller, Brian Grazer or Brad Grey,'' he says, giving moguls and producers top billing over lesser players like Sophia Loren and Anthony Hopkins. (Mr. Bochco, the producer of shows like ''NYPD Blue,'' has a highly droppable name himself, which surely helped his novel get published.)
In Hilary de Vries's slight but entertaining ''So 5 Minutes Ago,'' the narrator is a lowly actors' publicist, whose even lowlier assistant hates Charlize Theron because ''she was mean to him at a photo shoot.'' The assistant says, ''I'm waiting for the day when Charlize goes into cardiac arrest because Harvey Weinstein stops returning her calls.''
Mr. Weinstein's fictional personas are multiplying. His own company, Miramax Books, has acquired ''The Twins of TriBeCa,'' a roman à clef written by Rachel Pine, a former Miramax assistant, who turns Harvey and Bob Weinstein into the fictional Phil and Tony Waxman. Published reports describe the film company in the novel as venomously close to Miramax, with bullied employees driven to the edge of sanity and a Gwyneth figure swanning through. Cynics in the publishing and film industries have speculated that Miramax bought the novel (scheduled to appear next year) not to promote it but to bury it; Miramax Books says there is no six-feet-under plan.
Of course, Nathaniel West got there first. With its nightmarish vision of the movie world, his unsurpassed ''Day of the Locust'' (1939) became the touchstone for every myth-shattering Hollywood novel since. Today's Hollywood fiction is just as corrosive, but now debunking has become the standard, and the roman à clef game is much more personal.
Bruce Wagner, the most ambitious novelist in the gossipy pack, straddles the line between the shallow and the literary in ''Still Holding,'' a name-dropping fiction that makes fun of name-dropping (the last book in his cellphone trilogy). At the center is Kit Lightfoot, a blond movie star with a distinct resemblance to Brad Pitt and a girlfriend who is the star of a ''Friends''-like sitcom called ''Together.'' A convert to Buddhism, Kit lies about how long he's been meditating -- readers can congratulate themselves on not being surprised by that Hollywood hypocrisy -- and he asks friends if they want to go ''to Harrison's ranch in Jackson Hole with Calista, Ben and Jennifer.'' (Bennifer!? The shelf life of Hollywood fiction is dangerously short.)
This comic needling of stars is effective, yet the novel's more perceptive strands concern characters who are Hollywood fringe players. Lisanne, a personal assistant to a lawyer, is destroyed by her obsession with Kit. Becca, a struggling actress, gets work as a Drew Barrymore look-alike. Mr. Wagner mocks the culture of celebrity with a single word, describing Becca's fellow look-alikes as ''the Cameron,'' ''the Cher'' and ''the Russell Crowe.''
Even Mr. Wagner's meta-celebrity novel includes supposed in-jokes the public can grasp easily -- the literary equivalents of movie stars pretending to dodge the paparazzi while making themselves conspicuous in gigantic sunglasses and hats. Kit, on the Leno show, gets a big laugh and says of his not-so-funny line, ''Carrie Fisher wrote that for me.'' In Ms. Fisher's new novel, ''The Best Awful'' (a sequel to her autobiographical ''Postcards From the Edge''), she returns the name-drop. Her acknowledgments in the back begin: ''For: Bruce Wagner (Special Needs).'' In ''Still Holding,'' ''Special Needs'' is the title of the fictional Darren Aronofsky film Kit Lightfoot is making.
The Carrie Fisher character, Suzanne, should be touching as she tells of her battle with manic-depression. But ''The Best Awful'' relies too much on its autobiographical guessing game -- did Eddie Fisher really swallow his own hearing aid the way Suzanne's father does? -- and never rises above the glibness of Ms. Fisher's bad-pun style. Suzanne doesn't get into a mental hospital because there was ''no room at the bin.''
It's a rare novel that balances Hollywood satire with true emotional resonance, which is why ''The Hunt Sisters'' is a higher achievement. Like her narrator, Olivia, Ms. Robinson worked on a never-begun film of ''Don Quixote,'' meant to star John Cleese as Quixote and Robin Williams as Sancho. Trying not to sell out entirely, Olivia tells the studio that ''Cleese is against the idea of doing a 'silly walk' in the movie.''
Beneath the humor, though, is a penetrating sense of what movie stardom means today. Olivia gets her sister a private hospital room by promising a nurse she'll cast her in her next film. ''Imagine if I was Julia Roberts, what I could do for my sister,'' she says. What might seem like a throwaway line is an insightful analysis of why stars -- with their power, stature and presumably easy lives -- are so enviable.
In ''My Last Movie Star,'' Ms. Sherrill understands the allure of movie stars, too. The narrator, Clementine, is a journalist for a Vanity Fair-style magazine, assigned to interview a young actress named Allegra Coleman, who is about to explode into the stratosphere of fame (the pitch would be: Julia Roberts meets Courtney Love). As the narrator says, Allegra's personality projects ''an irresistible careless-idiot thing,'' an ease that makes you feel ''while you watched her and desired her, that you could get some too.'' She is describing a Julia Roberts moment, when every woman walks out of the theater thinking she could be her while every man dreams he could be with her, that fleeting moment of fantasy when it seems that what you saw on the movie screen might be contagious.
The novel also indulges in its own surprisingly moving fantasies. After Clementine is injured in a car accident, actresses from the past appear to her and tell their sad, forgotten stories. Dorothy Lamour, washed-up in middle age, was hurt that Johnny Carson never asked her on his show. Gloria Swanson had an abortion because if she had given birth seven months after her marriage, her career would have been ruined.
Swanson tells Clementine how the nature of stardom changed in the 20's, when Fatty Arbuckle was accused of rape. ''That's when we realized that the public got as big a thrill watching stars fall as it did watching them shine,'' she says, a recognition that is the bedrock assumption beneath the new Hollywood novels. Although she is clear-eyed about the shallowness of the film industry, Ms. Sherrill actually makes us feel sorry for movie stars -- a neat trick to pull off in the midst of all this fashionable Hollywood sleaze.
Poison Popcorn
The Hollywood books in the Critic's Notebook article:  ''THE BEST AWFUL,'' by Carrie Fisher (Simon &amp; Schuster, $24).
''DEATH BY HOLLYWOOD,'' by Steven Bochco (Random House hardcover, $24.95; Fawcett paperback to be published next month, $7.99).
''DOWN AND DIRTY PICTURES: MIRAMAX, SUNDANCE AND THE RISE OF INDEPENDENT FILM,'' by Peter Biskind (Simon &amp; Schuster, $26.95).
''HOLLYWOOD ANIMAL: A MEMOIR,'' by Joe Eszterhas (Alfred A. Knopf, $26.95).
''MY LAST MOVIE STAR,'' by Martha Sherrill (Random House; hardcover, $23.95; paperback, $13.95).
''SO 5 MINUTES AGO,'' by Hilary de Vries (Villard, $21.95).
''STILL HOLDING,'' by Bruce Wagner (Simon &amp; Schuster, $25).
''THE TRUE AND OUTSTANDING ADVENTURES OF THE HUNT SISTERS,'' by Elisabeth Robinson (Little, Brown, $23.95).
CRITIC'S NOTEBOOK  Correction:  February 27, 2004, Friday  A Critic's Notebook article in Weekend last Friday about books on Hollywood misspelled the given name of the author of ''Day of the Locust.'' He is Nathanael West, not Nathaniel.
