After stating back in November that neither side in the suit between Gruner &amp; Jahr and the former talk show host Rosie O'Donnell should expect significant monetary damages, Justice Ira Gammerman of State Supreme Court in Manhattan delivered a decision yesterday that gave each side exactly nothing.
''Although there were breaches on both sides to this dispute, as indicated above, rather than directing the entry of a judgment in favor of each side for one dollar, it is more appropriate to direct the clerk to dismiss the complaint and counterclaims without costs or disbursements to any party and the clerk is directed to do so,'' the judge wrote.
Gruner &amp; Jahr, the publisher of magazines like Parents and YM, sued Ms. O'Donnell for $100 million in damages for breaching their joint venture agreement by walking away from it in September 2002. Ms. O'Donnell then countersued, contending that it was Gruner &amp; Jahr that breached their agreement.
In his decision, the judge seemed to suggest that both sides were right. Justice Gammerman said that when Gruner &amp; Jahr brought in a new editor who reported directly to Daniel B. Brewster Jr., then the chief executive, the company effectively took control of the magazine away from Ms. O'Donnell. But he also found that Ms. O'Donnell's tirades in response constituted a breach as well. Ms. O'Donnell, who stated during the case that she did not go to trial for financial reasons, had hoped to recover legal's fees, but the judge found that the relevant joint venture agreement did not support her claim.
Ms. O'Donnell's lawyers pointed out that she was not the one who sued. They said that the judge's finding of a breach by the company was a victory. They also pointed out that Mr. Brewster and Cindy Spengler, another Gruner &amp; Jahr senior executive, had been ousted since the trial. ''I think that it is worth emphasizing that the judge found that they seized editorial control,'' said Matthew E. Fishbein, a lawyer from Debevoise &amp; Plimpton. ''They sued her for $100 million, and when your client does not have to pay a penny, that's a victory.''
Gruner &amp; Jahr had no comment beyond a written statement.
''We respectfully disagree with this decision to the extent the court found G+J USA breached and G+J USA is exploring its options at this time,'' the statement read. ''We are happy to be putting this matter behind us and look forward to getting back to our business of publishing successful magazines.''
Ms. O'Donnell's lawyers argued during the trial that the company violated a nondisparagement clause in the joint venture contract by making a variety of negative statements to the media, and while the judge agreed, he did not find that it merited a financial award. The judge also disagreed with Ms. O'Donnell's contention that Gruner &amp; Jahr controlled both financial information and circulation numbers to keep her in the dark about the joint venture.
The judge said that because the magazine lost millions, there was really no basis for damages to either party.
