Directed by Jean-Claude Brisseau  In French, with English subtitles  Not rated, 115 minutes
The French cinema, thankfully, still has room for eccentrics, directors whose films compulsively pursue personal obsessions, whether or not they intersect with a wide public.
At the moment there may be no director more eccentric working in France than Jean-Claude Brisseau, a self-taught filmmaker and former public school teacher. Mr. Brisseau's subjects have ranged from the life of children in France's notoriously dysfunctional public-housing projects (''De Bruit et de Fureur,'' 1988) to adolescents on the run (''Les Savates de Bon Dieu,'' 2000), both of which will be shown, along with four other of his films, in a series at the Walter Reade Theater in Lincoln Center beginning tomorrow.
Mr. Brisseau's most obsessive subject is sex, particularly as it exercises its hypnotic influence over members of different generations, older men and younger women, and, more subversively, older women and younger men. ''Secret Things,'' which opens today at the Quad in Greenwich Village, is a frequently overheated, often delirious fantasy about two Parisiennes in their early 20's, the exotic dancer Natalie (Coralie Revel) and the shy ex-suburbanite Sandrine (Sabrina Seyvecou).
Co-workers in a strip club, the women become friends and roommates, and Natalie initiates the conservative, uncertain Sandrine into the pleasures of unbridled female sexuality. But pleasure also becomes business when the two resolve to use their sexual powers to conquer the male-dominated business world, represented by the private bank where Sandrine gets a job as a secretary and begins seducing her way to the top.
Mr. Brisseau is a protégé of the great Eric Rohmer, though it isn't easy to see Mr. Rohmer's elegant touch in Mr. Brisseau's often blunt, pulpy imagery, as when he demonstrates the disdain for mere money of Christophe (Fabrice Deville), the bank's arrogant heir apparent, by having him set fire to a handful of 500-euro bills.
Mr. Brisseau may pay lip service to postfeminist ideas of female empowerment through seduction, but his actual concerns seem to be less intellectual than frankly carnal. As the two friends compete to see who will be the first to conquer and tame the elusive Christophe (a Sadean libertine in his own right), Mr. Brisseau stages some rousingly voyeuristic sex scenes that, while stopping short of hard-core pornography, feature combinations seldom seen outside the oeuvre of Jenna Jameson.
Nathalie and Sandrine inevitably suggest the sex-besotted and violence-crazed heroines of Virginie Despentes and Coralie Trin Thi's 2000 ''Baise-Moi,'' though Mr. Brisseau does not approach the radically disruptive vision of that film, finding a strange comfort in the notion that men are still the most perverse and most ruthless power players on the sexual battleground.
Viewers of ''Secret Things'' will find it impossible not to allow a snicker to occasionally escape, as the film's lurid plot unfolds into ever more preposterous developments. But there is no denying the force of Mr. Brisseau's bizarre imagination and the personal conviction he brings to it.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
