In the unlikely event that your child's band is making its debut at CBGB this weekend, or in the equally improbable event that your parents are coming in from Westchester to see your band make its debut there, the perfect restaurant has finally opened on Bleecker Street, mere shouting distance from the cradle of American punk rock.
Bianca, the latest business venture of the chef Giancarlo Quadalti and Roberta Riccioli, who also own Teodora on East 57th Street and Celeste on the Upper West Side, is an inexpensive and charming neighborhood restaurant that evokes an Italian latteria, or dairy store, as outfitted by someone with a keen eye for architectural detail. A single row of gleaming white tiles lines a strip of the back wall of the restaurant. More are set beneath the wine bar, and the combination is enough to do the trick: it's instantly inviting, clean and warm. Simple country chic rounds out the aesthetic: soft lighting, gleaming wide-board wood floors, brick.
There is no sign out front. You simply peek in over the cafe curtains in the windows and think, yes.
The menu is from Emiglia-Romagna, as is Mr. Quadalti. Thus are plates of delicate, fragrant gnocco fritto, or yeasty, pillow-shaped fritters, served alongside dabs of Stracchino cheese or fans of salume: coppa, mortadella, salami, silky prosciutto di Parma. And thus do the tables groan beneath high piles of toothsome lasagna, bowls of hearty chicken brodo thickened with passatelli, a kind of spaetzle made with bread crumbs and Parmesan, and thick slices of boiled cotechino, made down the street at the venerable Italian pork store Faicco.
This last is served with a snowdrift of ridiculously flavorful mashed potatoes, rich with butter and something else.
''It is Parmesan,'' said the man serving as the restaurant's wine consultant, unofficial greeter and general good spirit, whom some will recognize as Maurizio de Rosa, a wine importer and erstwhile restaurateur who occasionally plays a similar role at Celeste. ''That is the secret ingredient, the best flavor in the world.''
None among us could disagree.
Bianca, 5 Bleecker Street, near the Bowery, East Village, (212) 260-4666. Cash only. Entrees, $9 to $15.
Diner's Journal
