Officials here moved on Thursday to force a constitutional showdown with opponents of same-sex marriage by suing the State of California over state laws that define marriage as between a man and a woman.
The lawsuit backs the core assertion by Mayor Gavin Newsom, a Democrat, that marriage definitions in the state's family code violate the State Constitution. It was also certain to inflame tensions further over Mr. Newsom's directive last week to issue same-sex marriage licenses, which has already led to two legal challenges by conservative and religious groups.
''The City and County of San Francisco is going on offense today in protecting the mayor's action,'' City Attorney Dennis Herrera said. ''Mayor Newsom took a bold step last week, and we fully agree with him that his position is justified and that the California Constitution provides that there should be equal opportunity under the law, and not just for straight people but for gay and lesbian people as well.''
The state attorney general, Bill Lockyer, who had been silent about the same-sex marriages, said in a statement that ''it is the duty of my office to defend'' the state against the lawsuit. The city contends in the suit that the state family code violates both the Constitution's equal protection clause and its due process clause by not giving equal opportunity to same-sex couples.
''The issue of whether state statutes prohibiting same-sex marriages violate constitutional protections is emerging as one of the great legal and civil rights issues of our day, and the question must be answered by our courts,'' Mr. Lockyer said.
Mr. Lockyer, a Democrat, also offered a hint of the political minefield that Mr. Newsom seems to have laid by making a personal observation that sounded a lot like an endorsement of the mayor.
''As a lifelong defender of civil rights, due process and equal protection for all,'' Mr. Lockyer said, ''I do not personally support policies that give lesser legal rights and responsibilities to committed same-sex couples than those provided to heterosexual couples.''
Gov. Arnold Schwarzenegger, a Republican, said Mr. Lockyer ''has assured me that he will vigorously defend the constitutionality of the law.'' The governor also said that the altered marriage licenses in San Francisco, which must be filed with the State Department of Health Services, ''fail to meet legal standards.''
''I will abide by the oath I took when I was sworn in to uphold California laws,'' Mr. Schwarzenegger said in a statement.
The lawsuit, which was filed in San Francisco Superior Court, also named two conservative groups that last week sued to block the same-sex marriage policy. By including the groups in the lawsuit, the city wanted to make sure that any court decisions in those cases took into consideration the city's constitutional arguments.
''What we are doing is trying to ensure that the constitutional issue is addressed,'' Mr. Herrera said. ''It's doing what any good lawyer would do and ensure that you are protecting your client's position on all available fronts.''
Lawyers for the groups that filed the lawsuits against the city said the city's new legal offensive was an acknowledgment that Mr. Newsom's case was weak.
''They are in a defensive posture, and frankly I think it's an admission that they didn't do things in the right way in the first place,'' said Richard D. Ackerman, a lawyer for one of the groups, Campaign for California Families.
Another group, the Alliance Defense Fund, which represents backers of Proposition 22, a ballot measure opposed to same-sex marriages that passed in 2000, said in a statement that the new lawsuit was ''an implicit concession that the city lacks legal authority'' to issue the same-sex marriage licenses.
''It is trying to retroactively validate its lawless activity,'' the statement said.
Mr. Newsom's directive on Feb. 12 set off a blitz of gay weddings, numbering more than 3,000 by the close of business on Thursday. People waiting in line for a license applauded the city's new legal move, but in a sign of the growing rancor surrounding the marriages, opponents began picketing outside City Hall.
Several people carried posters, including one that said ''Homosexuality is sin,'' while others used megaphones to issue dire warnings to the couples waiting in line on the sidewalk. ''You don't have to go to hell,'' one protester shouted.
Mr. Newsom, who had called a news conference to announce several changes in the top echelons of the Police Department, was bombarded with questions from reporters about the new lawsuit and the growing turmoil over his marriage policy.
''I think what we have done, is we have affirmed marriage in San Francisco,'' Mr. Newsom said. ''We have affirmed it because we're celebrating people coming together in their unions. I feel affirmed as a married man by what's happened here in San Francisco.''
