A Pakistani businessman who has been linked to the illegal export from the United States to Pakistan of high-speed switches has longstanding ties to the country's powerful military, according to documents filed in an American court and interviews here. The switches can be used as triggers for nuclear weapons.
Humayun Khan, the Pakistani businessman whose office address was the final destination for the shipment last fall of 66 triggers, confirmed in interviews that he and his father had been suppliers of equipment and technology to the Pakistani military for the last 20 years.
Mr. Khan insisted that he had not been involved in the effort to smuggle the American-made triggers to Pakistan.
''I know it's my address, and everything is pointing to me and my company,'' Mr. Khan said as he sat in the offices here of his company, Pakland P.M.E. ''Frankly speaking, if I want to deal in these things, I would never be so stupid as to use my own company.''
But documents Mr. Khan presented to bolster his argument as well as court papers filed in Washington provide evidence that he did business supplying the Pakistani military with restricted technology.
The court documents are part of the case against Asher Karni, an Israeli businessman living in South Africa who was arrested on Jan. 1 by federal agents in Denver and charged with illegally exporting the sophisticated switches to Pakistan by way of South Africa. Mr. Karni is now in custody awaiting trial in Washington, D.C.
Mr. Karni told the American manufacturer of the switches, PerkinElmer Optoelectronics of Salem, Mass., that they would be sent to hospitals in South Africa for use in treating kidney stones.
American law enforcement officials said ''voluminous'' e-mails to Mr. Karni detail Mr. Khan's repeated requests between June and September 2003 for the trigger switches.
Before the switches were sent out of the United States to Mr. Karni's company in South Africa, they were disabled at the request of federal law enforcement officials, and became part of a sting operation.
In other e-mail messages in the court records, Mr. Khan wrote repeatedly to Mr. Karni between May 29 and June 16 of last year to inquire whether he could purchase infrared target detectors for Pakistani Air Force fighter missiles. The United States bars the sale of such equipment to Pakistan without American government approval.
Mr. Khan himself produced letters showing that he tried to buy oscilloscopes, magnetometers, telemetry systems and airplane guidance systems from American companies in 2002 and 2003. He said all the devices were for civilian companies.
American nonproliferation experts said the items Mr. Khan sought to buy also had military applications.
President Pervez Musharraf of Pakistan has spent the last month trying to quell a nuclear proliferation scandal involving Abdul Qadeer Khan, a scientist who is called the founder of the country's nuclear weapons program. On Feb. 4, Dr. Khan, who is no relation to Humayun Khan, confessed to providing nuclear technology to Iran, Libya and North Korea for more than a decade.
A day later, General Musharraf granted a full pardon to the scientist. He said no other military or government official had been involved in the proliferation. He later declared that his government had stopped all Pakistani nuclear hardware smuggling when it removed Dr. Khan from his post in March 2001.
Pakistani officials declined to comment on the Karni case and the trigger devices. Syed Anwar Mahmood, the government's information secretary, said Thursday that Pakistan had received no official notification of the investigation of Mr. Karni.
''The concerned people say they can't comment on it because they have not been approached officially on it,'' Mr. Mahmood said.
In interviews Humayun Khan said his company supplied civilian companies and equipped college and high school chemistry, physics and television repair laboratories. He said he purchased equipment for the Pakistani military only occasionally.
Mr. Khan produced a letter from an Islamabad construction company asking that he purchase a sophisticated oscilloscope made by Tektronix, a Beaverton, Ore., company. The Pakistani construction company said it had never issued such a letter.
Mr. Khan also provided a letter from a television company that he said had requested another Tektronix oscilloscope. An official from the television company said he could not remember placing such an order, and did not respond to subsequent requests for comment.
Mr. Khan said that his company employed only four people and that military supplies made up only a small part of his business. At different points he suggested that a former employee, smugglers or his brother, a bitter business rival, might have framed him.
In a telephone interview, his brother, Faisal Khan, denied any role in the case.
Mr. Khan said he knew Mr. Karni as a supplier of electronic equipment, and had made contact with him to buy several pieces of American-made equipment that were not dual-use items -- that is, that could not be used to make nuclear or other weapons.
American investigators have said the high-speed switches were ordered for a group called AJKMC Lithography Aid Society. Mr. Khan showed a letter from the group dated Dec. 27, 2003, saying the switches had gone to hospitals in Pakistan and Sri Lanka. But the group's letterhead listed its address as Humayun Khan's office in Islamabad.
Mr. Khan said he could not explain why the group had used his office address. He said did not know who they were, and had had contact with the group only by e-mail. He said his e-mail records had been destroyed the day before by a computer virus.
Alisha Goff, a spokeswoman for Tektronix, said that Mr. Khan was an independent distributor in Pakistan for the company and that all shipments made to his company had been approved by the Department of Commerce. She said most of the company's customers in Pakistan were schools and telecommunications companies.
She said all shipments to Mr. Khan's company had been stopped, pending the criminal investigation into the trigger case.
