Directed by Robert Ramirez  G, 73 minutes
If you are reading this review, you are probably not part of the intended audience for ''Clifford's Really Big Movie,'' an oppressively innocuous animated feature.
Spun off from the PBS television show, itself spun off from Norman Bridwell's beloved series of picture books about an enormous red dog, ''Clifford'' will provide preschoolers with comfort and amusement, though not rapture or enchantment.
''Will there be bad guys?'' a precocious toddler inquired at the screening I attended. His accompanying adult, a film critic, guessed that there would not be, and she was right. Of course, some of the characters -- canine, human and other -- do some unkind things, and there are a few moments of worry and discomfort. Otherwise, as one of the gently cozy songs on the soundtrack suggests, there would be no story.
The story takes Clifford and his regular-size canine pals, Cleo and T-Bone, away from the rustic calm of Birdwell Island, a pleasant, bone-shaped, Martha's Vineyard-like spot, on a journey across various unimaginatively animated American landscapes. Because of a misunderstanding on Clifford's part -- he thinks his huge appetite threatens his owners' financial well-being -- the three dogs join a traveling carnival. Their goal is to enter a contest that will guarantee Clifford a lifetime supply of his favorite doggy snacks.
His size and talent quickly transform the faltering show -- which includes a skateboarding hound, a tightrope-walking cow and a multitalented ferret named Shackelford -- into a crowd-pleasing sensation. Its success causes some further misunderstanding and jealousy, and Clifford is briefly kidnapped by a doggy-treat mogul (voice of John Goodman), but friendly good feelings are quickly restored. (And I do mean quickly; the movie lasts a scant 73 minutes.)
Young children will snuggle up in the movie's cozy good cheer. They will probably not mind the clumsy, gaudy animation, which lamely tries to bring more color and dimension to the simple, soothing style of the television series. Grown-ups, on the other hand, may discover that the movements of the rubbery characters against the flat backgrounds give them headaches.
They may also find that the atmosphere of benign tedium is tinged with a bit of sadness, since Clifford speaks in the voice of John Ritter, who died suddenly last year. For the youngest moviegoers and channel-surfers, Clifford will be an important part of his legacy, at least until they wander away from the child-friendly channels and happen upon a syndicated rerun of ''Three's Company.''
''Clifford's Really Big Movie'' opens today in New York, Atlanta, Minneapolis, Phoenix and Austin, Tex.
A. O. SCOTT
FILM IN REVIEW
