Senator John Edwards on Thursday brought his populist campaign to New York, a state that has become an unexpected battleground that may offer him a last-ditch opportunity to slow Senator John Kerry's momentum and keep his own bid for the presidency alive.
Mr. Edwards landed in New York City and started the scramble for the state's rich lode of 236 delegates by declaring that the economy was in a shambles, in no small part because of the avarice of multinational corporations.
''It is not good enough to serve the interests of shareholders and executives but sacrifice the needs of ordinary people who work for a living,'' Mr. Edwards, of North Carolina, declared this morning at Columbia University, sounding his standard promise to end a system of two Americas, divided by wealth and privilege.
In recent years, New York has not played a decisive role in Democratic presidential primaries, partly because its contest has taken place late in the primary season. Not since 1988, when Michael S. Dukakis fought out the nomination against Senator Al Gore and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, has the state really mattered in the crucial delegate count buildup.
But, after Mr. Kerry's string of Democratic primary and caucus victories across the nation, New York has taken on new significance. Mr. Edwards asserts he will focus his efforts to stop Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, in New York, Ohio and Georgia.
''Who would have ever thought that the New York primary might make or break a candidate,'' said Charles E. Schumer, New York's senior senator.
On landing in New York City, Mr. Edwards, a first-term Democratic senator, has stepped into a state known for its complicated and contradictory electoral politics. It is a state divided north and south, urban and suburban, with fault lines built around unions, race, religion and ethnicity.
It has powerful fund-raisers who are sought out by candidates around the country and a vast media network that is both a curse and blessing to those who try to get their message across.
In sum, it has tripped up many homegrown candidates, not to mention those from other places.
Mr. Edwards has vowed to campaign aggressively in upstate cities and in pockets of New York City's outer boroughs where working-class people have lost jobs in recent years as more and more companies have moved their operations overseas, his aides say. He plans to barnstorm the state for five days, appearing on three of those days in Buffalo, Albany and Rochester, which have been particularly hard hit by plant closings and that may be more receptive to his message.
But it is far from certain Mr. Edwards's tactic of going after voters in economically hard-pressed regions upstate will work because most of the state's Democratic primary voters come from New York City and its suburbs, political strategists say.
In the 2000 Democratic presidential primary, for example, upstate accounted for 30 percent of the statewide electorate, compared with about 53 percent in New York City and 17 percent in New York City's suburbs: Westchester, Rockland, Nassau and Suffolk counties. The 70-to-30 downstate-upstate ratio was consistent with previous primaries.
''The problem with the numbers is most of the voters in the primary are in the New York metropolitan area,'' said Lee M. Miringoff, the director of the Marist College Institute for Public Opinion. ''So there is only so much you can get statewide by doing well upstate.''
A leading New York Democratic strategist, speaking on the condition of anonymity, put the problem more bluntly. ''Edwards's populist message of job loss works well upstate because it's a fading industrial area that's a lot like other parts of the country where he has done well,'' the strategist said. ''But in New York Democratic primaries, upstate is not where the votes are.''
Democrats like Senator Hillary Rodham Clinton of New York and Mr. Schumer have campaigned heavily upstate in recent years, showing in general elections that they can make inroads into what was once considered a Republican bastion by talking about jobs. But unlike the primaries in other states, only Democrats can vote in New York's Democratic primary.
Downstate the issues are much different form those upstate. Voters in the suburbs of New York City are more focused on property taxes and education, two issues that seldom become part of the national political debate. The city itself tends to be dominated by traditional liberal Democrats, for whom civil rights, the environment and a solid social safety net for the poor are important.
Political strategists say it remains to be seen how Mr. Edwards's brand of populism will be received in New York City. His supporters say many financial institutions and other service-sector employers in the city have begun to move some of their back-office operations to places like India, so the issue of jobs going overseas may resonate in the city as well.
But getting that message across may be challenging. With 10 states going to the polls on March 2, officials from both campaigns acknowledged that neither candidate has the resources to saturate the major media markets with television advertising. That means newspaper endorsements and television coverage on major networks could play an important role, several strategists said.
''Free media is going to be the No. 1 factor in this election,'' said Bill de Blasio, a city councilman who is a co-chairman of the Edwards campaign in New York. ''Both campaigns are going to be struggling.''
Another open question is where blacks and Latinos, who wield considerable power in a Democratic primary, will throw their support. Blacks and Hispanics account for about a third of the vote in a statewide Democratic primaries, though they are no longer a monolithic voting block in general elections.
They can often play a pivotal role if the white vote splits, and racially charged issues can quickly become decisive in New York elections. This is a state, too, where Mr. Jackson came in second in the Democratic primary in 1988.
The Rev. Al Sharpton, the only black candidate still in the race, is barely in the mix, with recent polls showing him in the single digits, despite the fact that New York is his home state. Yet, Mr. Sharpton is doing his best to stir things up, including injecting race into the contest.
On Thursday, Mr. Sharpton called on federal prosecutors to open an investigation in the case of a white police officer in Brooklyn who shot an unarmed, 19-year-old black on the roof of a public housing building.
''I'm also here to say that everyone on the ballot running for president on March 2 should not campaign in New York without taking a position on this case,'' he said. ''Police conduct, police misconduct and racial profiling is as much a presidential campaign issue as ethanol is in Iowa.''
Another major force in New York politics is organized labor, which has mastered the art of getting out the vote, particularly in New York City and in the state's other urban areas.
One of the most potent political machines in the state belongs to Dennis Rivera, the leader of the largest health workers union, S.E.I.U./1199. Mr. Rivera had supported Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor, who ended his active campaign for president on Wednesday. With Dr. Dean out of the race, Mr. Rivera is leaning toward endorsing Mr. Kerry, people close to Mr. Rivera say. Other major unions are still up for grabs, among them the United Federation of Teachers and the Civil Service Employees Association.
One difference in this year's contest is the grass-roots movement that Dr. Dean assembled before he withdrew from active campaigning. He has a formidable network of 70,000 volunteer organizers in the state, who proved their power when they collected 105,000 signatures to put him on the ballot, far more than any other candidate.
Most of the elected officials who supported Dr. Dean are gravitating toward Mr. Kerry. But it is unclear where many of the rank-and-file Dean followers will go and whether they will sway the vote, much in the way the unions have in the past. Ethan Geto, Dean's campaign director in New York, predicts they may well go with Mr. Edwards.
''Among the grass-roots people, there is a widespread antipathy toward Kerry,'' Mr. Geto said.
Some political professionals wonder whether Mr. Edwards can win the hearts of a majority of voters by campaigning across the state with his populist message, instead of concentrating solely on New York City and Buffalo, as many Democrats have done before him.
''It seems unorthodox,'' Ken Sunshine, a longtime Democratic strategist, said. ''But on the other hand, there's been nothing orthodox about this election. Who could have predicted that this would be such a roller coaster year?''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: NEW YORK
