The United States will demand next week that North Korea agree to dismantle all its nuclear weapons and development programs -- including a uranium enrichment program that Pakistan is believed to have supplied in recent years -- as a prerequisite for any assistance, a Bush administration official said Thursday.
But in a briefing on Thursday, in advance of talks with North Korea in Beijing next week, the administration official said he would not specify whether any commitment to dismantle the uranium enrichment program, along with other weapons programs, had to be explicit, or whether the administration would settle for a more vaguely worded commitment from North Korea to eliminate all its nuclear programs.
In an administration still split over how hard a line to take in the negotiations, the handling of the uranium program may determine whether the talks move forward or fail.
Confronted with intelligence gathered by the United States and South Korea, North Korea admitted to American officials in October 2002 that it had an active program to enrich uranium, in addition to its much older effort to turn spent plutonium into a bomb.
But it has denied the existence of the uranium program in subsequent meetings, and American intelligence officials said Thursday that they still could not determine where the uranium program was located.
In recent months, China, citing the failure to find weapons in Iraq, has questioned the quality of American intelligence about the North Korean program and suggested that it should not be a focus of the negotiations, which are to begin on Feb. 25. But the confession last month of Abdul Qadeer Khan, a founder of the Pakistani nuclear program, included an admission that he had provided nuclear technology to North Korea.
''Khan's statements have made it imperative that this program be dismantled right away,'' a senior administration official said Thursday.
Echoing what was said at the briefing, but taking a more threatening posture, another senior American official charged in Japan that any failure by North Korea to acknowledge its enriched uranium program could derail the plan for settling the issue without military force.
''I think North Korea's unwillingness to discuss the uranium enrichment program could subvert President Bush's determination for a peaceful, diplomatic resolution of the North Korean issue,'' the official, John R. Bolton, under secretary of state for arms control, said in an interview with NHK, the Japanese broadcast network.
The broader objective of the talks, the official at the briefing in Washington said, would be for North Korea to make a fundamental choice to abandon its nuclear aspirations altogether, as Libya did after lengthy negotiations last year. Otherwise, he argued, there could be no deal that would permit energy or economic assistance to North Korea.
The official's comments came at a session with reporters arranged before the trip to Beijing next week by the leader of the American delegation, James A. Kelly, assistant secretary of state for East Asian and Pacific affairs.
Many of the comments echoed a speech by Mr. Kelly last Friday in which he said the American delegation was ''prepared to listen carefully and respond to all positions.'' President Bush said on a trip to Asia last fall that he was willing to spell out security guarantees for North Korea as part of an overall deal.
The talks are sponsored by China and also include South Korea, Japan and Russia. American and Asian diplomats say the planning for the negotiations has been difficult, in part because of disagreements between the United States and two partners, China and South Korea.
The negotiations have largely focused, so far, on North Korea's decades-old program to produce nuclear weapons by extracting plutonium from spent fuel from its nuclear reactors. North Korea not only has acknowledged that program, but has boasted about it. American intelligence officials believe that the reprocessing operations are still going on.
The parallel effort to build a weapon from uranium is believed to be further behind. American officials believe that North Korea obtained from Dr. Khan's network designs and equipment similar to those sold to Libya.
But Bush administration officials say they came to know about the uranium program in 2002 and won an admission from North Korea that it existed after Mr. Kelly confronted officials in North Korea in the fall of that year. North Korea now denies that it made such an admission, but American officials reject that denial.
