American and British officials said Thursday that five British subjects who are prisoners of the United States military at Guantánamo Bay, Cuba, would be sent back to Britain soon.
In London, Foreign Secretary Jack Straw, who first disclosed the impending transfer of the prisoners, said they would be arrested on their return and prosecuted under British antiterrorism laws.
At the same time, American officials said they would soon release another Guantánamo prisoner to Denmark, his home country. The Danish foreign minister, Per Stig Moller, told Parliament on Thursday that there was no law under which that man could be prosecuted and that he would be set free upon returning home.
With the impending releases, more than 90 detainees at the Guantánamo base will have been released to other countries. The base houses some 650 detainees, most of them captured at the end of the Afghan war.
American officials have said the transfers from Guantánamo are a result of a long and arduous intelligence process of deciding who remains a danger and who can be released. Last week, Defense Department officials said some detainees could be held for many years.
For those prisoners, the Pentagon is setting up a special three-member panel that would annually consider their eligibility for release.
Nine Britons are being held at Guantánamo, including the five set for release in what Mr. Straw said would be the next few weeks.
Their detention has been a major irritant in relations between the United States and Britain, which was Washington's staunchest ally in the war against Saddam Hussein in Iraq.
Prime Minister Tony Blair faced pressure at home, where there was strong sentiment that the United States was exceeding its authority in detaining people at Guantánamo, some for nearly two years, without bringing charges or giving them access to lawyers.
''These detainees who are at Guantánamo Bay are people who are a threat to our country,'' Scott McClellan, the White House press secretary, said Thursday. ''That's why they were detained there; they are a danger to America and our friends and allies.''
