In a day of setbacks for Martha Stewart, a close friend of hers testified yesterday that Ms. Stewart, vacationing in Mexico shortly after her sale of ImClone Systems shares, indicated that her broker had told her about trades by other people involved in the company.
Ms. Stewart said, ''Isn't it nice to have brokers who tell you those things?'' the friend, Mariana Pasternak, testified. Ms. Stewart and the former chief executive of ImClone, Samuel D. Waksal, shared a Merrill Lynch stockbroker, Peter E. Bacanovic.
The conversation, Ms. Pasternak said, occurred in late December 2001, a few days after Ms. Stewart parted with nearly 4,000 ImClone shares in a trade that is a central issue in her criminal trial in federal court. At the time, she and Ms. Stewart were sharing a suite at the Las Ventanas resort in Los Cabos.
''I remember Martha saying that Sam was 'walking funny' at the Christmas party, that he was selling or trying to sell his stock, that his daughter was selling or trying to sell her stock, and Merrill Lynch didn't sell,'' Ms. Pasternak told the jury. ''I recall Martha saying that 'his stock is going down' or went down, 'and I sold mine.'''
Ms. Stewart's defense -- and her image -- were undercut in other ways yesterday with testimony that she routinely billed the smallest of items, like a cup of coffee, to her company.
In his opening argument last month, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, told the jury that she had been so focused on a pending $45 million sale of stock to an investor in her company that she had not paid much attention to her ImClone trade, which grossed about $228,000.
However, testimony yesterday from James Follo, the chief financial officer for Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, suggested that Ms. Stewart cared about small amounts of money as well as large ones. Mr. Follo said she sought repayment from her company for expenses like $17,000 for her weekend driver and trips to the hairdresser, as well as coffee and other items ''for less than $10.''
Ms. Pasternak's testimony appears to support the government's assertion that a broker's tip led Ms. Stewart to sell her ImClone stock. Mr. Bacanovic's former assistant, Douglas Faneuil, has testified that his boss had ordered him to tell Ms. Stewart that members of the Waksal family, who founded ImClone, were dumping their shares.
Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic are being tried together on conspiracy and obstruction of justice charges. She also faces charges of false statements and securities fraud; he is charged with perjury, false statements and false documents.
Mr. Morvillo will question Ms. Pasternak when court resumes today. He is likely to challenge the reliability of her memory. Ms. Pasternak, a real estate agent from Westport, Conn., seemed relaxed yesterday, answering questions in her clipped accent and smiling frequently. She described herself as a friend who saw Ms. Stewart every week and spoke to her ''probably every day.''
They have traveled together to the Galápagos Islands, Peru, Egypt and Brazil, as well as Mexico, Ms. Pasternak testified. In addition, she said, she attended dinner parties where Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic were present, and she met Dr. Waksal through Ms. Stewart.
A copy of the hotel bill from the Mexico trip, entered into the record by the government, showed that the two friends spent $1,500 a night on their room and hundreds of dollars on spa services. They also took a hike with an unidentified third person for $300.
On the stand, Mr. Follo, the company's chief financial officer, took the stand while the jury was out of the courtroom and told of being confronted by Ms. Stewart when he refused to sign off on some expenses. One was a $17,000 yearly bill for a weekend driver.
''Approximately how many times have you had conversations with Martha Stewart about expense reimbursement issues?'' the prosecutor, Michael Schachter, asked him.
''More than 10,'' Mr. Follo replied. Asked if they were ''contentious,'' he said, ''Occasionally.'' He balked at paying for the weekend driver, he said, when he found that part of the time Ms. Stewart was ''antiquing,'' adding: ''I would not consider that to be within the company policy or potentially, the tax rules.''
Mr. Schachter asked if Mr. Follo had ''had discussions with Ms. Stewart for having her hair done'' and billing the company. Mr. Follo said: ''Yes,'' without saying how much it cost.
The judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, stopped the testimony to ask specifically whether ''very small sums'' were sought by Ms. Stewart. Mr. Follo replied that there were ''requests occasionally for coffee, for snacks.'' Those requests were not contentious, but others were, he told the court. ''We have had discussions related to items being disallowed that were in the $200 range,'' he said.
Judge Cedarbaum ruled that she would not allow the testimony, but extracted a promise from Ms. Stewart's lawyer as a condition: that he not try to tell the jury again that Ms. Stewart's net worth was too vast for her to be concerned about her ImClone trade.
''Mr. Morvillo is not going to argue that this was too small for Ms. Stewart to focus on,'' she said.
Mr. Morvillo did not quite agree. ''That's a little too far, your honor,'' he said. ''The degree of attention you are likely to pay to a large transaction is different from the degree of attention you are likely to pay to a smaller transaction.''
For that, he got a frosty look from Judge Cedarbaum. ''You can't have it both ways,'' she told him.
An ink expert, Larry Stewart, testified yesterday that a notation on a document that belonged to Mr. Bacanovic appeared to have come from a pen that was different from other pens used on that document. The notation, ''@60,'' is central to the government's charge of false documents against Mr. Bacanovic. He and Ms. Stewart are accused of inventing an explanation for her ImClone trade; each has said it took place because they agreed some time earlier to sell if the price fell below $60 a share.
Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer, Richard M. Strassberg, pointed out to the jury that Mr. Stewart, who is not related to Martha Stewart, had not tested every ink mark on the document and questioned his thoroughness and even his title. Mr. Stewart described himself as the national ink expert, ''a title that was placed on me 15 or 16 years ago,'' and added that he was ''the only one.'' But Mr. Strassberg countered that he was not the only expert, and prodded Mr. Stewart to refine his title, as ''national expert in area ink analysis.''
Another witness, David Topper, a managing director for Morgan Stanley who worked on the initial public offering of stock in Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, described Ms. Stewart's keen interest in the marketing of her company's stock as well as the rules governing when executives could sell it.
Ms. Stewart said in meetings that she had been a broker, ''that she felt she was very familiar with the securities market,'' as well as ''what would make a common stock attractive to investors,'' Mr. Topper said.
In his opening argument, Mr. Morvillo described Ms. Stewart as someone who had been a broker ''30 years ago,'' asserting that she could not have been expected to know that information she received the day of her ImClone sale would get her into legal trouble.
