Russell T. Lewis, president and chief executive of The New York Times Company since 1997, plans to retire by the end of 2004, when he will be succeeded by Janet L. Robinson, senior vice president for newspaper operations, the company announced yesterday.
Until the succession, Ms. Robinson will serve as chief operating officer and executive vice president. In other announcements made yesterday, Leonard P. Forman, senior vice president and chief financial officer of the Times Company, was promoted to executive vice president and chief financial officer of the company. Scott H. Heekin-Canedy, senior vice president for circulation for The New York Times, was named president and general manager of the newspaper.
''Russ has done so much for this company and this newspaper,'' said Arthur Sulzberger Jr., chairman of the Times Company. ''Financially, he drove the earnings. But more importantly, he has taken the core values of this company and managed to turn them into a business strategy.'' During his tenure as chief executive, Mr. Lewis, 56, oversaw the transformation of The Times from a primarily local newspaper into a much more national media property, one that now derives the majority of its revenue from national advertisers and attracts 50 percent of its readers from outside the New York region. Mr. Lewis also oversaw the company's expansion into the Internet and television. More recently, the company attained full ownership of The International Herald Tribune, a Paris-based English-language newspaper, when it bought out the 50 percent share held by the Washington Post Company.
Mr. Lewis, said he was leaving far short of age 65, because he had worked at the Times Company for more than three decades and accomplished much of what he set out to do as a top executive.
''I think that I helped elevate the level of our business performance to the level of our journalism,'' Mr. Lewis said. ''I was ready and began thinking of what the next chapter would be. I would not like to think that this was the last job or position that I will have in life.'' Mr. Lewis, who is a lawyer, says he has interests in government, journalism and First Amendment law. He pointed out that the company's stock has nearly tripled in price since he became president in 1996. But in the last four years, as the newspaper industry has been buffeted by an advertising downturn and the stock market has suffered significant setbacks, the stock price has risen less than 10 percent. It closed yesterday at $47.60, down 40 cents.
Kevin R. Gruneich, an analyst with Bear Stearns, said he expected the transition to Ms. Robinson from Mr. Lewis to be smooth.
''There has been every indication that Janet was going to be Russ's successor and that it would happen sooner rather than later,'' Mr. Gruneich said. ''Russ has built a great bench. I don't think that there is going to be any concern in the investment community.''
Mr. Lewis first joined The Times in 1966 as a copy boy, and worked as a news clerk, a news assistant and then a reporter. After graduating from Brooklyn Law School in 1973, he joined the New York City law firm of Cahill, Gordon &amp; Reindel. Mr. Lewis returned to the Times Company in 1977 as a staff lawyer in the company's legal department. He then worked in various positions in the company's circulation and production departments before becoming vice president and deputy general manager in 1992. Mr. Lewis became president and general manager of the newspaper in 1993, was appointed president of the company in 1996, and was named chief executive the next year.
Ms. Robinson, 53, has been with the Times Company for 21 years, and her promotion means she will join a fairly small group of women who are chief executives of major companies. She was named senior vice president for newspaper operations in 2001, retaining her position as president and general manager of The Times, which she assumed in 1996. She has been responsible for the operations of all of the company's newspapers, including The Times, The International Herald Tribune, The Boston Globe and 16 other newspapers.
After joining the company in 1983, Ms. Robinson, a former public school teacher, worked in a variety of senior advertising positions for the newspaper as well as for the company's women's magazine and sports magazine groups. Both magazine groups have since been sold.
''I think that this company is going to be a growing business,'' Ms. Robinson said. ''As we have said in any number of presentations, we are agnostic in terms of what platform it appears on and think we have a great opportunity to explore more ways to bring our brand of news to people.''
Mr. Sulzberger said of Ms. Robinson: ''Janet is not the right woman for the job; she is the right person for the job. She has proven herself time after time as a strategic thinker who can execute.''
The company also announced yesterday that its board had nominated Doreen A. Toben, chief financial officer of Verizon Communications, to stand for election as a director at its annual meeting on April 13.
The New York Times Company, which had 2003 revenues of $3.2 billion, owns in addition to its newspaper group 8 network-affiliated television stations, 2 New York City radio stations and more than 40 Web sites, including NYTimes.com and Boston.com.
