The United Nations secretary general, Kofi Annan, and his envoy to Iraq, Lakhdar Brahimi, confirmed yesterday what realists already knew: there is no way to hold national elections in Iraq by June 30, the deadline chosen by the United States for transferring sovereignty to Iraqis. The problem is not only logistics, but also security: no one can guarantee the safety of the thousands of polling places that would be necessary for millions of Iraqi voters.
With the United Nations having weighed in, Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, the Shiite religious leader who has insisted on direct elections before any transfer can occur, becomes again the pivotal player in the drama. The problem is that while the June 30 date is not inherently significant to Iraqis, it matters greatly to the Bush administration, which has clung to it despite criticism that the time line is designed to fit the American electoral clock, not the Iraqi one.
Washington's initial hope for establishing a transition government in Baghdad by June 30 was pinned on using some sort of nationwide caucus system, but this foundered when Ayatollah Sistani ruled out caucuses as undemocratic. The ayatollah's position is not unreasonable: Iraq's novice electorate needs simplicity and transparency, and it would be hard to find a dozen ordinary Americans outside of Iowa who could explain the caucus system (there is not even an Arabic word for caucus).
Yesterday, according to members of the Iraqi Governing Council, Ayatollah Sistani said he was open to other options, including possibly enlarging the council, but only if they were part of a United Nations recommendation. But is there is a better solution that would meet the ayatollah's ruling that a new democracy should choose its first real government in free elections, while still allowing a transfer of sovereignty on June 30?
Here's an option: turning over sovereignty initially not to a transitional government but to a special Iraqi commission charged primarily with ensuring that elections occur promptly by the first feasible date, probably next spring. A similar commission was given sovereignty in Afghanistan in the run-up to the loya jirga that established the government of President Hamid Karzai, and while far from perfect, it got the job done.
The difference between a transitional government and government by special commission may seem like a technicality, but it is more than semantics. The mandate of a commission would be to create an unalterable path toward free and fair elections. Although the Iraqis, perhaps working with the United Nations, would have to work out their own system for deciding who would sit on this caretaker body, it would undoubtedly take in some influential members of the Governing Council, alongside other regionally respected, demographically representative figures -- including Sunnis who have a chance of reaching out to disaffected elements of their community.
Most important, the special commission would be created pursuant to a Security Council resolution, which would authorize it to exercise sovereignty for the period leading up to elections -- and not beyond. The resolution would clearly state that the caretaker body would refrain from enacting major legislation and that its focus would be to facilitate elections under international supervision. The technocratic ministers now overseeing day-to-day administration can remain in their jobs until after real elections; where coalition help is needed in delivering basic services, it should continue.
Like any compromise, appointing a commission until elections can be held will not make anyone perfectly happy. But it would satisfy the parties' basic interests. It would not only allow the United States to transfer sovereignty on June 30, but it could be presented honestly as a step toward democracy. It would enable a cross-section of Iraqis to participate in forming the new state. The Governing Council, scheduled to dissolve at the end of June, would probably embrace the proposal. The United Nations would have a sovereign government to deal with, not an occupation authority. In doing so, it would again would be a major player in Iraq, despite its overly hasty withdrawal after the bombing of its headquarters last August.
As for Ayatollah Sistani, if it were put to him that real elections are the goal shared by everyone -- and that the United Nations would set them for a specific date -- he might well be prepared to accept the special electoral commission. After all, his position has always been only that a proper Iraqi transitional government must be elected; he has never specified a timetable.
Contrary to his detractors' skepticism, Ayatollah Sistani is no demagogue. Nor has he called for an Iranian-style theocracy. Rather, he has built his current influence through a laser-like concentration on the message that Iraqi democracy must be born through elections. His demand was not derived through religious jurisprudence, but from a universal norm of democratic politics. The way to approach the ayatollah is therefore not to treat him as an ordinary, grasping politician, but to satisfy the spirit of his fatwa demanding elections.
And while it may seem strange for Washington to look to the United Nations to bail it out, the administration has already headed down this road, relying on Mr. Brahimi to shuttle around Iraq and bring the various factions into line. Six months ago, no one predicted that the future of Iraq would be negotiated between an Algerian-born United Nations envoy and an Iranian-born Iraqi ayatollah. But in diplomacy, arbitrary deadlines yield unexpected consequences.
The alternatives to the commission idea -- having some sort of half-baked election or turning the whole mess over to an expanded governing council -- are grim, and not just for Iraqis. It's time to face facts: even after Iraqis take office, the coalition military will remain in de facto control of security indefinitely. The current insurgency has inflicted hundreds of coalition and Iraqi casualties despite being restricted in large part to the Sunni triangle; resistance to an unelected, illegitimate government would be vastly greater, disrupting Shiite areas that have until now been quiet.
In the end, the Bush administration, with United Nations cooperation, will have to find a compromise that everyone can live with -- or it will have to quietly drop the June 30 deadline and hold on to full sovereignty until real elections can be held. Agreeing to a special commission with international approval means recognizing that our plans have to be revised on the fly. But as we are learning, improvisation is in the nature of nation-building.
An electoral commission would buy the United States precious time and political cover. While eager to take control of their own lives, the Iraqis seem to understand better than we do that the goal is to get democracy right, not to get it fast.
Op-Ed Contributor Noah Feldman, author of ''After Jihad: America and the Struggle for Islamic Democracy,'' is a law professor at New York University. He was a senior adviser for constitutional law to the Coalition Provisional Authority in Iraq.
