The Art Show is going it alone this year. The annual fair of the Art Dealers Association of America usually happens at the same time as the Armory Show, the gathering of contemporary-art dealers held on Piers 90 and 91. That arrangement has enabled visitors to shuttle between the quiet traditionalism of the Art Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory and the cutting-edge theater of its bigger and noisier younger sibling. Scheduling problems at the piers, however, have forced the Armory Show to wait until March 11 for its moment.
While this makes a less exciting weekend, it also entails less distraction, which is a good thing for the Art Show, where the kind of material displayed by its 70 dealers benefits from focused viewing. Mostly that means 20th-century painting, sculpture and drawing, but it also includes major old master prints and drawings at David Tunick; beautiful 19th-century American landscape paintings by Thomas Cole, John Frederick Kensett and Martin Johnson Heade at Berry-Hill; and intriguing photograms from the dawn of the history of photography at Hans P. Kraus Jr.
If you are immune to subtleties of form, craft and pictorial imagination and responsive only to art that is conceptually challenging, electrically powered or otherwise shockingly novel, you might as well wait for the Armory Show.
A number of small, single-artist exhibitions highlight this year's Art Show. One of the two best is PaceWildenstein's selection of pedestal-scale works by John Chamberlain, the master of crushed auto-body sculpture. Amalgamations of crumpled metal parts -- spirals, ribbons, tubes and other sorts of organic forms -- painted in glossy tropical colors or in black and white, these luscious small sculptures have an arresting combination of jewel-like delicacy and explosive energy.
Meanwhile, Fraenkel has a fine selection of photographs by Diane Arbus, including the monumental ''Woman With a Veil on Fifth Avenue, N.Y.C.,'' the grimacing boy with the toy hand grenade, the family of corpulent nudists, two different portraits of weird teenage couples and the haunting image of a Renaissance-style building facade on a grassy hillside in Hollywood.
A less satisfying but curious show at Tasende presents works by the late British sculptor Lynn Chadwick, whose crusty, semi-geometric human and animal figures exude a 1950's-style existentialist angst. Michael Werner has devoted its space to a large painting, some bronze sculptures and a selection of drawings by Per Kirkeby, the Scandinavian Abstract Expressionist. And drawings and ceramics by the Italian avant-gardist Lucio Fontana are at CRG.
At Lennon, Weinberg there is a small show-within-a-show centered on a major sculpture by the great Surrealist woodworker H. C. Westermann. Made in 1977, ''Female Figure'' is one of only about a dozen life-size figurative works that Westermann produced. It consists of a glass-front box on stick legs with arms and a head made from tree branches.
The box contains a painting of a tropical seascape, two carved wooden books inlaid with the names Faulkner and Dickens and a formal photographic portrait of a young soldier in dress uniform with his wife or girlfriend.
A selection of Westermann watercolors and an early example of his death-ship works carved from walnut round out this inspiring display.
Westermann fans will want to check out an even more surprising example of his work at George Adams. Painted on canvas in the mid-50's, it's a funky, bigger-than-life cartoon face of a jazz singer striped in primary colors.
Many other booths have multiple-artist shows that warrant patient scrutiny. Alice Adam has an impressive display of European black-and-white prints, including mournful images of illness and grief by Edvard Munch, James Ensor's riotous etching ''The Entry of Christ Into Brussels,'' and five powerful self-portraits by Max Beckmann.
C&amp;M Arts has a good show of works on paper, too, ranging from a delicately blotchy watercolor of a road going into the woods by Cézanne to an incongruously sexy picture of a pudgy girl naked below the waist drawn in red, black and white chalk by Lisa Yuskavage.
And Parrish &amp; Reinish have put together an engaging selection of paintings by American Modernists, including works by Edward Hopper, Charles Demuth, Marsden Hartley and Charles Sheeler as well as a Picassoid sculpture of a female nude called ''Figure in Rotation'' by Max Weber.
While this year's fair has no major works by European heavyweights like Picasso and Matisse, it still has lots of singularly interesting things scattered throughout. Richard Gray has a gripping, relatively small painting by de Kooning, an erotically charged black-and-yellow stew of biomorphic shapes made in 1948, a good year for the artist and for Abstract Expressionism. Also at Gray is a compact black-and-white painting by Jasper Johns that, you can see after some study, represents the numeral 7.
Kennedy has a big, radiantly mystical picture of the sun shining on rustic buildings and a field of dandelions by Charles Burchfield; Mary-Anne Martin has self-portraits by Frida Kahlo and Diego Rivera flanking a circular tray on which Kahlo painted a sumptuous, Magic Realist basket of flowers; and Joan T. Washburn has a puzzling object associated with Jackson Pollock: a green blotter with doodles on it that was found on the artist's desk. It may be a work of art, or it could be just a blotter.
The Art Show remains on view at the Seventh Regiment Armory, Park Avenue at 67th Street, (212) 940-8925, through Monday. Hours: Today and tomorrow, noon to 8 p.m.; Sunday and Monday, noon to 6 p.m. Admission: $15 a day.
ART REVIEW
