St. Bonaventure's men's basketball team was put on probation yesterday for three years, banned from the N.C.A.A. postseason this year and stripped of three scholarships as a result of allowing a junior college transfer with a welding certificate to play for the university last season.
The National Collegiate Athletic Association's infractions committee, which imposed the penalties, said that the former St. Bonaventure president Robert Wickenheiser was responsible for the scandal at the Franciscan institution in Olean, N.Y., last spring.
''The culpability ran to the ultimate decision-maker, which was the former president,'' Thomas Yeager, chairman of the committee, said in a telephone conference call yesterday. ''This is probably the most involved we've seen a president in a long time. If the president simply said, 'No,' we wouldn't be here today.''
Last February, the Atlantic 10 Conference barred St. Bonaventure from its tournament and ordered that it forfeit all but one of its victories when it was discovered that Jamil Terrell, a junior center, had earned a welding certificate at Coastal Georgia Community College but had not earned enough credits to play at a Division I university. Last March, after a players-only meeting, the team voted not to play its final two games.
In the ensuing weeks, Wickenheiser and Athletic Director Gothard Lane were forced to resign and Coach Jan van Breda Kolff was fired. At the time, Wickenheiser took responsibility for allowing Terrell's transfer, but yesterday Yeager said that Wickenheiser had also ignored Lane and other senior athletic department officials who had argued against the player's eligibility.
The N.C.A.A. also investigated an unethical conduct charge against van Breda Kolff, who employed Wickenheiser's son, Kort, on his staff. He was cleared of the charge, however.
''I don't think there's any confusion over the role the entire basketball staff played or the knowledge that they had,'' Yeager said. ''But it was upon orders from the president that the young man be certified eligible.''
St. Bonaventure (6-16) is banned from this season's N.C.A.A. tournament and National Invitation Tournament. It is up to the Atlantic 10 to decide whether the team will play in the conference tournament. Commissioner Linda Bruno said she would address that issue with conference members as soon as possible.
The three-year probation is retroactive to last July 15, when St. Bonaventure submitted its report to the N.C.A.A. In addition to the lost scholarships, recruiting visits by coaches and players were also reduced. St. Bonaventure will not appeal.
''Many people have been affected by the events of the last 12 months,'' Fr. Dominic Monti, O.F.M., St. Bonaventure's interim president, said. ''The confidence and trust of our alumni and friends was shaken. We hope that the actions of the members of our board of trustees and the university administration have restored their confidence and trust. The lives of many individuals have been affected. We have all learned from these events, and we face the future wiser and more determined than ever to do the right thing.''
COLLEGES
