THE grammar is imperfect, but not the heart behind the gesture, which takes the form of a simple sign. It is a sheet of paper taped to the front window of a dry cleaner on Second Avenue, near East 73rd Street.
''If you are unemployed and need an outfit clean for a interview,'' it says, ''we will clean it for free.''
The idea came to him soon after he opened his small shop in 2001, said Carlos Vasquez, the owner of First Professional Inc. Cleaners. His memory is that the sign went up early that year. But his wife and brother, who work with him, are pretty sure it happened after the Sept. 11 attacks. Well, Mr. Vasquez said with a shrug, what does it matter? The notice went in the window. That's the point.
''It's something to give back to the community and the people who are unemployed,'' he said the other day.
When people take him up on the offer, he asks to see the stub of an unemployment check. Trust, but verify, as Ronald Reagan said in a different context. But Mr. Vasquez is not fanatical about it. ''I ask for proof, but if they don't have it, I don't give them a hard time,'' he said. ''I take their word for it.''
Now, no one pretends that his regular customers on that stretch of the Upper East Side, ZIP code 10021, are destitute. Save the violins and handkerchiefs for less-fortunate precincts.
All the same, awash as it is with financial and advertising types, the neighborhood was disproportionately affected by the post-90's economic slump. Anecdotal evidence suggests to local elected officials, like State Senator Liz Krueger and Gifford Miller, speaker of the City Council, that a lot of people found themselves out of work. Sept. 11 was another blow. When the medical examiner's office tracked World Trade Center victims by ZIP code, it found that the largest number, 44, came from 10021.
But perhaps times are getting better. And perhaps Mr. Vasquez's shop is an indicator. Call it the D.C.I., the dry cleaning index.
He used to have five or six people a month coming in for free service, Mr. Vasquez said. That has slowed to two or three a month. ''Hopefully, that means things are picking up,'' Mr. Vasquez said.
That just might be the case, said Jim Brown, a labor market analyst for the New York State Department of Labor. The city's unemployment rate in December, the last month with available figures, was 7.8 percent -- not wonderful, but more encouraging than the 8.3 percent of December 2002 and far better than the 9.2 percent of last February.
While the D.C.I. may not be overwhelming evidence, Mr. Brown said that ''you like to have those small measures going in the same direction as your broad economic stats.''
Doing better, though, hardly means doing well. At the end of 2003, state statistics show, 67,400 fewer people held jobs in New York City than a year earlier. On this score, too, clothes tell a tale.
Last year, more than 3,000 New Yorkers looking for work turned to nonprofit groups for help with a basic first step to get through an employer's front door: the proper outfit.
CLOTHES may not always make the man or woman. But they go far to make a first impression. And many poor people, especially those who have never worked in an office, do not have what to wear -- or in many instances, even know what to wear -- to a job interview.
For that reason, job-training agencies refer women to organizations like Bottomless Closet and Dress for Success New York. Men are sent to Career Gear. The floors of these places look like mini-department stores, with racks upon racks of conservative suits, dresses, pants and jackets, all donated by people and companies. We're not talking shmattes. This stuff is in good condition.
Along with clothes, these groups offer instruction in job-interview etiquette, career counseling, financial planning and other skills. Yet more suits and dresses are provided to those who land jobs.
''We do the whole package,'' said Donna McGill, the executive director of Bottomless Closet. Career Gear follows a similar principle. ''It becomes a lot more than clothing,'' said Gary Field, the founder. ''It's the whole presentation, because it's very competitive out there.''
Still, success often begins with the right wardrobe, as Mr. Vasquez knows.
Now and then, he said, passers-by who live in other parts of town ask him whether they, too, can have their clothes cleaned free. ''I tell them, 'Sure, you don't have to be from Manhattan,''' he said. ''If you're unemployed, you're unemployed.''
NYC
