Some of the biggest objects in the cosmos are behaving in a way radically out of step with the prevailing theory of how the universe was born and evolved, a team led by French astrophysicists said here on Thursday.
The puzzling behavior of those objects, clusters of galaxies containing the mass of 100 trillion suns, has heartened some scientists who are not yet ready to accept the weird universe that the current theory describes. That theory says the overwhelming majority of the cosmos is made of strange stuff called dark matter and dark energy that have never actually been seen.
Many aspects of the universe, like its expansion rate, seem to be correctly explained by a universe in which the bright stars and glowing gases of the heavens are, in effect, floating in a sea of the unseen matter and energy. But the new findings, which rely on X-rays collected by a European satellite, XMM-Newton, suggest that the huge clusters are dancing to their own tune, refusing to behave as the mainstream theory predicts they should.
According to the theory, most of the clusters should have coalesced billions of years ago and changed only slightly since then. But by analyzing X-rays emitted by the stupendously hot gases whirling about in those clusters, the team found that there were far fewer of them in the distant past, said Dr. Alain Blanchard, a scientist at the Astrophysical Laboratory of Toulouse and Tarbes in France who spoke here.
The discrepancy with what is often called the ''concordance'' model, or theory, is not subtle, Dr. Blanchard said. The number of clusters several billion years ago is about a factor of 10 too small, the calculations show. Instead, he said, the clusters were still coalescing and growing in the cosmically recent past, apparently violating the predictions.
''The clusters are going in a way that is at odds with it,'' Dr. Blanchard said of the theory. ''I do not see the trend which you would expect if the concordance is right.''
Dr. Blanchard said he would be the first person to concede there could be some other unknown factor like complexities in the dynamics of the gases that scientists still do not understand. But Dr. Blanchard said he was partly driven by the strangeness of the concordance model to find possible mistakes in it. Asserting that the universe is mostly filled with dark undetected matter and energy, he said, is ''an incredible statement.''
Other scientists said they appreciated the bemusement and emphasized that shortcomings in the ethereal landscape that theorists have wrought should be pursued.
''I think it's a credible observation,'' said Dr. David B. Cline, a physicist at the University of California, Los Angeles, who organized the conference here, Sources and Detection of Dark Matter and Dark Energy in the Universe.
The guiding theory, Dr. Cline said, is ''still considered rather mysterious and potentially wrong.''
Dr. Max Tegmark, a cosmologist at the University of Pennsylvania, said it was essential not to allow the successes of the theory to obscure the need to look deeper into the cosmos with satellites, ground-based telescopes and other instruments.
''One should never, ever use a theoretical argument for not measuring something,'' Dr. Tegmark said.
Because other measurements of large structures in the cosmos do seem to fit the concordance theory, Dr. Tegmark said, ''I'm not losing sleep over'' the XMM-Newton data.
Dr. Neta A. Bahcall, an astrophysicist at Princeton, went further, saying that the X-ray measurements could be subject to large uncertainties and that other observations of the clusters did not see them changing much in time. Even Dr. Bahcall said the theoretical model should be examined for weaknesses.
''Many of us,'' she said, ''are in fact disturbed by the model that is coming up.''
Dr. Blanchard, who did his work with Sebastien Vauclair at the Astrophysical Laboratory and a team of French, British and American scientists, studied a sample of more than 300 large clusters observed by several X-ray satellites. He used detailed observations of eight clusters with sophisticated instruments on XMM-Newton to create a Rosetta stone that let him determine masses for the larger sample of clusters.
The figures showed that in the distant past the large clusters were too rare, by a factor of 10, to be explained by the standard theory, which says the cosmos is filled with much more dark energy -- something that creates a repulsive force on large scales -- than with matter.
In a cosmos filled with strange stuff, Dr. Blanchard said, his calculations suggest that ''there is trouble somewhere.''
