The next space shuttle mission, crammed with scores of modifications and new procedures for resumption of flight, will be launched no earlier than March 2005 and will have a backup, NASA officials said Thursday.
Officials of the agency had already indicated recently that the next shuttle flight, tentatively scheduled for September or October, would probably be moved to early 2005 because more time was needed for modifications. And Thursday night those officials said they were now aiming for a date between early March and mid-April of next year.
Earlier, in a news conference at the Johnson Space Center in Houston, NASA officials said that when the agency launched that shuttle mission, the first since the Columbia disaster, it would have a second shuttle on standby in case the craft was damaged and a rescue mission was needed.
Michael Kostelnick, NASA's deputy associate administrator for the shuttle and space station programs, said the new mission would be so full of changes that extra precautions were needed in case something went wrong. If the first shuttle gets into trouble, he said, its crew could take refuge at the International Space Station until help arrived.
''For the first flight, we're going to have the capability to do this,'' Mr. Kostelnick said. ''The second vehicle would be able to launch and go to the International Space Station and pick up the first crew if we had a problem.''
NASA has chosen the Discovery to be the first orbiter to fly, with the Atlantis to be prepared as the rescue vehicle. The third remaining shuttle, Endeavour, is undergoing scheduled major modifications.
Mr. Kostelnick said the agency did not know how long it would continue the practice of having a rescue shuttle ready. ''Our experience for subsequent flights will be determined by our success and our problems with the first flight,'' he said.
NASA has not planned a contingency rescue mission since the 1970's, when it modified an Apollo capsule to seat five astronauts instead of three in case a crew aboard its first space station, Skylab, could not return in its own capsule.
William Parsons, the shuttle program manager, said the rescue shuttle would not have to be sitting on a launching pad. The craft would simply have to be ready to fly within 45 to 90 days, he said, the currently estimated time the space station could support seven extra astronauts with oxygen, food and other supplies.
Mr. Parsons said the rescue duties would be added to the training of the next scheduled astronaut crew.
''I don't believe that there's an awful lot of extra training or extra things that we have to do for a rescue mission,'' Mr. Parsons said. ''It's not a huge amount of work. It's more about planning. It's more about contingency.''
Under the space initiative recently announced by President Bush, the shuttles are to keep flying until they complete building the space station in 2010, and then be retired. All remaining flights, up to 35, are to the station, where shuttles will be inspected for damage and, if necessary, docked for repairs.
Among the tasks that have delayed resumption of flight are study of the shuttle's giant fuel tank and the testing of modifications that keep it from shedding insulating foam, a piece of which damaged the Columbia's wing on liftoff a year ago and doomed the craft. Other sources of delay, Mr. Parsons said, are tests on a sensor boom that a crew could use to inspect a shuttle in orbit, and deciding on a method that could be used for in-orbit repairs of the composite carbon heat-shield material along the leading edge of the wing.
