Even as Conrad M. Black was spearheading an effort last fall to sell the assets of Hollinger International, he was engaged in secret talks to undermine that process by selling his controlling stake in the company, two advisers to the company testified on Thursday.
Lord Black, then the company's chairman, asked an investment bank, Lazard, to oversee any sale of assets by Hollinger International. But he then opened his own negotiations to sell his stake to the Barclay brothers of Britain, according to correspondence submitted to the court.
Those negotiations occurred without Lazard's knowledge, according to Louis G. Zachary Jr., a managing director of the firm. Mr. Zachary's testimony was similar to an account provided by Richard C. Breeden, a former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, who has been advising a special committee of Hollinger directors investigating Lord Black.
The two accounts came on the second day of a trial in Chancery Court here in Delaware, where Hollinger International is incorporated. Hollinger's holdings include The Daily Telegraph of London, The Jerusalem Post and The Chicago Sun-Times.
The independent directors of Hollinger have asked the court here to effectively block an agreement that Lord Black reached with the Barclays last month to sell his controlling stake. The directors contend that the agreement with the Barclays, twin brothers who are entrepreneurs, violates a deal that Lord Black struck with Hollinger International in November.
That agreement, Mr. Breeden and others testified, was intended to allow the company to pursue an orderly sale of its assets without the distraction of having Mr. Black's shares for sale at the same time.
Leo Strine, the vice chancellor of the court, has agreed to rule on the matter by Feb. 27, a deadline that is crucial because the Barclays' offer expires the following week.
Lord Black, who did not testify on Thursday but is expected to do so Friday, was a looming presence nonetheless. Mr. Breeden, for example, testified that relations between Lord Black and the board members he appointed grew so acrimonious in recent weeks that he began one meeting by threatening to sue several of them for defamation in the British courts -- in part because he knew they had houses in Britain and hoped to take the proceeds from them in a lawsuit.
''Mr. Black begins many conversations by threatening everybody,'' Mr. Breeden said.
In court on Thursday, Mr. Strine also heard sharply differing testimony over the state of the parent company's finances, a critical question on which this case may turn. In the November agreement, Lord Black had pledged that he would not sell his stake in Hollinger International unless Hollinger Inc., the company that holds his shares, was under severe financial pressure.
Lord Black's lawyers painted a portrait of Hollinger Inc. as a company facing great financial distress. For example, if it does not make a $7.2 million interest payment to bondholders by March 1, Lord Black risks losing some of the shares in Hollinger International that he put up as collateral. (Because these are so-called supervoting shares, Lord Black's holding company owns about 30 percent of Hollinger International stock yet controls about 70 percent of the company.)
In his testimony, Mr. Breeden argued that the financial strains on Hollinger Inc. hardly met the test of the November agreement, which stipulated that it must be on the brink of ''material default or insolvency'' before Lord Black could seek to sell his stake. Mr. Breeden noted that the stock Lord Black put forth as collateral was worth several hundred million dollars, far more than he owed.
In the November agreement, Lord Black also promised to reimburse Hollinger International for millions of dollars in payments that the company contends were not properly authorized or disclosed. Lord Black has since said that he does not intend to make those payments.
Mr. Breeden said Thursday that among the company's concerns about the sale to the Barclays was a fear that Lord Black would disappear to someplace remote, like ''the Outer Hebrides,'' rugged islands north and west of Scotland, and would then deposit the proceeds in banks as far afield as Beirut or Gibraltar.
The money ''could be wired anywhere in the world,'' said Mr. Breeden, noting that the Barclays had a company in the Channel Islands and that Lord Black's holding company is Canadian.
''I sincerely doubt it would be in the U.S.,'' he said.
Lord Black, who stepped down as chief executive of Hollinger International in November and was forced out as chairman last month, has filed a counterclaim here. In it, he seeks the court's assistance in permitting the sale to the Barclays to go through.
Should the independent directors prevail, they would likely carry out a so-called poison pill provision. In that case, if the Barclays proceeded with their plan to buy Lord Black's controlling stake, the board would create so many new shares that their voting majority now would turn into a minority.
The crisis in Hollinger International began last May, when an outside investor complained to the board that Lord Black and his senior associates had received millions of dollars in questionable payments, ostensibly tied to noncompetition agreements. The company has since said that much of that money was unauthorized or improperly disclosed.
Lord Black's lawyers argued today that a portion of those payments had, in fact, been authorized in 2000 by vote of the board's three-member executive committee.
But lawyers for the company, along with one director, Raymond G.H. Seitz, noted that two of the three members of that committee were Lord Black and his chief lieutenant, David Radler, who received the lion's share of those payments.
''It's a classic example of self-dealing,'' Mr. Seitz said.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS
