Fun is not a word that regularly comes to mind in this country, particularly in the leaden grip of a German winter. But Cologne, with its art galleries, theaters, nightclubs and television studios, can reasonably lay claim to the title of Germany's fun city.
The merriment peaks during the carnival season, which reels to a close next week when this ancient Roman city on the Rhine gives itself over to a bacchanalian display of parades, street festivals, and public drunkenness that makes Munich's Oktoberfest look like a garden party.
With high jinks so much a part of Cologne's image, it's little surprise that many locals are howling about a new tax the city is levying on all sorts of amusements -- from pop concerts and discos to the sex trade.
City officials say the ''pleasure tax'' is necessary to plug a $500 million hole in Cologne's budget, caused by the recent recession. The city hopes to raise almost $3.5 million a year from the tax -- a quarter of that from brothels, message parlors and table-dancing clubs, which are required to pay 150 euros, or $193, a month.
''We're not judging how people amuse themselves,'' said Josef-Rainer Frantzen, the head of Cologne's tax authority. ''Mr. A. spends his money in a gambling hall, Mr. B. in a discothèque, and Mr. C. in a brothel. But if you have a deficit, you don't have a lot of choices to raise income.''
Still, Cologne is drawing distinctions. While the tax applies to plays and concerts (in the form of a 3.5 percent surcharge on tickets), arts lobbyists persuaded the city to exempt performances with fewer than 250 people in the audience. They warned it would bankrupt small cultural institutions. Now, Cologne may roll back the tax on big events, because critics say it will drive away international pop stars.
The carnival, a four-month extravaganza that starts in November, is exempt entirely, even though it draws a million visitors to Cologne, many of whom pay $50 or more to get into clubs, where they can watch people in goofy costumes dance and deliver bilious speeches.
With its roots in the Middle Ages, when winter-weary people cut loose before the self-denial of Lent, the carnival is considered too much a part of Cologne's history to be taxed, according to Mr. Frantzen. Never mind that the city's sex trade goes back at least that long.
To many here, Cologne's move looks suspiciously like a sex tax. And an unjust one at that, since prostitutes note that the city is imposing it on them, not on the men who patronize their services.
''I can't increase what I charge,'' said Tanya, 30, who, like many prostitutes here, is an Eastern European immigrant. ''I can't tell my clients, 'You have to pay more because my taxes went up.' ''
Prostitution is both legal and regulated in Germany. Prostitutes are required to register with the local heath authorities, which offer health checkups. They also pay income taxes. There are 3,000 prostitutes registered in Cologne, though officials say the real number is probably much higher.
Tanya, who would not give her last name, said the tax might force her from the bar where she now waits for customers to the street, where it would be harder for the tax collectors to find her. She said Cologne was jeopardizing its reputation as one of the most tolerant cities in Europe.
''I came here because the people in Cologne are supposed to be relaxed,'' she said, staring mournfully into her drink.
Mr. Frantzen conceded that it would be harder to collect taxes from prostitutes on the street, many of whom are not registered with the authorities and are in Germany illegally. He said Cologne would focus first on its big brothels, which are in high-rise buildings on city's outskirts.
That may raise other issues. At Pascha, the city's largest brothel, prostitutes rent rooms by the day. Officially, they are just guests, since employing prostitutes is illegal. Cologne, however, said it would hold the Pascha liable for part of the tax, if it could not collect from the women.
''It's too soon to say what effect it will have,'' said the Pascha's manager, Armin Lobscheid. ''But there are a lot of questions. Who should have to pay the tax? The girls just rent rooms here.''
Mr. Lobscheid said he and other owners were in negotiations with the city, and declined to comment further.
At the Roman Baths, an upscale message parlor, the manager said the tax had already dented business. His customers, he noted, could afford to travel to Düsseldorf, Bonn or other nearby cities.
Cologne prides itself on being more liberal than those neighbors. This is a place where the police started a hip-hop band, which performs in uniform, to discourage teenagers from a life of crime. ''We would never have been allowed to do this in Munich or Frankfurt,'' said the band's manager, Mike Mannheim, who works as the police chief at Cologne's airport.
The trouble is, Cologne's finances, like those of Munich and other German cities, were blighted by the recent downturn. For the first time in the postwar period, the city was unable to balance its budget in 2003. Under German law, it must rid its books of red ink within six years.
With the carnival coming to a beer-soaked conclusion, Cologne will most likely forget its woes for a few days next week. But for the city's sex workers, the bitter truth is that they will not benefit much. ''People get sex free during carnival,'' Tanya said. ''Why should they pay for it?''
Cologne Journal
