Broadway Revival For 'Glengarry'
It seems like an easy sell: the first Broadway revival of ''Glengarry Glen Ross,'' David Mamet's fierce drama about scheming salesmen learning the ABC's of their craft, which are, of course, ''Always Be Closing.'' It's such a sure thing that it was proposed less than two years ago, but the production, which was to be directed by Daniel Sullivan, fell apart after Danny DeVito and Ben Stiller dropped out.
Jerry Frankel and Jeffrey Richards are behind the new revival, which aims to open in spring 2005. It is to be staged by one of Broadway's most-in-demand directors, Joe Mantello (''Wicked,'' ''Take Me Out''). No actors have been named. The original 1984 Broadway production starred Robert Prosky as Shelly (the Machine) Levene and Joe Mantegna as the brilliantly persuasive Ricky Roma, roles played by Jack Lemmon and Al Pacino, in the acclaimed 1992 film.
Over the last two decades, many imitators have mimicked the staccato rhythm of the terse, foul-mouthed script. ''It's become a bit clichéd,'' Mr. Mantello said. ''But when you get the real thing, it's astonishing.''
Mr. Mamet may have another major revival next season. The Araca Group's production of ''Speed-the-Plow,'' rumored to be arriving on Broadway this spring, has been postponed at least until fall.
Contagious Bad Luck
''Drowning Crow,'' Regina Taylor's adaptation of Chekhov's ''Seagull,'' set on an island off South Carolina, opened just last night (review, Weekend Page 1) but was sinking at the box office last week, coming in dead last among Broadway shows, with a paltry $160,174 in ticket sales. And many of those who did show up for previews didn't stick around too long, several audience members reported. Estimates of the exodus range from a few people to up to 100 exiting before curtain. Previews are typically packed with subscribers, who tend to be older than most ticket-buyers and may scratch their heads at the play's references to figures like the rapper Biggie Smalls.
Manhattan Theater Club had no comment on the number of walkouts.
The play, produced by the seemingly cursed Manhattan Theater Club, follows its troubled productions of Richard Greenberg's ''Violet Hour'' and Neil Simon's ''Rose's Dilemma.'' The theater's bad luck this season seems to have rubbed off on Ms. Taylor, who was replaced this week by Marsha Norman (''The Secret Garden'') as the book writer for the musical version of ''The Color Purple,'' aiming for a Broadway opening next season. The director, Gary Griffin, declined to comment on the change, and Ms. Taylor did not return phone calls.
An Unrushed Search
No one said replacing a beloved artistic leader would be easy. But as attention shifts to replacing George C. Wolfe at the Public Theater, there has been some grumbling at P.S. 122 that the second most prominent search committee in downtown theater has been moving too slowly.
Since Mark Russell announced in December that he was leaving P.S. 122, the committee has met only once, and no ads have been placed. Some names have been bandied about, including David Binder, a producer of the forthcoming ''Raisin in the Sun''; John Clancy, former artistic director of the Present Company Theatorium; and Boo Froebel, an independent curator. But there is little evidence that these rumors are anything but that.
''It's still very preliminary,'' said John Hoffman, a member of the search committee and a consulting producer for HBO Documentaries.
Many people are worried that time is running out for the theater, which has a $1 million budget and has been a training ground for important artists like Eric Bogosian, Spalding Gray and Richard Maxwell. ''Mark is leaving in June, and literally nothing has been done,'' said a P.S. 122 employee, speaking on the condition of anonymity.
It's not even clear that the committee has decided what kind of position it wants to fill. At the only meeting, the members discussed having an executive director and an artistic director. The idea of an interim leader for one year has also been floated.
Mr. Russell has already programmed the season through May 2005, which gives the people running P.S. 122 one less thing to worry about. ''We don't want to rush this,'' said Carmelita Tropicana, the sole artist on the committee. ''We will take our time and find the right person.''
'Can-Can' Sets a Record
Rave reviews for Patti LuPone last weekend helped ''Can-Can'' take in more money than any other show in the 11-year history of Encores! This series of neglected musicals performed in concert doesn't release precise numbers, but its press representative confirmed that the show, which received mixed notices, earned 11 percent more than the previous leader, last season's ''Pajama Game.''
This week, Brian D'Arcy James, Emily Skinner, Rob Bartlett, Jennifer Laura Thompson and Don Stephenson were confirmed for the cast of the next Encores! show, the little-known 1933 Gershwin musical ''Pardon My English,'' which begins performances March 25.
No casting has been announced for the final show of the season, ''Bye Bye Birdie,'' but Kathleen Marshall, who was to direct, has left the show because of scheduling conflicts. She will be replaced by Jerry Zaks.
The Boys Include a Girl
When Oscar Jaffe says ''Goodbye, boys'' to his business associates in Ken Ludwig's adaptation of ''Twentieth Century,'' the 1932 comedy by Ben Hecht and Charles MacArthur, he is using a very loose definition of boys -- so loose that it includes a girl.
In the Roundabout Theater production, which begins previews next Friday, Oliver Webb, one of the associates, has become Ida Webb. The director, Walter Bobbie, explains the change as an effort to compensate for the loss of female characters after Mr. Ludwig tightened the script. ''There was an imbalance after he cut the number of roles from around 30 to 10,'' Mr. Bobbie said. ''There were only two women.'' Julie Halston plays the part, turning him -- I mean, her -- into a tough dame in the spirit of Rosalind Russell.
''Hey, I was a founding member of Charles Busch's theater company, so I know about gender-bending,'' Ms. Halston said, speaking of the popular playwright and drag queen.
On Stage and Off
