Now that bad taste has become officially institutionalized, the sometimes funny -- but just as often dopey -- comedy ''Eurotrip'' has all of the anarchic charge of getting a tattoo at Wal-Mart. The movie is being touted as the newest project from the producers of ''Road Trip'' and ''Old School''; its inevitable sequel -- whether it ends up in theaters or goes straight to a Web site -- will probably be sold as ''from people who saw 'Road Trip' and 'Old School.' ''
The film's willingness to embarrass every single one of its participants is almost touching. It's like the new kid in school -- still wearing a John Deere cap and last year's Diesels -- asking to be punked, so he can fit in. ''Eurotrip'' plays pranks on itself, and when everybody's beneath contempt, there's no more room left for bad taste at the bottom. Maybe that's the new subversion.
The primary victim of the movie is Scotty (Scott Mechlowicz). At his high school graduation, he's dumped by a girl who looks as though she just stepped off the set of ''Smallville,'' and her Noxema-fresh angel face adds ground glass to her duplicity.
Worse, the e-mail correspondence that Scotty has had with his German friend Mieke takes a very weird turn; based on his extremely limited conversational German, Scotty figures out that Mieke has just come on to him. Horrified, he blows Mieke off forever -- until his younger brother, Bert (Nial Iskhakov), tells him that Mieke is a girl's name (Scotty thinks it's the German version of Mike) and, as it follows, Mieke (Jessica Boehrs) is a girl. And, yes, kids, she is hot. So the -- forgive me -- plot of ''Eurotrip'' hinges on what the philosopher Daffy Duck once referred to as ''pronoun trouble.''
As Scotty's friends the twins Jenny (Michelle Trachtenberg) and Jamie (Travis Wester, who looks a few years older than Jenny) are headed to Europe for a summer trip, he joins them so he can chase down Mieke and straighten things out. Scotty's best friend, Cooper (Jacob Pitts), tags along, in search of the kind of rampant sexual activity that he imagines is found only in more sophisticated countries, or perhaps Super Bowl half-time shows.
Scotty's intention is to get to Berlin to meet Mieke, but their tortuous path is more like circumnavigating the globe in order to reach the German capital. The movie is funny right away; the opening credit sequence is a cartoon take on the airline safety-procedure placard. (Scotty's indirect path to Berlin provides a fine visual bit, mapped out on a table.) And the mildly xenophobic humor includes one of the few inventive mime insults seen in a movie; ''Eurotrip'' may be stupid, but it's not dumb.
I'm not entirely sure the ''Eurotrip'' storyline qualifies as a plot; it's more like a series of Post-Its with joke topics rendered in felt-tip pen -- and underlined. The four principal cast members, who are reasonably good-humored about the pranks they're subjected to, spend most of their time staring into the camera with their heads slightly tilted; it's as if they're watching their newly hatched careers roll downhill.
Since this is a teen comedy, almost every girl in the movie with fewer than 10 lines to speak has to take her top off. The director Jeff Schaffer is gentleman enough to make sure that the camera remains still and in focus, so that all of the eventual buyers of the DVD will be able to skip right to the nudity with a minimum of fuss. (This will make it much easier to see the cheesy computer effects that make major world capitals look like an Eastern European backlot.) Mr. Schaffer also wrote the script, along with Alec Berg and David Mandel; the team was credited with the ''Cat in the Hat'' screenplay, and it's not much of a compliment to say ''Eurotrip'' is better, since no English-speaking person could do worse than ''Hat.''
In a nod to equality, there's male nudity as well, and even the suburban satyr Cooper gets his comeuppance. Mr. Pitts makes him a lazy, wicked hustler who plows through a speech about European debauchery that's close to Bill Murray's summation of the American psyche -- the lovable mutt speech.
And that's the dirty little secret: one of the executive producers of ''Eurotrip,'' Ivan Reitman, produced ''National Lampoon's Animal House,'' the tree from which this Dutch elm disease fell. This probably isn't highlighted because most of the principal cast -- and more important, the desired audience -- were probably born after ''House'' (1978). They may even have been born after 1981's ''Stripes.''
''Eurotrip,'' which opens nationwide today, has the overripe, anything-for-a-laugh spirit -- and I mean anything -- of the drive-in circuit parodies that Mr. Reitman got his start with. The caliber of the cameos displays his ability to talk anyone into joining his caravan. Perhaps there's work for Mr. Reitman yet, advising his performers on political campaigns -- he certainly helped one of the stars of ''Twins'': Arnold Schwarzeneggar.
''Eurotrip'' is rated R (Under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It has nudity, alcohol consumption, comic violence, alcohol consumption, strong language, alcohol consumption, sexuality and alcohol consumption.
EUROTRIP
Directed by Jeff Schaffer; written by Alec Berg, David Mandel and Mr. Schaffer; director of photography, David Eggby; edited by Roger Bondelli; music by James L. Venable; production designer, Allan Starski; produced by Daniel Goldberg, Jackie Marcus, Mr. Berg and Mr. Mandel; released by Dreamworks Pictures. Running time: 92 minutes. This film is rated R.
WITH: Scott Mechlowicz (Scott Thomas), Michelle Trachtenberg (Jenny), Jacob Pitts (Cooper Harris), Travis Wester (Jamie), Jessica Boehrs (Mieke), Nial Iskhakov (Bert), Lucy Lawless (Madame Vandersexxx), Vinnie Jones (Mad Maynard) and Fred Armisen (Creepy Italian Guy).
FILM REVIEW
