In Nascar race-calling, is the car number more important than the driver's name? Take this snippet from NBC's Wally Dallenbach during Sunday's Daytona 500: ''The 8 is so far in front, he can just weave. If the 20 gets a fender on the 8 car and the other two cars line up, they should get past the 8 car.''
The 8 car was Dale Earnhardt Jr. and the 20 car was Tony Stewart.
In Nascar parlance -- but not normal sports discourse -- the number is a predominant identifier. It is Nascar numerology. The car's the man, the man's the car.
But you cannot rely too little on drivers' names, not when Nascar is more mainstream than ever and you are selling stars to casual viewers. Heck, if Jeff Gordon said goodbye to good old No. 24, which of the two would fade to black?
We know Mickey Mantle wore No. 7, but Mel Allen never said: ''7 crushes a Ballantine Blast into the center-field bleachers. How about that?''
So it was odd to hear NBC's crew using numbers as if the cars were machines of artificial intelligence with ciphers in jumpsuits inside. Not that names were not used, but numbers were too important.
''Ninety-seven, who's he going with?'' Benny Parsons said when Kurt Busch was deciding to abet 8 or 20.
''Going with 22, Stewart!'' Dallenbach said.
Later, Dallenbach, a recently retired driver, said, ''He's got to anticipate whatever move 20 is going to make and he pretty much knows the 97 is going to go with him.''
Sometimes the attempt to balance name and numbers turns into a silly jumble that sounds like: 97 could help Tony, but he might help 8, who bumped into Kurt so now 97 is a lap back, and Busch has to choose to push 8 or Tony so that Dale Jr. or 20 might help 97 in the future.
''You need a mixture of the two,'' Sam Flood, NBC's producer, said. ''Every time you see the 20 car, you can't say, 'The No. 20 Home Depot car driven by Tony Stewart.' The easiest way to identify the driver is by number. With numbers, you know immediately what you're looking at. What's the best way to tell which car it is, by saying Greg Biffle, or No. 16? We do both.''
But the rookie Biffle, who finished third at Daytona, is not yet defined by a number, much like you and me. So a little more of saying, ''Biffle in the 16 car,'' or even ''16 Biffle'' would go a long way to helping occasional viewers, a group that no doubt swells every February for the Daytona 500, which generates ratings about double the Nextel Cup race average.
Sometime viewers cannot easily name the drivers inside the 01, 32, 38 or 45 cars, let alone the bigger stars inside 40, 48 and 88.
Flood is correct that announcers need not overuse the drivers' names when several are bunched together in a lead pack and their numbers are called repeatedly. ''If you're a novice fan, we have to best explain which car it is,'' Flood said.
Still, Fox's Darrell Waltrip said he was not a numbers man. ''That's old school,'' he said. ''For me to talk about Jeff Gordon, I'd never talk about the 24 car, or the DuPont car. You don't talk about the quarterback No. 12. That's old school.''
But he makes a distinction, which will be on display for Fox's fourth Nascar season, which starts Sunday with the Subway 400 from Rockingham, N.C.
''If I'm talking about the car, I'd say the 6 car is getting off Turn 2 well, but that's talking about the car,'' Waltrip said. ''I'd say the 29 car is smoking, not Kevin Harvick. He's not smoking.''
One must note that when the focus was on people, and not numbers, NBC excelled in reporting on Michael Waltrip's being upside down in his wrecked car -- with Parsons screaming, ''Turn the thing over!'' -- as well as in talking to crew chiefs and listening to spotters as they planned their strategies. We can only hope that crew chiefs like Tony Eury Sr. never acquire numbers.
While the penchant for using numbers too frequently is pesky, a far more annoying problem happened twice during NBC's telecast: the insertion from New York headquarters of animated promotions for ''Shrek,'' which the network was showing in prime-time Sunday. When a giant animated ogre lumbers across the screen -- he only had a name, not a number -- you noticed that he was blocking the track. He is a lovely and sensitive monster, but he could not have been more out of place.
Armed with the ability to animate promotions for coming programming in what should be a discreet corner of the screen, networks have gone bonkers, distracting from what is currently being shown. Maybe NBC could not downsize Shrek and left him larger than toon life.
TV SPORTS  Correction:  February 26, 2004, Thursday  The TV Sports column on Friday, about the use of numbers to describe the racecars in the telecast of the Daytona 500, referred incorrectly to Greg Biffle, a Nascar driver, and his finish in the race on Feb. 15. Biffle is a second-year driver in the top Nascar series, not a rookie. He finished 12th in the Daytona 500, not 3rd.
