Rare Arbuses For the Met
The Metropolitan Museum of Art has been promised one of the largest gifts of 20th-century photographs in its history: 13 vintage prints by Diane Arbus, to be given by Danielle and David Ganek, collectors from Greenwich, Conn.
All the prints were made by Arbus and bought directly from her estate. The selection includes several of her signature images, among them ''A Young Waitress in a Nudist Camp, N.J.'' (1963); ''A Family on Their Lawn One Sunday in Westchester, N.Y.'' (1968); and ''A Jewish Giant at Home With His Parents in the Bronx, N.Y.'' (1970).
Prints made by Arbus are particularly rare; most of her images were printed after her death, in 1971. Jeff L. Rosenheim, associate curator in the Met's department of photography, discovered these when he was working on the catalog for an Arbus retrospective coming to the Met next year.
''This museum has long been interested in Arbus's work,'' Mr. Rosenheim said, explaining that it had fewer than a dozen examples, most printed posthumously. When he discovered the prints made by Arbus that were in her estate, he persuaded the Met and the Ganeks that here was an opportunity not to be missed. The photographs will be given to the museum over a period of time, Met officials said.
The gift includes two early images, from 1956, ''Lady on a Bus, N.Y.C.'' and ''Fire Eater at the Carnival, Palisades Park, N.J.''
Arbus, who committed suicide at 48, produced portraits of everyone from celebrities to middle-class families to carnival performers in a way that explored the relationship between appearance and identity. In 1972 she posthumously became the first American photographer represented at the Venice Biennale. The same year, the Museum of Modern Art organized a major retrospective of her work.
Now, 32 years later, she has once again been the subject of two exhibitions. One is at the Grey Art Gallery at New York University through March 24. The other, ''Diane Arbus Revelations,'' ended on Feb. 8 at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. It is on its way to the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, where it opens on Feb. 29, before heading to the Museum of Fine Arts Houston (June 27 to Aug. 29) and then the Met on Feb. 28, 2005. From here the show goes on to Essen, Germany; London; Barcelona; and Minneapolis.
From an Earl's Attic
For more than a year, experts at Sotheby's in London have been spending countless hours on the upper floors of Shirburn Castle in Oxfordshire plowing through the contents of three libraries that have no electricity or heat. While those conditions have made the task of seeing what is there particularly difficult, they were ideal for ensuring that the more than 30,000 volumes, ranging from scientific and medical literature to architecture and music, have stayed in pristine condition for centuries.
Now the libraries, all collected before 1750 by the earls of Macclesfield, will be auctioned in London at a series of sales beginning in June.
The present earl is moving out of the castle, which will remain in a family trust, and cannot take such a vast number of books with him, said Stephen Roe, director of Sotheby's book department in Europe.
In 1998 Sotheby's brokered a private sale to Cambridge University of an archive of papers from Sir Isaac Newton and his contemporaries in one of the castle's libraries.
The bulk of this collection was put together by the first two earls of Macclesfield (the first died in 1732). The first earl, who became Lord Chancellor of Britain, was particularly interested in books about science and learning, Mr. Roe said.
''The libraries are a time capsule of artistic endeavors of life before 1750,'' he said. There are also books on literature, music and architecture, many with lots of extraordinary engravings. ''Most of the bindings tend to be 17th or 18th century or even older,'' Mr. Roe said. ''Once we blew the dust off them, they looked as new as when they were first bound.''
Sotheby's has already made a number of interesting discoveries. Tucked into a bigger book was the Macclesfield Psalter, a 14th-century illuminated manuscript made up of 252 leaves and full of whimsical illustrations, including a rabbit's funeral. Almost every page has scenes populated with animals, birds, people or monsters, many depicting fables and daily life. It is estimated at $1.5 million to $2.2 million.
Another discovery for sale is ''On the Revolutions of the Celestial Spheres,'' a first edition of Copernicus's 1543 landmark work, widely considered the most significant scientific publication of the 16th century. This one -- annotated by John Greaves, the 17th-century Oxford mathematician, traveler and Arabist -- is expected to sell for $1.3 million to $1.5 million.
So far Sotheby's has scheduled four auctions: natural history books on March 16; science books in two parts, on June 10 and Nov. 4; and manuscripts, including the Macclesfield Psalter, on June 22. Sotheby's estimates the first four sales will being in more than $19 million.
Highlights from the libraries will be shown at Sotheby's in New York from April 6 to 13.
Moving, but Staying Put
One of Chelsea's earliest pioneers, Perry Rubenstein, is moving his gallery -- but less than half a block, from 521 West 23rd Street to 531. He is also opening a second space at 526 West 24th Street. With two galleries, Mr. Rubenstein says he is planning to expand the gallery's efforts to include the work of emerging artists. He has hired Sylvia Chivaratanond, who was assistant curator of the 2003 Venice Biennale, as the gallery's curatorial director to be in charge of organizing a special program of younger artists.
The new 23rd Street gallery, which opens in September, will feature two traditional exhibition spaces along with private viewing rooms and offices. The one on 24th Street, which opens in May, will be more intimate, either for showing one great work or for introducing a young artist.
Inside Art
