Albert Heppner, who finished a disappointing fifth in the United States 50-kilometer racewalk trials for the Athens Olympics on Sunday, was found dead early yesterday at the bottom of a gorge near San Diego, an apparent suicide.
Heppner, 29, an Army enlisted man from Columbia, Md., was found after the California Highway Patrol received reports of an unoccupied vehicle parked on Interstate 8 a few hundred feet from a bridge in a mountainous area of eastern San Diego County.
''It appears to be a suicide,'' said Brian Pennings, a spokesman for the highway patrol in El Cajon, Calif., basing the preliminary finding on ''the location of where the body was found.''
The gorge dropped down several hundred feet from the bridge, he said.
An autopsy is to be conducted.
''The only thing on my mind is the Olympics, the five rings,'' Heppner, an Army Specialist and a member of its World Class Athletic Program, told reporters on Friday before competing in the trials at Chula Vista, Calif.
At the annual meeting of USA Track &amp; Field last December in Greensboro, N.C., he wore an Athens 2004 sweatshirt.
His Olympic hopes were dealt a setback by his fifth-place finish in the racewalk trials, a 31.1-mile event, but he still had a chance to make the Olympic team.
The winner of the trials, Curt Claussen, qualified for the United States team, but spots are still available for two other racewalkers, provided they can complete the event in under four hours, the Olympic standard.
At the postrace reception Sunday night, Heppner expressed optimism about beating the standard in the World Cup event to be held in Naumburg, Germany, on May 2.
Highway Patrol officers recovered Heppner's body at sun-up about 150 yards from the Pine Valley Bridge, under brush.
According to Pennings, an abandoned white Ford sport utility vehicle was found at 7:40 p.m. Wednesday, parked on the right shoulder of the interstate, and the vehicle matched the description of a car in a missing-persons report.
Heppner led Sunday's racewalk from the starting gun to the 35-kilometer point, before extreme fatigue, brought on by the bright, sunny conditions, slowed him to a hiking pace.
He struggled to cross the finish line in 4 hours 23 minutes 52 seconds. Claussen, who won in 3:58:24, was the only walker in the field of 13 to attain the Olympic qualifying time.
Heppner was a graduate of Howard High School School in Columbia, Md., and the University of Wisconsin-Parkside in Kenosha, one of the few American colleges that promote racewalking.
An aspiring journalist, he had written for many publications, most often on racewalking, an event he first tried in 1989, in a junior Olympic program.
Heppner worked part time as a dining hall cashier at the United States Olympic training center in Chula Vista and took graduate classes at San Diego State University, The Associated Press said.
He had walked the 50K event -- the longest footrace on the Olympic program -- in 3:58:45 in 1999, but was unable to finish the 2000 Olympic trial in Sacramento because of hypothermia brought on by rainy, cold conditions.
After last Sunday's race, as he received medical assistance, he said: ''I totally fatigued. I thought I could continue at that pace. I guess I couldn't.''
His father, Ben Heppner of Baltimore, was a spectator at his son's last race.
''When things happen in a 50K race, they happen fast,'' he said. ''Sometimes, when you see him hurting like this, you don't know what to wish for -- not finishing it and not hurting his health, or finishing it and being in this kind of pain afterward. But Al would never look at it that way. He'd never even think about dropping out.''
OLYMPICS
