THE HOLY GRAIL  Imagination and Belief  By Richard Barber  Illustrated. 464 pages. Harvard University Press. $27.95.
The Holy Grail has become a popular metaphor for elusive perfection, for the most exalted or unattainable object of one's desire.
Scientists talk of the possibility of finding a theory of everything -- that would unify general relativity and quantum mechanics -- as the holy grail of physics. Marketers talk of interactive, targeted commercials as the holy grail of advertising. And the digerati talk of the development of intelligent machines as one of technology's holy grails.
In his fascinating if long-winded new book, the British medieval scholar Richard Barber examines how the concept of the Holy Grail evolved: from a literary device to an explicitly Christian symbol to its present-day incarnation as an all-purpose object of a quest. He examines how generations of writers and scholars have reinvented the story of the grail, and what their disparate interpretations reveal about the religious and literary conventions of the day.
Some of Mr. Barber's digressions into matters like the history of the Eucharist and the development of the chivalric code are overly arcane. And the lay reader may well question some of his theories: his dismissal of Jessie Weston's influential argument that the Grail had roots in pagan fertility rites, for instance, sounds cursory and cavalier, as does his larger rejection of folkloric approaches to the origins of the Grail.
For the most part, however, this book avoids the pitfalls of pedantry and scholarly grandstanding. Indeed Mr. Barber, the author of ''The Penguin Guide to Medieval Europe'' and ''The Knight and Chivalry,'' demonstrates a gift for lucid, lively prose and an ability to make highly complex developments -- cutting across religion, literature and politics -- both immediate and accessible. He notes that Grail romances written at the end of the 12th century and the beginning of the 13th were ''for a new social class, the knights, warriors whose influence and wealth depend on the lands they hold in return for their military service,'' and that they articulated ''a new set of ideals to create a knightly culture.'' As for the church, it saw ''the opportunity to secure its influence over these powerful and potentially disruptive men'' and began ''to develop a religious version of these secular ideals.''
After Chrétien de Troyes wrote ''The Story of the Grail'' (left incomplete at his death in 1190), several other authors tried their hand at finishing his story or creating variations on it, and in the process, Mr. Barber writes, they ''virtually invented a new art form, the prose romance, which many centuries later became the modern novel.''
Chrétien's tale recounted the moral education of Perceval, a child of nature who witnesses the spectacle of the Grail, fails to ask a crucial question and learns that his lack of compassion has condemned the ailing Fisher King to continued suffering. It was essentially a bildungsroman about a knight's progress to maturity. In this story, Mr. Barber suggests, the Grail is primarily ''a narrative device'' used by the author ''to summon up the impact of something unbelievably rich and strange on a naïve young man.''
Subsequent variations on Chrétien's romance placed the story firmly within the Christian tradition, changing the focus from Perceval to the Grail itself, identifying it as ''part of the central drama of the Christian faith -- the Crucifixion of Jesus.'' Readers of these later Grail tales learn, Mr. Barber points out, that ''Joseph of Arimathea was the Grail's guardian, and that it was the dish from which Christ ate at the Last Supper.'' In Robert de Boron's version, the Grail is identified as ''the dish in which Joseph of Arimathea gathers the blood that flows from Christ's wounds after the body is taken down from the Cross.''
Mr. Barber does a dexterous job of conveying the mood and texture of these variations on the Grail story, while at the same time illuminating the religious and political dramas that informed their creation. He shows how Grail narratives went out of fashion with the coming of the Reformation in the 16th century, and how a 19th-century renewal of interest in the Grail and Arthurian legends was fed by the works of Tennyson, the pre-Raphaelites and Wagner.
Mr. Barber explicates debates over the actual nature of the Grail (was it a dish or a chalice, a jeweled object or a more mysterious apparition?) and its function (was it an agent of healing and a provider of food, a gateway to the spiritual world, or a generic symbol of fertility or of kingly power?).
Though the current best seller ''The Da Vinci Code'' didn't make it into these pages, Mr. Barber provides a sweeping if cursory index of allusions to the Grail, in works ranging from T. S. Eliot's ''Waste Land'' to Steven Spielberg's ''Indiana Jones and the Last Crusade'' to ''Monty Python and the Holy Grail.'' And he notes some of the more eccentric beliefs about the Grail: that it was once a jewel in Lucifer's crown; that it was a kind of flying saucer; that it was ''a kind of cross between an earthly paradise and limbo, in which knights remain alive until the Last Judgement, and indulge meanwhile in sensual pleasures.''
Although Mr. Barber's effort to provide a comprehensive history of the Grail results in a highly discursive narrative, the book still makes for engaging reading as both literary criticism and cultural history, thanks largely to the author's fluency and aplomb as a writer.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
