A federal grand jury in Manhattan is investigating the sale of tax shelters by KPMG, the big accounting firm, to corporations and wealthy individuals who used them to escape at least $1.4 billion in federal taxes.
The disclosure of the inquiry, made yesterday in a statement by KPMG, comes one month after KPMG shook up its tax practice and removed three senior executives in the wake of widening scrutiny by Congress, the Internal Revenue Service and lawsuits by clients whose shelters failed.
No subpoenas have been issued, indicating the inquiry is in the early stages. It is not clear whether the focus is solely on the tax professionals and bankers involved in the design, sale and execution of the tax strategies or if the inquiry will include customers who bought the shelters.
George Ledwith, a senior KPMG spokesman, said in the statement that ''it is our understanding that the investigation is related to tax strategies that are no longer offered by the firm.''
''As previously announced,'' he added, ''KPMG has taken strong actions as part of our ongoing consideration of the firm's tax practices and procedures, including leadership changes announced last month and numerous changes in our risk management and review processes.''
Bob Bennett, a partner at Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher &amp; Flom, who is representing KPMG in the inquiry, said that ''the company is fully cooperating with investigators.''
Marvin Smilon, a spokesman for David Kelley, the interim United States attorney in New York, declined to comment.
KPMG, the smallest of the Big Four accounting firms, was among the most aggressive sellers of strategies that it told customers could eliminate huge tax bills. As the I.R.S. learned of the shelters it demolished them, prompting lawsuits from clients who found themselves owing the taxes, penalties and interest, and out of the fees they paid to KPMG.
From 1997 through 2001, KPMG collected $124 million in fees for tax shelters, a report by minority staff of the Senate Permanent Investigations subcommittee estimated in November.
At a November hearing of that committee, one executive at the center of the tax shelter program, Jeffrey Eischeid, parried with Senator Carl Levin, the Michigan Democrat whose staff investigated KPMG.
Unable to extract from Mr. Eischeid a yes or no answer to whether he had written a memorandum that showed the tax shelters had no purpose but tax avoidance, which by law makes them invalid, Senator Levin rephrased his question several times. Then Mr. Eischeid sat silent for a moment before volunteering that he had not answered immediately because ''I don't know how to change my answer.''
Senator Levin suggested that Mr. Eischeid ''try an honest answer.''
Later Mr. Eischeid defended his conduct and expressed surprise that the senators had questioned his ethics.
Eugene D. O'Kelly, chairman of KPMG, put Mr. Eischeid on leave last month. Mr. O'Kelly also announced that the deputy chairman, Jeff Stein, would retire at the end of the month and that Richard Smith, vice chairman of the firm's tax services unit, was reassigned to unspecified new duties.
The Bush administration has vowed to vigorously pursue tax cheating, especially by corporations and wealthy individuals. It has proposed legislation aimed at promoters of unsound tax shelters, but even if the proposals were enacted selling abusive shelters would continue to be a profitable enterprise because the proposed penalty is relinquishment of only half of the fees charged.
