New Jersey lawmakers said yesterday that they would ask for more details about the $125 million cost of a plan to overhaul the state's beleaguered child welfare agency, but agreed that enough political will existed to find the money needed to repair the failed system.
A day after Gov. James E. McGreevey unveiled a set of sweeping changes to the State Division of Youth and Family Services, Mr. McGreevey's aides still did not provide details about how the governor would find the money to pay for the plan in the face of the state's multibillion-dollar budget deficit.
In announcing the plan, Mr. McGreevey said that based on current budget projections, the cost of the changes -- $125 million in the 2004 fiscal year and $180 million in 2005 -- could be paid out of the state's general fund. The agency's budget is currently more than $500 million.
Aides to the governor said that specific financing would be revealed when he presented the state's $24 billion budget plan on Tuesday.
''There will be some new revenue sources in the budget,'' said Kathleen Ellis, a spokeswoman for Mr. McGreevey. ''For the past two years the governor has made some really tough choices to balance some very difficult budgets. As a payoff for those difficult choices, we're finally able to make some investments, and one of those is the $125 million for DYFS.''
The leader of the Assembly's Appropriations Committee, Bonnie Watson Coleman, said that although her colleagues might want to know more about the plan, she believed that lawmakers would be more than willing to try to reach some common financial ground. ''We only have the outlines of the plan,'' said Ms. Watson Coleman, who is also a member of the Budget Committee and chairwoman of the state's Democratic Committee. ''The legislature is going to want to know more specifically. But this is a partnership to ensure that the children of New Jersey are protected, a partnership with the executive branch, not a we-versus-them situation.''
Even those who have frequently sparred with Mr. McGreevey, a Democrat, on spending issues expressed only muted cautions about the plan's costs.
''The protection of all children in New Jersey is among our highest priorities,'' said State Senator Leonard Lance, a Republican from Hunterdon County and the Senate's minority leader. ''And the fiscal analysis of the governor's proposal will be analyzed by the two budget committees. We will undertake that analysis. But certainly our highest priority is protecting the children.''
Child welfare experts said that by almost any measure, New Jersey has a long way to go before it has to worry that it is spending too much on children in the system. Richard Wexler, executive director of the National Coalition for Child Protection Reform, said that an examination of child welfare budgets has shown that New Jersey spends the lowest per child of any state in the Northeast.
Mr. Wexler said that New Jersey spends about $214 per child while the national average is $277. Elsewhere in the region, he said, New York State spends about $270 and Connecticut $652 -- second in the nation to Rhode Island, which spends $763.
He praised the plan as a significant first step in the state's effort to change the way it manages child welfare.
The plan, which calls for hiring about 1,000 child care workers, 436 supporting staff members and teams of investigators trained in forensics, draws on the methods used in states like Alabama and Illinois, which are considered leaders in the field of child welfare reform.
Mr. Wexler also cited the child welfare agencies in the Pittsburgh area and the New York City Administration for Children's Services as other improving systems.
Just as laudable as the proposals, he said, is that the plan was completed just four weeks after the state, anticipating that an earlier draft would not meet the muster of an oversight panel appointed to monitor the changes, turned the project over to the acting commissioner of human services, James M. Davy.
Shay Bilchik, president and chief executive of the Child Welfare League of America, said New Jersey was one of the first states to attempt to do better than the national caseload standard established by his organization. His organization recommends that workers handle no more than about 17 children at a time. The state's plan calls for a limit of about 15, to be achieved both through adding caseworkers and by cutting the volume of cases as improvements are made.
Mr. Bilchik, who said he has discussed child welfare reform issues with Mr. McGreevey, said he hoped that the state could sustain the political will -- and provide the funding -- to execute the plan.
''We've all seen those inaugural addresses, but then said 'Where's the beef?''' Mr. Bilchik said of promised reforms in other states and at other agencies. ''But he's shown,'' Mr. Bilchik said of the governor, ''he can put the flesh on the bone.''
Correction:  February 21, 2004, Saturday  An article yesterday about New Jersey's plan to overhaul its child welfare system misstated the amount of money that New York State's system spends per child and its comparison with the national average. It is $470 per child, not $270. That is above the national average, which is $277.
