''Against the Ropes,'' a corny new feminist-uplift boxing picture starring Meg Ryan and Omar Epps, was, according to the press notes, inspired by the true story of Jackie Kallen, one of the few women ever to succeed as a manager of professional fighters. What this inspiration means is that the movie, directed by Charles S. Dutton from a script by Cheryl Edwards, is not a biography of Ms. Kallen, but rather an entirely fictional piece about a female boxing manager (Ms. Ryan) who happens to have the same name.
The real Ms. Kallen, who is listed in the credits as an associate producer and appears on screen in a brief cameo playing a sports reporter, clearly did not mind, but I suspect that her own story is much more interesting, or at least not quite so cluttered with inspirational sports-movie clichés.
To play Ms. Kallen, Ms. Ryan cuts her natural charm with fast-talking abrasiveness, speaking in the harsh, flat accent of the urban Midwest. (The movie, filmed in Toronto, takes place in Cleveland; both the real Ms. Kallen and her movie alter ego come from Detroit.) Her short, tight skirts and lace-up tops, combined with her confrontational manner, will remind viewers, perhaps intentionally, of Julia Roberts in ''Erin Brockovich.'' Like the heroine of that movie, Jackie starts out as an office underling and, by dint of her natural moxie and her refusal to take no for an answer, quickly rises above her humble station.
Her boss, Irving Abel (Joe Cortese), who runs the Cleveland Coliseum, is a classic pig, demanding that Jackie bring him coffee, taking credit for her good ideas and blaming her for his blunders. Sam LaRocca (Tony Shalhoub), the dapper and vicious kingpin of the local fight scene, is even worse, taking a special pleasure in humiliating Jackie.
By the end, you will not be surprised to hear, comeuppances are handed out all around. But first, of course, Jackie must learn some valuable lessons about the price of success and struggle with the inner conflict between her generous, honorable impulses and her ravenous ambition.
The first boxer she tries to manage turns out to be a hopeless crackhead, but happily, the thug (Mr. Epps) who bursts into his apartment during Jackie's visit and beats the stuffing out of him turns out to be quite a prospect. Jackie makes bail for this rough diamond, whose name is Luther Shaw, and hooks him up with a crusty, semiretired trainer named Felix (Mr. Dutton). Before long Luther, a left-handed middleweight with a ferocious punch and a passing resemblance to Marvin Hagler, is angling for a shot at the title.
Jackie, meanwhile, is in danger of being seduced by her own celebrity, upstaging Luther at news conferences and betraying the local sports journalist (Tim Daly) who had been her friend and champion. The drama, like the fight sequences, is handled with a competence that is more flat-footed than inspiring.
Some of the performances show flashes of idiosyncrasy and flair that are nearly snuffed out by the pedestrian script. It is always a pleasure to see Kerry Washington (the star of ''Our Song'' and ''Lift,'' two wonderful and under-seen recent independent films), even in the underwritten role of Jackie's sidekick and Luther's love interest.
Mr. Shalhoub has a fine time playing the heavy, and Mr. Dutton grumbles his way through the picture with a twinkle of aggressive mischief, as if to say: ''Yeah, I'm a walking cliché. Want to make something of it?'' Ms. Ryan's performance is an admirable if not entirely persuasive attempt to play against type, a character in search of a better movie.
The film, which opens nationwide today, glances at some of the tensions and conflicts that hover over the world of boxing like a cloud of stale cigar smoke, but it can't find a way to deal with issues of racial exploitation, brutal hyper-masculinity, pervasive corruption and casual misogyny in the framework of its cheery, prepackaged inspiration.
''Against the Ropes'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned), for scenes of violence in and out of the ring, implied sexuality and drug use.
AGAINST THE ROPES
Directed by Charles S. Dutton; written by Cheryl Edwards; director of photography, Jack Green; edited by Eric L. Beason; music by Michael Kamen; production designer, Sandra Kybartas; produced by Robert W. Cort and David Madden; released by Paramount Pictures. Running time: 111 minutes. This film is rated PG-13.
WITH: Meg Ryan (Jackie Kallen), Omar Epps (Luther Shaw), Charles S. Dutton (Felix Reynolds), Tony Shalhoub (LaRocca), Tim Daly (Gavin), Kerry Washington (Renee) and Joe Cortese (Abel).
FILM REVIEW
