Maurice Clarett was far from the most imposing player meandering through the N.F.L. combine at the RCA Dome on Thursday. He was far from the strongest, the fastest or the most accomplished. He will not even work out in front of the N.F.L. coaches and general managers gathered here to evaluate the players eligible for the draft on April 24 and 25. Those interested will have to travel to Columbus, Ohio, for that.
But none of that mattered. Where Clarett will eventually be picked was beside the point. He was the center of attention, the former Ohio State running back who cracked open this process for young players the league had previously barred.
Clarett greeted this treatment with a shrug that has quickly become his signature. ''Right now, I'm just somebody else in the draft,'' he said, facing a packed room at his news conference. ''I don't look at myself as a groundbreaker. I'm just hoping some ball club gives me the same opportunity as somebody else.''
On the heels of his successful lawsuit -- an appeal is pending -- that led a judge to strike down the N.F.L.'s exclusion of any player until three years after his class's high school graduation, Clarett could not hope to be thought of as just another player.
Clarett's every move is already being dissected. Some team administrators wondered aloud why Clarett, who said he needed to lose seven pounds and was not ready to work out for them, did not stay in better shape during his suspension from Ohio State. Still, nearly every team signed up for a one-on-one interview with Clarett, whose first meeting was with the Dallas Cowboys on Thursday night.
Not that it is at all unusual for a player to refuse a workout here. Last year it seemed nearly every running back declined. Giants General Manager Ernie Accorsi joked that when one, Justin Fargas, finally did run the 40-yard dash for them, he received a standing ovation.
''The one thing about this venue is, it's the same for everybody,'' Accorsi said. ''It's very consistent. So it's frustrating. I just don't recall that many times that anybody ran here any different than what they do anywhere else. The speeds don't vary very much.''
Clarett did have medical examinations on his shoulder and knee Thursday, a day restricted to physicals and interviews. Workouts begin Friday and continue through Sunday.
Whether Clarett runs well enough to impress teams is a question that will not be answered, however, until April; he is generally projected as a third-round pick.
Should his victory be upheld on appeal -- Clarett has been allowed into the draft, so the outcome will not affect him -- the league may face a wave of young players following his lead. Few believe high school players will consider the draft in the same numbers they do in basketball, but the effects will still be felt.
''I think what you're going to see is a number of guys who either don't like school, don't feel that good about school, get into tough situations at school, those are going to be the guys that come out early,'' Colts Coach Tony Dungy said. ''You can look at a Randy Moss situation, where he signs at Notre Dame and doesn't go to Notre Dame, signs with Florida State and doesn't go to Florida State and ends up going a different route, either the junior college route or I-AA. And I think you're going to see a lot of cases like that in the future where they say, 'Why go through all that headache?' ''
Dungy said he would discourage most players from leaping to the N.F.L. early.
''I think we're encouraging people to take the easy route when the easy route is not always the best,'' he said.
Clarett said his troubles at Ohio State, where he was suspended for his entire sophomore season for National Collegiate Athletic Association rules violations and was investigated and cleared of academic improprieties, made this the right choice for him. But he would not speak for anyone else.
Clarett described his challenge of entering the league at age 20 as a huge one. He said that he knew he would be a marked player his first season, that league management and a lot of players do not want him to succeed.
''My first year, I feel personally there's going to be a lot of shots taken at me to see if I'm durable and mentally there,'' he said. ''But after the first year I will be accepted into the league.''
For now, Clarett will try to find acceptance in interviews with general managers and coaches who do not yet know what to think. He is the central figure at the combine and the central mystery of the draft, no matter where he ends up fitting into it.
PRO FOOTBALL
