DRIVE just one hour from Manhattan, the vacation brochures promise, and find yourself in one of North America's best terrains for freestyle snowboarding, an Olympic-size halfpipe that draws top-tier riders, and a full-service spa that rivals any found in Aspen. Yes, all the amenities of a top ski resort can be found in New Jersey. Or so the promoters of Mountain Creek insist.
The 47-mile journey to Mountain Creek is not especially encouraging. Route 23 cuts through a tableau of smoldering factories, bloated strip malls and bedroom communities tucked behind concrete noise barriers. And the brochures never talk about rush-hour delays, which can double the advertised driving time.
Nearly two hours into the drive, however, the view from Vernon, N.J., changes. The malls recede and four white-capped peaks emerge like rolling sand dunes.
Size is clearly not the mountain's greatest asset. With a vertical drop of only 1,040 feet, Mountain Creek could easily be remade into one enormous bunny slope, which might suit many weekend visitors just fine. But what nature has not bestowed on Mountain Creek, its deep-pocketed investors have compensated for. Like many vertically challenged ski areas nationwide, Mountain Creek has refashioned itself from a mediocre downhill mountain to a top-notch park for snowboarders and freeskiers.
Six years ago, the ski industry giant Intrawest bought the Vernon Valley/Great Gorge ski resort and gave it a zippier name, Mountain Creek. Along came seven higher-speed lifts, plenty of snowmaking and an elephantine Zaugg Pipe Monster for carving a competition-ready superpipe. Five terrain parks, which offer bannisterlike rails, tabletops and other surfaces to perform tricks on, cover one-fifth of the mountain.
The resort's reputation soon outgrew the mountain, helped in no small part by Danny Kass, a local legend and the 2002 Olympic silver medalist for halfpipe, who was reared on these very trails.
Last winter, the readers of Transworld Snowboarding magazine ranked Mountain Creek third best for ''rail and jib variety'' in North America.
But fame comes at a price and, in this case, the downside is the crowding. On a recent Saturday, after a foot of fresh snow fell on the region and the thermometer edged up, attendance hit a staggering 13,000. (When Mountain Creek first opened, 8,000 people was judged a busy day.)
The resulting lines can drive even the most Zen visitors toward madness. There are long lines to reach the parking lot, long lines to buy lift tickets at $52 a pop, long lines to pick up rental equipment (assuming that they do not run out, which can happen with snowboards), and long lines to use the restroom.
In Mountain Creek's defense, the resort lost its lodge to a fire several months before its grand opening five years ago, and quickly erected six temporary tents, constructed of white polyester and aluminum poles, to house its cafeteria, bars, kitchens, locker room, rental shop and restrooms.
The lift lines, thankfully, run smoothly and efficiently, even when they look like the checkout counters at Wal-Mart on Christmas Eve. That is in large measure because of the new lifts. The Cabriolet, for instance, is an open-air gondola that can whisk eight passengers at once to Vernon Peak in less than four minutes. (During the summer, the gondola converts into a transport rack for mountain bikers.)
Once on top, there is a choice of 45 trails that dip and weave across the mountainside.
West Coast riders may scoff at the notion of the more difficult black diamond trails being found in New Jersey, but a few trails, like Eagle Hunt and Zero G, offer thrills to titillate the most jaded snowboarder or skier. The terrain parks are clustered along the northern face of the mountain, where a crew of riders-cum-welders unleashes new and scarier rails every year.
Ten trails are designated green for easiest and are often the most crowded as well. A good option is to come on weekdays, when lift tickets are $39 and the crowds melt away. Or alternately, arrive at dusk for nighttime skiing, when 10,000 watts of floodlights sparkle like strands of yellow pearls.
Lifts stay open until 9:30 p.m., and on Thursdays, New Jersey Transit offers a new bus service between the Port Authority Bus Terminal in Manhattan and Mountain Creek, departing at 3 p.m. and returning at 11:42 p.m. The round-trip, which costs $16.90 and is scheduled to take an hour and 45 minutes each way, operates through the end of February.
But there are also plenty of reasons to spend the night. The Vernon Valley/Great Gorge area is a well-established vacation playground that has long drawn visitors for its golf, water park, hiking and camps. The Minerals Resort and Spa, down the road, opened last November at Crystal Springs, a master-planned community of vacation homes and five golf courses. The new Elements Spa offers a painless way to massage those aching muscles after slipping on an icy patch.
Back at Mountain Creek, a new gated neighborhood known as Black Creek Sanctuary has Adirondack-style town houses for rent from $229 to $449 a night, complete with full kitchens, gas fireplaces and the obligatory hot tub. More is to come, as Intrawest moves ahead on a 1,100-unit real estate development and a pedestrian village, including a new base lodge.
But the beauty of Mountain Creek is its proximity to New York. You can snowboard or ski for an entire day, and make it back in time for that dinner reservation. And if traffic is on your side, the New York skyline will re-emerge an hour after departure, beckoning like another mountain that needs to be conquered.
DAY TRIPS  Correction:  February 27, 2004, Friday  Because of an editing error, an article last Friday about snowboarding at Mountain Creek in northwestern New Jersey misstated the character of the area around Route 23, a highway nearby. It is not heavily industrial or commercial, and does not have concrete noise barriers. That description applied to highway sections in eastern New Jersey, which were part of the drive from Manhattan.
