A bad day is when (1) you get arrested (2) by the people who once worked for you and (3) they tell you exactly what they think of you.
Muhammad Zimam Abd al-Razzaq was having a really bad day. Mr. Zimam, a former interior minister under Saddam Hussein and an enemy of Iraq's Kurds, was No. 41 on the American occupation force's most-wanted list in Iraq.
He was in his house in the southern Baghdad neighborhood of Saidiya on Sunday, when a squad of Iraqi police officers showed up around lunchtime. No burly, locked-and-loaded American soldiers to hunt down the dangerous; no, this was a bunch of Iraqi cops barely old enough to shave, wearing baseball caps that read SWAT in homemade letters.
The indignities were just beginning for Mr. Zimam. Maybe not every crony of Mr. Hussein who has been captured has felt fate coming full circle, but for Mr. Zimam, what had gone around was clearly coming around.
Reporters were already waiting for him at the office of the new deputy interior minister, Ahmed Ibrahim. Mr. Ibrahim likes the news media. His walls are covered with photos of him shaking hands with every Bush administration official who has dropped in on Baghdad.
Mr. Ibrahim and Mr. Zimam sat together on a black couch. Speaking into Al Jazeera's camera, Mr. Ibrahim said he did not want Mr. Zimam to feel scared. This was, after all, the new Iraq.
''Despite the fact that he did so many bad things to the Iraqi police,'' Mr. Ibrahim said, ''we should respect him. He's our guest.''
Mr. Zimam did not appear to be convinced.
''Ahmed, I swear to God, I haven't seen Saddam since before the war,'' Mr. Zimam muttered. ''I don't own any farms, I swear to God,'' he added, perhaps trying to set himself apart from other top Baathist Party officials who grew rich under Mr. Hussein.
''You jailed one of these men,'' Mr. Ibrahim went on, indicating one of the police officers sitting on the carpet in front of them.
Lt. Munaaf Jabber had been recording the conversation between Mr. Ibrahim and Mr. Zimam.
''You sent me to jail,'' Lieutenant Jabber said. He took off his wristwatch and pointed to a place just above his wrist. ''These are the scars from the punishment.''
Mr. Zimam offered a fatherly smile. ''No, no,'' he said. ''I don't remember you.''
The door opened, and another police officer came in. He said he had spent 400,000 Iraqi dinars to repair police cars years before, but that Mr. Zimam failed to reimburse him.
''When am I going to get my 400,000 dinars back?'' the officer demanded, standing over Mr. Zimam.
''Ahmed,'' Mr. Zimam said, nudging Mr. Ibrahim, ''are you going to let these people talk to me this way?''
He was.
Lieutenant Jabber picked back up. ''You were responsible for the prisons behind the academy,'' he said. ''They punished me there. They kicked me for a crime I didn't commit.''
Mr. Zimam jutted his chin out. He looked imperiously bored.
''The first minute I was minister,'' he said, ''I got rid of those prisons.''
Others came into the room.
''I was punished for making phone calls,'' said Capt. Alaa Hamed. ''I was sent down to Amara for three months, to a prison where they lash you.''
Mr. Zimam retorted, ''If you have any proof that I did this, then I deserve the punishment.''
''The Kurds will know you better than us,'' Lieutenant Jabber said, ''because you were slaughtering their people.''
Mr. Zimam rolled his eyes and looked away.
''Have some tea,'' Mr. Ibrahim said. ''Have some coffee.''
Mr. Zimam complained, ''Now everyone will come in with their accusations.''
Two middle-aged American men who said they were with the occupation authorities hung back, their submachine guns resting against the black couch. They looked like houseguests during a family fight.
''They do things here that we wouldn't normally do,'' one of the men said, peeling open a stick of chewing gum.
After a while, no more people came in to denounce Mr. Zimam. The Americans had to talk to him. The Iraqi police officers loosened their grip on their old boss, but with a flourish. One officer stepped into the hallway outside Mr. Ibrahim's office and, with a smile on his face, threw fistfuls of candy to the other grinning police officers waiting there.
