PRECARIOUSLY straddling a ridgeline atop the nation's tallest sand dune, Rick Seth takes a moment to explain his addiction to dune buggies. ''I like to call it anger management,'' he says. ''It's like a roller coaster that never quits.'' With that, he guns his muscular Volkswagen-powered sand rail buggy, and we fall 600 feet down the gritty, black-diamond slope of Nevada's Sand Mountain at 70 miles per hour. Then we turn around, and do it again -- only faster.
Rising above the dry bed of prehistoric Lake Lahontan, Sand Mountain is just one of many extraordinary stops along Nevada's portion of Highway 50, a transcontinental road that, in the era of the interstate, stands largely forgotten. The 400-mile-long stretch from Carson City to the Great Basin National Park (one of America's least visited and most remote National Parks) has been nicknamed America's Loneliest Highway. But what it may lack in traffic it more than makes up for in uncluttered vistas and a sense of driving close to history and natural wonders like Sand Mountain, one of seven dunes in the country known for ''booming,'' resonating like a kettle drum or a pipe organ when it is hit by strong winds.
According to historians of the road, like Jamie Jenson, whose Web site, RoadtripUSA.com, features a trip along Highway 50, the designation dates back to a mid-1980's Life magazine article that warned of the road's lack of services and sites. Though locals were at first incensed by it, said June Shaputis, a historian with the White Pine Historical and Archaeology Society, in Ely, Nev., they soon adopted it as a marketing gimmick. These days, drivers can order a Loneliest Highway Survival Kit from the Nevada Tourism Commission, including a kind of scavenger hunt map that merchants and museums will stamp for visitors as they cross the state. According to estimates for 2002 by the Nevada Department of Transportation, Highway 50's loneliness is actually a function of where you are on it. In downtown Carson City, an estimated 24,000 cars pass daily. Farther east, in Eureka, the number drops to 2,150 per day, while on the long stretches in between, as few as 580 cars might drive by in a given 24 hours.
I didn't bother to pick up a Loneliest Highway map when I left Carson City, rolling through the historic downtown and then through a vast, barren desert valley pocked with trailer homes. Not far out of town I took the turnoff for Virginia City, once a booming mining town of more than 30,000 (the Comstock Lode was discovered in the hills there in 1859, eventually giving up over a billion dollars in bullion), now home to fewer than 1,000 people. The town got a boost in the 1960's when ''Bonanza,'' though filmed in California, was set nearby, but these days the main attraction is a shop- and saloon-lined Main Street, and a quirky diversion called The Way It Was Museum. There, visitors can follow the town's rise -- Samuel L. Clemens came here in about 1861 to work for The Territorial Enterprise newspaper; Piper's Opera House (a must-see) opened in 1863 -- and its decline in the early 1900's after the gold ran out.
After a night at the Gold Hill Hotel, Nevada's oldest, I headed east again. Outside of town, Highway 50 passes a disintegrating drive-in movie screen and lonely dirt roads with names like Break-a-Heart Lane, and then climbs through the 6,000-foot Dead Camel Range before descending onto the vast basin of Lake Lahontan and the town of Fallon. Home to the Navy pilot-training program known as Top Gun, and a quaint main street, Fallon stands as an oddly bustling desert outpost. Just east of town, the Grimes Point Historic Site/Hidden Cave Archaeological Site rises along an ancient, wave-splashed shore. There, Indians once hunted for antelope and left their mark on the black basalt rocks in a series of petroglyphs, some more than 7,000 years old.
A FTER hiking a few miles through the area to admire the etchings of turtles, birds and strange symbols -- and jumping at the odd sonic boom -- I watched as a monstrously wheeled black pickup truck roared up to the site. Its driver, Steve Price, 26, was soon joined by several friends. Why had Mr. Price jacked his $30,000 truck up so high? ''I just got bored,'' he said. ''The longer you live around here, the bigger your trucks get. We like to run over rocks with them -- though preferably not ones with pictures on them.''
Heading toward Sand Mountain, Highway 50 runs along the route once traveled by the Pony Express, and in the shadow of the huge dune lies the remains of the Sand Springs Pony Express Station, now an interpretive site run by the Bureau of Land Management. Despite its endless lore, the Pony Express ran only from March 1860 until November 1861, when it was driven out of business by the transcontinental telegraph. Though this quiet way station was later used as a stagecoach and telegraph outpost, it lay forgotten until being rediscovered and excavated in 1975.
Modern communications are carried by the rocks along the alkali flats east of Sand Mountain, where stones have been arranged into messages like ''Mike and Shelley,'' ''I love Sara'' and ''Jack and Judy,'' along with a hundred more. Through the Desatoya and Shoshone Mountains, I drove through endless vistas until the road dropped into the vast, salty nothingness of the Reese River Valley. In the distance, the snow-covered peaks of the Toiyabe Range rise to more than 11,000 feet.
Climbing into the range, I reached another old outpost called Austin. Once a bustling Pony Express stop, mining center and home to thousands, Austin is now quaint and tiny, populated by about 250 people. I met a few of them at the International Cafe &amp; Bar, in the second-oldest hotel building in Nevada. I asked Jamie Bullington, 24, a high school teacher who was sitting at the massive hardwood bar, what he thought of Highway 50's ''loneliest'' tag. ''You know,'' he said, ''sometimes you can stand on the 50 in the middle of town and not see another car for a half-hour.''
That night, I pointed my four-wheel-drive Volkswagen camper up a snowy side road and found a deserted spot to sleep beneath Orion's belt. The cold sky was astonishingly clear. Through my windshield, in the weak light from town, I just made out ski tracks running through the virgin powder on the expansive, treeless hill across the highway.
From Austin east, the remarkably maintained highway was clear, despite a landscape blanketed with snow, a reminder of human activity I was all the happier for when -- about 45 minutes outside of Austin -- I turned off the main road to visit the Hickison Petroglyph Recreation Area. As the snow-covered mile-long road to the site steepened I worried that the van might not make the climb, and stopped to put chains on my rear tires. Rolling to the parking area, I got out to find that the van had flung off both improperly fastened snow chains, one of which had wound itself tightly around my rear axle, threatening to snap the brake line. Heart pounding, and utterly alone, I said a prayer to the Great Spirit and climbed under the van. Somehow, I managed to uncoil the chain. Then I hiked along the petroglyph trail, through a silent forest dense with pinyon pines, and along a valley pass that is thought to have been a migratory path for antelope -- a perfect spot to set up an ambush for game. That may be what some of the rock drawings represent -- or maybe not. No one knows.
Over the next 80 miles of snowy vastness, I encountered five other cars before rolling into another beautiful old mining town, Eureka, at lunchtime. I stopped at the Owl Club Steakhouse, where a friendly cook named Lola Alanis fixed me a chicken sandwich topped with a mild pepper, a local specialty. On the wall hung a huge photograph of a hapless antelope that had tumbled into a ravine and gotten stuck, suspended by its antlers in the narrow gap. Ms. Alanis said she thought hunters had chased him there. ''The antelope come down in the winter, you know,'' she said. ''They're fearless. The big ones, too, with the huge antlers. They walk through the middle of town, and look like princes. You don't see that in the big city.''
In 1878, Eureka had a population of 6,500. Today, about 400 people call the town home. In the offices of the meticulously restored old Eureka Opera House, I found the caretaker, Patty Peek. After 16 years in town, she was preparing to move to Reno with her husband, Bob, who had left ahead of her.
''We've been in mining since we've been married,'' she said. ''Every mine we've been to has shut down. There's no future in it. I'm ready to go somewhere where there's a 24-hour store.''
I asked whether she and her husband would have stayed if the mining work had been steady. She said probably.
''The thing my husband hates about leaving,'' she said, ''is that you can go where you want out here. We get people who come in and ask, 'Where can you go and ride motorcycles?' I say anywhere. They say 'No, really.' I say anywhere -- anywhere you want to go. You see a gate, and a sign says 'Close the gate,' well, you close the gate behind you.''
DRIVING
