GOLF in the United States has a well-deserved reputation as a pastime for people who would rather sleep in or retreat to the comfy confines of the clubhouse than face even the slightest bit of physical discomfort.
Golf resorts lure guests with an absurd array of luxurious options, including caddies who help with lunch reservations as well as divot repair, and so-called golf concierges who schedule spa services in addition to tee times. Courses are primped and manicured like show dogs, providing perfect lies in the fairways and greens as smooth as the surface of a billiard table.
And, when the cold weather comes, golfers flock to Florida, Arizona or other warm states to indulge their passion.
All of that is very nice, and no golfer of right mind would reject the opportunity to play under such ideal conditions. But in the Northeast during winter, a small number of die-hards bundle up and head out to play on frozen courses.
''All the crazy people -- that's who we are,'' said Kurt Wiese, 55, of Jackson, N.J. He said that on his local course, the Pine Barrens Golf Club, play continues throughout the season, as long as the course is largely free of snow.
''I've played in zero degrees,'' said Mr. Wiese, a computer systems analyst with the New Jersey court system. ''Once, I hit the ball, and it split in half. The two halves went about 40 yards, frozen solid.''
Interviews with golf pros and players from Massachusetts to Maryland, primarily at courses along the seashore, where snow is less likely to blanket the ground, suggest that Mr. Wiese is part of a growing trend.
''It goes back five, six years,'' said Fordie Pitts, 73, founder of the winter pro-am league at the Hyannis Golf Club in Massachusetts. ''Weather permitting, we have a tournament every Wednesday. If the temperature gets up around 40, we'll have anywhere from 80 to 120 players.''
Even when the wind chill is near zero, about 20 players will show up, Mr. Pitts said.
Not only do winter golfers play under extreme conditions, they'll go to extreme lengths to play.
''We get guys driving from Baltimore, Philadelphia, even Connecticut -- some from as far as four hours away,'' said Bret Marshall, the head professional at Bear Trap Dunes in Ocean View, Del., part of the golf-rich resort area of Ocean City, Md. ''They'll come here because they're snowed in. They may not have the time or the money to go on a trip to Florida or South Carolina, but a four-hour drive is reasonable for them.
''Sometimes, they'll do an overnight and play for two days. Or they'll drive down in the morning, play 27 or 36 holes, and head home that same night.''
In February 2002, Mr. Marshall said, when temperatures sometimes climbed into the low 60's, Bear Trap recorded 1,200 rounds. In February 2003, when the weather was much colder and snowy, only 200 rounds were played.
Seventy miles up the coast, at the Seaview Marriott Resort &amp; Spa in Galloway Township, N.J., Rob Bartley, the director of golf operations, reported similar results. ''We had our best ever February in 2002 -- 1,302 rounds,'' he said.
Mr. Bartley said that the unusually cold weather and heavy precipitation this winter had prevented all but a few rounds from being played on Seaview's two 18-hole layouts, the Bay and Pines courses. ''We haven't had a round of golf in 21 days,'' a glum Mr. Bartley said earlier this month.
But Mr. Bartley expected the winter golfers to return. ''The hook at this time of the year is that you can play pretty much by yourself and get around in three hours,'' he said, noting that playing 18 holes in the summer can take as long as five hours.
One other attraction for winter golfers is the lower cost. ''Our winter rates are $49 during the week, $59 on weekends,'' Mr. Bartley said. ''During the summer you'll pay as much as $129 to play here.''
But the desire to be thrifty is hardly the only reason some golfers endeavor to play in frigid weather. ''It is a different game in the winter,'' Mr. Wiese said. ''The ball travels farther on frozen ground. You learn to play different shots. You adjust your expectations to the conditions. Some people may laugh at it or scorn it, but it's still golf.''
In fact, historians of the game trace its roots to winter play. In their new book, ''Golf Through the Ages: 600 Years of Golfing Art'' (Golf Links Press, 2004), Michael Flannery and Richard Leech cite the game of pallemail -- a ''multiclub driving and putting game'' played in the 15th century in the Loire region of France -- as a direct predecessor to modern golf.
''The game was played on vast fields,'' Mr. Flannery said in an interview from his antiques shop in Neu-Isenberg, Germany. ''They played after the crops were cleared down to a low stubble and the fields had frozen.''
A similar game called colf, which introduced a hole as the target, was played on frozen landscapes in Flanders; the book contains reproductions of paintings depicting the game as early as 1480. The Dutch took winter play a step further with ijskolf, which translates as ''ice golf.'' The 1625 painting, ''A Game of Ijskolf,'' by Hendrick Avercamp, shows men wearing heavy coats and spiked shoes (for better footing on the ice), knocking a ball around in a frozen port.
The Dutch imported ijskolf to North America in the mid-17th century, playing on frozen lakes of settlements such as Beverwyck, the area the British would later call Albany.
Winter golfers today may not know all the history behind their pursuit, but they still speak of it in romantic terms. They revel in the hardiness required to brave freezing temperatures for hours on end, and they marvel at the beauty of playing through the winter landscape.
''If the weather is tolerable, and I mean barely tolerable, we'll be out there,'' said Freddy Sammarone, 35, a restaurant owner from the Jackson Heights section of Queens. Mr. Sammarone recalls playing with friends on a clear, brisk Monday in January, when the weather suddenly turned.
''We ran into a squall,'' he said. ''It came out of the north and blanketed the course. It was just wonderful watching the ball run along the fairway, making a line in the snow.''
IF YOU PLAY  Sometimes It's Even Possible to Walk on the Water Hazards
FROM Massachusetts to Maryland, many courses are open for play regardless of the temperature. Icy or snowy conditions, however, can cause a course to close, so be sure to call ahead.
CONNECTICUT
Shennecossett Municipal Golf Course, Groton; 860-445-0262.
Situated on a spit of land at the confluence of the Thames River and the Long Island Sound, this historic course is owned by the town of Groton. It was built in 1898 and features small greens and numerous bunkers. Greens fee: $25; no carts.
DELAWARE
Bear Trap Dunes, Ocean View; 302-537-5600; www.beartrapdunes.com.
This 27-hole facility, opened in 1999, is part of a residential development. Situated on sandy, rolling terrain, the links-style design features few trees. $40 weekdays; $45 weekends.
MASSACHUSETTS
Hyannis Golf Club, Hyannis; 508-362-2606; www.hyannisgc.com.
The site of the annual Cape Cod Open, this par-71 course built in the mid-1970's is among the best on the cape. It is short, playing just 6,100 yards from the white tees, but the sloping terrain makes for uneven lies and challenging shots. $35 weekdays; $45 weekends.
NEW JERSEY
Twisted Dune, Egg Harbor Township; 609-653-8019; www.twisteddune.com.
Built on the site of a former horse farm, this windswept, nearly treeless course brings to mind a Scottish or Irish links course. $49 weekdays; $59 weekends.
Pine Barrens Golf Club, Jackson; 877-746-3227; www.pinebarrensgolf.com.
This long (7,112 yards from the back tees) and challenging course is routed through a sandy, ruggedly beautiful landscape of scrubby pines. $57.
Seaview Marriott Resort &amp; Spa, Galloway Township; 609-652-1800; www.seaviewmarriott.com.
Seaview's two courses have distinctly different personalities. The Bay Course has narrow fairways and small, sloping greens, placing a premium on accuracy; the Pines Course is longer, with wide fairways and big greens. $49 weekdays; $59 weekends.
MARYLAND
The Links at Lighthouse Sound, Bishopville; 888-554-4557; www.lighthousesound.com.
Just three years old, this highly rated, meticulously maintained course on 1,000 acres features nine holes along the Assawoman Bay; the rest of the course plays inland through marshland and forest. $65 weekdays; $75 weekends.
NEW YORK
Rock Hill Golf &amp; Country Club, Manorville; 631-878-2250; www.rockhillgolf.com.
Built in 1963, this course on hilly terrain near the Hamptons features two distinctly different nines: The front winds through the woods, the back is wide open. $45 weekdays, includes cart, range balls and hot lunch. $44 weekends (walking) and $60 with cart, lunch and range balls not included.
Long Island National Golf Club, Riverhead; 631-727-4653;
Opened in 1999 on land that was once potato fields, this links-style course features wide sloping fairways and fast greens. $65.
RHODE ISLAND
Winnapaug Country Club, Westerly; 401-596-1237; www.rigolf.com/winnapaug.
This quirky Donald Ross design, built in 1922, features narrow fairways and tricky, sloping greens typical of Ross's work. The course offers views of Block Island Sound, which is about a half mile away, and several holes play along the tidal Winnapaug Pond. $25 (walking), $35 (with cart).
RITUALS
