PLACED on paid administrative leave late Wednesday night by the University of Colorado, the besieged football coach Gary Barnett said he disagreed with the decision by the university's president, Elizabeth Hoffman, but would abide by it because he is a ''team player.''
He sure is. Barnett has no doubt been part of a cohesive and unyielding squad that has promoted and protected big-time college football over other campus interests.
The unrelenting succession of college sports scandals pains the soul and numbs the senses, but let's make a distinction between Colorado's and the recent basketball shame at St. John's. Something clearly went wrong on Mike Jarvis's watch in Jamaica, Queens. Out in Boulder, these are the values that preceded Barnett by at least a decade. And they will outlast him unless something drastic is done, like shutting down the program to investigate the root causes of the dreadful events that have been alleged.
''Nothing is going to change at these schools until people start saying, 'We will shut you down,' '' said Kathy Redmond, founder of the National Coalition Against Violent Athletes. ''It would be a beautiful message.''
Gary Barnett will wear a tutu to his next news conference before that happens in Boulder. As in so many university towns, college football and basketball are stitched into the community fabric, to where even a longtime critic of Colorado's football program, who is one of Boulder's leading women's advocates, was startled yesterday by the suggestion of a shutdown.
''Oh, no, I do not think that is a good idea,'' said Regina Cowles, the Boulder chapter president for the National Organization for Women.
Cowles said she had lived in Boulder for many years, had rooted for the Buffs and worked out with several mothers of football players. ''These are some great kids,'' she said. ''I think the program should just shoot for the highest level it can achieve.''
Even as Cowles seemed to be calling for restraint along with Barnett's ouster, a local television station was broadcasting news of the latest accusation against a Colorado player, bringing to six the number of women in recent weeks to say they were sexually assaulted.
Another day. Another allegation. Another reminder of how the objectification of women, the sex parties for high school recruits, cannot be explained away as random acts of poor judgment or even the organized work of a few repellent jocks.
''How could they not know this was happening right under their noses?'' Cowles said, referring to Barnett, the athletic department and the university administration.
Whatever they didn't know they apparently didn't want to know, and that goes for whoever was in charge. Under the former coach Bill McCartney, at least two dozen Colorado football players were arrested between 1986 and 1989. Under his successor, Rick Neuheisel, there were more than 50 rules violations in four years. Who has ever paid a price at Colorado, taken a fall? Who besides the occasional tenured professor has stood up and said that football and its almighty revenue streams were not worth the havoc and the harm?
''It's been frustrating that people haven't held Hoffman's feet to the fire,'' said Redmond, who lives in Denver and has long been a critic of the Colorado program, among others. ''She said the football situation was troubling in 2001, but she never planted her feet in the athletic department.''
It takes a village to raise a big-time college football program and conceal its blemishes. In Boulder, the police made no secret about officers assigned to work with the football program, saying the so-called athlete liaison unit was formed in the 1980's to help the players with social awareness and responsibility. Some watched the cozy relationships with coaches develop and began to suspect that the unit's purpose had become something entirely different.
Mary Keenan, the Boulder County district attorney, recently told The Boulder Daily Camera that she found the arrangement offensive. ''It gave them a chance to cover it up,'' she said, suggesting an unholy alliance between the police and the athletic department that sent a powerful message to female victims.
Redmond said she had seen this all before, in University Town, U.S.A., including the case of Alison Jennings, a former Oklahoma State student who said she was raped by four football players at a party in 1999 and was discouraged by the police from pressing charges. Bob Simmons, the coach at the time, responded by asking what Jennings was doing at the party, though not so gently, according to Redmond.
''And guess what? Before Simmons was at Oklahoma State, he was with McCartney at Colorado,'' Redmond said. ''It's all from the same breed, the same playbook.''
On that note, this week's Sports Illustrated reports that Barnett's player handbook, which includes a section on ''Date Rape/Social Policy,'' borrows liberally from the former Nebraska coach Tom Osborne. For Redmond, this completes a circle of culpability, as Osborne was the coach who stonewalled when a former Cornhusker, Christian Peter, was accused by Redmond and other women of sexual harassment or assault in the early 1990's.
It took years for such accusations to surface at Colorado, but Barnett wasn't put on leave until his comments about the former kicker Katie Hnida. She said a teammate raped her in 2000. He said, what the hay, she was a girl and a terrible kicker.
Barnett is either a blithering idiot or oblivious to the world outside the lines. It is much easier to accept or celebrate the fanatic pro coach who doesn't know Jerry Seinfeld from Howard Dean or who make ignorant, sexist remarks. The pros are not responsible for turning their macho princes loose on vulnerable young women in frat houses and dorms.
But let's not forget that Gary Barnett didn't set himself loose in Colorado. He was hired and rehired, and people looked the other way, as they did for Neuheisel and Promise Keeper McCartney. In Boulder, there is no I in team. Gary Barnett didn't raise this rotten program by himself.
Sports of The Times
