Legislators on a committee considering whether to pursue an impeachment of Gov. John G. Rowland discussed strategy for the first time on Thursday, naming subjects for investigation and making plans to start issuing subpoenas next week.
The committee, which has met several times since it was formed last month, will begin by examining renovations undertaken by state employees at the governor's cottage, members said. It was after Mr. Rowland admitted lying about those renovations and about gifts from state employees and contractors that the impeachment inquiry began.
The committee will also look at several state contracts and business deals that have already drawn the attention of federal investigators. All of the subjects the lawmakers mentioned overlap with those identified in a wide-ranging subpoena issued to the governor's office on Monday by federal prosecutors. But the legislators do not expect any conflicts with the federal investigation, said John Wayne Fox, the Democratic co-chairman of the 10-member impeachment panel. The committee may expand the scope of its inquiry as it proceeds, Mr. Fox said.
During its meeting, the committee approved the hiring of an investigator, Bart M. Schwartz, a former federal prosecutor in Manhattan. The legislators also hired a clerk, David Hemond, and adopted procedural rules based on those used in the impeachment of a Hartford probate judge, James H. Kinsella, in the 1980's.
The committee held most of its five-hour meeting on Thursday behind closed doors, prompting several newspapers to file complaints with the state's Freedom of Information Commission. After the meeting, Mr. Fox defended that decision to reporters, saying members were speaking with the committee's counsel, Steven F. Reich, and were therefore covered by attorney-client privilege. It is not clear that the committee is covered by the state's freedom-of-information laws, Mr. Fox said, though it will try to comply with their spirit.
''I would expect that in the future, a significant block of what we do will be done in an open public forum,'' including much of the discussion of standards for impeachment, a critical area, Mr. Fox said.
Other discussions will be closed to the public, Mr. Fox said, including talks about strategy and tactics for questioning witnesses.
Federal investigators asked this week for records of all state transactions since 1992 with two law firms whose lawyers have represented Mr. Rowland or have had business dealings with him, records show.
James K. Robertson, a lawyer for one of the firms, Carmody &amp; Torrance, won initial confirmation as a Superior Court judge by a legislative committee Wednesday. He testified at a hearing last Friday that he had provided hundreds of hours of free legal services to the governor, who he said still owed Carmody &amp; Torrance $100,000. The firm has received more than $5 million in state work since Mr. Rowland took office in 1995, though it received almost none before that time.
Michael H. Cicchetti, a lawyer for the second firm, Cicchetti &amp; Tansley, handled Mr. Rowland's divorce from his first wife and joined the governor in a real estate partnership in 1996 that earned Mr. Rowland $60,000 on an investment of $7,200. Two of Mr. Cicchetti's children have received state jobs during Mr. Rowland's tenure.
