''Made in Mexico,'' an exhibition at the Institute of Contemporary Art here, asks, ''What is Mexican about contemporary Mexican art?'' It gives no clear answer, and its contents, though entertainingly varied, are mostly underwhelming. But it does offer something valuable to think about and debate.
The exhibition, organized by Gilbert Vicario, a curator at the institute, mostly defies the usual stereotypes of Mexican art: gaudy church decoration, bleeding hearts and other images of mystic mortification, Day of the Dead skulls and bones, the socialist-visionary murals of Rivera and Orozco, the magic Surrealism of Frida Kahlo.
Countering popular fantasies of Mexico as a land of passionate extremists, the show features 20 artists who are mostly level-headed, academic conceptualists.
The exhibition sets out further to frame contemporary Mexican art not in regional, national or otherwise parochial terms, but as part of an international scene that extends equally to New York City, London, Berlin and other global metropolitan centers. In this it succeeds all too well; while many of the works in the show represent Mexican topics, most look as if they could have been produced in any number of other countries.
Starburst sculptures made of fluorescent light tubes by Thomas Glassford; a fiberglass mastodon studded with Hostess cupcakes by Eduardo Abaroa; a Constructivist-style structure of hinged transparent plastic sheets by Damián Ortega; Buckminster Fuller-type architectural models by Pedro Reyes; paintings by commercial sign painters commissioned by Francis Alys; and Melanie Smith's installation of candy-colored abstract paintings with videos of an upholstery shop transaction and technicians installing a string sculpture in a gallery: the works of these artists relate tangentially at best to anything specific to Mexico.
Some works do refer to particularly Mexican concerns, but only on the level of subject matter. Claudia Fernández's colorful, gridded montages of photographs documenting protective gates, fences, walls and garage doors in Mexico City suburbs address local socioeconomic and political matters, but the architectural catalog approach is owed to artists like the Germans Bernd and Hilla Becher and the American Ed Ruscha.
Sebastián Romo's architectural model, in which Mexico City buildings are represented by stacks of white block letters spelling words and phrases that describe the city, resembles a Sol LeWitt sculpture and could easily be translated to represent any other city in the world.
To substantiate further the internationalism of the contemporary Mexican art world, Mr. Vicario included eight artists who are not Mexican but produced works while visiting the country.
The celebrated German photographer Andreas Gursky, for example, produced a huge picture of a dump, which may or may not be a comment on Mexico's problems with waste and pollution.
A New Yorker, Andrea Fraser, presents a confusing double-screen video projection satirizing myths of revolutionary art and politics in Mexico, in which she stars as a partisan on a galloping horse waving a red flag. The London-based sculptor Mona Hatoum's colorful representation of a wooden bird cage based on her videotape of a man who has a canary doing tricks for money comments on oppressive labor conditions.
And Sharon Lockhart's large photographs of a mason working on floor tiles behind glass partitions in a Mexican museum comments, according to Mr. Vicario's catalog essay, on ''cultural patrimony, colonialism and ethnicity.''
However you may feel about the works of these and other non-Mexicans (the others are Anton Vidokle, Terence Gower and Erik Göngrich), the effect of including them is to undermine further any idea that there might be something distinctively Mexican about Mexican contemporary art.
The worst piece in the show, by the way, is by an artist who admits in his catalog interview that he has never been to Mexico: Yasumasa Morimura of Japan, whose overproduced photographic portrait of himself in Frida Kahlo drag wearing a Louis Vuitton shawl makes a humorless and obvious joke out of a Mexican icon.
There are at least four artists, however, all Mexicans, whose works could conceivably serve a case for Mexicanness in contemporary Mexican art.
One is the amazingly resourceful sculptor Gabriel Orozco. His human skull covered with a black-and-white checkerboard pattern hovers with sly metaphorical potency between the primordialism of the cult of death and the dandyism of Duchampian gamesmanship.
The three others are provocateurs who push boundaries of taste, morality and legality. Daniela Rossell makes color photographs of her young, fabulously wealthy female friends posing like fashion models in their grotesquely overdecorated homes.
Santiago Sierra is a conceptualist known for hiring ordinary people to act in his performance works, as when he paid people to push concrete blocks around a gallery or to masturbate.
The show presents his video of elderly, indigenous, non-Spanish-speaking women reciting in Spanish, ''I am being paid to say something the meaning of which I do not know.''
And Teresa Margolles, who has produced works involving parts of actual human corpses, here presents four machines that periodically spew into the gallery soap bubbles made from sterilized water that was used to wash bodies in Mexico City morgues.
Whether or not these controversialists are more in touch than others with the Mexican experience, whatever that may be, is hard for an outsider to say. Still, it seems reasonable to think that out of a country of such extremes -- of beauty and squalor, wealth and poverty, crime and punishment, traditionalism and revolution -- would come more unpredictably adventurous art than the anodyne internationalist conceptualism that makes up the bulk of ''Made in Mexico.''
''Made in Mexico'' remains at the Institute of Contemporary Art, 955 Boylston Street, Boston, (617) 266-5152, through May 9.
ART REVIEW
