Senator John Edwards, seeking to distinguish himself in Democratic presidential primaries from Senator John Kerry, has seized on the matter of international trade, a major issue in several states that have lost jobs to competition from abroad.
But their differences are fairly small and stem mainly from their voting histories rather than where they are now or how they say they would handle trade agreements in the future.
Mr. Edwards says that had he been in the Senate in 1993, when it passed the North American Free Trade Agreement and President Bill Clinton signed it, he would have voted against it. He says he campaigned against it in his 1998 Senate race, but newspaper clippings show it was not a major issue, in part because his opponent, Senator Lauch Faircloth, a Republican, was against it, too.
But once in the Senate, Mr. Edwards voted for a trade accord with China in 2000, and he initially supported a bill to give President Bush sweeping new authority to negotiate trade deals.
Mr. Kerry has been a classic free trader in the Clinton mold, supporting free markets as the key to economic growth. He backed President Bush's push for fast-track negotiating authority. But now on the campaign trail, he stands side by side with labor leaders who oppose Nafta and pledges that as president, he would review the pacts he supported.
The transformation of these two candidates on trade, which is now the hottest issue in the Democratic contest, highlights the peculiar dynamics of the race as it narrows to a two-man field. While Mr. Edwards has been seeking to highlight their differences on the issue, Mr. Kerry told reporters on Wednesday, ''We have the same policy on trade.''
Even though Mr. Kerry, 60, comes out of a liberal Northeastern tradition and Mr. Edwards, 50, comes out of a conservative Southern tradition, they are both trying to appeal to voters anxious over the shift overseas of manufacturing and white-collar jobs and to not antagonize organized labor, which has opposed the accords.
''Sure they are similar,'' said Senator Byron L. Dorgan, Democrat of North Dakota. ''Both of them are in the mainstream of the Democratic caucus in the United States Senate with respect to issues of health care, jobs and the economy.''
Making distinctions may also help give Mr. Edwards, who has lost all but one state in the primaries this year, a rationale to continue his candidacy. For Mr. Kerry, who has won all but two states, minimizing their differences helps minimize the rationale for Mr. Edwards.
''Trying to differentiate between these guys on policy grounds is virtually impossible,'' said Thomas Mann, an expert on Congress at the Brookings Institution.
''Edwards really has to reach to try to make this a fight about trade,'' Mr. Mann said, but he saw several reasons for him to try to do so.
He said there was political room because Representative Richard A. Gephardt, the candidate most prominently against trade agreements, had dropped out. He said the issue resonated in industrial states that have lost manufacturing jobs. And, he said, it works as an emotional issue.
''Even though Americans aren't overwhelmingly protectionist -- we don't elect people who are explicitly protectionist -- it is an issue that can catch hold under tough economic times,'' Mr. Mann said. ''And the delayed response in the job market to the economic recovery makes it all the more useful.''
Mr. Edwards says the distinctions he is drawing are real.
He did approve China's entry into the World Trade Organization, which opened one of the world's biggest markets to American industry. And he voted initially to give the president authority to negotiate trade agreements as long they contained certain labor provisions.
But when those protections were stripped out of the bill, Mr. Edwards voted against final passage, while Mr. Kerry voted for it.
Mr. Edwards also voted against smaller trade deals for African and Caribbean nations, while Mr. Kerry supported them. Even though these agreements opened up the American market to some of the poorest nations, Mr. Edwards said they would have hurt the textile mills and workers in his home state, North Carolina. The only free trade accord he supported was with Jordan, which has labor standards in the pact.
Mr. Edwards insists that protection for labor and environmental standards must be part of the texts of trade agreements because that is the only way to enforce them. Mr. Kerry says they can be accommodated in side agreements. This is probably their central dispute.
Mr. Kerry has voted for all trade agreements since the cold war ended and opened the way for increasing globalization. But on the presidential trail, he has become a skeptic and now promises to review them.
Standing at a rally on Thursday in Washington with John Sweeney, president of the A.F.L.-C.I.O., which endorsed him, Mr. Kerry said he would crack down on corporations that send jobs overseas.
Mr. Edwards would also penalize corporations that send jobs abroad. But he personalizes the issue by reminding voters that he is the son of a millworker and understands the devastation caused by losing a job.
While their histories on trade have differed, those differences tended to reflect their home-state interests. Massachusetts has lost much of its manufacturing base and now relies heavily on the high-tech and financial services industries. North Carolina is more of a mixed picture. Its textile industry is being undermined by inexpensive imports. But North Carolina is one of the fastest-growing states and its high-tech and banking industries are thriving, with far less to fear from foreign competition.
Mark Sanford, the Republican governor of South Carolina, who has pushed the Bush administration to be tougher on China's trade policies, said, ''Trade, in fact, is a surprisingly bipartisan issue -- you vote with your state, not your party.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: TRADE
