The authorities were notified in 1998 about a sham doctor who the police suspect may have killed a 35-year-old investment banker last year, state officials acknowledged yesterday. But he was not arrested until October 2002.
Even after his arrest on charges of practicing without a license, the man, Dean Faiello, 44, was able to set up shop in a friend's Manhattan apartment, where investigators believe he treated the analyst, Maria Cruz, on the day she disappeared last April, said Paul J. Browne, the chief spokesman for the New York Police Department.
In Newark on Wednesday, Ms. Cruz's body was discovered entombed in a concrete slab at the former home of Mr. Faiello, who authorities say has fled the country.
Detectives are investigating the possibility that she died as a result of botched illegal surgery performed by Mr. Faiello, and that he then buried the evidence of his error, the police said.
Yesterday, medical examiners in New Jersey confirmed that the body was that of Ms. Cruz, but they did not release the cause of death. No one has been charged in the death.
After learning yesterday that the body had been identified as that of Ms. Cruz, her uncle, Jose Navarro, said that Mr. Faiello should turn himself in. ''Face what you have done. Everyone makes mistakes. As long as you turn yourself in you will be at peace,'' he said.
As Ms. Cruz's fate made headlines, plastic surgeons and malpractice lawyers asked why Mr. Faiello was not stopped sooner, and whether the authorities were vigorously pursuing similar offenders.
Dr. Roy Geronemus, a dermatologist and director of the Laser and Skin Surgery Center of New York, said some of Mr. Faiello's clients had come to him for help. ''He certainly wasn't qualified to do what he was doing,'' he said. ''The real question I would ask the attorney general's office is why haven't they been more diligent in enforcing these regulations?''
State prosecutors said that Mr. Faiello was unlicensed in any medical profession.
Asked about the delay in stopping him from treating patients, Jonathan Burman, a spokesman for the State Education Department, which oversees medical licenses, said that the first complaint about Mr. Faiello was received in late 1998, from a former employer who said he had stolen prescription pads from here might be performing laser surgery without medical training.
In December 1998, an undercover investigator from the department's Office of Professional Discipline visited Mr. Faiello, and he offered to give her anesthesia and laser skin treatment, Mr. Burman said.
The following month, the case was referred to the office of the state attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, Mr. Burman said. The office chose not to prosecute, he said.
Dr. Geronemus, who has led efforts to reform state guidelines on the medical use of lasers, said that despite recent efforts to clarify agency responsibilities, there is a gap in enforcement. In the Faiello case, he said, ''Nobody took the bull by the horns.''
Brad Maione, a spokesman for Mr. Spitzer, defended the office's decision not to press charges at that time. ''Standing alone, that single count was not supportable in the facts or in the law,'' he said, adding that they asked the State Education Department to investigate further.
''It's not a case of them referring it to us and us not doing anything about it,'' Mr. Maione said. ''It's a case of building a better case that was ultimately successful.''
It was more than three years before the department referred the case to Mr. Spitzer's office again, in May 2002, Mr. Burman said. In October, two days after The New York Post ran an article about his practice, Mr. Faiello was arrested on three counts of practicing medicine without a license, including the incident in December 1998, and two other undercover visits, in February and March 2002.
Mr. Maione said that more complaints were received as a result of the Post's investigation.
Mr. Faiello was released on $5,000 bail, on condition that he not continue to treat patients.
In June 2003, he pleaded guilty to one count of practicing medicine without a license and one count of conspiracy to possess narcotics, but fled before he was sentenced.
Mr. Maione said that even before Mr. Faiello's trouble with the state authorities began, he had been arrested by the Manhattan district attorney on charges stemming from forging prescriptions for narcotics, and sentenced to three years' probation.
Just last August, he was arrested again in New Jersey during a traffic stop on narcotics-related charges, a spokesman for Mr. Spitzer said.
Harvey F. Wachsman, a medical doctor and malpractice lawyer, said that there were not enough protections for consumers or strong enough licensing laws. ''I think people don't know,'' he said. ''And the fact is that they're conned.''
More details emerged yesterday about the clues that led investigators to tear up the concrete slab in the detached carriage house on Mr. Faiello's former property, which he sold the month after Ms. Cruz disappeared.
According to Mr. Browne, Ms. Cruz had sought treatment for ''black tongue,'' a colloquial name that sometimes refers to a minor temporary condition resulting from diet or medication, and sometimes refers to a more serious condition known as ''hairy leukoplakia,'' a precancerous overgrowth of the cilia on the tongue, which can be treated by laser.
Investigators knew that she canceled an appointment with Mr. Faiello on April 11 because she had to work late that day. A credit card charge on April 13 at Loehmann's, a clothing store, led them to suspect that she went to see Mr. Faiello that day. Loehmann's, on Seventh Avenue at 16th Street, is close to the apartment at 115 W. 16th Street where the police say Mr. Faiello had moved his practice.
Mr. Browne said he could not say why Ms. Cruz had sought medical treatment in someone's apartment, or whether she had been treated by Mr. Faiello before.
Mr. Faiello is thought to be in Costa Rica. Mr. Browne would not disclose why investigators believe that, but he did say, ''Costa Rica has an extradition treaty, and detectives were reading it today.''
