Directed by Donald Petrie  PG-13, 115 minutes
Donald Petrie's ''Welcome to Mooseport,'' from a screenplay by Tom Schulman and a story by Doug Richardson, is a terminally mild attempt to revive the populist political comedy pioneered by Frank Capra in the 1930's.
A small town in Maine (ably portrayed by Port Perry, a small town in Ontario), Mooseport is populated largely by lovable eccentrics, like the geriatric nude jogger who appears under the opening credits. Its leading citizen is Handy Harrison (Ray Romano), the owner of the Main Street hardware store and the community's general Mr. Fix-It: a not-so-distant cousin to the Longfellow Deeds (Gary Cooper) of Capra's ''Mr. Deeds Goes to Town'' (1936). Handy's girlfriend, Sally Mannis (Maura Tierney), the local veterinarian, has been waiting seven years for him to pop the question, contenting herself in the meantime with delivering litters of cute puppies.
Mooseport is thrown into a tizzy when Monroe Cole (Gene Hackman), known as Eagle, a vaguely Clintonesque, immensely popular former president, decides to take up permanent residence at his Mooseport vacation home. Persuaded by some local burghers to run, apparently unopposed, for the vacant office of mayor, Cole sees an easy public relations victory. But as luck would have it, Handy has also filed for the office, thus pitting the canny, cynical professional politician against the one thing canny, cynical professional politicians apparently fear most: ''a genuinely honest man,'' as one of Cole's aides (the former child star Fred Savage) describes the relentlessly modest, affable Handy.
Complicating matters -- though not by much -- is Cole's crush on Sally, whom he has met in passing and innocently asked out on a date. Hoping to make Handy jealous, Sally plays up to the former president, turning the political rivalry into a personal one for her affections.
''Welcome to Mooseport,'' which opens today nationwide, is oversupplied with excellent actors (also in the cast are Rip Torn as Cole's chief political adviser and Marcia Gay Harden as Cole's dedicated executive secretary) but undersupplied with wit and dramatic interest. The immensely likable Mr. Romano (star of television's ''Everybody Loves Raymond'') and the charmingly pouty Ms. Tierney (a regular on ''E.R.'') make a lovely sitcom couple, and ''Mooseport'' could easily serve as a pilot for a new series. Mr. Hackman fills the role of special guest star, floating above and apart from the rest of the cast, descending occasionally for a verbal wrestling bout or a bit of broad slapstick.
Mr. Petrie, a director best known for making a star of Julia Roberts in ''Mystic Pizza'' (1988), gums his way through an already soft script, carefully effacing whatever hint of political commentary may lie in the screenplay. (We never learn which party Cole belongs to, though he is briefly seen looking at a letter from the Democratic National Committee.) But there is already a political statement in the film's unthinking assumption that it is personality, not ideology, that matters most in contemporary American politics. As Mooseport goes, so goes the nation.
''Welcome to Mooseport'' is rated PG-13 (Parents strongly cautioned) for some sexual innuendo and that elderly jogger's wizened backside.
DAVE KEHR
FILM IN REVIEW
