Simmering dissatisfaction among relatives over the way victims' names will be listed at the World Trade Center memorial spilled into the open yesterday in an unusual forum: at the board of directors' table of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation.
''I would like something that does not establish a hierarchy of those who were killed on that awful day,'' said Thomas S. Johnson, a board member and the chairman and chief executive of the GreenPoint Financial Corporation. One of his sons, Scott, worked for Keefe, Bruyette &amp; Woods in the south tower of the trade center and died in the attack.
In the design by Michael Arad, supported by Gov. George E. Pataki and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, victims would be listed randomly, with shields or other service insignia next to the names of uniformed rescue workers.
In April, as it considered the mission and program for the competition that was about to get under way, the board resolved that the memorial ''will honor the loss of life equally and the contributions of all without establishing any hierarchies.''
Asked yesterday about the current plan, Mr. Johnson said, ''My personal opinion is that it does not square with the resolution, and I'm working hard in conversations with a lot of people to resolve that.''
''It was an attack on America, not an attack on any particular group,'' he said. ''In the opinion of many, many families -- I would say a great majority of the families -- it's not appropriate to express any differences in the way the names are displayed.''
Kevin M. Rampe, the corporation president, said later that the inclusion of insignia merely ''tells part of the story of that day'' and ''is certainly not intended to impose a hierarchy.'' He said the corporation would stand by the selection process.
And Mr. Bloomberg repeated his support.
''We'll never know what happened in some of those buildings,'' he said, ''but also putting the shields next to the police officers and firefighters and Port Authority police officers -- and I think there are court officers who rushed into those buildings and paid the ultimate price -- it is exactly the right thing to do.''
