Amid a surge of interest from Wall Street buyers, the price of a prestigious Park Avenue address is now approaching levels not seen since the real estate market peaked four years ago and then tumbled along with a declining stock market, brokers say.
A study of the most expensive co-ops in the city, typically large prewar apartments on the Upper East Side and Central Park with grand views, found that average prices of high-end apartments, defined as those costing more than $4 million, surged nearly 15 percent last year, to $7.2 million. That figure was 5 percent below the peak of the market in 2000.
The study's author, Kirk Henckels, director of private brokerage at Stribling &amp; Associates, said the sales of these luxury homes accelerated throughout the fall, with prices rising further in agreements reached in the last few weeks in exclusive Fifth Avenue and Park Avenue buildings.
The study identified 91 luxury co-ops that sold for more than $4 million last year, a number that included 15 higher-priced trophy homes selling for more than $10 million each. There were more sales in the last half of 2003 than during the first half of 2000, when the market hit a peak, Mr. Henckels said. ''In co-ops the pressure has continued,'' he said. ''We have some outstanding town houses available, but in co-ops there is precious little left to sell.''
This finding is supported by other brokers, who say that a surge of buyers, buoyed by end-of-year Wall Street bonuses, entered the market intent on taking advantage of extraordinarily low interest rates. Interest rates have long been credited with driving up demand for lower-priced housing across the city and the country, but the link to the luxury housing market has traditionally been more tenuous.
This resulted in frequent bidding wars, little in evidence in the luxury market for several years, and a decline in the inventory of available apartments. Now with prices rising, many prospective sellers are afraid to put their apartments on the market until they can buy a new one first, further driving down supply.
Kathleen M. Sloane, a vice president and director at Brown Harris Stevens, said that the market came to a halt last spring at the time of the Iraq war, and that the peak spring selling season was delayed until July. But for the last few months, she has regularly worked 12-hour days to keep up with the demand for apartments. ''Since mid-December we have been engaged in bidding wars in every single transaction'' she said.
Frederick W. Peters, president of Warburg Realty, said the luxury market had ''turned 180 degrees in 12 months.''
''By the early fall,'' he said, ''there were bidding wars, with both bidders below the asking price. Later in the year, the winning bidder would typically be at the asking price. Now the winner is over the asking price.''
The study by Mr. Henckels also found that sales of single-family town houses were strong, with prices and sales up, and with 46 sales over $4 million, with an average sale price of $7.7 million. That was just below the peak year of 1999, when the average price was $7.9 million. That surge produced a glut of listings above market prices that took several years to work through, brokers said.
Stephen Kotler, an executive vice president at Douglas Elliman, said that he recently marketed an apartment at 700 Park Avenue at 59th Street, which, unlike the prime East Side apartments, had only two bedrooms and was in a postwar building. The asking price was nearly $3.5 million. ''The response was tremendous, we had 50 inquires in the first week,'' he said. A sale agreement is pending.
Sales of high-end condominiums were also reported strong last year at a number of new luxury buildings and were being aided by the strong market this winter as well, the brokers said.
The most expensive residential sale ever recorded in Manhattan was last year's purchase at $42.5 million, plus transfer taxes, of a 12,000-square-foot loft, plus terrace, in the Time Warner Center on Columbus Circle. Last year's peak co-op sale was a $20.5 million duplex on a high floor on Park Avenue in the 70's.
Asked about the state of the upscale condo market, Louise Sunshine, a marketing consultant to many of New York's newest condominium projects, including the Time Warner Center, said: ''We had four sales of more than $10 million in the last 10 days at Time Warner. The market is exceedingly strong.''
In early 2002, there was a burst of real estate sales in the luxury market that quickly faltered along with the economy. Mr. Henckels said that sharply higher interest rates or a declining economy could weaken the market again, but he remained optimistic, especially in view of the limited inventory.
''Even if the economy stalls,'' his report advised buyers, ''it will be at higher prices. And if you overpay by a few percentage points, it will seem irrelevant in a few years.''
Residential Real Estate
