Broadway-style entertainers who combine the barbed wit and vocal assurance of Christine Ebersole are an increasingly rare commodity. Ms. Ebersole, the singer and actress, who is appearing at Feinstein's at the Regency with her musical sidekick Billy Stritch (her fellow cast member from the Broadway revival of ''42nd Street,'' for which she won a Tony Award), flashes the same dangerously transgressive glint as Bette Midler, another performer who promises the slinging of a certain amount of mud.
In her barbed opening monologue, Ms. Ebersole recalls growing up liberal and Unitarian in Winnetka, Ill., and lands a number of hilarious zingers about the sociology and demographics of the upscale, mostly Republican culture, with which she found herself somewhat out of step.
The brightest moments of Ms. Ebersole's new cabaret show, ''In Your Dreams,'' which plays through March 6 at Feinstein's (Regency Hotel, 540 Park Avenue, at 61st Street), are fusions of humor and music in which she vents her instinct for amusing musical dress-up.
One detonation is her rendition of ''To Keep My Love Alive,'' the cheery, boastful murder confession of a wealthy widow who has dispatched several husbands, from the Rodgers and Hart musical ''A Connecticut Yankee.'' Ms. Ebersole turned this starchy mock art song into a pseudo-operatic spoof that brought out her inner Jeanette MacDonald.
For all its moments of merriment, the new show lacks the nerve and insouciance of Ms. Ebersole's previous cabaret show, overseen by Marc Shaiman and Scott Wittman, the wizards of ''Hairspray.''
If Ms. Ebersole has a strong theatrical voice, her renditions of the serious ballads ''Skylark'' and ''The Folks Who Live on the Hill'' still feel perfunctory and unfocused. The one noncomic number in which she bursts through her own glass ceiling and belts is a version of ''Can't Help Lovin' Dat Man.''
Mr. Stritch makes an amiable musical sidekick, but the two, who share a couple of duets, have yet to find the comfortable rapport of entertainers who know how to play together. Consider ''In Your Dreams'' an engaging work in progress.
CABARET REVIEW
