Prime Minister Ariel Sharon of Israel courted American support on Thursday for his proposal for ''unilateral disengagement'' from the Palestinians, saying that it would not replace President Bush's peace initiative, the road map.
In a speech and a three-hour meeting here with envoys from Mr. Bush, Mr. Sharon said he was committed to the road map. He defended his plan for withdrawing from most of the Gaza Strip as necessary for Israel's security should the Palestinians fail to abide by the peace plan.
''We will not wait for them forever,'' he said.
Mr. Sharon's aides had previously said he would only implement his proposal once he judged that the road map had failed. But the Bush administration appears reluctant to have anyone make that judgment.
Warning of a potential ''security and political vacuum'' in Palestinian areas, Mr. Sharon said in his speech, ''we must be realistic'' and prepare other steps.
But, he continued, ''I would like to stress that this disengagement plan is a security measure and not a political one. The steps that will be taken will not prevent the possibility of implementing the president's vision in reaching an agreed settlement if and when there will be a reliable partner on the Palestinian side.''
Palestinian officials accuse Mr. Sharon of deliberately undermining the governing Palestinian Authority. They say he wants to avoid negotiations that might force him to yield more land than he plans to turn over unilaterally.
Neither side has abided by its first obligations under the road map, a three-phase plan for reciprocal, simultaneous concessions to achieve a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza and a comprehensive Arab-Israeli peace in three years.
Under commitments made to Mr. Bush last June, the Palestinian leadership is supposed to begin breaking apart militant groups. Israel is supposed to dismantle dozens of settlement ''outposts'' set up in the West Bank over the last three years.
While Mr. Sharon has left the West Bank outposts largely alone, he is now proposing a far bolder step politically -- evacuating most of the established settlements in Gaza. He would take that step not as part of an agreement but as a unilateral measure to draw what he called ''security lines.'' He said any Israeli steps would be ''fully coordinated'' with the United States.
Saying he had not seen ''even the slightest signs'' of Palestinian action against terrorism, Mr. Sharon warned that his plan would leave the Palestinians with ''much less'' than they would have had under the road map.
With the plan under sharp criticism within his coalition government and his dominant faction, Likud, Mr. Sharon is trying to build support in the Bush administration, which has been seeking a fuller explanation of his plans. He met Thursday with Elliott Abrams, director of Middle East affairs at the National Security Council; Stephen Hadley, the deputy national security adviser, and William J. Burns, head of the Middle East bureau at the State Department. He is also seeking a meeting with Mr. Bush, but the White House has not set a date.
Mr. Sharon delivered his speech here to the Conference of Presidents of Major American Jewish Organizations. James S. Tisch, the chairman of the organization, introduced the prime minister, praising him as having ''gone against the dogma'' of his faction to arrive at ''a new way of looking at the situation.''
But the Americans were also buzzing with questions about the prime minister's plan. They wondered whether it might strengthen Hamas militants in Gaza, as some Israeli security officials have suggested, and whether Israeli soldiers would still be able to fight in Gaza if necessary after the settlers leave.
Mr. Sharon did not address such specifics. He has not yet decided on the details of his proposal, a senior Israeli official said.
He has also not submitted the proposal for the approval of his cabinet or the Parliament. Dr. Eran Lerman, director of the Israel-Middle East office of the American Jewish Committee, said that Mr. Sharon was seeking ''political cover'' from his hoped-for meeting with Mr. Bush.
''He wants to come back from Washington with an ability to tell his people in the Likud, 'Look, I'm doing this in partnership with George W. Bush,' '' Dr. Lerman said.
Although he still dominates what, after more than three years of conflict, has become the Israeli political center, Mr. Sharon has seen his popularity slide in recent months. Some Likud leaders have withheld support for his unilateral steps, and far-right parties have threatened to bolt his coalition if the government votes to evacuate any settlements. The left-of-center Labor Party might then join the coalition.
Benyamin Elon, the minister of tourism and a settler opposed to any evacuation, said in an interview on Thursday that Mr. Sharon would need much greater political strength to push his plan through.
''Now, he's not strong anymore,'' Mr. Elon said, in an example of the hard words being spoken within the cabinet. ''Sometimes it reminds me about the last days of Nixon.''
