Reliving A Brief Life
In many ways she was a typical teenage girl: headstrong and passionate, anxious about her appearance, at loggerheads with her mother, dreaming about fame. But she is remembered for what made her extraordinary: a precocious talent and the cruel circumstances that shaped her short life.
Both sides come through in ''The Diary of Anne Frank,'' Frances Goodrich and Albert Hackett's theatrical adaptation of Frank's journal, presented by the St. Bart's Players in honor of the 75th anniversary of her birth. In addition to being rich and nuanced theater, the production is distinctive for two reasons: it is directed by Stephen Press, who played the adolescent Peter in the original Broadway production in 1955, and it is accompanied by ''The Anne Frank Story,'' a fascinating but disturbing photography show (it includes Holocaust images) sponsored by the Anne Frank Center USA.
This ''Diary'' is thoughtfully detailed, from the haunting music that precedes the opening to the whining sirens and gruff German commands heard during the excruciating penultimate scene. No opportunity for realism is sacrificed, down to the serenely accommodating cat that plays Peter's beloved pet, Mouschi.
Brian Haggerty communicates the strong will and steadfast love of Otto Frank, and Barbara Blomberg makes his occasionally shrill wife humane and sympathetic. Anne Watters brings energy to the quiet daughter, Margot, and Daniel Burke offers comic relief as the fussy dentist, Mr. Dussel. Bradford Harlan and Leslie Engel are convincing as the warring but peculiarly united Van Daans. Adam Dodway, as Peter, their son, finds the appropriate combination of ardor and awkwardness as he falls in love with Anne.
In the starring role, Zoë Kawaller eerily resembles the real Anne, but more important, she embodies the fervor, optimism and mischievous wit that prevent her character from seeing herself as a victim. The staging and the photo exhibition, which explores what happened before and after the action of the play, make Anne Frank's legacy clear. Six million can seem like an impossible number to grasp; by giving the world her unforgettable story, she reminds us of the precious individuality of every one of those lives.
''The Diary of Anne Frank,'' at St. Bart's Playhouse, Park Avenue at 50th Street, Manhattan, (212) 378-0248 (or 0222). Tonight at 8; tomorrow at 2 and 8 p.m.; Sunday at 3 p.m. Tickets: $20; students and 65+, $18. ''The Anne Frank Story,'' through Feb. 29 in the cloister adjacent to the theater. Hours: 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Free.
Love in Bloom
Pity the poor royals. Whenever one falls in love with a commoner, someone insists on a sacrifice of either the romance or the crown.
In ''The Beak, the Sausage and the Axe,'' by a team that calls itself the Obfuscated Tortoise, Princess Platonia is in a fix even worse than Edward VIII's. She loves the palace gardener, a sweet tree-hugger (literally), but her father wants her to marry Sir Edmund, whom she calls a ''sausage-loving, simpering sycophant.'' So he banishes the gardener.
Fortunately, love conquers all, and it does so hilariously. Written by Bruce MacPhail and Yvette Feuer and based on an idea by Mr. MacPhail, this multimedia show includes filmed vignettes seen on a screen onstage. (They include moments with the exiled gardener, who takes his talents to the New York City Parks Department.) The device also enables Mr. MacPhail and Ms. Feuer to play all the roles, except that of the gardener's bird, Esteban, a puppet.
Much of the action takes place at the princess's birthday cabaret, which includes many dubious talents, like Tahitian magicians and an ax thrower. (Relax, the tools are plastic.) Music, ranging from Beethoven to the Rolling Stones to hip-hop, adds to the comedy. This show has not only a beak, but also a tongue planted firmly in cheek.
''The Beak, the Sausage and the Axe,'' Sundays at 3 p.m. through Feb. 29 at the Palace of Variety Theater, 125 West 42nd Street, Manhattan, (877) 246-3537. Tickets: $15; children, $7.
Saluting a General
The closest children usually come to seeing George Washington is admiring his portrait on a $1 bill -- in many young minds, a satisfying relationship. But on Sunday they can have a more personal glimpse.
That afternoon the Morris-Jumel Mansion, Manhattan's oldest house (1765), will present ''Happy Birthday, General Washington,'' a tribute to the mansion's most illustrious guest. Washington used the building as his headquarters in fall 1776 during the Battle of Harlem Heights.
''You could say it was the first victory in New York by the Continental Army,'' said Loren Silber, the mansion's education director. This year Washington himself will tell the story in the person of Michael Grillo, an educator, who will lead a 2 p.m. tour. He will also answer questions, probably much more freely than many of his military successors.
Children can also attend workshops in making Colonial hats and doing 18th-century dance. ''The dance is like a Virginia reel,'' Ms. Silber explained. They can also try churning butter and using quill pens.
Other attractions include a show of prints about Washington and a visit to his study and bedroom, usually roped off. (Yes, he slept here.)
''Happy Birthday, General Washington,'' Sunday from noon to 4 p.m. at the Morris-Jumel Mansion, 65 Jumel Terrace, between West 160th and 162nd Streets, Washington Heights, (212) 923-8008. Free.
Family Fare  Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  A report in the Family Fare column of Weekend on Friday about the play ''The Beak, the Sausage and the Axe'' at the Palace of Variety in Manhattan misidentified Yvette Feuer's partner in playing all the roles in the production. He is Sean O'Connor. (Bruce MacPhail wrote the play with her.)
