Gary Sheffield of the Yankees vehemently denied on Thursday that he had ever used steroids, but he acknowledged ordering vitamins from a California nutritional supplements company whose founder has been charged with distributing steroids and other performance-enhancing drugs to professional athletes.
Sheffield was one of more than a dozen athletes who testified last fall before a federal grand jury in San Francisco that has been investigating the Bay Area Laboratory Co-Operative, or Balco.
On Tuesday, the United States attorney's office inadvertently disclosed that Sheffield, a 35-year-old outfielder, had sent a package to the lab last year.
On Thursday, two days after Sheffield's name became the first to come out in documents released since the grand jury indicted four people linked to Balco last week, Sheffield spoke about his disdain for drugs and his disgust with being so closely connected to the investigation.
''The bottom line is that I did purchase vitamins from that company, being out there and working out with Barry Bonds,'' Sheffield said. ''Besides that, I don't know what else can come with that. I've been an honorable guy. I've been outspoken about testing guys. And anybody that wants me to say I'll take the challenge of taking a test, I'll be the first guy up there.''
Sheffield spoke quickly and passionately on Thursday while sitting in his light gray sport utility vehicle at the Yankees' minor league complex. He said that he had given blood and urine samples to Balco and that the company designed special vitamin supplements according to his body type and his nutritional needs.
The four men who were indicted for distributing steroids and other illicit performance-enhancing drugs to dozens of professional athletes were Victor Conte Jr., who founded Balco and is its chief executive; James J. Valente, Balco's vice president; Greg Anderson, Bonds's trainer; and Remi Korchemny, who coaches sprinters. All four pleaded not guilty.
Sheffield said he abandoned off-season workouts with Bonds after his home run total dropped from 36 in 2001 to 25 in 2002. He also referred to his uncle Dwight Gooden's substance abuse problems as an additional reason he would not think about taking performance-enhancing drugs.
''I've been guilty by association my whole life,'' Sheffield said. ''My uncle with his drug problem and I've been under investigation for that since I was 17 years old. And now I've been listening to the news and they've been trying to link Barry Bonds to things and everybody knows that I've been outspoken about training with the guy, so, obviously, they're trying to put two and two together and say, 'We got something.' ''
Jeff Novitzky, an Internal Revenue Service agent who wrote a 52-page affidavit that was released along with the indictments on Feb. 12, left an apologetic voice mail message for Rufus Williams, Sheffield's lawyer and business manager, and also faxed to Williams an apologetic letter for mistakenly revealing Sheffield's name to a handful of news organizations, Williams said.
Sheffield's name was blacked out on legal documents that were distributed at a news conference in San Francisco on Tuesday, but when the documents were e-mailed to The New York Times and other news organizations, his name was included. Novitzky said in the documents that he had found a receipt with Sheffield's name on it for a Federal Express package that had been sent to Balco on Feb. 17, 2003. Williams said Novitzky told him a clerical error had caused Sheffield's name to be disclosed.
''It's an unbelievably horrible mistake they made,'' Williams said. ''Is an apology enough? I don't know what else we can expect to get. It's bad that Gary is connected to something in which he wasn't involved.''
Williams said the grand jury had interviewed Sheffield because he had some dealings with the company. Williams also said that Sheffield had gone to the company for supplements.
''Gary is not accused of anything,'' Williams said. ''He does not take steroids. Gary is not guilty of anything.''
Yankees General Manager Brian Cashman said that he might speak to Sheffield to gauge his frame of mind, but that he would not probe further. When Sheffield and Jason Giambi, the Yankees' first baseman, testified before the grand jury, Cashman said, ''At this point, there's nothing for me to be concerned'' about.
Since the Yankees recently invested $39 million in Sheffield, Cashman was asked why he would not consider quizzing Sheffield more pointedly. ''Do you think I'd get any answers?'' Cashman said. ''It would be a waste of time.''
Minutes later, Cashman said that questioning Sheffield would be an investigatory interview and that he would need to get the approval of the players association.
Sheffield had worked out with Bonds and indicated that the sessions were unsuccessful for him. When Sheffield was asked if Bonds used steroids, he said: ''I've never seen Barry do anything to cheat and things like that. Nobody knows what each other is doing, but I didn't see anything.''
Sheffield called steroids in baseball ''a problem, to a degree'' and said the reaction to the first player who is identified as a steroid user under baseball's stricter drug testing would be dire. But Sheffield repeated that he did not need to cheat to be successful, and he vowed that he would overcome having his name attached to the Balco scandal.
''I'm not the type of person that, when negative stuff comes my way, I walk around with my head down like I did anything wrong,'' he said. ''I'll be the first to stand in line and lift my head up high and say, 'I'm a legit player.' ''
BASEBALL
