The deadly attack on an Iraqi police station in Falluja on Saturday revealed problems in American military support for newly trained Iraqi security services there, the top United States military officer said Thursday.
Gen. Richard B. Myers, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, said the bold raid, which left at least 25 people dead, had prompted the two top commanders of American forces in Iraq, Gen. John P. Abizaid and Lt. Gen. Ricardo S. Sanchez, to review how United States troops respond when Iraqi forces come under fire.
''It's tactical-level stuff that needs to be worked on the battlefield, and not here in Washington,'' General Myers said at a breakfast meeting with reporters. ''We can do better.''
He continued: ''It is never the intention of the U.S. military to leave the Iraqi forces out there on the end of a limb without helping them. Whether we do that well all the time is another issue.''
General Myers's comments were a rare admission of flaws in the training and equipping of Iraqi security forces, and in providing quick backup when Iraqis get into trouble.
Senior American commanders say having Iraqi forces assume more responsibility for security and stability in their country is a linchpin in the Pentagon's long-term strategy to reduce American forces in Iraq.
But many of the Iraqi police officers and militia now operating independently or in tandem with American forces still lack basic equipment, like radios and patrol cars. Some of those Iraqi forces have expressed fear that they will be outgunned by supporters of Saddam Hussein if American troops leave prematurely.
Pentagon officials elaborated on General Myers's remarks in interviews and a news conference later in the day. They said the Saturday raid -- in which heavily armed attackers moved in from four directions, and which was coupled with a simultaneous attack on a civil defense headquarters about a mile away -- revealed that there were no backup communications for the Iraqi police once their phone lines were cut. It also showed a shortage of weapons and ammunition in the Iraqi militia; the officers had to request arms from American forces in the middle of an intense 15-minute gun battle.
''Why were they in the position of needing weapons and ammo?'' one senior military officer asked.
American officials are also looking at how to hasten the response time of special teams of American soldiers in Iraq that are on standby for emergencies.
''In each one of these situations, just like this one, we'll do a review of the operation and see what we could have done better to make sure that this does not occur in the future,'' Brig. Gen. David Rodriguez, a Pentagon spokesman, told reporters.
Two attackers who were captured were from the Iraqi Civil Defense Corps, a militia organization akin to the American National Guard, General Rodriguez said, a factor that has added to concerns that the synchronized strike was an inside job.
''We're working very hard to vet these guys and to get Iraqis more involved in their own security,'' General Rodriguez said. ''But we know that we're going to pick up some of the wrong people, and we'll vet them and deal with them if that happens.''
In a wide-ranging, hourlong session, General Myers told reporters that he could not estimate with confidence how long American forces would have to stay in Iraq.
''I really do believe it's unknowable,'' he said. ''If I gave a good professional estimate, then that would be a standard that people would point to, and knowing that we can't know it perfectly, we'd get hammered.''
Army officials are planning worst-case scenarios of keeping about 100,000 troops in Iraq through 2006, but those plans depend on security conditions and how capable Iraqi security forces prove to be.
General Myers said that if he and the top American commanders in Iraq were to ''sit around a table, I think we could draw out a pretty good diagram of where we think we're going to go'' with the Iraq mission. But he declined to comment on those internal discussions.
He also said he had seen no signs of a potential exodus of National Guard and Reserve troops who are returning from yearlong assignments in the gulf.
''There's nothing that I've heard or seen in any of the data that tells me we have any kind of crisis here or even a problem,'' he said. ''It's just not an issue.''
Military personnel experts and even internal National Guard surveys, however, have warned of impending problems with retaining forces.
