Niccolini Says That Never Happened Before
Manhattan rents being what they are, we were skeptical when we got an invitation to ''celebrate the opening of the artist HUNT SLONEM's new 100-room studio.''
Since we went to the party on Tuesday night, in a former office building near the West Side Highway, we have to admit that there were too many rooms to count.
Neon-painted rooms to our left, neon-painted rooms to our right, and throughout, hundreds of Mr. Slonem's brightly colored canvases of jungle scenes: it all made entering his apartment like tumbling into a living ROUSSEAU.
Mr. Slonem greeted us warmly at the door; he was wearing a shocking pink sport jacket and matching pink-rimmed eyeglasses. A pink and navy-blue checkered tie flowed like a small waterfall over his belly. The foyer was painted chartreuse.
Before dinner, Mr. Slonem gave a tour to a few of his guests, who included ANN RAPP, FRANCINE LEFRAK and RICK FRIEDBERG; JULIAN (NAUGHTY) NICCOLINI and his wife, LISA; OLIVIA CHANTECAILLE and ERIC VILLENCY; and MONIQUE VAN VOOREN.
There were tapestries and brocade-covered furniture, thousands of monkey eyes staring out of gilded frames, 40 bathroom stalls, still labeled ''men'' or ''women.''
''Did we ever find Ann?'' Mr. Slonem asked a guest at one point in the evening. ''I haven't seen her for hours.''
Mr. Slonem's paintings can be found in galleries and in the Metropolitan Museum of Art; his canvases are, in a way, entangled with his lifestyle. The artist is well known for his Houston Street apartment, which he shares with the 70-odd birds that he paints: the toucans, macaws, cockatoos, African grays and hornbills.
After trying unsuccessfully to get a firm figure for the number of rooms he has, we have decided that he also excels at the art of the deal. According to CARRI LYON of Cushman &amp; Wakefield, Mr. Slonem is leasing a 29,925-square-foot portion of the fourth floor of a five-story building at 303 West 10th Street for less than $10 a square foot a year in a four-year deal. He is leasing the building as a subtenant of Corporate Express, an office products company that inherited the lease through an acquisition. Because of the configuration of the outdated corporate headquarters, where 300 employees once worked, Mr. Slonem has been given free rein over the remainder of the floor, which brings his studio space to 47,500 feet, Ms. Lyon said.
But to the great room, for dinner. It is here that Mr. Slonem paints, here that he keeps many of the birds he uses as models. There were two huge still-wet paintings -- one of butterflies, the other of a saint -- on oversized easels.
Before the guests were seated, a silver saber was presented to HERVE DESCHAMPS, Champagne Perrier Jouet's chef de cave. (That's French for winemaker, Columbia J-School young'uns and, more important, is a sign that you have finally finagled a decent assignment.) Then Mr. Deschamps was handed a bottle of Fleur de Champagne. He held it at an angle formerly reserved for the family of Louis XVI and raised the saber arm. Several guests covered their eyes. Mr. Deschamps scored the bottleneck twice, then made a clean cut. THWACK! Later, Mr. Niccolini tried his hand. The famed swordsman failed on the first attempt, but succeeded on the second.
Dinner, supplied by DANIEL BOULUD's people, included a scallops ceviche with oysters and lemongrass as well as the soft flesh of glazed duck. (Oui, les jeunes de Columbia J- School. Sometimes journalism is a most gratifying profession.) Mr. Slonem sat in a gothic chair with PERKY, an electric green yellow-naped Amazon parrot on his shoulder.
''There's Perky,'' Mr. Slonem said. ''Hi, Perk! Hi, Sweetheart! Say hello! Say hello! Say hello! How are you?'' And, to a guest. ''He was given to me recently. Very devoted. He's tired. He's better during the day.''
Ms. Van Vooren had misplaced her purse. Mr. Slonem left the dinner table to help her find it. We tagged along. Does Mr. Slonem use the entire space, we wondered?
''Oh, I go in and out of every square foot. I'm so territorial. I'm in and out of every square inch of this space all day long. You've already seen the Monkey Room. I have the Ganesh Room, the Mother Mary Room.''
''Big! It feels like a movie! Like a movie,'' said Ms. Van Vooren, who played KATRIN in ANDY WARHOL's ''FRANKENSTEIN.''
''Well, see, I'm totally influenced by 'Lost Splendor' by PRINCE YOUSSOUPOFF,'' said Mr. Slonem, referring to a book by the Russian aristocrat who killed RASPUTIN. ''I just think that great space is important and the more the merrier.''
He spoke of his spiritual life, and his visits to MOTHER MEERA in Germany. ''I'm very interested in Schaumburg Castle, which is near her,'' Mr. Slonem said. ''I've decided that I need 100,000 square feet to find myself.'' He paused. ''This is 50. I always believe that more is more.''
Mr. Slonem and Ms. Van Vooren made their way back to the dining room, where the table stood like a clearing in the woods, so vast that Mr. Slonem could watch the guests from afar, without their noticing him. He looked dreamily upon the scene.
''What a beautiful thing to encounter, no?'' he said.
with Lily Koppel
Boldface Names
