It does not make sense. Against the Islanders, the Rangers and their No. 1 goaltender, Mike Dunham, look like worldbeaters. Against almost everyone else, they just look beaten.
For whatever reason, the Islanders seem to bring out the best in the Rangers. Last night at Madison Square Garden, they also brought out the fierceness, and the Rangers won by 6-2 in a game that degenerated into mayhem.
The Rangers (22-27-7-4) have won all five meetings with the Islanders this season. They are 10 games under .500 against the rest of the National Hockey League.
Since the Rangers obtained Dunham from the Nashville Predators on Dec. 12, 2002, they have not lost to the Islanders. The Rangers are unbeaten in all nine games against the Islanders with Dunham in goal (7-0-2-0). It is the longest unbeaten streak -- by a goalie and by either team -- in the history of the series, which began in the 1972-73 season.
Dunham made 30 saves last night and surpassed John Vanbiesbrouck and Billy Smith for the longest unbeaten streak by a goalie in the series, which the Rangers now lead by 88-84-19. Vanbiesbrouck went 5-0-3 for the Rangers against the Islanders from December 1987 to January 1989. Smith went 7-0-1 for the Islanders against the Rangers from February 1984 to January 1987.
This season, Dunham is 9-20-6 against the rest of the league.
''I guess it would be nice to play the Islanders every game,'' said Tom Poti, the Rangers' much-maligned defenseman, who had four assists last night.
The Islanders' defeat dropped their record to 28-22-8-2. Coupled with Montreal's 4-1 victory over Calgary, it means that the Islanders and the Canadiens are tied at 66 points for the final two Eastern Conference playoff berths.
The Rangers have 55 points. Should the Canadiens and the Islanders play .500 hockey the rest of the season, the Rangers would probably have to win 17 of their final 22 games to qualify for the playoffs, which they have missed for the last six seasons.
Last night, each of the Rangers' top three lines contributed two goals. Mark Messier, Petr Nedved, Matthew Barnaby, Jaromir Jagr, Aleksei Kovalev and Bobby Holik scored the goals.
Jagr, who sat out the previous two games with a groin injury, had a goal and an assist in his first game for the Rangers against the Islanders. Jagr, who was obtained from Washington on Jan. 23, now has 43 goals and 60 assists for 103 points in 66 games in his career against the Islanders. As a precaution, Jagr did not play most of the third period after the Rangers went up by 6-2.
''My goal was to somehow survive the game, don't get injured and help the team win,'' Jagr said.
Messier, Nedved, Barnaby and Holik each added a goal and an assist as well. Messier and Nedved scored goals 1 minute 42 seconds apart to give the Rangers a 2-0 lead just 4:06 into the game.
Barnaby, who gave the Rangers a 3-0 lead at 17:31 of the first period, played the kind of pesky game that built his reputation. But the Rangers' best player was Dunham, who came up with crucial saves in the second and third periods to prevent the Islanders from getting back in the game.
Just under eight minutes into the second period, with the Rangers up by 3-1, Dunham stopped Oleg Kvasha on a breakaway, then threw up his left arm to knock aside a blistering slap shot from the right hash mark by Adrian Aucoin. Less than a minute later, at 8:33 of the second period, Jagr gave the Rangers a 4-1 lead.
With the Rangers leading, 4-2, early in the third period, Dunham somehow robbed Shawn Bates from the doorstep with his left skate blade. Bates has not scored in 32 consecutive games.
After Kovalev and Holik scored goals 1:43 apart, the Rangers led by 6-2 at 6:34 of the third. At 9:22, Islanders Coach Steve Stirling pulled goaltender Rick DiPietro in favor of Garth Snow, who was ejected less than seven minutes later for being the third man in a fight. The teams combined for 33 penalties and 132 penalty minutes, with the Rangers incurring 79 minutes.
On the first shift of the game, the crowd had chanted ''Fire Sather,'' in reference to Rangers Coach Glen Sather. By the end of the game, the mood of the crowd had shifted, and choruses of ''You can't beat us'' rang down.
SLAP SHOTS
JUSTIN PAPINEUA and MATTIAS WEINHANDL scored the Islanders' goals. . . . Islanders defenseman RADEK MARTINEK is scheduled to undergo a magnetic resonance imaging test on his left ankle today. . . . The Islanders could lose defenseman ERIC CAIRNS to a suspension. At 16 minutes 6 seconds of the third period, Cairns went after Rangers defenseman DALE PURINTON, fighting off both linesmen to do so. Purinton may be suspended as well. Before Cairns came back at him, Purinton kept throwing punches at Cairns after Cairns went down. . . . Islanders defenseman ADRIAN AUCOIN finished with a plus-minus rating of minus-5.
HOCKEY
