Tweeners -- that audience of preadolescent girls caught between Nickelodeon and MTV -- are the demographic target of ''Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen,'' a Walt Disney production starring the apple-cheeked Lindsay Lohan.
Ms. Lohan, who made her movie debut in Disney's 1998 remake of ''The Parent Trap'' and co-starred with Jamie Lee Curtis in last year's sleeper ''Freaky Friday,'' looks to have about 15 minutes left on the meter as a child star. Now 17, she is becoming distinctly womanly and will probably turn up soon as a rival to Kate Hudson and Drew Barrymore in romantic comedies intended for older girls.
But for the moment she still has her bright-eyed, baby-fat innocence, which serves her well in this modest, mildly engaging film.
A proudly bohemian resident of Greenwich Village, Ms. Lohan's Lola is uprooted from Manhattan and transplanted to a prosperous suburb in New Jersey when her mom (the enduring Glenne Headly), a potter, decides she has had enough of the big city.
Used to being the center of attention with her swirling outfits, honey blond hair and flair for self-dramatization (she dreams of becoming an actress), Lola is astonished to find herself the odd girl out at her new school, dominated by uptight preppies led by the imperious Carla (Megan Fox).
To wrest away Carla's crown, Lola must beat her out for the lead in the school play (a musical production of ''Pygmalion'' retitled ''Eliza Rocks'') and gain entry to a super-cool party in SoHo thrown by the rock star of her dreams, Stu Wolff (Adam Garcia). With the help of her new best friend, the mousy, uncertain Ella (Alison Pill), Lola lays her elaborate plans.
''Confessions,'' which opens today nationwide, was directed by the British filmmaker Sara Sugarman (''Very Annie Mary''), which may explain why its New Jersey looks more like Beverly Hills than North Caldwell. It seems to function on a similar cultural basis, grounded in conspicuous consumption and the pursuit of celebrity. (Of course, it's also the kind of New Jersey you reach by taking the PATH train.)
The screenplay by Gail Parent (who wrote ''Cadet Kelly'' for Ms. Lohan's archrival, Hilary Duff) walks a fine line between celebrating Lola's bluntly materialistic values and teaching little moral lessons: one should not lie to one's best friend, for example. There are a few traces of what once may have been a subplot involving Lola's attempts to reunite her divorced parents (her dad is a children's book writer who still lives in Manhattan), but for the most part Lola is a totally and unapologetically self-involved creature. Tweeners will love her.
''Confessions of a Teenage Drama Queen'' is rated PG (Parental guidance suggested) for some mild suggestiveness and vulgar language.
CONFESSIONS OF A TEENAGE DRAMA QUEEN
Directed by Sara Sugarman; written by Gail Parent, based on the book by Dyan Sheldon; director of photography, Stephen H. Burum; edited by Anita Brandt Burgoyne; music by Mark Mothersbaugh; production designer, Leslie McDonald; produced by Robert Shapiro and Jerry Leider; released by Walt Disney Pictures. Running time: 97 minutes. This film is rated PG.
WITH: Lindsay Lohan (Lola), Adam Garcia (Stu), Glenne Headly (Karen), Alison Pill (Ella), Eli Marienthal (Sam), Megan Fox (Carla) and Carol Kane (Miss Baggoli).
FILM REVIEW
