The Knicks made no trades Thursday but brought in a superstar to practice, one who always wanted to play for them.
Kareem Abdul-Jabbar, dressed in Knicks gear, was a striking presence in the team's huddle, and he said he hoped to work out a more definitive role with the Knicks. He could serve either as a consultant, helping to coach big men, or as a scout.
Isiah Thomas, the Knicks' president of basketball operations, said that no decision had been made to give Abdul-Jabbar an official position, but that the Knicks would ''talk to him and see if it makes sense to have him in our organization.''
''He wants to be in the game and we'll see if we can help him,'' Thomas said.
Abdul-Jabbar, 56, the N.B.A.'s career scoring leader, was an assistant coach during the second half of the 1999-2000 season with the Los Angeles Clippers under Jim Todd. He worked as a consultant for Thomas when Thomas coached the Indiana Pacers. In 2002 Abdul-Jabbar served as the head coach of the Oklahoma Storm of the United States Basketball League, a minor league.
Abdul-Jabbar was thrilled about possibly returning to the N.B.A. and joining the Knicks.
''This is a great feeling,'' he said. ''I started watching pro basketball in Madison Square Garden, was born and raised in Manhattan. When I was in grade school I had dreams of playing for the Knicks. It never worked out like that. I almost thought I could be a territorial draft pick and they ended all that before I even got into college.
''I never really connected with them, so being able to connect with them now at this point is really nice. It takes a long time to go full circle, but it seems like it happened.''
Thomas said that when he was the Pacers' coach, ''we brought Kareem in several times to work with our players.''
''He's very interested in coaching and being back in the game, and he has so much to offer,'' Thomas said.
Knicks Coach Lenny Wilkens said he introduced Abdul-Jabbar to his young players. ''I told them, this guy's got a wealth of knowledge, don't be afraid to ask questions,'' Wilkens said. ''He feels good about sharing that. I think they all were in awe when they saw him.''
PRO BASKETBALL
