A type of self-renewing cell found in the adult human brain may have the potential to repair brain damage or disease, scientists reported yesterday.
The cells, neural stem cells, have been known about for some time. But their function has been a mystery. Researchers theorized that the cells, as in rats and monkeys, generated new neurons that migrated to olfactory regions, helping maintain the sense of smell.
But the study, reported yesterday in Nature, indicates that in humans, the stem cells behave differently. They form ribbons that produce different types of brain cells, including neurons. The new neurons do not migrate to olfactory regions, and they are not involved in the human capacity for smell, the study found.
Dr. Nader Sanai, a resident neurosurgeon at the University of California at San Francisco School of Medicine and the study's lead author, said much remained to be learned before scientists knew whether the cells could be harnessed to regenerate or replace tissue lost to disease or injury.
''First we need to understand the biology of these cells,'' Dr. Sanai said. ''We don't know enough to predict their usefulness.''
One possibility, he said, is that the cells, found in the lining of two fluid-filled pockets near the front of the head, will turn out to serve no purpose. Or they may migrate to other parts of the brain to carry out repairs.
Dr. Pasko Rakic of Yale, a leading expert on stem cells who was not involved in the research, called the study ''important and interesting.'' The big challenge, Dr. Rakic said, remains to find a way to induce the potential neuronal stem cells to migrate into the right positions and replace lost or damaged neurons.
Researchers are keenly interested in the cells because they do not pose ethical questions raised by stem cells drawn from embryos. Many tissues in the body produce localized stem cells that presumably exist to replenish lost cells throughout a person's lifetime.
The study was conducted in the laboratory of its senior author, Dr. Arturo Alvarez-Buylla, a professor of neurological surgery at San Francisco. To learn more about human brain stem cells, the researchers collected target tissue from 65 people who had brain surgery and from 45 autopsied brains.
The researchers were struck by the fact that the tissue, when stained, contained ribbons of astrocytes, a kind of brain cell known to support many aspects of brain function.
''We immediately knew we had to investigate them further,'' Dr. Sanai said.
When the researchers added growth factors to the ribbons in a culture dish, tiny spherical balls appeared. Those balls in turn gave rise to neurons, other astrocytes and a kind of cell that insulates neurons.
In a second experiment, the scientists placed individual ribbon astrocytes on a warm layer of ordinary astrocytes. Again, the ribbon astrocytes produced new neurons and two types of helper cells.
