Senator John Kerry won the endorsement of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. on Thursday as Senator John Edwards called trade and job losses a ''moral issue'' and repeatedly pressed for debates with Mr. Kerry.
The leaders of the federation of 13 million labor union members endorsed Mr. Kerry as the Democratic primary struggle largely narrowed to a two-man race and focused on the economy and trade.
''We've had four years to see who George Bush fights for in this country,'' Mr. Kerry said in front of the A.F.L.-C.I.O. headquarters, two blocks from the White House. ''And we're here to say to working people across this country, 'In November, it's going to be your turn.' ''
Mr. Kerry's strategists hope that the endorsement will further establish him as the likely presidential nominee and extinguish the spark that Mr. Edwards's campaign received from a surprisingly strong second-place finish on Tuesday in the Wisconsin primary.
Outside the headquarters of the federation, its president, John J. Sweeney, made clear labor's view that the time for contested primaries was over.
''Today,'' Mr. Sweeney said, ''we know the time has come to unite behind one man, one leader, one candidate.''
Mr. Edwards, who has placed a battle for hard-pressed working people at the center of his campaign, said that although he had ''high regard'' for the labor federation, he was not overly concerned about the endorsement.
''I've done extremely well with union households,'' he said, ''and I think that will continue.''
A spokeswoman for the labor organization, Lane Windham, said the vote by its general board was unanimous, though two unions abstained. They were Unite, the apparel workers' union that has endorsed Mr. Edwards, and the United Automobile Workers.
As he campaigned from New York to Georgia, 2 of the 10 ''Super Tuesday'' primary states that vote on March 2, Mr. Edwards pressed for debates between him and Mr. Kerry, events that would give Mr. Edwards valuable exposure.
''I think it would be a real loss for our party if Senator Kerry and I didn't debate right here in New York,'' Mr. Edwards said to more than 700 people on Thursday at Columbia University. ''We should debate wherever and whenever the voters want us to, because this election is too important not to.''
Speaking later at Clark Atlanta University, he pushed again for a debate with Mr. Kerry, saying it should be held in Georgia.
Mr. Edwards told reporters that there should be as many debates as possible in the next few weeks and in as many states as can be arranged.
''I will come to New York, I will come to California, I will go anywhere in America to debate,'' he said, ''because the people of the United States deserve to hear a debate on these issues.''
After holding out for days, Mr. Kerry agreed to participate in a debate next week to be sponsored by CNN and The Los Angeles Times. Mr. Edwards, the Rev. Al Sharpton and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio had already agreed to participate.
Mr. Kerry has not agreed to a debate run by the League of Women Voters scheduled for Sunday in Los Angeles. If he does not agree, the league said it would probably cancel the event.
Mr. Kerry's campaign aides said that their candidate had a busy schedule and could not go to every proposed debate.
''We've got 10 contests in a little more than 10 days, and John Kerry is competing in each and every one of them,'' a spokeswoman, Stephanie Cutter, said. ''We want to communicate with voters in the best way possible and thought that the debate in Los Angeles next week was the best way to do so.''
In speeches on Thursday, Mr. Edwards continued to hammer at trade policy.
''This is a moral issue, and it's about right and wrong,'' he said. ''It's not enough to drive up stock prices if it drives down wages.''
Mr. Edwards said he would support just those trade pacts that included strong labor and environmental standards, a position that would result in more work for Americans. As president, he added, he would work to dismantle trade agreements that let American companies ''move to another country and hire children to make their products.''
Mr. Kerry's campaign fired off e-mail messages to reporters that attacked Mr. Edwards as a Johnny-come-lately on trade. Ms. Cutter circulated a major speech on economics that Mr. Edwards gave in June.
''There's one thing missing from this speech: trade,'' Ms. Cutter wrote. ''Apparently, cracking down on unfair trade practices and promoting fair and balanced trade was not a priority to John Edwards just eight months ago.''
Strategists for Mr. Edwards have said he will need to win some major states before mid-March to keep his candidacy alive. His schedule over the next few days has him making several stops in three big Super Tuesday prizes, New York, Ohio and Georgia.
The Super Tuesday primaries include some of the most expensive media markets, and there are questions about how effectively Mr. Edwards will be able to compete.
Officials said on Thursday that the campaign had raised $4.2 million since the senator's second-place finish in the Iowa caucuses on Jan. 19, including $700,000 since his second-place finish in Wisconsin on Tuesday. Two fund-raising events on Wednesday in New Jersey accounted for $250,000 of the total.
After Mr. Edwards spoke in Atlanta, he left for yet another fund-raiser, in Miami.
Mr. Edwards continued his policy of refraining from direct attacks on Mr. Kerry, a policy that he takes care to point out to each audience.
Mr. Kerry, too, refrained from criticizing his opponent directly. Surrogates did it for him.
Across the day, Mr. Edwards was greeted by supporters. Nancy Wells, 55, broke into tears as she listened to him in Atlanta. When he mentioned people whose jobs had moved abroad, Ms. Wells raised her hand and shouted, ''I'm one!''
Since she lost her position as an accountant for Siemens in Gainesville, Ga., and had a lot of time on her hands, she decided to volunteer for Mr. Edwards's campaign.
''I believe he is the one who can beat George Bush,'' Ms. Wells said. ''He's got that Southern thing going for him. He will hand you your guts on a platter, and you will thank him for it before you even feel the knife.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CHALLENGERS
