WOW, the recipe for his caviar omelet sounds seductive, but first, a word from our glib but glum chef du jour: ''I'm putting myself through the college of life, and it's pretty expensive,'' he says. ''I'm getting beat up pretty bad. I don't even know why I'm in this predicament.''
Blessed with a baby face and gel-infused Botticelli tendrils, but cursed, for the moment, by his beautiful people persona, celebrity chef platform, and virtual ubiquity in the news media, Rocco DiSpirito, who is being sued by one business partner and stands accused of sending out subpar edibles from the kitchens of both New York City restaurants he runs, is strumming the blues on a vintage Martin guitar. It's out of tune, perfect for a flavor maestro like him: the sour blues.
And, with minimal prompting, he sings them intermittently in an eyeball-to-eyeball chat at his esoteric office on East 22nd Street, where Rocco-designed pots and pans jam the bookshelves, the well-stocked bar showcases single malt Scotch (his beverage of choice) and a framed photograph of his cherished kitchen tools features his first chef's knife. He was 14 and hellbent on becoming a chef; it cost $15.
He's infinitely handier with the knife than with the Martin, but says he loves them both. It's a soul satisfaction thing; he may venerate Gray Kunz, his mentor and ex-boss, and Danny Meyer, his role model in the striking the proper creative-commercial balance, but he considers Bruce Springsteen a hero and included him on a long list of culinary influences in his first book, ''Flavor.''
On his desk, he keeps a whimsical thank-you note from Mr. Springsteen, in whose kitchen he once cooked. ''I was so nervous that it was a disaster,'' Mr. DiSpirito says. ''First I cut my finger, then I dropped a can of chicken stock, and then I made a dish with red peppers, and it turns out that he hates red peppers.'' Bummer. At least they keep in touch.
Mr. DiSpirito, 37, is a maximum-eye-contact guy: he's abundantly aware that personal magnetism is as marketable for New York City's star chefs as signature entrees. But currently he is -- owing to circumstances that may end up being resolved in a courtroom rather than over a conciliatory plate of pasta -- a dispirited, defensive guy; it goes against his nature.
''I'm an independent thinker, and I guess that sometimes means I can be reckless,'' he says. ''I'm still trying to perfect a balance between the creative and the commercial. As a creative person who lives in a commercial world, I understand it's not all about you. No chef is a pure artist; somebody has to want to come in and eat the food you cook and pay for it and like it. If there's people who think I'm not longer an artist and I've sold out, I'd say that the good chefs sell out every night: their dining rooms are sold out every night.''
He perks up, pours some San Pellegrino water and serves a few sticks of red licorice. He's at his happiest when his food pleases a guest: so what if it's a cellophane-wrapped hunk of dyed sugar? So what if he's a Culinary Institute of America graduate who apprenticed for a year in Paris and was named one of America's best new chefs in 1999 by Food &amp; Wine magazine? It's comfort stuff, same as the occasional McDonald's fries. He's no snob, and he suspects that's perceived as a flaw by the foodie firmament.
I'D been under the microscope in the New York food world for so long,'' says Mr. DiSpirito, who received raves while headlining Dava's brief shelf life in 1995 and re-established himself at Union Pacific in 1997, ''that when I made that calculated risk to combine opening Rocco's with a reality show about the process, I thought, 'What's the difference if there's a few cameras looking on?' Turns out, there was a big difference. Rocco's took the Italian-American food of my childhood, a heritage I'd been ashamed of as a kid growing up in Jamaica, Queens, and reproduced it. That food is very commercial, and I think people were appalled I'd consider doing something so commercial.''
Which yanks us back to the sober topic of why everyone seems intent on biting the hand that feeds him. (Him being Jeffrey Chodorow, the partner suing Mr. DiSpirito for control of Rocco's 22nd Street, the start-up eatery that starred in a network reality series last summer that was renewed for the spring broadcast season.) Or her? (Her being a food critic from The New York Times who stung Mr. DiSpirito with what he called a cursory two-star review of vaunted Union Pacific the same day he was served with the papers for the custody battle over Rocco's.) Mr. Chodorow's complaint charges Mr. DiSpirito with neglecting Rocco's; the restaurant review castigates Union Pacific for a rudderless kitchen.
And where's Rocco? Granted, he was off skiing at Stowe with his girlfriend on Valentine's Day, but he swears that he devotes 80 percent of his waking life to his two restaurants. Neglect them? Never! ''There's a lot of irony in my life lately,'' he deadpans. ''No, really, it's not funny. I feel bad about all this.'' And his reputation is at risk. ''I know the half-life of this lawsuit is going to be a long one. My family and I put our souls into Rocco's; it was like a rebirth for my mother at 79. She spent the day crying in a corner when I got the court papers. But I think Jeffrey would love it if I walk away and let him have it: he can call it Jeffrey's Formerly Rocco's and get his mother to come cook.''
Ouch. Single malt Scotch, anybody?
PUBLIC LIVES
