The Bush administration encouraged hospitals on Thursday to give discounts to uninsured patients and to financially needy Medicare beneficiaries.
Such discounts are permissible under federal fraud and abuse laws, the government said, in a clarification requested by the hospital industry.
Hospitals have been criticized in the last two years for charging uninsured people much more than they charge people with employer-sponsored health insurance. Group health plans often negotiate rates lower than the prices charged to people without insurance.
Tommy G. Thompson, the secretary of health and human services, explained the administration's position in a letter to the American Hospital Association.
''Hospitals can provide discounts to uninsured and underinsured patients who cannot afford their hospital bills and to Medicare beneficiaries who cannot afford their Medicare cost-sharing obligations,'' Mr. Thompson said. ''Nothing in the Medicare rules or regulations prohibits such discounts.''
Mr. Thompson encouraged hospitals to provide discounts. Dennis G. Smith, acting administrator of the federal Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services, said: ''Serving the uninsured is a high calling. We want to encourage our partners in the private sector to help.''
More than 43 million Americans, including nearly one-third of Hispanics, are uninsured.
K. B. Forbes, executive director of the Council of United Latinos, a Hispanic advocacy group, said: ''Hospitals have been charging outrageously high prices to the uninsured. We are very pleased with Secretary Thompson's letter. It's now clear that hospitals can offer discounts to the uninsured, including working-class families who earn too much to qualify for charity care, but not enough to pay their medical bills.''
Melinda R. Hatton, vice president of the American Hospital Association, said the guidelines did not go far enough. ''It's still not entirely clear what hospitals can do to help the working poor,'' Ms. Hatton said. ''How much of a discount can they give to a family of four with income of more than $37,000 a year?''
The new guidelines are a bit stricter for Medicare beneficiaries than for uninsured patients.
Dara Corrigan, acting principal deputy inspector general at the Department of Health and Human Services, said hospitals could reduce or eliminate co-payments and deductibles that would cause financial hardship for a Medicare beneficiary.
Hospitals will be free to define ''financial need,'' based on the local cost of living and the beneficiary's income, assets and medical bills, Ms. Corrigan said. But the hospital's criteria should be applied uniformly to all patients, she added. Moreover, she said, hospitals cannot offer discounts ''as part of any advertisement or solicitation'' intended to attract Medicare patients or to generate business payable by Medicare or other federal health programs.
But Ms. Corrigan said hospitals could advertise discounts available to uninsured patients.
Ms. Hatton of the hospital association said the distinction was unrealistic.
''We urge hospitals to make the community aware of their charity care policies,'' Ms. Hatton said, ''but how can they do that without informing Medicare beneficiaries?''
Consumer groups say the billing practices of some hospitals have been too aggressive. Medicare will pay hospitals for a share of their bad debt if they make ''reasonable efforts'' at collection, but the Bush administration said hospitals did not have to seize patients' homes or other assets.
