Jeffrey K. Skilling, the former chief executive of Enron, was indicted on Thursday on charges that he conspired to disguise the company's troubled financial performance while profiting from sales of stock inflated by false earnings reports.
Mr. Skilling, who pleaded not guilty at an arraignment here, was charged with 35 counts of fraud, insider trading and conspiracy. Simultaneously, the Securities and Exchange Commission filed a civil fraud action against Mr. Skilling, seeking the forfeit of all ''ill-gotten gains,'' including the compensation he received at Enron, which filed for bankruptcy protection in December 2001.
The collapse of Enron, a once-staid pipeline business that Mr. Skilling transformed into a global energy-trading giant, sent a clear signal that the boom years of the bubble era had come to an end. Investors lost billions in the debacle, which quickly became enmeshed in Washington politics because of the company's ties to White House officials.
While Enron seemed an isolated case at first, it was soon eclipsed by accounting scandals at an array of companies including WorldCom, Tyco and others that shook investor confidence in the integrity of corporate financial disclosures and led to sweeping revisions in federal securities laws.
The indictment of Mr. Skilling leaves the company's former chairman, Kenneth L. Lay, as the most prominent executive who has not been charged in the case. He was not mentioned in the indictment but is still under investigation.
The accusations against Mr. Skilling range from outright criminal violations that significantly affected reported profits to more subtle earnings-management techniques widespread in corporate America in the 1990's. They depict Enron as a struggling enterprise that grew deeply dependent on accounting manipulation to maintain its image as a financial powerhouse that turned in reliable performances.
Indeed, prosecutors have assembled a case that appears to depend not so much on the specific effect of any one accusation but instead on the overall impact of a range of activities over many years. In quarter after quarter, Enron is portrayed in the indictment as struggling to find another one-shot technique to lift its earnings to meet or exceed Wall Street's projections, helping the stock price continue what had been an almost uninterrupted climb over more than a decade.
With the indictment on Thursday, 29 people have been charged with crimes related to the collapse of Enron, including 20 former executives. Of those, 9 have pleaded guilty, including Andrew S. Fastow, Enron's former chief financial officer, who structured a series of off-the-books partnerships that were used to manipulate the company's financial performance. The Skilling charges were added to an indictment already filed against Richard A. Causey, Enron's former chief accounting officer.
Mr. Skilling, 50, surrendered just before 7 a.m. Thursday to agents at the Houston field office of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. Agents then led him in handcuffs to the federal courthouse, where he appeared before Magistrate Judge Martha Crone. After his plea, he was ordered released on a $5 million bond and surrendered his passport.
As part of the charges, the government will seek forfeiture of $66 million in cash and real estate from Mr. Skilling. It will also seek assets worth $6 million from Mr. Causey.
Prosecutors hailed the charges as a demonstration of the strength of their pursuit of wrongdoing at Enron.
''The Skilling indictment demonstrates in no uncertain terms that no executive is too prominent or too powerful and that no scheme to defraud is too complex or too fancy to avoid the long arm of the law,'' James Comey, the deputy attorney general, said at a news conference in Washington.
But, in the first salvo of what is sure to be a long-running legal battle, Mr. Skilling's lawyers lashed out at the prosecution, saying that the charges were a result of a predetermined effort to indict their client that was set in motion when the Justice Department created a task force to investigate the company's collapse.
''From the moment the Enron task force was designated, there was a decision to go after Jeff Skilling and demonize this company,'' said Bruce Hiler, one of Mr. Skilling's lawyers. ''The government's role is to investigate cases, not to create cases.''
Outside the courthouse, Daniel Petrocelli, another lawyer for Mr. Skilling, criticized the prosecution for what he said was a failure to account for information favorable to his client.
''I guess they needed a scapegoat, and I guess Jeff Skilling is that scapegoat,'' he said. ''Jeff Skilling did nothing wrong.''
Mr. Petrocelli said that soon after Enron's collapse, Mr. Skilling submitted to a polygraph test administered by a former coordinator for the F.B.I.'s polygraph program. He said that a copy of the polygraph report was provided to prosecutors this week.
The polygraph report shows Mr. Skilling was asked whether he knew of improper financial dealings hidden from the board, received undisclosed payments, believed in the accounting for certain off-the-books entities, or engaged in a particular stock sale based on inside information. In his answers, Mr. Skilling denied all knowledge or participation in wrongdoing, and the examiner found no indication of deception.
Still, the polygraph test will not play a role in Mr. Skilling's courtroom defense. Under the federal rules of evidence, lie detector tests are not admissible in court as proof of a witness's veracity or a defendant's culpability because of concerns about their reliability.
While the general public perception has always been that the ultimate target of the Enron investigation was Mr. Lay, the former chairman, Mr. Skilling has always been viewed by investigators and lawyers in the case as more likely to be the subject of a criminal indictment. That is because many of the underlying accusations of wrongdoing at Enron -- including those that have already resulted in guilty pleas -- involved associates and allies of Mr. Skilling. Moreover, Mr. Skilling was always perceived as being far more involved in the daily operations of Enron than Mr. Lay ever was.
There is no mention of Mr. Lay, either by name or title, in the Skilling indictment. He is, however, still under investigation.
Indeed, at the news conference in Washington, Mr. Comey, the deputy attorney general, appeared to portray Mr. Skilling as Enron's most important figure, saying that he ''essentially ran this company'' in the period covered by the indictment.
He added, ''In short, the indictment alleges that this was the guy at Enron.''
As described in the indictment and related charges by the S.E.C., financial projections at Enron were essentially guaranteed, with Mr. Skilling, Mr. Causey and others using the accounting devices to create the results that had been projected. In essence, the indictment says, Enron projected an unrealistic growth rate for Wall Street and then, when the company failed to meet those unattainable goals, manipulated its accounting to create the profits that the world expected to see.
That was accomplished, according to the indictment, by manipulating expenses, revenue, debt levels, cash flow and asset values through a variety of means, including fraudulent valuations, misuse of off-the-books partnerships, improper corporate reorganizations and intentional mistreatment of accounting reserves.
Indeed, what may well be most surprising about this case -- which has for so long focused on some high-level, complex accounting issues -- is how simplistic some of the suspected frauds actually were.
For example, one charge describes an effort in the second quarter of 2000, when Mr. Skilling and Mr. Causey decided that Enron should beat analysts' per-share profit estimates of 32 cents a share. Already, the indictment says, the company's performance had been rigged through various schemes just to reach those expectations. But, to do even better, Enron tapped certain trading reserves it held for no business purpose other than to reach the goal of beating the estimates. That quarter, Enron reported earnings of 34 cents a share.
The accusations involving Mr. Fastow are probably the most damning in the indictment, primarily because they constitute the most blatant potential violations. In addition to his job as chief financial officer, Mr. Fastow also ran an investment fund known as LJM2, which did numerous deals buying assets from Enron.
Such a setup -- while creating a conflict of interest for the company's chief financial officer -- would be legal if Mr. Fastow's fund was indeed incurring the risk of owning the assets.
But the indictment says that Mr. Skilling and Mr. Causey entered into undisclosed side agreements with Mr. Fastow under which LJM2 was guaranteed not to lose money on any of its Enron dealings. Such an agreement would, under any accounting interpretation, mean that Enron still owned the assets ''sold'' to LJM2. However, Enron used those dealings, the indictment said, to manufacture earnings and conceal debt.
Some of the charges stem, directly and indirectly, from the financial effects of the California energy crisis in 2000. According to the indictment, beginning in the third quarter of 2000, Enron received profits in excess of $1 billion from trading in California, a result that would signal investors that the company's revenue was closely tied to the market price for energy. Such a perception would, by necessity, make Enron a less valuable stock, since it would be seen as much more dependent on volatile commodity prices.
To avoid that perception, the indictment says, Mr. Skilling, Mr. Causey and others constructed reserve accounts for the huge windfall. Then, into 2001, hundreds of millions of dollars of those reserved amounts were used to allow the company to hit its earnings targets.
Throughout this period, the indictment says, Mr. Skilling and Mr. Causey were profiting from large sales of their stockholdings, based on prices pumped up by the bogus financial reports. All told, from 1998 until 2001, the indictment says, Mr. Skilling sold some $200 million worth of Enron stock and stock options, netting over $89 million in profit. In that same time, it says, Mr. Causey received $14 million from such sales, netting more than $5 million in profits.
Correction:  February 24, 2004, Tuesday  A chart in Business Day on Friday listing the former executives of Enron who have been indicted or pleaded guilty to various financial crimes referred incorrectly to charges against two former executives of Enron's broadband division, Kevin A. Howard and Michael W. Krautz. (The error also appeared in a similar chart on Jan. 8.) While the two men have been charged with fraud and conspiracy, they have not been charged with insider trading.
