For too long, a juicy Democratic primary for the most excitable New Yorkers has been like a reservation at Per Se for foodies -- something to dream about, but not terribly likely to get.
But for the first time in four presidential political seasons, New York has a hot race on its turf. And that has political devotees like State Assemblyman John J. McEneny, a Democrat from Albany and former Howard Dean supporter, in a tiny tizzy.
Mr. McEneny talks to his daughter Rachel McEneny Spencer in Yonkers, who is pushing him to switch his support to John Edwards. He talks to his county executive, Michael G. Breslin, who backs the other John. ''He has his Kerry button on, but he lets all of us in his office,'' he said.
Mr. Breslin's brother, State Senator Neil D. Breslin, was a Dean delegate, so there is that.
''I've gotten requests from both sides,'' Mr. McEneny said. ''I haven't made up my mind yet.''
It is delicious stuff, he says.
Mr. McEneny listens to talk radio, drops into political conversations going on around the capital, and ponders Nafta votes. ''I think this is the most fun we've had in a few years,'' he said.
The primary in New York is on March 2, the same day Democrats go to the polls in California, Connecticut, Georgia, Maryland, Massachusetts, Ohio, Rhode Island and Vermont, and the day of the Minnesota caucus. Of the 1,151 delegates at stake that day, California has by far the most -- 370 -- but New York, with its 236 delegates, is second in importance to the men still standing.
Several factors have ginned up some excitement among the sort of New York Democrats who irritate their spouses by clicking around Internet news sites late into the evening instead of coming to bed. Senator Edwards is poised to be in the state for the next five days, bringing the national spotlight with him. He has said he sees New York as crucial to helping him stay in the race for another day.
More exciting, the race, unlike in previous years, is not wrapped up by the time the show hits New York. Further, candidates who enjoyed support in New York but have dropped out have left their supporters scrambling to find a new man to get behind. And a dislike of President Bush tends to be more vitriolic among Democrats in New York.
''New Yorkers are like everybody else, only more so,'' said former Gov. Mario M. Cuomo. ''9/11 affected the entire country, only us more so. The state of the economy affected everyone, but us more so; the job numbers here are terrible. Desire to beat Bush, that desire plus plausibility to achieve that desire, makes us stronger than ever.''
There is also the entertainment value.
''It is chatter,'' said Kevin R. McCabe, a longtime Democratic adviser who recently volunteered for Gen. Wesley K. Clark. ''It's like talking about 'Mystic River.' You know, 'That was an interesting twist, I thought it was going to be Dean!' It's like, 'I thought it was going to be Tim Robbins.' People have had a lot of fun with this campaign since it started, and I think they don't want it to end.''
The thing is, they cannot stop thinking about it. They think about the primary as they rinse their salad greens. They think about it when they should be thinking about their PowerPoint presentation. They have too many outlets, and they know it.
''The Web I do in the morning,'' said Martha Baker, a Queens resident and the vice president of development for the Center for the Advancement of Women. ''I do it again in the day, and after I get home in the evening. Late at night, I am watching the cable news channels. My No. 1 issue is that my daughter is carrying twins. But after that, this is No. 1 on the hit parade, as they used to say.''
The Young Democrats of Richmond County are holding a shindig on Wednesday, ''Young Democrats After Dark,'' at a club in Midtown -- far from the Republican empire of Staten Island. While some New Yorkers are content to bet on baseball, these members wager on political outcomes.
''I think for political junkies this is a very exciting time,'' said Michael P. Schnall, a legislative financial analyst for the New York City Council, and vice president of the Richmond County organization. ''Because you don't have one candidate who is just taking over. I am constantly online. I look at CNN.com. I watch cable. I spend a lot of time reading the papers, talking to friends and betting a beer over who will drop out this week. It is almost a sport for a lot of us.''
William T. Cunningham, who usually works for Democrats but these days spends his workday as the communications director for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, a Republican of short standing, put it this way: ''The New York Democrats are like the Knicks. Just when you thought the season was over, they come back to life and make it interesting.''
