This is the groove and Stephon Marbury is feeling it, falling into a hypnotic rhythm with every shot he makes. The Knicks are in sync along with him.
This is the groove Marbury dreamed up last night: his artistry left the Los Angeles Clippers wide-eyed and flat-footed; he spun circles around his defenders; and he drove with jagged force through the lane. He pulled up for jumpers from 18 feet and from seemingly across the street. And he took over the game in the fourth quarter, scoring 20 of his season-high 42 points.
Kurt Thomas found the groove he had in Miami on Saturday afternoon, when he hit seven consecutive shots in the second half of the Knicks' victory. Last night, Thomas made his first seven shots in the first half. Then he passed the hot hand to Marbury, who made six consecutive baskets in the fourth quarter.
Thomas was the only other Knick to score in the final quarter, adding 10 points, including the icing free throws in the Knicks' 110-104 victory over the Clippers.
This is the groove for the Knicks: They have won five straight games for the first time since March 2001, when Jeff Van Gundy was coach. They improved to 25-27, 9-3 under Coach Lenny Wilkens and 11-6 since Marbury arrived Jan. 6 in the trade with Phoenix.
''We're rolling right now; we don't want to let up,'' Marbury said.
With just two more games before the All-Star Game break -- at Dallas and New Orleans -- the Knicks have a chance to reach .500 for the first time all season. ''I would love to go 7-0 going into the break,'' Marbury said. ''Nothing is impossible.''
What makes the winning streak so remarkable is that the Knicks have accomplished it without their captain and $100 million man, Allan Houston, who will be on the injured list until after the All-Star Game.
Thomas, despite playing with a badly jammed pinkie finger on his shooting hand, and Marbury more than compensated last night. Thomas hit 12 of his 19 shots, scoring 28 points. Marbury missed just 5 shots from the field, making 15 and pacing the Knicks to 56 percent shooting.
Just before time expired in the first quarter, Marbury launched a 3-pointer from 30 feet. As the ball swished, Marbury raised his arms and shouted ''Oh,'' holding the pose in admiration for five seconds.
In the second quarter, Marbury got the ball on the fast break, pulled up with 18 seconds left on the shot clock and buried a 26-footer without hesitation. He hit his first three 3-pointers, giving him a streak of six 3-pointers over two games.
''I was in a nice rhythm,'' Marbury said. ''My intent was to stay in the groove and not get out of it.
''Isiah has been pretty much telling me I got to start stepping on people's necks when you got them down,'' Marbury said, referring to Isiah Thomas, the team president, ''so that's what I concentrated on.''
The Knicks did not finish off the Clippers until the final minute, however. They let a 14-point lead, with 6 minutes 24 seconds left, slip to 4 points at 106-102 with 28.5 seconds remaining. Four seconds later, Thomas hit two free throws to seal the victory.
''We are feeling good and we're very confident,'' Kurt Thomas said. ''Stephon was the difference. Whenever we needed a basket, he just took over the game.''
On a night when fans received ''New York
Starbury'' posters, even his opponents gave him respect.
Elton Brand and Corey Maggette each scored 28 points for the Clippers (22-27) but were mesmerized by Marbury. ''There's not much you can do with a guy who's hitting four or five shots in a row,'' Maggette said. ''He's hitting tough shots with hands in his face.''
When he was not hitting jumpers, Marbury was blowing by defenders, one time spinning around two of them in the lane and dropping in a layup while drawing a foul. Other times, he passed behind his back off the pick-and-roll to Thomas, finishing with 8 assists.
Thomas and Marbury combined for 70 of the Knicks' 110 points and shot 69 percent. But the number that mattered most to the Knicks last night was 5, for their winning streak.
''It feels great,'' Thomas said. ''I haven't had that feeling in a while. Hopefully, we can keep it going.''
REBOUNDS
With just 10 days until the trading deadline, ISIAH THOMAS, the Knicks' president, acknowledged that he had begun talks to extend KURT THOMAS's contract. But he stopped short of saying that Thomas would not be traded. ''We're in negotiations with Kurt right now, in terms of extending him,'' Isiah Thomas said. ''We're trying to work numbers out. The first day I got here, I realized how important Kurt was to the team.'' But asked whether that meant the Knicks had no interest in trading him, Isiah Thomas said: ''I wouldn't go that far. We want to get better.''
PRO BASKETBALL
