Following are excerpts from President Bush's interview with Tim Russert on ''Meet the Press,'' broadcast by NBC yesterday, as recorded by Federal News Service Inc. A full transcript is at nytimes.com/washington.
MR. RUSSERT: How do you respond to critics who say that you brought the nation to war under false pretenses?
PRESIDENT BUSH: Yes. First of all, I expected to find the weapons. Sitting behind this desk, making a very difficult decision of war and peace, and basing my decision on the best intelligence possible -- intelligence that had been gathered over the years -- intelligence that not only our analysts thought was valid, but analysts from other countries thought was valid. And I made a decision based upon that intelligence in the context of the war against terror. In other words, we were attacked, and therefore every threat had to be reanalyzed. Every threat had to be looked at. Every potential harm to America had to be judged in the context of this war on terror. And I made the decision obviously to take our case to the international community in the hopes that we could achieve a disarmament of Saddam Hussein peacefully. In other words, we looked at the intelligence and we remember the fact that he had used weapons, which meant he had weapons. We knew the fact that he was paying for suicide bombers. We knew the fact that he was funding terrorists groups. He was a dangerous man. And that was the intelligence I was using prior to the run-up to this war. . . .
And so we expected -- I expected -- there to be stockpiles of weapons. But David Kay has found the capacity to produce weapons. In other words, David Kay goes in and says we haven't found stockpiles yet, and there's theories as to where the weapons went. They could have been destroyed during the war. Saddam and his henchmen could have destroyed them as we entered into Iraq. They could have been hidden. They could have been transported to another country. . . .
But David Kay did report to the American people that Saddam had the capacity to make weapons. Saddam Hussein was dangerous with weapons. Saddam Hussein was dangerous with the ability to make weapons. He was a dangerous man in a dangerous part of the world. And I made a decision to go to the United Nations -- by the way, quoting a lot of their data -- in other words, this is unaccounted-for stockpiles that you thought he had -- because I don't think America can stand by and hope for the best from a madman. And I believe it is essential -- I believe it is essential that when we see a threat we deal with those threats before they become imminent. It's too late if they become imminent. It's too late in this new kind of war. And so that's why I made the decision I made.
Q. Mr. President, the director of the C.I.A. said that his briefings had qualifiers and caveats. But when you spoke to the country you said there is no doubt. When Vice President Cheney spoke to the country he said it's no doubt. Secretary Powell: ''No doubt.'' Secretary Rumsfeld: ''No doubt. We know where the weapons are.'' You said, quote: ''The Iraqi regime is a threat of unique urgency. Saddam Hussein is a threat that we must deal with as quickly as possible.'' You gave the clear sense that this was an immediate threat that must be dealt with.
A. I think, if I might remind you, that in my language I called it ''a grave and gathering threat.'' I don't want to get into a word contest, but what I do want to share with you is my sentiment at the time. There was no doubt in my mind that Saddam Hussein was a danger to America. No doubt.
Q. In what way?
A. Well, because he had the capacity to have a weapon, make a weapon. We thought he had weapons. The international community thought he had weapons. But he had the capacity to make a weapon, and then let that weapon fall into the hands of a shadowy terrorist network. It's important for people to understand the context in which I made a decision in the Oval Office. I'm dealing with a world in which we have gotten struck by terrorists with airplanes, and we get intelligence saying that, you know, we want to harm America. And the worst nightmare scenario for any president is to realize that these kind of terrorist networks have the capacity to arm up with some of these deadly weapons, and they strike us. And the president of the United States' most solemn responsibility is to keep this country secure.
