CARBON fiber is a high-tech material created from humble ingredients, following an improbably simple recipe.
Bake acrylic- or petroleum-based fiber at 3,500 degrees Fahrenheit until brittle. Chop and blend into injection-molded plastic as a high-strength filler. For more demanding uses, reheat the threads to 5,500 degrees in an oven that prevents any contact with air.
When that is done, the baked goods have been ''graphitized,'' a form with increased elasticity that allows the strands to be woven into a coarse fabric. Once that fabric has been soaked in liquid epoxy and molded into rigid sheets, the material is strong enough to replace the steel in a car's chassis or exterior panels, reducing the weight by four-fifths.
One problem, though: with prices above $8 a pound for midgrade carbon fiber, the material costs about 20 times as much as the steel it replaces.
When carbon fiber components are visible, rather than buried deep in the car's structure, the material's distinctive weave is usually visible under a layer of clear plastic. Aerodynamic wings and interior trim pieces are constructed this way -- though what looks like carbon fiber is often just a plastic replica.
Carbon fiber's strength is best exploited by placing the strands in tension -- positioned so that forces are trying to stretch the material. It cannot take sharp bends, and when compressed its strength depends largely on the properties of the resin encasing it. But panels built up from multiple layers of the fabric, with the strands oriented in different directions, can sustain a great deal of force.
Carbon fiber usually begins as acrylic fiber or as strands drawn from a tarlike goop derived from petroleum or coal. Generally, things made of carbon fiber are good conductors of heat and electricity. This makes it useful for applications that require electromagnetic shielding or for dissipating static electricity, but bad for a component that needs to be insulated from either electricity or heat.
The use of carbon fiber was pioneered in military aviation and space exploration, where generous budgets and extreme conditions encouraged experimentation. Early applications typically used a long, continuous fiber carefully looped to make components like wing panels. Carbon fiber was also adopted for racing sailboats, especially to construct lightweight masts and hulls.
The future of carbon fiber as an automotive material may benefit from its rising popularity in sporting goods. Makers of golf clubs, tennis rackets, fishing rods and bicycle frames increasingly take advantage of carbon's high strength and low weight. As more of those products are turned out, the cost is likely to come down.
