As he courted voters at town hall meetings and intimate house parties in New Hampshire in December and January, Gen. Wesley K. Clark often responded to questions about his stance on abortion with one short sentence: ''I'm pro-choice.''
But when a woman asked the question last week at the Catfish Place, a sprawling roadside restaurant in the hills of western Tennessee, General Clark's answer was somewhat different.
''Well, I'm against abortion,'' he said. ''But there is a law of the land that comes from the Supreme Court, and that law is called Roe versus Wade. And I support the Supreme Court. I have to support the law.''
General Clark told reporters later that he had not changed his position on abortion.
''The woman stood up and asked me, she didn't say, 'How do you feel about choice?' or whatever,'' he said. ''She said, 'What do you think about abortion?' That was the question and that was the question I answered. I would hope that it could be done on only rare occasions. But it's a woman's right to choose.''
As he has traveled through Oklahoma, Virginia and Tennessee in the last two weeks, General Clark has also fine-tuned his message on a number of other subjects, including religion, his service in Vietnam and his view on whether he should attack his main opponents in the race.
General Clark insists that his views on the issues themselves have not changed. But he acknowledges that the differences reflect a reality that, as a first-time candidate, he did not anticipate: ''You can't just talk about policies, because people want to get to know you as a person.''
''As I go through the campaign I find out what people want to hear about people in order to have the confidence to vote for them, and that's what I'm telling them,'' General Clark said.
Since late December, for example, when he introduced a new stump speech that emphasized faith as one of his core values, General Clark has spoken nearly every day about his varied religious background. Though his father was Jewish and his mother Methodist, he chose to attend a Baptist church in Arkansas as a child. He converted to Catholicism, his wife's religion, while he was in Vietnam. Now they attend a Presbyterian church when at home in Little Rock, Ark.
When he visited the New Hope Missionary Baptist Church in Memphis on Sunday, however, worshipers were given only a glimpse of that complex history.
''I professed my faith to the Lord Jesus Christ when I was 9 years old in the Pulaski Heights Baptist Church'' in Little Rock, he said, omitting the other denominations in which he has practiced his faith.
The changes in his message appear to be having an effect. General Clark won the Oklahoma primary, if only by about 1,300 votes. And he has received enthusiastic welcomes in the South from crowds that usually number several hundred people, many of whom say they cannot remember any presidential candidate ever visiting their town.
For all his effort to be in tune with his audience, however, sometimes the effort falls flat. Soon after he entered the race for the Democratic nomination last fall, General Clark drew applause at a debate when he said he did not believe the candidates should be attacking each other. But General Clark's railing against ''Washington insiders'' drew little positive reaction at a Democratic Party fund-raising dinner on Saturday in Richmond, Va., roughly 100 miles south of the nation's capital.
Perhaps the most poignant change General Clark has made is in his treatment of his military record. In New Hampshire, statements about his service in Vietnam rarely went beyond the simple, ''I came home on a stretcher,'' and a reminder that veterans generally do not like to talk about combat.
But that reticence is gone. At a campaign rally this month in Lawton, Okla., near the Fort Sill Army base, General Clark, a company commander in Vietnam, held an emotional public reunion with Michael McClintic, a former Army sniper whom he credits with saving his life on Feb. 19, 1970, when both men were shot in an ambush in the jungle near Long Thanh, some 50 miles from Saigon.
''This is the first time we've seen each other in 34 years,'' General Clark said as he began to recall the firefight. After being shot four times, ''I couldn't use my hand or my foot or leg down there. I was on the radio hollering to get artillery in. I was yelling for the people behind to get the machine gun set up, and Mike and two other people were returning fire.''
''We had a really close call that day,'' he said. ''And Mike, I just want to say how much I appreciate you being here. You saved my life. And I'll never forget it. It's one of those instances you don't want to think about. It's taken me a long time to get back and think about that.''
Surveys of voters leaving the polls in New Hampshire, a state rich in veterans, showed that veterans there gave more support to Mr. Kerry and Howard Dean, the former Vermont governor, than to General Clark.
The general reunited with his fellow veteran a few days after the New Hampshire primary.
''I wanted to do it here in Oklahoma, in the heartland of America,'' he said, ''and I wanted to do it in front of a bunch of veterans and Army people who really appreciate and understood it.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE RETIRED GENERAL
