Back in the old six-team National Hockey League a half-century ago, a goal was a precious thing. The game was played by men in bare feet on frozen rivers. For sticks, they swung tree branches. For pucks, they hit rocks. Instead of nets, they used the openings to caves. To warm themselves between periods, they huddled around the flicker of black-and-white television.
Well, perhaps it was not quite so primitive, but today's game has evolved with bigger athletes, better equipment, larger arenas, more teams, bigger paychecks and more sophisticated defensive systems.
Yet one thing is strikingly similar. In the 1954-55 season, the goals-a-game average was 5.0.
About two-thirds into this season, the goals-a-game average has dropped back to 5.0. Should this hold, it will be the lowest average since 1954-55, down from a high of 8.3 in 1981-82 and from 7.2 as recently as 1992-93.
Gordie Howe, who scored many of his 801 N.H.L. goals in the 1950's, was at the All-Star Game on Sunday to see the Eastern Conference beat the West, 6-4, a relatively low score for this event. He appeared along with Ray Bourque and Patrick Roy for the N.H.L. Legendary All-Star Team, selected by fan balloting.
N.H.L. general managers will discuss the goal drought in meetings this week, and everyone else seems to have an opinion on it. So what would Howe do to increase scoring?
''They started already,'' he said. ''They got rid of Patrick.'' Roy, a star goalie with the Montreal Canadiens and the Colorado Avalanche, retired after last season.
Turning serious, Howe added: ''I'm from the old school. I don't like what they call a trap. I'm sorry. It takes the scoring away from the players and it slows everything up.''
Howe also said there was too much hooking. Turning whimsical again, he said: ''I like watching warm-ups. You see a lot of goals.''
Among the suggestions to be considered by the general managers are limitations on goalies in handling the puck, more reductions in the size of goalie equipment and bigger nets. Other ideas include making the rinks wider and allowing longer passes through more zones.
All-Star players who were asked how to improve scoring had varied answers, though there was no unanimity that scoring needed to be increased.
Philadelphia's Jeremy Roenick said: ''Make the nets bigger. We're in the 2000's now. We've got to change with the times. The goaltenders are getting bigger. We might as well make the nets bigger, about an inch on each side, and you'll see a lot more goals.''
Ottawa's Daniel Alfredsson said that the Devils started the low-scoring trend by winning the Stanley Cup in 1995 with a trapping defensive system. Since then, they have won twice more, including last year.
''You've got to find a way to beat the trap,'' Alfredsson said.
Would eliminating the center red line help, to increase long passing? ''It would, short term,'' he said. ''It would take a couple years before teams adjusted.''
Bill Guerin of the Dallas Stars said that ''getting through the neutral zone some nights is like getting through a battlefield.''
Robert Lang of Washington said fans wanted to see more scoring.
''They don't want to see 1-0 and 2-1 games, even though they sometimes can be fun, too,'' he said. ''Let the talent play.
''If you are going to be obstructed all the time and hooked, even the best players in the world can't do it. Call the rules.''
Keith Primeau of Philadelphia said that customers ''pay big money to come and see the action, and the action is goal scoring.''
Mats Sundin of Toronto said, ''As a fan of the game, too, I want to see more goals being scored.'' He said clutching and grabbing cut down scoring.
Mike Modano of Dallas said that goaltending had improved more than most positions.
''Now, some of your best athletes are goalies,'' he said, adding that Stars goalie Marty Turco ''passes the puck probably better than half our defensemen.''
Joe Thornton of Boston said that padded goalies now are ''huge, they're like machines.''
Jarome Iginla of Calgary, who acknowledged his bias because ''I try to be a goal scorer,'' said that the big problem was goalie equipment, particularly pads, which are bigger than they used to be.
''Look at 10 years ago,'' he said. ''When you compare pictures, it is so different. If the room's not there in the net, it doesn't matter how hard you shoot it. It's not going in.''
The former coach Scotty Bowman has suggested that goalies not be allowed to roam from the creases to play the puck in the corner or behind the net. Keith Tkachuk of St. Louis agreed.
''Maybe keep the goalies in the net,'' he said. ''That will help.''
Some goalies said they were not to blame. José Théodore of Montreal said that ''all the players are getting better, all the systems are getting better and all the game plans are getting better.''
Turco said that hockey did not need more goals.
''We played in a 5-4 game recently and it was one of the worst games to watch,'' he said. ''Goalies letting shots in from the red line, that's not what people want to see.''
Florida goalie Roberto Luongo said: ''Try and do something about the trap. The game is so defensive. Teams get only 20 shots on goal.''
Joe Sakic of Colorado said that not all low-scoring games were poor entertainment.
''We had a game the other night with Detroit, it was 3-2, and it was a great game to watch,'' he said.
Jaromir Jagr of the Rangers said that ''a lot of people want to see goals, but I don't think they should be too high scoring; I wouldn't like the games 9-8.''
He suggested that teams with power plays be allowed the full two minutes, instead of letting the penalized team replace its player after a goal.
''And maybe make the rinks a little wider,'' Jagr said.
Several players agreed with that suggestion. In the N.H.L., rinks are 85 feet wide and 200 feet long. In international competition, like the Olympics, the rinks are the same length but 100 feet wide.
The Devils' Brian Rafalski said wider rinks would compensate for the growing size of players and ''would buy more time for the offenses to open up bigger lanes in the neutral zone.''
Vancouver's Markus Naslund said that the rinks should be widened, but not necessarily to the international width.
Sakic said he would not mind wider ice.
''It really worked in the Olympics,'' he said. ''It was fun then.''
Chris Pronger of the St. Louis Blues said that calling more penalties would mean more goals, especially if the power plays overlapped. ''Call more five-on-threes,'' he said.
Nicklas Lidstrom of Detroit suggested one idea that will probably be seriously considered by the general managers: creating longer zones between nets by moving the goal lines to 10 or 11 feet from the boards, instead of 13, where they stand now.
''It would make it tougher for teams to play the trap, especially in the neutral zone,'' Lidstrom said. ''We could get more scoring chances that way.''
HOCKEY
