Listening to Howard Dean's five-minute sales pitch on Sunday in the auditorium of the local high school here, Nathaniel White quietly removed the John Edwards for President sticker from his sweater. He picked up his point-and-shoot camera, pointed and shot -- a keepsake of his first political act.
And just like that, Howard Dean earned a vote in the freewheeling caucuses here in this town of 15,000.
''He came here; he cares about us small-towners,'' said Mr. White, a high school senior who had planned for weeks to support Mr. Edwards, but ended up in Dr. Dean's corner. ''If Edwards came here, I could decide between both of them. But Dean's here. He came.''
So he did. Taking advantage of Maine's rules permitting candidates to make personal appeals in caucus rooms, Dr. Dean, whose Democratic presidential campaign has been in free fall since losses in Iowa and New Hampshire, made several stops throughout the state, visiting with about one in five caucusgoers.
It seems to have paid off -- at least here in Waterville, where he won 123 of 283 votes, while Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts won 92. But in the state as a whole, Dr. Dean placed a distant second to Mr. Kerry.
Dr. Dean hoped to use a decent showing in Maine to stoke a comeback in next week's primary in Wisconsin, which he has declared a must-win state for his presidential campaign. After nearly two weeks off the air, Dr. Dean plans to run television advertisements throughout Wisconsin beginning Monday that highlight his biography.
In a conference call with reporters, Dr. Dean's media adviser, Steve McMahon, said the campaign also planned to broadcast an advertisement made by supporters, and was polling people online to pick among three such spots. Mr. McMahon said the campaign had no current plans to use advertising to attack Mr. Kerry, but added, ''We haven't ruled anything in or anything out.''
''At the current time, everything we're doing is positive,'' he said. ''The folks in Washington who are concerned about this should just relax. Everything's going to be fine.''
As he went from meetings as small as 45 Democrats at the firehouse in Oakland to as large as the more than 4,000 at Portland's Deering High, Dr. Dean painted Mr. Kerry as a Washington insider beholden to special interests, and urged voters not to be swayed by the momentum of Mr. Kerry's victories.
''In Washington, they talk and they talk and they talk and they talk,'' he told nearly 300 people in the Lewiston High School cafeteria, where political placards were squeezed between college pennants on the walls. ''I think we need a real choice in this race. I think we need a doer, not a talker.''
Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio also appeared at several caucuses, often speaking just before Dr. Dean, while other candidates sent surrogates.
''Good luck in there,'' Dr. Dean told Robert F. Kennedy Jr., who was representing Mr. Kerry, as they crossed paths at the Bangor Civic Center. ''I got all the votes, though.''
Unlike in Iowa, where there are nearly 2,000 simultaneous caucuses across the state, Maine's Democrats gather in larger groups, and stagger their sessions. After hearing the pitches, voters break into groups by ward, where they continue debating or simply start with a show of hands.
''Make it as short as you can,'' Ed Desgrosseilliers, a retired postal worker, said as he explained the rules to voters in Auburn. ''In the second balloting, that's when the fistfights begin. That's when the kidnapping begins from one candidate to another.''
A woman in a Dean for America T-shirt with Mara on her name sticker had tallied 22 votes for Dr. Dean, but kept trolling. ''Where are the undecideds?'' she asked. ''We can take some more.'' She got 3, plus 5 absentee ballots, for a total of 30. Mr. Kerry had 24, Mr. Kucinich 10, Gen. Wesley K. Clark 3 and Mr. Edwards of North Carolina 2. Four remained uncommitted.
Don Casavant, a man in a gray pinstriped suit presiding over the chaos from his perch on a school chair, said he counted 72 voters, including the absentees -- but the votes totaled 73. Mara explained that one of the voters had already left.
''I think that's close enough for government work,'' Mr. Casavant said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR
