Most people, facing a guess about the position of a king or a queen, have sometime wished a little bird would peer into an opposing hand and chirp if it saw the crucial card.
Such birds were well-known in Italy half a century ago. They sat between two players, at the angle of the table, and were therefore known as angolistas. An attractive young woman often played this role, which sometimes served a secondary purpose by distracting a susceptible opponent.
It is sometimes possible to infer the presence of an angolista by studying the declarer's play. If he does something unusual and successful, perhaps playing against the percentages, the bridge detective is on the case.
A spectacular example occurred in the first World Team Olympiad, played in 1960 in Turin, Italy. In a match between representatives of Italy and the United States, both North-South pairs arrived in six spades. The Italian auction, shown in the diagram, began with two hearts. In the partnership style, this was a maximum weak two-bid. The Italians did not use Blackwood, and four no-trump was a general slam suggestion.
The contract clearly hinged on the play of the trump suit. South succeeds if he can avoid the loss of two trump tricks. The crucial situations arise when West has a singleton. But which singleton? If it is the six, four or three, it is necessary to start by finessing the queen or jack. If it is the king, South has to start with the ace, but that is playing against the odds by a three-to-one margin. (Both plays succeed against a singleton 10.)
The Italian declarer was Eugenio Chiaradia, a professor of philosophy. He was the team's theorist and knew the odds well. Yet he began the spades by leading the ace to collect the king. Then he crossed to the dummy, finessed the spade nine and made an overtrick.
The American declarer was B. Jay Becker, who did not have an angolista. He made the normal play of finessing the spade queen. Later he lost a trick to the 10 and went down in his vulnerable slam.
Angolistas have now disappeared in high-level competition. Play is regularly in closed rooms, where kibitzers are not permitted. Those who want to watch the proceedings do so in a Vugraph theater and listen to expert commentary.
BRIDGE
