When Variety published the news last week that the veteran director William Friedkin was attached to a new movie at Paramount Pictures, eyebrows went up in Hollywood. Not just because it is rare in the age-obsessed movie industry for a 69-year-old director to score a major studio assignment, but also because Mr. Friedkin would be making yet another movie at the studio where his wife, Sherry Lansing, is the chairwoman.
Since 1994 Mr. Friedkin, a celebrated director in the 1970's, has made four feature films, all at Paramount, three of them box office flops, one a financial disappointment.
So the choice of Mr. Friedkin to direct a big-budget movie about the Hollywood lawyer Sidney Korshak is sparking new talk of nepotism at a moment when the studio is in poor financial health.
In interviews a prominent agent, several producers and a senior executive at a major studio -- all of whom spoke on condition of anonymity -- criticized the choice of Mr. Friedkin. The studio executive noted that directors with two flops in a row usually have trouble finding work. And a producer pointed out that Mr. Friedkin, who has been married to Ms. Lansing since 1991, had lost tens of millions of dollars for Paramount.
Ms. Lansing, through a spokeswoman, declined to comment. But Jonathan Dolgen, chairman of Viacom Entertainment Group, defended the choice of Mr. Friedkin, saying in a prepared statement: ''Paramount, which is a unit of Viacom, has had a long-standing process in place to deal with family relationships within the company. In this case Sherry recuses herself from decisions about whether to make a particular film involving Billy. Under that process, I, in consultation with my colleagues, make the final decision on whether to make a film he might direct for the studio.''
Brian Grazer and Robert Evans are producing the Korshak movie, ''The Man Who Kept Secrets,'' which is still in development. When asked about Mr. Friedkin's involvement with the film, Mr. Grazer said:
''The answer today is I found a way to make the movie compatible to his directorial skills. He started in documentary filmmaking. The movie will be quite kaleidoscopic in the way it's told. It will be told 'JFK' style.''
Did nepotism play a role? ''I don't know,'' Mr. Grazer answered. ''I don't know. It's a tough one. I have no answer. What answer can I have?''
Reached by phone Mr. Friedkin declined to answer questions about any possible conflict of interest. ''I'm not going to comment on that,'' he said. ''I don't know that it's fair to raise the question.''
But the question has been reinforced in a new book by the screenwriter Joe Eszterhas, who writes that he supported Mr. Friedkin as the director of ''Jade'' in 1994 only because Ms. Lansing begged him to do so.
In the memoir published last week by Knopf, ''Hollywood Animal,'' Mr. Eszterhas describes a meeting in which Ms. Lansing, installed since 1992 as chairwoman of Paramount's Motion Picture Group, told him that her husband loved the ''Jade'' script and wanted to direct it. Mr. Eszterhas writes that he met with Mr. Friedkin and agreed Mr. Friedkin should do the movie, but Ms. Lansing then said she had a problem.
''She was going to be criticized, Sherry said, for letting Billy direct 'Jade,' '' Mr. Eszterhas writes. ''And she wanted me to say it was my idea for Billy to direct 'Jade,' not hers.
''As I thought about it, Sherry said, 'I'll owe you a favor, honey.' I smiled and simply said okay and Sherry said, 'I love you honey.' ''
The announcement that Mr. Friedkin was going to direct ''Jade'' did spark talk. ''Selection of Paramount Chief's Husband as Director Raises Eyebrows, Even in an Industry Known for Nepotism,'' ran a headline in The Los Angeles Times on April 18, 1994.
Mr. Friedkin and Mr. Eszterhas subsequently feuded over script changes. ''Jade'' was a huge flop, a $50 million production that took in less than $10 million at the box office. Before that Mr. Friedkin had directed ''Blue Chips'' at Paramount, which reportedly cost around $30 million and made only $22 million.
But even after ''Jade'' Mr. Friedkin continued to work at Paramount, directing ''Rules of Engagement'' in 2000, a $60 million production that took in $61 million domestically, a financial disappointment.
Last year Paramount released Mr. Friedkin's ''Hunted,'' starring Tommy Lee Jones and Benicio Del Toro, which cost an estimated $55 million to make and took in just $34 million.
Major studios typically spend more than $30 million marketing their movies and receive roughly half of the box office take. Paramount declined to confirm the marketing costs of Mr. Friedkin's movies or other expenses and revenues, such as DVD sales, but said it split production costs on both ''The Hunted'' and ''Rules of Engagement'' with a foreign partner.
In 1997 Mr. Friedkin directed a television movie, ''12 Angry Men,'' for Showtime, which is also owned by Viacom.
Hollywood is a relatively small industry town; husbands and wives, parents and children often work together. When Lucy Fisher ran Sony's Columbia Pictures in the 1990's, there was grumbling because her husband, the producer Douglas Wick, had a deal with the studio and multiple producing assignments there. But he did make hit movies, including ''Stuart Little'' in 1999. Donna Arkoff Roth, the wife of Revolution chief Joe Roth, produced two Revolution movies, ''America's Sweethearts,'' which her husband directed, and the forthcoming ''13 Going on 30.''
Revolution is a privately held company, but most Hollywood studios, including Paramount, are divisions of publicly traded corporations.
Mr. Friedkin's situation is particularly noticeable. Ms. Lansing, widely considered the most powerful woman in Hollywood, has the rare power to greenlight, or approve, a movie, and there is intense competition for directing assignments. Mr. Friedkin directed two legendary movies of the 1970's, ''The French Connection,'' which won the Academy Award for best picture in 1971, and ''The Exorcist,'' but has not had a hit in more than 20 years.
Mr. Evans, the producer, defended Mr. Friedkin, saying he he had not wanted to make the Sidney Korshak movie at Paramount because he had feared charges of nepotism.
''Billy didn't want to make it at Paramount, for the very reason we're speaking,'' Mr. Evans said. ''He'd rather not, just because it would look like -- he's very sensitive to that. To suggest there's any nepotism is the furthest thing from the truth. Sherry had nothing to do with it.''
Mr. Evans said that Universal had wanted the movie, but that it was being made at Paramount because Ms. Lansing ''is the best film executive I've ever worked with.''
Mr. Grazer, who is based at Universal, said it would have been impossible to make the Korshak movie there because of Mr. Korshak's connections to the former Universal chief Lew Wasserman.
Mr. Evans, who also produced ''Jade,'' disputed Mr. Eszterhas's account of hiring Mr. Friedkin: ''There were two people I wanted: Roman Polanski and Billy Friedkin. Billy is one of my favorite directors of all time. I bought it with him in mind, and Sherry wasn't even head of the company then.''
But Ms. Lansing, not Mr. Evans, bought ''Jade'' from Mr. Eszterhas for $2.5 million in 1992, making it one of the studio's most high-profile projects at the time.
