A felon pumped at least three bullets into a man on a Brooklyn street early yesterday morning, killing him, the police said. The victim's family said he was an off-duty city marshal's employee.
The victim, Hernan Bonilla, 32, was on his way to eat Chinese food with a friend when he was killed at the intersection of Seventh Avenue and 52nd Street in Sunset Park, his brother Dominick Bonilla said.
Shu Hong Li, who twice served time in federal prison for robbery, was arrested on a charge of murder. The police did not provide many details about the fatal shooting but said that detectives thought it stemmed from an argument over money.
Mr. Bonilla's family told a different story. Dominick Bonilla said that his brother, a divorced father of two who was known as Eddie, and a friend, Chino Lok, were in Mr. Lok's gray Chevrolet Astro minivan, driving to the Ocean Palace restaurant about 2:30 a.m. when their path was blocked by a Toyota Sienna van. Mr. Bonilla and Mr. Lok approached the van and asked the driver to move, Dominick Bonilla said. The passenger of the van got out and began shooting at Mr. Bonilla, hitting him six times, his brother said.
''There weren't too many words exchanged, something to the effect of, 'Could you move your car?''' the brother said.
A man who answered the phone at the Ocean Palace in Sunset Park yesterday said that the restaurant was closed for renovation, and that a second location, on Avenue U, closed at 11:30 on Saturday nights.
After the shooting, Dominick Bonilla said, Mr. Lok went to Hernan Bonilla's aid, but the gunman chased him, so he flagged down a passing police car. The Police Department spokesman confirmed that part of the account, saying that a patrol car had been flagged down on Sixth Avenue. The officers chased and arrested Mr. Li, the spokesman said, but the driver of the Toyota van fled.
Mr. Bonilla's family said he had never been arrested, which the Police Department said it could not confirm. Dominick Bonilla said that his brother had worked as a stockbroker but had recently changed careers, going to work for a city marshal two weeks ago. ''He was a stockbroker, but the suit and tie, sipping latte in Starbucks, wasn't for him,'' his brother said.
He gave a badge number he said was Mr. Bonilla's and showed reporters a ''City Marshal'' vest.
A spokesman for the city could not confirm Mr. Bonilla's employment last night.
