When it came time for a keynote article for this year's Sport's Illustrated swimsuit issue, the 40th year the feature has run, Terry McDonell, the magazine's managing editor, went to a real expert in swimwear: Jimmy Buffett, a songwriter and beach bum who has done much of his best work in a swimsuit.
Mr. Buffett's essay, which will be in the issue that comes out Wednesday, dwells on an epic battle with a fish, but Mr. Buffett and Mr. McDonell, who are old friends, saw other collaborative possibilities.
Mr. Buffett, who has recorded many songs praising surf, sun and goofing off, has a song, ''License to Chill,'' on his forthcoming album that includes some topical lyrics about the swimsuit issue -- ''It's amazing what they pass off as a bathing suit.'' The song and a sneak preview of its video appear on a CD-ROM packaged with 4.5 million copies of the swimsuit issue.
The disc was originally intended just as a newsstand promotion, but AOL, which like Sports Illustrated is owned by Time Warner, came into the project as a partner and the disc will now be mailed in subscriber copies as well.
Adding to the synergistic fun, recipients of the CD-ROM will be able to download AOL 9.0, the latest version of the online service, where they will also be able to see more pictures of models in swimsuits, along with the entire video for ''License to Chill.''
Mr. Buffett, who has published several successful books in addition to having a recording career that has lasted more three decades, first got to know Mr. McDonell when he wrote a story for him at Outside magazine in the late 1970's. He noticed that the author Carl Hiaasen had written for the issue last year.
Mr. McDonell said Mr. Buffett made a good pitch. ''He called me and said, 'Who do you know who has spent more time in a bathing suit than me?''' Mr. McDonell said. Mr. Buffett added: ''It was basically jealousy. I thought it looked like fun.'' And the deal went surprisingly smoothly, Mr. Buffett said.
''The fun thing is that in this age of megadeals, this basically came together in a week,'' he said. ''There were no agents involved, no managers. We just did it.''
DAVID CARR
