Carbon fiber is miraculous stuff: gray atoms as greasy as a smeared pencil, amazingly transformed into strands stronger than steel. It is the real-world equivalent of Superman squeezing a lump of coal in his fist to make a diamond.
Used for its most valued property -- as a lightweight structural material -- this combination of high-tech fabric and epoxy plastic resin is rarely seen, a terrific-looking sandwich hidden from view under carpet or paint.
In sporting goods, fiber enjoys better exposure, looking as great as it works. It is both a replacement for familiar metals, as in golf club shafts, and the material that makes possible strikingly unconventional designs like the three-spoke wheels and single-backbone frames now available for bicycles.
Several recent introductions demonstrate the growing structural use of carbon fiber in automobiles -- notably in exotic sports cars like the Porsche Carrera GT, Mercedes-Benz SLR McLaren, Aston Martin Vanquish and Ford GT -- but a look inside suggests that the material is actually becoming less visible to the passengers.
That is something of a reversal of the traditional course of things. Carbon became a decorative element almost before it became a functional one -- and now that it is functional, it is less decorative. It is as if the designers who create auto interiors have become bashful about showing off carbon inside the cockpit.
In some cases, as at the rear of the Chrysler ME Four-Twelve design study shown at the Detroit auto show last month, woven carbon fiber peeks out like a knit vest under a professor's gray suit.
The seats in Porsche's $440,000 Carrera GT have carbon-fiber frames, but because they are covered in leather, they do not reveal a hint of what is inside. And even with full upholstery, they still weigh half as much as the conventional seats of the 911.
Blame overexposure for the coyness. When the import tuners slapped carbon-fiber dashboard panels and gearshift knobs into their customized cars years ago, in places that made no functional sense, the mystique withered into cliché.
Fiber is handled more thoughtfully in the SLR McLaren. The edges of the carbon fiber seats are visible, showing them as shells supporting a cluster of cushions, hinting at the use of fiber in the structure elsewhere.
Often the carbon fiber composites that appear in plain view on automobiles are a low-cost imitation of a high-price material. In the Honda Civics and Toyota Celicas favored by young import-car ''tuners,'' carbon represents the technology of racing, where weight reduction matters.
Carbon may, in fact, be easier to fake than burled walnut, since people are less familiar with the real thing. The authentic and the simulated look equally false, gleaming layers of transparent plastic over woven black fabric.
As if to counter the theme of lightness offered by carbon, Maybach, the ultraluxury brand of Mercedes-Benz, will offer ''natural granite trim'' as a dashboard option, in case you don't like amboyna, an exotic wood. The subliminal message: with an engine of such power, there is no need to be concerned about the penalties of weight.
Auto designers seem almost to take pride in adapting inappropriate materials for auto interiors. Wood must be sliced millimeter-thin and attached to metal. To deal with the hostile environment of the interior, leather must be of the most rugged grade. But these materials mediate between cold, hard metal and warm, soft passengers.
Carbon, used right, could become such a material, too -- a symbol of the lightness and engineering of the rest of the car.
''But real carbon is too expensive, and imitation doesn't work,'' said Bill Fluharty, the design director at Johnson Controls, a manufacturer of interior parts. ''We are still looking for a new visual symbol of luxury.''
Frank Stephenson, the design director for Ferrari and Maserati, is looking, too, poking around the runways of Milan fashion shows and hanging out at racetracks with Ferrari's Formula One team. In the Maserati Quattroporte, Mr. Stephenson decided that the company would offer a gray ''titanium style'' substance. He rejected carbon fiber as too harsh for a luxury car.
But titanium, too, was once the mysterious gray metal of airplane builders. Then Frank Gehry wrapped buildings in it, and computer makers housed laptops in it.
Titanium is still enjoying its run. Carbon fiber is not there yet, but perhaps someday -- if auto designers figure out how to make it as beautiful as it is useful -- there may be a credit card named for it, too.
