The tournament was not over after 10 holes Sunday, but for anyone hoping to catch Vijay Singh, it was all but over.
With a birdie-birdie-birdie start, Singh took immediate command and showed why he has been the world's most consistent player for six months. He pulled away from the field the way a Ferrari would pull away from a go-cart. Starting the final round of the AT&amp;T Pebble Beach National Pro-Am tied with Arron Oberholser, Singh birdied 6 of the first 10 holes, building a five-stroke lead with eight holes to play.
Oberholser, a California native, was seeking his first PGA Tour victory, but he ran into the Singh buzz saw. In his last 12 starts, Singh has 12 top-10 finishes, including three victories, and this three-stroke victory ranked among his most impressive.
Singh, who earned $954,000, finished at 16-under-par 272 after shooting a 69, three strokes ahead of Jeff Maggert (69) and four ahead of Phil Mickelson (69). Oberholser faltered to a 76 and tied for fourth with Mike Weir (70) and K. J. Choi (71) at 279.
At least Oberholser had a front-row seat on a gorgeous day for the Singh show, playing with him in the final group. Singh's streak of 12 consecutive top-10 finishes ties him with Jack Nicklaus for the third-longest streak in PGA Tour history. (Nicklaus also had streaks of 14 consecutive top-10's in 1977 and 13 consecutive top-10's in 1973.)
Since last August, nobody in the world, including Tiger Woods, has played at Singh's level. His swing is elegant, his demeanor is unflappable, and his goal to replace Woods as the world's No. 1 player hardly looks unattainable. Does Singh view himself as the best player?
''My ranking doesn't say that; I'm No. 2,'' said Singh, referring to the world ranking.
''I want to be No. 1 before I finish playing competitively, but it's a hard feat to take Tiger off the top, because he is playing well as well. My goal is to go out there and just try to beat the field every week. I'm not going to be pushed to answer questions about me and Tiger.''
Early in his round, Singh sent a message that everyone else was playing for second place. After yanking his opening tee shot into the left rough at No. 1, Singh had 163 yards to the pin, out of deep rough and over trees. No problem. He almost made an eagle, hitting a sensational 6-iron shot that sailed over the trees, landed on the green and rolled toward the hole. The ball hit the flagstick before stopping about 3 feet past the pin. Singh made the easy putt for a birdie, and he had a one-stroke lead.
At the par-5 No. 2, Singh missed the fairway again. But after laying up, he hit a nice pitch shot to 8 feet and drained another putt. At No. 3, he missed another fairway. But he hit a nice approach shot to 10 feet and made another putt for a birdie. Perhaps a little shaken after seeing Singh make another birdie, Oberholser missed his 8-footer for birdie at No. 3, and he was three strokes down after three holes.
Singh gave Oberholser an opening at No. 5, when Singh made a bogey 6. But Oberholser did not capitalize, missing a 5-footer and making bogey.
That allowed Singh to keep his three-stroke lead, and he went for the jugular. He birdied No. 8, hitting a 4-iron approach shot to 5 feet. After a bogey at No. 9, Singh chipped in from 16 feet for a birdie at No. 10, moving five strokes ahead of Maggert, his closest pursuer.
Singh, who won for the 16th time on Tour and for the 38th time worldwide, then started to think about adding his name to the impressive list of Pebble Beach champions. It includes Nicklaus, Woods, Billy Casper, Johnny Miller, Ben Crenshaw, Tom Watson, Hale Irwin, Mark O'Meara, Fuzzy Zoeller, Payne Stewart, Phil Mickelson and Davis Love III.
Singh, who will turn 41 later this month, belongs in that company. He travels with a personal trainer, works out daily and says he has never felt better. And the results clearly make that work worthwhile.
''It kind of reminds me of the streak Tiger was on a few years ago, when he won four majors in a row,'' Maggert said. ''It was like all he had to do was show up, and he was going to shoot five or six under.''
Woods will return from a four-week break to defend his title at the Buick Invitational, which begins Thursday at Torrey Pines Golf Course in La Jolla, Calif. It will be the first time that Woods and Singh have been in the same field since the Mercedes Championships in January, when Singh finished second and Woods tied for fourth. Singh won the money title last year, but the Tour's players voted Woods player of the year for the fifth consecutive time.
Singh has begun 2004 by racing to the top of the money list again, working at his craft passionately like one of his idols, Ben Hogan.
''I've read every book he wrote,'' Singh said of Hogan. ''He never stopped practicing. There's a guy that worked. He found it in the dirt. That's the way I want to be.''
GOLF
