In the four months since runways were last erected for the trans-Atlantic fashion spectacle, Hollywood produced two movies that seemed poised to take hold of designers' imaginations. The first was ''Kill Bill: Vol. 1,'' Quentin Tarantino's epic revenge fantasy, in which Uma Thurman emerges from a coma in a snazzy leather union suit, bent on assassinating former colleagues and the boss who tried to liquidate her. Here was inspirational catnip, or so it appeared, given how adoringly fashion regards beautiful, lanky women who look as though they are about to be called into service by the Mossad.
The second film, ''Mona Lisa Smile,'' approached female identity from a different angle -- the world of Wellesley College, circa 1953 -- and it clearly left a stronger impression on those in the business of making clothes. The fall 2004 collections of American designers, which began on Friday, have so far turned up no versions of Ms. Thurman's highly stylized dragoness. But there are plenty of references to the place and moment analyzed by ''Mona Lisa Smile,'' which has Julia Roberts calling into question the domestic ambitions of her intelligent and expensively dressed students.
No one did a better job rendering this aesthetic than Patrick Robinson, now in his second season at Perry Ellis. Scouring eBay a few months ago, Mr. Robinson found an original Perry Ellis scarf with a button print, he said. He reproduced the fabric and cut it into gently fluted silk skirts. He paired one of the skirts with a lean, colorful tweed jacked wrapped at the waist with a rhinestone belt, an accessory that gave the outfit an air of seeming nicely left of proper. He also paired a narrow tweed skirt with a distressed gray bomber jacket, and reworked the traditional Fair Isle sweater so that it arrived on the runway free of its typically sexless, tea-sandwich implications.
Like Miuccia Prada, Mr. Robinson is able to interpret the 1950's without irony or another less appreciative form of judgment. Perhaps he understands that a woman of 22 does not come at a full skirt, fitted twin set and pair of pumps with the same set of associations that a woman 20 years her senior might. For the younger woman, such a combination is merely a style, not a blanket symbol of the wrongs of patriarchy, nor an intimate reminder that her mother's life was less than it could have been. This 22-year-old's mother may have worn a hefty Armani pantsuit, or may even have dressed like Chrissie Hynde.
An affectionate view of the mid-20th century was also in play at Pierre Carrilero's show on Saturday. Mr. Carrilero, who studied comedy in France and designs a line he calls Pierrot, has made a name with knit sweaters that look as though they were made by a dear, kindly relative. In addition to pretty, short-cropped sweaters -- some in broad checks, some with the image of the Eiffel Tower or a Siamese cat -- Mr. Carrilero showed funnel skirts, or others full in cut, one looking like two-fifths of a homemade afghan, another even depicting a poodle. It was easy to imagine any of them crossing a campus lawn, swinging from the hips of a chicly inclined political science major.
A few years ago, Patrick Michael Hughes, a lecturer in costume history at the Parsons School of Design, met John Gomes, a business student in the graduate program at Baruch College (and now a manager at the restaurant Balthazar). Mr. Hughes wanted to design a line of clothes. Together they established a company under the resurrected name of Norman Norell, which had been defunct since 1996. Mr. Hughes showed his first collection, a small one, on Thursday evening. Save for one misstep in the form of a satin pantsuit Norma Desmond might have worn, the clothes were neatly refined in the spirit of this moment -- now two seasons going -- obsessed with conventional understandings of femininity.
Such notions also took shape at the Ron Chereskin show on Friday afternoon, where Carson Kressley, one of the makeover impresarios on ''Queer Eye for the Straight Guy,'' sat in the front row. Mr. Chereskin included some women's looks in his men's collection. Among them was a pretty satin-hemmed pleated herringbone skirt.
Kenneth Cole, as he typically does, mixed men's and women's wear Friday morning. He managed some especially appealing color combinations, pairing solid limes with browns. Most notably, though, he showed velvet for men, in the form of tuxedo trousers and jackets, a trend already in force in New York night life. Perhaps fashion has Mr. Kressley, the celebrity generating the most excitement at the shows so far, to thank.
Velvet also had a showing at Andrew Harmon's show on Friday. Mr. Harmon avoided the 1950's, favoring instead a very cleaned-up idea of the years that came two decades later. He showed smartly cut velvet jackets for men and women, but without any Hugh Hefner connotations. Mr. Harmon recalled a 70's suburbia when well-meaning fathers who couldn't get in on the action tried their best to dress as if they really could. To this end, he showed shawl-collared sweaters worn under suits, among other things.
Alice Roi's show under the tents of Bryant Park yesterday gave prominence to her ever growing tailoring skills. Ms. Roi turned out long-sleeved woolen shift dresses that looked sculptured onto the body. She took seemingly stark cuts and gussied them up with ruffles that were fleetingly visible. Her prints, as always, were creative too, this time relying on beach grass. The Eisenhower years or the Nixon administration? Wellesley or Berkeley? It was impossible to say, and happily, it hardly mattered.
