Millions of American men grab their credit cards every weekend and head to Home Depot or Best Buy to fulfill their heart's desire with hardware and technology. Brad Chroback's version of home improvement includes himself.
Mr. Chroback, 27, a finance executive at Cendant who lives in Summit, N.J., woke up ahead of his girlfriend on a recent Saturday and went to Bloomingdale's at the Mall at Short Hills to spend several hours shopping not for his house, but for his own closet.
''I like to come by myself; that way, I can take my time and browse,'' he said, adding that he was looking for a pair of jeans with ''cut edges and faded lines.'' He found a pair of Lucky Brand jeans that fit the bill, but at $97, punished the pocketbook. Magazine publishers and retailers who have traditionally focused on catering to women's needs are betting that there are plenty more like Mr. Chroback, men who are as interested in prowling malls for five-pocket jeans, faux vintage T-shirts and clunky, large-soled boots as for cordless drills.
Next month, Condé Nast Publications, the owner of glossy magazines like Vogue and Glamour, will publish Cargo, a men's shopping magazine. And in the fall, Fairchild Publications, which publishes high-end women's fashion magazines like W, will begin publishing Vitals. The magazines, following on the success of Condé Nast's Lucky, a shopping magazine for women, will serve as printed guides to the growing array of clothing and grooming products aimed at men, all on the premise that male vanity is now a business, not just an isolated trend.
''This is not just a coastal phenomenon or a metrosexual phenomenon,'' said Marshal Cohen, a senior analyst at the NPD Group, a market research company, referring to a term used by trend spotters to describe straight men in urban areas who consume grooming products and high-end fashion. ''Young men all over America know where the stores are in the mall, pre-shop on the Internet and understand value.''
While sales of women's casual sportswear declined by 3 percent in the last two years, sales of men's casual sportswear increased by 5 percent from 2001, to a total of $28.2 billion, according to STS Market Research. And when men do shop, they often do it alone. More than 45 percent of men's wear sold in the United States is sold to men who are shopping without women, a huge increase from 26 percent in 2000, according to the NPD Group.
Department and specialty stores as different as Bergdorf Goodman and J. Crew are increasing their advertising spending geared to men, while rejiggering their shops and merchandise to better attract a new generation of young men who care a great deal about how they look.
''Without a doubt, we are seeing strong spending habits from men, especially younger men,'' said Robert Burke, fashion director at Bergdorf Goodman, which has gradually redesigned its men's department and is pouring money into marketing to men. ''They shop more frequently, they spend more money and they are looking for more variety in fashion,'' he said. ''Some of their purchasing habits are not that different from the female customer.'' Bergdorf is about to introduce its biggest advertising campaign aimed at men to capitalize on the interest.
But other retailers suggest that the attention and hype around a new kind of male shopper is just that. ''We haven't seen any change in the male spending pattern,'' said Thomas Lennox, spokesman for Abercrombie &amp; Fitch.
Ariel Foxman, editor in chief of Cargo, disagrees. ''There has been an explosion in the consumer marketplace in the categories geared toward men,'' he said. ''That explosion has bred a higher level of curiosity, but some confusion as well.''
Cargo, which will initially be published six times a year at a rate base of 300,000 -- the number of copies promised to advertisers -- will embrace a broad swath of consumer goods, while Vitals, a four-times-a-year publication with a rate base of 150,000 will be more fashion-oriented. The magazines represent a significant investment in a category that has proved difficult before. In the early 90's Esquire tried a fashion spinoff that did not last, and in 2001, Dennis Publishing tried a style-heavy version of its bawdy British-inspired men's magazine, Maxim, called Maxim Fashion, but stopped publishing it last year. FHM, another so-called lad magazine, just put the finishing touches on its most recent issue of FHM Collections, its twice-a-year fashion publication.Stephen Colvin, the chief executive of Dennis, said that Stuff, its 1.3-million-circulation men's magazine that features articles about gadgets and fashion, in addition to risqué photographs of women, makes more sense than a pure shopping magazine.
''Of course guys are shoppers, but you have to connect with them in other ways as well,'' Mr. Colvin said. ''If all they were interested in was shopping, they'd just look at a catalog.''
Dave Zinczenko, editor of Men's Health, a 1.7-million-circulation magazine owned by Rodale Inc., agreed.
''You need a magazine that is more like the complete mall, with food, sports, and women,'' he said. Although he declined to be specific, he suggested the forthcoming Best Life, will have all of those elements, with an emphasis on fashion. The theory is that if men are shopping for fashion differently, perhaps they will want a different magazine as a gateway.
Larger demographic shifts, the postponement of marriage and the increasing professional responsibilities of women, have entwined with a cultural shift that not only tolerates, but encourages, male vanity. Many more stores are now oriented toward men, and a host of amenities that have nothing to do with shopping -- high-end dining, movies, nightclubs -- have made the mall not only safe for men, but attractive as well.
As a result, shopping for clothes, which has been viewed by previous generations of men as a feminized ritual, has been legitimized for men, said Paco Underhill, chief executive of Envirosell, a behavioral market research and consulting company, and the author of ''Why We Buy'' and ''The Call of the Mall.'' For the current generation of male shoppers, he says, the mall has often been the place where they declared dominion over their own identity.
''Young men have a fundamentally different attitude toward the mall,'' he said. ''For many of them, this was the first place they became individuals. Busy, working moms dropped them off at the mall as young teenagers and gave them money to go shop for clothes.''
Wendy Liebmann, president of WSL Strategic Retail, agrees that ''there has been a generational shift.'' Her company just issued a study stating that men say they shopped for clothing 21 percent more often in 2003 than in the previous year.
''The young men who are shopping today have more in common with their female counterparts than their fathers,'' she said.
Jeff Pfeifle, president of J. Crew, a specialty retailer, said ''guys want to have more fun with their looks,'' but they still behave like the stereotypes when in the store. ''They are different than women in their shopping patterns,'' he said. ''It is not a social moment. They want to come in and know where the pants are and where the swimwear is.''
Dave Cowhey, 19, a student at Drew University, stopped by the mall to pick up a shirt and whatever else caught his interest. Like many of the men at Short Hills that Saturday, he was a lone wolf, quickly hopping from store to store in pursuit of the things he needed. He was clad head to toe in Abercrombie &amp; Fitch.
''In college, you can roll out of bed and put on something from the floor of your dorm room, but sometimes you want to look, you want to look good, you know, clean-cut,'' Mr. Cowhey said.
Much of the dynamism in male fashion, in terms of the willingness to adopt new styles and spend what they cost, comes from younger men. Male teens and young adults spend an average of $291 a year on casual sportswear versus all men, who spend just $247, according to STS Market Research.
''I think that young men are shopping differently, in part because they have so many more influences,'' said Stephanie Greenfield, co-owner of Scoop, an eclectic high-end fashion store that has opened five Scoop Men stores in the last five years. ''Whether it is Us magazine, or People, MTV, sports or Ashton Kutcher on 'Punk'd,' everyone has a great deal of information on what the current styles are.''
Joe Zee, editor in chief of Vitals, suggested that one of the hangovers of the dot-com boom and its optimism was that young people developed the kind of aspirations that take significant means to satisfy.
''The stupid money went away, but the sensibility and the desire remained,'' Mr. Zee said. And those desires, he said, are not restricted to big cities on the coasts.
''Many of the trends may germinate in urban areas, but that doesn't mean that anybody who lives in Iowa can't have the same thing,'' he said. ''You can log onto the Internet, see what the trends are, order and have it delivered to you in 24 hours.''
For magazines like Cargo and Vitals to reach a mass audience, they will have to go beyond men who have time to obsess about their appearances and purchases. Last weekend, there were plenty of regular guys who were making the rounds of the stores.
Michael Nastus, 25, is a pipe fitter from North Brunswick, N.J., who stopped at the mall for socks and a belt. He takes many of his fashion cues from friends, but also gets ideas from publications like Men's Health and Maxim.
''All week long, I am in work clothes and dirty,'' he said. ''When I get to the bars in the city on the weekend, I want to fit in. It's what society calls for these days. I enjoy looking good, but for the most part, I am mostly dressing to find women.''
