Treating back pain costs Americans $26 billion a year, or 2.5 percent of the total health care bill, according to a new study from Duke University, and far more if disability payments, workers' compensation and lost wages are taken into account. The costs are rising, researchers say, as patients get ever more aggressive forms of treatment.
Back problems are the leading reason for visits to neurologists and orthopedists and the eighth leading reason for visits to doctors over all -- ahead of fever, knee pain, rashes, headaches and checkups for healthy babies. More than 70 percent of adults suffer back pain at some time in their lives, studies show. A third have had it in the past 30 days.
Yet for all the costs, for all the hours spent in doctors' offices and operating suites, for all the massage therapy and acupuncture and spinal manipulations, study after study is leading medical experts to ask what, if anything, is doing any good.
A variety of studies have suggested that in 85 percent of cases it is impossible to say why a person's back hurts, said Dr. Richard Deyo, a professor of medicine and health services at the University of Washington. And most of the time, the pain goes away with or without medical treatment.
''Nearly everyone gets better, nearly everyone improves,'' said Dr. Deyo, citing evidence from large epidemiological studies. But he cautioned, ''Getting better doesn't necessarily mean pain-free.''
''For a small number of patients,'' he added, ''surgery can offer quick relief, although even then it is common to have mild symptoms and recurrences.''
The Duke researchers, led by Dr. Xeumei Luo, used national data from 1998. Back pain expenses, they say, included $11.1 billion for office visits; $4.5 billion for hospitalization; $3.9 billion for prescription drugs; $4.7 billion for outpatient services; and $1.1 billion for emergency room care, with the rest made up of such things as medical devices. The total, $26 billion, was a 30 percent increase from 1977 after adjusting for inflation.
''It's not like there's an explosion of new back pain,'' said Dr. Steven Atlas, an assistant professor of medicine at Harvard Medical School, who investigates back treatments. ''The number of cases isn't increasing; the cost per case is increasing. There is a lot more that is being done, but the issue is, Is it helping or not?''
Back pain has always been around, like headaches, or the common cold. What has changed, doctors say, are people's expectations.
''People say, 'I'm not going to put up with it,' '' Dr. Deyo said. ''And we in the medical profession have turned to ever more aggressive medication, narcotic medication, surgery, more invasive surgery.''
But studies find little evidence that patients are better off for all the treatment.
Researchers asked, for example, what is the meaning of disk abnormalities, so often seen when a back patient undergoes an magnetic resonance imaging, or M.R.I.? So they examined people with no back pain. One study, of 98 people, found that two-thirds had problems like bulging or protruding disks, herniated disks and degenerated disks. A third had more than one abnormal disk.
Sometimes a problem like a herniated, or ruptured, disk causes the pain, and surgery can relieve it, said the study's author, Dr. Michael N. Brant-Zawadzki, a radiologist at Hoag Hospital in Newport Beach, Calif. But usually, he added, it may be more coincidence than cause and effect when an M.R.I. finds an abnormal disk in someone with back pain. And even when a herniated disk causes the pain, the problem often goes away by itself.
It is easy to see the appeal of an M.R.I., said Dr. Stanley J. Bigos, an emeritus professor of orthopedic surgery and environmental health at the University of Washington. ''The reality is, patients want an answer, the doctor wants to get the patient out of the room, and the hypotheses start to flow.''
Other studies have indicated that the development of abnormal disks is usually inherited. But there were no links to occupation, sports injuries or weak muscles, said Dr. Nortin Hadler, a professor of medicine at the University of North Carolina.
Researchers then asked whether patients who have M.R.I.'s do any better.
In a study published last year in The Journal of the American Medical Association, Dr. Deyo and his colleagues randomly assigned 380 patients with back pain to X-rays or M.R.I.'s. X-rays can reveal tumors or fractures but not abnormal disks.
Half the M.R.I. patients had disk abnormalities, and the imaging patients, as a group, ended up with more intensive treatment -- more doctor visits, physical therapy, acupuncture and chiropractic manipulations as well as more surgery. And while they were happier with their care, they fared no better than the X-ray patients. Within a few months, most patients in each group were feeling better and were back at work.
Many in each group continued to feel some pain but were living with it. ''Many continue to have grumbling symptoms and occasional flare-ups,'' Dr. Deyo said. ''Their pain was better but certainly not gone.''
Since no one knows the cause of most back pain, Dr. Hadler said, imaging is not much help. Nor are most treatments. ''Maybe you're better off not going to a doctor,'' he said.
Dr. Deyo concurs that while a small proportion of patients may be helped by surgery, medical care may not be necessary for most.
Surgery, too, is under new scrutiny, with a national study getting started at 11 medical centers. About 1,000 patients with the problems that most often lead to surgery will be randomly assigned to have surgery or not. The problems under study are herniated disks, spinal stenosis, which is a narrowing of the spinal canal that usually occurs with arthritis and aging, and degenerative spondylolithesis, a slipped vertebra.
One of the investigators in the study is Dr. James N. Weinstein, a Dartmouth professor of orthopedics and community and family medicine and the editor in chief of Spine, the professional journal that published the Duke report in its January issue.
''I've met with two groups who said they fear the results will take away their practice,'' Dr. Weinstein said. ''I don't know how to deal with that. I don't know what the results will be.''
Back experts say it is clear that surgery can make some patients feel better immediately.
''Let's say you have a herniated disk and let's say you have leg pain and let's say you are as miserable as hell and you convince somebody to operate on you,'' said Dr. Michael Modic, chairman of the radiology department at the Cleveland Clinic. ''You have a 95 percent chance of waking up with no pain.''
Most people will get better anyway, Dr. Modic said, but surgery can ''reduce the symptomatic time period.''
Dr. Thomas Errico, president of the North American Spine Society, says surgery is a last resort. His patients have X-rays or M.R.I.'s. They try over-the-counter anti-inflammatory drugs. They are given an exercise program, or get muscle relaxants or painkilling injections. They are told to stretch and to get their weight under control. They might get a steroid injected into the spine to reduce inflammation.
''That's what the vast majority of the 3,700 members of the North American Spine Society do,'' Dr. Errico said. ''The vast majority discourage surgery or don't offer surgery as the first recourse.''
Whether patients benefit from treatment or whether their pain eases on its own, back experts agree that 10 percent of cases are intractable. Dr. Rowland Hazard, a professor of orthopedics and medicine at Dartmouth, estimates that 80 percent to 90 percent of spending on back pain ''is devoted to this 10 percent who don't get well.''
Their prognosis is disheartening. Those with disabling pain for three or four months have just a 10 percent to 20 percent chance of getting better in the next year.
For this group, some doctors are now advocating a different approach altogether: teaching people to live with pain, to put aside the understandable fear that any motion will aggravate their injury. They have to learn, Dr. Weinstein said, that ''hurt doesn't mean harm.''
In programs often known as functional restoration, that is the goal. Patients are trained in strength, flexibility and endurance. They are counseled about their fears of re-injury and about anxiety and depression.
It can be difficult to get them back to work, noted Dr. Bigos, of the University of Washington, because many left their jobs on disability and had bitter disputes with their former employers or with insurance companies. ''Usually, lines have been drawn in the sand by one or both sides,'' he said.
But success is possible, said Dr. Thomas Mayer, director of a clinic called Pride, for Productive Rehabilitation Institute of Dallas for Ergonomics. Among the 3,500 back patients who entered his one- to two-month program and completed it, almost all returned to work and nearly half went back to their original employer, Dr. Mayer said.
''We deal with it face on,'' Dr. Mayer said. ''What are you going to do for the rest of your life? What are you getting from being disabled? What would you get if you were not disabled?''
The lesson, Dr. Weinstein says, is that ''you can have pain and still function.'' And while there may appear to be more treatments that ever, he adds, ''more isn't necessarily better.''
