If the supreme tool to catch trout is a five-weight bamboo flyrod, cast to rising fish sipping mayflies, then the perfect tackle for perch, crappies, bluegills and other panfish is the diminutive jigglestick -- ideal for lowering tiny jigs through holes on frozen ponds and lakes.
And during this current ice-fishing season for the ages, also known as the Winter of '04, more and more anglers have discovered what a select few have known all along: that jigging panfish through the ice is high sport. To them, a 1-to-2-foot-long jigglestick, rigged with a toy-sized reel and two-pound line, represents the Tonkin cane of the hardwater.
The same way trout become more selective as rivers and streams warm, panfish are changed by cold water. By the time lakes have frozen, they have transformed from gangs of precocious schoolchildren ready to bite on every cast into cynical old men warily eyeballing the most enticing lure or bait.
I once witnessed this seasonal selectivity on a shallow lake in New Jersey where schools of bluegills cruised under six inches of clear ice. With my ski jacket shrouded over my head and using polarized glasses, I could spot individual fish as they scrutinized my lure. It seemed as if their entire world had gone into very slow-motion, reminding me of that Bugs Bunny cartoon with the mad scientist when the bottle of ether breaks: ''Come back here, you rabbit.''
An ever-so-subtle jigging motion would draw fish in slowly, while the typical, rapid yo-yoing one might associate with attracting ''dumb'' sunfish went completely ignored. Only when the lure stopped completely would the fish sip it in -- and often spit it out just as fast. Half the time I never felt even the slightest tap on my line, making me realize that I must routinely miss a good 50 percent of my strikes.
Come April on this lake, a crust of tossed bread prompts a bluegill feeding frenzy straight out of the Amazon.
Yellow perch, too, suddenly become glamour fish when caught through the ice. Bass anglers bemoaning schools of ''bait-stealing'' perch nipping at their lures have left for the season, replaced by perch fishermen who groan when oafish bass snap their line and swim away with their ice-jigs.
Big yellows -- 13-to-15-inchers called jackperch by old-timers -- are impressive; coal black eyes, humped backs and convict stripes running down their sides give them the rugged good looks of true game fish. Even when numbed by the ice, they fight hard, peeling off line as they bulldog their way into a nearby weed bed. Good perch spots are jealously guarded. Spot an ice fisherman in some far-off cove looking like a red-tailed hawk staring down a rabbit hole, and chances are you have stumbled onto a perch specialist.
Black crappies, also called calico bass, maintain a mystical hold over me with their Victorian gaudiness and ephemeral habits. They seem to have too many elegant fins and black speckles for any practical purpose, and come up through the ice looking like an example of English whimsy.
Fish the size of dinner plates (nicknamed slabs) adorn the walls of local tackle shops. The largest I ever saw came from a weedy pond in central New Jersey. It measured 16 inches, with an equally impressive girth. Unfortunately, my friend caught it in July on a plastic worm meant for a largemouth bass; to an ice angler, this is the equivalent of landing a five-pound brook trout on chicken liver.
Crappie are also the most subtle of panfish when it comes to taking a bait, with most hits sensed rather than actually felt. Recently I sat on a bucket on a frozen pond in New Jersey trying to imagine how a faint crappie bite would feel through the extralimber jigglestick I held. As I watched, I noticed my pulse actually caused the rod tip to slightly hiccup with each beat. A minute later the rod stopped and instead of keeling over, I lifted into a nice crappie.
Any similarities between panfish and trout end when the fish are landed. Many trout anglers release their fish, but keeping panfish remains a guilt-free pleasure. Many fishery managers state outright that harvesting sunfish is good for the population, allowing more big fish to mature with less competition. I could only imagine the same holds true for other panfish, which is why limits remain liberal for most species. Anyone who has ever bitten into nutty, slightly sweet perch fillets on a winter evening remains thankful for that.
As the ice season wanes, fishing often gets better, with anglers who dare venture onto honeycombed, or rotten, ice scoring the best catches of the season. Eventually, the ice will melt completely and the water will warm. Panfish will once again hit on every cast -- just about the same time jigglesticks are traded in for five-weights.
OUTDOORS
