Decode Genetics, the Icelandic company that discovered genes for schizophrenia and osteoporosis, has found a variant gene that doubles the risk of heart attack and stroke among Icelanders who carry it, the company's researchers are reporting today.
The company says it is starting advanced clinical trials of a drug intended to counteract the variant gene's effects. The company's chief executive, Dr. Kari Stefansson, says the drug may help more patients beyond those who carry the variant gene. Last year, more than a million people in the United States died of heart disease and stroke.
But several experts on the genetics of heart disease said they were not fully persuaded by the company's evidence linking the variant gene to heart attacks.
Decode Genetics is a leader in the difficult art of identifying the genes involved in complex diseases, the name for the common diseases to which several variant genes contribute. The company uses DNA analysis and statistical genetics to find disease-causing genes in Icelanders, and has shown that many of its findings apply to other populations, too.
In their article in today's Nature Genetics, the company researchers say they have found that a variant form of a gene known as FLAP -- for 5-lipoxygenase activating protein -- is carried by 29 percent of all heart attack patients in Iceland and almost doubles their risk of the disease. The gene is known to help make a chemical signal that activates the white blood cells involved in inflammation.
Since heart disease and stroke can be caused when an inflamed plaque ruptures and blocks an artery, the researchers believe that an overactive FLAP gene may be an important contributor to both problems.
The German pharmaceutical company Bayer has created a drug that inhibits the enzyme made by the gene. Bayer believed the gene might contribute to the lung inflammation of asthma. It tested the drug in 2,000 asthma patients and found that it was safe but ineffective for asthma.
Decode Genetics has licensed the drug from Bayer and hopes to start testing it in humans almost immediately, since the required safety testing has been done.
''If this clinical trial is successful, the size of the market for this drug would equal the market for statins,'' Dr. Stefansson said, referring to a widely used class of drugs that lower cholesterol.
But several experts expressed reservations about the company's claim. Dr. Richard P. Lifton of Yale, an expert on the genetics of cardiovascular disease, said that the evidence linking the variant gene to heart attacks was ''actually rather weak'' and that as a reviewer he had advised Nature Genetics to reject the article.
The evidence for identifying genes in multigenic disease should be as high as for single-gene diseases, Dr. Lifton said, adding, ''If you don't have the same standards of proof, you can spend a lot of resources to no effect.''
Both he and Dr. David Altshuler, a medical geneticist at Harvard Medical School, expressed concern that because the article was being published in a prominent journal, the public would assume the claim was correct and would be disappointed if it later turned out to be false.
''If people like cardiologists or investors interpret this as a very interesting hypothesis generated after a lot of good work and that it might be true, then they have taken away the correct message,'' Dr. Altshuler said. He added that he, too, had been asked to review the paper before publication and that he had cautioned the editors that its conclusions were too strongly expressed.
A third expert, Dr. Christine E. Seidman, also a medical geneticist at Harvard Medical School, said that each part of the paper was good science but that ''the sum of the parts does not add up to the conclusion they have reached.''
Dr. Stefansson defended his article and its conclusions, saying he was fully confident they were correct.
Critics have taken issue with a statement in the journal article that the company had replicated its Icelandic finding in a population in Britain. Decode, in fact, found that a different variant of the same gene was involved in the British heart attack patients, which is not an exact replication, Dr. Altshuler said.
Dr. Stefansson said the objection had no merit because many different mutations would be expected to exist for a disease as common as heart disease. The same variant would be expected in two different populations only if both had inherited it from the same founder many generations ago, an unlikely event in the case of two groups as different as those in Britain and Iceland. So he had not expected to find the same variant in the British population but had confirmed his Icelandic result by identifying a different variant of the same gene.
Dr. Eric J. Topol, a medical geneticist at the Cleveland Clinic Lerner College of Medicine of Case Western Reserve University and a co-author of the paper, called the finding ''a signal of a really big step forward.''
Devising drugs based on genetics is a new approach that pharmaceutical companies have not yet embraced, Dr. Topol said.
''So this is a real test of a model that many of us have dreamed about for years,'' Dr. Topol said. ''It changes everything, because Big Pharma has not gotten it yet.''
Dr. Stefansson and Dr. Topol are testing the drug first in people with the variant gene. But the drug could also help a much wider spectrum of people, Dr. Stefansson said, since the more the FLAP gene's enzyme is inhibited, the greater the drug's protective effect should be.
