Written off in this state just a month ago, Senator John Kerry holds the upper hand in Virginia's Democratic primary on Tuesday. His aides say a victory would undercut Senator John Edwards's Southern base and President Bush's strength among military voters.
Mr. Kerry has clearly benefited here from the fading candidacy of Howard Dean, once considered unbeatable in the more liberal northern suburbs, and from the aggressive campaign of Gen. Wesley K. Clark, which has cut into Mr. Edwards's support in the more conservative south side, analysts and Democratic officials said.
Mr. Kerry's strong status in the state -- indicated by recent polls that show him leading Mr. Edwards by nine points or more -- was bolstered Sunday when Gov. Mark Warner endorsed him outside the governor's mansion in Richmond. Mr. Warner, Virginia's first Democratic governor in 12 years, ran well in both urban and rural areas in 2001, and his support could sway undecided voters toward Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts.
Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards attended church in Virginia on Sunday and are scheduled to return to the state on Monday. The two campaigns have flooded the airwaves with television commercials, though only Mr. Kerry's are running in the Washington suburbs, where airtime is expensive.
Dr. Dean has all but conceded Virginia to concentrate on Michigan, where he placed second on Saturday, and Wisconsin, which selects delegates on Feb. 17. Though his core supporters are expected to remain loyal, undecided voters who had been leaning his way seem to be shifting toward Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards, Democrats said.
''The hard part for us is Kerry's momentum,'' said Donald S. Beyer, a former lieutenant governor in Virginia who is national treasurer of the Dean campaign. ''And it's exaggerated by not having television money or having our candidate in the state.''
Advisers to Mr. Edwards, acknowledging Mr. Kerry's surge, have tried to keep expectations here low, contending that Mr. Edwards does not need to win Virginia or Tennessee to slow the Kerry bandwagon. They say Mr. Edwards, of neighboring North Carolina, needs only strong second-place showings to demonstrate that he is the lone viable alternative to Mr. Kerry. Tennessee also holds its primary on Tuesday.
''Our goal is to get Senator Edwards one on one'' against Mr. Kerry, said Harrison Hickman, Mr. Edwards's pollster.
In many ways, Mr. Edwards's populist message would seem tailor-made for Virginia's south side, which straddles the North Carolina border. There, laid-off textile workers and struggling farmers have felt the economic pinch, and as Mr. Edwards frequently points out, 15 Virginia textile mills have closed since 1997.
But it is not clear if his oratory resonates in the densely populated northern suburbs, where high-technology companies flourish, voters are more affluent and unemployment is relatively low. This area, once thought to be Dr. Dean's stronghold, is tilting toward Mr. Kerry, analysts say.
''Virginia is the only Southern state where populism never took root,'' said Larry Sabato, director of the University of Virginia's Center for Politics. ''Kerry is strong in north Virginia and the urban corridor. And that's who votes.''
Virginia is important to Mr. Kerry because it is in Mr. Edwards's backyard and because it has a high number of veterans, military retirees and active-duty soldiers, heavily concentrated in the Williamsburg-Hampton Roads area. A victory on Tuesday will show not only that Mr. Kerry, a decorated Vietnam veteran, can win in the South, but also that a Democrat can compete with President Bush for the military vote, the senator's aides contend.
''Traditionally you think of those military voters as being Republican,'' said Rick O'Dell, co-chairman of Veterans for Kerry. ''Apparently they are not. What's different this time is we have a candidate that appeals to them.''
After a slow start, Mr. Kerry's campaign swung into high gear last week, focusing heavily on veterans. The campaign has been running commercials statewide featuring testimonials from veterans who served with Mr. Kerry in Vietnam. Max Cleland, a former senator from Georgia who is a disabled Vietnam veteran, will campaign for him on Monday. And the campaign has opened phone banks of veterans calling other veterans to vote.
Tuesday's election, in which 82 delegates are at stake, is the first binding Democratic primary in state history. It is open to all voters, regardless of party identification, and Mr. Kerry's advisers believe they can encourage Republican veterans to come out for their candidate.
Mr. Kerry has also received strong labor backing. Though the state A.F.L.-C.I.O. has remained neutral, its president, Daniel G. LeBlanc, and several major locals representing firefighters, teachers and food and communications workers have endorsed him. Mr. Edwards has the support of the textile workers' union.
In a speech at the state Democratic Party's Jefferson-Jackson dinner in Richmond on Saturday night, Mr. Kerry, who commanded a Navy patrol boat in Vietnam, played heavily on his military service and veterans' issues. He castigated President Bush as having played ''dress up'' by wearing a flight suit for an appearance on an aircraft carrier last year. And he accused the Bush administration of slashing health care for veterans and trying to cut combat pay and other benefits for deployed troops.
Virginia's Republican Party has returned fire at Mr. Kerry, accusing him of demeaning National Guardsmen. In a recent television interview, when asked about President Bush's attendance record in the Texas National Guard, Mr. Kerry said, ''I've never made any judgments about any choice somebody made about avoiding the draft, about going to Canada, going to jail, being a conscientious objector, going into the National Guard.''
Republicans contend Mr. Kerry equated serving in the Guard with draft dodging. ''This is an outright insult to the over 28,000 Guardsmen who are serving our nation today in Iraq,'' said Kate Obenshain Griffin, the state party chairwoman.
On Sunday, Mr. Kerry said he meant no slight, but asserted that in the late 1960's, many joined the Guard because the odds of ''going to Vietnam were very low.''
Advisers to General Clark, a West Point graduate, had thought he could win Virginia because of its large military population. His campaign got off to an early start, sending full-time staff members here in early December and running commercials for several weeks this year.
But last week, Mr. Clark stopped his advertising in Virginia to focus on Tennessee. Before that, he spent more than the other candidates here on television, over $500,000, Democratic officials said.
The general stood a strong third in two polls conducted last week, and he has continued to attack Mr. Edwards, particularly on veterans' issues, in a battle for second place.
''I think Virginia is still up for grabs,'' said Mo Elleithee, a campaign spokesman. ''In the southwest and south side, it's a battle between Clark and Edwards.''
But the central battle seems to be between Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry. That struggle is playing out in one family that attended rallies for both candidates in Richmond on Saturday night.
Steve Ferguson, 55, is a Vietnam veteran who likes Mr. Kerry. ''He resonates with veterans because he served,'' Mr. Ferguson said.
But his wife, Brenda, also 55, is supporting Mr. Edwards. ''He has a far better chance to beat Bush because he represents the South,'' she said. ''He has youth and vitality and optimism. And I'd have to say I'd be a bit disheartened if he lost here.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE SOUTH
