The 80 chairs filled up a half-hour before the caucus was to start, as did two dozen more that were hastily brought into the back of the room, and then the chairs along both walls and the window ledges and the aisles in the 20th-floor meeting room overlooking the grounds of the Imperial Palace.
Before long, what the Japan chapter of Democrats Abroad really needed was one of those Tokyo transit workers who cram commuters into rush-hour subway cars.
''We had about 40 people show up for our caucuses in 1996 and 2000,'' said John McCreery, vice chairman of Democrats Abroad and a 24-year resident of Japan. ''We knew there was more interest this year, so we thought we'd get 80 people.''
Instead, 156 eager, percolating Democrats showed up Sunday at the meeting room of Tokyo's Foreign Correspondents Club, the great majority of them attending their first overseas caucus and many voting in their first presidential election.
''I never got involved in politics before; I never even voted,'' said Terri MacMillan, 46, who was raised in Harlem and now runs her own English translation company in Tokyo. ''But I had to get involved this year because of George Bush and what he's doing to the world.''
Similar scenes are playing out in the more than 30 countries where Democrats are holding caucuses this weekend. The earliest was on Friday; The last will be on Monday night.
In Paris, caucus organizers had arranged for a meeting room adjacent to the American Church and expected 300 people. Instead, 800 showed up, and the caucus had to be moved into the church itself. Democrats in London, who normally have one of the biggest turnouts, do not know what to expect at their gathering Monday night.
Here in Tokyo, Mr. McCreery stood in front of the buzzing throng, waving his arms and trying to maintain order while someone ran next door to run off more ballots. They had not printed enough.
''I'm sorry,'' he said. ''We weren't expecting so many people.''
''Neither is Bush!'' shouted Christopher Shannon, 40, a software writer and former Green Beret who was waving a Howard Dean poster taped to a pink whiffle bat.
In some ways, the scene could not have been more different from that of a snowy Iowa caucus. The room was jammed with professionals in a glass-and-steel skyscraper overlooking the modern cityscape of sprawling Tokyo. To decide which candidate's representative would speak first, they used a Japanese children's game called janken, a version of rock-paper-scissors. But at its heart, the caucus was Iowa to the core, filled with earnest Democrats burning to beat President Bush and enjoying the high emotions and the political horseplay of the raucous event.
In the big bare-knuckles world of presidential politics, the Democrats Abroad Caucuses are fairly small potatoes. Organized by the party as a means of attracting support from among the nearly seven million American expatriates, the caucuses that are being held this weekend are just the first step in a process that will continue with a regional caucus and global convention in Edinburgh in late March and result in the selection of nine voting delegates to the Democratic National Convention in Boston in July.
Unlike the Republican Party, which also has an overseas operation but does not award it voting delegates, the Democrats treat their delegates from abroad the same as any other state delegation, with full voting privileges and seats on the Democratic National Committee.
Of course, compared with the 249 delegates that were at stake in Michigan and Washington State on Saturday, or the 181 that are up for grabs in Virginia and Tennessee on Tuesday, it may seem like a great deal of trouble to hold nearly three dozen caucuses all over the world, from Costa Rica to the Czech Republic, just for nine delegates.
''But just imagine those seven million Americans living abroad,'' Mr. McCreery said. ''We are potentially a lot of voters.''
Brent O'Leary, a lawyer for Bloomberg's Japanese trade book division and co-chairman of the Japanese chapter of Democrats Abroad, said the organization had grown steadily since President Bush took office, and explosively over the last year.
Four years ago, Mr. O'Leary said, his organization had a mailing list of 200. Since early summer, that list has grown to nearly 700 from 350. Who are they?
''Lawyers, a lot of translators, academics, corporate executives, and we're just starting to attract some of the U.S. military personnel stationed here, which is really exciting for us,'' he said. ''They range in age from early 20's to mid-70's. Mostly, they're people who've been here for a while, five years or more.''
No one quite knew how the crowd would split among the candidates on Sunday. Over the last several months, volunteers for Dr. Dean have been the most active in Tokyo, carting a life-size cardboard picture of the candidate they call ''Flat Howard'' to approach potential voters in places frequented by expatriates, like commuter trains.
Led by Lauren Shannon, 36, the director of a restaurant and catering company called Fujimama's in the trendy Harajuku shopping district, the Dean contingent went to Sunday's caucus with the most passionate organization and the largest stack of posters and campaign material. (Ms. Shannon, her husband, Christopher, and Ms. MacMillan even traveled to Iowa last month to knock on doors for Dr. Dean.)
Sven Serrano, 45, a history and English instructor in Osaka who has been in Japan for 14 years, took ''a cheap but very bouncy overnight bus'' to get to Tokyo for the caucus. He intended to support Gen. Wesley K. Clark, but when no other Clark supporter came forward he found himself manning the Clark table at the caucus and speaking on behalf of his candidate.
Robert Scheele, 30, a computer instructor at Temple University Japan, was in a similar position for Senator John Edwards of North Carolina. He patiently laid out campaign material on one of several tables in the back of the caucus room and tried to explain the nuances of Mr. Edwards's policies.
In the straw poll that opened Sunday's proceedings, Dr. Dean drew 52 votes to 43 for Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, 18 for Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio, 15 for Mr. Edwards, 11 for General Clark, 1 for the Rev. Al Sharpton and 12 for an uncommitted slate.
At this point, the caucusgoers broke into their presidential preference groups, squeezing together in the crowded room and trying to find secluded corners to gather and plot. The room was too crowded, though, and the groups bled into one another.
''I think we've got some movement here,'' Mark Smith, 42, an Edwards supporter who teaches at a private school in Kobe, told Mr. Scheele after a discussion with the Kucinich camp.
''Why don't we split up and focus on the groups that aren't going to be viable,'' suggested a Kerry supporter, Robert M. Orr, the president of Boeing Japan, sending a bevy of agents for his candidate fluttering through the room seeking converts.
In the end, just as the Kucinich supporters were voting whether to shift to Mr. Edwards, time was called. The result: Dr. Dean 53; Mr. Kerry 38; Mr. Edwards 15; Mr. Kucinich 12; and General Clark 11. Twenty-seven were uncommitted.
The Clark camp evaporated. Supporters of both Dr. Dean and Mr. Kerry swooped upon the Edwards and Kucinich groups.
At the second vote, Mr. Kerry had 51 votes, Dr. Dean 50 and Mr. Kucinich 25, the result of a deal that sent some Dean supporters to the Kucinich camp in a failed effort to outflank the uncommitteds. There remained 27 uncommitted.
''Beat Bush!'' the Kerry supporters chanted from one end of the room.
''Change America!'' responded the Dean camp from the other side.
The final vote was 69 for Dr. Dean (most of the those who had left to support Mr. Kucinich returned to the fold), 51 for Mr. Kerry and 29 uncommitted. Each group got one delegate for Edinburgh.
''I just want people back in America to know that we're taking this very seriously,'' Ms. MacMillan said. ''We're not just a bunch of people living it up in a foreign country, you know. We're Americans, too.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: VOTERS ABROAD
