A Staten Island fire captain who delayed reporting a brawl on New Year's Eve that left one firefighter critically injured had been drinking with other firefighters the night the fight erupted, Fire Commissioner Nicholas Scoppetta and an official with the city's Department of Investigation said yesterday.
The captain, Terrence M. Sweeney, admitted to investigators that he and other firefighters had been drinking at the firehouse in Tottenville that evening, said Emily Gest, a spokeswoman for the Department of Investigation. Ms. Gest would not say how much the firefighters had drunk that night, or whether Captain Sweeney bought the alcohol.
Earlier yesterday, on the WNBC-TV broadcast ''News Forum,'' Commissioner Scoppetta said Captain Sweeney was ''very definitely involved'' in the drinking that night.
The commissioner also said that the captain's involvement in the drinking ''played an important part in imposing a severe punishment.''
Captain Sweeney has been demoted and fined $90,883 -- equal to one year's pay -- and has agreed to retire after 26 years with the department. His last day will be tomorrow. Other firefighters have been reassigned as part of an investigation into the assault and suspected cover-up of the Dec. 31 fight at Ladder Company 76, in which one firefighter threw a metal chair at another, severely injuring his face and sending him into a coma.
In his television appearance yesterday, Commissioner Scoppetta also rebuffed union officials' charges that the department had reneged on an agreement more favorable to Captain Sweeney under pressure from the office of Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg.
''There was no deal,'' Commissioner Scoppetta said on WNBC. ''I'm the only one who can impose the punishment.''
But the commissioner's comments did nothing to heal the rift between the Fire Department and the president of the Uniformed Fire Officers Association, Peter L. Gorman, who has said the department's treatment of Captain Sweeney has amounted to a ''public flogging.''
Mr. Gorman said he helped fashion an agreement in which the captain would have paid a fine of six months' pay and retired immediately, but he said the fine was increased and Captain Sweeney was demoted after an unrelated incident in which two fire officers were found drinking in uniform at a Manhattan karaoke bar.
Mr. Gorman said the question of whether Captain Sweeney had been drinking on New Year's Eve was not supposed to affect his agreement with the department. Mr. Gorman said the commissioner's remarks yesterday amounted to a smokescreen.
''I think the commissioner is saying this to try to cover the fact that he betrayed an agreement,'' Mr. Gorman said. ''He's trying to cover for himself and for City Hall.''
