He is doing his barbecued best to connect with voters in Virginia and Tennessee, Southern-frying his speeches with references to God and country music, talking tough about law and order, tempering his environmentalism with affirmations of his faith in capitalism.
But in what may well be the homestretch of his race for the Democratic nomination, Senator John Kerry, facing down a populist challenge from Senator John Edwards of North Carolina, is also working hard to overcome, for want of a better phrase, his patrician upbringing.
He talks personally about the deaths of his parents. He empathizes with those less privileged. He answers insinuations that he is out of touch using the testimonials of his salt-of-the-earth fellow sailors from the Vietnam War.
Mr. Kerry has covered a lot of ground already in refashioning his persona. The man who now tosses footballs and plays hockey with firefighters once regaled reporters on his bus with the poetry of Pablo Neruda, Shakespeare and T. S. Eliot.
When he rode a Harley-Davidson onto the set of the NBC program ''The Tonight Show'' last fall, the stunt was widely seen as an awkward overcompensation.
Now, with the winds of 10 state primary and caucus victories at his back, Mr. Kerry, who is from Massachusetts, is connecting with audiences young and old, wealthy and poor. After a rally here on Sunday, he spent an hour and a half signing autographs; at other times he opens up more in his stump speech.
On Wednesday, in Portland, Me., he told of his parents' difficult last years. ''I have seen that health care system at great length,'' he said. ''I saw the administrative hassles, the problems, the things you run into, and I remember what it's like to be told, in a rehab hospital, 'Uh, well, we're sorry to tell you this, but tomorrow your Medicare runs out, you've got to decide what you're going to do about your mother.' Now, in our family's case, we're very lucky -- we're able to afford to get alternatives -- difficult as it was, if I may say, it was hard to find the people, hard to line them up, and extraordinarily expensive.
''For most families in America, they don't have that choice,'' Mr. Kerry continued. ''Most families in America say, What do we do? Sell the home? Dig into all our savings? There goes what money would be left for the grandchildren. It's gone! You have to go into poverty to get care.''
In the crowd, Shawn Rumery, 18, nodded. ''He was right on,'' Mr. Rumery, a first-time caucusgoer, said. ''My parents were in the same situation. I'm going to caucus for him on Sunday.''
On Saturday in Nashville, Mr. Kerry tried to channel John F. Kennedy before an audience of 1,000 people at Belmont University.
''This race is not just about replacing George Bush, it's not just about a Democratic vision versus a Republican vision,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''It is about our own democracy, the quality of government in the United states, and the ability to again make public service a noble profession and simply worth being part of.''
Elizabeth Conyer, 18, a freshman from Paducah, Ky., said she had not expected to like Mr. Kerry. ''I expected him to be more aristocratic, more Northern,'' Ms. Conyer said. ''But he was down to earth. I thought, He's really rich -- but I really liked him.''
Scott Martz, 24, a second-year law student at Vanderbilt, said he was hooked. ''He made me feel hopeful,'' Mr. Martz said.
Before the rally, he said, ''I only knew that his middle name's Forbes -- he's got some bucks. But I don't really hold people's wealth against them.''
Mr. Martz added: ''Honestly, I found him to be inspiring. As a role model you'd look up to, I think he's got it.''
Senator Edwards does not let a campaign stop go by without talking about his humble origins as the son of a millworker. His aides make no secret of their view that Mr. Kerry's upbringing would be a liability against President Bush, that Mr. Kerry lacks the common touch.
Mr. Kerry responded in an interview on Saturday that his background would be irrelevant against Mr. Bush, because Mr. Bush's background was no less privileged.
Still, Mr. Edwards uses his own upbringing as a selling point. ''I understand their lives,'' he said of voters last week. ''I come from the same place they come from.''
Mr. Kerry typically answers that an upper-class background should not be a disqualifier. ''If those were the criteria for being president, then we wouldn't ever have had Franklin Roosevelt or John Kennedy,'' he said Saturday.
''Jack Kennedy was in front of a mine in West Virginia -- it's a famous story -- and Hubert Humphrey was trying to bang away at him,'' Mr. Kerry said, ''and a guy came up to him and said, 'I understand, according to your opponent, you never worked a day in your life.' And he said, 'Well, don't worry -- you haven't missed a thing.' ''
In the interview, Mr. Kerry said Mr. Edwards's talk of his upbringing was misplaced. ''Now I admire John, I admire anybody who fights their way up, because I think that's great, that's the great American story,'' he said. ''But it doesn't mean someone else can't fight the fights and can't care.''
Mr. Kerry also said that his Vietnam buddies were an effective rebuttal. ''I think the fact that the guys who fought with me on my boat, 35 years later, are standing beside me, still with me, and care about me, speaks volumes,'' he said. ''Unless you're haughty, or you don't care about people, or you're somehow out of touch, people don't measure you by where you came from.
''Look, I was out in the streets with kids who came out of the barrios in South-Central Los Angeles, fighting for veterans and veterans' benefits,'' he said. ''Again and again, I've been out in the streets, walking the picket line, or fighting for nurses, or fighting for the transportation workers' right to strike, or whatever. I think those are the fights that matter.''
''You've got to be who you are in life,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''You take the cards you're dealt. I think I've tried to use the cards that I was dealt to be a champion for other people to get the same cards.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
