Prince, formerly known as a bad boy of the music industry, did not say a word against it. And unless the cut-out holes on the hips of Beyoncé's sparkling fuscia mini-sheath were meant as a peekaboo protest against the banning of Janet Jackson, neither did anyone else on last night's telecast of the Grammy Awards.
Even Justin Timberlake, who was the man who bared Ms. Jackson's breast during the infamous Super Bowl halftime show, did not mention her when he accepted his award for best pop male vocalist. Dressed as if for a college interview in a brown suit and tie, Mr. Timberlake kissed his date for the evening, his mother, when his name was called, and then apologized.
''I know it's been a rough week on everybody, and, um, what occurred was unintentional, completely regrettable,'' Mr. Timberlake said sheepishly, ''and I apologize if you guys were offended.'' His apology, it turned out, had been demanded by CBS.
''Ms. Jackson and Mr. Timberlake were invited to participate in the show as long as they agreed to apologize on the air for what happened during our network's broadcast of the 'Super Bowl Halftime Show,' '' a CBS statement last night explained. ''Ms. Jackson declined the invitation. Mr. Timberlake accepted.''
One may deplore Ms. Jackson's taste in halftime attire, but she showed surprising gumption in turning down CBS. Mr. Timberlake did not. His was a surprisingly tame performance for a former Mouseketeer who has been seeking to add an edgier, outlaw image. A more chivalrous artist might have expressed regret that his co-conspirator was not there to apologize at his side.
And that widely shared docility was perhaps the only shocking thing in an evening of pop entertainment that ran the musical gamut from OutKast to Andy Williams. On a night that celebrated both the pioneer rebellion of the Beatles and the truculent defiance of hip-hop, it was strange that no one spoke out in solidarity with a shunned comrade. No one even dared make a joke.
The closest thing to a mention came from Christina Aguilera, dressed as a 20's flapper in a satin slipdress. When her perilously loose décolleté gaped apart, she made a halfhearted attempt at self-deprecation, saying that she did not want to happen to her ''what happened to Janet.''
Backstage there were a few murmurs in Ms. Jackson's favor. But in front of the CBS cameras, there was no sign of pity or snickering for Ms. Jackson from her peers, even though many of them have known similar moments of backfiring publicity or career-crushing missteps. Instead her colleagues ignored her as if her disgrace were contagious.
Snoop Dogg was stately. Madonna was missish. And Queen Latifah, of all people, was downright sanctimonious, saying, ''Sometimes it's not about celebrity, it's not about gossip, it's about the music.''
Actually, if the Grammy Awards were any guide, it was really about the music business, which is in such a fragile state right now that even the recording academy's new public service campaign is self-serving -- advertisements aimed at discouraging young people from downloading music free from the Internet. Even the industry's most successful artists are afraid to buck convention -- or the institutions that prop up their industry. In today's entertainment industry, self-expression and self-promotion are so blurred that younger artists have no sense that the two can be at odds.
Pop stars act out, but only in the most predicable, profitable ways, with sexual high jinks like Madonna kissing Britney Spears at last year's MTV Video Music Awards, or with safe political causes, like the ''Rock the Vote'' T-shirt worn by Amber Tamblyn, the young star of CBS's drama ''Joan of Arcadia,'' when she helped present an award. (Chris Martin of ''Coldplay'' dedicated that British band's award for single of the year to Johnny Cash and Senator John Kerry.)
Mr. Timberlake exemplified the career-first mentality of his generation. Younger musicians grew up watching MTV cycle through various fads -- hair metal one year, rap the next. They grew up watching ''Behind the Music'' on VH1, documentaries in which all heroes are depicted as one bong hit or bad manager or failed record away from oblivion. Caution, not recklessness, is their creed. And the 46th Annual Grammy Awards perfectly captured the new spirit of meekness. Perhaps that is why there were so many posthumous awards.
THE TV WATCH
