With elections approaching, Canada's new prime minister, Paul Martin, is promising to conduct a more ethical and transparent government, hoping to calm voter cynicism after a string of scandals plagued the previous administration.
Now, with Parliament in session for a whole week for the first time since he took office in December, he has not found it easy to pull off that goal. He was put on the defensive by sharp criticism from opposition lawmakers who contend that the shipping company owned by his family secretly benefited from more than $100 million in unpublicized government contracts and subsidies in the years when he was finance minister.
Mr. Martin, a Liberal who succeeded Jean Chrétien, has not been accused of wrongdoing. But the appearance that the company he owned and built up, Canada Steamship Lines Ltd., may have benefited from his position in government is becoming the strongest issue for his opponents ahead of elections expected in the spring.
''There has been all kinds of smoke and mirrors about how much money flowed from the government to C.S.L.,'' said John Williams, a Conservative member of the House of Commons.
That kind of criticism dominated debates in Parliament all week, stealing attention from Mr. Martin's initiatives for urban renewal and environmental cleanups.
Last March, while Mr. Martin was vying for the Liberal leadership, the government reported that Canada Steamship Lines had received about $100,000 in government contracts from 1993 to 2002, when Mr. Martin was finance minister.
But after months of opposition inquiries, the government corrected itself near the end of January, saying the figure was closer to $110 million. Government spokesmen characterized the earlier tally as an unfortunate administrative reporting error.
Mr. Martin became sole owner of the shipping company in 1988. After he became finance minister, he was supposed to be separated from the company's operations and kept in the dark about company operations. But The Ottawa Citizen has reported that Mr. Martin was briefed by company managers several times.
The opposition has also criticized the government for allowing another advantage to the company while Mr. Martin was finance minister, letting it profit from changes in tax laws that benefited offshore companies. Several affiliates of Canada Steamship Lines are registered in Barbados and are able to direct profits back to Canada tax free.
Canada Steamship Lines is run by Mr. Martin's three sons. Opposition leaders insist that the sons should sell the company to avert the appearance of a conflict of interest as the government considers a bailout of Stelco Inc., a steel company that is a major customer of the shipping line.
Mr. Martin has denied any infractions, and he said he pushed the government months ago to give a full accounting of public contracts to the company. He has called on the Canadian auditor general, Sheila Fraser, to investigate the government contracts to his company; any report would appear after the elections.
''It was only when I became the prime minister that I had the levers to say I want you to get the full numbers out,'' Mr. Martin said in a televised encounter with voters on Wednesday. He said his involvement in the leadership race kept him from dealing with the issue promptly.
''This is a Canadian company that paid its taxes in Canada, and the bulk of its operations are right here in Canada,'' he said.
Nevertheless, Hugh Winsor, a columnist for The Globe and Mail of Toronto, wrote last week that the controversy ''has already driven a hole in his credibility.''
