With Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg and Gov. George E. Pataki poised to announce plans to build a stadium and a convention center on the far West Side of Manhattan, there is a growing unease in business and civic circles about the wisdom of the plan to erect a $1.5 billion domed football stadium that would also serve as the centerpiece of the city's bid for the 2012 Olympics.
The hotel and tourism industry, the real estate lobby, the city's convention and visitors bureau and the chamber of commerce have all endorsed the city's effort to establish new zoning and tax incentives intended to turn the West Side into a major commercial and residential district.
They also support the city's bid to serve as host for the Summer Olympic Games in 2012 and for the $1.5 billion expansion of the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center.
Privately, though, some members of these groups are questioning the city's and the state's decision to invest more than $600 million in public money in a 75,000-seat Jets football stadium that faces neighborhood opposition and an almost inevitable lawsuit. Some say the stadium would do little for the city's economy other than enrich team owners, while others worry that the opposition will slow -- or even halt -- other elements of the project.
Few are willing to speak publicly for fear of alienating Mr. Bloomberg or Deputy Mayor Daniel L. Doctoroff, the architect of the city's 2012 Olympic bid. ''Everybody has to go to Doctoroff to get things approved,'' said one developer. ''How can we say anything?''
Among those who questioned spending so much public money on the sports complex was a leading figure in the city's real estate industry. ''What does a stadium do for us in Manhattan?'' he said. ''Queens is a logical place to put it.''
A civic leader and retired businessman said: ''There are enormous infrastructure needs in the city today. In a world of limited resources, one has to question subsidizing a stadium.''
While acknowledging that some members of her group have misgivings, Kathryn Wylde, the president of the New York City Partnership, one of the city's leading business and civic organizations, said their concerns were limited.
''We've enthusiastically endorsed the Olympics and the West Side plan,'' Ms. Wylde said. ''The confusion is that most business people worry about a stadium on the West Side in that it raises political issues that could result in litigation that would derail the effort.''
Broadway theater owners have raised broader questions about the stadium's effect on traffic congestion and pollution in the area. Many hotel owners and executives in the tourism industry are strongly behind expansion of the Javits Convention Center, which they say will increase business at hotels and restaurants, but care little about the fate of the stadium. ''You're talking about redeveloping a 50-block area,'' said a tourism executive who was an initial supporter of the stadium. ''It shouldn't be driven by the need for an Olympic stadium.''
Some downtown landlords and business leaders fear that the West Side project will absorb resources needed to rebuild Lower Manhattan, and Cablevision, the company that owns Madison Square Garden, the Knicks and the Rangers, is worried that the stadium may compete with it for ice skating shows, circuses, concerts and other events.
Some people also worry that the plan to subsidize a stadium for the Jets has set off a chain reaction. Mayor Bloomberg has endorsed a $485 million arena for the Nets. The Yankees and the Mets each have plans to build $800 million stadiums, and Madison Square Garden executives have indicated that they would like a new building that at least one developer said could cost $600 million.
The outcome could be a huge public investment in professional sports facilities that account for only a tiny fraction of the city's economy. According to a study by the city comptroller in 1996, professional sports events account for about 0.7 percent of the city's annual gross economic product.
''People have raised some questions about the stadium,'' said Steven Spinola, president of the Real Estate Board of New York. ''But clearly, it's part of the city's effort to redevelop the area and get the Olympics. My personal opinion is that a stadium would be great.''
Some groups are pushing for a public discussion of the policy issues. The Regional Plan Association has scheduled a forum about the city's plans for the West Side, and a similar forum is being jointly held by the Women's City Club, the Municipal Art Society and the New York chapter of the American Planning Association.
Regardless of whether the city is selected as the site of the Summer Games, Mr. Doctoroff contends, the city should move ahead with the stadium, the $1.67 billion extension of the No. 7 subway line, the Javits center expansion and rezoning for 28 million square feet of office towers as a way of improving New York's economic health. In a city where it is often difficult to accomplish big projects, he said, the Olympic bid would impose much-needed discipline and deadlines
But even some proponents of the West Side effort describe the stadium as the redevelopment plan's ''Achilles heel.'' It has inspired local community opposition, and most economists say that stadiums are relatively poor public investments. To offset those objections, the Jets and Mr. Doctoroff said that the public would also benefit from as much as 200,000 square feet of exhibition and meeting space that would be part of the sports complex and physically linked to the convention center. (Mr. Doctoroff has also banned the word ''stadium'' to describe the complex and favors terms like ''Sports and Convention Center.'')
The Javits center would also expand northward from 38th Street to 40th Street, for a total of 1.3 million square feet.
In an effort to appease Madison Square Garden officials, the Jets have eliminated plans for an arena within the stadium complex.
''This version is proving more popular,'' said the president of the Jets, L. Jay Cross. ''We've met with the three biggest show guys,'' he said, ''and we're confident'' that Javits exhibitors will bring 25 to 30 additional events to the stadium space. We'll attract more overnight visitors,'' he added, ''providing a bigger economic impact for the region.''
Hotel owners, who have sought to expand the convention center for more than a decade, believe that a larger exposition space will attract larger conventions, which would attract more guests for their hotel rooms and more customers for restaurants, shops and Broadway shows.
Charles A. Gargano, chairman of the Javits Development Corporation, said the stadium exhibition space and the convention center, which he said would be expanded in two phases, to 40th Street and then to 42nd Street, would provide a major economic stimulus.
''We will experience many more years of delay if we wait'' to expand the Javits center to 42nd Street, he said. ''The common-sense approach is to expand to 40th now.''
But not everyone accepts the notion of the stadium as exhibition hall.
Like most exhibitors, Kevin McAvoy, senior vice president of Reid Exhibitions, the largest trade show company in the world, said his company was ''in favor of any kind of expansion that provides more quality exhibition space for trade shows and other events we produce at the Javits.''
But George F. Little II, the president of George Little Management, which produces 17 shows a year at the Javits, including the largest, the International Gift Show, said he was skeptical that the stadium would work well as an adjunct to Javits, given potential scheduling conflicts, management issues and the fact that it will not be contiguous with the convention center.
''The space is not ideal,'' he said, ''and it's not a viable replacement or addition to the Javits. I may use it, but it's a pure add-on. My concern is that it won't be available when I need it.''
Peter Nathan, a 50-year veteran of the trade show business who was head of marketing and sales at the Javits center in the 1980's, also criticized the stadium as exposition space.
''A big expansion will give larger shows an opportunity to come to New York and it'll allow the Javits to put on several shows simultaneously,'' he said. ''But I just don't see the stadium being of any long-term help. It's being built for other reasons, football.''
Building or expanding conventions centers is no guarantee of success, especially since the national supply of exhibit space soared in recent years while demand has faltered. The soon-to-be completed $800 million Boston Convention and Exhibition Center is already struggling, with initial bookings falling far behind projections, and it is now expected to operate at a deficit for years. The newly expanded Baltimore convention center is also a disappointment, although the 750-room waterfront hotel built nearby with public subsidies is reportedly booming.
