Over lunch at a diner here on a recent afternoon, 14 teachers from a neighborhood elementary school were trying in vain to identify the television journalist interviewing prospective voters at the next table.
Two were sure he was Peter Jennings of ABC. Another, apparently having a Beach Boys moment, said she thought his name was Brian Wilson.
Finally, their waitress, Denise D'Ambro, identified the interviewer as Brian Williams. She then explained that he was not only a former reporter on WCAU, then the CBS station here, but also the designated successor to Tom Brokaw on the ''NBC Nightly News.''
Mr. Williams and Mr. Jennings ''do have the same hairdo and they're fair-skinned,'' Ms. D'Ambro, 50, said, trying to deconstruct her customers' confusion. ''But when Brian gets this new position, he'll definitely be recognized more.''
She added: ''Then he'll be sitting in the big chair.''
Though poised to become the first person to take over a network evening newscast in more than two decades, Mr. Williams remains relatively unknown. To educate viewers about him, NBC News executives ended his nightly newscasts on their cable news channels in January after seven years and put him in a featured reporting position on Mr. Brokaw's program. They are also giving Mr. Williams, whom some critics have dismissed as stiff and remote on the air, more opportunities to demonstrate his sense of humor on shows like ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien.''
No small amount of money -- NBC's program is the highest-rated and most lucrative of the networks' nightly newscasts -- is riding on whether NBC can succeed in raising his profile and softening his image before he assumes his new responsibilities.
The passing of the generational baton from Mr. Brokaw, 64, to Mr. Williams, 44, which was announced by the network in May 2002, is scheduled to occur sometime between the end of the presidential election and the beginning of the new year. Mr. Williams's crash course till then, part seasoning and part marketing, is one that no television journalist or his audience has been put through since the early years of the Reagan administration. At that time, Dan Rather of ''CBS Evening News,'' Mr. Brokaw and Mr. Jennings of ''World News Tonight'' on ABC assumed their current positions in relatively quick succession. Each was arguably better known at the time than Mr. Williams is now.
Mr. Williams, who has dreamed about becoming an anchor since elementary school, anchored several thousand hours of live news broadcasts on NBC's sister cable networks, MSNBC and CNBC, whose ratings are a small fraction of NBC's. (For much of that time, he also anchored NBC's Saturday night newscast.)
Since giving up his cable program, Mr. Williams has been given a standing segment on the ''Nightly News'' (titled ''Assignment America,'' it will take him around the country), as well as roles covering the presidential primaries, the presidential conventions and the Summer Olympics in Athens.
Mr. Williams, who is as loose off the air as he is solemn on it, has tried to convey that more relaxed side in his broadcasting sidelines. In recent appearances on ''Late Night With Conan O'Brien'' and Don Imus's radio program, he traded mock insults with both hosts like a borscht belt comedian.
On ''Late Night,'' he told of recently accompanying Jeffrey R. Immelt, the chairman of General Electric, NBC's parent company, to the open door of Mr. O'Brien's dressing room and finding the host without pants. ''I think someone was putting on a little show for the staff,'' Mr. Williams said.
Such appearances are aimed at attracting the type of viewer who has increasingly shunned the network news, and one whom advertisers covet: someone between the ages of 18 and 49. Over the last decade, the evening newscasts on NBC, CBS and ABC have collectively lost a fifth of their viewership, according to Nielsen Media Research. Over the same period, the average age of a viewer of the evening news has risen by five years, to 60.
Attracting younger viewers to the evening news without alienating those who have grown comfortable watching Mr. Brokaw will be a balancing act that some industry experts say may well be impossible.
''News viewers are people who have responsibilities, mortgages, health concerns,'' said Eric Ober, a former president of CBS News. ''Younger people are generally more oblivious.
''The whole point of news is to communicate what's important. If you start pandering to young people, you're going to get accused, as programmers in non-news do, of simply giving people what they want.''
Once he slides permanently into Mr. Brokaw's chair, Mr. Williams says he intends to proceed cautiously. But he disputes the notion that the importance of the broadcast he inherits has been diminished in the information age. Although viewership has fallen by 7 percent in the last decade, it is higher this year than last and the newscast still attracts an average of more than 10 million viewers a night. Annual advertising revenue is an estimated $175 million.
''It's like someone has given you the keys to the car Clemenza drove in 'The Godfather' for a day,'' said Mr. Williams, who peppers his off-camera speech with enough obscure references to pop culture and political history to rival Dennis Miller. ''This is an American icon. This is something to be handled very carefully. You're not going to grind through the gears.''
Mr. Williams was raised in Elmira, N.Y., and later Middletown, N.J. -- his father was, at one time, a vice president at Corning Glass; his mother acted in community theater -- and some of his fondest memories are of his family gathering each night to watch Walter Cronkite on CBS or David Brinkley and Chet Huntley on NBC.
Even at a young age, Mr. Williams was not shy about approaching those in power.
In November 1966, at age 7, he wrote a letter to Lyndon B. Johnson, then mired in the Vietnam War, at least partly to encourage the president to ''buck up.''
''I have not ben in the White House befor,'' Mr. Williams wrote at the time. ''But I will some time.''
Mr. Williams's path to the anchor desk was circuitous. In a rush to start his life, he left Catholic University in Washington, D.C., in the early 1980's without graduating -- it remains ''one of my great regrets,'' he said. He worked as a reporter in locales that included Pittsburg, Kan.; Washington, D.C.; and Philadelphia before landing at WCBS, the network-owned station in New York City, in the late 1980's. By then, he had married Jane Stoddard, a producer; they have two children.
While in New York, Mr. Williams was the anchor of the station's noon newscast and drew notice for his coverage of the World Trade Center bombing in 1993 and of the trial of Joel Steinberg, who was convicted of killing his adopted daughter, Lisa.
In 1993, at age 34, he jumped to NBC, in large part, he said, because Mr. Brokaw raised the issue of grooming a successor.
During Mr. Williams's first assignment, covering the Clinton administration, Mike McCurry, then the president's press secretary, said he sensed that Mr. Williams's lack of a college degree was ''a source of some insecurity for him.''
But Mr. McCurry said that Mr. Williams compensated by being ''better prepared, better read, than a lot of people who were covering this stuff day in and day out.''
While Mr. Williams may have spent more time than any of his predecessors anchoring an actual evening news program, that experience has come at a price.
''Part of the penalty of this generation is that if they've got anchor skills, they get jerked into a studio and don't get out very often,'' said Mr. Brokaw, who covered the Watergate hearings and served as the host of ''Today'' for five years.
Though Mr. Williams has traveled extensively on high-profile assignments recently -- he spent several weeks in Iraq -- Mr. McCurry says he senses that, at times, he is straining to convey authority.
''It's almost like he's trying to demonstrate gravitas on the air,'' Mr. McCurry said. ''He's naturally an 'aw shucks' kind of guy, but you probably have to pull yourself into Walter Cronkite mode if you're sitting in a chair like that.''
Mr. Williams's transition has certainly not been helped by rumors, some stoked by rival networks, that Mr. Brokaw has experienced something akin to seller's remorse.
Mr. Brokaw quickly shot down that scuttlebutt. ''I'm going,'' he said.
But he could not resist a good-natured parting shot at his successor.
''If it had been left to me,'' he said, ''I'd have chosen Justin Timberlake.''
