Israel is working to reroute parts of its West Bank separation barrier to make it less burdensome on the Palestinians and more acceptable to the United States, a senior aide to Israel's prime minister said Sunday.
Israel is continuing to build the barrier, but Prime Minister Ariel Sharon's government has made some minor adjustments, and is considering additional changes, said the aide, Zalman Shoval.
Mr. Sharon has recently spoken of a range of independent measures that he could take if he concludes that Middle East peace efforts are hopelessly deadlocked. Mr. Sharon expects to visit Washington in the next few weeks, and Israeli officials acknowledge that they will be seeking American support before proceeding with unilateral steps.
Last week, Mr. Sharon said he was considering plans to withdraw most Jewish settlers from the Gaza Strip. The new proposals on the West Bank barrier are to be presented to visiting Bush administration officials this week, Mr. Shoval said.
He spoke in response to an article published Sunday in Haaretz, a liberal Israeli newspaper, that said parts of the barrier that would cut deep into the West Bank would be altered so the route runs closer to the West Bank boundary. The newspaper said such changes would reduce the barrier's length to about 420 miles from about 480 miles.
''The aim is to make the line more efficient and alleviate the problems that some Palestinians face,'' said Mr. Shoval, though he said he could not confirm the details of the Haaretz article.
The Bush administration has been generally supportive of Israel during the past three years of Middle East fighting. But the president has criticized Israel for building the barrier inside the West Bank, which Israel captured in the 1967 war.
Israel says that the barrier is needed to stop Palestinian suicide bombings and other attacks, and that the route runs through the West Bank to protect Israeli settlements.
The barrier is roughly one-quarter built. A long stretch runs along the northern West Bank, and parts have been erected around Jerusalem.
Saeb Erekat, the chief Palestinian negotiator, said the talk of limited adjustments to the barrier was not acceptable to the Palestinians. ''I hope the Americans will simply tell Israel, 'Stop building the wall,' '' he said.
The barrier is facing two legal challenges this month. The Israeli Supreme Court is to hear a claim this week by the Association for Civil Rights in Israel, which says the barrier infringes on Palestinian rights. In The Hague, the International Court of Justice is to hear arguments and issue a nonbinding, advisory ruling on the legality of the barrier.
In a clash on Sunday, Israeli troops entered the Palestinian town of Rafah, in the southern Gaza Strip, searching for a suspect and a tunnel used to smuggle weapons.
When the suspect, Asraf Abu Libdeh, fled a house and refused orders to stop, he was shot and killed, the Israeli military said.
