During the last presidential campaign, Condoleezza Rice criticized President Bill Clinton for too ''romantic'' a view of Russia's Boris Yeltsin, and at the outset of his administration, President Bush kept a chilly distance from President Vladimir Putin. But romance blossomed after Mr. Bush met Mr. Putin for the first time in June 2001 and proclaimed that he had seen into his soul. Now the ardor seems to be cooling again. On his recent trip to Moscow, Secretary of State Colin Powell lectured the Kremlin on not finding the ''essential balance'' between branches of government (read ''Putin has grabbed all the power'') and said Russia's policy in Chechnya was of concern (read ''the Kremlin ought to stop that bloody war'').
That's hardly ''evil empire'' talk. But it was still a marked shift from Washington's studied silence about Russia's glaring faults, and it served to underscore the way American foreign policy seems to require pegging foreign leaders as friend or foe. It is an approach that generally leaves leaders and citizens of foreign lands feeling patronized, miffed, puzzled or all of the above. The timing of Mr. Powell's comments had the air of nothing more than a play to election-year politics.
That Mr. Putin richly deserves criticism is not in dispute. Russia's behavior in Chechnya has been crude and cruel. At home, Mr. Putin has systematically imposed his will on the broadcast media, the Parliament and the legal system. The assault on the Yukos oil company and its jailed director, Mikhail Khodorkovsky, has been a sad regression into Soviet ways. But Mr. Putin wasn't all that different when Mr. Bush peered into his soul; the Chechen bloodbath, after all, had been his ticket to power. The point is not that Mr. Putin should be embraced or reviled, any more than other leaders should be declared friend or foe. Russia will always pose both an opportunity and a threat for Washington. The Bush administration needs to shed the melodrama, the ''good and evil'' posturing. It serves no purpose, and creates a lot of irritation.
