The rising political reaction in the United States to the loss of some American jobs to workers overseas is creating a whiplash effect among India's leading technology companies.
''The dramatic buildup of opposition before the U.S. elections is disturbing,'' Jaithirth Rao, the chairman of a leading software and call center company, MphasiS BFL Ltd., said in an interview at the three-day annual meeting of Nasscom, India's software industry trade association.
MphasiS, based in Bombay, has 6,000 employees and its operations spread across Bangalore and Pune. More recently, it has expanded to Shanghai and Tijuana on the Mexican border with the United States.
Companies like MphasiS are the biggest beneficiaries of a movement among many of the largest corporations in the United States to shift certain white-collar work to low-cost India, where local companies are adding thousands of skilled, English-speaking employees every quarter to meet the increased demand. At the same time, companies like General Electric and Microsoft are expanding their operations in India on everything from basic customer service to high-end research and development.
The political reaction in the United States against such outsourcing has built rapidly in the last year; nearly two dozen states have voted on legislation to ban government work from being contracted to non-Americans.
More recently, the United States Senate approved a bill aimed at restricting outsourcing of contracts from two federal departments. The House has not acted on similar legislation.
''We are concerned that this is federal legislation, and that it is sponsored by a Republican,'' said Kiran Karnik, president of the software association. ''Republicans are traditionally free marketers.''
Mr. Karnik, who has been vocal in promoting the cost-saving advantages of India's work force, said he was perturbed that ''all of the election-year rhetoric equates offshoring with job losses.''
Mr. Karnik and others also point to the Web site of John F. Kerry, the Democratic presidential front-runner and traditionally a strong supporter of free trade, who has outlined what companies here see as a plan to investigate and prevent outsourcing.
For all the alarms being sounded here, however, officials acknowledged that the effect of the proposed legislation in the United States was likely to be minimal.
India's rapidly expanding technology and services industry earned revenue of about $12 billion in the fiscal year that ended last March, and $9.5 billion of that came from exports. In the year ending March 2004, the industry is projected to grow to about $15.5 billion, with exports of $12 billion.
Over 70 percent of India's software export revenue comes from companies based in the United States, but less than 2 percent of India's export earnings comes from work for American governments, and the software and related services industry accounts for only 3 percent of India's economic output.
Still, the industry is increasingly associated with the Indian economy's upbeat mood, and its leaders are anxious. As fears of white-collar job losses in the United States continue to rise, they say, the issue is expected to become a sticking point in trade negotiations between India and the United States.
Gartner, the technology research firm, predicts that the outsourcing reaction will continue to escalate at least through the fall.
''The aggressive campaign against moving work to low-cost destinations will become a political imperative for the presidential campaign,'' said Partha Iyengar, a Gartner vice president for research who is based in Bombay.
Protectionism dominated the proceedings of the meeting here. Several sessions were specifically dedicated to discussions on dealing with anti-outsourcing sentiment.
The conference tone was set in the inaugural address by Daniel T. Griswold, associate director of the Cato Institute's Center for Trade Policy, based in Washington.
Mr. Griswold told his audience, hundreds of Indian executives, that the recent American political moves sent negative signals. ''To restrict outsourcing through legislation is bad policy because, ultimately, Americans are going to get less service for their tax dollars,'' he said.
American corporate customers of Indian software companies were not conspicuous at this year's annual meeting. Corporations in the United States, and the Indian companies they contract with, kept a low profile.
But Cognizant Technology Solutions, a company based in Teaneck, N.J., has 70 percent of its development operations in India and said it was still seeing five to eight customers and prospective clients from the United States every week at its offices in Chennai in southern India.
In a further indication that outsourcing is likely to be an increasingly touchy subject here, Robert Blake, the United Stateschargé d'affaires in New Delhi, said last week that India's best response was to open its markets wider to help create other jobs in the United States.
Mr. Blake's remarks rankled India's government. ''That is not the way to go,'' said Yashwant Sinha, the external affairs minister. ''It smacks of retaliation that, 'If you don't open up, we will impose restrictions,''' Mr. Sinha told reporters last week.
''The U.S. has to realize that by outsourcing, its companies remain competitive and save jobs,'' Mr. Sinha said.
Mr. Iyengar of Gartner said India might not go as far as an eye-for-an-eye approach, but he added, ''I see greater confidence among Indian officials to engage in an equal-trade dialogue with the U.S. on this issue.''
Still, most of those involved in the business here say they are hoping that common economic interests will override political differences that could lead to trade protectionism.
For now, the message to India's outsourcing specialists, Mr. Rao of MphasiS said, is simple: ''Don't panic.''
TECHNOLOGY
