Geno Auriemma asked his own question, then answered in the same bewildered manner that everyone else did Sunday. How could his Connecticut women's basketball team defeat Miami by 18 points after committing 33 turnovers?
''I have no idea,'' Auriemma said after the 83-65 victory at Gampel Pavilion.
UConn is 18-2 over all and 8-1 in the Big East Conference, and will perhaps leap to No. 1 from No. 4 when the next Associated Press poll is released Monday. But these were not the same imposing Huskies who had knocked off top-ranked Tennessee on Thursday.
UConn was careless and impatient against the Miami press, unnerved by the Hurricanes' quickness. Frequently, UConn passes flew right into the hands of the opponent. At times, the Huskies struggled just to inbound the ball. Diana Taurasi (21 points, 7 rebounds, 6 steals, 8 turnovers) even hit the referee in the foot with one pass, and Auriemma could not yank her out of the game fast enough in the first half. Had this been vaudeville, he said, he would have used a hook.
It has been a long time since Auriemma had to rush his starters back into the game in the closing minutes, as he did Sunday after a wide garbage-time lead shrank to 79-64.
''Minus the turnovers, it was an unbelievably good game by us,'' Auriemma said, firing off a string of one-liners. ''But that's like saying minus Cindy Crawford's body and face, she's just an average person.''
Every player is back from last year's national championship team, yet these Huskies are a fitful, uneven bunch. Taurasi, perhaps the best player in the college game, has not been at her most resourceful. At times, a lack of confidence has bothered players like center Jessica Moore and guard Ashley Battle. The Huskies are smallish on the interior and vulnerable to the power game. And they have added no significant contributions through recruiting.
Yet, UConn continues to win, and no one would be surprised if the Huskies earn their third consecutive N.C.A.A. title. Whatever UConn lacks, it is not toughness, forceful defense or ferocious rebounding. A 46-30 advantage was gained on the boards over No. 22 Miami (16-4, 5-4), which frequently turned the ball over shortly after swiping a pass from UConn.
The Huskies also usually manage to avoid foul trouble, another attribute that means they have a chance to win every game, even one as sloppy as Sunday's.
''I think Connecticut and Texas are the two best teams I've seen on tape all year,'' Miami Coach Ferne Labati said. ''I don't think there are too many people close to them.''
As untidy as this game was, it produced plenty of encouraging moments for UConn. Battle scored a career-high 18 points. Moore provided the kind of game a struggling player needs with 13 points and 10 rebounds. But this is not a team that understands the past or appreciates history, Auriemma said. The usual dominance will be absent, he predicted. Instead, it will be two steps forward and three steps back. And maybe that's not all bad, he said.
''They're in the locker room saying, 'That was awful; we've got a lot to work on,' '' Auriemma said of his players. ''That's probably right where you want them this time of season.''
COLLEGES
