One man was killed and two others were left in critical condition when gunfire erupted last night in a Coney Island housing project, amid what fellow residents described as rival gang activity and drug sales in the building's corridors.
The police said they responded to a 911 call about 7:30 p.m. from someone describing the sounds of multiple gun shots inside Surfside Gardens, a 15-story public housing building at 2940-42 West 31st Street.
The building is less than two blocks from the Coney Island boardwalk and about 10 blocks west of the Coney Island Amusement Park and KeySpan Park, home of the minor league Brooklyn Cyclones.
The police said that when officers arrived on the scene, all three shooting victims were in a bloodied elevator cab on the third floor.
There was no immediate indication of who was responsible for the shootings. Shortly before midnight, as detectives continued to interview residents, a man who identified himself as Anthony Ward, 20, was seen being taken away in handcuffs by the police.
Mr. Ward, responding to a reporter, said he believed he was under suspicion in the shootings.
One of the victims was pronounced dead on the scene.
The two others were taken to Lutheran Medical Center and Coney Island Hospital, where they were in critical condition last night, the police said.
The identities of the victims were withheld by investigators, who said they believed they were all in their 20's. Fellow residents of Surfside Gardens and other public housing buildings on the same block said two of the victims were known by the street names of ''Mel'' and ''Ebay.''
Some people in the neighborhood said the three victims were thought to be involved in low-level drug dealing, and had mostly likely fallen prey to a simmering dispute between rival gangs over turf -- or market territory -- in the housing project's hallways.
The shootings came in a neighborhood that has lately avoided high levels of violent crime, and where economic activity has benefited from the construction of the KeySpan Park, and an increase in visitors to the Coney Island Amusement Park and the nearby New York Aquarium.
But a woman who identified herself as Joli and said she was a resident of O'Dwyer Gardens, another public housing building on the same block -- and others who live in the housing projects surrounding Surfside Gardens -- described her corner of Coney Island as plagued by drug dealing and violence.
''We all knew this was coming,'' Joli said.
She said it was common knowledge in the public housing buildings that gangs were battling over control of the drug trade.
Anthony Wittman, a resident of O'Dwyer Gardens, said crime on the block seemed to be getting worse, and might be reverting to the high levels of violence during the 1970's and 1980's.
Over the last decade, residents of the 60th Precinct, which includes Surfside Gardens, have experienced a sharp decline in violent crime. The police said last night that there were 10 murders in the precinct last year, half the number in 1993 and 33 percent less than in 1997.
''It is getting worse over here than it was,'' Mr. Wittman said. ''I don't even want to go out at night.''
