In Silicon Valley having the best technology never guarantees reaching the finish line first.
That is the predicament facing Foveon, a maker of sensor chips for digital cameras, which plans to introduce a consumer-oriented 4.5 megapixel digital camera at this week's Photo Marketing Association trade show in Las Vegas.
For the last seven years Foveon, based in Santa Clara, Calif., has been in a battle with the dominant Japanese camera makers who use a competing sensor technology.
Until now, Foveon has sold custom cameras costing as much as $50,000. In 2002, Foveon introduced a digital single-lens reflex camera in partnership with the Sigma Corporation, a Japanese camera and lens maker. Nikon and Canon dominate the market for cameras that cost more than $1,000.
This week Foveon will enter the mainstream market with a new camera priced at $399 that will be manufactured in China and marketed as the Polaroid x530 with Foveon technology.
The Foveon sensor chip, called the X3, is made using an industry standard semiconductor manufacturing process and has received good reviews for color fidelity and resolution. The chip is composed of millions of photo-detectors, each capable of capturing red, blue and green light. In contrast, most of today's digital cameras use three separate chips, each with a separate color filter. Although the Foveon technology is generally thought to have advantages over the three-chip approach in image quality, cost, lower power consumption and adaptability to new photo and video applications, it has not been widely adopted. The challenge has been to compete with an older, more entrenched technology that is falling in cost.
Some analysts have suggested that Foveon technology may be bypassed as the consumer marketing effort pushes simplistic measures of picture quality like how many million pixels the camera sensor has. ''We are faced with a very active market with formidable competitors,'' said Federico Faggin, a well-known Silicon Valley engineer who was the co-inventor of the microprocessor and who joined Foveon as chief executive last August. ''We are hoping that our technology will rise above the noise.''
But in a consumer market dominated by powerful brands like Sony, Nikon, Olympus, Canon and Hewlett-Packard, a tiny innovator may not emerge enough to be noticed.
''The danger, of course, is becoming a Betamax,'' said Paul Saffo, a technology industry consultant at the Institute for the Future, in Menlo Park, Calif. In the 1980's, the Betamax format by Sony, which offered better video recording quality than the competing VHS format, lost in the marketplace.
Some industry analysts say it is too soon to declare a winner in the competition over digital camera image sensors. The digital camera market, they said, is still in rapid flux, making it possible for late entries to gain a foothold.
More than 41 million digital cameras were sold in 2003 worldwide, according to the InfoTrends Research Group, a market research company based in Norwell, Mass. That number is expected to grow to 53 million this year, creating a $17.9 billion market, the company said.
Moreover, the marketplace could be transformed when a new generation of camera phones that can take video, as well as still images, arrives perhaps next year. If that power-hungry function proves popular, Foveon's sensor chips with their low power use would have a significant advantage.
''If the idea of a camcorder in a cellphone catches on, there's an immense market,'' said George Gilder, the technology analyst who has written a book about the work of Carver Mead, a pioneering physicist who founded Foveon in 1997. Foveon executives say they are in conversations with cellular telephone makers, but no deals have been completed. Analysts disagree over how much the current digital photography and camcorder markets will be affected by cellphones.
''Some people believe that digital cameras will be cannibalized by cellphones, but we don't see that,'' said Chris Chute, senior digital imaging analyst for the International Data Corporation, a market research company based in Framingham, Mass.
The Foveon technology could possibly be used in new-generation hybrid cameras that capture video and then allow a user to obtain high-resolution still pictures from any point in the video file. But that capability is still not in the company's new cameras or its line of professional cameras, company executives said.
The Polaroid x530 camera is being made by World Wide Licenses, a Hong Kong subsidiary of the London-based Character Group, which originally made digital cameras for the toy market and has significant distribution channels in the United States.
In addition to a longer battery life, the new camera will come with personal computer software that will let photographers touch up photos by bringing out features that would otherwise be lost because of exposure problems in conventional digital cameras.
TECHNOLOGY  Correction:  February 10, 2004, Tuesday  An article in Business Day on Monday about Foveon, a maker of advanced image sensor chips for digital cameras, misstated the technology now used in most digital cameras. It is sensor chips that each contain an array of photo-detectors to filter red, blue or green light. They do not use separate chips with separate color filters.
