Almost from the moment this hilltop town rose, it began to fall, and for most of the many centuries it has been living, it has also been dying.
The Etruscans have to answer for that. They were good at battle strategy but apparently bad at land surveys, and when they looked up, up, up to this improbably high summit in the middle of an extremely deep canyon, they saw a position that would be easy to defend, at least from invaders, and clambered to the top.
They failed to see a longer-term threat: the flimsy, fickle ground beneath them.
''The clay soil here falls away like fresh ricotta,'' said the mayor, Erino Pompei, whose name bears an uncanny resemblance to that of another ill-fated hamlet at odds with geology.
Mr. Pompei, sitting in his office on a recent afternoon, smiled and shrugged: Land will be land, and nature will be nature.
But people will also be people, which means that they will fight against those forces, especially if something beautiful is at stake. Civita is stunning: an extremely compact warren of medieval buildings -- the ones, that is, that have not tumbled over the edge -- on a kind of butte that resembles a ridiculously tall, top-heavy cupcake.
Although the rate at which it is crumbling is more or less glacial, Mr. Pompei said the battle to contain the process was intensifying. At the start of this year, he said, engineers began a soil-fortification project that will cost more than $15 million and take 10 years.
There may be more work to come, and one reason is that Civita, inexplicably unheralded by many travel books, seems at long last to be catching the eyes of tourists, who are directed by road signs that advertise, in Italian: ''The town that's dying.''
Franco Sala, who owns the town's sole inn, said that its three bedrooms were being occupied more frequently and that a promotional Web site for Civita, www.civitadibagnoregio.it, registers 60 hits a day, compared with fewer than 10 four years ago, when he started it.
He said a combination of factors, including the recent international broadcast of a Brazilian soap opera with an Italian character from Civita, had lifted the profile of this ever-slumping place. ''Now it's the prima donna,'' Mr. Sala said.
It is certainly difficult. Because of the canyon that surrounds it, the only way to enter or leave is by a concrete footbridge that takes more than five minutes of walking, much of it at a daunting incline, to cross.
Cars do not fit, so supplies are brought in on mopeds, which inherited the task, not so many years ago, from donkeys. There is not a single food market. There is no pharmacy.
Mr. Sala tried briefly in the mid-1990's to live here, then headed for terra more firma, further reducing the local population, a figure that is a matter of some dispute.
''There are about 16 people,'' said Astra Zarina, a Latvian who taught architecture at the University of Washington and retired here with her American husband, Tony Heywood, who is also an architect.
''There are about 12 people,'' said Sandro Rocchi, who lives here part time and teaches a course in agriculture at a nearby school.
''Let's see,'' Mayor Pompei mused, his eyes rolling upward as he did a head count. ''One, two, three,'' he said, then continued in silence.
''Not more than 10 people,'' he concluded. He is the mayor of all of the municipality of Bagnoregio, which officially includes and governs Civita and has about 3,900 residents.
Civita was never exactly teeming. Even before all the landslides, it covered little more area than it does today: a diamond-shaped patch less than two-tenths of a mile long and about one-tenth of a mile wide.
But people kept drifting away, perhaps taking their cue from structures on the inconstant perimeter. One century, a bit of a house would drop into thin air; a few centuries later, it would be all or part of a church.
Slow as the process has been, a sentence of eventual extinction nonetheless hangs over the place.
''It's like a morgue,'' said Ms. Zarina. She was referring principally to the dearth of inhabitants, but she also seemed to be acknowledging the aura of doom.
''From left and right, north and south, we are threatened,'' she said.
They are constantly reminded of that. One sizable wedge of Civita, just beyond Mr. Sala's restaurant and inn, is cordoned off with orange police tape and signs warning people not to proceed a step further. The erosion there is particularly severe.
Ms. Zarina and Mr. Heywood said local, regional and national officials were not doing nearly enough to slow it. So the couple appeal constantly -- and often vainly, they said -- to philanthropic organizations for help.
Mr. Pompei said the project under way should do some good. It includes planting concrete blocks in the dirt below the rocks upon which Civita teeters. They would act as dams to keep claylike soil from getting too wet and unstable.
For at least the next few centuries, he said, Civita would be safe.
And then?
''Nature stops for nothing,'' the mayor said.
Civita di Bagnoregio Journal
