While it pays to be skeptical of pixie dust stories in fashion, fluke successes and overnight sensations do occur. When Burt Bacharach and Hal David wrote ''Do You Know the Way to San Jose,'' their bittersweet 1968 classic about failed ambition, they cautioned the world's hopefuls that ''all the stars that never were are parking cars and pumping gas.'' Lose your illusions, the lyrics suggested, advice one would have assumed had applications well beyond Hollywood.
Yet oddly enough, there may be no better place than a gas pump for a modeling hopeful to start a career. Consider Danny Miller, an 18-year-old with bee-stung lips and an otherworldly air who is ubiquitous on runways and in magazines. Waiting backstage at Kenneth Cole's show on Friday, Mr. Miller fiddled with his BlackBerry while diffidently explaining that he had been discovered at a suburban motocross rally.
''The business is a little bit shady,'' Mr. Miller said, referring to modeling. ''But it's amazing what they pay you, considering I'd probably do it for 10 bucks.'' In case the modeling thing doesn't work out, Mr. Miller has held on to his mechanic's job at a shop where his specialty is repairing limousines.
Will Chalker, the 23-year-old who has probably had the busiest season of any male model now working, was also discovered cute, in his case pouring concrete at a construction site outside London. ''Someone said I should take some snapshots to an agency,'' said Mr. Chalker, who must be gratified that he did, since his fee for 10 minutes on a catwalk averages $3,000.
The 23-year-old model Chris Grossarth was spotted by a casting agent as he waited to get a Mohawk at the Astor Place barbershop. Persuaded to forgo the scalping and ditch his day job as a carpenter, Mr. Grossarth has since been featured in ad campaigns for Gap and DKNY. ''I was really skeptical'' of the business, he said on Saturday. ''There's a big flip between, on one side, being a person and, on the other, being this product.''
Still, he added, ''I look at the whole modeling thing as, like, a total piece of luck.''
Like luck, inspiration can be overplayed during Fashion Week, when designers seem in competition to conjure ever riper narratives to explain what one would think was a simple enough act -- stitching a dress. Among the inspirational doozies cited by designers this season are Durga, the Hindu goddess and embodiment of the ''sacred feminine'' (Mara Hoffman of Circle); ''Thoroughly Modern Millie'' meets Gwen Stefani (Reem Acra); and the paintings of Francis Bacon blended with Hitchcock and the mysticism of the Scottish lochs (Roland Mouret). Huh?
One show that was plausible in its references was Gary Graham's, which took as its point of departure a Joseph Mitchell story about the Romany. ''My boyfriend is a writer and he gave me the book,'' Mr. Graham said after his presentation on Saturday. ''In the past couple seasons I've done Goth themes, and I wanted to go in another direction,'' added Mr. Graham, 34, whose clothes are sold at Bergdorf Goodman and Fred Segal in Los Angeles.
''The Gypsies started me thinking about the idea of clothes that were found in a trunk, pieced together or even stolen,'' the designer said. On a more basic rag trade level, the clothes for the show cost $35,000 to produce -- a pittance by the standards of a large design house, but a colossal sum for an independent designer -- and were all predicated on finding ''the perfect piece of Battenburg lace.''
Fortunately, that wasn't tough, since vestiges of Mitchell's New York persist, even if caricature Gypsies do not. Mr. Graham found the lace at Klauber Brothers, a trimmings house so long established that one of its founders died aboard the Titanic, returning from Europe during a season that was also a big one for lace, according to news reports of 1912.
Fur was popular that year, too, and so it is again in tundral New York. Sales are said to be on the rise, and so PETA, the animal rights group, will again be bringing its street theater tactics to Bryant Park. ''As thrilling as it is to disrupt the fur-pimp shows,'' said Dan Mathews, a vice president of PETA, referring to some of the group's better publicized actions, ''we also like to bring the case to the public.''
On Tuesday morning, a dozen activists plan to drape themselves in front of the tents, wearing bloodied fur coats that, weirdly enough, were among 3,000 donated to the rights group last year.
FASHION DIARY
