An off-duty Customs Service inspector fatally shot a bodega clerk who approached him as he parked his car on a deserted Brooklyn street early yesterday morning, the police said.
The inspector, Martin Carrington, 38, has not been charged with a crime, the police said. He fired the shots from his licensed 9-millimeter handgun after arguing with the clerk, Wilson Alba, 31, of the Bronx, on Halsey Street near Irving Avenue in Bushwick about 1:45 a.m., the police said.
Exactly what happened between the two men on a block of graffiti-scarred, low-slung brick buildings was unclear.
Mr. Carrington had just gotten off work at Kennedy International Airport and was returning to his house, which is a few blocks from the intersection where he shot Mr. Alba, the police said. A plastic bag filled with takeout food sat on the passenger seat of his gold Chevrolet sedan.
The police initially said that Mr. Alba had tried to rob Mr. Carrington, but said later that there appeared to have been no robbery attempt, and that the two men had fought after Mr. Alba approached the inspector's car. When the argument escalated, the inspector fired his gun twice, striking Mr. Alba in the chest, the police said. They said no gun was found on Mr. Alba.
Miguel Arellano, 31, who lives across the street from where Mr. Alba was shot, said that he came home early yesterday morning to find his block swarming with police officers and his mother deeply distraught in the apartment they share on Halsey Street.
''She said the two men were arguing and then she heard two gunshots,'' Mr. Arellano said. ''She ran to the window and saw a guy lying on the street in front of the open car door.''
Ambulances soon arrived and took Mr. Alba and Mr. Carrington away. Mr. Alba was taken to Elmhurst Hospital Center in Queens, where he was pronounced dead at 4:23 a.m. Mr. Carrington was taken to Bellevue Hospital Center in Manhattan for observation and was later released.
Mr. Alba's relatives described him as a hard-working immigrant from the Dominican Republic who steered clear of trouble for the sake of his two young children, an 8-year-old son also named Wilson and a daughter, Wendy, 5.
''He was not a troublemaker,'' said Dorothy Lamourt, who was once married to Mr. Alba's uncle and still lives in the Brooklyn apartment where Mr. Alba lived when he first came to the United States at the age of 17. ''All he cared about was family and his children.''
Mr. Alba's companion, Diani, who would not give her last name,said that Mr. Alba had worked at a bodega in Brooklyn near the intersection where he was killed, leaving his Bronx home at 9 a.m. and returning after midnight, until he lost the job about a month ago.
''He is not a criminal,'' she said, sobbing and speaking in Spanish in a telephone interview as she waited for a ride to the morgue to identify Mr. Alba's body.olice records show that Mr. Alba had been arrested twice in the past 90 days on charges of dealing drugs and resisting arrest.
A spokeswoman for the United States Customs Service said that Mr. Carrington had worked for the agency for four years and was allowed to carry a gun.
