A QUESTION OF BLOOD  An Inspector Rebus Novel  By Ian Rankin  406 pages. Little, Brown &amp; Company. $22.95.
A distillery catches fire and sends hot whiskey running down the streets; people who try to drink it wind up hospitalized. That's the kind of background detail that animates Ian Rankin's serial portrait of Edinburgh. Mr. Rankin's scabrous, panoramic view of that city (where he lives), and of its resident gumshoe John Rebus, is sufficiently hard-boiled and arch to have made him the most popular mystery writer in Britain. By this time, with 14 novels along with shorter works in this series, Rebus is ready for a full-scale Atlantic crossing.
''A Question of Blood'' confirms Mr. Rankin's place -- for those who don't already know him, although his preceding ''Resurrection Men'' reached American best-seller lists -- as part of the nouveau-noir pantheon that dominates contemporary mystery writing. Character, setting and conscience count for at least as much as plot does in the masculine, brooding work of Dennis Lehane, Michael Connelly, Harlan Coben, George P. Pelecanos and Jonathan Kellerman, not to mention Peter Robinson, another stellar British practitioner of this craft.
In the case of Rebus, acerbic back talk is a particularly vital element. ''And if we don't see each other again . . . well, I'll be crying inside, believe me,'' Rebus calls out to one of the many people who annoy him. ''The smile will just be for show.''
For those who came in late, Rebus has already been through a great deal by this juncture. Since Mr. Rankin began writing about him in 1987, this detective (whose name denotes a form of visual puzzle) has paid his figurative dues. The former angry young man has been in the military and been stationed in Northern Ireland. He has trained for special duty and failed to make the grade. He has had a breakdown and has become estranged from his family. He appears in ''A Question of Blood'' as a bulky, sardonic, highly charismatic figure with an endless capacity for fact-finding and world-weary asides. It's also clear, during the course of this story, that Detective Inspector Rebus has never met a beverage he didn't like.
Amid this book's endless prowl for cups of tea, shots of booze and whatever else he can drum up (''You don't honestly think I'm sharing these?'' he asks, holding six bottles of lager), Rebus keeps his head improbably clear. This is helpful, since he is simultaneously embroiled in two different investigations. The first involves a shooting at an elite school, an incident that left three students dead and the mysterious lone gunman an apparent suicide. The second case -- and of course they ultimately come together -- is one in which Rebus has literally been burned.
With his hands scalded and bandaged throughout ''A Question of Blood,'' Rebus is under suspicion in the fiery murder of an ex-convict. The victim had been stalking Rebus's appealing younger partner, Detective Sgt. Siobhan Clarke -- who doesn't like the Americanized, noir-sounding nickname ''Shiv'' but winds up hearing it a lot anyway. This book picks up in mid-action, just as it ends on a sinister note that suggests a sequel. No wonder: Rebus is too knowing, jaundiced and popular to go away.
During a roundup of suspects here, Siobhan remarks: ''Thought I recognized some faces.'' Rebus replies: ''Aye, and not from judging any bonny baby contests.'' The Scottish turns of phrase abound, sometimes a might impenetrably, but the book's essential language is universal. Rebus is after the deeper implications of the trigger-happy tragedy at school. And he will brook no resistance, not even from the politician whose son was wounded in the incident. ''Sanctimonious bastard gives me the boak,'' Rebus remarks about his revulsion for this grandstanding public figure.
The investigation flings Rebus toward a cross-section of Edinburgh high-rollers and miscreants, including one teenage girl with links to the school shooting and (here's a first for the genre) her own ''100 percent non-pornographic (sorry, guys!)'' home page on the Internet. ''I'm no fashion expert,'' says Rebus, getting a load of this potential suspect's black stilettos, fishnets and leather, ''but I get the feeling you're not just in mourning.''
''A Question of Blood'' -- which takes its title, in part, from Rebus's kinship to one of the teenage victims -- is by no means the best example of Mr. Rankin's plotting skills. This story means to be far ranging, but it winds up all over the map; there are enough strands of mystery for a diffuse investigation followed by a hasty tying-up of loose ends at denouement time.
When it comes to sharper plotting, Mr. Rankin's spiritual soul mate Peter Robinson (whose Yorkshire-based Inspector Alan Banks books constitute a similar series, and whose own new installment is ''Playing With Fire'') tends to be more intricate and careful. Banks has the quiet psychological edge; Rebus has cornered the market on surly nobility.
Beyond their simultaneous timing and British ambience, Inspectors Banks and Rebus share the reigning predilection for dwelling on the musical soundtracks of their youth. Long ago Mr. Rankin may have been variously employed as a grape picker, swine-herder and alcohol researcher (this training has come in handy), but he had a punk musician period, too. So ''A Question of Blood'' devotes the requisite attention to music trivia (Elton John's first record label), dubious references (quoting Meat Loaf) and clues involving a favorite Scottish band.
Most of this qualifies as superfluous but universal. At one point Rebus comes across a Gideon Bible. By the rules of this game, that leaves him no choice but to mention Rocky Raccoon.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES
