President Bush on Sunday offered a preview of how he would defend his presidency, justifying the war in Iraq even though no banned weapons had been found there, saying he has acted aggressively to help the economy and presenting himself as a steady leader in perilous times.
In a rare broadcast interview that he agreed to do as his poll numbers were falling and Democrats were increasingly hopeful of ousting him in November, Mr. Bush said on ''Meet the Press'' that he was far from alone in judging Saddam Hussein to be a threat. He rebutted accusations that he did not complete all of his duties while in the National Guard in 1972. He portrayed job growth as strengthening and did not rule out the possibility of more tax cuts.
The president's appearance came on a day when the White House also said Mr. Bush believed that existing contract law could ensure many of the rights gay partners are seeking in civil unions or marriage, suggesting that the administration was preparing to step fully into an issue of great importance to his conservative base. [Page A15.]
Questioned at length about the war for the first time since the former chief weapons inspector in Iraq said last month that Mr. Hussein did not have stockpiles of unconventional weapons, Mr. Bush acknowledged that he might have been wrong in asserting repeatedly before the invasion that Iraq possessed such weapons. But he suggested that the threat was no less urgent because Mr. Hussein was capable of producing banned chemical and biological agents -- and might one day have a nuclear bomb -- and could pass them along to terrorists intent on striking the United States.
''We thought he had weapons,'' Mr. Bush said in the one-hour interview, which was taped on Saturday. ''The international community thought he had weapons. But he had the capacity to make a weapon and then let that weapon fall into the hands of a shadowy terrorist network.'' [Excerpts, Page A19.]
Mr. Bush agreed to the interview after he and his aides concluded that he needed to respond to months of Democratic attacks, Republican officials said. They said he also had to deal with the statements by the former chief weapons inspector, David A. Kay, that the White House had been wrong before the war in asserting that Iraq had unconventional weapons. Some Republicans said Mr. Bush had been too much on the defensive in the past few weeks, and they had urged the White House to accelerate its schedule for going into full-scale campaign mode.
Mr. Bush's job approval ratings have been dropping, and Democrats are increasingly rallying around their front-runner, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts, who has led or run even with Mr. Bush in hypothetical matchups in some recent polls. Those developments have made it increasingly difficult for the president to stick to his strategy of presenting himself as focused on dealing with the nation's problems rather than on his re-election.
But if Mr. Bush went on the Sunday morning news show as a candidate, he was a tentative one not yet ready to give up the advantages of incumbency -- including the Oval Office setting for the interview -- for a more freewheeling but less presidential campaign. He said he did not know Mr. Kerry when they overlapped for two years at Yale, and dismissed Democratic attacks on him as ''politics.''
Democrats and liberal groups responded to the interview with further attacks on Mr. Bush's credibility, suggesting that the president exaggerated the degree of cooperation between Iraq and Al Qaeda and disputing many of the particulars about his economic record. Mr. Kerry issued a statement saying Mr. Bush should level with people about why he had gone to war.
''Americans need to be able to trust their president, and they deserve the truth,'' Mr. Kerry said.
Mr. Bush was most assertive in trying to rebut what some strategists in both parties said could be a potent line of attack against him, the charge that he skipped out on some of his National Guard duties not long after Mr. Kerry served heroically in Vietnam.
''They're just wrong,'' Mr. Bush said of reports that there was no record of him reporting to his unit in Alabama in 1972, while he was working on a Republican Senate race. ''There may be no evidence, but I did report. Otherwise I wouldn't have been honorably discharged.''
Mr. Bush said he was ''absolutely'' willing to have all his service records made public. But he acknowledged that so far no one has been able to find records from the relevant period of his service.
At a news conference in Richmond, Va., Mr. Kerry said he did not know whether Mr. Bush had completed all his Guard duties, but he added that ''just because you get an honorable discharge does not in fact answer that question.''
Asked why he should get a second term given that the economy has lost 2.2 million jobs since he took office, Mr. Bush said his presidency has coincided with ''a time of tremendous stress on our economy'' and that he had acted aggressively, mainly through tax cuts, to turn things around.
The economy generated 112,000 new jobs last month, a respectable performance in the view of economists but a level well below what would normally be expected at this point in a recovery. In calling for repeated rounds of tax cuts since Mr. Bush took office, the White House implied, sometimes with detailed projections, that the reductions would lead directly to substantial job growth. Democrats say the main effect of the tax cuts has been to help plunge the government into deficit and leave the nation unable to afford other needs.
Much of the interview covered Iraq and, implicitly, whether Mr. Bush had lost credibility by having asserted that Iraq had weapons that it now appears not to have.
When the interviewer, Tim Russert, said it ''apparently is not the case'' that Iraq had the weapons Mr. Bush had said it had before the war, the president responded, ''Correct.'' Mr. Bush later mentioned the possibility that the weapons might have been hidden or moved to another country.
Mr. Bush said the intelligence about Iraq's weapons was the best available, matched what foreign governments were saying and was the basis for similar judgments about Iraq made by President Bill Clinton and Congress, although some Democrats have said the intelligence they received was stripped of the caveats that the intelligence agencies had attached to it.
The president said he went to war only after the United Nations had issued an ultimatum and only ''because we had run the diplomatic string in Iraq,'' an assertion that many other nations and opponents of the war in the United States have disputed.
The defense he laid out in the interview did not include the sense of immediate urgency he and his administration had attached to Iraq before the war. Mr. Bush told ''Meet the Press'' that Mr. Hussein ''could have developed a nuclear weapon over time -- I'm not saying immediately, but over time -- which would then have put us in what position?''
In 2002, as the administration was building its case against Mr. Hussein, Vice President Dick Cheney said, ''On the nuclear question, many of us are convinced that Saddam will acquire such weapons fairly soon.'' Dr. Kay told the Senate Armed Services Committee last month that Iraq did not have a ''reconstituted, full-blown nuclear program.''
But, in keeping both with his conception of his job after the Sept. 11 attacks and his political strategy of presenting himself as an experienced, steady commander in chief, Mr. Bush emphasized that he is leading the nation through great danger.
''I'm a war president,'' he said at one point. At another, he said, ''I have shown the American people I can sit here in the Oval Office when times are tough and be steady and make good decisions, and I look forward to articulating what I want to do the next four years if I'm fortunate enough to be their president.''
Correction:  February 14, 2004, Saturday  Because of an editing error, an article on Monday about the issue of gay marriage referred imprecisely to reports of a discussion on an airplane trip between President Bush and Representative Jim DeMint, Republican of South Carolina. (The error was repeated in a front-page cross-reference on Monday about an interview the president gave to ''Meet the Press'' on NBC about issues in the presidential campaign.) While Mr. DeMint did say that he and Mr. Bush talked about having contracts and agreements in relationships, the congressman said that Mr. Bush did not refer specifically to gay partnerships; Mr. DeMint said the discussion centered on marriage in general.
The headline reference to ''options on gay rights'' also overstated Mr. DeMint's description of Mr. Bush's position. The congressman said Mr. Bush was open to various types of agreements in relationships; he did not say the president was open to states' bolstering gay rights.
