Other than bruising a spectator with another 150-mile-an-hour serve, Andy Roddick did nearly everything right Sunday when many would have excused him for not doing anything at all.
The United States had already clinched its first-round Davis Cup series against Austria, and Roddick had already pleased fans with a decisive victory on Friday. But he played anyway on Sunday and made quick work of his match-turned-exhibition against Jurgen Melzer, 6-4, 6-2, before a crowd of 5,936 at Mohegan Sun Arena. Robby Ginepri later beat Stefan Koubek, 7-5, 6-2, to complete a 5-0 shutout.
The scores did not matter. The circumstances did not matter. But to Roddick, the commitment did.
''I feel a pretty good obligation to the fans that make Davis Cup possible,'' he said. ''To be honest, it's a pretty easy decision. Robby and I are on the same plane tonight to San Jose, so I wasn't leaving until he was leaving anyway.''
Patrick McEnroe, the United States captain, and his crew hoped that the sweep, albeit over a weak Austrian team with no singles player ranked higher than 76th, would underscore a renewed commitment to Davis Cup.
A previous generation that included Pete Sampras and Andre Agassi developed a reputation for being reluctant to play. Roddick said he did not think that reputation was accurate, but he said, ''We're a closer unit than that team was.''
''I'm very committed to playing Davis Cup,'' Roddick said. ''I love the guys I'm with. That has a lot to do with it.''
Whether friendship matters will be further revealed when the United States plays host to Sweden in a quarterfinal April 9 to 11.
The site, which must be decided within 14 days, will probably be in Florida, California or Arizona, a spokesman for the United States Tennis Association said.
Sweden ousted the defending champion, Australia, 4-1, with Jonas Bjorkman and Thomas Enqvist winning the final two singles matches Sunday.
The last time the Swedes played the United States, they won the 1997 final, 5-0.
''These guys personally don't remember that, but I'll try to remind them of that in the coming months,'' McEnroe said.
That defeat was among a string of disappointments for the United States, which has not won the Davis Cup since 1995. McEnroe said he would like to build an era of dominance.
Roddick said: ''Well, yeah, but we have got to get through this one first. You have to get to that first tier before you can become perennial favorites. Obviously, I think it excites Patrick like it does the rest of us that we have a pretty young core of guys who are very willing and very eager to play.''
The quartet that played here -- Roddick, ranked third; Ginepri, ranked 25th; and the doubles specialists Bob and Mike Bryan -- appeared inseparable. They spoke of their bonhomie, telling tales of friendly battles in Ping-Pong and arcade games.
''It's not anything that's canned or that we talk about,'' McEnroe said. ''It is real. I think that the more they enjoy themselves, I think it has a big effect on the court.''
Ginepri said: ''It's extremely important to have a good relationship on and off the court. It makes it more fun, more energetic, more positive.''
McEnroe made no guarantees about who would play against Sweden. The only lock is Roddick, who said he thought that he had room for improvement.
Roddick has tinkered with his serve under his coach, Brad Gilbert. Although the controlled indoor environment here let him use brute force to blast two more serves of 150 m.p.h. on Sunday -- he set the record in his match Friday -- Roddick is thinking more location than speed.
''You can't have people sitting on your fastball,'' said Roddick, who delayed a news conference to apologize to Joan Sweeney of Tampa, Fla., who had Roddick's first serve of the match ricochet off her shoulder and neck. He posed for a picture with her, and she later wore an ice pack.
Three Nations Advance
Spain, last year's Davis Cup runner-up, defeated the Czech Republic, 3-2, in a first-round match yesterday in Brno, Czech Republic. Rafael Nadal, at 17 the youngest man to play for Spain in the Davis Cup, topped Radek Stepanek, 7-6 (2), 7-6 (4), 6-3, in the deciding match.
Feliciano López started the comeback for Spain by beating Tomas Berdych, 6-4, 6-7 (2), 6-3, 6-4. Spain was without its injured stars Juan Carlos Ferrero and Carlos Moya.
Spain will meet the Netherlands in a quarterfinal in April.
Martin Verkerk beat Frank Dancevic of Canada, 6-7 (5) 6-2, 7-5, 6-3, yesterday in Maastricht, the Netherlands, to send the Dutch team into the quarterfinals. In the final match, Sjeng Schalken defeated Simon Larose of Canada, 6-2, 7-5, to make it 4-1.
Top-ranked Roger Federer overpowered Andrei Pavel of Romania, 6-3, 6-2, 7-5, in Bucharest to give Switzerland a first-round victory. Switzerland won, 3-2, after Victor Hanescu beat the Swiss reserve Stanislas Wawrinka, 6-3, 7-6 (3). Switzerland will play host to France in April. (AP)  TENNIS
