A project to destroy the plutonium from thousands of retired Russian and American nuclear weapons has been delayed, and some experts say they fear that the work may never be done.
The plan was to have both countries build factories that could mix uranium with plutonium, the material at the heart of nuclear bombs, to be burned as fuel for civilian reactors. It was conceived in the mid-1990's at a time of intense concern over the security of weapons materials in the former Soviet Union; Russia agreed to it in 2000.
The point was to ensure that weapons being disassembled by mutual agreement would never be rebuilt, and that the weapons plutonium, the hardest part of a nuclear bomb to make, could not be sold or stolen.
But the Bush administration's budget plan for the Energy Department, released last week, said groundbreaking for a conversion factory planned for South Carolina had been delayed from July of this year until May 2005.
The immediate reason is that the United States and Russia are deadlocked on the liability rules for American workers and contractors that would help build the plant in Russia, and the United States will not break ground first. Each plant is to dispose of about 34 tons of weapons plutonium.
Administration officials want to use terms written for early nuclear agreements that protect American contractors from almost all liability in case of accidents involving the release of radioactive material; the Russians have refused those terms.
But another problem is that after years of effort, Western nations have not raised the approximately $2 billion that the Russians say they need to build and operate their conversion plant. The British said recently that they were withholding any pledge until the liability issue was resolved.
In 1997, when President Bill Clinton's energy secretary, Hazel R. O'Leary, announced that the United States would rid itself of weapons plutonium, she said burning it as fuel in civilian reactors might begin by 2002. But even before the delay made clear in the Bush budget, the American plant, estimated to cost nearly $4 billion, was expected to begin producing fuel only in 2008. The Energy Department's eventual plan is to pay the Duke Power company to use the plutonium in its reactors.
The issue is particularly delicate in South Carolina, because the Energy Department has already been shipping plutonium from its other weapons factories to its Savannah River Site, near Aiken.
In 2002, South Carolina sued the Energy Department in an unsuccessful effort to prevent shipments. The governor at the time, Jim Hodges, said he wanted a binding agreement that the weapons plutonium would be disposed of elsewhere if the plant was not built. The new delay, Mr. Hodges said, ''leads me to believe there's no serious commitment from the Bush administration.''
But administration officials say the plan is alive. ''I'm absolutely confident we're going to resolve this,'' said Linton F. Brooks, the under secretary of energy for nuclear security. But he could not say when. ''Nobody who tells you he can predict how long it will take is worth listening to,'' he said.
He described the impasse on liability as ''a speed bump as opposed to a death blow.'' The money, he said, would follow quickly once an agreement on that issue was reached.
But a State Department official acknowledged that ''between the liability and details of financing, there's a lot of things to iron out.''
Some environmentalists oppose turning weapons plutonium into reactor fuel. Dr. Ed Lyman, a senior nuclear physicist with the Union of Concerned Scientists, has argued that a reactor accident would be more serious if the fuel was a plutonium mix rather than simply uranium, because the fuel's constituents are more dangerous if released.
A Greenpeace nuclear expert, Tom Clements, said the plan would leave Russia with a factory that -- after the weapons plutonium is processed -- could turn additional plutonium into reactor fuel, encouraging the creation and circulation of material that could be diverted into weapons production, or be stolen by a terrorist or militant group.
In Europe, some plutonium is recovered from spent fuel for reuse, and the Russians would like to do the same. In contrast, the Energy Department plans to bury American spent fuel, including the plutonium.
The plan for the South Carolina factory also faces its own hurdles.
The consortium of contractors the Energy Department chose to build it -- an affiliate of the Duke Power company; the Stone and Webster engineering firm; and Cogema, a French nuclear company -- proposed to meet the limits for radiation releases at the plant by pushing the measurement boundary about five miles from the factory.
The Energy Department insisted that the boundary be the factory site perimeter, requiring changes to the safety analysis the consortium must submit to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to win a license.
