HIGHLIGHTS
FRANCE: EASING ARTS RULES -- Could the time come when a foreigner presides over the Louvre? Yes, said the French culture minister, Jean-Jacques Aillagon, last week after the French government announced changes intended to ease procedures for foreign artists and culture professionals seeking temporary visas. The changes would also expand short-term training courses for foreigners in subjects like theater and film, Reuters reported. ''The welcoming and training in our country of foreign cultural professionals and artists contributes to the international influence of France,'' Mr. Aillagon said. Citizens of the European Union will now be allowed to apply for the post of museum curator, a job previously open only to French citizens. ''It is perfectly possible to imagine a foreigner running the Louvre or any other French museum,'' Mr. Aillagon said.
CASTING NEWS: MARY J. BLIGE -- The hip-hop soul singer, producer and actress Mary J. Blige, left, will make her theater debut on Feb. 24 when she joins the cast of ''The Exonerated'' at the 45 Bleecker Theater at 45 Bleecker Street in the East Village. Ms. Blige is to appear through Feb. 29 as the exonerated Sunny Jacobs in the acclaimed show directed by Bob Balaban and written by Jessica Blank and Erik Jensen, based on their interviews with former death-row inmates.
THEATER: BACK TO SECOND AVENUE -- The new Avery Corman-Cy Coleman musical, ''The Great Ostrovsky,'' about the tumult of American Yiddish theater in the 1920's and the dramas that were the lives of those who created it, began rehearsals on Friday at the Ripley-Grier Studios in Manhattan. The book is by Mr. Corman, the author of the novel ''Kramer vs. Kramer''; the music is by Mr. Coleman, whose credits include ''On the 20th Century,'' ''Barnum'' and ''The Will Rogers Follies''; and both men collaborated on the lyrics. With a score that combines vintage klezmer and Broadway-style music, the show focuses on David Ostrovsky (played by Bob Gunton). A fictional character reminiscent of Yiddish theater greats like Jacob Adler, Maurice Schwartz and Boris Thomashevsky, Ostrovsky is a man of monumental talent and self-confidence, fighting for survival among hustling promoters, aspiring artists, left-wing idealists and young women eager to become stars. (Louise Pitre, who starred in ''Mamma Mia!,'' plays Rose, his sister and a member of his company.) ''The Great Ostrovsky,'' directed by Douglas C. Wager, former artistic director of the Arena Stage in Washington, is scheduled to run from March 6-28 at the Prince Music Theater in Philadelphia. Mr. Corman said that Broadway has expressed interest, but that there were no firm commitments.
PHOTOGRAPHY: IMAGES OF WAR -- A museum devoted to war photography is to open in June in Dubrovnik, in southern Croatia, Agence France-Presse reported. Described by its curators as the first of its kind, the institution, tentatively called the Museum of War, will be inaugurated by ''Blood and Honey,'' an exhibition by 10 photographers who covered the conflict in the 1990's in Croatia, Bosnia, Kosovo and Macedonia. ''The focus will be on the world's greatest war photographers, and their work will be used to educate the public,'' said Wade Goddard, the museum's director. ''Our aim is to take away the Hollywood image that war is only about glory.'' Exhibitions are planned about the Israeli-Palestinian conflict, the Sept. 11 attacks and the invasion of Iraq.
REMEMBERING GIELGUD -- ''Ages of Man: A Centennial Tribute to Sir John Gielgud,'' a series of free public programs at the New York Public Library for the Performing Arts, will salute that British actor (1904-2000) beginning at 6 tonight with a staged reading of ''The Importance of Being Earnest,'' directed by Estelle Parsons. Among other presentations in the series are screenings of Irene Worth's one-woman shows on Lillian Gish and Ellen Terry, created by Ms. Worth with the assistance of Gielgud, above; a reading of his original letters from the library's collection; and the appearance of Richard Easton, Simon Jones and Hayley Mills in a new play about the 50-year friendship between Gielgud and Noël Coward. Admission is first come first served, but some programs, like tonight's, require tickets. Information: (212) 642-0142.
FOOTNOTES
The playwright is Shakespeare. The lineup of actors consists of Philip Bosco, Rosemary Harris and Brian Murray. The subject is Shakespeare's writings on theater. The title of this dramatic reading, ''This Wooden O,'' comes from a passage in his prologue to ''King Henry V'' that refers to the round, wooden Globe Theater: ''Or may we cram/Within this wooden O the very casques/That did affright the air at Agincourt?'' This program of Shakespeare begins at 8 tonight at the 92nd Street Y under the auspices of the Unterberg Poetry Center. . . . The spring season of Cabaret at Café Sabarsky, the series in the Neue Galerie that is devoted to German and Austrian music from the 1880's to the 1930's, opens on Thursday in Manhattan with a performance by Angelina Réaux. Celebrating the golden age of Berlin cabaret and accompanied by Scott Dunn at the piano, she performs at 9 p.m., after dinner at 7. She will also appear on Feb. 19 and 26. Coming up in March and April are KT Sullivan, accompanied by Jed Distler; and Max Raabe, accompanied by Christoph Israel.
