THE Bush administration's budget proposal for 2005 has set off the perennial scramble among government agencies and federal programs to dodge financial cuts. For the Patent and Trademark Office, the traditional battle is to keep Congress from diverting chunks of the revenue the office takes in from the patent-seeking public. It is a fight the agency has never won.
But this year, for the first time since 1997, when the White House began including such diversions in its proposed budgets, the president's proposal calls for the patent office to keep all its income, which is projected to be $1.32 billion for 2005.
''Right now I'm cautiously optimistic,'' the agency's acting director, Jon W. Dudas, said in an interview last week, after the budget proposal was announced. ''We see friends everywhere in Congress. Both the appropriators and authorizers recognize we have a problem and are seeking a solution.''
Mr. Dudas said that lack of money had prevented the patent office from staying on schedule with its five-year plan for overhauling its operations -- a plan the agency adopted partly in response to Congressional criticism of its mounting backlog of patent applications.
But what the White House seeks to give, Congress may yet take away. Since 1991, when the patent office stopped being supported by taxpayers and started financing itself through user fees, Congress has diverted more than $650 million to unrelated programs, according to the agency. During that same 12 years, the patent office, which is part of the Department of Commerce, took in $9.7 billion in fees charged to the public to file, process and maintain patents and trademarks.
For the last two years, the Bush administration has reduced the amount it has asked Congress to divert, in keeping with what Mr. Dudas says has been an administration promise to end the diversion gradually. But each year, Congress wound up taking more than the president proposed.
The administration is now asking Congress to keep its hands off the patent office's revenue, but the request comes at a difficult time. There are estimates that military operations in Iraq and Afghanistan will cost $50 billion and the administration is proposing to end dozens of federal programs and scale back dozens of others, in hope of denting a record federal deficit of $521 billion.
So Congress might seek extra money where it has found it in the past. But Mr. Dudas says that because his agency earns its keep, it should be treated differently from other government programs now threatened with cuts.
''We're not more important, just different,'' Mr. Dudas said. ''We're a fully funded agency, not one funded with taxpayer dollars. We're not subject to the same considerations of what should Congress give and what should it not.''
In 2002, the patent office devised a five-year plan to tackle the applications backlog by hiring 2,400 examiners who would be qualified to evaluate the increasing number of computer and technology inventions and by moving the agency into the electronic age with all-digital processing of applications.
But the agency says it has not been able to keep enough of its revenue to carry out the plan. Instead of hiring 750 examiners as planned last year, for example, it barely managed to replace those who left. The plan calls for 900 additional examiners in 2005.
The backlog of patent applications has, meanwhile, grown to 500,000, and the patent-pending period now averages 26 months.
For the agency to get back on track, it will have to restart the five-year clock, which means that Congress will need to avoid diverting the patent office's revenue for five years, Mr. Dudas said. ''We've said, 'Here's our strategic plan, but we need the funding to do it,''' he said.
But ''even a one-year surge of appropriate funding would allow us to hire 900 more examiners,'' Mr. Dudas said. ''If that's all we get, it would be helpful. It would be dramatically helpful.''
The patent office's revenue could be more than $1.32 billion if Congress approves the agency's request to raise fees and add new ones. That would raise the forecast to $1.53 billion, but the White House opposes the authorization bill in its current form because it includes a provision that would put the agency's revenues permanently off limits to budget diversion.
Mr. Dudas predicts dire consequences if the fee increases are not approved: no hiring, no overtime, an eventual lengthening of the patent-pending period to 45 months and a backlog of applications exceeding one million. ''If the patent system becomes useless, or people feel the need to find alternatives, that's wasteful to the economy as a whole,'' Mr. Dudas said. ''What the economy and industry need is certainty.''
Still, Mr. Dudas was upbeat. ''What is different this year is that the administration made a promise and it has kept that promise,'' he said.
Patents may be viewed on the Web at www.uspto.gov or may be ordered through the mail, by patent number, for $3 from the Patent and Trademark Office, Washington, D.C. 20231.
Patents
