Peter E. Bacanovic worked for Martha Stewart as her stockbroker, shared her social orbit and once even appeared in her magazine wearing a bathrobe. On the first day of their criminal trial, the two greeted each other with kisses. What happens today in court could determine whether they remain so friendly.
This morning, Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, faces the daunting task of discrediting the prosecution's star witness, Douglas Faneuil, and putting distance between his client and any possible wrongdoing. In doing so, Mr. Morvillo may isolate Ms. Stewart from Mr. Bacanovic, arguing that she had no part in any cover-up involving him and Mr. Faneuil.
Thomas Ross, a law professor at the University of Pittsburgh, said, ''This is Martha Stewart's lawyer and the focus would be, 'What do you specifically know about Martha Stewart?''' Mr. Faneuil, he added, ''works for Bacanovic but his contacts with Martha Stewart were quite limited.''
Several lawyers who are following the case noted that such a strategy could hurt Mr. Bacanovic's case, the jury conceivably finding him guilty and acquitting Ms. Stewart. But if things go badly for Mr. Bacanovic, he could seek a deal with prosecutors -- which would be a potentially devastating matter for Ms. Stewart.
While the trial is still in its early stages with many more witnesses to come, Mr. Morvillo's handling of Mr. Faneuil is critical. Mr. Faneuil, a former assistant to Mr. Bacanovic, who last week told what some said was a compelling story of Ms. Stewart's wrongdoing, apparently charmed the jury and held off more then seven hours of hostile questioning. Even before he enters the courtroom, Mr. Morvillo, who declined to comment for this article, faces a disadvantage: last week's protracted questioning of Mr. Faneuil by a lawyer for Mr. Bacanovic, which seemed to backfire with the jury and to annoy the judge.
''Bacanovic's lawyers have dug a huge hole for Morvillo,'' said one lawyer who declined to be identified by name because he is indirectly involved in the case. ''He must be beside himself'' over the length of time taken by Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer, David Apfel, because it may leave Mr. Morvillo thinking that he should limit his questioning, this lawyer added later. ''It ties his hands.''
Ms. Stewart faces charges that she lied to investigators about the reasons she sold stock in ImClone Systems shortly before the company announced news that drove down the price of its shares. Prosecutors say that after the fact, she and Mr. Bacanovic concocted a false explanation for the sale -- an agreement to sell if the share price fell below $60. That explanation was made before Mr. Morvillo took on Ms. Stewart's case in June 2002.
So far. Mr. Faneuil -- who has drawn laughs from jurors with details of his job at Merrill Lynch and his interactions with Ms. Stewart -- has described his role in tipping her off to sell nearly 4,000 shares of ImClone in December 2001 and in covering up the reason for the sale. At the time ImClone was run by her friend Samuel D. Waksal, who is serving a seven-year sentence for securities fraud and other crimes.
Prosecutors, to prove an obstruction-of-justice charge, must convince jurors both that Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic knew of the government's investigation into the sale of ImClone stock -- something that is not in question -- and that they acted to hinder the investigation, said Michael J. Shepard, a former prosecutor who now practices at Heller Ehrman White &amp; McAuliffe in San Francisco. For the securities fraud charge, which names Ms. Stewart alone, the prosecutors must show that when Ms. Stewart asserted her innocence to protect the stock price of her company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia, she lied. Because the charges are intertwined, the jury could find Ms. Stewart guilty of obstruction of justice but not of securities fraud, Mr. Shepard added.
According to several people, Mr. Morvillo will almost certainly try to keep his effort to discredit Mr. Faneuil's testimony short and engaging. He must avoid alienating the judge, Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum, and tiring jurors, who were already showing signs of boredom last week. And the outcome will no doubt be a factor as Mr. Morvillo and his client debate weigh whether to put Ms. Stewart on the stand.
''Faneuil's obviously a really important witness,'' Mr. Shepard said. He noted that testimony by another government witness, Ann E. Armstrong, Ms. Stewart's assistant, will probably be very significant, too.
''There are usually cooperating witnesses who are going to come in and give the key element of the government version,'' Mr. Shepard continued. ''Their testimony is important, and how they come across is important and how they're cross-examined is important.''
Mr. Morvillo is widely recognized among his peers as tough, skillful and willing to take on difficult cases. Still, Ms. Stewart's case may be the most prominent one he has handled. ''He is one of the top three or four people you would think about going to, not only because he is a very good lawyer,'' a lawyer who knows him said. ''He is known to try cases the old-fashioned way: he is very prepared, very well spoken, and he points out things that average lawyers would not be pointing out.''
The nearly eight hours that Mr. Faneuil spent answering questions from Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer may have a silver lining for Mr. Morvillo, lawyers said. It has illustrated tactics that do not work.
''You don't take Faneuil on, head-on,'' said a lawyer who is not involved in the case but who also refused to be identified by name because he has in the past worked with lawyers on both sides. ''They've already done that, and that was a failure.''
Mr. Ross said that Mr. Morvillo must spend some time on damage control. ''What he has to say about that contact is damning,'' he said, alluding to Mr. Faneuil's testimony, ''not only in terms of proving the formal elements of the criminal charge but also damning in terms of resonating with the negative aspects of that celebrity personality.''
Mr. Morvillo may also argue that Mr. Faneuil, who has pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor in connection with his role in Ms. Stewart's stock sale, has every reason to lie, Mr. Shepard, the former prosecutor, said. ''He had done something wrong but Martha didn't,'' Mr. Shepard said, and then the prosecution offered him ''a cushy deal if he'll make it sound like Martha was part of it.''
Mr. Apfel, Mr. Bacanovic's lawyer, already tried to undermine Mr. Faneuil's credibility by raising questions about his drug use and his acknowledged lies to investigators about Ms. Stewart's stock sale. Mr. Faneuil said that he had lied because he felt intimidated by his boss, Mr. Bacanovic, and conceded that he had taken various illegal drugs, but not regularly and not while on the job. He also said that he was never explicitly told to lie and that Mr. Bacanovic had never before asked him to share information about a client -- in this case Dr. Waksal, who was trying to sell nearly 80,000 ImClone shares -- with another client.
Lawyers said Mr. Faneuil's answers to Mr. Morvillo would be a factor in the decision whether to have Ms. Stewart testify. But her legal team may be reluctant to put her on the stand because she could subject herself to hostile questioning and a potentially harsher sentence if she is convicted. Of course, members of the jury may want to hear from her, and her celebrity status could help her, several lawyers said.
Even in cross-examining Mr. Faneuil, there are possible gains to be made for Ms. Stewart's image at this point, a lawyer who is not involved in the case said. ''I'd try to make Martha look more human,'' he said. For example, Mr. Morvillo could try to counter Mr. Faneuil's depiction of Ms. Stewart by pointing out that many investors become excitable when making investment decisions.
Whether she will testify remains uncertain. Mr. Morvillo has said he will make that decision after prosecutors conclude their case. ''The downside of it, of putting your client on, is that you give the prosecution a chance to replay for the jury some of its best proof,'' a lawyer said.
''The other thing is, until the defendant takes the witness stand, the jury's keeping in mind that it's proof beyond a reasonable doubt and all that,'' this lawyer added. ''When the defendant hits the stand, then it's just who's got the most credible story: Faneuil or Martha or Peter.''
