It took Diana Perdomo, a 22-year-old student from Manhattan, a several-minute stroll through the vertical shopping mall in the new Time Warner Center to arrive at a verdict about the place, known as The Shops at Columbus Circle.
''It's like a mecca for everything,'' Ms. Perdomo said, strolling arm-in-arm with her friend, Sarah Ladmer, a 19-year-old cocktail waitress. They gazed wide-eyed at many of the luxury and specialty chain stores, including Joseph Abboud, A/X Armani Exchange, Cole Haan, Eileen Fisher, Thomas Pink, Sisley, Stuart Weitzman and Hugo Boss.
The four-story public galleria of stores, restaurants and bars -- the retail component of the $1.7 billion Time Warner Center at the southwest corner of Central Park -- was celebrated with a star-studded opening last Wednesday night.
It opened to the public at noon Thursday, and has been much discussed in the retail circles and the media. But over the weekend, the mall faced its most important critics: the shoppers themselves. Just as in the blockbuster film industry, the opening weekend of a top-flight retail center is closely watched as a predictor of its long-term success.
''This is it, the magic moment,'' Kenneth A. Himmel, the president of Related Urban Development, which helped develop the retail operation, said as he stood on the second-floor balcony Saturday morning peering down as the first weekend shoppers streamed in through the massive glass doors. Mr. Himmel called the weekend a litmus test of the mall's drawing power and a test of whether New York's street-loving pedestrians would have the patience to ride escalators and elevators up and down four floors and trapise through yawning, crescent-shaped spaces that connect two city blocks.
''There was a time we didn't know if they'd come,'' he said. But come they did. Shoppers showed up in droves and there were high-profile sightings. Michael Eisner strolled in early Saturday morning and Chelsea Clinton waltzed through the first level toward the Coach store around noon. Passing a tuxedoed worker pushing a trash can, she chatted on her cell phone but withheld her opinion of the mall and all other comments, when approached.
Comparatively few of the thousands of people gawking at the new space actually carried shopping bags, and it was hard to tell how many visitors were actually buying. At any given time, hundreds of people milled through the fourth floor, for example, even though there were none of the floor's signature restaurants have opened. They squinted through darkened windows and peered at fact sheets.
One of the busiest stores was Whole Foods, whose 59,000 square feet make it the largest supermarket in Manhattan, with a wine store, sushi bar, juice bar, 248-seat cafe, 42 cash registers and 390 employees. Mr. Himmel smiled as a Whole Foods employee, posted at the entrance to the basement store like a bouncer, regulated the hordes of shoppers elbowing one another out of the way, to better ogle the $50 beef tenderloin and order Jamba Juice smoothies.
And since most New Yorkers are nothing if not critical, few shoppers reserved judgment on the new center
Ms. Perdomo, who compared the retail center to Mecca, also warned that it might be too upscale to attract a broad enough spectrum of shoppers. ''They need more variety to attract different types of people,'' she said. ''There's nothing down-to-earth. A good business has to offer diversity.''
Jennifer Patel, 29, an internist from Manhasset, held up a purple macramé blouse in A/X Armani Exchange, where shoppers were offered sweeping views of Central Park and a soundtrack of pumping dance music. Ms. Patel compared the center to Long Island's malls.
''It's more upscale than Roosevelt Field, but not as much as the Americana,'' she said, referring to the strip of expensive shops in Manhasset known also as the Miracle Mile. ''It is amazing how spacious it is for Manhattan.''
Mr. Himmel bristles at the mention of the word mall or comparisons to suburbia.
He calls the center ''an urban retail center,'' and insists that the m-word is ''an antiseptic reference to suburbia that doesn't do justice to what this is, architecturally or otherwise.''
Alan J. Segan, a public relations executive representing the center, agreed.
''I didn't hear the word 'mall,''' he said. ''I don't want to hear that word.''
But the m-word and the s- word were sprinkled liberally among the comments of many weekend shoppers.
A school counselor from Stamford, Conn., Mariane Bauer, stood outside the Bose store yesterday and said she felt right at home.
''This is like a piece of Stamford in Midtown,'' she said. ''It's really nice that they brought the suburbs into the city.'' Ms. Bauer, who also has an apartment on the Upper West Side, patted her pocketbook and said she came ready to shop. ''I've got my credit cards,'' she said.
Miok Joo, 32, in Armani, a financial analyst from Brooklyn, bought a $16 martini glass from Williams-Sonoma.
''I hate to say it but it is a mall; it's not Fifth Avenue,'' she said. ''Not that that's necessarily an insult.''
Mall or not, much of the clientele was unmistakably Manhattan. One woman carried her Pomeranian across her chest in a baby holder. Two women in long fur coats and carrying Yorkies stopped to introduce the dogs to each other.
Mr. Himmel said the center was not designed to compete with Manhattan's most upscale retail corridors on Fifth and Madison Avenues. But there are plenty of expensive items.
Williams-Sonoma sells French stoves upward of $24,000. Tourneau sells a Jaeger-Le Coultre diamond watch for $258,000. On Saturday, customers selected expensive cigars from the Davidoff store's plush humidor and sampled them in the private smoking room, furnished with plush sofas, rugs and original oil paintings. The store has diamond lighters for $40,000. A bottle of Budweiser at the Stone Rose (run by Cindy Crawford's husband, Rande Gerber) costs $8 and a glass of Rémy Martin Louis XIII cognac costs $190. The average dinner check is $250. The adjoining Mandarin Oriental hotel has rooms for $595 a night.
It was too much for Sabrina Berryhill's pocketbook.
Ms. Berryhill, 34, a city employee from Queens, said she had heard that a new mall was opening, so she came with her daughter, Kiana, 3, to visit the toy stores. There are none.
"Not everyone is going to want to shop here," she said. "Budget-wise, there's no stores that I would really come back to."
