In a rare occurrence, popular, critical and Grammy-voter tastes all coincided at the 46th Annual Grammy Awards ceremony on Sunday at the Staples Center here. The witty, innovative Atlanta hip-hop duo OutKast walked away with the top award, album of the year, for ''Speakerboxxx/The Love Below.'' Music from that diverse double-CD, which topped critics' year-end Top 10 lists and has been hovering at and around the No. 1 spot on the Billboard charts since its release five months ago, earned the band three Grammys.
The other big winners were Luther Vandross and Beyoncé. Mr. Vandross, who was not present because he suffered a major stroke last year, won four awards, including song of the year (an award given to songwriters, which he shared with Richard Marx) for the title track of his latest CD, ''Dance With My Father.''
And Beyoncé, who opened the show performing alongside a purple-suited Prince, swept up the most awards of the evening, winning five of the six awards she was nominated for based on music from her first solo CD, ''Dangerously in Love.'' She lost only the record-of-the-year Grammy, in a surprise upset to a rock song, ''Clocks,'' by Coldplay.
''I love that song, and they definitely deserved it,'' a well-mannered Beyoncé said of Coldplay's win in the press room backstage. ''That song is just genius.''
It was an event that belonged to the lonely and the dead. First-time solo artists (including Beyoncé and Justin Timberlake) and the recently deceased (including Johnny and June Carter Cash, Warren Zevon, George Harrison and Celia Cruz) garnered most of the recognition.
Mr. Timberlake received two awards, including best pop album, for ''Justified.'' And OutKast's ''Speakerboxxx/The Love Below'' is packaged as a double CD consisting of a solo album from each of its members. Accepting the honors for best rap album, André 3000 of OutKast delivered what must be among the shortest Grammy speeches on record: just a terse, smart-alecky ''thank you.''
The specter of Janet Jackson, who had been scheduled to introduce a Luther Vandross tribute on Sunday, hung heavy over the show. She was notable by her absence from CBS's broadcast of the Grammys after she flashed a breast during a Super Bowl performance with Mr. Timberlake.
The Grammys ceremony began five minutes ahead of schedule so that it could be broadcast with an uncharacteristically long five-minute delay.
The subtext was that even at the relatively staid and surprise-free Grammys, the conduct of pop stars is not to be trusted. (Neil Portnow, president of the National Academy of Recording Arts and Sciences, which presents the Grammys, said that ''not a second'' of the show was censored.)
The rapper 50 Cent was a rare wild card, rushing onstage and cutting off members of Evanescence as they were accepting the coveted best new artist award, which he had no doubt hoped to win.
''I expected him to win, as well as I guess he did,'' said Amy Lee of Evanescence. ''I guess it was a statement from him that he felt he should have won.''
The only other major gaffe came from the show's production team, which had Celine Dion singing into a dud microphone at the beginning of her tribute to Mr. Vandross.
Referring to the Super Bowl halftime half-reveal during an acceptance speech, Mr. Timberlake said, ''I know it's been a rough week on everybody, and, um, what occurred was unintentional, completely regrettable, and I apologize if you guys were offended.''
Commenting on the incident backstage, Dave Matthews, who won for best rock vocal performance, said deadpan that ''the interesting thing'' about the uproar was that there have been breasts ''since before there was entertainment.''
And P. Diddy, who performed at the Super Bowl halftime show, said: ''I have three sons. I don't mind. I'm very happy for them that they were able to see one of Janet Jackson's breasts in their lifetime. I don't think they'll be scarred for life.'' He added that if he had known of Ms. Jackson's plans, he ''would have exposed America to something that you still would have been talking about.''
Accepting an award for producer of the year in the nontelevised portion of the ceremony, Pharrell Williams of the hit-making team the Neptunes was the first person at the ceremony to break the Janet Jackson silence, speaking with some trepidation. After sticking up for both parties involved, he said that the Federal Communications Commission, which received 200,000 complaints, ''wouldn't have gotten half of those complaints if the news didn't keep it on TV all day.''
When Christina Aguilera stepped on stage to accept an award for best female pop vocal performance for her soaring ballad battling feminine insecurity, ''Beautiful,'' she made a show of her struggle to keep her low-cut pink dress in proper form; in case she failed, the cameras quickly zoomed in for a close-up from above the sternum.
Ninety-four awards were presented before the televised portion of the ceremony. The first went to one of the most moving musical statements of last year, Mark Romanek's final video for Mr. Cash, ''Hurt,'' which won best short-form video. June Carter Cash, who died four months before Mr. Cash, her husband, won best traditional folk album and best female country vocal.
Mr. Harrison won best pop instrumental performance for ''Marwa Blues.'' And Mr. Zevon, who also died last year, won for best contemporary folk album, a rather odd category for his rock album ''The Wind.'' He also won for best rock duo or group, which he shared with Bruce Springsteen, for ''Disorder in the House.'' Finally, Ms. Cruz, who died in July, won best salsa/merengue album for ''Regalo del Alma.''
It seemed so certain that the deceased would triumph over the living in each category that it was a surprise when Tony Bennett and K. D. Lang won over Rosemary Clooney for traditional pop vocal album (''A Wonderful World''). In keeping with the theme of the night, Mr. Bennett said in his acceptance speech that he would like to pass on the award and ''give this one to Rosemary Clooney.''
Eminem was among rap's top winners, with two awards for ''Lose Yourself,'' including best rap song.
And the rock star of the moment seems to be Jack White of the White Stripes, which delivered one of the most electrifying rock performances in recent Grammy memory. Mr. White received two awards, his first Grammys.
In country music Alison Krauss, who seems to be joining the ranks of Pierre Boulez and Jimmy Sturr as a perennial favorite of Grammy voters, won three awards. And ''Livin', Lovin', Losin': Songs of the Louvin Brothers'' (which features Ms. Krauss and other stars) won best country album in what was a slow year for the genre.
Manuel Galbán, who was denied a visa to enter the United States, could not accept his award for best pop instrumental album for ''Mambo Sinuendo,'' his collaboration with Ry Cooder.
The Cuban singer Ibrahim Ferrer, who won best traditional tropical album, was also absent because his visa application was rejected. In the press room backstage Mr. Cooder said that 45 Cuban musicians who had planned to attend the Grammys were denied visas.
For best classical album, two recordings of Mahler's Symphony No. 3 were competing. The version conducted by Michael Tilson Thomas won over Mr. Boulez's, though the Boulez album took the honor for best orchestral performance. Winning three awards was Yo-Yo Ma's ''Obrigado Brazil.''
Only albums released between Oct. 1, 2002, and Sept. 30, 2003, were eligible for this year's Grammys. Winners were selected by the roughly 12,000 voting members of the academy. The voting body consists of recording-industry professionals who have creative or technical credits on at least six albums or songs.
