Inside the state's largest nursing home, elderly patients shamble past locked, empty corridors and lie in their beds. Some of the younger ones have been caught dealing heroin. It is a place where incongruities are as plentiful as wheelchairs.
The home, the A. Holly Patterson Extended Care Facility, has long been a last stop for indigent people, but former employees said it was once the Park Avenue of public nursing homes, a place where residents took trips to watch horse races at Belmont and to sail Long Island's South Shore.
Today, many see the home as a dinosaur on the brink, a sprawling relic serving both the elderly and deeply troubled younger residents that is losing patients, leaching millions of dollars and struggling to treat a rapidly changing population inside a Kennedy-era facility.
At a time when the average nursing home is built for 50 patients, it has 889 beds, more than 200 of them empty, and some of its corridors are as quiet and still as movie theaters after the credits.
Now, a growing number of Nassau County officials say it is time to shut down Holly Patterson. A recent study of the county's health care system said it was necessary, ''by any modern standard of nursing home care,'' to do something about the facility. The report, which has been endorsed by county officials, recommends razing the home and rebuilding it smaller, or closing it completely, sending its patients to different facilities and selling off its 72 acres of land.
Nursing-home experts said the move to close Holly Patterson reflected a national push toward smaller nursing homes. It is a trend that mirrors the decades-old move to close psychiatric hospitals and replace them with assisted-living facilities and group homes, nursing-home experts said.
''You can't fix that building,'' Nassau County Legislator Lisanne Altmann said. ''That particular facility has got to go. It's just got to be leveled.''
Now, as Holly Patterson braces for its transformation, the lives of 650 residents hang in the balance. Many are physically or mentally frail and could be jarred by an abrupt move. Others have a litany of emotional and psychiatric ailments and could have problems finding another home.
''We serve people no one else serves,'' said Larry Slatky, a vice president of the health care corporation who is in charge of the home. ''We've been doing it for years. The people who live here are going to have a home.''
Despite its problems, many residents said they had become attached to the home's sprawling linoleum corridors and the nurses and staff who walk them to the showers and bring them breakfast.
After a review of state inspection reports and interviews with residents, their families and current and former employees, a complex portrait emerges.
The employees of Holly Patterson are described as dedicated people who care for the most difficult patients. But state inspectors have documented instances where they have slipped up. In 2000, inspectors found that the home failed to protect residents prone to choking after Albert Zangrillo, 84, choked to death on a hot dog.
Ruth Garone, who has lived at the nursing home for seven years, said she had known nothing but compassionate care, a sentiment echoed by other residents and former employees.
Ms. Garone, like many residents, arrived here accidentally. She fell down one day, went to the hospital and then was sent to the nursing home one Christmas Eve to recover. She has no husband or children, and seven years later, she is a permanent resident.
''You've got to have someplace, and this is that someplace,'' Ms. Garone said one afternoon as she sat in her room. ''This is the only place I know. If I was let go, I'd be on the street.''
The home is part of the Nassau County Health Care Corporation, a public-benefit company that took over the county's health care system in 1999. Nassau tied its bond ratings to the corporation's financial health by guaranteeing its debt, so county officials have expressed frustration as the corporation continues to rack up multimillion-dollar deficits.
The nursing home has lost $13 million since 1999, according to a recent study conducted by a Manhattan law firm specializing in hospitals and health care. The home receives the bulk of its financing from Medicaid patients, whose reimbursements vary based on their illness.
Once, when all the beds were full, the home's patients were almost exclusively elderly, several former employees said. But recently, more and more young patients -- many of them with histories of emotional problems, drug abuse and mental illness -- have moved in. Today, about 40 percent of residents are younger than 65, according to the home's records.
Mr. Slatky said the age groups blended well, and he pointed to younger residents who pushed elderly patients' wheelchairs down the hallway.
But state health records show younger patients mingled with old can also be a volatile mix. Last February, a 36-year-old man with a history of aggression toppled a 79-year-old man from his wheelchair, cutting the older man's hand. In March, a 56-year-old resident with schizophrenia got into a fight with his roommate, a 77-year-old.
And in December, a 35-year-old resident was arrested on charges of selling heroin, and a 54-year-old was arrested on heroin possession charges. Mr. Slatky said that two workers were also implicated in the incident and that although they are still employed at the home, they attend drug rehabilitation classes.
For years, the nursing home was a hive of nocturnal drug use, said a former security director at Holly Patterson who insisted that he not be identified. Residents ducked outside to get drunk or smoke marijuana at night, and two or three residents were caught smoking crack in their rooms, he said.
Shirley Quirk, 41, said she had to leave the grounds to find cocaine. Every time she left Holly Patterson and sought out old friends, Ms. Quirk, an H.I.V. patient, said, her drug habit bloomed, and her health deteriorated.
So now she stays, holding onto her routine of coffee, conversation and cigarette breaks as if it were a life raft. The staff cares for her and keeps her healthy, she said, and she quickly learned which residents to stay away from.
''Word gets around,'' Ms. Quirk said, as she sat in one of the home's lounges, sucking on a strawberry Blow Pop. ''You know the bad people from the good people.''
Across the hall, a man inside the dementia unit tugged at its closed front doors.
For years, one of Holly Patterson's most formidable foes has been the building itself. The nursing home was built like a hospital, but its construction seems outmoded. Some rooms have four beds. Some residents must use communal bathrooms and showers. Three elevators were not working one recent afternoon.
During a tour, Mr. Slatky pointed out one remodeled wing, and he said there were plans to replace the elevators and refurbish other parts of the home. Still, he said the building must be replaced.
''The environment is the environment,'' said Marian Epstein, the home's director of social work. ''We can't compete with these places that have birds flying in the lobby.''
The floors squeaked and smelled like cleaning solution one recent afternoon, but health inspectors and residents' families have reported otherwise.
This fall, state inspectors cited the home after finding mold growing over pipes and ceiling panels in the basement. In earlier inspections they have reported broken plumbing fixtures, pools of water, dirty bathrooms and dirty shower rooms. One state health report noted ''dried brown material'' on bathroom walls.
When Karen M. Dolan brought her mother, Mafalda DeRienzo, to the home in May 2002, she said she found spatters on the walls and floors of her mother's bathroom that appeared to be blood, urine and feces. Workers told Ms. Dolan the stains were rust, she recalled.
''I was for 20 years a housekeeper,'' she said in an interview at her home in Levittown. She played a grainy videotape of the room that showed blotches on the floors and loose electric sockets. ''I could tell. I got my mother out of there in 24 hours.''
But residents like Jim Breister, 58, brush aside such stories, saying they only make people nervous and generate bad publicity for the home. He and Ms. Garone sat in his room and talked about the home one afternoon. Neither planned on ending up here, but over the years, their notions of what constitutes a home have conformed to the surroundings provided by Holly Patterson.
''If it wasn't for this place, I don't know where I'd be,'' Mr. Breister said.
Ms. Garone concurred. ''I do believe that in the long run, the residents here are comfortable,'' she said. ''I can't say all of them are happy, but they're comfortable.''
