When the St. John's Eight, the remaining players from the men's basketball team, emerged from the locker room tunnel onto the court at Madison Square Garden yesterday morning, the few thousand fans sprinkled in the stands stood and cheered for the remnants of a once-proud program.
The Rev. Donald J. Harrington, the university president, watched from three rows behind the bench. Lou Carnesecca, the legendary coach and the program's remaining link to consistent success, sat behind him. When they lined up for the national anthem, St. John's had more administrators on hand, 10, than players. Four of the eight players yesterday were walk-ons, and they smiled broadly and joked afterward about how thrilling it had been.
''I wouldn't want to wear any other uniform but St. John's,'' said Phil Missere, a junior forward who joined the team after preseason tryouts.
Between the anthem and the postgame interviews, another game slipped away for the Red Storm, its ninth loss in 10 games. Boston College won, 89-61.
''It was wonderful to see those kids hustle,'' Carnesecca said. ''It was even more heartwarming to see the fans give these kids their support. That shows people care. People understand the frailties. People understand you can't be St. Joseph every day. What else can you ask for? Who's going to remember what the score was today? Unfortunately, people will remember the wounds.
''That will be hard to heal.''
It may have been the highlight of some of the St. John's players' careers, but it came against a sobering backdrop. Early Thursday, several players went to a suburban Pittsburgh strip club after a game and later had sex at the team's hotel with a woman they had met at the club. She told the police that she had been raped by several players, accusations the police discounted after a player produced video recordings from his cellphone of consensual sexual intercourse and threats by the woman. One St. John's player has been expelled, and the university has moved to expel two others. Two additional players were suspended from the team, and a sixth player was suspended for yesterday's game.
Harrington addressed the remaining players yesterday morning and asked them to be resilient. Kevin Clark, named the interim coach after Mike Jarvis was fired in December, told players they should be proud to wear St. John's uniforms.
Missere has strong bloodlines to the university. He was born in Queens, his father teaches at St. John's and his cousin Robert Werdann was the team's center a decade ago. But Missere had never scored a point before scoring 13 yesterday, and he appeared almost embarrassed when he said he had never imagined receiving a standing ovation; he got one after fouling out.
''Every kid that grows up in New York wants to play for St. John's,'' Missere said. ''It's St. John's. I just love St. John's.''
Joe McDonald, a walk-on from Long Island, had 3 points off the bench, as the walk-ons combined for 23 points. When McDonald made a 3-pointer, one fan yelled, ''Who is that guy?'' McDonald said: ''Everyone else says I'm not a walk-on. But I'm still paying tuition.''
Missere and Curtis Johnson, a 7-foot-3 center who scored 2 points, wound up fouling out. Their departures left St. John's (5-15, 0-9 Big East) with six players.
Harrington has said he will consider canceling St. John's remaining games only if that was the players' wish, but they seem intent on proceeding. As Boston College (15-7, 4-5) mounted a 17-3 run in the second half, the senior Andre Stanley turned to a teammate and yelled, ''C'mon, got to keep playing!''
Stanley said: ''It's disappointing, but we just have to do what we do. We wish that it didn't happen, but we have to play with what we got.''
COLLEGES
