Gregory Mosher has directed and produced about 150 productions, at Lincoln Center, on Broadway and off, at the Goodman Theater in Chicago and in London at the Royal National Theater and in the West End. Now Mr. Mosher is about to take on his most unusual production yet, as director of the new ''University Arts Initiatives'' at Columbia University.
It is a post created by Columbia's president, Lee C. Bollinger, to build the arts into the lives of students, professors and others and to build Columbia more into the arts.
''All of us believe there should be far less separation among intellectual and creative activities,'' Mr. Bollinger said during an interview in his office on Friday, as Mr. Mosher, sitting next to him, nodded in agreement.
''We don't know exactly how we will do this,'' Mr. Bollinger added. ''But we are going to make an effort. We hope to build something quite distinctive, and to make a contribution.'' He declined to disclose Mr. Mosher's salary. The appointment, effective immediately, is to be announced today.
Finding new ways to thrust Columbia into the arts has been a priority for Mr. Bollinger since he became president in 2002.
Shortly after his arrival from the University of Michigan, where he was also president, he announced that Columbia and Michigan would jointly sponsor a stage adaptation of Salman Rushdie's novel ''Midnight's Children'' by the Royal Shakespeare Company.
Mr. Bollinger has had other ideas, too, like creating a long-term relationship with a dancer like Mikhail Baryshnikov or Bill T. Jones, although that has not come to fruition. Now he is seeking a more systematic way to meld Columbia, the arts and the community.
'''Midnight's Children' made a stab at this,'' he said. ''The idea is not to take that as a template, but to find other ways, too. We need someone to really think this through and do it, and that is Gregory. ''
He said he had heard about Mr. Mosher years ago, when he was trying to create the Arthur Miller Theater at Michigan. ''Gregory was at the top of everyone's list for a director,'' he said.
Mr. Mosher, 55, said the invitation from Columbia had come at a perfect time for him.
''After I left Lincoln Center in 1992, I had been working solipsistically,'' he said. ''Then I read 'The Metaphysical Club' a couple of months after it came out, about a group of people who had to think of a new way of thinking, and I realized that that was what I wanted to do next: find a community. That was the spark.''
Columbia officials said they did not yet know what the budget for University Arts Initiatives would be.
Mr. Mosher said he was not yet ready to propose specific ideas, because he was planning to ''pick the brains'' of a wide range of people at Columbia and outside. In his long career as a director and producer, he has worked with many stars, including Elaine May, Sigourney Weaver and Matthew Broderick.
He says he already has a list of 187 people -- he did not name names -- whom he plans to talk to, ''not counting the people at Columbia.''
He says he plans to lean on his long list of contacts in other ways, too: ''My theater colleagues are all going to receive calls from me, saying, 'You know darn well you have empty seats and we have kids who would love to be filling them.'''
He is also beginning to think about how he might stir up the students. He says that historically, the people who formed the most exciting theater troupes were people in their 20's.
''They were people who looked at the world and found it insufficient and started something,'' Mr. Mosher said. He said he tells students: ''Create something of your own. Don't wait for someone to call you.''
''I find the idea of being around a lot of young artists very exciting,'' he added.
Mr. Mosher said he had been thinking about the challenges Mr. Bollinger was posing since he was 16 and one of his teachers introduced him to ''Art and the Intellect'' (The Museum of Modern Art, 1960) by Harold Taylor, a philosopher and former president of Sarah Lawrence College.
''It knocked me sideways,'' he said. ''This idea of connecting the intellectual life and the imaginative life. So the chance to be part of the Columbia community is astonishing.''
The two men have not known each other long. But as they sat side by side in Mr. Bollinger's office, it was clear that each held the other in high regard, and that they enjoyed each other's company.
When Mr. Bollinger said that Mr. Mosher brought managerial talents, intellect and charisma to Columbia, Mr. Mosher teased, ''You haven't mentioned my devilishly good looks.''
Nodding at Mr. Bollinger, Mr. Mosher added, ''And I have also known about him for years, as an unusually eloquent, passionate and sincere advocate for and believer in the arts.''
With New York so rich in cultural opportunities, it may seem surprising that Columbia students would need any help in partaking. But an editorial on Friday in the student newspaper, The Columbia Spectator, said that while the city's cultural riches were one of Columbia's biggest selling points, ''Columbia leaves its students largely in the dark about how to maximize New York City's resources.''
Mr. Mosher said he was not surprised to hear that some students found it difficult to dive in, but hoped to change that. ''New York is so intimidating,'' he said. ''There are so many theaters, so many galleries, so many films. It is easy to wonder, 'Well, how do I break in?'''
It is not a problem that Mr. Mosher, who has won two Tony Awards and a host of other honors, finds personally troubling. He talks admiringly of how the Polish activist Adam Michnik decided to behave as if he lived in a free society even when Poland was still under communist rule. Mr. Mosher said he followed that approach when he arrived at the troubled Lincoln Center Theater in 1985.
''I said, 'Let's act as if we were a real theater company, a great theater company, rather than one with looming problems,''' Mr. Mosher said. ''I am not saying we are going to replicate that here,'' he added. ''But that kind of thinking is very invigorating.''
