George W. Bush's goal in stepping down from his presidential pedestal and into the political hothouse of ''Meet the Press'' was to frame the election on his capacity to make the tough, unpopular decisions that he thinks are in the best interests of the national security and economic health of the United States.
Mr. Bush, who opened the window a little wider into his thinking about his decision to take the nation to war with Iraq, tried to use his unusual hourlong encounter in the Oval Office with Tim Russert of NBC to make a larger case for his presidency and, by extension, what he hopes will be seen as his sincerity.
The moment that seemed to capture that strategy came early on in the interview, when Mr. Bush said he wanted to share ''my sentiment'' as he marched toward his confrontation with Saddam Hussein.
''It's important for people to understand the context in which I made a decision in the Oval Office,'' Mr. Bush said. ''I'm dealing with a world in which we have gotten struck by terrorists with airplanes, and we get intelligence saying that, you know, we want to harm America. And the worst nightmare scenario for any president is to realize that these kind of terrorist networks have the capacity to arm up with some of these deadly weapons, and they strike us.''
The ''most solemn responsibility'' of an American president, Mr. Bush concluded, ''is to keep this country secure.''
It is too early to say if Mr. Bush's interview worked the magic he wanted -- and the Republicans will be polling to find out -- and Democrats instantly criticized the president's comments during the interview as more backpedaling on his reasons for going to war.
''What we saw today was an administration with shifting rationale for a questionable war,'' Senator Edward M. Kennedy, Democrat of Massachusetts, said through his spokesman, Jim Manley.
But many of Mr. Bush's supporters insisted that he had made a critical connection to voters.
''He made a better connection today, period, than I'd seen before,'' said Michael K. Deaver, the image maker for Ronald Reagan who has on occasion advised the current administration. ''I think he had his arguments down, they didn't sound like they were rehearsed, but clearly what he believed. He basically said, 'I am who I am and I'm not going to change.' And that's a great strength.''
Still, the great risk for Mr. Bush, Democrats and Republicans said on Sunday, is that he could just as easily lose as win an election that turns into a referendum on his judgment and character. Mr. Bush is particularly vulnerable, they said, if the Democrats raise enough doubts about his credibility on the war and on the economy, which now faces the highest federal budget deficit in history.
The Democratic front-runner, Senator John Kerry, made clear that was his strategy early on Sunday, when he issued a statement on Mr. Bush's performance.
''This morning on 'Meet the Press,' President Bush said his decision to go to war with Iraq when he did was because Saddam Hussein had 'the ability to make weapons,' '' Mr. Kerry said. ''This is a far cry from what the president and his administration told the American people throughout 2002. Back then, President Bush repeatedly told the American people that Saddam Hussein 'has got chemical weapons.' ''
He added, ''And it was on that basis that he sent American sons and daughters off to war.''
Whatever the result of the interview, it clearly showed that the White House has decided it cannot just throw $100 million in advertising at a Democratic nominee and try to turn him into George McGovern, the liberal trounced in the 1972 election by President Richard M. Nixon. If anything, the interview showed that Mr. Bush has concluded that he must make a persuasive argument not only for his presidency, but in effect his own electability.
The interview put on display what sometimes seemed an odd hybrid of Mr. Bush as both president and presidential candidate. If he seemed to descend from his commander-in-chief mountaintop by dueling with Mr. Russert -- the Washington insider who usually interrogates people who seek rather than sit in the Oval Office -- he also did not entirely assume the role of a candidate willing to engage in partisan combat.
When Mr. Russert baited Mr. Bush with a comment from Mr. Kerry that Mr. Kerry was ''appalled'' by ''the president's lack of knowledge,'' Mr. Bush simply smiled, called it ''politics'' and added that ''if you close your eyes and listen carefully to what you just said, it sounds like the year 2000 all over again.''
If the response appeared tentative, Mr. Bush's campaign officials insisted it was all part of the plan, at least at this point in the campaign. ''He didn't take that bit because he understands that people want a leader in Washington, they want somebody who is not going to lead by responding to polls and who is not going to engage in attack politics,'' said Gerald L. Parsky, the chairman of Mr. Bush's campaign in California.
Another Bush campaign adviser said the goal of the White House was not only to explain Mr. Bush's decision-making, but also to show him as more human and humble than his warrior image suggests.
The adviser said he was optimistic that the polling numbers -- some of which show Mr. Bush trailing Mr. Kerry in a hypothetical election match-up by as much as seven percentage points -- would improve for the president after the interview. (Officially, the Bush White House says it pays no attention to polls.)
''I think that will make him a little less vulnerable to charges of arrogance and hardheadedness,'' the adviser said, hopefully, ''and that he's unwilling to ever acknowledge mistakes.''
News Analysis
