A young college-educated South Asian woman living in the United States returns home on a mission of exploration and discovery. She finds no certain answers, but along the way she dons a burqa, the head-to-toe garment women wear in many conservative Muslim societies, meets radical Islamists who wish to impose a Taliban framework on her homeland and experiences the kindness of (Westernized) strangers. We follow her on this journey, our sympathy for the plight of her homeland marching alongside our admiration for her pluck and determination to expose gross injustices, especially in regard to women.
''Reinventing the Taliban?,'' which will be shown tonight on the Discovery Times Channel resembles ''Kandahar,'' the Iranian feature film film that won several prizes after its release in 2001. Both are road movies with a feminist edge: their theme is the oppressive rule of the Taliban in Afghanistan (''Kandahar'') and the growth of pro-Taliban Islamist forces in Pakistan (''Reinventing the Taliban?''). Both stress the terrible treatment accorded women: real in the case of the Taliban in Afghanistan, potential in the case of the Northwest Frontier Province in Pakistan, where most of this documentary was shot, and in the rest of that country. There the resemblance ends.
For all of its faults -- amateur acting and made-up situations -- ''Kandahar'' provides some glimpse of a truly awful situation and is superbly photographed. ''Reinventing the Taliban?'' is pedestrian at best, and more interesting for what it leaves out than for what it shows.
Sharmeen Obaid, the protagonist of the documentary, is a Karachi-born Pakistani who, as she informs us, was educated at Stanford and at Smith College. Returning to Pakistan, where she once listened to Guns N' Roses, she is alarmed at the growth of Taliban-like sentiments; she ends with a plea to ''secular'' minded Pakistanis to help stem the tide of extremist Islam.
Quite properly Ms. Obaid begins in the Northwest Frontier Province, a region known to most Westerners as Kipling country and home to the fiercely independent and profoundly conservative Pashtuns. These tribes spill over into Afghanistan, and the Taliban were Afghan Pashtuns educated in the ultraconservative religious schools so vividly portrayed in ''Kandahar'' but unmentioned in this documentary.
Ms. Obaid meets members of one of the political parties that trained and supported the Taliban, and talks with several Pashtuns who fought in Afghanistan alongside them. Later she witnesses a political rally and then talks to a number of liberal Pakistanis in Peshawar, the capital of the Northwest Frontier Province, and in Lahore, the major city of Pakistan's most important province, Punjab.
Unasked, and therefore unanswered, is the question what did the Pakistan government (and others) have to do with this? Had Ms. Obaid investigated further, she would have discovered that the Taliban were the creation of only some (not all) members of the six-party Islamist alliance, the United Action Front, or MMA, that governs the Northwest Frontier Province and Pakistan's neighboring Baluchistan Province.
These parties were used by Pakistan's intelligence service to train and support the Taliban; the Taliban themselves were at one time supported by the United States and, to the very end, by Saudi Arabia. She might also have asked her United Action Front interlocutors if they knew the whereabouts of Mullah Omar, the Taliban's mystical leader, and the man who allowed Osama bin Laden to turn Afghanistan into a base for Al Qaeda.
The Taliban-like actions that alarm Ms. Obaid consist of a ban on playing music in public and at weddings and the defacement of movie posters that have human faces on them (two ''sins'' that are believed, incorrectly, to be un-Islamic by extremely conservative Muslims). She does note that Peshawar still has concerts, and she visits one sponsored by a powerful political rival of the United Action Front, the Awami National Party (which goes unidentified in the documentary).
How did the front come to power in the Northwest Frontier Province and Baluchistan, and obtain 20 percent of the National Assembly seats with only 11 percent of the vote? As one of the people she interviews points out, the answer is less alarming than the program's title and Ms. Obaid's narration would suggest. The United Action Front did well in the Frontier and in Baluchistan (a neighboring province), because the Pakistani government put restraints on the more secular parties that would have drawn away its supporters. Further, the Northwest Frontier Province Pashtuns were enraged by American intervention in Afghanistan, and the front made corruption a major issue.
There is reason to be alarmed at the rise of Islamic extremism in Pakistan, but not all conservative Muslims are Taliban, and in any case the real failure is that of the Pakistani state, under Benazir Bhutto and Nawaz Sharif, no less than the generals, to provide modern education and enforce laws already on the books.
''Reinventing the Taliban?'' offers a few startling images, but never comes to grips with a problem larger than the defacement of movie posters: the incoherence of this nuclear power's politics and its fraying social structure. Daniel Pearl was murdered precisely because he sought to explore the links between Islamic radicals and the government (in Ms. Obaid's hometown, Karachi); this documentary is more of an apology for the secular centrist President Pervez Musharraf than a serious effort at uncovering the truth.
REINVENTING THE TALIBAN?  Discovery Times Channel, tonight at 8, Eastern and Pacific times; 7 Central time
Produced and written by Sharmeen Obaid and Ed Robbins for New York Times Television and the Discovery Times Channel; executive producers, Bill Smee for the Discovery Times Channel and Ann Derry and Phil Boag for New York Times Television.
TELEVISION REVIEW Stephen P. Cohen is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, and has written and edited books on Pakistan and South Asia.
