Democratic leaders, once fearful that their presidential nominee would inherit a demoralized and divided party, said Sunday that Democrats now seemed poised to nominate a candidate who had escaped damage from internal battling and enjoyed broad support from all factions of the party.
With Senator John Kerry's lopsided victories this weekend in Michigan, Washington and Maine, states that were once considered the heart of Howard Dean's support, many Democrats said Mr. Kerry could become one of the party's earliest nominees in memory. Some Democratic leaders had openly worried that if Dr. Dean lost the nomination, after being perceived as having it all but locked up, the eventual nominee would have to revive a broken party.
''There is unity within our party; they are not going after each other,'' said Terry McAuliffe, the Democratic national chairman, in an assessment that was echoed in the camps of Mr. Kerry's rivals. Mr. McAuliffe took care not to proclaim any winner in the race but said he expected the contest to be resolved within weeks, saying that would be ''a great result.''
Art Torres, the California Democratic Party chairman, said in an interview on Sunday that in a career dating to working for Robert F. Kennedy in 1968, he had never seen ''a party more unified proceeding through the primary season.'' Mr. Torres said that development made him increasingly hopeful about his party's prospects in November.
''That's what Democrats are being smart about now: coalescing around a candidate that has electability, that has gravitas,'' said Mr. Torres, who has not endorsed a candidate. ''The issue is to defeat George Bush and put America back on track.''
Despite the rallying around Mr. Kerry, the senator has at least a little way to go before he wins the nomination, including primaries on Tuesday here and in Virginia, where Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark are making intense efforts to head off a first Kerry victory in a Southern state. And Dr. Dean has pumped his remaining resources into Wisconsin, where Democrats vote Feb. 17.
Still, even many Democratic leaders who do not back Mr. Kerry said he was emerging quickly as a consensus candidate. In state after state, with Democrats turning out in consistently record numbers, Mr. Kerry is rolling up big margins, winning 10 of the 12 contests so far, including a victory in Maine on Sunday. Even aides to some of Mr. Kerry's rivals said they thought the race could effectively be over a week from Tuesday.
More significantly, they said, the votes held this weekend demonstrated that Mr. Kerry was drawing the support of Democratic voters and elected officials spanning many geographic and ideological lines, and appeared to be triumphing with barely a scratch in what many warned would be a brutal nominating process. There is considerable evidence, Democratic campaign aides said, that people are voting for Mr. Kerry even if they do not agree with him on some positions, and even if they have not particularly warmed to this gawky Northeasterner. This also shows the extent to which fierce anti-Bush sentiment is shaping this presidential election for Democrats.
In Michigan, for example, Mr. Kerry won the support of 52 percent of Democrats and the state's governor and two Democratic senators, despite his backing of free trade measures and automobile emission restrictions that are highly unpopular there.
Rather than producing antipathy among disillusioned Dean voters, the results so far, many Democrats say, suggest that many of those voters have switched their support and even some of their energy to Mr. Kerry, believing that he can do what Dr. Dean cannot: beat Mr. Bush. Mr. Kerry won double-digit victories on Saturday in what had once been expected to be Dean country, Michigan and Washington State.
A CBS News poll of Michigan Democrats who voted by Internet -- presumably including many Dean voters -- showed a rush of support from Dr. Dean to Mr. Kerry in the final days of the election.
''If you're going to have that happen and get this kind of momentum -- the momentum from the impulse to get Bush, which has clearly been lurking for every candidate -- now is when you want to have it,'' Joe Trippi, who was forced out as Dr. Dean's campaign manager two weeks ago, said Sunday. ''Kerry has it, and that's great for him.''
Mark Penn, the pollster for Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut, who dropped out of the race last week, called Mr. Kerry's nomination all but inevitable.
''It is the voters' notion of electability, which seems to be based on whoever is winning, and who has momentum,'' Mr. Penn said. ''Look at his press. He's had the cover of every newsmagazine. There's a very strong bandwagon effect here.''
As early as the start of the year, before Dr. Dean began his decline, Democrats were expressing concern about a divisive campaign. Bruce Reed, the president of the centrist Democratic Leadership Council, said at the time that Dr. Dean was running a negative campaign and that most of his opponents were ''chasing him down that hole.''
This prospect of a peaceful conclusion to this nomination battle could have significant implications in a general election match-up between Mr. Kerry and Mr. Bush.
Dr. Dean argues that he can beat Mr. Bush because he has drawn so many new Democrats into the system. Many Democratic leaders agreed that Dr. Dean had stirred a new pot of potential voters, but worried that his temperament and lack of foreign policy experience would severely limit his appeal and make him an easy mark for the Bush White House.
By contrast, Mr. Kerry appears to be moving toward a position where he can combine some of the excitement of the Dean movement with the establishment credentials he has presented -- be it his service in Vietnam or the Senate -- to appeal to moderate voters.
''The energy in the Dean campaign was largely based on a desire to get rid of George Bush,'' said Steve Elmendorf, who worked as a senior adviser to Representative Richard A. Gephardt before he dropped out of the race three weeks ago, and is now a senior aide to Mr. Kerry. ''I think those people are going to unite behind whoever they think has the best chance of beating Bush.''
Mr. Trippi said he believed that the new voters Dr. Dean had drawn into the system would stay with the Democratic Party, no matter who wins the nomination. ''It's now obvious to everybody that there is huge energy within the party because of the desire to get rid of Bush at the grass roots,'' he said. ''So people, regardless of which candidate they were motivated by to get in, will stay in.''
In attaining his status as front-runner, and in so far staying free from any serious attacks from his opponents, Mr. Kerry has benefited from a change in the political environment that has suddenly made this race even more urgent to many Democrats. Over the past three weeks, at the very time that Democrats were voting in caucuses and primaries, a series of polls, including one released Sunday by Time magazine, showed Mr. Bush as vulnerable to defeat, and Mr. Kerry as being the Democrat best positioned to beat him.
In an election that is so much about unseating Mr. Bush, those kinds of high-profile reports, including magazine cover stories, may have done more for Mr. Kerry than any speech he gave or advertisement he ran, Democrats said.
And an environment where Democrats seem to have a real chance of winning the White House has complicated the task for Mr. Kerry's opponents, who in normal times would want to act aggressively to knock him down.
''Traditionally you've had these primaries where, at this point, people were ripping each other to shreds,'' said Mr. McAuliffe, the Democratic chairman who has come under criticism for pushing through an accelerated calendar, which in no small part is responsible for the early choice of a nominee. ''Talk to Bill Clinton about what Paul Tsongas and Jerry Brown did to him. You don't have that today. People want to beat Bush.''
Mr. Penn, the Lieberman pollster, argued that the perception of Mr. Bush as being in trouble, and his decision to submit to an interview broadcast on ''Meet the Press'' on Sunday, had pressed Democrats even more to rally quickly around a candidate.
''The Democrats can show a sign of strength by coalescing around Kerry,'' he said.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
