Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, had to do it, twice, as did Senator John Edwards of North Carolina. Bill Clinton had to do it in 1992 and 1996, as did Al Gore and George W. Bush, the candidate, in 2000.
Now George W. Bush, the president, has done it again: taking the hot seat on the NBC program ''Meet the Press'' with Tim Russert.
For the fourth straight election cycle, the candidates who are trying to win, or to keep, the presidency, have gone on the program to try to right listing campaigns (Dr. Dean), prove their mettle (Mr. Edwards) or set the record straight (Mr. Bush) with the Washington insiders who tune to the morning interview shows each Sunday.
Mr. Bush's appearance went beyond politics yesterday, as he addressed crucial issues: the lead-up to the Iraq war, unemployment and the growing budget deficit.
But with a chorus of Democratic candidates hammering the president daily, his aides acknowledged that he chose to go on ''Meet the Press'' in part to demonstrate that he could face tough questions and perhaps even put some behind him.
''Meet the Press'' would seem a logical place to go in terms of reach alone. It has the largest audience of the Sunday-morning programs, averaging 4.4 million viewers a week last quarter. But an appearance on any program would have drawn reams of attention.
''Obviously, he could go on 'Oprah,' '' said Suzy DeFrancis, the White House deputy assistant for communications. ''I think the president felt that was a forum in which he could reach a large number of people and that Tim was known to ask probing questions.''
That Mr. Russert, 53, has such a tough-guy reputation irritates his competitors. Executives at rival networks have long grumbled that their star interviewers can give just as good as he can.
Several strategists said they believed George Stephanopoulos of ''This Week'' on ABC, Bob Schieffer, the moderator of ''Face the Nation'' on CBS, and Chris Wallace, the moderator of ''Fox News Sunday,'' were important parts of the interview mix. But Mr. Russert is seen as a challenging interviewer with a style informed by the life he left 20 years ago as a lawyer and Democratic political operative for Gov. Mario M. Cuomo and Senator Daniel Patrick Moynihan, both of New York.
''There has been an aura of Russert built up, there's a perception, that he asks the toughest questions.,'' said Jenny Backus, a Democratic strategist who is not aligned with a candidate.
By appearing on ''Meet the Press,'' said David Doak, a Democratic consultant who is also unaligned with a campaign, a candidate can portray himself as willing to take all of the heat the news media can dole out. A decision to appear on another Sunday-morning program, conversely, can sometimes be read as ducking Mr. Russert.
Some rivals accused Mr. Edwards of just that when he did not appear on ''Meet the Press'' for more than a year after receiving poor reviews for an interview there in May 2002.
When he made a stronger appearance in November, ''in certain ways it was a benchmark of his evolution as a candidate,'' said David Axelrod, a media strategist for Mr. Edwards.
In June, Dr. Dean was roundly criticized for flubbing explanations of his positions on ''Meet the Press.'' He did not return to the program until this month, when his advisers decided he had to demonstrate he was confident enough to enter Mr. Russert's Coliseum.
A similar calculation went into Mr. Bush's appearance on Sunday. Mr. Russert said he has a standing interview request filed with the White House, but, he said, he renewed it a few weeks ago, initially trying to land the president for a January program marking Mr. Russert's 12th year as moderator.
''I continued to make the case that if you really want to have an opportunity for serious people across the country in the millions to listen to you and make a judgment about serious issues, you need a credible forum,'' Mr. Russert said.
He refused to say what he thought about Mr. Bush's performance. In a column posted on OpinionJournal.com, Peggy Noonan, a speechwriter for President Reagan, wrote of Mr. Bush's interview, ''I am one of those who feel his performance was not impressive.''
On the Fox News Channel, Pete Snyder, a Republican strategist, said the president had proved ''he's a firm leader.''
