JUST before St. John's played Boston College yesterday, the Rev. Donald J. Harrington, the St. John's president, faced a team that has been decimated by scandal.
Harrington told the players that he was proud of them, and that what happened to their former teammates was no reflection on them.
The Red Storm went out and played a great first half before Boston College's size, depth and talent took a toll. Boston College cruised to a 28-point victory, leaving St. John's without a Big East victory this season.
The weight of the season has fallen on Kevin Clark, the interim head coach, who has gone from an anonymous assistant to the glue of a program in distress. He has handled an awkward situation with grace.
On Friday, Clark sat next to Dave Wegrzyn, the university's athletic director, as Wegrzyn fielded questions about St. John's search for a new coach. Someone asked if the scandal had hurt the effort to bring in a quality coach.
From what I've seen these last few days, including yesterday's blowout loss, St. John's already has quality.
Instead of going on another wild search for glory, St. John's should give the job to Clark. Announce the decision now and let Clark begin to build.
I can hear the collective groan at the mere idea. Most St. John's fans want a big name. They want this nightmare to end as painlessly as possible. They want Wegrzyn and Harrington to find an established giant to lead the Red Storm out of the maelstrom.
But the pursuit of hot names is what got St. John's in this fix to begin with. Fran Fraschilla was the hot name in 1996, and Mike Jarvis was the big name in 1998.
If this is St. John's continued mind-set, Clark is as much of a long shot to get the job as St. John's is to win its last seven games.
But perhaps after seven years of misfiring, the university may want to break the mold and try something new. Or, actually, something old.
St. John's has its own peculiar culture, and a successful coach needs to have been immersed in its bloodstream to fully understand and appreciate what the university is trying to accomplish. Joe Lapchick and Lou Carnesecca were part of that bloodstream. Lapchick coached at St. John's from 1936 to 1947 and from 1956 to 1965. When Lapchick left, Carnesecca coached from 1965 to 1970 and from 1973 to 1992.
I'm not suggesting that Clark will be another Carnesecca, but who knew Carnesecca was going to be Carnesecca?
It will be tempting to look at Clark and see Jarvis. He was with Jarvis at George Washington from 1993 to 1997, followed Jarvis to St. John's and was named associate head coach in 1998.
But what's attractive about Clark is that his roots are in Division III. He was a three-time all-American at Clark University in Massachusetts, where he still holds career records for rebounds and field-goal percentage and is the university's fourth-leading scorer. He is also a member of Clark's Hall of Fame and the New England Basketball Hall of Fame.
In his first season as head coach at his alma mater, in 1987, Clark won the Division III Northeast Regional Championship. He was an assistant coach at Fairfield before joining Jarvis at George Washington.
Clark replaced Jarvis in December, but for all practical purposes his tenure as coach began yesterday, when his depleted team took the court. After the loss, Clark said the best part of the day was watching his walk-ons, Joe McDonald, Devin Mayo, Nygel Roach and Phil Missere. He praised them. Missere played 27 minutes and led the walk-ons with 13 points. McDonald played 13 minutes and scored 3 points; Roach played 18 minutes and scored 2 points; and Mayo played 4 minutes and scored 5 points.
When he fouled out with 4 minutes 37 seconds left, Missere received a standing ovation. After the game, Missere framed the shock of the last five days this way: ''I never thought I would walk off the court to a standing ovation.''
He went on to add: ''This is a great experience, one that will serve me well down the road. How far down the road, who knows?''
Harrington has absolved Clark of any blame for the incident last week in Pittsburgh that led to the expulsion of one player, the impending expulsions of two others and the suspensions of three more. Yesterday, Harrington denied that he was blaming last week's episode on Jarvis.
''Absolutely not,'' he said. ''No one should be a scapegoat. Everybody will look for a scapegoat; there should not be a scapegoat.''
Scapegoat or not, all sorts of names are circulating as the next St. John's coach. They range from Georgia Tech's Paul Hewitt to Memphis's John Calipari to all sorts of midlevel names. The former St. John's and Knicks star Mark Jackson has even been mentioned as a possibility.
But the university would be well served by letting Clark shepherd the program. Look at him these last few weeks and make a choice based on needs, not desire.
Talent will come, but first you have to restore faith, and faith lies in the opportunity given to someone like Clark.
Yesterday's loss to Boston College was the beginning of a new day and a new era for St. John's. The university can either use this as an opportunity to go in a fresh direction, or it can continue to chase ghosts.
Sports of The Times
