Wrapping up a four-day European trip, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld stopped here on Sunday to promote this Balkan nation's efforts to join NATO and to pay tribute to Croatia's security forces, which are fighting terrorism in Afghanistan.
Mr. Rumsfeld, the first United States cabinet officer to visit Croatia since Secretary of State Madeleine K. Albright came in 1999, met with Croatian officials, including President Stjepan Mesic and Prime Minister Ivo Sanader, during a nearly four-hour stop on his way back to Washington.
''I look forward to the day when Croatia becomes a part'' of NATO, Mr. Rumsfeld said at a news conference with Mr. Sanader after the meetings.
Croatia has sent 50 military police officers to assist the NATO-led security operation in and around the Afghan capital, Kabul, and has donated rifles and ammunition to the new Afghan Army. American officials are also exploring whether Croatia might send troops to Iraq.
''This question remains to be considered by the Croatian government,'' Mr. Sanader said.
Mr. Rumsfeld's visit comes less than three months after the governing party, the Croatian Democratic Union, regained power. It had been ousted four years ago after allegations of corruption and hard-line nationalist politics.
Under Mr. Sanader, the party has purged extremists, some of whom were implicated in war crimes committed during the 1991-95 Balkan wars, and he has embraced a pro-American foreign policy. Mr. Sanader says he wants Croatia to join the European Union and NATO within the next two to three years.
He said that Croatia's membership in NATO would send ''a strong clear signal to neighboring states'' and that political and economic progress could be made by following the membership entry requirements.
Mr. Sanader was asked whether Croatia was uncomfortable with NATO's goal to withdraw most of its 12,000 troops in Bosnia this year and replace them with police officers and troops commanded by the European Union. He said that there could be no substitute for NATO forces but that the transition to a European command, if it happened, would allow Europe to assume more responsibility for regional security.
Mr. Rumsfeld emphasized that a NATO headquarters would remain in Bosnia to help the nation's military reforms and to help the hunt for indicted war crimes suspects. Mr. Sanader said he supported the Bush administration's pre-emption doctrine, and said ''hundreds of thousands of lives would have been saved'' in the Balkan wars had ''there been the will for preventive action'' to topple Slobodan Milosevic, the former Yugoslav president.
Croatia, a nation of 4.4 million people, has reduced the size of its military to 33,000 troops from 44,000 in the past year, but has taken steps to make it a more professional army.
The United States and Croatian navies have conducted joint exercises recently, and the Bush administration has taken several steps to reward the government's efforts to combat global terrorism and to take the necessary steps to join NATO.
Last month, the Pentagon honored the Croatian chief of armed forces, Gen. Josip Lucic, with a ceremony in Washington, as well as meetings with the Army chief of staff, Gen. Peter J. Schoomaker, and the commandant of the Marine Corps, Gen. Michael W. Hagee. Secretary of State Colin L. Powell met with the Croatian foreign minister, Miomir Zuzul, and the speaker of the Croatian Parliament, Vladimir Seks, and President Bush invited them to attend the State of the Union address.
American officials attribute much of the pro-American shift in Croatian foreign policy to Mr. Zuzul, a former Croatian ambassador to the United States who studied at the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard.
The new government and the Bush administration are still working out some rough patches, which Mr. Rumsfeld was expected to address in his meetings. The governing party has been openly hostile to the United Nations tribunal in The Hague for war crimes in the nations that once made up Yugoslavia in the 1990's.
