Opening statements are expected to begin today in the long-brewing court battle between the developer Larry A. Silverstein and two dozen insurers over how much money will be available for rebuilding the vast commercial complex at the World Trade Center site.
A courtroom in the federal courthouse in Lower Manhattan will be jammed with dozens of lawyers, and much testimony in the coming weeks will be from underwriters and agents discussing arcane insurance terms and forms. But the dry recitations will belie what is at stake for both sides: billions of dollars.
Mr. Silverstein claims that he is entitled to a double payment of nearly $7 billion because two planes hit two towers in what he describes as two separate occurrences during the terrorist attack on Sept. 11, 2001. Swiss Re, Travelers Property Casualty Corporation and the other insurers that provided coverage for the trade center contend that the developer is entitled only to the policy limit, $3.55 billion.
Mr. Silverstein has lost a series of crucial rulings leading up to the trial, but both sides have expressed optimism over the ultimate outcome. Opening statements will come from a trio of shrewd and colorful lawyers, with Barry R. Ostrager and David Boies representing the insurers and Herbert M. Wachtell representing the developer.
The dispute has taken on an especially bitter cast over the past two years, with the chairman of Swiss Re, Jacques E. Dubois, portraying Mr. Silverstein as a rapacious developer who concocted a ''self-motivated hoax'' in an attempt to grab an insurance windfall. Mr. Silverstein, in turn, has denounced Swiss Re, calling its attacks scurrilous and accusing it of a ''cynical'' attempt to avoid its responsibilities.
But the ramifications of the case go beyond the two contending sides. It is being closely watched by city and state officials and people involved in the downtown rebuilding effort, especially now that a master plan has been completed for the site, as well as initial designs for one of the first buildings, the $1.4 billion, 1,776-foot Freedom Tower.
Judge Michael B. Mukasey of Federal District Court, who is hearing the case, has tried to contain the issues. He threatened contempt charges if the two sides talked to the news media in an attempt to sway public sentiment. And he told the jury last week that he did not know if the verdict would affect the rebuilding effort, but he cautioned jurors that it should not ''enter into your decision in this case.''
That prompted a reaction from Kevin M. Rampe, president of the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation, the agency overseeing plans for the trade center site.
''This litigation will have a real and direct impact on the rebuilding effort,'' said Mr. Rampe, who estimates it will cost $9 billion to $11 billion to rebuild the trade center. ''I invite the judge to come down here if there's any uncertainty in his mind. We understand this is a private litigation, but there's a substantial public interest: healing the wounds from the worst terrorist attack in U.S. history.''
So far, the insurers have paid out $1.9 billion, $600 million of which has been spent on rent, debt service and legal fees. (An additional $700 million was spent on paying off the mortgage on the property and buying out the trade center mall operator, Westfield America. But both Mr. Silverstein and the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey are required to replenish the rebuilding fund when the insurance case is resolved.)
The two sides have been at odds on almost every point. The case is particularly complicated because Mr. Silverstein took control of the office complex at the trade center only six weeks before the terrorist attack. At the time, the insurance companies had signed binders pledging to provide coverage but had not completed the final documents.
The two sides have split over which insurance form was in place at the time of the attack. Mr. Silverstein claims that the companies are bound by a proposed policy known as the Travelers form, which, he says, makes it easier to claim that the attack on Sept. 11. constituted two occurrences.
The insurance companies, however, say that the document in force was the so-called Wilprop form, a policy devised and proposed by Mr. Silverstein's consultants to avoid multiple deductibles.
The court has already ruled that three insurers, with a total coverage of $112 million, were bound by Wilprop, which regards the destruction of the trade center as a single occurrence. Early on, Mr. Silverstein settled with two other companies, with coverage totaling $365 million.
This trial is to determine whether Swiss Re and 12 other insurers were bound by Wilprop, as they contend. Swiss Re's legal arguments have centered on one of Mr. Silverstein's insurance executives, Robert Strachan, the developer's risk manager. The day after the attack, Mr. Strachan sent out a memo indicating that the insurance language entitled Mr. Silverstein to one payment of $3.5 billion.
But Mr. Silverstein's pretrial memo contends that Swiss Re never accepted the Wilprop form and that the company was later notified that the Travelers form was going to be used in the placement.
A second phase of the legal proceedings will determine whether Mr. Silverstein is entitled to two payments under the Travelers form.
