Nuzzling up to the first outcrop of bedrock ever examined on Mars, NASA's rover Opportunity took more than 100 photographs over the weekend and gathered readings on the minerals in the rock, mission managers said on Sunday.
''We finished pretty much a great day,'' said James K. Erickson, one of the mission managers.
Up to now, scientists have had close looks only at loose rocks on the Martian surface. The Opportunity landed in a small crater with exposed bedrock along the inner rim. Because the bedrock formed at that spot, it will offer evidence of the site's geological history. Scientists are further intrigued because the bedrock consists of thin layers, which may be volcanic ash or sedimentary rock deposited by water or wind.
If the rock turns out to be sedimentary rock formed by the flow of water, it would support the theory that Mars was once much warmer and wetter than it is today.
The Opportunity, which rolled off its lander a week ago, spent a couple of days examining the soil next to the lander and then made a cautious 10-foot-per-day trip to the bedrock.
The new pictures from the Opportunity have already answered one question. In the analysis of the soil, scientists saw some tiny, almost perfectly round pebbles scattered on top. They now know where the pebbles came from. The same pebbles are also seen cemented in some bedrock layers; they come loose as the rock weathers away.
The pebbles appear to be glass beads formed from molten rock that was thrown in the air by volcanic eruptions or meteor impacts.
The Opportunity is to now move along the base of the outcrop, which is less than a foot high in most places but more than 30 feet long.
On the other side of Mars, the Spirit, twin of the Opportunity, finished examining a rock nicknamed Adirondack. On Friday, the Spirit, using a diamond-tipped abrasion tool spinning 3,000 times a minute, ground into Adirondack, allowing scientists to get their first look at pristine Martian minerals.
''We put a nice, full-circle hole in a rock on Mars for the first time,'' said Stephen Gorevan, lead engineer for the grinding tool. The three-hour procedure resulted in a hole 1.8 inches wide and one-tenth of an inch deep. By taking readings of both the interior and surface of the rock, scientists hope to understand its history.
The Spirit will travel next to a crater about 800 feet away. Scientists hope to find bedrock outcrops there as well. Both rovers will study Mars for at least two more months.
