Senator John Kerry won a solid victory in the Maine Democratic caucuses on Sunday, giving him a sweep in the voting this weekend.
With about 50 percent of the precincts counted, the party announced that Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, had about half of the vote, Howard Dean had about a quarter, and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich of Ohio had about 15 percent. Senator John Edwards of North Carolina and Gen. Wesley K. Clark were far behind.
''It is Senator Kerry,'' said Dorothy Melanson, the state party chairwoman.
On Saturday, Mr. Kerry handily won the caucuses in Michigan and Washington, and he has now finished first in 10 of the 12 states that have voted for delegates to the presidential nominating convention.
''Today, the voters of Maine have sent a message that George Bush's days are numbered and change is coming to America,'' Mr. Kerry said in a statement.
The focus now turns to Virginia and Tennessee, which hold primaries on Tuesday. Mr. Edwards and General Clark, of Arkansas, are counting on their Southern background to give them an edge in these states, but Mr. Kerry has been campaigning hard there in the past week.
Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, is unlikely to be competitive in Virginia and Tennessee. But he had expected to do well in Maine, banking on his familiarity as a New Englander and the state's history of voting for mavericks.
But reports here indicated that his support slipped rapidly, just as it did elsewhere, after weak showings last month in Iowa and New Hampshire.
Elinor Goldberg, a Kerry supporter who helped organize the caucus in Hope, a rural community near Camden, about halfway up the Maine coast, said she thought Mr. Kerry offered the best chance to defeat President Bush.
''I hate to say that electable thing,'' Ms. Goldberg said at the caucus, ''but current circumstances in America and the world are difficult, and we need change.''
Mr. Kerry apparently benefited from endorsements last week from Gov. John Baldacci and former Senator George J. Mitchell.
Only 24 delegates were at stake in Sunday's voting. With the caucuses sandwiched between the much larger prizes in Michigan and Washington on Saturday and Virginia and Tennessee, the candidates did little campaigning here.
''The state was ripe for plucking, but nobody sought to pluck it,'' said L. Sandy Maisel, a political scientist at Colby College in Waterville.
Mr. Kucinich spent more time in Maine and put more advertisements on television than the other candidates. Some candidates ran commercials on Portland television before the New Hampshire primary, because the stations broadcast into the eastern part of that state.
Mr. Kerry campaigned in Maine last Thursday. Dr. Dean and Mr. Kucinich campaigned across the state during the caucuses.
For the last two presidential elections, Maine chose its Democratic delegates in primaries, won by Bill Clinton in 1996 and Al Gore in 2000. Before that, delegates were chosen in caucuses, and party leaders reverted to the process this year in an effort to create more enthusiasm among devoted Democrats.
More than 400 caucuses met across the state on Sunday afternoon and evening. Registered Democrats and voters not affiliated with any party were eligible to participate.
At the caucus in Hope, 45 Democrats showed up at the town library, and they broke evenly for Mr. Kerry, Dr. Dean and Mr. Kucinich.
Snacking on doughnut holes, coffee and cider, those at the caucus broke into groups to support candidates. When Mr. Edwards did not have enough supporters to meet the 15 percent threshold, supporters of the others competed to win them over.
''The real question,'' said Larrain Slaymaker, a Kerry backer, ''is how do you like Bush? The bottom line is we want Bush gone.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: MAINE
