Standing next to each other on the sideline for an inbounds play, Allen Iverson appeared about three inches taller than Lawrence Frank.
Two of the littlest big men in basketball came together Sunday night at Continental Arena, and the Frank phenomenon continued to grow.
Since taking over for Byron Scott two weeks ago, Frank has gone 7-0, winning every game by double figures. The Nets' latest victory, 99-87 over Philadelphia on Sunday, was the closest call of his young head-coaching career.
The credit for this one went more to the coach on the court than to the one on the bench. Jason Kidd was still trying to catch his breath at the postgame news conference after earning his 57th career triple-double. He had 14 points, 13 rebounds and 10 assists. As impressive as those numbers seemed, they were not indicative of his overall effort.
Kidd chased Iverson for most of the second half and held him without a field goal in the fourth quarter until the final 30 seconds, when the outcome was no longer in doubt. Iverson finished with 27 points, but he made only 6 of 21 field goals.
''Wait until you see him,'' Richard Jefferson said of Kidd. ''He's exhausted. He couldn't even look up in the shower.''
Frank also praised Kidd, his starting point guard. ''What Jason was doing on Iverson was unbelievable,'' he said. ''And then he does it on the other end, too.''
Sensing that the 76ers were vulnerable -- Boston beat them by 30 points Saturday night -- Kidd pushed the ball and made everyone try to chase him. He wore himself out, but Philadelphia lacked the legs to keep up.
''Tired?'' Kidd said. ''A. I. will do that to you. But I knew they were on a back-to-back and I wanted to force the tempo, make it a bit of a track meet.''
The 76ers collapsed in the fourth quarter, making just 3 field goals and missing 14. Philadelphia could not hit a shot for the first 3 minutes 46 seconds of the quarter.
But making their free throws, the 76ers narrowed the deficit to 4 points. Then they hit another drought that lasted 7:06, and this one was decisive, with the Nets opening a double-digit lead.
''We just stopped making shots,'' Iverson said. ''We couldn't catch a rhythm because of foul problems.''
The 76ers tried to intimidate the Nets with physical play, but the home team reaped the benefits, making 35 of 43 free throws while the 76ers sank 21 of 24. Glenn Robinson spent much of the game in foul trouble and moped on the end of the bench, refusing to join his teammates in the huddle.
Philadelphia had no one to match Kenyon Martin, who scored a game-high 29 points, made 11 of 12 free throws and traded barbs with a female fan wearing an Iverson jersey. With Jason Collins out with a sprained left big toe, Aaron Williams and Martin played center, and the Nets outrebounded the 76ers by 11.
''We've got guys who don't mind contact,'' Martin said. ''I'll dish it out. I don't mind.''
Kidd has nicknamed the Atlantic Division ''the black and blue division,'' but right now the Nets are handing out all the bruises. They are 13-2 against teams from the division, 7-0 against them at home, and they are narrowing their sights on Indiana and Detroit, which have the best records in the Eastern Conference. The Pistons visit Continental Arena on Tuesday.
Concerned that his team might look ahead, Frank said he had planned another compelling pregame speech. He stayed up until 4 a.m. Sunday reading a Sports Illustrated anthology for new material. In the end, though, he caught the players' attention by mentioning one little-known statistic: heading into Sunday, the Nets had lost six of their last seven games against Philadelphia when Iverson was healthy and playing.
To compensate, they threw different defenders at him, different looks and, in the final quarter, their best player. Rewarding his team, Frank canceled practice Monday.
He is trying to steady the Nets for two more games. If they win both, the Nets will take a 10-game winning streak into the All-Star Game break. There, they can look back on a first half that included the end of Alonzo Mourning's comeback, the sale of the team and the firing of the coach.
Emerging from the chaos was the youngest head coach in professional sports. Frank is 33 years old and measures 5 feet 8 inches, but in a game of 7-footers, he might be making the biggest difference of all.
PRO BASKETBALL
