Following are excerpts from statements by two Democratic candidates for president, Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts and Howard Dean, the former governor of Vermont, about President Bush's appearance yesterday on NBC's ''Meet the Press,'' as recorded by The New York Times and CNN.
MR. KERRY  On Iraq
President Bush said that his decision to go to war with Iraq when he did was because Saddam Hussein had ''the ability to make weapons.''
This is a far cry from what the president and his administration told the American people throughout 2002. Back then, President Bush repeatedly told the American people that Saddam Hussein ''has got chemical weapons.'' They told us they could deploy those weapons within 45 minutes to do injury to our troops. They told us they had aerial vehicles and the capacity to be able to deliver those weapons through the air. And it was on that basis that he sent American sons and daughters off to war. Now the president is giving us a new reason for sending people to war, and the problem is not just that he is changing his story now.
It is that he, it appears, that he was telling the American people stories in 2002. He told America that Iraq had chemical weapons two months after his own defense intelligence agency told him there was, quote, no reliable information on whether Iraq is producing and stockpiling chemical weapons. I once again call on the president to have a legitimate and immediate investigation into the extraordinary failure of intelligence, or to help explain to the American people whether there was politics involved in the development of that intelligence.
I respect the fact that the president has asked for a commission that will look at all of the intelligence agency. But that's not what Americans asked for. What Americans asked for and what we need is an explanation of what happened to our intelligence.
On President Bush's  Military Record
I have always honored, and I will always honor, anybody who serves anywhere. I've said since the day I came back from Vietnam, that it was not an issue to me if somebody chose to go to Canada, or to go to jail, or to be a conscientious objector, or to serve in the National Guard or elsewhere. I honor that service. But that's not the issue here. The issue here as I have heard it raised is, Was he present and active, on duty in Alabama, at the times he was supposed to be? I don't have the answer to that question. And just because you get an honorable discharge does not in fact answer that question.
DR. DEAN  On Iraq
This president has some peculiar thing going on about Saddam Hussein. There's no question that he's a terrible person. There's now no question at this point that he was never a threat to the United States nor an imminent threat to the United States. The president for whatever reason has not been truthful with the American people about why we went to war.
Whether he was deceived by his own intelligence or the vice president's office, or whether he knew that he wasn't being truthful to the American people, we don't know. If there were a Democratic Congress right now there would be a series of very serious inquiries along the matter.
On the Intelligence Inquiry
I think this commission needs to be a great deal more independent than it is. If you were investigating the fact that we went to war apparently on false information, it seems to me that you need an inquiry that is not appointed by the president of the United States no matter how good the people on it may be. They owe something to the president of the United States. They owe their appointment to the president of the United States. The president of the United States sent our troops to war.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN
