Having cleaned up the credit card business of Providian Financial, the next move for its chief executive, Joseph W. Saunders, may be to sell it.
The company, which is valued at $3.8 billion, is in merger talks with Barclays Bank, which bought Providian's British card operations two years ago, several people close to the situation said Sunday.
Discussions are preliminary, they emphasized, and a deal may not be reached. Still, discussions between Providian and Barclays, first reported on Saturday in The Financial Times, indicate the direction Mr. Saunders seems to be heading.
In its report, The Financial Times said that Providian executives first came to Britain in December and held talks with local financial institutions with large credit card portfolios.
Mr. Saunders, 57, was recruited to Providian, which is based in San Francisco, in November 2001, after Providian's losses from bad loans skyrocketed. Providian had misjudged the risks in its core business, giving credit to customers with a spotty history of paying back loans.
In the last two years, Mr. Saunders has sold major assets. In January 2002, the company sold $8.2 billion of its best performing accounts to J.P. Morgan Chase. A month later, Providian sold its British operations, which had 500,000 customers and £395 million ($730 million) in credit card receivables, to Barclays, Britain's biggest credit card lender.
Providian has changed its business model to focus on customers with better credit records, and is trying to entice them with new products. For example, this year it is introducing a credit card for Democrats; $1 for every $100 spent will go to the Democratic National Committee.
The company reported a $67.1 million profit for the fourth quarter of 2003, a fivefold increase from the year before. Providian's stock closed Friday at $13.14, up sharply from its November 2001 low of $2.01.
Mr. Saunders has made no secret that he thinks Providian suffers from the lack of a strong corporate parent to shore up its balance sheet. In March 2003, he told American Banker, a trade paper that covers the finance industry, that he would not rule out the possibility of a sale.
A spokesman for Barclays would not comment. A spokesman for Providian could not be reached on Sunday.
Any such deal would more than double Barclay's credit card customers to 19 million and give the London-based bank a United States retail presence that is part of the bank's long-term business plan.
It would also complete a hat trick of sorts for Mr. Saunders. Previously, at FleetBoston Financial and Household International, Mr. Saunders was responsible for fixing ailing credit card units.
Now may be a prime time for Providian to sell. Some analysts are doubtful that the company's stock will trade much higher than current levels, as competition is stiff for the customers that Providian seeks, and fees that companies can earn are shrinking.
Morgan Stanley downgraded Providian to underweight last week.
