Throughout this N.H.L. All-Star weekend, Mark Messier conducted himself as if he were a statesman on a final walk down the Washington Mall. No All-Star smiled more often or enjoyed himself more than the 43-year-old Messier, who seemed to treasure every moment of his 15th All-Star Game.
Messier brought one of his two sons and five nieces and nephews to the game, all of whom wore matching white-and-red Eastern Conference jerseys. They clustered around him on the bench during Saturday night's skills competition. And Sunday, after Messier scored a key goal in the Eastern Conference's 6-4 victory over the Western Conference, he turned toward their seats in the stands and flashed the puck.
''I was just holding it because one of the kids was going to get it,'' said Messier, the Rangers' captain.
Joe Sakic scored three goals for the Western Conference and was named the game's most valuable player, but Messier was as inspirational as anyone from the East.
Messier's goal, and an earlier assist, lifted him past Gordie Howe into third place in career All-Star scoring with 20 points, behind only his former Oilers teammate Wayne Gretzky (25) and Mario Lemieux (23). Messier's assist gave him an All-Star record of 14, breaking a tie with Ray Bourque.
Messier was chosen to the game more for his career achievements than for his recent performance, and rumors abounded this weekend that he had decided to retire after the season. Messier denied it Saturday night, and Sunday he was coy about whether this might have been his final All-Star appearance.
''I thought my last time was the last time,'' said Messier, whose last All-Star appearance was in 2000.
If this was Messier's unstated farewell, he left on an uplifting note. His introduction before the game brought a standing ovation, which Messier acknowledged with a raised stick. ''I didn't expect it,'' he said. ''It's nice to be recognized.''
Though the third-oldest All-Star in N.H.L. history -- only Gordie Howe, at 51, and Doug Harvey, at 44, were older -- Messier played with as much friskiness as anyone.
He kidded teammates on the bench that he scored in the last All-Star Game in Minnesota, in 1972. ''I told them I centered Howe and Hull,'' Messier said before laughing. In turn, his linemates, Jaromir Jagr and Robert Lang, told Messier that they would get him a goal.
''It's respect,'' Jagr said. ''He's one of the best. If I played with Gretzky, I would do the same thing.''
But it was Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer, not Jagr, who fed Messier when he scored. Niedermayer, with his back to the goal, took a pass from the Capitals' Lang in the left circle and backhanded the puck to Messier near the right post. Messier beat Nashville goalie Tomas Vokoun, leaned back, pumped his right arm and smiled.
''I was really lucky,'' he said.
In one sense, so were his teammates. Many, sensing that this might be Messier's final appearance, approached him for autographs and posed with him for photos. Devils goalie Martin Brodeur had his picture taken with Messier and applauded the N.H.L. for adding him to the roster. ''It's awesome,'' Brodeur said. ''He's well deserving for being here. Messier has had a tremendous career.
''I think everybody really appreciated he was around. And he was really around. He didn't just come in at the last minute. He really appreciated his time in Minnesota.''
Messier does not deny that his career is winding down. ''That's why I think I probably enjoyed it,'' he said. ''I enjoyed being around and savored yesterday and today maybe more than I should have. We'll wait and see what tomorrow brings.''
But Messier was not finished savoring. He lingered in the Eastern Conference dressing room and signed autographs while equipment men loaded duffel bags onto trailers. In the corridor outside the room, he signed more autographs and chatted with anyone who approached him.
Finally, he looked back into the room and waved to the trainers and workers who remained. ''Take care, guys,'' he said loudly.
SLAP SHOTS
The N.H.L. dedicated the game to Herb Brooks, the St. Paul native who coached the 1980 United States Olympic team to the gold medal. The actor KURT RUSSELL, who portrays Brooks in the film ''Miracle,'' narrated a pregame video tribute.
WAYNE GRETZKY, GORDIE HOWE, BOBBY HULL, BOBBY ORR, RAY BOURQUE and PATRICK ROY were selected N.H.L. Legendary All-Stars in a vote of fans. Players with seven or more All-Star selections were eligible.
--------------------
Goring Rejoins Islanders
(By The New York Times), UNIONDALE, N.Y., Feb. 8 -- The Islanders hired Butch Goring, their former head coach, as an assistant to Coach Steve Stirling on Sunday. He will observe games from the press box and make suggestions. He won four Stanley Cups as an Islanders player and was 41-89-14-4 as coach before his firing in March 2001.
HOCKEY
