In the first of what is likely to be a series of player purges, the Jets yesterday said goodbye to two starters: guard Dave Szott, who retired, and cornerback Aaron Beasley, who was released.
With the start of free agency looming next week, the Jets are expected to shed their longtime linebacker Mo Lewis and could also cut a fourth starter, linebacker Marvin Jones.
Newsday reported yesterday that the Jets, who finished 6-10, were also giving serious consideration to trading John Abraham, the two-time Pro Bowl player who amassed a total of 26 sacks in the 2001 and 2002 seasons. Abraham, a defensive end, played only seven games last season before going out with a groin muscle injury.
A person with knowledge of the Jets' boardroom discussions yesterday said that Abraham's name came up in trade talks that the team conducted internally, ''but he was never offered.''
Abraham's agent, Tony Agnone, also threw cold water on the prospect of a trade. ''I don't know anything about it,'' he said, ''and no one I talked to on the Jets knows anything about it.''
Abraham has been mentioned as a central part of the Jets' realigned defense under its recently hired coordinator, Donnie Henderson. Coach Herman Edwards has envisioned shifting Abraham from defensive end to pass-rushing linebacker -- a move that could permit him to avoid the injuries that have marked his career since he was a first-round draft pick in 2000, because he would not be taking on heftier offensive linemen on every play.
Meanwhile, the Jets picked up a quarterback in the wake of Vinny Testaverde's announcement that he would not attend the team's off-season conditioning program; he remained undecided about his future. Ricky Ray, whom the Jets signed yesterday, led the Edmonton Eskimos to the Canadian Football League's championship last season. Ray, 24, who played at Sacramento State, has never played in the National Football League. He will play behind Chad Pennington and most likely compete with Brooks Bollinger for the No. 2 job.
Szott was a two-year starter at left guard, rounding out a 14-year career. He spent much of his time traveling between the Jets' complex and his home in Morristown, N.J., to help care for a son, Shawn, who has cerebral palsy. When he joined the Jets, he said he turned down more money from other clubs so he could make the trips home after practice at the Jets' facility in Hempstead, N.Y.
Beasley started all but one game in his two Jets seasons. He was with the Jacksonville Jaguars in his first six years in the N.F.L.
PRO FOOTBALL
