Their blue jerseys were untucked and drenched with sweat. The Knicks wore an intense stare, one that flashed their determination and masked their anxiety.
Stephon Marbury played 45 minutes, driving the lane and pulling up for open jumpers all night. But with 30 seconds left in a frantic contest against the Clippers, Marbury nearly lost the ball out of bounds, scrambled to get it back and launched a jumper near the end of the shot clock that hit nothing but air.
There were 28.9 seconds remaining and the Knicks held a 94-93 lead. The Clippers rebounded the ball and Bobby Simmons connected on a 19-foot jumper from the right corner with 21.3 seconds left, putting the home team ahead, 95-93.
Quentin Richardson made only one of two free throws with 1.1 seconds to play, giving the Knicks a faint chance. Kurt Thomas, who clanged a 14-foot jumper with 4.9 seconds left, shot an air ball with .6 seconds remaining.
When it counted most, and with a one-point lead, the Knicks missed their last three shots as the Clippers clawed their way to a 96-94 victory.
The Knicks (26-34) have lost three straight on this four-game road trip, five in a row over all and seven of their last eight. They will conclude the trip Sunday night at Denver.
Marbury led the Knicks with 28 points on 9-of-19 shooting, with 9 assists. Tim Thomas scored 22 points and sank two free throws with 1 minute 13 seconds to play that gave the Knicks a 94-92 lead. Chris Wilcox was on the line to tie the game, but missed the first of two free throws, cutting the lead to 94-93.
Penny Hardaway's two free throws had tied the game at 92-92 with 3:56 to play. They missed three shots on three consecutive possessions and turned the ball over once. But the Clippers could not capitalize in that time.
Dikembe Mutombo, who had two key blocks playing just 13 minutes, tied the game for the first time since the first quarter when he tipped in Marbury's missed jumper. Mike Sweetney scored on a driving layup to cap an 8-0 run, putting the Knicks ahead, 85-83.
Coach Lenny Wilkens put an unconventional lineup on the floor to begin the fourth quarter, with the rookie Sweetney, his fellow Georgetown Hoya, Mutombo, at center and DerMarr Johnson and Hardaway complementing Marbury.
Elton Brand gave the Clippers an 11-point lead -- the largest of the game -- on his 3-point play with 6 minutes 32 seconds to play in the third quarter.
The Knicks had allowed an average of 101 points in their previous four losses.
Mutombo, the 7-foot-2 center who had only played a combined 20 minutes in the first two games, entered the game with 6:19 remaining in the third quarter because Kurt Thomas was in foul trouble.
Marbury scored 15 points in the first half, 8 from free throws, while adding 7 assists, but the Knicks trailed by 62-55.
''I just haven't been shooting well,'' Marbury said before the game. ''But I'm not worrying about that, I had 13 assists, so other guys played well.''
With Knicks losses mounting, Marbury's face has become a frustrated scowl. He understood that when the team was winning five consecutive games two weeks ago, he was perceived as a great leader.
''When you're losing, you need to lead,'' he said.
Marbury has had more pressure with Houston out of the lineup, saying he finds less room, especially without another scoring threat to spread the floor. He was relieved to learn before the game that Tim Thomas would play despite a hyperextended right elbow he sustained in Wednesday's loss against the Phoenix Suns.
''I know how much the team needs me right now,'' Thomas said.
Thomas scored 15 points in the first half, and although he shot 4 for 11, he provided the Knicks with a highlight clip. He stormed through the lane, grabbed a pass from Marbury, took two giant steps and slammed down a dunk with his right arm, ailing elbow and all.
The game was an offensive explosion in the first half, and the Knicks followed form by showing a glaring defensive deficiency. They allowed the Clippers to score 62 points and shoot 46.5 percent.
Othella Harrington started at power forward while Kurt Thomas, who started at center, picked up two quick fouls in the first 90 seconds of the game. Nazr Mohammed, who had started the previous two games, came in for him and had an immediate impact, grabbing 11 rebounds in the half.
The last time the teams met -- a Feb. 8 victory for the Knicks -- the Clippers made 42 of 46 foul shots and the Knicks went to the line only 23 times the entire game.
The Knicks went to the line 23 times in the first half alone, converting 22. But defense was -- and still seems to be -- the part of the Knicks' game that needs the most improvement.
REBOUNDS
ALLAN HOUSTON missed his 13th consecutive game but said that he will practice Saturday in Denver and hoped to play Sunday against the Nuggets. ''If it responds well, hopefully I'll be ready to play,'' he said. ''If I don't play Sunday, then I'll definitely be back Wednesday. Now I'm feeling to the point where I don't feel hesitant.'' . . . KURT THOMAS said that contract extension discussions that his agent, JERRY HICKS, has had with the Knicks are going well. As a free agent when he plans to opt out of the remaining year on his contract this summer, he could be able to command more than the collective bargaining agreement allows him to make now on a four-year extension -- worth about $30 million. ''If they're willing to talk, we definitely should listen and see what's going on,'' Thomas said. ''My main focus is to take care of my family.''
PRO BASKETBALL
