Shacun Malave, the center for the New York City College of Technology, plays for El Salvador's national team, was voted CUNY's most valuable player in the regular season and has very soft hands.
But he was no match for the teamwork of Lehman College in the final of the CUNY athletic conference tournament last night at York College. As Malave tired, Lehman seemed to pick up energy and earned a 75-69 victory, clinching its first trip to the N.C.A.A. Division III tournament.
''We don't have a go-to player,'' Lehman Coach Steve Schulman said. ''We have a go-to team.''
Malave scored his points -- 21 to tie for the game high with Lehman's Miguel Jorge -- but went nearly 10 minutes without a point in the second half. Lehman denied him the ball, increased the tempo and erupted for a 17-2 blitz to take a 55-36 lead with 13 minutes 42 seconds to go.
The Hunter College women earned their third straight trip to the N.C.A.A. tourney, defeating College of Staten Island, 58-56. The game was decided on a running basket by Jen Agosto in the final seconds.
City Tech (16-11), in its first season as an official member of the N.C.A.A., did not go quietly. Roger Redhead made three consecutive 3-pointers to spark a 15-3 run, trimming the lead to 65-64 with 5:29 left, but Tech was unable to score in the final 1:38.
Lehman (22-6) is likely to open the Division III tournament Wednesday on the road. Seedings will be announced tomorrow. A CUNY men's team has not won a tournament game since 1998, when Hunter advanced to the final eight.
Lehman has had four winning seasons under Schulman; its second victory of the season over City Tech gave it a team-record 22 victories.
The Hunter women (18-10) outscored Staten Island (21-6) by 14-1 to tie the game at 56-56 with eight seconds left. After a turnover, Hunter called a timeout to set up an out-of-bounds play. Agosto took a pass, dribbled twice and launched a short runner from the free-throw line that banked in.
Agosto, a senior forward, said she was trying to draw the foul from Tamara Taylor. ''I threw the ball up hoping it would go in,'' said Agosto, who scored 25 points and was named the tournament's most valuable player.
Hunter center Tania Blanco had 13 points and 22 rebounds.
The Staten Island junior forward Jacclyn Rock, the league's most valuable player, had 14 points and 17 rebounds as Staten Island lost to Hunter in the closing seconds of the final for the second straight season.
Hunter has won five league titles in 11 years under Coach Jackee Meadow but will be trying to capture the conference's first victory in the Division III women's tournament, which begins Wednesday. ''We've been working all year, gearing up for that,'' Meadow said.
COLLEGE BASKETBALL: CUNY TOURNAMENT
