The Republican chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee said Friday that the panel had not reached agreement on any specific plan to compel the release of documents from any source as part of its inquiry into prewar intelligence on Iraq.
The chairman, Senator Pat Roberts of Kansas, disputed as inaccurate a report in The New York Times that the panel voted Thursday in closed session to move toward a possible subpoena unless the Bush administration produced certain documents within three weeks. Mr. Roberts and Democratic Congressional officials said Friday that there had been no vote on the issue and no agreement to any specific timetable during Thursday's meeting.
Senior Congressional officials who provided the initial account said Friday that they had misspoken. Senior Congressional officials said Friday that there had been only general discussion of a plan to compel the release of the documents by the White House and federal agencies.
A senior member of the committee's staff phoned The Times late Thursday to dispute the account, but his comments were not included in the article. [Editors' note, Page A2.]
In a statement on Friday Mr. Roberts said, ''The committee does, however, possess and will exercise its authority when necessary to compel testimony or the production of documents.''
Citing committee rules that forbid discussion of closed-door proceedings, neither Mr. Roberts nor other Congressional officials would discuss the specifics of Thursday's session. In his statement, Mr. Roberts also denounced what he called ''the irresponsible leak of information which appeared to have produced the inaccurate New York Times report.''
''This was a clear violation of the committee's rules,'' he said. ''Unauthorized disclosures undermine the integrity of the committee and display nothing but contempt for its rules. More importantly, such leaks make the American people lose confidence in our ability to conduct their business professionally and in a nonpartisan manner.''
The article quoted Senator John D. Rockefeller IV of West Virginia, the top Democrat on the panel, as saying that the committee was prepared to resort to ''other means,'' which he said could only mean a subpoena, if the Bush administration did not end its refusal to provide the documents. The article said that Senator Rockefeller had declined to discuss the committee's deliberations in detail.
In his statement, Mr. Roberts said the committee's senior staff member who phoned The Times on Thursday night in response to a request for comment from the chairman had explained that he ''could not comment on the details of an executive session of the committee, even though, apparently, someone else already had, albeit inaccurately.''
A spokeswoman for Mr. Rockefeller, Wendy Morigi, said Friday that the senator ''fully endorsed Senator Roberts' statement that correctly described the facts related to Thursday's meeting.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: INTELLIGENCE
