A Waterbury man already charged with falsely reporting the death of his wife, an Army reservist serving in Iraq, has been arrested again and charged with the sexual assault of a 14-year-old girl.
The man, Edward Valentin, 43, landed back in jail on Thursday, facing two charges of sexual assault, and one of risk of injury to a minor.
The suspect's lawyer confirmed that the police in Waterbury said the suspect raped a 14-year-old while she and her mother were staying at the Valentins' home in February 2003. The arrest was first reported in The Republican-American of Waterbury.
Mr. Valentin's wife, Betsy, a sergeant in the Army Reserve who served in Iraq for the past year, filed for divorce on Monday after she learned of the initial charges against her husband.
On Feb. 11, he reported to the police that he had received an ''official-sounding call'' alerting him that his wife had been killed in Iraq. But Sergeant Valentin was still alive, the police learned the next day. Mr. Valentin had made up the story about the call, possibly to woo another woman who had told him she would not date a married man, the police said.
He was charged with two counts of phone harassment, and one count each of falsely reporting an incident involving a death and making a false statement. The false reporting charge, a felony, carries up to five years in prison. Mr. Valentin told the police he had invented the story because he thought it would persuade the Army to send his wife home early. He got his wish, but it was not the happy reunion he had hoped for.
Leonard M. Crone, Mr. Valentin's lawyer, said he thinks the publicity around the death hoax may have prompted the sexual assault charges. ''As far as the evidence goes, this is someone who a year after the incident happened has come forward to say this happened,'' he said. ''There is no physical evidence, no witnesses, and Mr. Valentin doesn't have a history of doing this.''
Sergeant Valentin came home last week on leave and filed for divorce, seeking custody of her three children as well as child support and alimony.
Mr. Valentin was arraigned yesterday in Waterbury Superior Court and is being held in bail of $150,000.
