The United States, North Korea and four other nations were due to issue a statement Saturday pledging to work for a nuclear-free Korean peninsula, but they left almost all major disputes about the North's nuclear program unresolved, officials and news reports said.
In a joint statement that China, the host of the six-nation talks, was scrambling to finalize Saturday afternoon, the participants also agreed to meet again by June and to establish working groups that would tackle some of the most contentious issues about nuclear disarmament before then, according to Bush administration officials.
But a closing ceremony was delayed by at least an hour following indications that North Korea objected to some of the wording in the final communiqué at the last minute, raising questions about whether the parties would have anything to show for their four days of talks.
The statement, if issued as drafted, would be the first written commitment by the United States and North Korea to resolve the crisis that broke out 16 months ago, shortly after the Bush administration accused the North of breaking an earlier accord. It represents the fruits of intensive diplomacy by China, which had been pushing the parties to declare a common goal despite some stark differences in their negotiating positions.
Still, after three such sessions of talks between the United States and North Korea -- and two that also included China, Russia, South Korea and Japan -- the parties have only begun to debate detailed terms for ending the North's nuclear program.
While diplomats are likely to hail Saturday's agreement as at least a modest advance, it merely delays negotiations on the most delicate issues and potentially gives North Korea time to continue to develop nuclear weapons, experts say.
A senior Bush administration official signaled that the United States intended to treat the latest talks as a step in the right direction, even though they ended without addressing the main American concerns. ''We think we have the basis for the kind of talks we need,'' the official.
Although the joint statement did not use the words the United States had been insisting are its bottom line -- the complete, verifiable, irreversible dismantlement of North Korea nuclear program -- this official said it remained high on the agenda.
''It is understood by all that in the follow-up process we will take up complete, irreversible, verifiable denuclearization,'' the official said.
Although the talks began Wednesday with hints of a new flexibility on all sides, the United States and North Korea remained far apart on several crucial questions, participants said. They included whether North Korea is using enriched uranium as well as plutonium for bomb fuel, whether it must discontinue both military and civilian nuclear programs, and whether it must agree to dismantle completely its nuclear program before receiving aid.
Over all, the talks were described as more substantive than previous rounds. North Korea put forward a plan to freeze its weapons program in return for economic benefits. South Korea offered to provide energy aid to its northern neighbor after a nuclear freeze. provided that the freeze was a first step toward full elimination of the nuclear program.
Diplomats said all parties had greeted North Korea's offer to stop its nuclear program as a positive development. China and Russia offered to join South Korea in providing energy aid if North Korea froze its weapons program, though the United States and Japan said they would not offer aid at that stage.
But the discussions bogged down when North Korea made a new distinction between its civilian and military nuclear programs, and insisted that it would continue to develop nuclear technology for peaceful purposes, like generating electricity. Experts say the country does not now have a civilian nuclear program to produce electricity.
North Korea has also continued to deny that it has made efforts to produce fissile material for nuclear bombs by uranium enrichment in addition to its larger and better known facility for extracting plutonium from spent nuclear fuel rods.
The United States says it has solid intelligence that North Korea pursued this second channel for developing atomic weapons, a claim that was bolstered by the recent confession by a Pakistani nuclear scientist who said he had provided such technology to North Korea.
Bush administration officials took a tough stance in the talks, demanding that any statement of common goals include a reference to the ''complete, verifiable, irreversible dismantlement'' of all nuclear programs undertaken by the North.
