The International Space Station suffers from some of the same shortcomings that plagued the space shuttle program and needs to make improvements, a NASA review released on Friday has found.
As with the shuttle program, the report said, the space station's managers have failed to maintain a complete set of diagrams and blueprints of all systems as they exist now in space. Some of the computer database for the material is outdated, and other critical information has not been entered. The data are crucial to quick resolution of safety problems that may arise in flight, the report said.
The 172-page internal report was drafted to apply lessons learned from the Columbia shuttle disaster to other space agency projects. The Columbia Accident Investigation Board, in examining the loss of the shuttle and its crew of seven last year, noted that the shuttle program had done a poor job of tracking and analyzing safety problems. The same holds true for the space station program, the new report said.
The space station is run jointly by NASA and the Russian space agency. With the American shuttle fleet grounded since the Columbia disaster, it has been occupied by just two astronauts instead of the usual three, and efforts to expand it and to carry out some of its scientific projects have been curtailed.
In response to Friday's report, NASA managers noted that there had been no major breakdowns on the station and said they were moving aggressively to improve operations in light of the Columbia board's recommendations. For example, they said, the agency has taken steps to reduce sources of space debris that might strike the station.
NASA also said it had expanded an agreement with United States intelligence agencies to use spy satellites and other means to examine the station for damage.
To keep better tabs on the condition of the station, NASA said, it will install extra cameras on future sections as the outpost is expanded, and plans for astronauts to photograph it more intensively on coming spacewalks. Existing cameras outside the station have some blind spots.
NASA officials also said Friday that they were pleased with the spacewalk from the station the day before, even though it was called off early. The American commander, C. Michael Foale, and the Russian flight engineer, Aleksandr Y. Kaleri, were more than halfway through a five-and-a-half-hour excursion when Mr. Kaleri's spacesuit malfunctioned. A bent cooling line caused the suit to overheat and moisture to build up inside, ending the first two-person spacewalk from the station.
Michael Suffredini, NASA's operations manager for the station, told a telephone news conference that the exercise showed that spacewalks could be made from the station while it was left unattended. Some NASA officials had expressed misgivings about the safety of such walks.
Agency officials said Thursday's spacewalk provided valuable experience in case the astronauts needed to make an emergency excursion to fix a problem. In addition, more spacewalks are possible for future two-member crews. The next crew to go aboard the station, in April, has two spacewalks on its schedule, to prepare the outpost for future operations.
