The Suffolk County Executive, Steve Levy, halted the county's practice of seizing cars driven by accused drunken drivers yesterday, one day after a State Supreme Court justice declared the county's seizure law unconstitutional.
The ruling came in the case of a man whose sister had taken his 1999 Honda without permission and was arrested, for the third time, on charges of driving drunk. The police seized the car and Suffolk County prepared to auction it off, as it typically did with property deemed to be the ''instrument of a crime.''
For six months, the man, Luis Baird, and his father, Rollyn Baird, the co-signer on his car loan and the car's co-owner, fought to get it back. While his son continued to make the car and insurance payments, the elder Mr. Baird gave him a used car and hired a lawyer.
A few months before his car was seized, Mr. Baird had lost everything he owned in a house fire that also killed his girlfriend's grandfather. He moved back in with his parents in Lindenhurst, and soon after was laid off from his job at U.S. Airways. The first bit of good news that Mr. Baird, now 26, had gotten in a long time came yesterday when the judge ordered his Honda returned.
''My son just kept saying, 'I don't understand. It's not her car,''' Rollyn Baird said of his sister. ''They put my family through hell, but especially my son.'' When the County Legislature adopted the law in 1999, Mr. Levy was a legislator. A lawyer, he argued that it was unconstitutional and voted against it.
Earlier this week, Acting Justice Edward D. Burke Sr. of State Supreme Court in Riverhead, reached the same conclusion. Justice Burke ruled that the seizure law was defective in large part because police officers, rather than some neutral person, were presiding over post-seizure hearings and deciding whether there had been probable cause for an arrest and seizure. He also ruled that the loss of one's vehicle was unduly harsh in cases like the Bairds', in which the owner is not accused of a crime.
''The county executive feels vindicated that his opposition to the original wording of the law has proven to be prophetic,'' said Ed Dumas, Mr. Levy's communications director.
Mr. Dumas said the county would evaluate whether seizing cars used by drunken drivers and the resulting revenue were worth revising the law or removing it from the books altogether. No decision had been made on whether to appeal Justice Burke's decision, but he said Mr. Baird's car would be returned if the county does not appeal.
Mr. Dumas said county attorneys would review the decision to determine whether it could affect owners of cars that have been seized but not yet auctioned off.
The county executive's office was unable to say how many cars had been seized since the law was enacted or how many were owned by someone other than the arrested driver or by a leasing company.
Unlike Nassau's law, which the State Court of Appeals declared unconstitutional last November on different grounds, Suffolk's permitted a seizure only after a subsequent drinking-and-driving arrest. Nassau seized cars after a first arrest.
According to court records, Luis Baird tried to report his car stolen about 7 a.m. on May 11, but the police declined to take a report, saying his sister, Rebecca Baird-Fusco, was under arrest. The next month, a police captain presided over the family's post-seizure hearing at Suffolk police headquarters in Yaphank, where Mr. Baird admitted leaving his car keys out in the open knowing his sister had twice before been arrested on drinking-and-driving offenses.
The law required a car owner to prove at the hearing that he or she did not consent to the use of the car or did not know it had been taken, which the hearing officer ruled Mr. Baird had failed to do. But Justice Burke's decision said officers could be biased when deciding whether another officer had probable cause and noted their employer, the county, has a financial interest in the auctioning of the cars.
