Devils Coach Pat Burns was presented with a guitar and a painting to commemorate his 1,000th N.H.L. game Friday. He soon wiped off his smile and began grumbling at the officials.
Burns did not appear to enjoy his 1,000th game any more than the first 999. Although Atlanta was playing without its leading scorer -- left wing Ilya Kovalchuk was a healthy scratch -- the Devils scuffled the entire game and lost to the Thrashers, 3-2.
''Once the game starts, it's the game that's the main thing,'' Burns said. ''Right now, I'm disappointed we lost.''
Atlanta right wing Dany Heatley tipped in a shot by defenseman Andy Sutton on a power play with 5 minutes 48 seconds left in regulation to beat the Devils (33-18-11-1).
''The puck was not going anywhere close to the net, and he just brought it back with one hand,'' said Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur, who had 20 saves.
The Devils had won three games in a row. By losing to Atlanta (25-32-6-2), the Devils missed a chance to gain ground on the Philadelphia Flyers, the Atlantic Division leaders. The Devils trail the Flyers (33-15-12-5) by 5 points.
The Devils, who open a five-game trip Saturday in Toronto, never seemed to get up to speed against the aggressive Thrashers. Devils center Scott Gomez landed in the Atlanta bench after one scrap and was roughed up some more.
The line of Gomez, left wing Patrik Elias and right wing Brian Gionta accounted for the Devils' goals. Gionta scored off a pass from Elias 8:20 into the second period, and Elias scored off a pass from Gomez 1:44 later. The line has 13 goals and 17 assists in the last four games.
But Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer dragged down center Derek McKenzie with a high stick at 13:02 of the third period, and the Thrashers scored on the power play to break a 2-2 tie.
It is not every day that the Devils' opponent scratches its top scorer. Kovalchuk, tied with Columbus's Rick Nash for the league lead with 33 goals, missed a team meeting Friday and was held out of the lineup by Coach Bob Hartley.
The Thrashers took the lead less than two minutes after a four-minute high-sticking penalty on Serge Aubin expired. McKenzie prevented Brodeur from catching the puck, leading to defenseman Garnet Exelby's goal at 7:50, his first in the N.H.L.
Goals were scored on the next three shots. Gionta was plastered into the boards by Exelby after the face-off, but he scored his 18th goal after Elias stole the puck from Exelby and passed to Gionta in front of the net.
Atlanta took the lead 80 seconds later, when center Patrik Stefan scored off a pass from Heatley on a two-on-one breakaway. But Elias tied the score 24 seconds later with his 28th goal, matching his total from last season.
Devils right wing Grant Marshall, who had a skirmish earlier with Sutton, fell on Thrashers center Ben Simon and pinned him to the ice. Marshall received a two-minute roughing penalty and a five-minute major. But the Thrashers frittered away the power play, collecting three minor penalties. They did not fritter away the penalty on Niedermayer in the third period.
''We played catch-up hockey,'' Burns said. ''We went down twice. We came back twice. I think the penalties hurt us.''
HOCKEY
