New diagnostic tests and better information programs are urgently needed to improve the control of a number of infectious diseases that affect women and newborns, a top federal health official said here on Friday.
Sexually transmitted diseases and certain other common infections affect women disproportionately, compared with men, and can be dangerous, particularly in pregnancy, said the official, Dr. Julie L. Gerberding. Dr. Gerberding is director of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention here.
Cultural, economic and social factors also have a critical role in the disparities between men and women. Women often serve as the brokers for their families' health care ''but are last in line to address their own health problems for lack of time,'' Dr. Gerberding said at the opening of a two-day international meeting on women and infectious diseases.
A lack of scientific knowledge and the failure to apply what is known also increases the burden of such illnesses on women, she said.
The centers, the World Health Organization and the American Society for Microbiology are sponsoring the meeting to renew efforts to decrease infection death rates among women and newborns.
''Women disproportionately suffer the burden of poverty, are the victims of widespread and persistent discrimination in all areas of life and put their lives at risk every time they become pregnant,'' Dr. Gerberding said.
She added that although the problem of women and infection was more complicated than gender alone, it offered ''some unique aspects.''
One is that certain diseases can cause more serious illness and lead to more severe complications among pregnant women. Another is that women are at least four times more vulnerable to infection from H.I.V. and other sexually transmitted diseases.
For example, 60 percent to 70 percent of the women who are infected with gonorrhea or chlamydia may be unaware of it. Delayed diagnosis and treatment can lead to chronic pain, stillbirth, infertility and even death.
''Nearly every sexually transmitted pathogen can also be passed on to the fetus or infant, sometimes with fatal consequences,'' Dr. Gerberding said.
The most notorious example is H.I.V., the AIDS virus, which has created millions of orphans in Africa.
Dr. Paul DeLay, an official of United Nations AIDS, said information from 2002, the latest available, showed that women accounted for 58 percent of H.I.V. infections in sub-Saharan Africa.
New H.I.V. infections are also increasing among women in the United States. In 2001 in New York City, 35 percent of new H.I.V. diagnoses were in women, compared with 28 percent before 2001.
In Africa, H.I.V. infection rates among teenage girls are 5 to 16 times higher than among teenage boys, and women in their early 20's are infected at three times the rate of male teenagers.
Hepatitis E, a viral liver disease, is another potentially fatal infection, particularly in the third trimester of pregnancy. Hepatitis E can cause miscarriages, stillbirths and serious illness among newborns. The infection is spread through fecal contamination of water. There is no vaccination to prevent hepatitis E and no specific therapy after it develops.
Though hepatitis E is considered rare in the United States, some studies suggest that the virus has infected 5 percent of Americans. Hepatitis E is common in Mexico and some African and Asian nations, and many countries have had large outbreaks.
Dr. Gerberding pointed to successes in reducing illness and deaths from two common infections among women.
She said immunization against the hepatitis B virus at birth prevented one death for every 15 infants born to mothers infected with the virus.
Participants at the meeting said routine testing of pregnant women for streptococcal B bacteria prevented an estimated 4,500 cases last year in the United States. But the participants said further prevention efforts were needed, because the infection remained a leading cause of maternal and newborn illness and death. There were 1,570 cases and 110 deaths from group B streptococci in 2002.
Last fall, scientists reported the discovery in Tanzania of a new species of a spiral-shape bacteria that can be spread by household ticks and that causes relapsing fever. The disease is common in Tanzania, where it causes serious illness among children and pregnant women.
The world's two most common parasitic infections, malaria and schistosomiasis, also affect women disproportionately, Dr. Gerberding said.
In pregnant women, malaria causes more severe complications like brain infection than in women who are not pregnant. Schistosomiasis is common among women who wash laundry in shallow water where the parasite thrives.
