With only a few days to go, and without spending much time or money in New York before the primary on Tuesday, Senators John Kerry and John Edwards have largely left their fates up to momentum, and to small cadres of backers with long careers working New York politics.
Mr. Kerry has relied on a party insider, Dennis Mehiel, and an experienced event organizer, Paul Rivera, to produce a few well-choreographed events and a long list of endorsements.
Mr. Edwards has relied on a popular city councilman, Bill de Blasio, and an experienced political operative, Terence D. Tolbert, who bring together an ethnically diverse group of volunteers who show the kind of verve that Howard Dean's young supporters once showed.
They are running slightly different campaigns, with Mr. Kerry's team emphasizing endorsements and traditional party support and Mr. Edwards's campaign geared to the grassroots, particularly minorities and union members.
With 236 delegates at stake, the battle is a crucial one, but neither candidate has tailored his message to New York. Both have only broadcast commercials upstate, saying television time in the city is too expensive. Mr. Edwards has published a brochure that mentions New York. Both have mostly sent representatives to make campaign appearances on their behalf, though they are scheduled to return to New York at least once before voting begins.
But that is about it.
''They are both sticking with their poll-tested national message, and it doesn't have enough of a New York flavor yet,'' said Dan Cantor, executive director of the Working Families Party, one of the few influential groups that has not yet endorse either candidate. But for the moment, at least, the candidates' local staff members say there are no plans for major changes.
Mr. Kerry has relied largely on Mr. Mehiel, a multimillionaire businessman who serves as his state chairman. After making a fortune manufacturing corrugated cardboard packing materials, Mr. Mehiel has run for office many times, hoping to vault into Congress or the lieutenant governor's office. But he has never won a race. Instead, he has transformed himself into a party insider, though he has never really become the political player he had hoped to become. In the high-tempo political arena of New York City, he is instead viewed as a nice, helpful, party guy, political strategists said.
Mr. Kerry's New York campaign manager is Mr. Rivera, whose experience is in the nuts and bolts of running a campaign. He helped organize events as an advance man for President Clinton and Hillary Rodham Clinton when she was the first lady..
Mr. Rivera refuses to discuss his work with the campaign. He says he is too busy and it is not his job to talk to the press.
Mr. Mehiel's connections and Mr. Rivera's hands-on experience aided by Mr. Kerry's front-runner status, have helped Mr. Kerry collect nine pages of official endorsements.. .
''People say endorsements don't matter,'' Mr. Mehiel said. ''Wrong!''
He said endorsers serve as ''validators'' whose support offers ''subliminal'' persuasion to voters.
''On some intuitive level, they feel the validators,'' Mr. Mehiel said, poking his fingers at his temples.
Mr. Edwards has as his campaign co-chairman Councilman de Blasio, who served as Mrs. Clinton's campaign manager in her successful run for Senate. In manner and style, he is Clintonesque, with a ready smile, quick handshake and the reputation of getting along with people on the left, the right and in the center of his party. If he has alienated anyone, colleagues say, it has been because of his ambition to move up in the political food chain. He is considered a candidate to replace City Council Speaker Gifford Miller and had begun jockeying for that position.
Mr. de Blasio's role in the campaign raised some eyebrows when it was reported this week in The New York Observer that he is also a paid consultant to Mr. Edwards, an unusual role for an elected official. But Mr. de Blasio said that he had a career as a political strategist before being elected to office, and that the contract with Mr. Edwards was approved by the city's Conflict of Interest Board.
Terence Tolbert, Mr. Edwards' New York campaign manager, is a lifelong resident of Harlem who has taken leave from his position as chief of staff to Assemblyman Keith L. Wright (who is backing Mr. Kerry). An experienced political operative, Mr. Tolbert moves in and out of government posts, having served in 2000 as Vice President Al Gore's state director in Louisiana and as field director for H. Carl McCall's failed bid for governor of New York.
Together, Mr. de Blasio and Mr. Tolbert have tried to amplify Mr. Edwards' populist message, driving a campaign that has virtually no money, no paid staff (except Mr. de Blasio), but a group of volunteers hoping to counter the conventional wisdom that says Mr. Kerry will run away with the race.
If they fail to overcome that perception, and if as a result voter turnout is low, Mr. Kerry will benefit because he has the institutional party support, political strategists say.
The campaign offices could not be more different.
Mr. Kerry's New York operation is on Park Avenue South, in the office complex from which Mr. Mehiel runs the Sweetheart Cup Company. The company and its 600 employees produce disposable food-service products like paper plates and plastic forks in a factory in Baltimore. Mr. Mehiel rented the front end of the office to the Kerry campaign, and Mr. Rivera and Mr. Kerry's sister, Peggy Kerry, were in a corner office there recently working the phones.
Mr. Mehiel said that many of the people in the room were sent to New York from Mr. Kerry's New Hampshire operation. They were young, almost all of them were white.
Mr. Edwards' shop is on Seventh Avenue, in offices that belong to Unite, the Union of Needletrades, Industrial and Textile Employees. Volunteers from all over New York City study maps of voters, work the phones, try to set up events around the state. The room was filled with black, Asian, Latino and white volunteers.
Mr. Tolbert is a political pragmatist, and he is not counting on victory. He just wants to do well. But he also says he does not believe the polls, which show Mr. Kerry winning decisively (Mr. Mehiel says he also does not believe the polls). Both Mr. Tolbert and Mr. Mehiel said that they had paid particular attention to black voters, though they have taken different approaches.
Mr. Mehiel said that he had gone to black ministers, hoping they would use their influence to draw votes to Mr. Edwards.
Mr. Tolbert went to his neighbors. ''My wish,' Mr. Tolbert said, ''is for every African-American to receive a call from someone who knows them.''
