Cal Ripken Jr. spoke about how Alex Rodriguez would make a smooth transition to third base with the Yankees. But Ripken, who made the same switch from shortstop with the Baltimore Orioles in 1997, cautioned that it would probably take Rodriguez about 100 games to feel comfortable with his new position.
As Ripken was grudgingly making the change, he asked his father how long it would take to become a competent and confident third baseman. Ripken said that Cal Sr., the baseball lifer whom he called ''The Encyclopedia of Baseball,'' told him to expect 100 games of growing pains. As it turned out, father knew best.
''I trained myself for 15 years as a shortstop,'' Ripken said. ''You can't let that go as easily as you might think. Once you start getting into playing and start experiencing live action, probably a hundred games was a pretty good indication. Probably three-quarters of the way through my first year, I started to feel like a third baseman.''
Even as the Yankees have maintained that Derek Jeter will be their shortstop, speculation that Rodriguez will eventually supplant him still hovers over the team. Rodriguez is considered the superior defensive player, and there is a theory that the Yankees will have to recognize that and allow him to play shortstop.
But Rodriguez has said he is beginning a new chapter in his career, and the chapter begins with his abandoning shortstop and embracing the challenge of becoming the premier third baseman in the major leagues.
Ripken said the best way to facilitate the change was to forget that his old job was 50 feet to his left.
''I would highly recommend to Alex that you're a third baseman now, that's your identity, that's who you are,'' Ripken said in a telephone conference call. ''You're going to work hard to be that, so force yourself mentally to prepare as a third baseman and to try to leave shortstop behind.''
In leaving shortstop behind, Ripken said Rodriguez would be helped by his soft hands and solid instincts. Ripken said it could be jarring to switch from the relatively safe confines of shortstop, about 125 feet from the batter, to third, where Rodriguez will sometimes be playing less than 90 feet away. Rodriguez has to learn how to read the ball off the bat because it will zoom at him with a different spin than he saw at shortstop.
A shortstop can be more deliberate in fielding a grounder and getting his feet set. A third baseman has to be chiefly concerned with catching or stopping the ball. The reaction time for a third baseman is minimal.
''At third,'' Ripken said, ''if you don't develop the mentality to be more of a goalie, to be aggressive once the ball comes at you and to be willing to give up your body to block the ball, you won't be a good third baseman.''
Graig Nettles, the two-time Gold Glove Award-winning third baseman who is tutoring Rodriguez this spring, said he would instruct Rodriguez to play deep so that playing third would feel more like being at shortstop.
Ripken said that strategy might be sensible as Rodriguez eased into the position, but, as a shortstop, Ripken preferred that the third baseman played shallow.
The closer the third baseman and the shortstop are in depth to each other, the sooner one of them must peel away and let the other have the only chance to field a ball headed for the hole.
But if there is enough of a difference in their depth, Ripken said, ''the third baseman has the ability to go full force after the ball in front and the shortstop has the ability to take the full-force angle in the back, and it gives both a chance to catch the ball.''
Ripken said he had a big problem pursuing pop flies as a third baseman because he was used to breaking back or moving laterally for them as a shortstop. As a third baseman, Ripken was responsible for pops in front of him, and wound up getting a lot of late jumps.
One American League scout said Rodriguez did ''everything right'' except pursue balls in the air. Rodriguez has acknowledged the weakness and has told Jeter to get whatever ones he can glove. But Jeter cannot get the balls popped in front of third.
Those are for Rodriguez, the former shortstop who is trying to get comfortable at third base.
BASEBALL
