For the first time in the state's history, marriage ceremonies were performed for gay men and lesbians in New York on Friday, as a little-known mayor of a small upstate village thrust New York squarely into a dispute that has divided the country in recent weeks.
Almost immediately, the office of Gov. George E. Pataki reacted to the two dozen marriages, in the Village of New Paltz, by asking the attorney general to seek a court order to halt the proceedings, state officials said.
But the attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, a Democrat who is considered a likely candidate for governor in 2006, rejected the efforts of the governor, a Republican.
''We will not seek an injunction against either the mayor of New Paltz or any other mayor solemnizing marriages in the state,'' Mr. Spitzer said in an interview late Friday. He said he would seek an injunction only in cases where ''irreparable harm,'' like bodily injury, was threatened. Mr. Spitzer said he did not believe that was the case here.
Whether the couples married Friday would be considered legally wed under state law -- and entitled to the same benefits as opposite-sex married couples -- is likely to be decided by the courts.
Pressed on the issue of the marriages' legality, Mr. Spitzer declined to comment.
But Darren Dopp, an aide to the attorney general, later said, ''Mr. Spitzer has made it clear that he thinks gay marriage should be legal.''
Mr. Dopp added, ''Whether this particular action was constitutional or not will be decided by the courts.''
There are two legal issues here: whether the mayor violated the law by performing a marriage ceremony, known as a solemnization, when the couple has not secured a marriage license, and whether the couples wed on Friday would be considered legally married under state law.
The law is relatively clear that it is a misdemeanor crime for a person to perform a marriage if the participants have not secured a marriage license. However, it is far less clear whether that would void the marriage.
But the specifics of the situation are part of a greater question about whether same-sex marriages are legal in New York State.
While the law now defines marriage as between a husband and wife, there is no New York Law explicitly forbidding marriage between people of the same sex.
The marriages were performed in a series of short afternoon ceremonies by Jason West, 26, the mayor of New Paltz, a picturesque university town in rolling hills about 80 miles north of New York City. Mr. West is a member of the Green Party.
The ceremonies came as a surprise to many officials in the State Capitol, who have been conspicuously silent on the issue, even as it has erupted nationally. The last census counted nearly 50,000 same-sex partner households in New York, and, by some estimates, 500,000 gay residents.
Coming with little warning, the wedding ceremonies here left many lawyers and politicians struggling to respond, while independent observers and advocates for gay rights said the move may signal a shift in the scope of the cultural struggles -- from big cities to small towns.
Mr. West said he planned to continue performing ceremonies. A staff of six volunteers answering phones has scheduled more than 100 people to be wed next week.
''This is the first time a U.S. president has ever tried to change the Constitution in order to restrict someone's rights,'' Mr. West said on Friday, as eager couples waited to to be married. ''We wanted to participate in this, the greatest flowering of civil rights in a generation.''
However, the town clerk in New Paltz refused to grant marriage licenses, further confusing the impact of what the mayor had done. Experts and lawmakers, asked for their opinion, disagreed on whether the marriages he performed without licenses were legal.
Meanwhile, advocates of same-sex marriage said the court cases that would likely result from Mr. West's actions may not provide the ideal test of same-sex marriage in the state. Many have said that advocates have recently been leery of pushing a challenge, given the uncertain response of the Court of Appeals, the state's highest court, whose majority of judges were selected by Governor Pataki.
Still, politicians, advocates, and outside observers said the events of Friday demonstrated how quickly the issue is moving and how unpredictable it has become.
''We are talking about this going away from the big gay centers like San Francisco and moving to smalltown America, which is very significant,'' said Evan Gerstmann, a lawyer and the author of ''Same-Sex Marriage and the Constitution.''
Even as the state's top elected leaders were trying to figure out how to react to what was happening in New Paltz, another local New York politician opened a new front in the press for gay marriages.
John Shields, the mayor of the Village of Nyack in Rockland County, became the first local leader to say that his village will respect the legal marriages of same-sex couple performed in other states or countries.
''I don't understand how extending marriage to same-gender couples undermines traditional marriage and weakens community,'' Mr. Shields, a Democrat, said.
The issue of same-sex marriage, which has come up in the state periodically in recent years, took on a new urgency after the Massachusetts' Supreme Court gave its blessing to the unions. That was followed by San Francisco's decision on Feb. 12 to begin issuing marriage licenses, 3,300 so far.
Trying to stop what he termed ''activist judges,'' President Bush on Tuesday called for an amendment to the Constitution to define marriage as the union of a man and a woman, which he called '''the most fundamental institution of civilization.''
The president's remarks left New York's top two Republican politicians in the awkward position of disagreeing with Mr. Bush, not something either often does publicly.
One of them, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, has said that he does not believe a constitutional amendment is necessary and that the decision should be left up to the states.
The other, Governor Pataki, who has spent a considerable amount of time courting the gay and lesbian community, has also publicly disagreed with the president over the issue of a constitutional amendment.
But asked on Friday whether he thought the New Paltz marriages were valid, Mr. Pataki said, ''My view has always been, and I believe it is the law in New York State, that marriage in New York is between a man and a woman. Period. That's the law. It's been that way for 200 years.''
He repeatedly said that the decision on how to react to the events in New Paltz would be left to the Health Department, which issues marriage licenses. That agency, in turn, would consult with the attorney general, the state's lawyer.
However, according to two government officials with knowledge of the events, it was the governor's office that called Mr. Spitzer's office to ask for an injunction.
Ultimately, the decision on how the state would react was left up to Mr. Spitzer. By declining to seek an injunction, Mr. Spitzer was essentially keeping his hands off what is perhaps the thorniest political issue of the moment.
Despite Mr. Pataki's interpretation that same-sex marriages are banned under state domestic relations law, other experts said the law is far from clear.
In a paper on the subject, the New York City Bar Association said that New York's domestic-relations laws are so vague and gender-neutral that same-sex marriages can be allowed.
The New York State Bar Association, however, has yet to issue an opinion on the matter. ''We are at the infant stages of probing this issue of law,'' said Brian Barney, chair of the family law department of the association.
''New York has traditionally proceeded with caution,'' he said. ''We do not leap in this state.''
While Mr. Barney said it was likely that this and future cases would end up in the courts, because New York's domestic laws are statutory, he said, it was really a decision for the Legislature.
''Whenever the Legislature thinks it is too politically hot of an issue, they toss it over to the courts,'' he said.
State Senate Leader Joseph L. Bruno, a Republican from upstate Rensselaer County, is staunchly opposed to gay marriage. Still he is not pushing to move a bill that would outlaw it.
Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver, a Democrat from Lower Manhattan has not taken a position on the issue and has no immediate plans to push a bill allowing same-sex marriage, according to his aides.
Besides the greater legal questions about whether same-sex marriages should be legal, there is the specific matter of whether the marriages performed in New Paltz, without licenses, meet state law. For the couples married on Friday, though, none of that mattered.
Several hundred cheering supporters witnessed the ceremonies, which took place on a low platform erected in the parking lot of the Village Hall.
The couples, carrying flowers donated by a local florist, filed out of the Village Hall one by one, making their way through a tightly packed crowd of supporters, media and about a dozen protesters.
Shortly after midday, Billiam van Roestenberg and Jeffrey S. McGowan became the first gay couple to partake in the ceremony.
Embracing his partner and holding up flowers, Mr. van Roestenberg gave a thumbs-up sign to the cheering crowd after the ceremony.
''We feel totally different now that an elected official was so brave as to give us this chance for marriage,'' Mr. van Roestenberg said. ''It is totally different to have this legal recognition.''"
