What could possibly link the fertility of a champion racehorse, a corporate governance inquiry and the deal- maker owner of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers football team?
The answer to that seeming riddle is Manchester United, one of the biggest sports names in the world and a $1.3 billion company on the London Stock Exchange.
If the logic of this bond seems elusive, then consider events of recent months since Sir Alex Ferguson, the manager of Manchester United, became embroiled in a dispute over his share of the stud rights to a racehorse owned by John Magnier, the leading Irish horse breeder. Along with a fellow Irish millionaire, J.P. McManus, Mr. Magnier is the biggest shareholder of Manchester United, which, in recent years has been the New York Yankees of English soccer.
That is the starting point of a turn of events that has spurred a sharp rise in the shares of Manchester United and led British regulators to place the company in an ''offer period'' -- which means that transactions by investors holding more than 1 percent of the shares must be declared lest a takeover bid be in the air.
Mr. Magnier and Mr. McManus, the Irish partners, have acknowledged acquiring around 29 percent of the club's shares -- just shy of the 30 percent that would require them under market rules to bid for the rest.
Just this week, Malcolm Glazer, 74, the owner of the Tampa Bay Buccaneers, bought a million more United shares at £2.65 each to raise his stake to just less than 17 percent.
So who's bidding? Well, no one -- at least not yet.
''Why would anybody pay for it at the current exchange rate with the U.S. dollar?'' said Andrew Lee, an analyst with Dresdner Bank, who also said he did not think an imminent bid was likely.
In this tangled tale, however, the fate of the club may hang not so much on financial considerations as on the outcome of Sir Alex's dispute with Mr. Magnier over a racehorse.
And not just any racehorse, but Rock of Gibraltar, a European champion and the runner-up in the 2002 Breeders' Cup Mile. Rock of Gibraltar won 10 of 13 starts, earning more than $2 million before being retired to stud.
That dispute began to surface last year after Sir Alex argued in a lawsuit that a half-share in Rock of Gibraltar extended to breeding rights worth more than $200 million. The manager says Mr. Magnier gave him a half-share in the stallion in 2001, but Mr. Magnier says he did not.
The Irish partners offered instead a share in the breeding rights worth some $85,000 a year, according to British press reports. Sir Alex, known for his blunt and pugnacious manner, did not accept that, either.
So the two Irish partners began increasing their stake in Manchester United. And as bid rumors mounted, so, too, did the stock price, which has more than doubled in the last year, meaning that the two investors may already have increased the value of their stake by tens of millions of dollars. That made the dispute over the racehorse a serious affair.
''They have got nearly a 30 percent stake'' in a company valued at around $1.3 billion, said Mr. Lee at Dresdner Bank, ''and you don't play around with that.''
Operating through an investment vehicle called Cubic Expression, however, Mr. Magnier and Mr. McManus did play some serious hardball with the club's management, demanding an inquiry into the club's business practices. Those included transfer dealings between the club and players' agents including Jason Ferguson, Sir Alex's son.
Cubic Expression also submitted a list of 99 questions about the way the business was run, and the club promised an internal investigation.
Philip Townsend, a spokesman for Manchester United, did not return calls about the club's response on Friday.
''To begin with there was a high degree of mutual respect between Magnier, McManus and Ferguson, and it was good for both sides,'' said Bill Gerrard, professor of sports management and finance at Leeds University. ''But as they got more involved, McManus and Magnier began to have concerns about how Manchester United was run, in a sense protecting their interests in terms of their investment.''
''I have always thought Rock of Gibraltar was more of a symptom than a cause,'' he said.
Symptom or not, Manchester United's fans have played tough, too. This month, more than two dozen fans staged a protest before a horse race in Hereford, England, by running onto the track. Many others threatened to protest at races where Mr. Magnier's other horses were running.
That threat extended to the prestigious Cheltenham Gold Cup on March 18, but Sir Alex urged United fans in a statement on Friday not to disrupt the race.
''My current dispute with John Magnier is a private matter not involving the club and its supporters,'' he said, ''and I am concerned first and foremost to protect and serve the best interests and further success of the club.''
Enter, then, Mr. Glazer, who has been an investor in a wide range of businesses, most notably the Zapata Corporation, the one-time oil and gas company founded by former President George Bush that has become a food and fish processing company. Mr. Glazer bought the Tampa Bay Buccaneers in 1995 and has more than tripled the value of the team, according to Forbes magazine.
Mr. Glazer has said that he built up his stake in Manchester United for a variety of reasons including ''investment purposes.''
In a statement last week, he said his company ''is considering possible options, which may include increasing its shareholding or decreasing it.
''It could also include a possible offer, or a possible sale of its shareholding,'' the statement said.
Manchester United claims the support of some 53 million fans worldwide. In the United States, Manchester United has a marketing alliance with the New York Yankees. In 2003, Manchester United P.L.C. reported a pretax profit of £39.3 million on sales of £173 million ($323 million).
''I think there's a belief that there's much more shareholder value to be extracted,'' Mr. Gerrard at Leeds University said.
But Mr. Glazer is unlikely to make a bid to take over the English team while Sir Alex is locked in dispute over Rock of Gibraltar. ''The future will depend on a meeting'' of the biggest investors, Mr. Gerrard said.
That might put Sir Alex further into a corner. ''I don't think Ferguson would be offloaded'' because of his value as one of Britain's most successful soccer managers, Mr. Gerrard said. ''But he would find that his sphere of influence would be more constrained to the coaching.''
Sir Alex, 63, has been the architect of Manchester United's resurgence since joining in 1986 after having success with Aberdeen in the Scottish league. From 1993 to 2003, Manchester United won eight league titles (the team is now in second place). A native of Glasgow, Sir Alex was knighted in 1999.
He is no stranger to controversy. Sir Alex found himself at the center of a national debate last June over his readiness to sell David Beckham, a star midfielder and captain of the England soccer team, to Real Madrid for $41 million.
''Ferguson has won his battles by reshaping United, but control is elsewhere now,'' Sam Wallace wrote in The Daily Telegraph. ''Winning this battle will take a whole new kind of plan.''
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
