A federal advisory panel recommended on Friday that the Food and Drug Administration further tighten restrictions on the acne drug Accutane, which is known to cause severe birth defects.
The panel recommended mandatory enrollment in a single central registry for patients who take the drug and doctors who prescribe it. The registry would allow the drug's makers to ensure that women taking Accutane or a generic equivalent receive regular pregnancy tests and use two forms of birth control.
At present, two voluntary registries are kept.
The recommendation, approved 16 to 8, stopped short of a proposal by the Health Research Group of Public Citizen, a consumer organization, that Accutane be restricted to people with severe acne that does not respond to other treatments.
Accutane is known in its generic form as isotretinoin.
The recommendation comes almost two years after Hoffmann-La Roche, a unit of Roche Holding AG and Accutane's maker, imposed tougher prescribing restrictions in an effort to prevent pregnant women from taking it. Three makers of generic forms of the drug followed with similar programs. But critics said such voluntary measures had failed.
In 2003, seven pregnant women were given Accutane, according to the drug agency. Another 120 women became pregnant after they started taking Accutane or a generic. Of those, 48 elected to have abortions, and 6 miscarried. Two gave birth to infants with birth defects related to the drug.
The figures were similar to those in 2002, despite the new restrictions, the drug agency said, adding that the true number of pregnancies is probably higher.
Hoffmann-La Roche said that pregnancies had probably not increased but that greater awareness had led to more reports.
The drug agency said the earlier restrictions were probably behind a 23 percent drop in prescriptions in 2003, to about 1.2 million. Hoffmann-La Roche said its sales also fell to $144 million last year, from about $200 million in 2002.
The mandatory registry was proposed by the drug's manufacturers. The companies also suggested that all women taking the drug complete regular surveys, a proposal the panel also adopted Friday. Hoffmann-La Roche estimated that at present only 28 percent of women who take Accutane complete such surveys.
The panelists said that closer monitoring would provide better data, but that it would not eliminate pregnancies among women on the drug.
''I can't see how mandatory surveying of people gets them to change their behavior,'' said one panelist, Dr. Arthur Kibbe of Wilkes University in Wilkes-Barre, Pa.
Dr. Peter Gross of the Hackensack University Medical Center, the panel's chairman, said some restrictions were better than none.
''While zero pregnancy is our goal, no matter what we do, we're probably not going to reach that level,'' Dr. Gross said.
Representative Bart Stupak, Democrat of Michigan, has fought for limits on the use of Accutane since his son committed suicide while on the drug in 2000. Mr. Stupak said he would introduce legislation to require participation in the registry.
''How many babies have to be born with serious defects, how many more women need to have miscarriages, and how many more children have to die before the F.D.A. implements meaningful protections and restriction on the use of Accutane?'' he asked.
