For Ronald Johnson, flush times are about to end. Next week, when the State Legislature is expected to pass a law limiting the access of street vendors to certain areas in Midtown and Lower Manhattan, Mr. Johnson says he will head to Brooklyn, where his $3 ''I Love New York'' T-shirts will surely be less popular than they are now with the tourists at his table outside MTV headquarters in Times Square.
After partisan squabbling initially delayed the new law, state and city officials reached an agreement on Thursday on a bill to keep vendors off certain streets in Manhattan. Legislators expect it to pass sometime next week, helping to thin a throng of peddlers who have poured into Manhattan streets since old restrictions lapsed nearly a year ago.
Mr. Johnson, 49, who has sold the T-shirts for five years, said that when the old law expired, he moved from a corner in Lower Manhattan where he made $80 a day to the lucrative bustle of Times Square, where he now averages about $400 a day.
''I probably won't even be able to sell my favorite item anymore,'' he said, explaining that he may switch to leather belts, crystal souvenirs and vinyl handbags, like other vendors. ''That about sums up my feelings right now: no more 'I Love New York' T-shirts.''
The legislation specifically affects an estimated 374 disabled veterans who possess special permits to sell on city streets, but would make few changes to the original set of rules. It still allows for 60 blue permits to go to disabled war veterans, permitting them to sell their wares on most of the side streets along the bustling Seventh Avenue corridor between 33rd and 66th Streets. Over the next three years, the law would allow an additional 45 disabled veterans to receive blue permits. The law also provides for an unlimited number of yellow permits, which allow vending on the remaining city streets.
But unlike the old law, the new one would bar vendors from the area around ground zero and forbid any peddling within five feet of a street corner.
Duane M. Jackson, who sells leather purses and belts at 46th Street and Broadway, is one of the lucky few with a blue permit. ''I'm not worried for myself,'' he said. ''But I still think the law is wrong,'' he said, explaining that it pits one disabled vet against another. ''Why shouldn't we all be able to stay?''
Mr. Jackson, 52, said he and other vendors would try to block the law from taking effect by filing an injunction in federal court on Monday, citing discrimination against the disabled.
Mr. Johnson, the T-shirt seller, has only a yellow permit. A Vietnam veteran who was partly paralyzed in the neck when his Jeep overturned, said the last several years have been hard. In 2001, after finding a profitable spot downtown at 120 Broadway, in front of Attorney General Eliot L. Spitzer's office, Mr. Johnson said he had to move after the Sept. 11 terror attack. He went to 60 Court Street, where another vendor with more seniority displaced him. Then the old vending law lapsed, and it was open season in Times Square.
''I literally ran over here with my cart,'' he said. ''But now look at me. Banished once again.''
Standing by his table of small wooden figures and hand-painted calligraphy, John Xiang, 26, said the law was not a big concern. Mr. Xiang is among the so-called First Amendment vendors who sell photographs, artwork and free-expression kitsch. These peddlers do not need licenses and can set up shop as long as there is at least one vendor on the block with a blue permit.
During his weekly radio show yesterday, Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said he was glad to see an agreement reached so the city could begin getting sidewalk crowding under control. ''We didn't get everything we wanted -- we would have liked some more enforcement tools in the law,'' he said, adding that he still thought the new legislation was an improvement on the old.
Gretchen Dykstra, the commissioner of the city Department of Consumer Affairs, said there were 2,531 general vendors licensed on the city streets, 374 of whom are disabled veterans. She said she did not know how many First Amendment vendors there are, because they are unlicensed.
