More often than not, if you care deeply about the public good, Albany will break your heart. But this is one of those rare moments when a whole raft of New York's politicians seems to be talking about doing the right thing. It's time to hold your breath. On the crucial issue of reforming the authorities -- that huge, secretive parallel government that has become such a scandal in recent years -- there are a lot of people competing for a gold star.
One of them is Gov. George Pataki, who technically has the most control over these state entities. Mr. Pataki is also the one with the most to lose as each scandal unfolds under his watch. So the governor has apparently put his shoulder behind an executive order that requires more public information on anyone lobbying for state contracts. It would not be as effective as a decent law, but it's a start.
Mr. Pataki has also called on Ira Millstein, a respected expert on corporate governance, to help figure out how to make these public-private hybrids work more openly, fairly and efficiently. This, too, is a good start, though a good law would be better.
With the backing of Attorney General Eliot Spitzer, Comptroller Alan Hevesi issued a disturbing report last week on ''New York's Secret Government'': the more than 640 quasi-public authorities, corporations, trusts, associations and what-alls that operate mostly in private around the state. These entities run our subways, build our public housing and amass lots of debt -- $100 billion by the comptroller's count, with the state responsible for one-third of it. Nobody knows how much money they control or how many people work for them. Mr. Hevesi's right. It's time for a full accounting.
Mr. Hevesi has offered a comprehensive bill that incorporates some of the best ideas in other legislation circulating in Albany. It would also create a commission to assess whether all 640 authorities set up over the last 80 years still need to exist. The Overcoat Protection Authority, for one, would seem to have had its day.
Mr. Hevesi has promised that if no bill is passed -- this man knows Albany well -- he will continue nosing into the books of these authorities, one set at a time. For the governor and others, this probably means more unhappy headlines because in recent months, Mr. Hevesi, Assemblyman Richard Brodsky of Westchester and the news media have uncovered one abuse of the public trust after another in these covert agencies.
With the governor, the comptroller, the attorney general and both houses of the Legislature promising to turn over a new leaf, perhaps for once the press releases won't be the beginning and the end of reform.
Fixing Albany: Editorials in this series remain online at nytimes.com/albany.
Fixing Albany
