Two transit workers were found fatally shot inside a trailer on the grounds of a gated railyard in Brooklyn early yesterday morning, and the authorities said they were investigating whether the two were killed as part of a workplace dispute.
The police questioned dozens of workers at the Coney Island railyard, concentrating their investigation on a train cleaner who had been disciplined by both of the victims and who was fired in October.
A security guard found the dead men, both employees of New York City Transit, around 7:40 a.m., about three and a half hours after they had last checked in with a supervisor, a police detective involved in the investigation said.
The police identified the slain men as Luigi Sedita, 61, of Staten Island, and Clives Patterson, of Far Rockaway, said to be in his 40's. Both men were veterans of the transit system, and both men had grown children.
They were found lying face down, dressed in blue work clothes and orange reflective safety vests, Several 9-millimeter shell casings were found at the scene, the detective said. Mr. Sedita was shot in the right hip and in the right side of his upper body, a police official said. Mr. Patterson was shot once through his hand, apparently the result of a defensive gesture, and once in the head, a police official said. The city medical examiner planned an autopsy for today, a spokeswoman said.
The two men were middle managers at the Coney Island Rapid Transit Car Overhaul Shop, a sprawling maintenance yard near the southern terminus of the F line.
Mr. Sedita started working for New York City Transit as a car inspector in 1982 and was promoted to a supervisory position three years ago, said Paul Fleuranges, a spokesman for the transit agency. Mr. Patterson, he said, has worked for the agency since 1993.
A transit union official said that Mr. Sedita and Mr. Patterson were working an 11 p.m.-to-7 a.m. shift yesterday morning. Detectives held about 50 workers from a night cleaning crew through the morning for interviews in a cafeteria at the railyard, the official said.
The railyard where the men worked spans dozens of acres pinned between the Belt Parkway and the elevated train line over McDonald Avenue. The trailer where the body was found was behind a gate that a police official said was usually locked and remained so when the bodies were discovered.
''That's why it's so weird,'' said Alex Ruiz, 30, who has worked as a conductor for three years and who walked out of the complex yesterday morning after a shift. ''You walk in there or you drive in there, they stop you and check you.''
But in testament to the size of the complex, the entrance from which Mr. Ruiz had emerged was a quarter-mile or so from the scene of the shootings, where a police helicopter was hovering above workers from the medical examiner's office in white suits and police detectives. In an indication of the great size of the complex, several workers professed to be unfamiliar with the dead men.
''Some people are sad, some people don't care,'' said a worker named Jose, who spoke on the condition that his last name would not be published. ''I pray for them.''
Mr. Sedita's neighbors and family members tried to fill out his profile: he was born in Italy, came to the United States as a child, married a couple of decades ago, had two grown sons, one with a daughter of his own, planned to retire in December. People called him Lou.
''I don't know why this happened,'' said Nick Caputo, his brother-in-law, who had tears in his eyes as he spoke. ''You can imagine the tragedy.''
Vincent Rizzi, 41, a neighbor said that ''if anything broke mechanical, he was here in five minutes.''
Mr. Patterson's landlord, who lives downstairs from his apartment, filled in the profile of his life as known to neighbors: he had two grown children and a wife from whom he was separated.
''He's a good person, very good person,'' said Elaine Gardner, the landlord. ''He goes in, he sleeps, he gets up at night and goes to work.''
Lawrence G. Reuter, president of the transit agency, called the killings disturbing and shocking. Police Commissioner Raymond W. Kelly said, ''The detectives are confident that we'll be able to close this case.''
