A state panel blocked a proposal by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority yesterday to speed the purchase of 120 badly needed Metro-North train cars. It was a victory for Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, who had waged a campaign against the plan.
Unless the proposal is revived, that batch of M-7 electric rail cars will be delayed until at least 2006, slowing the rollout of cars that are vastly more reliable in winter weather. Some new cars will appear in March, but the authority had hoped to accelerate the delivery of a second group of them by a year and a half.
Mr. Bloomberg had vigorously lobbied the four-member Albany panel, the Capital Program Review Board, which oversees the authority's spending on major projects.
Arguing that the city would be shortchanged, Mr. Bloomberg had urged Assembly Speaker Sheldon Silver to ask his representative on the panel, Assemblywoman Catherine T. Nolan, a Democrat from Queens, to veto the proposal. Yesterday afternoon, Ms. Nolan told the board of her veto in a brief statement that contained no explanation.
A spokeswoman for Mr. Silver said yesterday that the authority failed to adequately answer questions the speaker's office raised on the plan.
The panel has four members, appointed by the governor, the mayor, the Assembly speaker and the Senate majority leader, and any of them can kill a proposal. The mayor's representative can vote only on New York City Transit proposals.
The authority had wanted to add $230 million to its current 2000 to 2004 capital plan to buy the cars originally scheduled for the next capital plan. Authority officials said it made obvious financial sense, because it would allow the railroad to purchase cars it was already planning to buy earlier and at a cheaper price. The commuter railroad has struggled this winter with repeated breakdowns in its aging fleet. About 180 of the new cars are scheduled to be added in March, in the first phase of the modernization.
But, casting himself as a defender of the interests of city riders, Mr. Bloomberg argued the purchase would change the split in capital spending between the transit authority and the commuter railroads to 72 percent and 28 percent, from 75 percent and 25 percent, a change that could result in hundreds of millions of dollars in lost money if carried over to the next capital plan.
''I'm not opposed to better cars for the suburbs, but I've just got to make sure that the city is getting taken care of,'' Mr. Bloomberg said on his radio show yesterday morning. He later issued a statement praising the decision.
Even Assemblyman Richard L. Brodsky, a Democrat from Westchester County, said yesterday that the mayor's concerns about the split were legitimate, but he said the mayor had politicized the debate by linking it to another political dispute, the transportation authority's refusal to take over the operation of seven private bus lines in Queens. The authority, facing the possibility of yawning deficits in the coming years, has insisted that the city continue to help subsidize the lines, which now costs $150 million a year.
''You have people that live in other parts of New York City that just don't have reliable mass transit,'' said Edward Skyler, a spokesman for the mayor, yesterday. ''We've been pushing for several years to get the M.T.A. to take over, to provide what their mandate is, to provide mass transit for the city and region.''
It is the linkage between the seemingly unrelated issues that led one unlikely group, the Straphangers Campaign, to spring to the defense of suburban commuters yesterday. Gene Russianoff, a Straphangers lawyer, criticized the veto and warned of possible fare increases if the authority is forced to take on the bus lines without city help.
''It drives me wild that in the posture of demanding a fair share for the city, what the mayor is really doing is trying to balance the city's budget on the backs of subway and bus riders,'' he said.
