It took eight years to try Shoko Asahara, the former leader of the religious cult Aum Shinrikyo, on charges of masterminding the sarin gas attack in the Tokyo subway in 1995 that killed 12 people, injured 5,500 and shattered Japan's cherished self-image as one of the world's safest nations.
On Friday, it took more than four hours for the presiding judge in Tokyo District Court to recite guilty verdicts on the 13 charges against him and sentence him to death.
As the judge spoke, Mr. Asahara, his trademark flowing black hair and beard now graying and trimmed short, reportedly crossed his arms, smiled, openly yawned, snorted, scratched his head, smelled his fingers, mumbled incoherently and muttered as if reciting mantras.
After the judge twice instructed Mr. Asahara to stand to receive his sentence, he was made to stand up by five guards. Mr. Asahara, 48, wearing a black sweatshirt, stood silently as the judge read out the sentence of death.
''The defendant schemed to scatter large amounts of sarin in Tokyo to destroy the capital, build an Aum state and rule as its king,'' said the judge, Shoji Ogawa.
Since the trial started in 1996, Mr. Asahara has refused to answer questions and has never made more than confusing comments. In what was regarded as an overly long and frustrating trial, the delivery of the death sentence provided one of the rare emotional moments for victims' relatives and ordinary Japanese.
''I am relieved,'' said Shizue Takahashi, 57, the widow of a subway worker killed in the attack. ''I could only think of the death sentence. I visited my husband's grave this morning.
''But what I couldn't learn was what Asahara thought in causing these incidents,'' she said in an interview after the sentencing. ''He should have his reasons and intentions because he ordered his followers. I wanted to find out how he grew up, what his psychological condition and personality are like, but these are things that we could know only from his voice. The court could not find out these things. Nor did I understand why the young people committed murder, even if they had been ordered.''
Lawyers for Mr. Asahara, who became the 12th Aum member to receive the death penalty, immediately filed an appeal. The process could drag on in court for years, experts say.
Execution in Japan is by hanging.
The trial's outcome hinged on which portrait of Mr. Asahara proved more credible. Was he, as his state-appointed lawyers argued, an innocent religious leader whose misguided disciples acted independently? Or was he the master puppeteer, as depicted by the prosecution?
Aum, which now goes by the name Aleph, issued a short statement apologizing to victims and their families, saying, ''We will deeply take to heart the death sentence.''
During the morning rush hour on March 20, 1995, Aum members released sarin into five crowded trains on three subway lines. They targeted the Kasumigaseki station, the area in which government buildings are concentrated, raising suspicions that they were plotting a coup.
Mr. Asahara, who was born half-blind and into a large, poor family, founded Aum in 1987 by espousing a mixture of Buddhist and Hindu thought. At the time of the attack, Aum is believed to have had more than 10,000 followers in Japan, and 30,000 to 40,000 in Russia.
The sarin attack led to much soul-searching in Japan, coming as it did less than three months after the great earthquake in Kobe and as the effects of the collapse of the so-called bubble economy began to be felt. Many of Aum's leaders were considered members of Japan's elite, graduates of top universities who, according to the values dominant at the time, should have been among society's most fulfilled.
Yet many of them had grown deeply dissatisfied with a Japan they viewed as having grown materially rich but spiritually empty.
''Some of them started to ask whether it is O.K. to live like this, and wondered seriously about the meaning of their lives and the way society should be,'' said Kimiaki Nishida, an associate professor of social psychology at Shizuoka Prefectural University who has interviewed seven Aum defendants. ''These are the people who joined Aum.''
Before the subway attack, Mr. Asahara appeared regularly on television, and in 1990 he and other members ran for Parliament. After none won, Aum built a commune at the foot of Mount Fuji, and factories to produce weapons and sarin. On Friday, the judge said that Aum had planned the attack to thwart a raid by the police, who have also been widely criticized for having failed to investigate the cult more aggressively.
Despite Aum's involvement in crimes resulting in 27 deaths, the organization has been allowed to operate. The Justice Ministry's Public Security Intelligence Agency issued a recommendation that Aum be disbanded under an antisubversion law, but it was rejected on the ground that it had declined in membership and resources, and posed no immediate danger.
Today, the organization has 1,650 members in its headquarters in Tokyo and 13 other locations throughout Japan, said Norifumi Ishii, an official at the intelligence agency. Most were members before the subway attack.
Under a law enacted since the attack, the intelligence agency is allowed to monitor the group's activities. Last year, a commission ruled that the group would be kept under surveillance for at least three more years despite its leaders' attempts to refurbish its image.
In 2000, the group's leaders acknowledged Mr. Asahara's involvement in the attack and said he would no longer serve as its head. They changed the group's name to Aleph and renounced violence.
Last year, its leader, Fumihiro Joyu, went further by removing Mr. Asahara's books and videotapes from the group's buildings, Mr. Ishii said. But other members revolted, and in a news conference last month they announced that Mr. Joyu was taking a rest.
Mr. Ishii said Mr. Asahara's books and other material are again prominently displayed, buttressing the authorities' argument that Mr. Asahara remains in control of the cult. Other experts also believe that the group's changes are cosmetic and intended to persuade the authorities to relax their attention.
''Their state of mind is not different from what it was in 1995,'' said Shoko Egawa, an author on Aum.
