Today's oil industry reminds Amory B. Lovins of the whaling industry of the 19th century.
''When oil was discovered, the whalers ran out of markets before they ran out of whales,'' Mr. Lovins said. These days, opportunities to improve energy efficiency and meet increased needs profitably with other sources, he argues, are accumulating so rapidly that demand for oil is likely to tumble more rapidly than the industry has projected.
''When you add up all the alternatives,'' Mr. Lovins said, ''the game is moving away from oil much faster than people think.''
Who would pay Mr. Lovins, 57, for such unconventional opinions in an era when a former oilman is in the White House, the government routinely opposes proposals to raise mileage requirements or other energy standards and many industry officials fret about whether Saudi Arabia can pump enough oil to avoid global shortages.
Try Shell Oil, which has turned to Mr. Lovins to help figure out how the oil industry can profit from leading the transition away from today's main uses of its core product. Major companies like Shell, Coca-Cola and Texas Instruments do not always agree with Mr. Lovins, but they value his iconoclastic views enough to pay the Rocky Mountain Institute, the nonprofit consulting and research group he leads, up to $20,000 a day for his consulting services.
Mr. Lovins is hoping his scrutiny of the oil industry, which will be published as a book this summer, could provide a jolt to debate about the world's energy future. By most accounts, he remains the best-known freethinker in the energy and environmental policy world and he routinely weighs in on important issues, like the role of hydrogen in the world's energy future. But it has been a while since any of his insights have made headlines.
''Hunter once remarked that I have a good idea every five years,'' Mr. Lovins said, referring to his former wife, L. Hunter Lovins. ''I'm due and there are several cooking.''
In the Lovins lexicon, a ''good idea'' is not simply a technical suggestion that saves a client a lot of money. Such services have added to Mr. Lovins's credibility in the business world, but his real power comes from weaving together insights from many fields into a new perspective that can shake up how clients see their world and also how they manage energy and environmental challenges.
''Amory is not a maverick,'' said Thomas Feiler, a former senior executive at the Rocky Mountain Institute. ''He's an enabler of mavericks.''
Mr. Lovins, a balding slightly built man with a trace of middle-age paunch, pursues his grandiose goals without a hint of flamboyance. He is equally at home chatting about energy minutiae -- like the proper size for a motor controlling the pump he is viewing on a tour of a chemical plant -- as he is pontificating about the transformation of entire industries.
Sometimes he does more than talk and write about it. Hypercar, a venture started by the institute, is developing manufacturing machinery that Mr. Lovins hopes will hasten the replacement of steel in cars with lightweight carbon-fiber reinforced plastics.
Mr. Lovins first gained notoriety in the mid-1970's for predicting that nuclear power was doomed because of the steadily rising cost of building new plants. He warned a disbelieving Wall Street and the utility industry that it would be financially reckless to invest in large new power plants of any sort because investments in energy efficiency, or ''negawatts,'' as he called them, would almost always be cheaper than new megawatts.
His reputation was forged in an article in Foreign Affairs in 1976, when he argued for a soft path emphasizing energy efficiency over what he called the hard path based on expectations that the nation had no choice but to build thousands of large new power plants to meet its energy needs.
''It was the most influential thing I have ever read on energy,'' said Ralph Cavanagh, co-director of the energy program at the Natural Resources Defense Council, a leading environmental group.
Long before other experts worried about such things, Mr. Lovins also described the nation's reliance on big power plants and a nationwide electric grid as a brittle power structure vulnerable to terrorism and extensive blackouts.
Although harshly criticized at the time by the utility industry, his projections proved more prescient than the conventional ones. These days, energy industry executives who have never heard of Mr. Lovins are probably as rare as theologians who have never picked up a Bible. Mr. Lovins and the institute are also widely known in architecture and engineering circles as advocates of ''green design.''
''I view Amory as my older, much smarter brother,'' said Paul Westbrook, Texas Instruments' project manager for worldwide construction, who arranged for an institute team of 11 design and energy experts led by Mr. Lovins to conduct a three-day brainstorming session in December with engineers and executives responsible for planning a chip factory and office near the company's Dallas headquarters.
Among the conclusions that violated what currently passes for common sense in Texas was the proposal that a new office building, if properly designed, might not need air-conditioning -- only ceiling fans.
''He's not preachy,'' Mr. Westbrook said. ''He's just showing you a better path and hoping you will walk along with him. He recognizes that the devil is in the details but he doesn't let that deter him.''
Not everybody is so charmed by Mr. Lovins. Plenty of critics say many of his arguments are wrong. Even many energy experts who support much of what he proposes disagree, for example, with his conviction that there is no place for any form of nuclear energy.
More recently, his ''Twenty Hydrogen Myths,'' published last summer on the institute's Web site (www.rmi.org), ignited arguments about whether Mr. Lovins had misleadingly played down or ignored hurdles to moving from an economy based on oil to reliance on clean-burning hydrogen, which still must be produced from some basic energy source.
Critics said the paper, among other things, glossed over the potential effect on the price of natural gas, the most obvious source for hydrogen fuel in the foreseeable future. (Mr. Lovins calculated that it would actually reduce overall gas demand and prices.)
Even more common than assertions that Mr. Lovins is wrong are complaints that he is far too optimistic. The complaint, in which many admirers join the critics, is that Mr. Lovins repeatedly fails to account realistically for the many ways that business, government and society resist change.
''He thinks that if he talks to seasoned technology people it rises to the top,'' said Ralph Nader, the consumer advocate. ''He won't listen to anyone with experience to the contrary.''
Mr. Nader's qualms about Mr. Lovins trace in part to the Hypercar, a vision Mr. Lovins began developing in 1991. He calculated that such a vehicle would get well over 100 miles to the gallon.
Mr. Lovins optimistically viewed Detroit's subsequent expressions of interest as genuine. Mr. Nader saw them as one of many tactics the industry adopted to put off pressure from Washington to improve mileage with more readily available technology.
In the end, Mr. Lovins was unable to find an auto company to embrace Hypercar fully. The concept was spun off as a for-profit subsidiary in 1999. This spring, Hypercar will show off a forging process for making high-quality carbon-fiber parts that Mr. Lovins contends can be done at 15 percent of the current cost.
''We have a lot of companies that want to see it,'' Mr. Lovins said.
Whatever becomes of Hypercar, it has been a classic example of the kind of research and demonstration program that the Rocky Mountain Institute has taken on since Amory and Hunter Lovins founded their ''think-and-do tank'' in 1982.
More than 70,000 people have made the journey to the 4,000-square-foot home that doubles as the institute's headquarters here, it said. Facing south and embedded in a hill, the building bristles with seven types of solar panels. Its rock faces regulate its absorption and heat loss. The centerpiece is a greenhouse where banana and other tropical fruit trees surround a fish pond fed by a small waterfall. The only heating comes from two small woodstoves that are dormant on all but the most frigid days.
''Snowmass tells you something about the values and mythology of R.M.I.,'' said E. Kyle Datta, a former intern who rejoined the institute in 2002 as director of research and consulting after pursing more conventional work, including a stint as head of the energy practice at Booz Allen Hamilton.
The mythology was rocked during the late 1990's by the board's desire to make the institute more businesslike and capable of surviving without Mr. Lovins. The transition added more seasoned experts to the institute's staff, many of whom do extensive work for clients with little or no input from Mr. Lovins. The added expenses, however, helped plunge the organization deeply into the red in 2001 and 2002.
It also created conflicts between Marty Pickett, the institute's executive director since 1999, and Ms. Lovins, who had continued to work both on administration of the institute and on research projects with Mr. Lovins after separating from him in 1989 and their quiet divorce 10 years later. The battle with Ms. Pickett culminated in the board's decision, unopposed by Mr. Lovins, to fire his former wife.
The firing was presented publicly as Ms. Lovins's voluntary departure to concentrate on her own pet projects. The raw reality of the transition required Mr. Lovins to pay more attention than ever before to issues like employee morale. Since then, the institute has recovered financially and life there is calmer, but it may be more Amory-centric than ever.
''There's people on staff now who complement Amory's brilliant optimism,'' said Adam Albright, a board member, adding that Mr. Lovins was the central processing unit. ''If you don't have the rest of the computer built around it, you don't have useful output.''
