From the moment news reached Secretary General Kofi Annan that the British government had been conducting electronic surveillance of him, he was intent on presenting a calm and knowing outward reaction.
He told aides who urged him to say he was ''dismayed'' at the news to say instead that he was just ''disappointed.'' And his official statement added the condition that he would be disappointed only ''if this were true.''
Avoiding confrontation is central to a secretary general's job, which may account for his low key public response. If, as is likely, he has harsher private judgments, he will save them for Sir Emyr Jones Parry, the British ambassador, who, calling from London on Thursday in behalf of Prime Minister Tony Blair, alerted him to the disclosure.
Mr. Annan's spokesman, Fred Eckhard, said Friday that Mr. Annan was very concerned with how the reported eavesdropping would affect his work and was expecting another talk with Sir Emyr shortly. ''It is safe to say that he would like a fuller explanation,'' Mr. Eckhard said.
The British spying was revealed in a BBC interview on Thursday with Clare Short, an outspoken former member of the Blair cabinet who resigned last summer and has called on Mr. Blair to do the same. Ms. Short said that Britain had regularly spied on Mr. Annan and that transcripts of conversations with him had circulated freely in the cabinet.
Mr. Blair rebuked Ms. Short and said she had endangered national security with her outburst. The incident has produced a political furor, with Mr. Blair's opponents challenging him to ''come clean'' and arguing that the case further erodes his postwar credibility.
If the reaction at the United Nations is more subdued, it may reflect the recognition that wiretapping at the United Nations is as old as the institution itself.
''The U.N. has been monitored by bugging or surveillance from day one,'' said Stephen C. Schlesinger, author of ''Act of Creation: The Founding of the United Nations,'' an account of the 1945 San Francisco conference that created the body.
John E. Pike, director of globalsecurity.org, a nonprofit security policy group in Alexandria, Va., was even blunter. ''You could say that there are more spooks in that building than any other on the planet,'' he said.
''Everyone knows that there is a lot of spying and eavesdropping that goes on at the U.N. and during the cold war, it was a hotbed of Soviet espionage,''
Sergey V. Lavrov, the Russian ambassador, said his country was not a participant. He added, ''I think it is illegal, but this shows that the British intelligence service at least technically are very professional.''
Evidence of recent bugging activity emerged Friday in BBC interviews with former Secretary General Boutros Boutros-Ghali and a former Iraq weapons inspector, Richard Butler.
Mr. Boutros-Ghali said: ''From the first day I entered my office, they told me, 'Beware, your office is bugged, your residence is bugged.' It is the tradition that member states that have the technical capacity to bug will do it without hesitation.''
Mr. Butler said, ''There was abundant evidence that we were being constantly monitored.'' He said that if he had something sensitive to discuss, ''I had to go to the basement cafe in the U.N. where there was heaps of noise or I'd go and take a walk in Central Park.''
According to Mr. Schlesinger, there were three intelligence agencies at work in San Francisco in 1945. ''The Army Signal Corps was intercepting all the cable traffic among the diplomats, so we knew in advance the negotiating strategies of practically all the 46 countries coming to San Francisco,'' he said. ''Second was the F.B.I., which was tapping the phones of many of the American visitors and observers at the conference, and there was some belief that they were also tapping the calls of the members of the U.S. delegation itself.
''The third intelligence agency was the Office of Strategic Services, the O.S.S., and they were supplying all sorts of technical equipment to the U.S. delegation to track their movements and the papers being passed around.''
Mr. Pike said there were many ways to spy on someone like Mr. Annan whether he was using a land line, a cellphone or a secure phone near a window where a laser beam can reproduce speech from measuring vibrations on the glass. ''Even if his office is not bugged, the person he's talking to might be,'' he said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: UNITED NATIONS
