Once, when Senator John Edwards told his 5-year-old daughter Emma Claire that he would take her on an outing, her reply was instantaneous. ''But is it O.K. with Miles?''
That would be Miles Lackey, the campaign chief of staff for Senator Edwards, of North Carolina. Mr. Lackey is the man in the jeans, well-worn dark trench coat and preppy sweaters who possesses a divinity degree from Yale but is rooted enough to jerk his head to the beat of Mr. Edwards' rocking campaign theme song, ''Small Town.''
Mr. Lackey, as one senior adviser put it, ''facilitates everything.'' That could mean rounding up policy advisers for the less than wonkish Mr. Edwards; or overseeing the hunt for water wings in Iowa so Mr. Edwards's young children could swim in a hotel pool; or talking through changes to Mr. Edwards's stump speech on a late-night flight between primary states.
Mr. Lackey, 44, worked in the Clinton White House and on Mr. Edwards's Senate staff is among a half-dozen aides who have helped Mr. Edwards last longer than many expected in this primary season, through the rise and fall of Howard Dean, the disappearance of Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, the entrance and exit of Gen. Wesley K. Clark.
It is a small group of people who struck some personal connection with Mr. Edwards or his wife, Elizabeth, his closest confidant -- even if they have known them for a relatively short time. Mr. Lackey has known Mr. Edwards for a little more than four years since Mr. Lackey left his job in Mr. Clinton's National Security Council and joined Mr. Edwards's Senate staff, first as the legislative director then rising quickly to chief of staff. But he is a contemporary of the senator and hails from small-town North Carolina.
David Ginsberg, Mr. Edwards's 28-year-old communications director, worked for his 1998 Senate campaign and is said to have particularly impressed Mrs. Edwards then. Jennifer Palmieri, the senator's press secretary, worked all eight years in the Clinton White House in various jobs.
Harrison Hickman, his head of surveys, handled polling for Mr. Edwards's 1998 Senate race, is six months older than the candidate and is as likely to talk about their shared experience growing up in rural North Carolina as Mr. Edwards's standing in a poll. Nick Baldick, the campaign manager, worked for Mr. Edwards's New American Optimists political action committee, which laid the groundwork for the presidential run.
Other campaigns have gone through turmoil -- including the very public departures of the campaign chiefs for both Senator John Kerry and Dr. Dean -- but this group has held together without public bickering. Most of Mr. Edwards's advisers generally avoid any hint of upstaging the boss. It is a unity, some say, born out of Mr. Edwards's relative newness to politics and out of the need to constantly buck expectations that Mr. Edwards would falter early.
''He has not been in politics his whole life, so it is not like he has three or four wars behind him and the scars and baggage that come from past campaigns,'' said Ed Turlington, the campaign's chairman and a Raleigh lawyer who helped recruit some of the staff. ''We have experienced people but a fresh campaign.''
None of the aides carry the title chief strategist. Mr. Edwards, in fact, discouraged that from the start, aides say, and has encouraged ad hoc decision-making. His aides say Mr. Edwards accepts advice but often relies on a visceral feel for how things are going and which steps to take.
Few major decisions go forward without the advice of Mr. Edwards's wife, Elizabeth, a former lawyer who has made her influence felt on everything from policy to the logo on the campaign T-shirts.
After Elizabeth's ideas, it is the opinions of Mr. Lackey, Mr. Ginsberg, Mr. Baldick and Mr. Hickman that tend to carry more weight, according to several aides.
Mr. Hickman, for instance, has pushed among the hardest to keep the campaign on positive themes, several aides said, despite pressure to take on the other candidates.
In December, the debate intensified, with some aides suggesting Mr. Edwards should draw more pointed contrasts with Dr. Dean, then high in the polls, if not attack him outright. Mr. Hickman recalled Mr. Edwards calling late at night to take soundings on his inclination to stay positive.
''He would say, 'Am I crazy to think this is going to turn out all right?' I would say, 'Are you calling to argue or are you calling for affirmation? I happen to agree with you,' '' said Mr. Hickman, who said that Mr. Edwards would have fallen by the wayside had he been just another attacker.
Even now, heading into Super Tuesday, with Mr. Edwards under pressure to find a way to push ahead of Senator John Kerry, Mr. Hickman said he still believed in avoiding sharp attacks.
From the start, senior campaign aides knew many would doubt whether Mr. Edwards had the experience and attitude to make a mark on the race. But Mr. Edwards, his advisers said, demanded loyalty, enthusiasm, optimism and faith in the idea that he could survive second- and third-place showings in the early primaries to reach the Super Tuesday round now looming.
''John had a plan from the start,'' said Mr. Baldick, who took a leave from his consulting business for the campaign managing job. ''He laid it out and it didn't have unrealistic expectations and we all bought in to it and believed in him.''
Mr. Hickman said he did not even remember being asked to work for the campaign. It was simply assumed. Mr. Ginsberg and Mr. Baldick were among the earliest hires in January 2003. Mr. Baldick took the lead in hiring many of the other staff members.
Mr. Edwards considered Robert Shrum, his media strategist in the 1998 Senate race, for his presidential campaign, but the two men could not agree what his role would be and Mr. Shrum went to work for Mr. Kerry instead. Mr. Edwards turned to David Axelrod of Chicago, whom, aides said, he found appealing because while Mr. Axelrod had extensive experience he was based outside Washington's beltway.
Though Mr. Edwards has been spared tumultuous departures, the campaign has added people when needed. In August, as Dr. Dean surged and Mr. Edwards was dogged by questions over whether he would give up the race to run for re-election to the Senate, he hired Jim Andrews, a longtime consultant who worked as campaign manager for Harvey Gantt, Mr. Edwards's national chairman and a former mayor of Charlotte who twice lost Senate races to Jesse Helms. Mr. Andrews helps direct message and strategy and coordinates the work of the various other consultants.
Some Edwards advisers have undergone transformations, at least publicly, from more rough-and-tumble lives. The chain-smoking Mr. Ginsberg made his mark as the chief researcher for Vice President Al Gore in 2000, meaning he led the way in looking for unflattering information about Mr. Gore's rivals: first former Senator Bill Bradley, then Gov. George W. Bush.
Today, however, Mr. Ginsberg preaches the positive. ''We always knew it was going to be a positive campaign and, as tempting as it was to deviate from that, we didn't because we had a plan,'' he said.
Just how much longer Mr. Edwards can remain viable is at issue. He lags in the polls in the Super Tuesday states and these final days before that next set of primaries are proving a test of resolve.
Ms. Palmieri, his press secretary, followed her time in the Clinton administration with a stint as press secretary to the Democratic National Committee. She gloats over bad news in other campaigns and can turn cheerful in the midst of haranguing reporters. But at the end of a long day this week, Ms. Palmieri sounded weary.
''It has been one long crisis,'' she said. ''This has taken more fortitude than working in the Clinton White House. It's much harder to plug away when every person outside the campaign, all day long, is telling you you can't do this.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
