''What the Gospels don't reveal about Christ's sufferings, science does.'' That headline tops an advertisement, occasionally appearing in conservative Roman Catholic publications, for a decades-old book, ''A Doctor at Calvary.''
''For Lenten meditation, this volume is unsurpassed,'' the advertisement promises. One can learn, for example, about ''the painful hemorrhaging phenomenon which corresponds to Jesus' sweating 'drops of blood' -- and renders the skin more susceptible to pain.''
One can learn about ''evidence that Christ received more than the customary number of blows during the scourging -- by two soldiers at once.'' One can learn about ''the 'flagrum' used for scourging: designed to inflict deep wounds.'' And about ''the Crown of Thorns'' and ''how we know the thorns were particularly long and sharp.''
One can also learn about these things from ''The Passion of the Christ,'' assuming that one is at least 17 or accompanied by a parent or an adult guardian.
That Mel Gibson has depicted the brutal torture and execution of Jesus at length and in graphic, relentless detail is perhaps the only point on which all the friends and all the foes of his film agree.
Mr. Gibson has spoken of wanting to push viewers ''over the edge.'' Reviewers have compared his work to the violent films of Quentin Tarantino, for example. ''It will be amusing to see some of the same scolds who condemned Mr. Tarantino's 'Kill Bill: Vol. 1' sing the praises of 'The Passion of the Christ,' '' A. O. Scott wrote in his review in The New York Times.
Agreed. But it will also be amusing to see critics who explained away, or even celebrated, Mr. Tarantino's relish for violence suddenly turn sensitive at Mr. Gibson's. ''The Passion of the Christ'' is a highly personal film, from its dialogue in Aramaic and Latin to its weird Felliniesque touches and its sudden lurches from dogged Scriptural literalism to artistic license. It certainly operates on the edge, which in many critical circles is the very place to be.
One wonders how this project would have been greeted if it had been the work of a New Age rapper or a gay Marxist (like Pier Paolo Pasolini, the director of the 1966 classic ''Gospel According to St. Matthew'') rather than a more-Catholic-than-the-pope Catholic. Might not its peculiarities have been blessed with the gold-star accolade in today's vocabulary of cultural criticism: ''transgressive''?
What is genuinely transgressive, of course, as Mr. Gibson meant it to be, is the movie's delirious violence. The intense, almost obsessive focus on Jesus' suffering, on his lacerated body and flowing blood, on his pierced hands, feet and side, is an undeniable part of Christian tradition.
This Passion-centered spirituality arose in the late Middle Ages and is therefore all too easily dismissed as medieval. It was kept alive in the hymns and devotions of some strands of Protestantism but especially in the mystical fervor and visual imagery of Counter-Reformation Catholicism. The walls of Catholic churches still feature the 14 Stations of the Cross, tracing Jesus' painful course from condemnation by Pontius Pilate (although not, incidentally, portraying condemnation by Jewish authorities) to Golgatha and Crucifixion.
Why should this religious emphasis on pain and suffering prove resonant with 21st-century Americans? Dr. Robert M. Franklin, presidential distinguished professor of social ethics at the Candler School of Theology, at Emory University, has suggested that African-American Christianity, in spirituals, prayers and preaching, has always embraced the ''graphic reality'' of Jesus as suffering Savior and political victim.
David Neff, editor of Christianity Today, has explained evangelical Protestants' enthusiasm for this ''almost medieval Catholic vision'' by pointing to a rediscovery of the power of meditative prayer and the harnessing of the imagination to complement evangelicals' customary ''talking to God about what is on their heart.''
For many Catholics, Mr. Gibson's movie seems to be a re-enactment of the Stations of the Cross, now in live-action tableaus, or a dramatization of the Five Sorrowful Mysteries traditionally contemplated while saying the rosary. The movie reignites religious embers that may have cooled over the years.
Critics who have recoiled at Mr. Gibson's grim vision are puzzling over the widespread positive response. They do not grasp that viewers are bringing to the film a whole store of religious beliefs and emotions, embracing and kindly as well as apocalyptic. These people are not simply going to a movie; they are going to church.
To recognize the powerful sources of the movie's theology and spiritual impact, however, is not to quell all misgivings. There have always been Christian thinkers who have worried about the dangers of focusing obsessively on Jesus' pain and suffering.
Nor does such an outlook hold a monopoly on Christian spirituality. The Gospels do not dwell on the details of Jesus' suffering; nor did the first centuries or even the later mainstream of Christian art. There was usually a careful balance between Christ suffering and Christ reigning, between the sacrificial victim and the triumphant ruler.
In Christian doctrine, after all, Jesus was redeemer because he was God's beloved son and not because of an extraordinary capacity to absorb pain.
The question is whether a depiction like Mr. Gibson's successfully points to these truths of Christian faith, or obscures them. Pain, personal or empathetic, notoriously blocks thought and concentrates the mind rather than expanding it. That Mr. Gibson's company is called Icon Productions is ironic, since the icons of Eastern Christianity have hewed to stylized, symbol-laden and restrained forms that work to lead the worshiper from the seen to the unseen.
To return to the advertisement for ''A Doctor at Calvary,'' maybe medical science has some modest bit to contribute to Christian understanding of Jesus' suffering and death. But the advertisement's emphasis certainly seems to reduce, even trivialize, a great mystery. Christians should be debating whether ''The Passion of the Christ'' does the same.
Beliefs
