Jack B. Grubman, the former telecommunications analyst at Citigroup, has been barred from the securities industry. But he can still work wonders on a stock price.
Yesterday, Distinctive Devices Inc., a small developer of hardware and software for the digital television and telecommunications industry in Europe, India and Russia, announced that it had hired Mr. Grubman as a strategic consultant to advise it on corporate development.
Shares of the company, which is based in Fort Lee, N.J., advanced 41 cents on the news, a rise of 20 percent on the day. Distinctive Devices shares, which trade on the over-the-counter bulletin board market for small companies, closed at their 52-week high, $2.45 each.
Mr. Grubman, the top telecommunications analyst on Wall Street until he resigned under pressure in August 2002, was known for his unflagging support for upstart telecommunications companies like WorldCom, McLeodUSA, Global Crossing, and Rhythms Netconnections. All those companies filed for bankruptcy after the technology stock market bubble burst.
Mr. Grubman was especially bullish on WorldCom and kept his buy rating on the stock until just a few days before the company announced the enormous accounting misstatement that helped force it into bankruptcy in July 2002.
Regulators sued Mr. Grubman in September 2002 for publishing misleading research. He paid a $15 million fine but settled the case, neither admitting nor denying wrongdoing.
Mr. Grubman's spokesman confirmed that his consulting agreement with Distinctive Devices is his first association with a company since he left Citigroup. Mr. Grubman's consulting company is the Magee Group.
Since his departure from Citigroup, Mr. Grubman has spent most of his time preparing his defense against the throngs of investors who have sued him for the losses they contend they incurred by following his stock advice.
Mr. Grubman was not available for comment.
But Sanjay Mody, president and chief executive of Distinctive Devices, said that he met Mr. Grubman two weeks ago at a presentation Mr. Mody was making to drum up interest in his company. Mr. Grubman introduced himself, Mr. Mody said, and after the former analyst reviewed the company's technology, he made some suggestions. ''He said if he were to be there, he would add a lot of value'' to the company, especially in attracting new business, Mr. Mody said. He added that Mr. Grubman would not be involved in any financial matters at the company.
Distinctive Devices traded as high as $48 in March 2000. The stock collapsed along with other technology concerns soon thereafter. A year ago, the shares changed hands at 45 cents a share.
As of Sept. 30, 2003, according to the most recent company filing, it had accumulated losses of $5.4 million. In that filing, the company noted that there was a ''substantial doubt'' that it could continue as a going concern. Management is looking for financing, the filing said.
In recent months, the company has had trouble filing its financial statements on time with the Securities and Exchange Commission. Filings have been delayed in each of the last five quarters; in November, the company said it was late because it had problems obtaining and processing financial information from its operations in India.
In January, Distinctive Devices acquired Galaxis Technology, a German developer of digital television technology, in an all-stock deal.
Mr. Grubman's spokesman declined to comment on what Mr. Grubman would earn through his association with Distinctive Devices. But a person involved in the negotiations said he would be paid in stock warrants rather than a salary. Warrants entitle a holder to buy a set amount of stock in the company at some point in the future at a specified price that is usually higher than the current level.
Distinctive Devices, with a market value of $44 million, is a much smaller company than those Mr. Grubman advised at Citigroup. Indeed, the company's market value is the rough equivalent of two years' pay for Mr. Grubman during his heyday.
Mr. Mody said he evaluated the downside his company might face hiring Mr. Grubman. ''There may be several people because of his past issues who might hate a company like ours,'' he said. ''But there will be some people who know the bright side of Jack Grubman -- he knows the technology, he knows the trends -- and they would like to talk with the company.''
