The Italian industrial group Fiat, which lost almost 4 billion euros in 2002, said on Friday that it had narrowed its fourth-quarter loss, advancing on the path to recovery.
The net loss in the fourth quarter dropped by almost two-thirds, to 1.1 billion euros ($1.37 billion) compared with 2.97 billion euros in the period in 2002. For the full year, the loss was 1.9 billion euros, down from 3.9 billion euros in 2002.
''I can't say I'm happy with these results because we still have a significant loss, but I can say I'm happy with the work the management team has done in the last few months,'' Fiat's chairman, Umberto Agnelli, said at a news conference in this northwestern industrial city where the company has its headquarters.
The announcement of the smaller loss came just a day short of Giuseppe Morchio's one-year anniversary as chief executive of Fiat, Italy's largest carmaker and the country's biggest private-sector employer, with 80,000 workers in Italy and 162,000 worldwide. Mr. Morchio has used his year at the helm to close factories, cut jobs and invest aggressively in developing cars.
Mr. Morchio, who spent 20 years at the tire and cable maker Pirelli before joining Fiat, said Friday that his turnaround plan was on track and that the company would return to profit in 2006. Fiat's car business, which accounts for about 42 percent of sales and was the only unit in the group to post an operating loss in the fourth quarter, is forecast to make money again in 2007.
Under his plan, Mr. Morchio has shuffled 12 of Fiat's top 19 managers, including the chief financial officer and the head of the auto business. Eight of 12 factories scheduled to be closed have shut, and most of the 12,300 jobs to be cut by 2006 have been eliminated. In the last year, Fiat has sold 7.3 billion euros in assets, raised 1.8 billion euros in new capital and its tractor unit, CNH Global, has raised 900 million euros through bond sales.
''The road to recovery is still very long, but we have begun,'' Mr. Morchio said. ''This is an interim step.''
Mr. Morchio said that Fiat's cooperation with General Motors, which owns 20 percent of Fiat's car business, had increased in the last year. Beginning in January 2005, Fiat has an option that allows it to sell the remaining 80 percent of its car unit to General Motors.
When Mr. Morchio joined Fiat a year ago, he was the fourth chief executive in 12 months and there was speculation that Mr. Agnelli had hired him to sell the auto business. Mr. Agnelli himself has been chairman for only a year, assuming the post after his older brother, Giovanni, died of cancer in January 2003.
Before taking over as chairman, Umberto Agnelli stated that he thought the car unit should be sold to free cash for Fiat's profitable businesses. Fiat instead took the opposite tack, selling two money-making businesses: its insurance company, Toro Assicurazioni, and its aerospace components operation, FiatAvio.
Excluding the sale of Toro and FiatAvio, sales for the company fell 2 percent in the fourth quarter, to 12.6 billion euros ($15.75 billion). The auto unit's sales were little changed in the fourth quarter after dropping about 10 percent during the first three quarters.
Fiat was founded 105 years ago by the grandfather of Giovanni and Umberto, also named Giovanni, and the family still controls 30 percent of the company through holding companies. Fiat, once a symbol of Italy's industrial strength, also makes tractors, trucks and auto components and has a controlling stake in Ferrari, the luxury carmaker.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
