Following are excerpts from a report on sexual abuse by Roman Catholic clergy conducted by the National Review Board for the Protection of Children and Young People. Subheadings are from the report. A complete transcript is online at nytimes.com/national.
WHAT IS THE NATURE OF THE CURRENT CRISIS? -- Narrowly defined, the nature of the current crisis is twofold: It consists both of the sexual abuse of minors by clergy and the failure of many church leaders to respond appropriately to that abuse. But the crisis also has a spiritual dimension, for, as is the case with all sinful conduct, it represents a failure to comport with divine law and the teachings of the church. Unless all aspects of the crisis are addressed forthrightly, any steps to remedy it will bear only the patina of reform and renewal.
WHY DID SO MANY PRIESTS SEXUALLY ABUSE MINORS? -- Although it is not possible to pinpoint any one ''cause'' of the problem of sexual abuse of minors by priests, there were two overarching contributing factors:
Dioceses and orders did not screen candidates for the priesthood properly. As a result, many sexually dysfunctional and immature men were admitted into seminaries and later ordained into the priesthood.
Seminaries did not form candidates for the priesthood adequately. As a result, seminarians were not prepared for the challenges of the priesthood, particularly the challenge of living a chaste, celibate life.
In addition, although neither the presence of homosexually oriented priests nor the discipline of celibacy caused the crisis, an understanding of the crisis is not possible without reference to these issues. There are, no doubt, many outstanding priests of a homosexual orientation who live chaste, celibate lives, but any evaluation of the causes and context of the current crisis must be cognizant of the fact that more than 80 percent of the abuse at issue was of a homosexual nature. Likewise, celibacy does not cause sexual abuse; but the church did an inadequate job both of screening out those individuals who were destined to fail in meeting the demands of the priesthood, and of forming others to meet those demands, including the rigors of a celibate life.
WHY DID CHURCH LEADERS RESPOND TO THE PROBLEM OF SEXUAL ABUSE SO POORLY FOR SO MANY YEARS? -- Perhaps even more troubling than the criminal and sinful acts of priests who engaged in abuse of minors was the failure of some bishops to respond to the abuse in an effective manner, consistent with their positions as leaders of the flock with a duty to protect the most vulnerable among us from possible predators. Sexual abuse of minors is an evil and, as one priest told the board, knowingly allowing evil conduct to continue is ''cooperation with evil.'' Causes of this failure include the following:
Bishops and other church leaders did not understand the broad nature of the problem but treated allegations as sporadic and isolated.
Some bishops and other church leaders often put what they erroneously believed to be the institutional concerns of the local church above the concerns of the universal church. The fear of scandal caused them to practice secrecy and concealment.
The threat of litigation caused some bishops to disregard their pastoral role and adopt an adversarial stance not worthy of the church.
Some bishops and other church leaders failed to comprehend fully the extent and magnitude of the harm suffered by victims of sexual abuse by priests.
Bishops and other church leaders relied too heavily on psychiatrists, psychologists, and lawyers in dealing with a problem that, while it undoubtedly has psychological causes and legal implications, is at its heart a problem of faith and morality.
Bishops and other church leaders did not do enough in the way of ''fraternal correction'' to ensure that their brethren dealt with the problem in an effective manner.
Some bishops and other church leaders placed the interests of the accused priests above those of the victims and too often declined to hear from victims directly, relying instead on denials and assurances from those accused of abuse.
Canon law and canonical procedures made it too difficult to remove a predator priest from ministry, and bishops did not make sufficient use of what canonical authority they did have to take action against such priests and protect the children and young people of the church. . . .
THE ESSENTIAL NORMS -- Some observers -- including a group of child sexual abuse experts who participated in a Vatican-sponsored conference last April and recently issued a report entitled ''Sexual Abuse in the Catholic Church: Scientific and Legal Perspectives'' --have expressed concerns about the zero-tolerance principle. Both experts and board witnesses have noted that the public may be protected more effectively if such priests remain under church oversight rather than if they are laicized and live in the secular world without any oversight. In addition, some individuals with whom the board spoke question whether the policy discourages self-reporting that could pre-empt further acts of abuse, and whether it is inconsistent with concepts of natural justice and canon law that are premised upon differentiation in penalties depending upon the gravity of the misconduct. Finally, given the nature of the priesthood, laicization is an extreme remedy. As one priest said to the board, ''It's like being divorced by your wife, fired from your job, and evicted from your home all at once.'' Accordingly, the application of a zero-tolerance policy in certain instances strikes many observers as inconsistent with Christian mercy.
The review board acknowledges this is a difficult issue and that the zero-tolerance policy may seem to be too blunt an instrument for universal application. Nonetheless, the board believes that for the immediate future the zero-tolerance policy is essential to the restoration of the trust of the laity in the leadership of the church, provided that it is appropriately applied. In assessing individual cases in order to determine whether the priest engaged in an act of sexual abuse of a minor, the bishops must consult with the diocesan lay review board, so that together they might strive for individualized justice in light of their developing experience and expertise.
The review board also believes that any discussion of the charter's zero-tolerance provision would be incomplete without noting that there is no equivalent policy of zero tolerance for bishops or provincials who allowed a predator priest to remain in or return to ministry despite knowledge of the risks. In fact, in the minds of some priests, the impression was created that the Dallas Charter and the Essential Norms were the bishops' attempt to deflect criticism from themselves and onto individual priests. To the extent that this impression exists, in the minds of priests or anyone else, the members of the National review board stress that we see this crisis as one of the episcopacy as much as it is a crisis of the priesthood. Priests, who now stand uneasily under a sword of Damocles, with their every action scrutinized, understandably may ask why the bishops do not face such consequences if they fail to abide by the charter. This distinction has deteriorated the relationship between priests and bishops. Given the events of the last two years, the bishops must place priestly morale high on their agenda and must show that they are willing to accept responsibility and consequences for poor leadership decisions if the confidence of the laity in the leadership of the Church is to be restored.
SCANDALS IN THE CHURCH
