It took nearly two years for restive shareholders of Hollinger International to force an investigation of Conrad M. Black, the chief executive and controlling shareholder.
But after nudging Lord Black out of his executive role last year, the minority shareholders won another victory Thursday. In a strongly worded decision, a Delaware Chancery Court blocked Lord Black from selling his stake in a deal that would have left them out in the cold.
''The Hollinger decision is a major advance for minority shareholders because it says that directors must act on behalf of all shareholders and not in the interests of a controlling shareholder,'' said Chris Browne, the managing director at Tweedy Browne, who helped wage the fight.
A re-examination of the unusually bitter struggle that stripped Lord Black of control of the company shows that the dissidents were emboldened not just by the legacy of the corporate scandals. They judged that the well-known members of the Hollinger International board would wilt under fire. They also pointed to a court opinion against members of the Walt Disney Company board that the dissidents felt would give the Hollinger International directors pause.
Now they are free to try to find the best deal for the company's assets, including The Daily Telegraph and The Sunday Telegraph of London, The Chicago Sun-Times, and The Jerusalem Post.
In retrospect, the turning point was last April. Herbert Denton, the president of Providence Capital and an adviser to shareholders on corporate issues, called Mr. Browne then and asked him to help force the board to examine a number of Hollinger International payments to Lord Black.
Lord Black dominated the board because of supervoting shares. Though he owned far less than half of the equity, he controlled 73 percent of the vote.
Mr. Browne, whose firm owns 18 percent of Hollinger International, was ready to listen. Tweedy Browne had bought the stock at an average cost of $11 a share beginning in 1999. Last April, the price was $8.25.
Mr. Denton also called Staley Cates, a portfolio manager at Southeastern Asset Management, and asked for his support. Southeastern, which then owned 23 percent of Hollinger International, is a large management company that includes the Longleaf funds and that prefers to stay far out of the limelight. Mr. Denton recalls Mr. Cates' response as ''I think you have one chance in a million.'' Though rebuffed by Mr. Cates, Mr. Denton took the odds.
On Thursday, at least, his bet seemed to be paying off.
After being quiescent for years during the market boom, shareholders shaken by corporate scandals have begun taking a more active role in questioning boards and their support for management. As Disney prepares for its annual meeting on Wednesday, a number of institutional investors are planning to withhold their votes for the re-election of Michael D. Eisner, the chairman and chief executive, to the board.
In the Hollinger International case, Mr. Browne began his protest with a letter to the board in 2001 asking about the questionable payments. There was little reaction from the board or Lord Black, but Tweedy Browne stopped short of litigation. ''I am not a corporate rabble-rouser,'' said Mr. Browne, a well-known value investor whose funds manage $10 billion.
But Mr. Denton got the ball rolling when he approached Mr. Browne last year. Tweedy Browne demanded in mid-May that the Hollinger International board begin an investigation into millions in questionable fees that Lord Black and his top lieutenants received.
The company's board included an unusual lineup of public figures: Henry A. Kissinger, the former secretary of state; Richard N. Perle, the former head of the Defense Policy Board at the Pentagon; Marie-Josée Kravis, an economist married to the financier Henry Kravis; James R. Thompson, the former governor of Illinois; and Richard R. Burt, a former ambassador to Germany, among others.
These people ''would not want to hear negative talk at every cocktail party about a company they were connected with,'' Mr. Denton recalled. ''I believed all the publicity about Lord Black would actually help us.''
Mr. Denton was also aware that the opinions coming from the Delaware court, where many big United States companies are incorporated, had begun to hold corporate boards more accountable to shareholders for their oversight of management.
His group was encouraged by a shareholder case against the directors of Disney questioning $140 million that was paid to Michael Ovitz after his brief stint at the company.
The Delaware Chancery Court said last spring that the case could go forward, questioning the diligence of the board in permitting the payments and alluding to the possibility that the directors might be personally liable because they did not look out for the shareholders.
The opinion indicated that the failure to look out for shareholders might void the business insurance policy for the directors and officers, Mr. Denton recalled.
Whether or not the Disney case influenced board members, Mr. Browne said that the Disney opinion ''appeared to give shareholders more power to ask for accountability from directors.''
By June, Hollinger International had set up a special committee with three independent directors and had hired Richard C. Breeden, former chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, as an adviser. ''Institutional investors and Richard Breeden galvanized the board,'' said John Coffee, director of the Center on Corporate Governance at Columbia Law School. ''They got the board scared enough so that they started filling their fiduciary duties.''
In six months, the special committee announced that it had hired Lazard to explore the sale of Hollinger International assets and that Lord Black had agreed not to sell his controlling stake. By then, the special committee had discovered unauthorized payments of $32.15 million to Lord Black and his lieutenants. Lord Black promised to repay his share of that.
''That was the our first indication that the camps -- Lord Black and his board -- were separating because of Lord Black's admission that he had taken money that the board did not know about,'' Mr. Browne recalled.
Additional pressure was applied by Cardinal Value Equity Partners, a hedge fund that filed suit against Hollinger International's board members, Lord Black and others seeking not just the $32 million but more than $300 million in what they called wrongful payments.
With a payment coming due, Lord Black refused to put up the money, but Mr. Kissinger won an extension for his first installment. But those efforts to reach an accord collapsed when Lord Black struck a deal to sell his stake -- in violation of his earlier agreement -- to the Barclays brothers of Britain. He then summarily revised Hollinger International's bylaws so that no assets could be sold without unanimous board approval.
Infuriated, the board of Hollinger International filed suit on Jan. 26 in Delaware Chancery Court to carry out a so-called poison-pill provision that would make it prohibitively costly for the Barclays to buy out Lord Black.
The court's decision, which Lord Black is not expected to appeal, was as much a financial victory as a legal one for shareholders. Yesterday, Hollinger International's stock jumped $1.30, to close at $18.60 a share. That is double its price when the battle began last April.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
