With panic rising across Haiti's capital and rebels within 25 miles of the city, the Bush administration said Friday that it was still pursuing a diplomatic resolution. Even so, the Pentagon was drawing up plans for possible intervention by the Marines.
''We're interested in achieving a political settlement and we're still working to that effect,'' President Bush said after a meeting with the German chancellor, Gerhard Schröder. ''We're also at the same time planning for a multinational force'' to provide stability in the event of a political settlement.
Mr. Bush reiterated the administration's position on Haiti's president, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, which was spelled out Thursday by Secretary of State Colin L. Powell: that he should ''examine his position carefully.''
Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, said the administration was in ''very close touch'' with the French government, which has called for Mr. Aristide to resign and has offered to take part in a multinational effort to stabilize Haiti.
The American Embassy in Port-au-Prince released a statement on Friday evening calling for Mr. Aristide to stop ''the blind violence'' wracking the city.
Among the possibilities the Pentagon is considering, Defense Department officials and military officers said, is to send a force of 2,200 Marines from Camp Lejeune, N.C., aboard Navy ships from Norfolk, Va., to take up positions off Haiti. But they said such a deployment, similar to what was done to stabilize Liberia last year, could take several days to organize.
In the gathering chaos in Port-au-Prince, no one could say for sure if that would be soon enough.
Truckloads of armed men, many in ski masks, patrolled the city on Friday, vowing to kill anyone who challenged Mr. Aristide's presidency. Looters pillaged warehouses at the port, and at least four people were killed in violence sweeping through the city. The bloodshed was set off by rumors that rebel soldiers would soon march in to remove Mr. Aristide by force.
Insurgents have already seized several large cities, and some moved Friday into Les Cayes, the nation's fourth largest town, The Associated Press reported. Rebel troops also took control of Mirebalais, an important crossroads town 25 miles northeast of the capital, The A.P. reported.
A rebel leader, Guy Philippe, told reporters that his plan was not to attack the capital immediately but rather to put it under siege. ''We want to block Port-au-Prince totally,'' The A.P. quoted him as saying. ''Port-au-Prince now, it would be very hard to take it. It would be a lot of fight, a lot of death.''
With shouts of ''Viv Titid!'' -- Titid is a Creole diminutive of Aristide -- armed troops loyal to the president and his party, Lavalas, vowed to stop the rebel advance, brandishing M-16 rifles and semiautomatic handguns at barricades of flaming tires.
The port was a mad scene of looting, with thousands of people streaming into a narrow entrance that had been pried open. Just outside the gate lay the body a man killed earlier in the day, dressed in a pink shirt and black pants, a stream of blood congealing next to his head.
Poupé, a 7-year-old boy, came running out through the gate with all the booty he could carry -- two bags of strawberry lollipops and an automobile air filter. ''I am going to sell them,'' he said, holding the bags of candy aloft. ''Maybe I will eat some, too.''
Residents of La Saline, a seaside slum next to the port, helped themselves to all manner of goods -- boxes of Brazilian pastries, calculators, packages of sanitary napkins, even second-hand mattresses.
''These people have no choice but to do this,'' said Tassy Frantzy, 36, a telephone company worker who lives in La Saline. He stood watching the frenzy but did not join in. ''People hear false rumors and they panic. They think Aristide is running away. But he will never run away.''
In the Nauzon neighborhood, Ronald Dacayet was drinking his morning coffee at his house at 6 a.m. when he heard gunshots just outside his gate. When he ran outside, he saw two men on the sidewalk, both bleeding from the head. One man's hands were bound by plastic ties, and rivulets of blood streamed from their wounds.
''Every day we hear gunshots,'' Mr. Dacayet said. ''This is how we live now,'' he said, gesturing to the dead men splayed on the sidewalk. He said he had never seen the men before.
Other witnesses said the two men had been captured by Lavalas militants and executed on suspicion of cooperating with the rebels. Rebel leaders have said they have operatives awaiting orders in Port-au-Prince.
The body of another man killed Friday lay on a commercial thoroughfare downtown, his legs spread and his genitals cut off.
At a coast guard pier in Carrefour, on the edge of the city, officers deposited boatloads of people who had been picked up by United States Coast Guard cutters as they tried to flee to the United States.
Dupiton Jean-François, an inspector at the depot, said 537 people were being repatriated, a sharp increase from the usual flow.
Luis Diaz, a spokesman for the Coast Guard, said 531 Haitians were carried aboard Coast Guard cutters to Port-au-Prince. None were deemed to be eligible for refugee status, he said. Advocacy groups for immigrants have sharply criticized the Bush administration for returning people to Haiti's political turmoil.
Osner Sainta boarded a boat on Feb. 17 with his wife and two children in their hometown, Miragoâne, headed for Miami. But their vessel, which carried 102 people, was intercepted before they even got away from the coast, near Môle-St.-Nicolas, at Haiti's northwestern tip.
Gripping two toothbrushes that were given to her by Coast Guard officers and cradling her yearold son, Jefferson, in her lap, Mr. Sainta's wife, Larose, spoke bitterly of their failed attempt to escape as their country descends into chaos.
''We did not even get close,'' she said. ''There are too many problems here. We have to go away. We have no money to eat. We paid for our children's school, but now the schools are closed. We have to go to America.''
As the family sat on a low wall, wondering how they would scratch together bus fare back to Miragoâne, Mr. Sainta vowed to try again as soon as possible, saying, ''We will be back on the next boat.''
In Washington, three Democratic senators who played a prominent role in the 1994 intervention in Haiti -- which restored Mr. Aristide to power -- called for the immediate dispatch of a security force to Haiti to avert a tragedy.
''One way or another, the United States is going to have to get involved to resolve this mess,'' said Senator Christopher J. Dodd, who joined Senators Tom Harkin of Iowa and Bob Graham of Florida in urging the Bush administration to act. ''We can do it sooner -- and minimize the loss of life and property destruction -- or we can do it later.''
