In the end, there was no peevishness among the contestants. (Quick, you have 15 seconds. Peevishness means: a. irritability, b. small-mindedness, c. piety, or d. spitefulness.)
The right answer (a. irritability) turned Elizabeth Scibetti from an average eighth grader who attends St. Adalbert School on Staten Island into the New York State champion in the Reader's Digest National Word Power Challenge.
One hundred fourth-through- eighth graders from across the state competed Friday in the state finals at the bucolic Westchester campus of the Reader's Digest Association.
Jourdan Urbach, 12, from the Roslyn Middle School on Long Island, hardly needs the accolades a national vocabulary win can bring. He plays violin professionally, has founded a charity and raised $175,000 to bring music therapy to children in hospitals and is working on his second novel. ''I'm not really much of a vocab kid,'' Jourdan said. ''These are elementary SAT-type words. They're not particularly challenging.''
But when it's one strike and you're out, it's hard not to feel trepidation. (When you feel trepidation you feel: a. exhausted, b. anxious and shaky, c. enthusiastic, d. honest and virtuous.)
When Jeleine Toussaint, a sixth grader from the Frederick Douglas Academy on 122nd Street, came in fourth place for her grade level, she felt extolled by her family, the biggest fan club in the plush auditorium. Her mother, father, grandparents and brother all came to see her compete. She came in first at her school, she said, because ''I had my friends' support; they were all cheering.''
In the competitive arena of national bees (there are geography, math and, of course, spelling) vocabulary is a relative newcomer. It was started last year with an eye toward enticing a new generation of readers. Word Power, a half-page vocabulary test that is a staple in the monthly Reader's Digest Magazine, is a decades-old favorite of readers, said Nancy Strini, executive director of the competition.
''We said let's see if we can expand it,'' Ms. Strini said. ''It's also doing the right thing for students. I've never heard one person say 'Oh no, don't give kids more vocabulary.'''
Just being invited to the contest was an inspiration for some of the contestants. Don Shore, of Ballston Spa in upstate New York, said his family started playing the dictionary game when his son, Harry, 13, made the state level. ''You know, open the dictionary and point your finger at a word and guess the meaning,'' the father said. ''And we got a word-a-day calendar. That was the extent of our preparation.''
Chudi Nwasike Jr., a seventh grader from Brooklyn, started reading five novels a week when he was notified that he made the state competition, said his father, Chudi Nwasike Sr.
''Already, he says he's coming back next year,'' Mr. Nwasike said.
As state champion, Elizabeth Scibetti will go to Disney World on March 29 to compete for $50,000 in college scholarships against the 49 other state champion winners.
Since August, 1.6 million nationwide have entered the contest, which is held first at the classroom level, then grade level. Winners from each competing school have to compete a written qualifying exam, and the students who score highest on that exam make the state finals. After beating all but one competitor, Elizabeth got the highest number correct on the final five questions.
Stefan Muller, an eighth grader from Port Washington who is a student at the Long Island School for the Gifted, came in second.
The competition had its inevitable roller coaster of heartbreak. Peter Stoekl a 10-year-old from a suburb of Rochester, left home at 6:30 a.m. to get to the vocabulary bee by noon. A fourth grader, with wire-rimmed glasses and a ''Lion King'' shirt, Peter was in a late-afternoon tie-breaker in which 18 students competed for 7 of the top 10 spots.
Before the tie-breaker was announced, Peter said he was just happy to be there, he did not care if he won. When he did not make the finals, however, his freckled face turned scarlet with anguish and he leaned against his mother quietly.
His fortunes changed later. He was not a finalist, but he did tie for best fourth-grade Word Wizard in the state.
Correction:  July 14, 2004, Wednesday  An article on Feb. 28 about the New York State championship of the Reader's Digest National Word Power Challenge misspelled the name of the school attended by the fourth-place winner, Jeleine Toussaint. It is the Frederick Douglass Academy on West 122nd Street in Harlem, not Frederick Douglas. A reader's request for a correction, received shortly after the article was published, was misdirected at The Times.
