Frank Capece, a Nets season-ticket holder for 26 years, was trying to explain why he was still at Continental Arena, why he was still happily rooting for his team despite the announcement more than a month ago that the Nets were headed to Brooklyn. When words failed, he tried something else.
''Watch this,'' he said, turning quickly in his front-row seat toward the court, where the Nets were warming up for the second half of a game Tuesday night. He shouted, ''Lu, Lu,'' to Nets guard Lucious Harris, who spotted him and tossed him a basketball. The 5-foot-7 Capece fired up a shot from the sideline that clanged off the rim as the rest of the players continued to warm up.
''See, that's why we love this,'' Capece said. ''Can you do that in New York? Can you do that at Madison Square Garden?''
The only reprimand Capece got was from Harris, who chided him. ''Don't you ever make the shot?'' he said.
And that might help explain why, with the team set to desert New Jersey, the fans who have been there are still coming.
The Nets were 28th among the 29 teams in the N.B.A. in average attendance on Jan. 22, the day Bruce C. Ratner, who wants to make the Nets the centerpiece of a downtown Brooklyn development, emerged as the new owner of the team with a winning bid of $300 million. At that point, the Nets had drawn 14,158 fans a game through the first 20 home games this season, about 1,000 fewer than last season and almost 6,000 a game below capacity. The arena had sold out once, when LeBron James and the Cleveland Cavaliers came to town.
But the exodus of fans that some had forecast as the sale went through has not come. In the eight games since the announcement, the average home attendance has risen slightly, to 14,288, and the Nets have moved to 27th in the league. Those numbers should increase this weekend with an afternoon game today against the Miami Heat and a game tomorrow night against the Los Angeles Lakers.
Part of the explanation is in the team's play. A 14-game winning streak finally ended in Minneapolis on Wednesday night, and a lot of favorable publicity has been generated by the team's new coach, Lawrence Frank.
There is also a belief that after 23 seasons in the Meadowlands, 4 seasons at Rutgers in Piscataway and even humbler beginnings at the Teaneck Armory, the Nets will somehow remain in place. ''I think our best ally is that nothing ever gets done in New York,'' Capece said.
The team has also sent out mailings for playoff tickets, and according to the team president, Rod Thorn, the reaction has been good. Thorn believes the loyalty of longtime fans in New Jersey has kept them in place, even if the team may not stay.
''We've got people that have been with us the whole time, people that have been here -- 15, 20 years,'' he said. ''They have come to like the Nets or N.B.A. basketball. They're loyal, hard-core fans. I would think that those people, unless it's totally inconvenient, even with the move, will stay with us.''
He added, ''And we have a good product.''
The product -- one of the league's most entertaining teams, with Jason Kidd leading a fast-paced offense -- has never been enough to draw big crowds to Continental Arena, even though the Nets are the league's ninth-best draw on the road.
''That has become just a fixture,'' Kidd said of the empty seats at Continental Arena. ''We understand that's just part of it. That's what makes us even more special. We don't play for people. We play for each other.''
He added: ''I think the crowds have been pretty good of late. If they can figure out different ways to get people to come, we'll be fine.''
Mike Kozlowski, who works in advertising and on the side started a Nets fans Web site, organized a protest at the first Nets home game after the awarding of the franchise to Ratner. With temperatures just above zero, Kozlowski and about 30 die-hards voiced their gripes outside the arena. He is trying to keep up the fight, hopeful that the move to Brooklyn will fall apart and the Nets will remain where they are.
''When it happened, we got off-the-cuff, angry reaction,'' Kozlowski said of the initial e-mail messages to his Web site. ''It was, 'I'm done,' and 'I'm turning in my tickets.' Then they hit the streak and Byron Scott was out, which a lot of long-timers wanted. Now people are finding it hard to disengage. My philosophy is that it's not over till it's over, and Ratner's got to prove he's going to get all the approvals.''
Kozlowski is soliciting fans to stage another protest, this one in better weather, which he hopes will help draw a better crowd. But it has always been hard to draw a crowd here for anything but a Bruce Springsteen concert.
Obstacles may eventually prove to be troublesome in Brooklyn, where land acquisition and tax dollars, as well as the N.B.A. board of governors, may stand in the way of the $2.5 billion project. In New Jersey, there is the promise, still, of a rail line to the arena as well as the development of the Xanadu entertainment complex. In the meantime, there are games to be played and a belief that a title may still land in New Jersey.
''I guess we're just not going to let the future destroy the current,'' Capece said. ''The sense is that it's so far down the road that we're not focusing on it. It doesn't seem relevant to our lives.''
He added: ''We're having fun now. In New York, they've got their celebrities. Here, we've got Gary the investment counselor, Danny the Israeli builder, Ed the frozen food king. And you look up, and Kenyon Martin is actually smiling at the crowd.''
REBOUNDS
The Nets waived EDDIE GRIFFIN yesterday, ending their brief association with him. Griffin, a 6-foot-10 forward who was the seventh pick in the 2001 draft, was troubled by legal problems and alcohol problems. He never played for the Nets after signing with them on Jan. 8. He practiced with the team until Jan. 28.
PRO BASKETBALL
