A woman attacked by a man with a stun gun as she left her White Plains office for lunch fought back, punching and kicking, and her winter coat shielded her from being shocked, the police said yesterday.
The brazen attack, which happened on Thursday in front of at least four witnesses, began in the parking lot of 333 Westchester Avenue, an office building, when a man boxed in the woman's car with his own. He approached the woman, who had gotten out of her car, with a map and a stun gun that looked like a cellphone, said James Bradley, chief of the White Plains Police Department.
''He repeatedly tried to stun her,'' Chief Bradley said, ''but you have to have good skin contact for it to work and fortunately she was wearing a coat.'' The woman fought back -- kicking, punching, wiggling and calling out, and also ripping off an identification card the attacker was wearing around his neck.
The woman got away, got back into her car and dialed 911, as did the witnesses, Chief Bradley said. The attacker jumped in his car and began to leave, but circled back and began fighting with the woman again, trying to pull back his identification card, officials said. Finally, he sped off, bumping a curb and flattening one of his front tires. The police, arriving minutes later, arrested a man on the ramp to the Hutchinson River Parkway -- his car had a flat tire -- as he threw evidence out of the car window into the woods. They identified him as Chauncey Ramos, 39, of Yonkers, who was paroled in December after serving multiple prison terms on sex, robbery and criminal possession of a weapon convictions.
Mr. Ramos was arraigned yesterday morning on charges that included attempted kidnapping, criminal possession of a weapon and assault. He is being held in the Westchester County jail without bail and Jeanine F. Pirro, the county district attorney, said her office was investigating whether Mr. Ramos has been involved in any other attacks. Search warrants were issued for Mr. Ramos's home in Yonkers and another residence in Stamford, Conn., Chief Bradley said.
Mrs. Pirro, like Chief Bradley, said the fight that the woman put up helped her avoid what could have been a disturbing fate.
Chief Bradley said: ''Considering what happened, she was very composed. Upset, but very composed.''
