Britain's prime minister, Tony Blair, is again being taken to task by a former cabinet colleague over his behavior leading up to the Iraq war. This week, Clare Short, who resigned last April over policy differences on Iraq, charged that during the crucial weeks of prewar United Nations diplomacy, British intelligence electronically monitored Secretary General Kofi Annan's communications. If her allegations prove true, they will further damage Mr. Blair's fading reputation at home and abroad.
The months before the war were a heady time for Mr. Blair. His smooth way with words and his public insistence, almost to the end, on working through the United Nations won him plaudits, especially in America, as a rising world statesman. Now, with no unconventional weapons yet found in Iraq and Mr. Blair's original rationale for war in tatters, the behind-the-scenes details of his performance are being endlessly rehashed in Britain, often to Mr. Blair's pained embarrassment.
Ms. Short's charges should be placed in a realistic perspective. Spying on the conversations of even friendly diplomats has a long history, and those who follow intelligence issues will not be surprised by the latest allegations. The news here may be less the surveillance and more the willingness of a former cabinet official from Mr. Blair's own party to reveal such sensitive intelligence information in public.
Still, if Mr. Annan's communications were intercepted, laws, as well as diplomatic crockery, may have been broken. Substantive harm may have been done as well. For Mr. Annan to perform his delicate job effectively, many of the people he talks with need to be sure their words will be kept confidential.
As it happens, an early controversy over intelligence agencies' bugging the U.N. was just winding down when Ms. Short made her charges. Almost a year ago, Katharine Gun, a linguist working for one of Britain's intelligence agencies, reported that she had seen an American request for British help in bugging the diplomats of six Security Council members whose votes were being courted for the resolution authorizing war. This week, the Blair government decided not to prosecute her, perhaps hoping to avoid further damaging public debate.
As much as Mr. Blair wants to shift attention to domestic policy, that debate needs to proceed.
