Dealing a setback to prosecutors in the Martha Stewart case, the judge overseeing the trial threw out the most serious charge against her yesterday, simplifying the closing arguments both sides must make next week.
Judge Miriam Goldman Cedarbaum of Federal District Court in Manhattan dismissed the charge of securities fraud against Ms. Stewart, which was based on an unusual application of federal law. Judge Cedarbaum wrote in a 23-page opinion that ''a reasonable juror could not, without resorting to speculation and surmise, find beyond a reasonable doubt'' that Ms. Stewart was guilty of the charge.
Ms. Stewart appeared pleased when she left the courthouse for lunch with her lawyers, who had been meeting with the judge on possible jury instructions when the judge told them about the decision. The defense team celebrated at a nearby Chinatown restaurant, Hop Kee, on Mott Street, with a meal including Peking duck and pork dumplings, a spokesman said.
Prosecutors had argued that when Ms. Stewart publicly asserted her innocence in the months after the stock sale that led to her indictment, she lied to bolster the price of the shares in her own company, Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia. The implication of the prosecution argument was that investors might have held onto their Martha Stewart shares longer than they would have if she had not made the statements and that they lost money as the share price fell on the adverse publicity around Ms. Stewart.
''I'm pleased that the judge has dismissed the most serious of the charges against me, concluding that there is no evidence to support it,'' Ms. Stewart said in a statement on her Web site.
Although the decision by the judge was a significant victory for Ms. Stewart and her lawyers, she still faces serious criminal charges in the case. Prosecutors have charged her with participation in a conspiracy to hinder a federal investigation and with lying to the government agencies conducting it.
Investors responded favorably to the news as well, pushing up the price of shares in Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia by $1.43, or 11 percent, to $14.53.
But several lawyers emphasized that the securities fraud charge was the weakest of those made by the prosecution and that the remaining charges had always been more dangerous to her.
''It's premature for the defense to feel any elation because they're still facing very serious felony charges and if convicted face real jail time and, in the case of Ms. Stewart, a permanent bar to serving as an officer and director of a public company,'' said Orin Snyder, a former federal prosecutor who practices at Manatt Phelps &amp; Phillips in New York. ''They are by no means out of the woods.''
Ms. Stewart now faces four criminal charges based on the accusation that she lied to and conspired to deceive federal investigators about the reasons she sold 3,928 shares of ImClone Systems, a company headed by a friend, Dr. Samuel D. Waksal, on Dec. 27, 2001.
Prosecutors contend that she sold the shares after receiving a tip, passed on by an assistant to her former broker and co-defendant, Peter E. Bacanovic, that Dr. Waksal was trying to sell his own shares in ImClone. Dr. Waksal is now serving a seven-year prison sentence for crimes including securities fraud. Ms. Stewart's lawyers have argued that she had an existing agreement with Mr. Bacanovic to sell the ImClone shares once their price fell below $60, and much will turn on whether the jury believes that explanation.
Judge Cedarbaum will probably instruct the jury to disregard the securities charge and not to read anything into its absence, lawyers said, although several noted that jurors may or may not pay attention to the order. The judge will probably also prohibit lawyers from trying to lead the jury to draw conclusions from the absence of the charge.
The dismissal of the securities charge may have other effects on the jury, Mr. Snyder said. For example, jurors who might otherwise have been torn about Ms. Stewart's guilt will not be able to ''split the baby'' by finding her guilty of the obstruction of justice charges and not the securities charge, he said. ''It forces them now to focus squarely on did she lie or not.''
Securities lawyers said the securities fraud charge was a novel application of the law. ''In the ordinary securities fraud case, there's an allegation, for example, that there were false and misleading statements by the executive of a company'' about the company's financial condition to inflate the stock price, said Tom Dewey, a securities litigator at Dewey Pegno &amp; Kramarsky in New York.
''In this case, Ms. Stewart's statement related to an explanation of why she sold the stock of another company, so her statement had nothing to do, per se, with Martha Stewart Living,'' Mr. Dewey continued. ''She wasn't saying, 'We're going to blow past analysts' estimates.'''
Judge Cedarbaum's decision will not make it more or less difficult for prosecutors pursuing other executives to make the argument in other cases, Mr. Dewey said. The judge's decision finds that the facts shown by the prosecution in the case against Ms. Stewart were inadequate to prove the charge, not that this kind of charge itself could never be brought, he noted.
As Judge Cedarbaum wrote: ''I have concluded that no reasonable juror can find beyond a reasonable doubt that the defendant lied for the purpose of influencing the market for the securities of her company. Another way of putting it would be that in order to find the essential element of criminal intent beyond a reasonable doubt, a rational juror would have to speculate.''
Friends and supporters of Ms. Stewart said they felt vindicated by the judge's decision and hoped that the jury would acquit her of the remaining charges.
''I'm very happy and just sad the other things didn't fall like dominoes right behind it,'' said Kevin Burger, a friend who is also the project coordinator at Martha Stewart Living Omnimedia. He said that he had not spoken to Ms. Stewart as of yesterday afternoon but that he would see her at a farm that she is redeveloping in Bedford, N.Y., today. Mr. Burger is helping to choose interior paint colors.
Rosie O'Donnell, who attended the trial briefly and has been very vocal in her support of Ms. Stewart and her criticism of the government for prosecuting her, said she was thrilled with the judge's decision. ''The federal government's case is pathetically weak,'' she said, adding later, ''It is a waste of our government's money and our country's time.''
The strategy for Ms. Stewart's lawyer, Robert G. Morvillo, will probably not change as a result of the dismissal, other lawyers said. Much will, however, turn on his presentation, they said, because the defense case was so short -- Mr. Morvillo questioned just one witness, for less than 20 minutes, before resting.
It allows him to make his closing argument more focused, said Alan Vinegrad, formerly the United States attorney in Brooklyn and now a partner in Covington &amp; Burling's New York office. Mr. Morvillo can argue, ''All she's accused of is X, and let me tell you why the government hasn't proven X,'' Mr. Vinegrad said. ''It's the 'where's the beef' scene. That's what he can do very, very cleanly.''
The prosecution will also be able to focus carefully just on the argument that Ms. Stewart did lie to investigators and did conspire with Mr. Bacanovic, Mr. Snyder said. ''The government continues to do what it has done from the beginning, which is say the case is about telling the truth,'' he said.
Lawyers said that it was unlikely that the dismissal of the securities charge would affect the defense strategy of Mr. Bacanovic, her co-defendant.
''He wasn't charged with that in the first place,'' Mr. Vinegrad said. ''He's still the one there's more direct evidence against.''
Until yesterday morning when the judge told lawyers for Ms. Stewart and Mr. Bacanovic about her decision, there was no hint that she would dismiss the securities charge. Judge Cedarbaum included the charge in draft jury instructions provided Thursday night.
According to the schedule outlined by the judge, closing arguments will begin Monday, with the final version of the instructions to be read to jurors on Wednesday.
