Venezuelan troops and antigovernment demonstrators clashed Friday in the streets of the capital, Caracas, leaving at least two people dead and several wounded as President Hugo Chávez convened a summit meeting of developing nations.
The confrontation, in which National Guard troops repeatedly fired tear gas at protesters and gunfire broke out, came two days before a government electoral board was to rule on the validity of signatures government opponents had collected to force a referendum on recalling Mr. Chávez from office.
Earlier this week, the Venezuelan electoral authorities said up to a third of the 3.4 million signatures submitted would require further revisions and be checked for fraud because of technical violations, leading to an outcry from the petition's organizers. A Western diplomat familiar with the electoral process said the National Electoral Council would announce Sunday a five-day ''repair period'' in which those who signed could verify their signatures.
Since a brief uprising in 2002 and a series of strikes failed to oust Mr. Chávez, the opposition has resorted to a binding recall referendum as allowed in the Constitution. The opposition needs 2.4 million signatures, but many political analysts warn that if the government succeeds in blocking a vote, Venezuela could become gripped in violence.
Opponents of Mr. Chávez say the government and the electoral board have increasingly put up obstacles to derail their referendum efforts. Though he was democratically elected, many Venezuelans accuse him of authoritarian rule and mismanaging the economy. The government accuses the opposition of provoking violence.
''Tensions are high, and it's an important moment for the country,'' the diplomat said in a telephone interview from Caracas.
The Bush administration, which has been increasingly critical of Mr. Chávez and supportive of the opposition, called on his government on Friday to respect the rights of the people. ''The Venezuelan government has, at times, agreed with those rights, but often we've seen activity that we think is not consistent with that,'' said Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman.
The Organization of American States and the Atlanta-based Carter Center, mediators in Venezuela, are working with electoral officials to streamline the signature verification process and ensure that the repair period is technically feasible.
The Caracas fire chief, Rodolfo Bricero, said 2 people had been killed and 14 wounded by gunfire, and 10 more hurt by plastic bullets, Reuters reported.
The government halted live broadcasts of the unrest, replacing them with speeches from the summit meeting, which was attended by leaders from 19 Latin American, Asian and African nations.
