Priests in the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of New York abused young people at a far lower rate than the national average, according to figures the archdiocese released yesterday. In the Diocese of Brooklyn, the rate was close to the norm.
The archdiocese said that 38 of its priests and deacons and 7 priests from other dioceses serving on its territory committed at least one act of abuse of a minor from 1950 to 2002, or 1.19 percent of the total of 3,780.
Nationally, an average of 4 percent of priests were accused of molesting young people, according to a survey commissioned by American bishops officially released yesterday. Experts say estimates are likely to be low because many victims never come forward.
Advocates for abuse victims said they were baffled by New York's rate -- paltry compared with 7 percent in Boston, another large, urban archdiocese. Several were skeptical.
''There's always been a disturbing silence in the archdiocese,'' said David Cerulli, who leads the New York chapter of Survivors Network of Those Abused by Priests. ''I worry, too, that victims who have tried to report have been treated so poorly that they've just given up.''
A spokesman for the archdiocese, Joseph Zwilling, said he had no explanation for the low numbers, but insisted they were accurate.
Both the archdiocese, which covers Manhattan, the Bronx, Staten Island and seven northern counties, and the Brooklyn diocese, which includes Queens, waited until yesterday to release their figures on clergy abuse. They coincided with the official unveiling of two major reports on the abuse crisis by the American Catholic bishops. Many dioceses nationwide released their individual figures in past weeks.
One national report was a survey by the John Jay College of Criminal Justice in New York of data provided by the dioceses on the incidence of abuse by priests. The other was an examination of the causes and context of the abuse, produced by a lay review board. Together, the New York Archdiocese and Brooklyn Diocese include 4.3 million Catholics.
The news was mixed for Cardinal Edward M. Egan. While the archdiocesan numbers were relatively low, the review board singled him out among a handful of bishops for failing to address the problem of abuse.
Citing published reports, the board said that a memorandum in 1990 -- during Cardinal Egan's tenure as bishop of Bridgeport, Conn. -- identified a pattern of accusations that the Rev. Charles Carr had abused young boys. Father Carr was suspended in 1995, but was reinstated four years later, to serve as a nursing home chaplain, and only permanently removed in December 2002 by Cardinal Egan's successor.
Cardinal Egan's spokesman, Mr. Zwilling, said the Carr case was properly handled, given how such matters were dealt with at the time.
''The priest was sent for the very best psychological assistance available,'' Mr. Zwilling said. ''All consulted at that time felt the course of action taken was the appropriate one.''
The archdiocese yesterday also said it had paid $6.2 million to abuse victims for counseling and legal settlements; $1.1 million for counseling and treatment for clerics; and $1.2 million for legal fees.
The archdiocese's outside insurers paid another $4.2 million to victims, mainly toward settlements, Mr. Zwilling said.
The archdiocese said that 136 people made accusations of abuse, with most of the incidents taking place in the 1970's. Most cases were reported in the 1990's.
The Brooklyn Diocese reported that 73 priests and deacons were accused of sexual misconduct with a minor, for a rate of 3.45 percent. Brooklyn also said that abuse in the diocese peaked in the 1970's, with most of the reports coming in after 1990. The costs, according to the diocese, were far lower than New York's. Settlements accounted for $783,168; counseling cost $683,373; and legal fees were $187,902, said Bishop Nicholas DiMarzio.
Bishop DiMarzio issued an apology to the victims, and declared April 5 a day of prayer and penance. ''You have endured indignities that can never be justified,'' he said in a statement.
Also yesterday, Cardinal Egan and the archdiocese were named in a lawsuit accusing 11 priests of molesting minors between the mid-1940's and the early 1980's. The archdiocese said eight of the priests were now dead, and criticized the lawyer who filed the suit, Michael Dowd.
The lawsuit was ''frivolous'' and an effort by Mr. Dowd to exploit his clients, the archdiocese said.
Mr. Dowd said the lawsuit was fixing on the extent of the ''cover-up'' by the church. ''Go tell the victims that it's frivolous,'' he said.
SCANDALS IN THE CHURCH: NEW YORK
