Major League Baseball's new crackdown on access to team clubhouses, dugouts and other areas, a reaction to a federal investigation of steroid use, began to have an immediate effect Friday, especially on the Yankees.
The restrictions, which Commissioner Bud Selig reminded teams of Thursday, will cut down on the celebrities and friends who have flocked around the Yankees' facilities, including Manager Joe Torre's office. But more important, Jason Giambi's longtime personal trainer no longer has access to team facilities.
Giambi said he would ''be very upset'' if his trainer, Bob Alejo, was among those barred from team facilities.
''He's been around me going on 10 years now,'' Giambi said, referring also to his days with the Oakland Athletics. ''You just don't tell a guy to change his routine like that.''
General Manager Brian Cashman told the Yankees' players in a meeting Friday morning that outsiders like personal trainers, agents, lawyers, friends and associates would be barred from team facilities. The ban includes playing fields, clubhouses, weight rooms and dugouts.
Access to team facilities has become an issue since Barry Bonds's personal trainer, Greg Anderson, was among four men indicted by a federal grand jury in San Francisco this month on charges of distributing illegal performance-enhancing drugs. Bonds has been noted for often having personal trainers in the Giants' clubhouse.
The Yankees had previously told Giambi that Alejo would have access to the batting cage and the trainer's room this season, as he did the past two seasons, though not the clubhouse. But under the commissioner's directive, Alejo, who is not currently a Yankees employee, would no longer have that access.
Alejo was listed as a Yankees batting practice pitcher two years ago but not last year, when the team reduced his access to facilities.
The restrictions are not new but are being newly enforced. Selig issued a similar directive in 2002, and in 1986, Peter Ueberroth, the commissioner then, barred the same categories of people from the areas listed in this new memorandum.
Sandy Alderson, Major League Baseball's executive vice president for baseball operations, said that if Alejo pitched batting practice, he might qualify as eligible under the newly enforced rules. But if he doesn't, he would be circumventing the directive, Alderson said.
Cashman said no decision had been made on whether to hire Alejo this season.
Torre acknowledged that many players had become accustomed to using personal trainers.
''I think they're necessary,'' he said, ''but if they're not allowed in, they'll have to find another way to do it.''
Giambi, who is now meeting with Alejo at an off-site gym in the afternoons, said he depended on Alejo's hands-on guidance to keep him in top playing condition. He offered last season as an example. Despite a balky knee that required off-season surgery, Giambi played in 156 games. He attributed his ability to stay off the disabled list in part to Alejo.
''I didn't come out,'' Giambi said. ''Knock on wood, I've never been on the D.L. in my career. That's the biggest thing. From a personal side of it, if I play every day I'll get my numbers. Last year, even though I was hurt, I know my average was down, but my home runs and R.B.I. were still there. So he's pretty important in keeping me on the field.''
While saying that he respects Giambi's belief, Cashman said that Giambi could perform at a high level on his own. He cited Roger Clemens as an example, saying that Clemens had his own trainer ''on our property'' for only one year before he was removed, but that Clemens continued to perform well.
A few Yankees have had personal trainers, but none have had the access to team facilities that Alejo had. Among Alejo's duties with Giambi were pitching indoor batting practice before games and serving as his strength and conditioning coach.
''Jason Giambi, as far as I'm concerned, is Jason Giambi,'' Cashman said. ''He doesn't need someone to make him Jason Giambi -- at least in my mind. We didn't sign a package deal here. We signed Jason. Do I worry about that? No.
''Do I know he's important to Jason?'' Cashman said of Alejo. ''Yes.''
The Yankees might have worried that other players would want the same privileges that Giambi had.
''I do think personal trainers are becoming a problem in our sport,'' Cashman said, though he did not specify Alejo. ''Not that personal trainers don't have an important role for certain individuals. Players are going to find different people who motivate them. But when they're on your property, we have people in place that we want utilized.''
Cashman clearly seemed happy about baseball's move to limit access to team facilities. ''I think over all the game has gotten liberal in the last 10 years in letting more people in who are not your employees,'' he said. ''That creates difficulties. In the long run, it'll be better. In the short run, it'll cause problems.''
Selig's directive will also restrict the celebrities who are common around the Yankees. Billy Crystal has been a regular in the clubhouse, and others seen there in recent years include Robin Williams, Marvin Hamlisch and musicians from bands like Creed, Metallica and Bon Jovi. Already this spring, Tampa Bay Buccaneers defensive tackle Warren Sapp and the former National Hockey League coach Scotty Bowman have been spotted in the Yankees' clubhouse.
''If Regis Philbin wants to watch batting practice on the field, is he not allowed to watch batting practice on the field if the Yankees want him out there?'' Cashman said.
The answer is that he is not. That would also clarify Torre's uncertainty about whether outsiders would be allowed in his office.
''I guess this gives me an excuse not to have anybody in there,'' he said, chuckling softly.
INSIDE PITCH
BERNIE WILLIAMS, who had an emergency appendectomy Thursday, was originally scheduled to be released from St. Joseph's Hospital on Friday but developed a slight fever, JOE TORRE said. Williams will probably be released Saturday.
BASEBALL
