Like an ace pitcher who had escaped a first-inning jam, Tiger Woods found his fastball Friday.
After squeaking past John Rollins in Wednesday's first round of the Match Play Championship, Woods knew he was fortunate. But as often happens with world-class players, Woods returned to action with better stuff.
With a 5-and-4 wipeout of Trevor Immelman in the morning, followed by a 5-and-4 victory over Fredrik Jacobson in the afternoon, Woods was one of eight players heading into Saturday's fourth round at La Costa Resort and Spa.
Saturday's four morning matches will feature Woods vs. Padraig Harrington; Ian Poulter vs. Stephen Leaney; Darren Clarke vs. Jerry Kelly; and Phil Mickelson vs. Davis Love III. Those matches will be followed by Saturday afternoon's semifinals, with the two semifinal winners meeting in Sunday's 36-hole championship match.
Forget about a Sunday championship battle between Woods, who is No. 1 in the world, and Vijay Singh, who is No. 2. Singh was ousted Friday morning by Kelly, 4 and 2. Mike Weir, the reigning Masters champion, was another morning casualty; he was bounced by Leaney, 4 and 2. But Woods rolled to his ninth consecutive victory at La Costa, and, while Mickelson and Love played outstanding golf as well, Woods began the weekend in his familiar position as the player to beat.
''I played well all day,'' said Woods, who never trailed in either match. ''I think what's important is I kept the pressure on my opponent all day.''
Both Mickelson and Love could say the same. Mickelson had the most lopsided victory, drubbing Ben Curtis, 7 and 6, in the morning, before coming back to defeat Chris DiMarco, 3 and 2. This was the first time that Mickelson had advanced to the fourth round of this event, and he could not remember a time when he felt better about his game. Mickelson has five top-10 finishes in five starts this year, including a victory at the Bob Hope Chrysler Classic.
''I've been playing better than I ever have, for the reason that I'm driving the ball in the fairway now,'' Mickelson said. ''It's kind of nice.''
After an 0-5 record at the Presidents Cup in November, Mickelson entered this tournament determined to re-establish his match-play prowess. He is expected to be one of the key members of the United States Ryder Cup team that will face Europe in September.
''I want Hal Sutton, the captain, to have a lot of confidence in me,'' Mickelson said. ''I want him to play me, and I want him to believe that I can help him get points.''
Meanwhile, Leaney has been the surprise of the tournament, defeating Fred Funk, Weir and Colin Montgomerie to reach the fourth round. Leaney's 1-up victory over Montgomerie ended when Montgomerie bogeyed the par-5 No. 18 hole. After pulling his third shot into a greenside bunker, Montgomerie had a difficult lie. He left his next shot in the same bunker, and from there he failed to get up and down.
Thursday's rain forced morning and afternoon matches to be played on Friday, but those who advanced hoped adrenaline would carry them through a long weekend. Love, who beat Fred Couples and Adam Scott on Friday, looked forward to facing Mickelson.
''I saw the draw, I knew what I'd have to go through, probably Couples, and Scott, and Mickelson,'' Love said. ''You know, I hope Phil is worried. I doubt it. He looks happy and obviously he's playing good.''
Sunday's winner will receive $1.2 million. Needing three more victories, Mickelson hoped his best golf was still ahead.
''The fact is that over six matches, seven rounds, you're not going to play every round perfect,'' Mickelson said. ''You need a little luck. Like the first-round match, I think I was three-under par, which is still a good score, but I didn't putt well. Lee Westwood, if he had a good round, could have passed me. When you have lulls, you need a little luck, and in the past I haven't had it.''
Woods said that he had also gotten lucky in match play, but that he has also been good. This is the sixth year that this World Golf Championships event has been held, and Woods hoped to be the first to win it twice. Yet, with seven other talented players remaining, Woods did not expect it to be easy.
''For someone to make it through three matches, they're probably playing pretty good,'' Woods said. ''It's just like in tennis. Guys who get into the second week understand that they're going to have tougher matches. Guys who have gone three matches here had to have played well.''
CHIP SHOTS
Friday's longest match was ADAM SCOTT's 23-hole victory over ROBERT ALLENBY. It ended when Allenby, who had made numerous clutch putts, missed a 3-footer.
DAVID TOMS, who reached the championship match last year, was ousted Friday afternoon by PADRAIG HARRINGTON, 1-up.
DARREN CLARKE, who won this event in 2000, looked strong in his 3-and-2 victory over KENNY PERRY in the afternoon.
GOLF
