Al Goldis and Bill Livesey cram about 80 years of baseball experience into about 100 square feet of office space.
The two men working side by side in a small corner of the Mets' spring training complex have seen some 20,000 games. They have scouted most of the legends of the modern era. They have signed enough players to make up All-Star teams in each league. And they can turn any 15-minute meeting into a five-hour marathon down memory lane.
Soon after the Mets made Jim Duquette their full-time general manager in October, they hired Goldis and Livesey as his special assistants. They can also come across as Duquette's surrogate grandfathers -- wise, jovial and brimming with advice. The Mets missed out on Vladimir Guerrero and Alex Rodriguez, but in Goldis and Livesey they landed the kind of men who might find the next Vladimir Guerrero and Alex Rodriguez.
At a time when baseball is filled with young general managers who crunch statistics, a pair of pot-bellied baseball men are helping the Mets into a new era. As Goldis and Livesey saunter in step around the Mets' complex, wearing identical warm-up jackets, a couple of young players notice the tufts of white hair peeking out of their baseball caps and say, ''There goes the brain trust.''
Goldis and Livesey are a combined 124 years old, have been with a combined 10 major league organizations and have occupied almost every baseball position outside of shortstop: professional player, hitting coach, manager, sports information director, area scout, associate scout, national cross-checker, director of scouting, scouting supervisor, vice president for scouting and player development, and now, special assistant to the general manager. The Mets have a far more fitting title for them: superscouts.
''The Mets must have thought: These guys made all their mistakes already and are probably ready to do something right,'' Goldis said. ''I'm always looking back and saying to myself: 'Jeez, why did I draft this guy? What did I see in that guy?' ''
Goldis, 61, started his professional career working for a fiberglass company and driving a taxi in Long Island City, Queens, because his son, Eric, needed heart surgery. But Goldis found time to get a master's degree in physical education at Columbia, receiving a minor in motor learning and biomechanics, the foundation for his future in scouting.
He first met Livesey 30 years ago, when Goldis's Atlantic League all-star team played Livesey's Cape Cod League all-star team in an exhibition game at Yankee Stadium. (''I think Abner Doubleday was there,'' Goldis said.) A few years later, Livesey started working full time with the Yankees. He still wears a 1978 World Series ring, a reminder of so many lessons.
Livesey, 63, was integral in the signing and development of players like Fred McGriff, Greg Gagne, Willie McGee and Jose Rijo, but the Yankees jettisoned all of them in a futile attempt to win right away. When Livesey left in 1995 to help build an expansion team in Tampa Bay, the Yankees' system was stocked again, with Derek Jeter, Bernie Williams, Mariano Rivera and Andy Pettitte the cornerstones of a dynasty.
''I learned there that in this day and age, you have to have a core group of your own players,'' said Livesey, who was hired by the Mets after Bill Singer was fired for making racially insensitive comments to a Los Angeles Dodgers executive. ''We don't just want to build a championship team, because that can go away. We want to build a championship organization. That's the job here.''
Livesey is applying his past with the Yankees to his future with the Mets, another team that invested too heavily in high-priced veterans and is finally rebuilding a respectable farm system. In the past, the Mets had Omar Minaya and Dave Wallace to counsel Steve Phillips, the former general manager, but when Minaya and Wallace left, so did Phillips's support system.
''We knew when Jim took over that that we had to hire two superscouts right away,'' said Fred Wilpon, the Mets' owner. ''Now Jim has two guys who are very, very important to him.''
Although the Mets use statistical analysis, Goldis and Livesey also evaluate players the old-fashioned way: they watch them. During a typical bullpen session, Goldis and Livesey break down a pitcher's movement in his lower body and his core, the area from his knees to his chest. They examine the position of his head and his hands. They analyze the release point and the follow-through.
In the batting cage, they notice a hitter's balance, footwork and head position. They cite how he holds the bat, tracks the ball and turns into his swing. Meanwhile, they hardly write down a word, taking only mental notes.
''I'm always looking at the proficiency of human movement,'' Goldis said. ''There are different segments. You're looking at how guys become proficient at controlling themselves. I know Bill looks at it the same way.''
Livesey has spent most of his career in baseball management and is recognized for his vast international connections; Goldis is the quintessential scout, developing a keen eye for young talent. He drafted Frank Thomas, Kerry Wood, Robin Ventura, Jack McDowell and Alex Fernandez, but the only one he takes complete credit for is Devon White.
The day Goldis showed up at a rundown field on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, White was playing third base, positioned in front of a tall pile of dirt. White appeared unfazed. Later, at a concessions stand at Yankee Stadium, Goldis signed him to a contract with the California Angels.
''Those guys have a lot of good stories,'' Duquette said. ''Some of them can't be repeated in public, but you can learn from most of them. They have to do with mistakes they made, guys they passed on or guys they got and success they had. We'll see what we can borrow or what we can steal.''
Goldis and Livesey are using spring training to help Duquette evaluate the organization and will spend the season watching the Mets' home games, traveling to minor league affiliates and scouting amateurs around the world.
As Livesey reviewed his calendar, he looked around his small, spartan office, which is decorated only by two colorful characters.
''We really don't need this much space,'' he said. ''We won't be here often, anyway.''
INSIDE PITCH
Amid speculation that the Mets could package prospects and trade them to Texas for ALFONSO SORIANO, the team owner, Fred Wilpon, said the club had no intention of dealing SCOTT KAZMIR, its top pitching prospect. ''He's not going anywhere,'' Wilpon said.
BASEBALL
