Now that Conrad M. Black's attempt to sell his controlling stake in Hollinger International has been thwarted by a Delaware court, the auction of the company's most valuable assets, The Daily Telegraph and The Sunday Telegraph here, can take a slower track.
Bankers at Lazard collected initial bids for the Telegraph assets on Feb. 12 and initially planned to secure a buyer by next Wednesday, according to people who are participating in the bidding process. The rush sale was an attempt to obtain cash for the assets before David and Frederick Barclay's offer for Lord Black's stake was formalized.
Instead, the auction of the 150-year-old newspapers and Spectator magazine may take weeks or months, participants said. Bidders include the private equity firms Apax Partners and Candover Investments, as well as Richard Desmond, the owner of the Express newspapers in London, and The Daily Mail and General Trust.
Mr. Desmond, who has a reputation as a fearsome cost-cutter and an unapologetic self-promoter, was already claiming the upper hand on Friday. He is co-owner of a printing press in West Ferry with The Daily Telegraph and has the right to approve or deny any buyer of The Telegraph's stake. Both Telegraph papers and the Express papers are printed at the press. ''We view West Ferry as a trump card,'' said a spokeswoman for Mr. Desmond.
It was unclear on Friday whether the Barclay brothers would try to join the bidding process. A spokesman for the brothers declined to comment.
One bidder has already been ruled out -- the brokerage firm Collins Stewart Tullett, which had plans to immediately take The Telegraph public. The firm submitted a bid on Feb. 12, but is ''not in the auction,'' a spokesman said on Friday, and ''has no part to play going forward.'' The initial price Collins Stewart offered was deemed too low, he said.
Interested buyers are now waiting for Lazard to give them more detailed information about the finances of The Telegraph so they can come up with a precise price. The Telegraph assets are expected to bring £400 million to £600 million ($745 million to $1.12 billion).
The newspapers are being sold at a tough time in Telegraph history. ''Circulation is under pressure,'' said Paul Richards, an analyst with Numis Securities in London.
Other well-respected newspapers in London like The Times and The Independent have recently switched to a tabloid-size format to compete with their more sensationalist rivals like The Daily Mail and The Sun. But The Telegraph is sticking with its broadsheet format.
Nonetheless, The Telegraph ''remains a fantastic asset, and the type that only changes hands once a generation,'' Mr. Richards said.
INTERNATIONAL BUSINESS
