President Bush's new tax and spending plan would produce deficits of $2.75 trillion over the next 10 years, the Congressional Budget Office reported Friday in the first detailed analysis of the White House budget.
If there were no changes in taxes and if spending increased only at the rate of inflation, the deficit would be about $2 trillion over the next 10 years, the budget office reported today. But the new estimate is $737 billion higher, primarily reflecting Mr. Bush's desire to make permanent the tax cuts due to expire by 2011.
Three years ago, the budget office forecast budget surpluses totaling $5.6 trillion for the 10-year period ending in 2011.
The budget office predicts that this year's deficit will be $478 billion, lower than Mr. Bush's estimate of $521 billion, and it estimates that the deficit will be cut almost in half in three years, to $242 billion.
The forecasts by the budget office, a nonpartisan arm of Congress, indicate, however, that deficits will begin rising again toward the end of the next 10-year period, after the Bush tax cuts take full effect. And like the administration's budget, the budget office excludes some large expenses like the cost of operations in Iraq.
The most revealing part of the office's projection is the outlook from 2010 to 2014.
Deficits would total almost $1.4 trillion over that period, and the annual deficit will be $289 billion, and growing larger, as the nation heads into a wave of soaring costs from Social Security and Medicare payouts as more baby boomers reach retirement age.
Republicans argue that 10-year projections are flawed and unreliable and that the tax cuts were needed to get the economy going in the short-term while encouraging job growth and new business investment in later years.
Democrats contend that the White House wants to use five-year numbers to hide the huge and continuing deficits in later years. They argue that the tax cuts will squander resources needed to address a multitude of problems facing the country, including domestic security and more Social Security claims.
''As bad as these numbers are, they are actually worse because they omit significant costs that the president has omitted from his budget,'' said Representative John M. Spratt Jr. of South Carolina, the ranking Democrat on the House Budget Committee.
In addition to operations in Iraq and Afghanistan, which could cost $50 billion next year, the budget does not include a provision for fixing the alternative minimum tax, a change that will probably drain $600 billion from the budget over the next decade, Mr. Spratt said.
By making only five-year projections, he said, the Bush plan ''left most people thinking we will cut the deficit in half and it will keep on declining. But in truth, we see in the C.B.O. projections that the deficit gets worse over the long term. We simply don't have a plan to eradicate it.''
Chad Kolton, spokesman for the Office of Management and Budget at the White House, said that administration officials are pleased that the budget office endorsed White House forecasts of a halved deficit within five years. But Mr. Kolton dismissed concerns about the large deficits predicted for later years.
''Once you get beyond that five-year window, the numbers, even by the C.B.O.'s account, become notoriously inaccurate,'' Mr. Kolton said. ''Even C.B.O. would admit we don't honestly know what these numbers will look like 10 years from now.''
Brian Riedl, federal budget analyst at the Heritage Foundation, a conservative research group in Washington, said the 10-year projections ''should be taken with a grain of salt because a 1 percent change in economic growth this year could alter annual tax revenues by hundreds of billions of dollars over the next decade.''
More important, Mr. Riedl said, were Congressional Budget Office forecasts indicating that total tax revenues will grow by almost 30 percent over the next three years because of the economic rebound and stock-market profits that will bolster capital-gains taxes. ''I was pleasantly surprised that revenues were projected as high as they were,'' he said.
Senator Kent Conrad of North Dakota, the ranking Democrat on the Senate Budget Committee, said it was ''fantasy'' to say the deficit would fall by half in just a few years because those budgets included hundreds of billions of dollars in surpluses from Social Security that would have to be repaid at some point.
''Instead of cutting the deficit in half,'' Mr. Conrad said in a statement on Friday night, ''the president's policies will lead to an explosion of debt, with gross federal debt reaching almost $13.9 trillion'' by 2014.
