Federal officials helping to coordinate security for the Republican National Convention this summer are planning to keep Pennsylvania Station open during the four-day event, though there will be much more security in the station and perhaps on the trains as well.
Penn Station is the busiest commuter rail station in the country, serving about 600,000 passengers on any given work day, and the possibility of its closing during the four-day convention is a source of anxiety not only for commuters, but for political leaders not eager to disrupt the lives of so many people.
The United States Secret Service, the lead federal agency coordinating security for the convention, has been working on plans that it says seek to balance security at Madison Square Garden for President Bush and the 50,000 others at the convention with the need to keep Midtown running when the convention is held from Aug. 30 through Sept. 2.
Steven G. Hughes, Secret Service coordinator for the convention, said it is inevitable that New Yorkers will be inconvenienced. Stores within the area will have to arrange their pickups and deliveries at specified times. No truck will get into the area without first being screened. Garbage cans and mailboxes will be removed. Garbage pickups will have to be rearranged so that bags do not sit on the street.
But he said that the Secret Service wanted life to go on. So while plans can change if there is suddenly a perceived threat, plans call for the rail station to remain open, he said. There may, however, be security agents on every train that comes in and out of the station, which services Amtrak, the Long Island Rail Road and New Jersey Transit. In addition, the National Guard, which already patrols the station, may be asked to beef up its presence there.
It is a sensitive assignment for the Secret Service, which is working closely with the New York City Police Department and 39 other state, city and federal agencies to address the prospect of record numbers of protesters, the potential threat of terrorism and the promise of frayed nerves among residents and business people from the area.
''There will be ultimate security for this event,'' Mr. Hughes said in an interview in his office in Brooklyn. ''We are leaving no stone unturned.''
The Republican National Convention has been declared a national security event, which gives the Secret Service status as lead federal agency helping coordinate the activities of other agencies. Together the Secret Service, the city police and the other agencies have assembled 18 subcommittees to address everything from training to motorcade route safety to public information. The agencies plan to stage mock drills in June, for example.
This will be the first Republican National Convention in New York, a city with a history of liberal activism and with five enrolled Democrats for every enrolled Republican. Though it is impossible to say how many people will turn out, demonstrators are predicting large numbers of protesters. Mr. Hughes said that law enforcement began planning last year and would be ''prepared for any number.''
While a lot of the nuts and bolts of the security operation will be carried out by the Police Department, a lot of what the city police decides will depend on where the Secret Service sets up its so-called frozen zone, which has not yet been determined. The Police Department -- which will decide where protesters will be permitted and how they will be allowed to assemble, whether behind barricades or in penned areas -- must first wait for the Secret Service to makes its decision, law enforcement officials said.
Security for a convention is a mammoth task. Law enforcement officials, for example, will conduct an assessment of each of the 43 hotels that will house officials, delegates and guests. It takes one month to scrutinize a hotel, Mr. Hughes said, with investigators looking at all personnel as well as the accessibility of fire escapes, the reliability of backup generators and other details.
The Secret Service must also provide security inside the Garden. In 1992, when the Democrats held their convention in New York, no one but New York City police officers and Secret Service agents were allowed to carry guns in the arena, which angered state police security details working with governors from other states. This time, however, the Secret Service is trying to come up with some type of negotiated agreement in advance, so that there are no conflicts on conventions days.
