President Bush and Chancellor Gerhard Schröder of Germany agreed Friday to put behind them their bitter rift over Iraq and pledged to work together to fight terrorism and bring democracy and stability to the Middle East.
They seemed to mean it.
''We have had differences in the past,'' Mr. Bush said with Mr. Schröder at his side in the Oval Office. ''But there's nothing wrong with friends having differences. And we have both committed to put the differences behind us and move forward.''
Mr. Schröder, who not only opposed the war but ran for re-election in 2002 on a platform that some White House officials considered to be anti-Bush, if not anti-American, said he and the president had agreed to talk ''not about the past'' but about what comes next.
''We both have an interest in seeing a stable and democratic Iraq develop,'' Mr. Schröder said.
The visit was the German leader's first to the White House since the war, and he seemed to succeed in forging a personal connection with Mr. Bush, or at least to temper his reputation among some administration officials as a dour Old European.
''The chancellor has got a good sense of humor, and therefore, he is able to make me laugh,'' said Mr. Bush, whose aides were unable or unwilling to recount any of Mr. Schröder's jokes. ''And a person that can make me laugh is a person who's easy to be with.''
Mr. Bush and Mr. Schröder covered a range of issues during their Oval Office meeting and a subsequent lunch. In addition to discussing Iraq and the Middle East, aides said, they talked about Turkey, with Mr. Schröder assuring the president that Germany would support negotiations for Turkey to become a member of the European Union.
Aides said they also discussed the weakening dollar, a subject of mounting concern in Europe, especially in Germany, whose export-driven economy is being hit hard by the weak dollar. Mr. Bush, said Scott McClellan, the White House spokesman, reiterated American policy that a strong dollar was good for the United States.
After their meeting, the leaders issued a joint statement. Its centerpiece was ''an ambitious goal, rooted in our shared values and experience: to promote freedom, democracy, human dignity, the rule of law, economic opportunity and security in the Greater Middle East.''
Mr. Schröder has voiced support for the administration's attempt to bring its allies together to transform the Middle East, although other European nations, particularly France, have expressed reservations about associating their own efforts in the area with those of the United States.
Meanwhile, the administration said Under Secretary of State Marc Grossman would go to Europe and the Middle East next week to quell criticism that the United States was preparing its so-called Greater Middle East Initiative without consulting the countries to be affected.
One topic that did not come up in the talks between Mr. Bush and Mr. Schröder, Mr. McClellan said, was whether the United States would drop its ban on allowing German companies to bid on prime contracts for rebuilding Iraq.
The administration has limited the bidding to countries that supported the United States in the war, though it has made an exception for Canada.
In recent months, however, Germany has signed on to an American effort to win agreement among Iraq's creditors to forgive much of the international debt run up by Saddam Hussein's government. The administration has suggested that Germany's cooperation can eventually lead the White House to rethink its decision about barring nations that opposed the war from making contract bids on Iraq's reconstruction.
But if Mr. Schröder had any illusion that he had been welcomed into Mr. Bush's inner circle of favored foreign leaders, it might have been shattered had he hung around a little longer. Then he might have seen Mr. Bush's helicopter fly the president away for a weekend at Camp David, the retreat to which Prime Minister Tony Blair of Britain and other leaders from abroad have been invited in the past few years as a reward for steadfast support.
