The United States indoor track and field championships began Friday under a cloud. Athletes and officials complain that this most elemental of sports receives no attention, except when it comes to real or presumed problems with illegal performance-enhancing drugs -- and they say that they and their sport are too often guilty by association.
Erin Gilreath, who won the women's 20-pound weight throw Friday at the Reggie Lewis Center with a distance of 77 feet  1/2 inch, said she was tired of innuendos.
''It bothers me when people make accusations about other people,'' she said. ''They don't say it directly to my face, but I find it. Not with this group of competitors, because we're all more or less professionals. But it's the only thing people outside the sport talk about.''
Concern about drugs has escalated in recent months with the detection of THG, or tetrahydrogestrinone, a synthetic steroid that was previously unknown. Four track and field athletes from the United States have tested positive for using THG. All four are contesting the finding, their lawyers said Friday.
Anita de Frantz, one of three Americans on the International Olympic Committee, promised this week that the United States would send a ''clean'' team to the Athens Olympics in August. She did not define what would constitute a clean athlete.
To Jennifer Toomey, who had the third-best time in qualifying for the 800 meters Friday and is also among the favorites in the women's 1,500, the picture was clear. ''Everyone not taking a banned substance should be able to go,'' she said. ''I hope every athlete who goes is doing it fairly.''
Michael Stember, an Olympian in 2000 who is running the 800 and 1,500 here, was second among the qualifiers in the 800 Friday. He said he was happy to hear of de Frantz's promise.
''I suspect she was alluding to the fact that USA Track and Field and the U.S. Olympic Committee have done everything in their power to rid our sport of drugs and have upped the standards to scare off people who were cheating,'' Stember said. ''To me, this whole drug thing doesn't make sense. Drugs undermine the whole process.''
Track and field tests athletes in and out of competition. The top three finishers in each event here are being tested. Others will be tested at random.
The tests are especially significant because the first two finishers in most finals here will represent the United States at the world indoor championships next weekend in Budapest. The men's and women's weight throws and racewalks are not contested at the worlds.
Allen Johnson, the 1996 Olympic champion in the 110-meter hurdles and a favorite in the 60 hurdles here, had mixed feelings about the impact of drugs on the sport.
''I have very little sympathy for the people involved, but there is some sympathy,'' said Johnson, who won his heat in the 60 hurdles Friday to advance to Saturday's semifinals. ''The sport wasn't dirty from the start. We have some people who cheat. Fortunately, we have some mechanics to catch people who do that. I think it's getting cleaned up.''
John Chaplin, a longtime track official and the coach of the American men's team at the 2000 Olympics, says de Frantz's promise of a clean team is not as simple as it sounds.
''I think what she said is a public relations statement,'' he said. ''It means you must test negative before leaving the U.S. Anyone who has tested positive but is in the appeals process would be left home. That would contradict the Amateur Sports Act, which the Congress made a law of the U.S. Otherwise, you're rearranging deck chairs on the Titanic.''
INSIDE TRACK
The only other final Friday was in the men's 35-pound weight throw. JAMES PARKER of Layton, Utah, won with a throw of 76 feet  3/4 inch. DUANE ROSS led the qualifiers in the men's 60-meter hurdles (7.53 seconds), JESSE O'CONNELL led in the men's 800 (1 minute 48.74 seconds) and HAZEL CLARK in the women's 800 (2:04.81).
TRACK AND FIELD
