Gov. Bill Owens of Colorado on Friday appointed the state's attorney general, Ken Salazar, as a special prosecutor to investigate the scandal surrounding the University of Colorado football program.
''The allegations of sexual misconduct, rape, alcohol abuse and recruiting violations, and the potential role in all of this by university employees, are well known,'' Owens said at a news conference in the state Capitol. ''Of equal concern is the perception that a climate may exist within the athletic department that discourages victims from reporting crimes.''
As a special prosecutor, Salazar will have subpoena power to investigate the allegations swirling around Colorado's football program. The university's Board of Regents had appointed an independent panel to investigate the scandal and examine the culture of the football program, but the panel lacks subpoena power.
The unusual appointment of a special prosecutor was supported by leading university officials.
At a news conference on campus in Boulder, the university's president, Elizabeth Hoffman, said: ''It is critical that we work expeditiously and responsibly to address the serious allegations that have been made, and the special prosecutor will help do that.''
Allegations involving the university's football team date from 1997, when a woman claimed she was sexually assaulted at a party for recruits. Three women have sued the university in federal court, saying they were raped by players or recruits during or after recruiting parties in 2001. While no charges were filed in those cases, in a recently released sworn deposition the Boulder County prosecutor, Mary Keenan, accused the Colorado football program of using sex and alcohol as recruiting tools.
In a recent article in Sports Illustrated, Katie Hnida, a former place-kicker for the team, said she had been raped by a player. Hnida has not filed a sexual-assault complaint with the authorities.
Coach Gary Barnett was put on paid administrative leave earlier this month after he criticized Hnida's athletic ability when her accusations became public.
Hoffman has said she was troubled by a police report in which an unidentified woman accused a player of rape and Barnett said he would side with the player ''100 percent'' if she pressed charges.
At the news conference on Friday, Owens noted that the allegations crossed county lines and that they involved different judicial districts and law enforcement agencies.
''The facts need to be put on the table with no spin, no whitewash and no excuses,'' he said.
Owens also announced that he would ask university officials to add two more members, including a victim advocate, to the independent panel investigating the football program. Owens said that he intended to appoint the new members.
The panel is scheduled to issue its first report by April 30, and Owens and Salazar said they wanted the Legislature to give the panel subpoena power.
Hoffman said she was surprised to learn that the governor was making his announcement about the special prosecutor on Friday, but said she did not think the appointment or its timing showed a lack of confidence in her.
''In fact, I think that the appointment of a special prosecutor, in particular, reflects his and the attorney general's concern that there are multiple jurisdictions and there is a need to prosecute or clear,'' she said.
Earlier this week, the university named John DiBiaggio, a former president of the University of Connecticut, as a temporary special assistant to oversee the athletic department.
Keenan said in a statement that she had asked for the attorney general's involvement in the investigation.
She has said she has been looking into what she described as ''an understanding'' within the athletic department that sex would be provided to recruits in their visits to campus.
COLLEGE FOOTBALL
