A day after a debate in which aides to Senator John Kerry said he had solidified his advantages over Senator John Edwards, Mr. Kerry attacked President Bush's handing of the war on terrorism on Friday, while Mr. Edwards raised the possibility that he might not win a single state on Super Tuesday.
In Los Angeles, Mr. Kerry laid out his own strategy for combating terrorism, saying he would expand the authority of the C.I.A. director over the nation's intelligence community and fight to ''win the war of ideas'' against radical Islam.
''I am convinced that we can prove to the American people that we know how to make them safer and more secure,'' he said, promising a ''stronger, more comprehensive, and more effective strategy for winning the war on terror than the Bush administration has ever envisioned.''
In a speech at the University of California, Los Angeles, Mr. Kerry said he would put the C.I.A. director in charge of the National Security Agency, the Defense Intelligence Agency, and the National Imaging and Mapping Agency.
Mr. Kerry, whose aides said Friday that his performance in Thursday's debate revealed his edge in stature over Mr. Edwards, drew would-be listeners who waited in a line that snaked hundreds of yards through the sculpture garden at U.C.L.A. Those who found seats included the actor Leonardo DiCaprio and the political commentator Arianna Huffington.
He said he would train more linguists and ''break down the barriers between national intelligence and local law enforcement,'' noting that two of the Sept. 11 hijackers had been arrested for drunken driving and one stopped for speeding in the months before the attacks.
On Thursday, Mr. Bush criticized Mr. Kerry without naming him, saying the nation would be more vulnerable to terrorist attacks under a Democratic administration and asserting that his opponents ''view terrorism more as a crime, a problem to be solved with law enforcement and indictments.''
After Sept. 11, 2001, Mr. Bush said, ''It is not enough to serve our enemies with legal papers.''
But Mr. Kerry shot back in his speech, saying ''We can't wipe out terrorist cells in places like Sweden, Canada, Spain, the Philippines, or Italy just by dropping in Green Berets.''
''It was local law enforcement working with our intelligence services that caught Khalid Shaikh Mohammed and Ramsi Bin al-Shibh in Pakistan, and the murderer known as Hambali in Thailand,'' Mr. Kerry said. ''Joining with local forces didn't mean serving these terrorists with legal papers, it meant throwing them behind bars.''
He added, ''Much more would be possible if we had a president who didn't alienate long-time friends and fuel anti-American anger around the world.''
Mr. Bush's campaign held a conference call in which Senator Jon Kyl, a Republican from Arizona and member of the intelligence committee, said Mr. Kerry's ''actions belie his words.''
''His call for the president to provide more rings rather hollow when you look at his record,'' Mr. Kyl said, asserting that Mr. Kerry had favored some cuts in intelligence spending in the past and wanted to abolish the USA Patriot Act. Mr. Kerry has called for revising the law when it expires this year to rein in what he called abuses by Attorney General John Ashcroft.
As Mr. Kerry flew from Los Angeles to San Francisco for fund-raisers and then rode across the bay to Oakland for a rally with Teamsters, his campaign released a new Internet ad attacking Mr. Bush's credibility.
The ad, called ''Keeping Our Word?'' shows Mr. Bush promising jobs, affordable health care and small and short-term deficits, while citing statistics showing 2.9 million jobs lost, 3.8 million people losing health coverage, and predicted yearly deficits of $400 billion for a decade.
Mr. Edwards, meanwhile, canceled a Los Angeles event and flew to St. Paul, in Minnesota, one of the Super Tuesday states his campaign has called pivotal to his survival. While his aides conceded he had not had the kind of impact they had hoped for in Thursday's debate, Mr. Edwards played down the importance of Tuesday's contests.
''Our goal is to continue winning delegates in substantial amounts,'' he said. Asked if Tuesday would mark a turning point, he replied, ''I don't think it's Tuesday. I think it's a much longer process than that.''
Mr. Edwards spoke to a few hundred people at Hamline University in St. Paul and promoted his endorsement by a statewide group of former supporters of Howard Dean.
Mr. Edwards has run no television commercials in Minnesota, while he has ads running in Georgia, Ohio and New York, the three states where he will spend much of his time until Tuesday. The far-flung Super Tuesday states and the pressure to raise money seemed to limit Mr. Edwards's personal appearances. After spending 18 minutes at the St. Paul rally, Mr. Edwards then left for a Louisiana fund-raiser.
In New York on Friday, several elected officials and a politically powerful union that had backed Dr. Dean fell in behind Senator Kerry, adding to his already lengthy list of local endorsements.
His New York campaign has focused on picking up as many officials' endorsements as possible, and among those who backed him Friday were the City Council speaker, Gifford Miller, and Representatives Joseph Crowley of Queens, Jerrold Nadler of Manhattan, Major R. Owens of Brooklyn and Maurice D. Hinchey, whose district stretches from Poughkeepsie to Ithaca. Members of Congress are superdelegates, so their endorsements help inch Mr. Kerry closer to the nomination.
Mr. Kerry, who is to campaign in Brooklyn Saturday night, also picked up the backing of Local 1199, the giant health-care workers union that controls one of the most potent political machines in the state.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: BATTLEGROUNDS
