THERE was nothing when the F.B.I. agent first came to the Fresh Kills landfill, and nothing when he left. During his 11-month stay, though, he helped to create, supervise and tear down a village of grim purpose: the sifting of 1.8 billion tons of World Trade Center debris.
The operation that the agent, Richard Marx, had conceived, along with a New York police inspector named James Luongo, became a marvel of efficiency and compassion. It recovered more than 4,200 pieces of human remains, returned nearly 70,000 personal effects and treated grieving families as though they were visiting dignitaries. If they wanted a rock, a fistful of dirt -- something to hold on to -- they were not denied.
Jack Lynch, a board member of the Coalition of 911 Families, remembers Agent Marx's passion. ''He told me that in all his career, this was the most emotional, most important endeavor that he was ever involved in,'' he said.
The Fresh Kills operation also became a model of foresight. Determined to save remnants of the now for the future, they catalogued everything from a crushed police car to a trade center janitor's key. In the spirit of a Congressional mandate, they helped distribute items to museums around the country. ''We were extremely touched and impressed and awed by what we saw up there,'' recalled Jan Seidler Ramirez, the museum director of the New-York Historical Society.
When there was nothing left to sift, Agent Marx returned to the bureau's field office in Philadelphia an affected man. ''This was his baby,'' his supervisor, Jeff Lampinski, said. ''He had a hard time, emotionally, leaving the landfill.''
In the eyes of many, Agent Marx was a hero. Until a few days ago.
That was when Senator Chuck Grassley of Iowa made public his letter to Robert S. Mueller III, the F.B.I. director. Citing a report by the Justice Department's inspector general, he accused agents of ''filching'' items from ground zero and the landfill.
Calling it a ''ghoulish practice'' -- ''grave robbing,'' in fact -- he pointed a finger at a someone easily identified as Agent Marx, a forensics expert who has been with the bureau since 1997. Using the report's findings, he said that the agent had taken many items, from an elevator wheel to a fire truck door, from melted guns to airplane pieces. The clear implication was that Agent Marx had kept these items, either to admire or to sell.
Actually, the artifacts have been stored in an F.B.I. warehouse in Philadelphia, awaiting public display somewhere. In addition, Mr. Grassley's letter does not reflect a telling detail in the report: that two investigators from the inspector general's office were taken to the warehouse by an F.B.I. supervisor and shown the items.
''We even turned over e-mails to the investigators that were communications between our headquarters and Richard regarding the disposition of these items,'' said the supervisor, Michael Thompson, who is now retired. ''He kept asking: 'What am I going to do with these things?'''
ANOTHER finding in the report, also shared by Senator Grassley, was that Agent Marx had given an American flag found in the rubble to the assistant director of the F.B.I.'s New York office, and was less than candid about this and other items removed from the site.
Barry W. Mawn, the assistant director, now retired, recalled yesterday that he asked for a memento, but specified that it be something that would otherwise become landfill. He said that Mr. Marx suggested he take a small piece of concrete and a souvenir flag, the kind waved at parades.
Mr. Mawn dismissed Senator Grassley as a ''hip shooter,'' but said of Mr. Marx: ''He truly did an outstanding job.''
Jill Kozeny, a spokeswoman for Senator Grassley, said that any factual dispute Agent Marx might have is with the inspector general. A spokesman for the Office of the Inspector General declined to comment on the report, citing privacy.
The F.B.I. has now effectively prohibited agents from removing any items from a recovery site and is conducting an internal review of the report's findings. It seems that some F.B.I. agents acted inappropriately, including the one from Minnesota who made off with a Tiffany paperweight.
But what about Agent Marx? He declined to comment about the report, which accuses him of changing his version of events and of being less than forthcoming. His supervisor, Mr. Lampinski, said that the Philadelphia bureau planned to respond to the report, which neither he nor Agent Marx has yet seen.
By the way, he said, Agent Marx has no trade center trophies displayed on his desk.
About New York  Correction:  March 6, 2004, Saturday  The About New York column last Saturday, about assertions that F.B.I. agents kept souvenirs from the World Trade Center attack, misstated the amount of debris from the site that was sifted at the Fresh Kills landfill on Staten Island. It was 1.8 million tons, not 1.8 billion.
