The debate in Congress over President Bush's call for a constitutional amendment banning gay marriage is deeply dividing Republican lawmakers from New York, reflecting the quandary the party faces nationally on the issue.
Even as one New York Democrat after another denounced the Bush proposal, many leading Republicans from the state say they are grappling with the issue and acknowledge that it is one of the most difficult matters that they have had to confront.
By and large, New York Republicans agree with the president's contention that traditional marriage is under assault, pointing to recent events in Massachusetts, where a court has ordered the state to begin issuing same-sex marriage licenses in May, and in San Francisco, where the mayor has already begun to issue such licenses. And in New York, the mayor of New Paltz began performing marriages on Friday, even though the local clerk refused to issue licenses.
But at the same time, several New York Republicans contend that they are not entirely persuaded that passing a constitutional amendment is the appropriate way to ensure that marriage remains an exclusive union between men and women.
Representative Peter T. King, a Republican from Long Island, said that before he supports an amendment, he wants to see how the Supreme Court rules on individual state laws barring gay marriage.
''We have to be deliberative about this,'' he said. ''Before I amend the Constitution, I want to be clear that the Supreme Court is going to take this power away from the states.''
For the president's proposal to pass, it would need the support of a two-thirds majority in Congress. At this point, Republicans would have to provide the bulk of the votes to approve any amendment outlawing gay marriages.
Already, New York's two most prominent Republicans, Gov. George E. Pataki and Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg, have stated their opposition to a constitutional ban, saying it should be up to the states.
But the issue is not so clear-cut for many of the state's Republicans on Capitol Hill. Their quandary is epitomized by the case of Representative Sue Kelly, a moderate Republican from Westchester County.
Ms. Kelly has stopped short of endorsing the president's proposal, noting, in a statement released by her office, that an ''amendment to our Constitution is one of the most serious acts of government and one that I do not take casually.''
But at the same time, Ms. Kelly expressed concerns with events in Massachusetts and San Francisco. ''These circumstances have challenged Congress to undertake a careful and sensitive review of proposals that will preserve the sanctity of marriage in our country,'' she said.
Similarly, Representative James T. Walsh, a Republican from the Syracuse area, ''wants to ensure that all other legislative means are exhausted'' before Congress takes action on a constitutional amendment, according to his spokesman.
But the spokesman, Dan Gage, added that Mr. Walsh was prepared to vote in favor of a constitutional ban if such a measure reached the floor of the House. ''The congressman doesn't take light amending the constitution,'' Mr. Gage said. ''But this is an important issue that impacts so much of the fabric of our society and our daily life.''
The president's proposal does enjoy unqualified support among a few New York Republicans. Representative John Sweeney of the Albany area, for one, argued that Congress had little choice but to pass a constitutional prohibition on gay marriage.
''Unfortunately, a handful of activist judges have decided to undermine the will of the people, and a few local officials have begun egregiously flouting the law,'' he said. '' While the government should not be in the business of legislating personal matters, I strongly believe marriage is a sacred bond that occupies a special place in our society and history.''
But through a spokesman, Representative Vito J. Fossella, a Republican from Staten Island, said he opposed the president's call for a constitutional amendment. ''Vito does not feel it's appropriate at this time,'' the spokesman, Craig Donner, said.
In the meantime, one of New York's most influential Republicans in Congress, Thomas Reynolds, has avoided taking a public position. People close to Mr. Reynolds, from the Buffalo region, say that as the chairman of the National Republican Congressional Committee, he does not feel it is appropriate to take sides on an issue over which House Republicans are so deeply divided.
