Richard A. Grasso is vowing not to return a penny of his pay from the New York Stock Exchange, but regulators are boring deep into his past, examining his conduct as an outside director as well as his business relationships with former board members, according to people who have been briefed on the investigation.
This broader investigation, combined with the hardening stance of Mr. Grasso, who resigned under pressure as chairman, presages what is sure to be a rancorous and, for the stock exchange and its former directors, a potentially embarrassing legal dispute.
For more than a month now, regulators, who are considering whether to seek a return of at least some of the money, have been issuing subpoenas to former directors, asking expressly about their business ties to Mr. Grasso and the exchange.
On Thursday, Mr. Grasso fired back, breaking a silence that had lasted for months by informing the Big Board that he would refuse to give up any part of his $139.5 million pay package and might even sue the exchange for about $50 million owed to him.
Regulators say that Mr. Grasso's new public stance will have no effect on their investigation, which began earlier this year when John S. Reed, the interim chairman of the exchange, referred the matter of Mr. Grasso's pay to the New York attorney general, Eliot Spitzer, and the Securities and Exchange Commission.
By taking a close look at Mr. Grasso's conduct as a director on companies listed at the stock exchange, regulators are casting a wider net than the Big Board did when it hired a former federal prosecutor to look into the origins of Mr. Grasso's pay.
During his time as chairman, Mr. Grasso was a director of Computer Associates, where he sat on the board from 1994 to 2002, and Home Depot where he is still a director, though he plans to step down this year.
Mr. Grasso also sat on the compensation committees at both companies.
By learning more about Mr. Grasso's past behavior related to executive pay, regulators could then be in a better position to support their case that Mr. Grasso, as chairman of the exchange's board, put in place the processes that led to his being granted the large pay package.
Regulators are expected to make the case that under New York State not-for-profit law, the $188 million total awarded to Mr. Grasso was unreasonable and not commensurate with his responsibilities as a chairman of a quasipublic institution like the exchange.
In a blistering letter sent on Thursday to Mr. Reed, Brendan V. Sullivan Jr., Mr. Grasso's lawyer, criticized Mr. Reed for saying publicly that Mr. Grasso should return large amounts of his pay.
''Mr. Grasso has no intention of returning any portion of his compensation to the exchange,'' according to the letter, which was reported yesterday by The Financial Times and The Washington Post. ''If the exchange believes it has a valid claim, it should file it, rather than conducting a campaign through the press and intermediaries in an attempt to pressure Mr. Grasso.''
Mr. Sullivan did not return a call seeking comment.
The letter came in response to a letter Mr. Reed sent to Mr. Grasso on Feb. 12, when he demanded that Mr. Grasso repay $120 million to the exchange.
Mr. Sullivan's letter puts the long-simmering topic of Mr. Grasso's pay back in the public eye and comes at difficult time for the exchange.
John A. Thain, the new chief executive of the exchange, has been trying hard to bring about structural change at the Big Board by trying to modernize both its trading and governance practices.
If anything, the exchange of letters underscores what seems to be a growing personal animus between Mr. Grasso and Mr. Reed, with the former chairman going so far as to suggest possible legal action against the exchange in response to public comments made by Mr. Reed.
In some ways, the letter is an unusual document.
Written with evident passion, it very much gives voice to the anger that directors who have spoken with Mr. Grasso say he bears against Mr. Reed and against directors who withdrew their support for him last summer.
''The exchange signed a contract that prohibits the public disparagement of Mr. Grasso, we suggest that it is time for you and Mr. Thain to read the contract as we intend to hold you to it,'' Mr. Sullivan wrote to Mr. Reed.
In approaching the question of Mr. Grasso's pay, Mr. Reed has reached for the high moral ground, saying on numerous occasions that Mr. Grasso's pay was unreasonable.
But Mr. Grasso's impassioned response now leaves that approach open to question.
While the former directors hired Mr. Reed to address the conflict-of-interest issues that led to Mr. Grasso's pay package, they were also under the impression that reaching some sort of agreement with Mr. Grasso over his pay was part of his job description.
Now, a settlement seems farther away than ever.
Having put in a new board and hired Mr. Thain, Mr. Reed, who still calls himself an interim chairman, has been an infrequent presence at the exchange in recent weeks.
He has recently bought a $10 million seaside estate outside of Boston and has been put on a list of candidates under consideration to become the next president of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, his alma mater, according to several members of the search committee.
By recruiting Mr. Spitzer to investigate Mr. Grasso and continuing to speak out against Mr. Grasso's pay in public, Mr. Reed has forced Mr. Grasso, who remains at heart the scrappy street fighter from Queens, to take the offensive.
Regulators continue to sift through reams of information related to Mr. Grasso's conduct, five months after his resignation.
And it is not clear yet what new information they will uncover.
As a member of the compensation committee at Computer Associates in 1998, Mr. Grasso signed off on a much-criticized package that awarded top executives of the company more than $1 billion in stock.
As for Home Depot, Mr. Grasso has been on the compensation committee there since 2002.
Also on the Home Depot board is Kenneth G. Langone, who in addition to being a friend of Mr. Grasso was also the chairman of the stock exchange's compensation committee from 1999 through the first half of 2003.
