ONE recent afternoon outside the red brick headquarters here, Robert McBride, the new police chief of the huge Ekurhuleni district in eastern Johannesburg, bumped into a white officer who used to throw people like him in jail.
In the topsy-turvy world of post-apartheid South Africa, Mr. McBride, a mixed-race former anti-apartheid guerrilla, is now the officer's boss. ''Chief, I have a past, you have a past,'' Mr. McBride said the officer told him. ''I trust you will not hold my past against me.'' Mr. McBride said he promised not to. He seeks the same tolerance. He needs it, perhaps, more than most.
At the height of the violence over apartheid, Mr. McBride was a legendary bomb maker, whose shrapnel-packed explosives helped shake South Africa's white rulers to the core. His most devastating attack, in June 1986, killed 3 civilians and wounded 73 others at Magoo's Bar on a Durban beach.
To many who fought apartheid, Mr. McBride is a hero who risked his life to defy white supremacy, which ended in 1994. To others, including some blacks who also defied the old government, he is a slayer of innocents.
South Africa's Truth and Reconciliation Commission, which exhumed the sins of apartheid's supporters and foes alike, was supposed to set such debates to rest. Mr. McBride, now 40, with a paunch and three daughters, was granted amnesty in 1999.
But in places like the Ekurhuleni public safety offices, the question lingers: Is that enough to wipe the slate clean?
Today, Mr. McBride's feelings about the Magoo's Bar bombing are decidedly shaded. He regrets it, he said, but in the manner that many former combatants regret unintended civilian casualties in a just war.
''I find it a tragedy people had to die,'' said Mr. McBride, dressed in gray slacks and a tie with a tiny elephant pattern during a recent conversation in his tidy corner office. ''But I cannot separate the sadness I feel from the sadness I feel about all of the other deaths of apartheid.'' Asked if he felt guilty, he grew exasperated. ''I have said 'sorry' a million times,'' he said. ''Do you want me to say it another million times?''
South Africa's president, Thabo Mbeki, waded into the controversy over Mr. McBride's appointment, saying history should not be a barrier. A transformation is under way, he argued, because ''enemies of the past have reached out to one another.'' [Winnie Mandela, another prominent supporter, showed up at a muddy stadium to see Mr. McBride sworn in on Friday.]
CRITICS say it is incredible that a man who blew up civilians, and who has no training in public security, should now oversee the safety of more than 2.5 million people. To them, it is a sign that the ruling African National Congress is simply bent on rewarding its own.
Eddie Taylor, who heads the local caucus of the mostly white Democratic Alliance party, walked out of the local council meeting in late October when Mr. McBride was appointed. He and other members have sued to have the appointment overturned. ''This man's character is a question mark, but because he is a struggle brother, he can take whatever position he likes,'' Mr. Taylor said in a telephone interview. ''We are saying, 'Sorry, that's not acceptable.' ''
In the precinct house, some white officers are pulling for Mr. McBride. Others quietly hope he is forced out. For Louis Englebrecht, a white lawyer and police officer who now serves under Mr. McBride, South Africa is a nation of people in glass houses. He says he himself would just as soon forget the day in 1986 when he watched fellow officers in the apartheid security force beat a black man.
''Look, he's a good guy,'' he said of his new chief after delivering a sheaf of papers to sign. ''We fought our war, he fought his war, and we came together. I simply have gone out and advocated, 'Give the man a chance.' ''
IT is not surprising that opinions of Mr. McBride as chief are so divergent. Fitting Robert John McBride into a neat category has never been easy.
He grew up in Durban in a ghetto set aside for ''coloreds,'' the apartheid term for mixed-race residents. In the past decade, among other things, he has gone from death row to a seat in the nation's Parliament.
He battled white rule but married the white daughter of the fabulously wealthy director of Anglo American, the gold and diamond empire. The headline-grabbing death-row union has lasted for 15 years. But his own father, who fought with him in the guerrilla ranks, no longer speaks to him, because Mr. McBride ultimately supported political compromises to end apartheid.
He was 22 when his career as a bomber began. The explosives that Mr. McBride planted at an electrical substation killed an officer of South Africa's internal security force. He also killed a civilian in a rescue of a fellow apartheid fighter from a hospital.
Mr. McBride told the truth commission that he never meant to single out Magoo's; he was aiming at the bar next door, which a fellow fighter had told him was packed with government security officers. But when he detonated 100 pounds of explosives on the street outside, the only victims were civilians.
Captured weeks after the bombing, Mr. McBride was beaten regularly in detention. He spent the next six years in prison, four of them on death row. After being released in 1992, he served two years as a member of the provincial and national Parliaments, then in posts at the Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
His career there was marred when he was arrested in Mozambique in 1998 on suspicion of gun smuggling. He said at the time that he was investigating the smugglers, but South African officials said he had no such assignment. Mozambican officials later dropped the charges, and Mr. McBride, in a midlevel staff job at the ministry, began looking for a new challenge.
Izak Berg, an independent white council member, was the first to walk out of the chamber when he saw Mr. McBride's appointment on the calendar. But to his own astonishment, he said in a telephone interview, his attitude has softened. He said Mr. McBride's style is upfront, like his own. Some white officers have urged him to give the new chief a chance.
''People need to stop judging,'' he said. ''We've got to. We've got no other choice.''
That would be fine by Mr. McBride. He said he was focusing entirely on his new job, not on the hullabaloo around him. In a nation where violent crime has steadily increased, he urges his 700 police officers, nearly half of whom are white, to get back to basics.
He said he did not accept that whites who created and benefited from an oppressive government should sit in moral judgment on how the oppressed, like him, responded.
His past refuses to fade from the public consciousness, he says, only because, unlike most others who suffered and died in the battle over apartheid, his victims were white.
''I am the only one singled out,'' he said.
THE SATURDAY PROFILE
