The punches came from everywhere, landing on his head and shoulders like anvils, threatening to stall Roberto Benitez's hopes of an Olympic medal, just as they did four years ago.
But Benitez, who grew up on the Lower East Side of Manhattan, is older now, and he quietly told himself to be patient, to weather the punches from Eric Hunter, and to keep his feet moving.
When the bout was over, and the referee raised Benitez's left hand, Benitez knew he had taken another step toward the Olympic Games in Athens. He scored a four-round decision over Hunter in the 119-pound bantamweight class at the United States Olympic box-offs on Friday night at the Convocation Center at Cleveland State University.
The victory put Benitez, who fought in the champions bracket, on the 11-man Olympic team, but he and the other victors from the box-offs are not assured of a trip to Athens unless they place either first or second in one of the two remaining Americas qualifiers, in Tijuana, Mexico, on March 12-20 and in Rio de Janeiro on April 4-11.
Benitez said he would fight in the Tijuana qualifier.
Jason Estrada, a superheavyweight from Providence, R.I., does not have to place in the remaining qualifiers because he earned a gold medal at the 2003 Pan Am Games. He defeated Mike Wilson of Central Point, Ore., on Friday to become the first boxer to make the team and qualify for Athens.
''I've earned my spot,'' said Estrada, who has the words Lights Out etched into his left shoulder. ''Now I just have to do what I know I can do.''
The 24 amateur boxers were divided into a champions and challengers bracket, based on their performances leading up to the box-offs.
The fighters in the champions bracket needed only to win Friday night to earn a spot on the team, while the challengers needed to win Friday night to force a second bout Saturday.
All the bouts were scheduled for four rounds, and each round lasted two minutes. Benitez's fight was particularly difficult and controversial.
Four years ago, he failed to qualify for the Games in Sydney, Australia. On Friday, he took several big shots from Hunter, who peppered him hard enough to prompt the referee to give Benitez a standing eight count in the fourth round.
When the judges declared Benitez the victor by a 29-15 margin, many in the sparse but energetic crowd booed the decision.
''I tried to be careful, but I knew I had it on points,'' said the 23-year-old Benitez, who attends Northern Michigan University. ''I just had to stick to the game plan, which was move.''
Hunter, who is 17, walked away from the ring with a noticeable frown, as did Hunter's trainer, Sloan Harrison. Both disagreed with the decision.
''This is why a lot of kids turn professional,'' Harrison said. ''You get to the door and they shut it in your face.''
Hunter, who is from Philadelphia, said he would not wait for 2008 to try to become an Olympian. He said he would turn professional. ''I've got talent,'' he said. ''I might as well get paid for it.''
Even before Friday night's bouts, dark clouds of controversy visited these box-offs.
Late Thursday night, Juan McPherson of Cleveland and Andre Berto of Winter Haven, Fla., were disqualified from the box-offs by the American Arbitration Association because of an incident during their bout at the Olympic trials on Feb. 17 in Tunica, Miss. Berto threw McPherson to the canvas and incurred a disqualification.
Although McPherson sustained an injury during the incident, the arbitrator ruled that the suspended bout between the 152-pounders would not be made up, ending the dreams of McPherson, 19, and the 20-year-old Berto.
Four other welterweights replaced McPherson and Berto on the card in a continuation of the Olympic trials. Vanes Matirosyan of Glendale, Calif., defeated Cory Jones of Brooklyn in a champions' bracket bout. Austin Trout of Las Cruces, N.M., handled Edward Joseph of Fort Carson, Colo., in a decision in the challengers bracket.
Jones and Trout will meet Saturday and Matirosyan will face the winner Sunday to determine which 152-pounder will make the Olympic team.
BOXING
