I AM more than willing to forgive Bread Tribeca for its bland soups, its charming but not always focused serving staff and the lack of spoons for its saltcellars -- I hate to think how many fingers have taken a pinch or two -- because most of the food is a pleasure.
Every neighborhood would be lucky to have a place like it, where the dress code is immaterial for patrons and waiters alike, and people who linger over a cup of coffee and the paper in the middle of the afternoon are not shooed out. With its soaring windows, white brick walls, open fireplace and stripped-down look it is quintessential TriBeCa.
Good breads may be the foundation of the restaurant -- Luigi Comandatore, the co-owner of the restaurant with Bob Giraldi, also owns Bread, a paninoteca on Spring Street. This more ambitious spot has moved way beyond panini, though. Still, if you fancy something between two slices you will be amazed at how good sardines taste with pepperoncini and tomatoes on a baguette.
Taking its cue from Liguria, the restaurant offers food that is simply prepared and delicious. In fact, its fritto misto may be one of the best in the city. Tender, crisp, and lightly breaded, the assorted seafood and vegetables are fried to perfection and served on white paper. There are no architectural renderings on the plates here; no froufrou decorations, just straightforward cooking.
If you, like me, think the only kind of pizza crust worthy of the name is rolled as thin as possible and baked in a brick oven, then you would do well to make this restaurant a pizza hangout even though there are only two choices -- pizza margherita and pizza with prosciutto and arugula. If you live in the neighborhood, so much the better: they'll deliver. Baking it in an impressive iron and brick wood-burning oven (handmade, custom built) does make a difference. Not just to the pizzas and breads, but also to the grilled vegetables and roasted meats.
(It's not often that people marvel over the flavor of a plate of grilled vegetables. They usually leave them to the veggie eaters at the table.)
The chef showed a very sure hand with fish: it was never overcooked. A savory tomato-shrimp flavored broth perfumed the zuppa de pesce filled with tender seafood that was sautéed before being added to the broth. Fried sardines were perfectly cooked, light and greaseless and balanced by the slight bitterness of arugula and lemon zest. Grilled shrimp, which are almost always cooked too long, were sweet and tender. Branzino, sea bass on a bed of braised radicchio, was moist and simply flavored with rosemary, lemon and salt and showed off to its best advantage on a slab of black slate.
Pesto, perhaps the most famous export of Liguria, generally overpowers whatever it is meant to complement. Here just the right amount is used with taglierini, haricots verts and potatoes. The tagliatelle with braised lamb and tomatoes was also a treat but the star of the pasta department is the pansotti with walnut sauce, plump supersized tortellini filled with minced herbs and topped with a irresistible cream sauce of ground walnuts, cheese, milk and garlic.
Fat green-lipped mussels from New Zealand in a peppery tomato broth fortunately come with thick slices of crusty bread, the best method for conveying the last drop of liquid from the bottom of the bowl to your mouth. But maybe the biggest surprise of the day was the moist whole roasted Cornish hen, a bird neither known for its flavor nor its tenderness but rather for its frequent appearance at large catered events.
The chef, Iacopo Falai, formerly the pastry chef at Osterio del Circo, has brought his considerable dessert skills with him. The freshly fried orange pastry cream-stuffed fritelle, about the size of doughnut holes, come with a chocolate sauce, reputedly infused with basil. I didn't get a whiff of the basil but the fritelle didn't need chocolate sauce. Strawberries, sautéed and glazed, are served with vanilla gelato, wonderfully scented and flavored with the sweet Italian wine, moscato. The simple plate of cookies, including tiny muffins flavored with coffee and lemon, lemon cookies and excellent biscotti, was remarkable. The pumpkin crème brûlée is a mistake.
Bread Tribeca has other faults that are curious because they are so inconsistent with most of the food. The mashed potatoes had no flavor, not even any salt. The huge plate of prosciutto was nice but it needed something more than a couple of Parmesan breadsticks, which didn't have much cheese flavor, to set it off. The gnocchi were singularly disappointing, not especially flavorful and a trifle doughy.
There is a short, reasonable wine list, emphasizing Italian bottles and the usual cocktails that have nothing to do with the food.
Although I am not necessarily a fan of communal tables -- there are also tables for four or more -- one night my party was seated at one and perhaps because it was not full, the other guests did not seem intrusive. We admired their shrimp before we got ours; they admired our desserts.
I'm glad I was not facing the 50-inch television screen that runs constantly though without sound.
I don't know what to say about the black sink in the bathroom, so trendy, so deep, so square, so filled with pebbles -- and large enough to bathe a toddler in.
Bread Tribeca  * [Rating: one star]  301 Church Street (Walker Street), (212) 334-0200.
ATMOSPHERE -- Spare, informal with open kitchen and wood-burning oven.
SOUND LEVEL -- Moderately noisy with music raising the decibel level.
RECOMMENDED DISHES -- Antipasto di mare; fritto misto; fried sardines; grilled vegetables; pansotti with walnut sauce; taglierini with pesto; tagliatelli with lamb; roasted Cornish hen; steamed mussels; zuppa de pesce; pizza margherita; branzino; shrimp with vegetables; sardines and pepperoncini on baguette; fritelle; strawberry soup; cookie plate.
SERVICE -- Always well intentioned, occasionally forgetful.
WINE LIST -- Short, mostly Italian and generally reasonable.
HOURS -- Lunch, 11:30 a.m. to 5 p.m. every day; dinner, 5:30 to 11 p.m. Sunday through Thursday; Friday and Saturday until midnight. Weekend brunch is offered during lunch hours.
PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers $5 to $14; Entrees, including pastas, $13 to $25; Desserts $6 to $8.
CREDIT CARDS -- All major cards.
WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- Two steps to dining room; staff members will create a makeshift ramp as needed.
WHAT THE STARS MEAN:
(None) Poor to satisfactory  * Good  ** Very good  *** Excellent  **** Extraordinary
Ratings reflect the reviewer's reaction to food, ambience and service, with price taken into consideration. Menu listings and prices are subject to change.
PAST REVIEWS from The Times, with additional capsule reviews by Times critics: nytimes.com/dining
RESTAURANTS  Correction:  January 15, 2004, Thursday  The Restaurants column in the Dining section yesterday, reviewing Bread Tribeca, at 301 Church Street in Manhattan, carried an erroneous star rating. The critic assigned it two stars, not one.
The review also misstated the reservation telephone number. It is (212) 334-8282; for delivery orders, (212) 334-0200.
Correction:  January 21, 2004, Wednesday  The Restaurants column last Wednesday, reviewing Bread Tribeca, at 301 Church Street in Manhattan, carried an erroneous star rating. The critic assigned it two stars, not one.
The review also misstated the reservation telephone number. It is (212) 334-8282; for delivery orders, (212) 334-0200.
The complete review is available online: nytimes.com/dining.
