Mets General Manager Jim Duquette said yesterday that he might have overstated the amount of medical information the team had about Vladimir Guerrero's back.
The Mets cited the information as one of the reasons for their modest offer to Guerrero, the All-Star outfielder who wound up joining the Anaheim Angels over the weekend.
Duquette's comments were in response to questions from Guerrero's agent, Fernando Cuza, and the players association over the origin of medical information that appeared to disparage Guerrero.
''To my misunderstanding, we did not have a look at any reports or documents or anything like that,'' Duquette said in a telephone interview last night.
He said the evaluation of the Mets' doctor, Andrew Rokito, was based on ''conversations with the doctor, what was common knowledge in the newspapers, whatever kind of information we could find out about the injury.''
''But the doctors did not review any medical reports,'' he said. ''If I said that, I misspoke.''
In Saturday's conference call to announce that the Mets were not signing Guerrero, Duquette said that Mets doctors advised against offering a long-term deal based on seeing medical reports on the herniated disk and discussions with the physician who examined Guerrero this off-season.
Access to the medical information allowed Mets doctors to make a ''credible evaluation,'' Duquette told reporters.
Cuza, who has contacted the union about his concerns, said yesterday that the only medical access the Mets were given was one discussion with Dr. Bart Green, a spinal specialist affiliated with the University of Miami who examined Guerrero this off-season and who offered the Mets positive feedback.
''We are taking some steps into where they acquired their information from,'' Cuza said by telephone yesterday. ''To my knowledge, myself and my partners, nobody has ever given any authority for medical information to the Mets.''
Cuza, who has not spoken with the Mets since Saturday, said he had contacted a representative of the players association and would speak with other members of the union, presumably its lawyers, if an investigation proceeded. Cuza was one of the agents who negotiated a five-year, $70 million contract with the Angels, a deal that dwarfed the Mets' proposal.
The Mets offered Guerrero a five-year, $71 million deal, but only three years and $30 million were guaranteed.
Insurance covers only the first three years of a contract and precludes pre-existing injuries; the Mets would have had no protection had Guerrero hurt his back again.
The Mets, who have gambled and lost by acquiring players with a high risk of injury -- most notably with Mo Vaughn -- have repeatedly defended their offer by noting the risk of Guerrero's reinjuring his back.
Duquette said conversations with doctors familiar with Guerrero's injury left Rokito ''confident this was a risk.''
Duquette said, ''If I misspoke, it was in that specific area that our doctors saw notes.''
He added, ''I think I characterized all the conversations between the doctors as more than what it was.''
Guerrero missed seven weeks last season with a herniated disk, which did not require surgery, and hit .353 with 17 home runs in 218 at-bats after his return.
He passed his physical examination with the Angels' doctor, Lewis Yocum, on Monday -- ''which speaks for itself,'' Cuza said -- before being introduced at a news conference.
Asked why the Mets were so concerned about Guerrero's health, Cuza said, ''I do not know where that's coming from.''
INSIDE PITCH
The Mets inquired into GREG MADDUX's interest in playing for them this season, but they have decided against making even a modest offer because he is seeking too much money for their tastes. Maddux, the longtime ace of the Atlanta Braves, is a free agent and could return to the Chicago Cubs, where he began his career. SCOTT BORAS, Maddux's agent, said this week that he had fielded offers from ''as many as five or six teams,'' but that he would not discuss conversations with the Mets because ''I'm sworn to secrecy with certain teams.''
BASEBALL
