Just a week after bailing out two of the country's biggest banks, China's Ministry of Finance is preparing to help them again, this time by writing off its $41 billion stake in them in a bid to help cleanse their balance sheets of nonperforming loans and prepare them to issue stock, Chinese bankers said on Tuesday.
The move is the latest in a series of steps by China to fortify its banking system ahead of what could be a difficult year for the Chinese economy. China's central bank announced Tuesday afternoon that inflation at the wholesale level continued to accelerate last month, with prices up 6.3 percent from a year earlier, increasing pressure on the central bank to slow the economy.
The planned write-off by the Ministry of Finance comes only a week after Beijing officials announced that they would invest $45 billion of the country's foreign exchange reserves in the two banks, the Bank of China and the China Construction Bank.
The injection of the $45 billion and forgiveness of the $41 billion show that China is quickening its pace in dealing with financial problems, economists said. Both moves will help prepare the banks for the sale of shares in Hong Kong and overseas later this year or in 2005.
''China has done more in the past two weeks than in the previous two years,'' said Tao Dong, an economist with Credit Suisse First Boston.
Liang Hong, an economist at Goldman Sachs, said that there was still considerable political sensitivity in China about using the country's hard-earned foreign exchange reserves to bail out banks for years of poor lending decisions. Having the Ministry of Finance write off its longstanding ownership stake in the banks is more politically palatable within China than directly using some of the country's holdings of Treasury bonds and bills to cover the banks' losses, although the practical difference is limited, she said.
''On paper, you still have the good assets, the foreign exchange,'' she said, referring to the $45 billion injection.
Neither the Bank of China nor the China Construction Bank had any immediate comment on Tuesday.
Until late December, the Ministry of Finance was the sole owner of both banks, with two-thirds of its $41 billion stake in the Bank of China and the rest in the China Construction Bank. At the end of December, the State Administration of Foreign Exchange moved $45 billion of the country's foreign exchange reserves into a specially created management concern, the state-owned Central Huijin Investment Company, which in turn bought stakes in both banks from the banks, increasing the banks' equity. The planned move essentially swaps the Ministry of Finance's old equity stake for a new government stake in the banks, bought by Central Huijin.
To help China continue preventing its currency, the yuan, from appreciating against the dollar, the $45 billion in foreign exchange came with restrictions on converting it into yuan. Central Huijin, controlled by the central bank and the foreign exchange administration, now plays an active role in placing the money in various investments denominated mainly in dollars.
Partly as a result, the banks have now worked out a deal to write off nonperforming loans instead against the Ministry of Finance's longstanding $41 billion stake in them, Chinese bankers said.
Yen Wei, the vice president for Chinese banks at Moody's, the credit-rating agency, said that the Chinese banks had not yet mentioned the plan to him. But when told about what was envisaged, Mr. Yen said that the details were what China needed to do.
''The current structure would suggest that's the way to go,'' he said.
Beijing is in the process of converting the Bank of China and the China Construction Bank from state-owned enterprises into joint stockholding companies. Under Chinese regulations, this means that they must have at least five owners, instead of just one, the Ministry of Finance.
Having the Ministry of Finance write off its equity stake in the banks will make it easier to find room in the banks' ownership structure for four investors to join Central Huijin in preparation for the sale of stock, with the Ministry of Finance itself possibly reacquiring a stake in the banks at some point, bankers said.
A peculiarity of Chinese tax laws also makes it appealing to the banks for the Ministry of Finance to write off the equity stake. Unlike the laws in the United States and many other industrialized countries, Chinese tax law does not allow banks to reduce their tax liability by setting aside loan-loss provisions, making it expensive for banks to set aside reserves for losses on bad loans.
Chinese officials have also been looking at similar ways to strengthen the balance sheets of the country's other two big banks, the Industrial and Commercial Bank of China and the Agricultural Bank of China. But with neither of those banks scheduled for a sale of stock soon, this has been less urgent.
The medium-term deadline for fixing China's banks is 2007, when China is supposed to open its banking sector to foreign competitors under the terms of its accession to the World Trade Organization a little more than two years ago.
China's four main banks are awash with yuan reserves right now, a byproduct of the central bank's huge purchases of dollars for yuan to prevent the yuan's appreciation. The four banks have been using the yuan reserves to lend huge sums, raising fears of another wave of nonperforming loans.
The central bank, the People's Bank of China, has been trying with mixed success since last summer to persuade banks to slow their increase in lending.
The increase in wholesale prices announced on Tuesday by the People's Bank of China suggested that the rise in the country's money supply is nonetheless beginning to wash over into higher inflation. Agricultural prices rose 10.5 percent in December from a year earlier, led by a jump of 51.3 percent in cotton prices and 20.2 percent in grain prices. Mineral prices rose 9.3 percent.
The National Bureau of Statistics is expected to announce soon last month's figures on consumer prices, with economists predicting that the annual increase will jump to as high as 4 percent in December, from an increase of 3 percent in November.
Xie Xuren, the commissioner of the State Administration of Taxation, announced in Beijing on Tuesday that the Chinese economy grew 8.5 percent last year, rebounding from a virtual halt in the second quarter because of an outbreak of severe acute respiratory syndrome. Growth in 2003 was China's strongest in six years.
