Bilal al-Masri lost his 15-year-old son, Amjad, to Israeli Army gunfire on Jan. 3. During the funeral hours later, his teenage nephew was shot and killed by Israeli troops. And on Sunday, Mr. Masri's 16-year-old son, Iyad, set out seeking revenge as a suicide bomber, but killed only himself.
Mr. Masri is angry at the Israeli military, but in a telephone interview on Tuesday from Nablus, in the West Bank, he directed his sharpest criticism at fellow Palestinians who had turned Iyad into a human bomb.
''Those who sent him were not supposed to do that,'' said Mr. Masri, 44, who works at a pharmacy. ''They were supposed to understand his situation and not to let him do such a thing, even if he asked.''
The parents of Palestinian suicide bombers almost always praise their sons and daughters as martyrs and heroes. Mr. Masri's opposition is a sentiment rarely voiced.
What makes it even more unusual is that many Nablus residents are expressing similar feelings. Nablus is a center of Palestinian militancy, and tensions have been running high after repeated Israeli raids and numerous Palestinian casualties.
Yet many believe that those who planned the bombing exploited Iyad's grief, knowing the mission would cause the family to lose a second son.
''This reaction is coming not only from the family,'' said Dr. Moawiah al-Masri, a member of the Palestinian legislature and a distant relative of the three dead youths. ''It is also the reaction in the streets of Nablus. This was a great mistake, and the one who made this mistake should be made accountable.''
No group has claimed responsibility for planning the bombing.
Palestinians have carried out more than 100 suicide attacks, killing hundreds of Israeli civilians, in the past three years. A strong majority of Palestinians have backed them throughout the fighting, though it has become more common recently to hear Palestinians oppose them.
For Mr. Masri, who has three surviving children, the chain of events began during clashes on Jan. 3. Palestinian youths were throwing stones at Israeli soldiers, and Amjad was on a rooftop watching, according to one Palestinian witness, Osama Bustami. Amjad ''wasn't throwing anything, just watching,'' Mr. Bustami said. But the army said it had identified and shot a youth who had thrown large rocks down at soldiers.
Amjad was one of three Palestinians killed in clashes that day. At a funeral several hours later, the crowd carried the bodies through the streets toward a cemetery. The Israeli Army said it shot two armed Palestinians who broke away from the procession and charged toward army vehicles.
Muhammad Qais al-Masri, 18, Amjad's cousin, was hit in the head and died several hours later. Palestinian witnesses denied that he had threatened the soldiers.
Following the deaths of his brother and cousin, Iyad spoke repeatedly of revenge. But family members dismissed it as idle talk. The youth did not belong to any Palestinian faction and had never been in trouble with Israeli authorities, Mr. Masri said.
''My son was in shock after his brother's death,'' he said. ''He was not conscious of what he was doing.''
But Iyad made contact with a faction that armed him. ''I blame them because they were supposed to think of him and his circumstances,'' Mr. Masri said.
The Israeli military had a warning on Sunday that a suicide bomber was heading from Nablus to central Israel. The troops set up roadblocks and were closing in on Iyad in a West Bank village. When they were within 200 yards, he detonated his bomb belt. The soldiers were not hurt.
Mr. Masri said that word of Iyad's death quickly filled the streets of Nablus, but that people hesitated to tell him. ''The whole city knew about my son, but not me,'' he said. ''We were not able to absorb the fact that we had lost Amjad, when we heard what happened to Iyad. Now I have lost two sons without understanding why.''
