Howard Dean won the District of Columbia's nonbinding presidential primary here on Tuesday, with the Rev. Al Sharpton running a stronger second place than had been expected.
With 137 of 142 precincts reporting, Dr. Dean received 17,584 votes, or 42 percent, to Mr. Sharpton's 14,090, or 34 percent.
The closer-than-expected victory for Dr. Dean was mostly symbolic, with no delegates at stake and more than half the top-polling candidates not participating.
The primary designed more to attract attention to highlighting the District of Columbia's lack of voting rights in Congress, than actually helping to select a nominee to run for president.
Still, for Mr. Sharpton, making his first test as a national candidate, the second-place finish demonstrated that he had persuaded many minority voters to support his long-shot candidacy over that of Dr. Dean's, local political observers said.
''African-American turnout was greater for him than I thought it would be,'' said Mark Plotkin, a political commentator on WTOP radio. ''You can't underestimate him in the African-American community. There is an emotional tie.''
Turnout was higher than expected, officials said. The primary historically attracts 8 percent to 25 percent of the Democratic Party's voters. Yesterday officials said it was about 16 percent.
The primary used two voting systems, one a traditional paper ballot and the other a new electronic ballot designed for handicapped access.
Of those they had counted, officials said Carol Moseley Braun was running a distant third, with 4,776 votes, or 11 percent, and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich taking 3,408 votes, or 8 percent.
Washington has traditionally held its primary in the spring. This time, city leaders decided to try to draw attention to their cause -- seeking to have voting representation in Congress -- by making their primary the first in the nation.
The City Council approved the date change, but local party leaders bowed to pressure from national party officials and made the primary nonbinding in order to preserve New Hampshire's traditional spot as the first real primary. That means the District of Columbia's 39 delegates will actually be apportioned at caucuses scheduled for Feb. 14.
By the time polls opened, many voters said they were angry and dispirited that they were participating in little more than a beauty contest.
''It's too bad,'' said Judy Brody, 63, as she headed into St. Thomas Parish Episcopal Church to cast her ballot. ''My husband won't even come out and vote for this. He thinks it's a joke; why bother?''
City officials tried to put the best face on their primary saying that while it did not turn out exactly as they had hoped it did draw the nation's attention to their cause.
''We did this to get attention to the lack of voting rights for residents and it has been wildly successful,'' said Councilman Jack Evans, who helped push the date change through the council. ''We will continue to raise the profile. This is not a one-shot deal.''
Even though he did better than expected -- which has become a trademark of Mr. Sharpton's -- he still could not make the same kind of gains that the Rev. Jesse Jackson managed with his presidential bids 1984 and 1988 when he won the Washington primary.
Mr. Sharpton has frequently drawn parallels between his bid for the Democratic nomination and that of Mr. Jackson.
But some political observers said that if Ms. Moseley Braun had not run in the race, Mr. Sharpton may indeed have come in first.
Dr. Dean's spokesman, Jay Carson, would say only: ''We have great grassroots support all over the country. We are glad that it turned out today in D.C.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE CAPITAL
