The scandal at Parmalat, the dairy and food conglomerate known for its long-lasting milk, has this prosperous and proud city down in the dumps. But there was some joy in Milkville last week. The local soccer team gave Parmigiani the big bouquet of a 1-0 win over the favored Milan team.
''It was a beautiful victory,'' Simone Barone, the only local player on the team, said after the game. ''These are difficult times, and the city is wounded.'' The team, he added, dedicated the night to the people of Parma and to the 35-year-old team president, Stefano Tanzi.
But it was a bittersweet gift for Mr. Tanzi, whose family controls Parmalat, as well as the team. As part of the fallout of the scandal that has grown over the last month, Mr. Tanzi was ousted from his soccer job, effective on Wednesday. It was his last game as president.
For a month now, drama has gripped this prosperous land, where the Tanzis loom large and have fallen hard. Mr. Tanzi's father, Calisto, who was the company's founder, is in a harsh Milan jail. Stefano Tanzi's sister, cousin and uncle also had central roles in family enterprises. At least 25 Parmalat officials or advisers are under investigation.
Across Parma, there is a mix of wounded pride and of disbelief that the city's leading family could have done wrong -- but also bitterness that just maybe, Parma's best had betrayed the hometown (and investors). There was certainty among many that somebody else was to blame, like the banks that allowed the group to sell off suspect bonds, or ill-serving advisers to the Tanzis.
''They were all in love with money,'' Nino Zappimbulso, proprietor of a restaurant on the outskirts of the city that was a favorite of the Tanzis, said of the banks and advisers.
Many people here spoke of a painful blow to the honor of the city, famous for its cuisine, including Parma ham and Parmesan cheese, and also for a rich musical tradition. Arturo Toscanini was a native son, Paganini studied here, and Verdi was born 20 miles away.
In the nearby town of Collecchio, headquarters of Parmalat, Mayor Giuseppe Romanini said of the local people: ''They are worried about jobs, but they are more worried about their good name. It's really a feeling of wounded pride.''
Valerio Levati, a grocer, said he had made money in the past on Parmalat bonds, which have plummeted in value after the fraud charges. ''If he did it to save the company, he did well,'' Mr. Levati said of Calisto Tanzi. ''But if he did it to steal money, that's not a good thing.''
On Saturday, the first sunny day after a week of gray, there was no better place to feel Parma's emotions than the soccer stadium, where collective Italian hopes live and die more vividly perhaps than anywhere else.
The Milan team, Inter, came to town with rumors that the Parma team, Parma A.C., would be sold at season's end, with many of its players possibly unloaded. The home team was in fifth place, and losing money, as are most squads in Italy. But on Saturday, it rose to an occasion. ''It was important for the city that the team let it know it was not alone,'' said Cesare Prandelli, the coach.
Emanuele Filippini, a midfielder, took advantage of some defensive confusion to bounce in a goal. ''It's a miracle!'' shouted Andrea Molinari, 29, of Milan, who attended with his father, Gianni, a former Parma player. Thanks to brilliant play by the French goalie, Sebastien Frey, Parma held on. ''We wanted to win for the Tanzis,'' he said.
At the whistle, the team rushed in a line and leaped in the air in appreciation toward the curva, the equivalent of the bleachers, where the hardest-core fans belt out fight songs in perfect unison. The team ran back in front of the owners' box to salute Stefano Tanzi. Veteran sportswriters said they rarely had seen such enthusiasm. Mr. Tanzi went to visit the players in the locker room and broke down in tears.
Prosecutors and Parmalat financial officials under investigation have said Stefano Tanzi clearly knew about the company's manipulations. But that mattered little on Saturday.
''He will always be our president,'' said a faithful Mr. Barone, the local player, who said he had known Stefano Tanzi since joining the Parma system at age 11. ''All those things written in the papers are garbage.''
The next day, the mood at Parma's cathedral was more sober. The Rev. Lorenzo Tagliani celebrated Mass facing frescoes restored with $2 million of Tanzi money. Calisto Tanzi is a strongly observant Catholic.
Power should be used not for arrogant ends, but to serve others, the priest said.
''We should not let ourselves get caught up in human vanity or illusions,'' he said, ''because you can find yourself at rock bottom.''
