Shane Mosley could only smile Tuesday when it was suggested that his sweetest victory had tasted like bitter fruit.
''I definitely feel cheated,'' said Mosley, who defeated Oscar De La Hoya on Sept. 13 but had little time to savor it.
Immediately after the fight, De La Hoya and his promoter, Bob Arum of Top Rank, screamed about the judging. Soon after they backed down, Mosley was subpoenaed to testify before the grand jury investigating a Bay Area company that is accused of supplying the designer steroid tetrahydrogestrinone, or THG, to athletes.
Then Mosley's $7 million payday for a March 13 fight against Ricardo Mayorga was scrapped when Mayorga, a Nicaraguan who twice beat Vernon Forrest, the only man to defeat Mosley as a professional, was upset by Cory Spinks.
Mosley immediately accepted a $4 million guarantee to fight someone his father and trainer, Jack Mosley, considers a more dangerous opponent, Winky Wright.
Finally, before they could officially announce the Wright fight, a junior-middleweight unification bout on March 13 in Las Vegas, published reports of a 20-month undercover sting by federal and New York police investigators surfaced and it was again suggested that the result of the De La Hoya-Mosley rematch was not legitimate.
The likelihood that that fight, in which De La Hoya made about $20 million and Mosley $7 million, was fixed seems unlikely because investigators have not contacted the participants or their camps.
''I get a lot of bad press,'' said Mosley, 32, long considered one of boxing's best practitioners, ''but at least it's press.''
Mosley, who felt he was overlooked after he beat De La Hoya in 2000, said his ups and downs had added a lot of flavor to his career. He was frequently smiling at a news conference at the Mandalay Bay Resort and Casino while he answered questions about the boxing probe, which came to light when F.B.I. agents raided Arum's Top Rank offices in Las Vegas last week and confiscated computers, medical records and fight contracts.
Mosley, who won the World Boxing Council and World Boxing Association 154-pound titles with his second victory over De La Hoya, was asked for his reaction when headlines last week suggested the fight was rigged.
''We know that the fight wasn't fixed, so nothing was on my mind,'' said Mosley, who is 39-2 with 35 knockouts. ''I've heard that they're not looking into that fight.''
Mosley will receive $4 million to meet Wright, 32, who holds the International Boxing Federation title at 154 pounds. Wright, a southpaw, is 46-3 with 25 knockouts and is finally receiving a chance in a big fight.
But his opportunity, and Mosley's next moment in the sun, had a dark cloud over it Tuesday, and the news conference reflected the trepidation.
Gary Shaw, Mosley's promoter, wanted to proclaim that Mosley would beat Wright. It's what they do at boxing news conferences.
''I can't guarantee anything more because of what's going on,'' Shaw said. ''I don't want to use this term, guarantee.''
The talk was about investigations and fixes and not about what Wright said was ''going to be a great fight.''
''This is the real deal,'' Wright said.
BOXING
