In the last two years, the Pataki administration has worked to toughen its scrutiny of the state's adult homes for the mentally ill, dispatching squads of inspectors to determine whether residents are being neglected and demanding fines as high as $55,000 for health and safety violations.
But now, the administration's enforcement efforts are in disarray and it is expected to abandon 70 cases against adult homes after two judges determined that health inspectors had violated state law and regulations governing how they document their visits to the homes.
The rules say the inspectors are required not only to detail violations in their reports, but also to specify how the violations should be corrected. They failed to do so, the judges ruled.
As a result, some of New York's most notorious adult homes are likely to avoid punishment for serious problems -- places like the 216-bed Brooklyn Manor, where inspectors said they discovered that rooms were infested with flies, chronically ill residents were left unsupervised and psychotropic medication was distributed haphazardly, if at all.
The collapse of the enforcement efforts is a significant setback for the Pataki administration, which has often cited its stepped-up inspections and stiff fines as evidence that it was cracking down on abuses.
Advocates for the mentally ill called the flawed inspections another unfortunate chapter in the history of the homes.
Statewide, roughly 15,000 mentally ill people live in more than 100 adult homes, which have been a cornerstone of the mental health system since New York began closing its dismal psychiatric wards in the 1960's.
Robert Kenny, a spokesman for the State Health Department, said the department was disappointed in the judicial rulings and had revised its practices so that future inspections will be conducted properly. He said the department was considering changing state regulations to enable it to more readily go after homes repeatedly found to be in violation.
''It's sad that some adult home operators would rather spend their energy and resources finding ways to skirt their responsibility to provide quality service and care to residents, rather than taking appropriate steps to address the violations,'' Mr. Kenny said.
The judicial rulings hinge on a section of state law and regulations for adult home inspections. Last summer, in a case brought by a group of adult homes, a judge in State Supreme Court in Albany decided that inspectors had failed to specify the corrective measures, and said all future inspection reports were required to include them.
While the state had asserted in court papers that it was required to spell out corrective action only where it was not obvious, it did not appeal the decision.
Late last month, one of the Health Department's own hearing officers for the first time dismissed a case against an adult home, based on the rationale of the State Supreme Court decision.
''It would not be appropriate to impose civil penalties in this case, due to the department's violation of its own regulations dealing with the content of inspection reports,'' wrote the hearing officer, Stephen Fry, who is an administrative law judge.
Judge Fry wrote that to rule against a home based on a flawed inspection report ''would send the message that it is acceptable for the department to decline to comply with the regulations that apply to itself, but it is not acceptable for a facility to fail to comply in full with those portions of the regulations that apply to it.''
State officials acknowledged that Judge Fry's sternly worded decision is expected to apply to all pending cases against homes. In all, the fines in those cases amount to hundreds of thousands of dollars, officials said.
The State Health Department has not formally dropped the remaining cases, but Jeffrey J. Sherrin, a lawyer who represents many adult home operators and who brought the two cases challenging the flawed inspections, said it had no choice.
''The homes expect that in implementing the decisions, the department will act fairly, and all pending enforcement proceedings will be withdrawn,'' Mr. Sherrin said.
The homes' operators have said that recent inspections have been onerous and unfair. They have asserted that the state continues to require the homes to shoulder more responsibilities while failing to increase the fees it pays them.
Lisa Newcomb, executive director of the Empire State Association of Adult Homes and Assisted Living Facilities, said the group was reviewing the legal decisions and was not yet sure about their ramifications.
To pursue troubled homes, state health officials will now have to conduct entirely new inspections and, if violations are not quickly corrected, begin the legal process of seeking fines. The state will not be able to use previous reports to bolster the cases, officials said.
''It's terribly unfortunate that the state has dropped the ball on this,'' said Geoff Lieberman, executive director of the Coalition of Institutionalized Aged and Disabled, one of the few advocacy groups that represents adult home residents. ''As has happened over the years, the people who have suffered will continue to suffer -- adult home residents. We believe that there are many places where actions need to be taken to improve homes.''
