A day before the Legislature was expected to announce the formation of a committee to study his impeachment, Gov. John G. Rowland of Connecticut said on Tuesday that he welcomed the inquiry.
The House speaker, Moira K. Lyons, was scheduled to meet with the governor on Wednesday and is expected to announce the formation of the impeachment inquiry committee.
Governor Rowland released a statement Tuesday saying: ''I welcome a process that is deliberate, objective, and fair.''
Mr. Rowland, a Republican elected to a third term in 2002, has been under growing pressure to resign since he admitted a month ago that he had lied about accepting free work and gifts at his private cottage from people who did business with the state. Many of those people are now subjects of a federal corruption investigation.
As the impeachment drama continued on Tuesday, Mr. Rowland and his aides responded to allegations that he was making veiled threats to raise ethical issues against legislators as they moved toward the hearings.
During recent meetings with legislators, the governor cited the humiliations suffered by some vocal critics of former President Bill Clinton when he was being impeached, said Representative Michael P. Lawlor, a Democrat from East Haven who met with Mr. Rowland last Friday.
Some lawmakers came away from the meetings with Mr. Rowland saying they felt that he was insinuating they could expect the same.
For example, Mr. Lawlor said, Mr. Rowland mentioned former Representative Robert L. Livingston of Louisiana -- who was forced to step down from his leadership position in an adultery scandal. Asked about those accusations of reprisals earlier Tuesday, Mr. Rowland said, ''I said to all the groups the very same messages, which is that there are going to be standards set.''
Dean Pagani, a spokesman for Mr. Rowland, called the accusations of threats ''overblown.''
This afternoon, Mr. Rowland spoke to a group of seven Christian clergymen in his office here for about 30 minutes. Approached by a reporter as he left the meeting, Mr. Rowland said the purpose of the session was ''my spiritual growth.''
Asked if the mounting pressure had led him to consider stepping down, Mr. Rowland replied, ''We are way beyond that now.''
Still, aides said Governor Rowland had decided not to attend President Bush's Jan. 29 fund-raiser in Greenwich. ''Given the current circumstances, the governor does not want to detract from the president's evening,'' Mr. Pagani said.
The executive director of the State Ethics Commission released a draft opinion yesterday saying that state law forbids public officials from accepting expensive gifts from subordinates or state contractors. The opinion, in response to a request from the House majority leader, James A. Amann, a Democrat, relates to Mr. Rowland's acceptance of free work on his private cottage done by or paid for by state officials.
But Ross H. Garber, the governor's legal counsel, disputed that opinion in a statement released last night, calling it ''a deliberate attempt to influence members of the Ethics Commission'' before a scheduled hearing on Friday.
Earlier in the day, Mr. Rowland spoke at a conference in Cromwell on spirituality in adolescent substance-abuse treatment. His remarks often seemed aimed at his own difficulties. The conference took place at the same hotel where he appeared last month shortly after admitting that he had lied about the free work done on the cottage, and where his wife recited a satirical poem that seemed to blame the media for his troubles.
This time, it was Mr. Rowland who read: ''Give the world the best you have and you'll get kicked in the teeth,'' he read. ''Give the best you have anyway.'' Mr. Rowland said the message was sent to him by e-mail by a supporter.
