President Bush reversed United States policy on Tuesday and said Canada would be allowed to bid on some of the $18.6 billion in American-financed Iraqi reconstruction projects, bringing to an end a bitter dispute with a major ally.
Mr. Bush made the announcement with the new Canadian prime minister, Paul Martin, after a breakfast meeting the two held during a conference of 34 leaders from the Western Hemisphere. Late last year, the Bush administration barred companies from nations that opposed the war, including Canada, France, Germany and Russia, from bidding on the lucrative Iraq contracts, though not from becoming subcontractors.
But Bush administration officials almost immediately said that they were open to negotiations with Canada, which has pledged millions of dollars in Iraq aid. Mr. Bush cited that support in announcing his decision, which gives Canada the right to bid on a second round of contracts, which are worth some $4.5 billion. The first round, which excluded Canada, amounted to $5 billion.
''They want Iraq to succeed, they want Iraq to be free,'' Mr. Bush said, sitting next to Mr. Martin. ''They understand the stakes with having a free country in the midst of the Middle East.''
Mr. Martin said that ''it actually does show that working together you can arrive at a reasonable solution.''
Asked about further expanding the list of possible contractors, Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, briefing correspondents on Tuesday at the Pentagon, said ''there were three or four'' nations on a list being debated at senior levels of the interagency process.
Separately, a senior administration official said it was likely that some other countries would be allowed to bid in the next round.
It was unclear on Tuesday if Canada had done something to get back into the administration's good graces or if Mr. Bush was merely cleaning up a major diplomatic mess from December, when a Pentagon directive limited the bidding on Iraq contracts to companies from the 63 countries that had given political or military aid in the war.
Although White House officials had approved the policy, they were angry about the directive's tone and timing. Pentagon officials in turn fumed that the White House blamed them for something it had endorsed.
Canada had already pledged more than $225 million in Iraq aid, and its officials were shocked. Then they were incensed by the Pentagon's explanation in a memorandum that the restrictions were required ''for the protection of the essential security interests of the United States.''
In a phone call last month with Mr. Bush, Jean Chrétien, who was about to step down as Canada's prime minister, pressed for his nation to be allowed to compete for the contracts. Mr. Chrétien later told reporters that Canada would be eligible.
White House officials at the time were vague but implied they were open to seeking an agreement. Scott McClellan, Mr. Bush's spokesman, said that the White House would be ''glad to talk'' about the decision with Canada and that the United States appreciated ''the contributions they have made, both in Afghanistan and to Iraq.'' Canada has 2,000 troops in Afghanistan and commands the multinational force there.
Canada meanwhile, moved rapidly to start its aid projects, like training 30,000 Iraqi policemen in Jordan. ''What's helpful is that we're getting this done as quickly as possible,'' said Bernard Etzinger, the spokesman for the Canadian Embassy in Washington.
On Friday, Condoleezza Rice, the national security adviser, hinted that a deal had been reached. She told reporters at a White House briefing that there was ''some understanding'' about Canada's participation in future rounds of bids.
Sean McCormack, a spokesman for the National Security Council, said Tuesday that Mr. Bush made his decision ''to recognize the important contributions of Canada and other nations at the Madrid conference in our efforts to help the Iraqis to build a better future for themselves.''
Administration officials left open the possibility that a major commitment of money and manpower would work in favor of nations that had been barred. ''If they want to join our efforts on Iraq, the circumstances can change,'' Mr. McCormack said.
Mr. Bush's argument in restricting the bidding was that only countries that contributed to the Iraq war should reap the benefits of the $18.6 billion being paid by American taxpayers. That money is part of $87 billion for military and reconstruction aid to Iraq and Afghanistan that Congress approved last year.
''The taxpayers understand why it makes sense for countries that risk lives to participate in the contracts in Iraq,'' Mr. Bush said in December. ''It's very simple. Our people risk their lives. Coalition, friendly coalition folks risk their lives, and, therefore, the contracting is going to reflect that.''
The policy enraged the excluded allies, who said the administration was petulantly punishing those who disagreed with the war.
Mr. Bush and Mr. Martin also pledged to try to restore consumer confidence in beef and to resolve trade problems over cattle. Last week, American officials said genetic tests had confirmed that a Holstein in Washington State that had mad cow disease was born on a dairy farm in Alberta. The announcement delayed any easing of a ban on Canadian beef exports to the United States, imposed earlier last year after a Canadian cow, also born in Alberta, was found to have mad cow.
Mr. Bush said again that he had not changed his diet because of mad cow. ''I like to eat beef and will continue eating beef,'' he said, ''because I believe the food supply is safe.''
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: THE RECONSTRUCTION
