The terror alert level has just been lowered to elevated (yellow) from high (orange), and America's cities, their budgets strained from paying police overtime, can breathe a sigh of relief for now. Federal announcements of a terrorism alert seem to be as regular as clockwork -- but there's been no talk of federal help to cities. Local governments now open their wallets with little help from Washington, but eventually cities may decide they can't afford to increase security during terrorism alerts, leaving the country more vulnerable to attack.
On Dec. 21, the nation officially jumped to orange alert, and remained there until last Friday. A few days before, the Department of Homeland Security had recommended that several cities, including Los Angeles, increase antiterrorist precautions.
Although the federal government makes them responsible for increasing local security and readiness at airports, cities largely make their own decisions on what specific measures they want to take. For instance, Los Angeles reassigned police officers to the airport, canceled vacations for port police officers, activated special centers to coordinate with state and federal agencies, and stepped up patrols of 650 potential targets in the city.
Orange alerts -- there have been five nationally since the alert system was introduced in March 2002 -- cost Los Angeles as much as $2 million a week at a time when it already faces a multimillion-dollar budget deficit and the State of California has yet to resolve its own budget problems. And the decrease in flights into Los Angeles International Airport since the Sept. 11 attacks means less money from landing fees and concessions.
Since 9/11, Los Angeles has spent $15 million to $20 million in costs directly related to alert level increases, while receiving promises of only $4.5 million from the federal government. Some estimates of the city's total security bill since Sept. 11 reach $150 million, with only about $50 million in federal grants on the horizon.
So what can Los Angeles expect to get from Washington to cover the latest round of overtime and other expenses? Nothing. There are no federal funds allocated for such reimbursements. The best the city can hope for is that the administration will bend the rules and allow Los Angeles to apply for reimbursement from funds meant for long-term investments in local antiterrorist measures.
Meanwhile, the costs of the orange alert come straight out of the city's budget. That means that $2 million a week is not being spent on antigang efforts, street repaving, airport upgrades and fire protection. Many urban politicians, including some of my colleagues, already place terrorist preparedness low on their list of budget priorities. It is only a matter of time before they begin to question whether to respond to orange alerts at all.
The potential consequences are obvious -- there's no question that big cities have an essential role to play in protecting the country against terrorism. The next time the federal government raises the alert status, big-city mayors should call the president and simply ask where the money will come from.
Specifically, the administration should create a fund for financing cities' extra security measures during terrorism alerts. The past two and a half years of experience can be used to project major cities' costs. Cities would be entitled to dollar-for-dollar reimbursement from the fund for their extra costs, payable immediately. The total amount of the fund and the weekly averages could be reviewed yearly to ensure fairness and accuracy. Federal funds would be allocated where local funds have actually been spent rather than, as has been the case, to states that are at low risk for terrorism.
Otherwise, it's hard to see how local officials can continue to make the case to their constituents that they must patrol the airport instead of the gang hangout around the corner.
Op-Ed Contributor Jack Weiss is a member of the Los Angeles City Council.
