Vida Blue  Roseland Ballroom
Lots of bands start off as loose-knit conglomerations of like-minded musicians. But Vida Blue, the egalitarian trio led (if that's the right word) by Page McConnell, the keyboardist from Phish, has ended up that way, too. And on Saturday night Vida Blue, named after the former major-league pitcher, gave an easy-to-please audience a two-hour lesson in the pleasures and perils of musical democracy.
For the band's second album, ''The Illustrated Band'' (Sanctuary), Mr. McConnell merged his group with the Spam Allstars, a Miami-based Latin funk collective. ''The Illustrated Band'' consists of four extended jams, but Saturday's concert was more disjointed and more interesting, although not quite satisfying.
It sometimes seemed as if every musician onstage was going to get a chance to be bandleader. Early on the group played ''Ochimini,'' and the percussionist Lazaro Alfonso, from Spam Allstars, led call-and-response vocals. Then he passed the baton to the bassist Oteil Burbridge (a Vida Blue member who also plays with the Allman Brothers), who sung along with his own angular counter-melodies.
The third member of Vida Blue, the drummer Russell Batiste (who also plays with the Funky Meters), led the band through a cover of the Meters' ''Just Kissed My Baby,'' striking up a heavy, loping beat while he growled the vocals. Mr. Batiste also indulged in the sort of showmanship that his bandmates mainly avoided: he asked the crowd to cheer, letting the noise replace the drums while he took a brief (and these days illegal) cigarette break.
More often, though, the band members would find a groove they liked and stuck to it. While Phish's improvisations are full of unpredictable shifts and leaps, this group sometimes seemed to be merely keeping time.
For the encore Mr. McConnell came out alone to sing some piano ballads, including a quiet version of Phish's ''Strange Design.'' Not long after this brief respite came the overstuffed finale: Vida Blue and the Spam Allstars, joined by the members of the opening act, the Jazz Mandolin Project, including Phish's drummer, Jon Fishman. This small army attacked Led Zeppelin's ''No Quarter,'' and after much sound and not so much fury, the song surrendered.
KELEFA SANNEH
IN PERFORMANCE: POP
