Jennifer Byers stood in the bright peach-orange lobby of the John A. Reisenbach Charter School trying not to cry as she contemplated the likelihood that the school, on West 117th Street in Harlem, would be forced to close at the end of the academic year. ''It's worth it to fight for this school,'' she said.
Reisenbach, where Mrs. Byers has a daughter in second grade and a son in kindergarten, was one of New York State's first three charter schools. On Monday state evaluators said the school, which has 432 students, should be shut down, citing poor test scores, an uneven curriculum, high teacher turnover and other problems.
Mrs. Byers, who lives on West 134th Street near Amsterdam Avenue, said she had read the state report but would not want to send her children anywhere else. Absorbing the shock of the evaluators' critique, she and other parents, along with school staff members, vowed to fight to keep the school open, saying it deserved time to improve.
''The schools in my neighborhood are not adequate,'' Mrs. Byers said. ''The first day I came here and saw the upper grades walking around, I knew there was a difference. They were confident, poised and their eyes were alive. They did not have that anger in their eyes.''
She added, ''That love of learning is what this school is teaching its children.''
Karolyn A. Belcher, the school's director since it opened in 1999, said school officials accepted responsibility for past failings but had already made great strides.
''I really feel we've turned the corner,'' she said. ''We're trying really hard not to sound defensive. We've turned it around. Our weakest year was last year.''
Among the problems evaluators cited were scores by Reisenbach's eighth graders on last year's statewide reading and math tests -- the first year that the school had an eighth grade to take the exam. Only 13 percent of 69 students tested met state standards in English, and 7 percent met standards in math.
Daniel F. Oscar, president of the Learning Project, a nonprofit group that runs Reisenbach, said the scores were unacceptable. But he said the poor test results did not reflect the school's vibrant academic atmosphere or the passion for teaching and learning in its classrooms.
And on its surface at least, Reisenbach does not look like a failing inner city school. The hallways are quiet and clean. In one orderly classroom after another, the children seemed engaged and excited to learn.
''Today is a brand-new day,'' a sign in Class 2-106 declared. ''What are you going to do with it?''
In another room, Tracy Rebe, a fourth-grade science teacher, held a dry-erase marker in her hand and had a roll of masking tape around her wrist. ''Somebody give me the definition of species, in your own words,'' she said.
Later, in response to another question, a student replied, ''A carnivore is a living thing that eats meat.''
There are about 25 students in each class, with teaching assistants in all three kindergarten classes. There are lessons in art, music and drama, subjects that are sometimes eliminated in regular public schools because of budget cuts.
But according to the state evaluators, the pleasant atmosphere and high levels of parent and student satisfaction are no substitute for demonstrable results. They also said that Reisenbach had drastic teacher turnover, with more than 60 percent of the staff departing in each of the last three years.
The report by evaluators at the State University of New York's Charter Schools Institute also criticized the other two charter schools up for review this year. They said that the Sisulu Children's Academy, also in Harlem, should get a probationary two-year extension and that the New Covenant Charter School in Albany should be allowed to continue its elementary school but forced to shut its failing middle school grades.
Some supporters of charter schools, which are publicly financed but operate independent of school districts, said Monday's report proved that charter schools were being held to too high a standard of accountability. But teachers and parents at Reisenbach said closing the school was too extreme.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said he supported strict accountability. ''It is encouraging if these schools are, as reported, not working that somebody is doing something about it,'' he said.
Laurell Lasenburg, whose son Keion Watson is a first grader at Reisenbach, said she and her husband traveled up to an hour from their home in the Parkchester section of the Bronx to bring Keion to school before going to work. ''This is something we do every day to make sure our son is here,'' she said. ''My son is thriving. He's articulate. He's bright and he's reading a book a night.''
She urged SUNY trustees to spare the school when it makes its decision on the school on Jan. 27. ''Give us time to fix what's wrong,'' she said.
Matthew Clavel, a third-grade teacher, said he used to teach at a Bronx public school that was far worse. ''That school was huge, it was chaotic and it had very low test scores,'' he said. ''My fourth graders had much lower reading skills than my third graders in this school. What upsets me is that that school is not in danger of being closed.''
Gina Cooper, a teacher's assistant, said her daughter, Tyra Keitt, a fourth grader at Reisenbach, was reading on the sixth-grade level. She said she dreaded the thought of the school closing but had faith that it could prevail. ''I am not planning on sending her anywhere,'' she said. ''I expect us to be here.''
