Gov. James E. McGreevey, facing a third year of fiscal strain, used his annual address to the Legislature on Tuesday to set out modest plans to build on recent economic gains and environmental protections.
Speaking hours after swearing-in ceremonies for new legislators, Mr. McGreevey greeted a Legislature that is controlled by Democrats for the first time since 1991. But even with his own party enjoying a comfortable majority in Trenton, the governor kept to more limited and attainable goals.
He proposed incentives for start-up companies working with the state's research universities, a statewide after-school program to be developed with seed money from the state and measures to consolidate municipal and school services to ease local budgets. He called for New Jersey to be the first state in the country to offer parents a plan that would require large employers to give them 16 hours of paid time off to attend their children's school functions.
He urged assessments for developers and set a goal of cutting diesel emissions by 20 percent, saying, ''I invite the Legislature to join me, but I will continue alone if necessary.''
But, as Republicans noted sharply, Mr. McGreevey made only glancing references to climbing property taxes, and he did not renew the promise he made last year to seek far-reaching campaign finance legislation. Both were major themes of Mr. McGreevey's election campaign two years ago.
Leonard Lance, who was installed on Tuesday as the Senate minority leader, said the governor's remarks on ethics issues had been ''modest at best'' and said his office had helped stymie legislation limiting campaign contributions from government contractors. ''We need to end the horrible system of pay to play, which is rotten to the core,'' Senator Lance said.
Much of the governor's 50-minute address reviewed his own first term in office at its halfway point.
He cited the overhaul of the corporate business tax, auto-insurance reform and stronger protections for drinking water sources and open space.
''Our economy is strong, as strong as any in the nation,'' Mr. McGreevey said, noting that New Jersey had gained 40,000 jobs since 2001 while the nation lost 2 million.
To accelerate that growth, he said, he will reorganize state worker training programs and set up resource centers for small businesses to help them find workers and deal with government agencies.
The governor also proposed ''innovation zones'' near the state's three research universities, offering tax credits and other incentives for start-up companies. He invited biotech and pharmaceutical companies as well to take advantage of New Jersey's support of stem-cell research.
Mr. McGreevey's education proposals included a nonprofit corporation set up by the state to raise private funds for after-school programs that would serve 20,000 pupils by the end of the next school year.
He did not say how much money the state would contribute, but his aides said several million dollars would be required.
The governor did not hint at any increased state aid for municipalities and school districts for the next fiscal year; his proposals for aid levels will not be announced until his budget address on Feb. 24. Rather, in the state with the highest per-pupil costs in the nation, Mr. McGreevey urged the consolidation of purchasing and administrative services in smaller districts.
Last year, in his first state of the state address, Mr. McGreevey struck a single major theme, suburban sprawl, and in language that taunted developers, set out far-reaching plans to combat it. Most of those proposals withered in the Legislature, although the governor said on Tuesday that ''we did more in two years to stop sprawl than was done in the entire decade before.''
In his more scattered proposals this year, he was being ''realistically ambitious,'' said Ellen Mellody, a spokeswoman for Mr. McGreevey.
As if anticipating disappointment with the scope of his proposals, the governor spoke proudly of his fiscal record, contending that he had held overall spending below the rate of inflation. ''No one has done that in nearly 15 years,'' he said.
The Assembly speaker, Albio Sires, said, '' I was happy that he listed his accomplishments. I was happy that he got that out.''
Acknowledging the treasury's estimate of a $5 billion deficit next year, Mr. Sires said he would lobby Mr. McGreevey, as he did last year, to consider a tax increase on incomes of more than $1 million.
As of Tuesday, Mr. Sires has a firmer grip on the Assembly, having gained six seats for Democrats for a 47-to-33 advantage. The Senate, split 20-to-20 for two years, now has 22 Democrats and 18 Republicans.
Mr. Lance said the Senate Republicans would make campaign-finance limits their first priority in the new session.
The Assembly Republicans' new leader, Alex DeCroce, made the same plea in his remarks in chambers. ''Every member of the Republican caucus is ready, today, to put an end to pay to play,'' Mr. DeCroce said.
