The deadline looms. Under federal law, by 2006 every classroom must have a highly qualified teacher, and Louis V. Gerstner, the former I.B.M. chairman and an architect of the school standards movement, has a prediction. ''We don't have a chance,'' he said flatly.
At least, not unless states follow his commission's advice, he added. For the last year, Mr. Gerstner and a panel of marquee figures in the fields of politics, business and education have been kicking around an intractable problem: how to entice the best and brightest to a profession woefully ill equipped to compete for them.
''For the cost of 15 B-2 bombers, we can give three million teachers real incentives to raise student achievement and stay in the classroom,'' reads the press release for Mr. Gerstner's teaching commission. It calls for an overall spending increase of $30 billion to raise teacher pay -- not necessarily a scientific number, but something to get the debate started.
''For long-term national security, well-educated workers -- and not just weapons and bombers -- are crucial,'' the release continues.
As Mr. Gerstner will happily admit, the commission's report, which is being released today, is largely a compendium of proposals that have made the educational rounds for years. It proposes higher pay for teachers who work in needy urban areas, who teach understaffed subjects like science and math, and who manage to push up students' scores.
There is also a demand for more stringent certification standards, a challenge to university presidents to herd honor students toward teaching, and a potentially dicey insistence that principals, not union contracts, decide who works for them.
''It's a trite rehash of 45 years of recommendations,'' said Arthur Levine, president of Teachers College at Columbia University, who was not on the commission. ''We've wasted another year instead of acting upon these recommendations. Once again, we've studied the problem.''
It is a criticism that Mr. Gerstner seems to have anticipated. He closes the report in very large, very bright type promising that ''the commission will not measure its success by its recommendations, but through its ability to mobilize key stakeholders, and through subsequent changes in policies and practices nationwide.''
And to that end, there is something the commission has in abundance: influence. It boasts one former first lady (Barbara Bush), four former governors (Roy E. Barnes of Georgia, James B. Hunt Jr. of North Carolina, Frank Keating of Oklahoma, Richard W. Riley of South Carolina), the head of a major teacher's union (Sandra Feldman of the American Federation of Teachers) and an assortment of other heavyweights.
Though the commission has been meeting for a year, in some respects its real work has only just begun, said Mr. Gerstner, who seeks to turn teacher quality into a campaign issue this election year.
The problems are familiar enough. The nation will need two million new teachers within the next decade, yet half of all teachers leave the classroom within the first five years, the commission says.
As it is, college graduates with SAT and ACT scores in the bottom quartile are more than twice as likely to have majored in education as their counterparts in the top quartile, the report contends. And once they choose to enter a classroom, the report adds, certification standards are so lax that almost half the states do not require them to pass tests in the subjects they plan to teach. And states that do, sometimes allow them to get half the questions wrong and still receive a license.
''What we're trying to do is make a deal, a compact,'' Mr. Gerstner said, describing the proposition of paying teachers according to their performance in the classroom. ''Isn't that what most people want? To be paid for their excellence?''
But motivating states to come up with significant increases in education spending is no small order, Mr. Gerstner acknowledged. He and his staff say they have already heard expressions of interest from 8 to 10 current governors who are willing to ''work with us'' on the issue.
The prospect of using the commission's heft to make headway on these issues has even mollified some of the skepticism surrounding it.
''If Gerstner can pull this off, it would be an enormous boon to the country,'' Mr. Levine said.
