Two members of a Bronx family, including a 9-year-old girl, died last night of what fire officials said was carbon monoxide poisoning caused by a leak in a gas boiler ventilation pipe.
The victims, Martin Duffy, 37, and his daughter, Hannah, died at Our Lady of Mercy Medical Center, fire marshals said. The family's son, John, 12, and the mother, Valerie Duffy, 37, were transferred later to Jacobi Medical Center after being taken to Our Lady Of Mercy , where their condition was said to have improved later last night.
Fire marshals said carbon monoxide had seeped into the family's apartment from a leak in the flue pipe in the gas-powered boiler on the ground floor of the building, at 4279 Oneida Avenue, in Woodlawn.
Firefighters received a call at 5:42 p.m. from a resident on the first floor of the building. On the second floor, in the Duffy family's apartment, firefighters found Mr. Duffy and his daughter in cardiac arrest.
Carbon monoxide readings in the apartment were 500 parts per million, said Chief Dennis Munnelly. ''That's pretty high, enough to knock you out,'' he said.
Fewer than 50 parts per million is considered safe, and 100 parts per million can cause vomiting, headaches and flu-like symptoms. According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, carbon monoxide kills or sickens at least 1,000 people every year in the United States. The gas becomes deadly when it is not burned off, but breathed. The gas replaces the oxygen in the blood, said Dr. Peter Rizzo, who treated Valerie Duffy and her son at Our Lady of Mercy.
A fire official said, ''Marshals found there was an opening in the elbow joint going to the exterior of the building.'' The official added that Consolidated Edison ''tested and found extremely high levels of carbon monoxide coming from there. It had escaped via that opening.''
Investigators said the gap appeared to have been repaired in the past. A four- to six-inch hole appeared to have been wired shut, they said.
Public records indicated that the house was owned by Bridie Doheny, also of the Bronx. The Doheny family did not return a telephone call for comment last night.
Ciara Griffin, 10, a playmate of the two Duffy children, watched from outside her home across the street as firefighters carried the family out. ''I'm really sad,'' she said. ''We played with them in the last snow storm.''
Mr. Duffy was a drum instructor for the Fire Department's band, the Emerald Society's Pipes and Drums, said Brian Meagher, a bagpipe instructor with the band. ''Drumming was a big part of his life,'' Mr. Meagher said.
The condition of Ms. Duffy and her son had improved by late last night. Dr. Rizzo said that ''their prognosis is good.'' At Jacobi, they were expected to be treated in a special room that concentrates oxygen.
''The belief is it will displace the carbon monoxide in the bloodstream,'' said Dr. Rizzo, who works at Our Lady of Mercy, where the two were first taken last night.
Chief Munnelly urged residents to install carbon monoxide detectors in addition to smoke detectors.
