AS a lesson in the twists of globalization, nothing beats the story of the United States lime business. Spurred by immigrants from tropical countries and the taste for their cooking, lime consumption per capita quintupled to 1.9 pounds a year in the last quarter century. At first mostly American growers fed the demand, but in the last decade, as low-priced imports from Mexico surged, domestic production collapsed.
In South Florida, traditionally the country's dominant lime region, two catastrophes, Hurricane Andrew in 1992 and the destruction of citrus trees since 1995 to eradicate canker disease, devastated the state's acreage, which fell to less than 200 acres from 6,700. Imports, which surpassed domestic supplies in 1992, make up 98 percent of the market. In California, long second fiddle in limes, less than 500 acres survive.
A major commercial lime industry will probably never return to the United States. But growers like Eric Christensen of Rising C Ranches in the San Joaquin Valley are prospering by raising exotic varieties.
''The ethnic population of this country has a craving for their homeland fruits, which they're not getting, and they're willing to pay,'' Mr. Christensen said recently over dinner.
He also focuses on mainstream markets, however, selling to stores in New York like Fairway and Gourmet Garage. To stay ahead of the curve, he experiments with varieties like the Rangpur lime, which looks like a tangerine and has a rich, distinctive flavor.
''I've got high-end purveyors knocking my door down, begging me for them,'' he said. ''Everyone's looking for an angle; everyone wants something new.''
The original lime species is Citrus aurantifolia, the small, round and seedy ''true lime'' with a spicy, penetrating fragrance and flavor. Scientists recently confirmed that it is a natural hybrid of citron, a giant ancestor of the lemon, and the small-flowered papeda, a tiny, primitive citrus. This true lime originated in the region from northeastern India to Malaysia. In the 16th century, the Spanish brought it to the New World, where similar strains became known as West Indian, Mexican or Key limes.
It is the most appreciated sort of lime in the tropics, but is rarely grown in the United States because the tree is wickedly thorny, vulnerable to diseases and sensitive to cold. Florida's small but glamorous Key lime industry has almost completely succumbed to the canker-eradication program; in California, just a few Mexican limes, as they are called locally, are grown for ethnic and farmers' markets. Virtually all true limes in the United States now come from Mexico.
The larger oval, usually seedless lime that accounts for 95 percent of American sales is C. latifolia, which is actually a hybrid of true lime and citron. Of obscure origin, it probably passed through Iran to the Mediterranean area and in about 1875 arrived in California and Florida. In California it is called Bearss (pronounced BAIRCE), after a San Joaquin Valley nurseryman, but it is also known as a Persian or Tahiti lime. Less pungent than true lime, it is better adapted to growing conditions in the United States. And because it stores better, it will probably remain the standard.
The center of California's remaining Bearss lime industry is in northern San Diego County, where trees bear most heavily from September to March. On a sunny morning last month, Sammy Travis, 68, who was once the state's largest shipper, resignedly swept his arm over a remnant of his lime empire, 300 trees interplanted with avocados around his packing shed in the Warmlands neighborhood here in Vista.
He once grew about 200 acres, he said, but has cut back because of competition from Mexico, where labor, land and water are much cheaper. ''Last year I let 70,000 pounds go to the ground,'' he said. ''Why pick them if you lose money?''
Most Bearss growers who persevere with limes have a niche, like farmers' markets, or are affluent. In Fallbrook, just north of here, Robert Beck, a retired computer designer, and his wife, Helene, raise 590 Bearss lime trees organically, part of 30 acres of specialty fruits. On a steep hillside next to their elegant home, the planting, perfumed by lime blossoms and bordered by cypress, evokes a Mediterranean estate.
On an early morning visit, Mrs. Beck, who markets sauces and condiments made from her crops, said her organic limes commanded a considerable premium. Even organic buyers usually demand deep green limes, for longer shelf life, but she prefers the yellow fruit, which are fully ripe, or ''silver'' limes, in the intermediate phase and juicier.
But tradition and practicality dictate that limes are sold green. At distant markets, it is hard to know if yellow limes were harvested fully ripe or turned color with age.
By contrast, the sweet lime, C. limettioides, is usually sold bright yellow. Roundish, with a smooth, thin, distinctively aromatic rind and pale-yellow juicy flesh, this fruit contains less sugar than most citrus, but is called sweet because it lacks acidity. It is actually quite insipid, with a faintly bitter aftertaste, unappealing to most Western palates but much beloved in the Middle East, India and Latin America, where children, the elderly and sick people, in particular, find the juice refreshing.
Long thought to be a hybrid of true lime and another citrus, and classed with limes, it was recently identified as a cross of citron and probably sweet orange.
Aficionados of various nationalities passionately dispute which of the strains originally grown from seedling trees are the most authentic. The most common worldwide is the Palestine sweet lime, but in San Diego County the main variety, grown in small groves totaling about 30 acres, is Gloria Gold, which a Vista nurseryman, Jose C. Lopez, discovered as a seedling in 1974 and named after a daughter.
On a warm afternoon, Mr. Lopez walked along a row of sweet lime trees near his house and shared a fruit with its namesake, now Gloria Lopez Cook, a graphic designer. He harvests mostly from January to August, he said. At the wholesale market in Los Angeles, he gets about $24 for a 40-pound carton, twice the price of Bearss limes.
Most sweet limes are bought by people of Middle Eastern descent who think the fruit and juice cure colds and flu. This may be more than superstition: curiously, although sweet limes lack the citric acid that provides flavor, they contain a full dose of ascorbic acid, vitamin C. Also, many cancer patients believe that sweet limes help relieve their nausea from chemotherapy.
Sweet lime from Mexico cannot legally be imported into the United States, but the Mexican government has petitioned for it to be admitted, said Russell Duncan, an import-export specialist with the Agriculture Department.
Commercial growers usually don't bother with odd varieties, but Seaview Packing, which owns or manages 3,000 acres of citrus, grapes and dates in the Coachella Valley southeast of Palm Springs, Calif., farms 50 acres of Palestine sweet limes, two acres of limequats (a hybrid of true lime and kumquat) and 500 young trees of kaffir lime, C. hystrix, another favorite of smugglers.
''I got into niche farming because the returns from commercial crops have been pretty poor,'' Dennis Maroney, the general manager of Seaview, said as he looked over a planting in Oasis, Calif. ''Since I grow dates, that gave me the idea to raise other items that appeal to ethnic communities.''
Kaffir lime, a papeda native to Southeast Asia, has distinctive knobbly fruit, about the size of a Bearss lime, and double-lobed intensely aromatic leaves. Unusually for citrus, the leaves are the most prized part, indispensable in Thai cooking. The fruit's zest also imparts a pungent flavor to many dishes, but the very bitter juice is used chiefly as hair wash in its homelands.
Until the late 1980's, when a California agency released certified disease-free budwood for nurseries, legal kaffir lime leaves were quite rare in this country, since Asian-grown leaves can carry canker and are illegal to import. Now that Seaview, the Becks and several other growers have planted groves, supplies are increasingly available year-round.
The fruit's name, however, remains problematic, because kaffir, originally an Arabic word for unbeliever, is used by whites in South Africa as a derogatory term for blacks. The name kaffir lime derives from Asia rather than South Africa, perhaps from Indian Muslims who encountered the fruit as an import from Thailand and Sri Lanka, where non-Muslims predominated. Nevertheless, the term is offensive to some, and the Thai name, makrut, is sometimes used as a substitute.
The most spectacular of the emerging exotic limes is the Australian finger lime, Microcitrus australasica, which is shaped like a gherkin and colored green, black or burgundy. When the fruit is sliced open, its round, separate juice vesicles, which are compressed, ooze out mysteriously, looking like tiny translucent citrus pearls. Taken on the tongue, they crunch and pop like caviar, releasing an intensely tart, limey juice.
Finger limes drive chefs wild, not least because they have been tantalizingly unavailable. Given samples at the Copia museum, a food, wine and arts center in Napa, Calif., two years ago, Ferran Adrià, the celebrated chef of El Bulli, near Barcelona, declared that they moved him to tears. When Daniel Boulud tried some at a tasting in New York in October, his eyes widened, and he asked where he could get them. Alas, the only mature fruiting trees in this country are at the University of California Riverside Citrus Variety Collection, 60 miles east of Los Angeles.
The California Citrus Clonal Protection Program plans to release certified finger lime budwood in September, so in a few years the first fresh fruits should be offered domestically.
Erika Birmingham, a former chef who owns Byron Bay Native Produce, two hours south of Brisbane, Australia, has spent eight years breeding superior new varieties of finger limes and other indigenous limes. She has introduced one variety, Rainforest Pearl, with luminous pink skin and pulp and is researching five other species, including the round lime and the desert lime, that have attracted commercial interest.
The Australiana Group, based in Victoria, plans to introduce a desert lime drink in the United States by next summer and Sinfully Australian, a Colorado importer, is bringing in frozen Australian native limes.
''The range of species and fruits is extremely exciting,'' Ms. Birmingham said in a phone interview. ''Their potential for culinary use is enormous.''
On the Exotic Side
FAMILIAR and exotic limes are available from several suppliers. Prices do not include shipping:
BECK GROVE -- Fallbrook, Calif. Organic Bearss limes, green or yellow, $2.50 a pound (five pounds minimum); fresh kaffir lime leaves, $6 for a quarter-pound; dried kaffir lime leaves, $8 for a quarter-pound; kaffir limes, $7 a pound; (760) 723-9997 or www.lavignefruits.com.
RAINFOREST FOODS -- Byron Bay, Australia. Finger lime marmalade, a 7.3 ounce jar, $5.45; 011-61-2-6685-8097 or www.rainforestfoods.com.au.
RISING C RANCH -- Reedley, Calif. Palestine sweet limes, $2 a pound; fresh kaffir lime leaves, $2 an ounce; (559) 637-9546 or www.ripetoyou.com.
ROBERT IS HERE -- Homestead, Fla. Key limes from Mexico and Florida, $2.50 a pound; (305) 246-1592 or www.robertishere.com.
SINFULLY AUSTRALIAN -- Aspen, Colo. Frozen finger limes, $38 a pound (2 pounds minimum); frozen desert limes, $26.50 a pound (2 pounds minimum); desert lime juice, 6.7 ounce bottle, $21.95. Available by mid-January; www.sinfullyaustralian.com or (877) 930-2872.
