Derek Jeter sensed that Roger Clemens was close to abandoning his brief retirement when they spoke at Michael Jordan's golf tournament in the Bahamas last week. Clemens told Jeter about his fruitful discussions with the Houston Astros and how he was waiting for his family to give approval for him to pitch one more season.
So, when Jeter shook Clemens's hand on the golf course, he figured he had shaken the hand of a former Yankee who was about to join Andy Pettitte, another former Yankee, in Houston.
''Everyone has the right to change their mind,'' Jeter said yesterday, a day after Clemens announced he was returning to baseball with his hometown team. ''Everyone thought he was going to retire, but with Andy going to Houston, I think it changed his plans. He's the only one who can decide when he's finished.''
On Monday, George Steinbrenner, the Yankees' principal owner, issued a terse statement about Clemens's signing with the Astros, and General Manager Brian Cashman expressed disappointment over Clemens's reversal of his supposedly concrete retirement plans. But Jeter said he was not annoyed by Clemens's decision to come back at age 41 and pitch for Houston.
''From a team point of view, we weren't planning on having him here this year,'' Jeter said in a telephone interview. ''We didn't think he'd be here. We don't have to think about Houston. We don't play Houston.''
But the Yankees could play the Astros in the World Series in what would be an entertaining scene featuring two marquee pitchers who bolted from Steinbrenner's team in the Bronx to play in their own backyard. After Jeter was reminded of that sweet possibility, he said he would accept that matchup because it would mean the Yankees were one series victory away from a title.
Though the Yankees have only one returning starter in their rotation, Mike Mussina, and will have at least nine players making their debut with the team this season, Jeter said he was not fazed by the overhaul. He noted that the Yankees had undergone successful alterations even after winning titles. The Yankees acquired Clemens from the Toronto Blue Jays for David Wells and two others after winning 125 games in 1998 and won it all again in 1999.
With Kevin Brown trying to prove he can stay healthy, Javier Vazquez trying to show he can thrive in a more unforgiving environment, José Contreras trying to perform like a $32 million pitcher and Jon Lieber trying to come back from elbow surgery, the Yankees have a fragile rotation that is devoid of a left-hander. If the rotation falters, the loss of Pettitte and Clemens could haunt them.
''I think we've got a pretty strong team,'' Jeter said. ''There are no worries. I don't look at it as there should be any worries. I just look at it as we're changing personnel.''
In addition to Brown and Vazquez, the Yankees have added Gary Sheffield and Kenny Lofton in the outfield and Tom Gordon and Paul Quantrill in the bullpen.
Jeter said he naturally becomes eager as spring training approaches. He is looking forward to seeing some of his new teammates.
''We're adding All-Stars,'' Jeter said. ''We're definitely adding good players.''
But in Brown, Lofton and Sheffield, the Yankees have some players whose reputations do not seem to mesh with the selfless approach of previous teams that Joe Torre has managed. Brown can be grumpy, Lofton can be ornery and Sheffield can be petulant. While Jeter did not dispute the personality traits, he believes that every player will adjust to how Torre wants things done, not the other way around.
''The Yankees change them,'' Jeter said. ''If you don't fit in here, you've got to adapt pretty quickly. If you don't adapt, then something else will happen to you. We've had people come here over the years, and they've had the reputation of being this or being that and they've fit in. I don't foresee that being a big problem.''
Besides, Jeter noted, there is always an easy solution to any problem on the Yankees. Just do what the Yankees have failed to do for three straight seasons and win a championship.
''That's always the expectation here,'' Jeter said. ''We don't go into the season saying that we're trying to win the division or get to the World Series. We say we're trying to win the World Series. Those new guys, if they don't know about that, they'll learn it quick.''
BASEBALL
