The introductions were not even completed at Alumni Memorial Fieldhouse when the chant began, the student section shouting, ''You can't guard him,'' to the undermanned Fordham Rams.
The chant referred to Jameer Nelson, St. Joseph's senior point guard and a front-runner to be national player of the year. And the fans were right, as Nelson did just about anything he wanted Tuesday night, piling up 13 points and 6 assists before being removed early in the second half of a 79-35 victory.
Before Nelson departed, the inventive St. Joseph's fans turned to pleading to him, ''We want a cheese steak, Jameer,'' for the free cheese steaks awarded ticket holders if the team tops 100 points. And they chanted ''You can't guard him'' in honor of the 7-foot freshman Artur Surov, who entered the game with 2 career points but was 4 for 4 in this game.
Amid all of the joyous noise, the only voice louder than the capacity crowd at the tightly packed fieldhouse was that of the St. Joseph's coach, Phil Martelli, who was shouting defensive instructions even as the lead topped 40 points.
The Hawks have ascended to No. 6 in the national ranking, the highest spot for the program since it finished the 1966 regular season at No. 5. They improved their record to 14-0 over all and 4-0 in the Atlantic 10, the best start in team history, facing an overmatched Fordham team that was missing two starters to injury.
Fordham (4-10, 1-2) was led by Michael Haynes, who had 17 points.
''Any team in that situation, in this building, against this team, on this day, it's going to be near impossible for them,'' Martelli said. ''And when we come with that much energy, it's really kind of hard to deal with. You feel for them.''
St. Joseph's jumped out to leads of 12-2 and 23-4, then extended the lead to 48-12 by halftime.
''No matter what happened and no matter what the score was, we kept playing like it was 0-0,'' said Nelson, who moved into second place on the Hawks' career scoring list, a reflection of his decision to pull his name out of the N.B.A. draft last summer and return for his senior season.
''We kept up our intensity,'' he said. ''We're going to play harder because people are going to play harder against us.''
The junior guard Delonte West added 12 points and 10 rebounds.
''We've got to remain hungry,'' West said. ''Going into these games, we knew we had them overmatched and had an advantage with them coming into the Fieldhouse. But you've got to have a personal challenge. On the bench, with our second unit out there, Coach gave them situations. You're down 2 and we're holding the ball. We've got to get things to work on.
''Early on we kind of understood what we have, but I think guys weren't really grasping how special this team could be. I think I'm seeing it more in guys' eyes that they want to continue this.''
The Hawks were double-teaming and pressing and getting on the floor even when the lead ballooned to as many as 45 points in the second half. They listened to Martelli's shouting until the game was over.
''I think the confidence thing is overwhelming,'' Martelli said. ''They believe that good things are going to happen. But there's no satisfaction. They want to get better. They let me bark at them and then they take it personal. They want to get better.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
