We often equate loss with chaos. Loss has its own logic, though, its ''architecture'' to use the playwright Julia Cho's word. The materials of loss include grief, rage, repression and longing. A family is the subject of ''The Architecture of Loss,'' Ms. Cho's touching new play at New York Theater Workshop's Fourth Street Theater. The play opens on a dry hot summer day just outside Tucson. We see bare white walls. Sand at the front of the stage represents the desert; a bare floor, a white table and a few chairs are all we get of home. (This effective design is by Riccardo Hernandez.)
When we first meet the members of this family, they seem barely connected to one another or to anyone else. A young woman in Western dress lectures tourists about the desert. (''People think it never rains out here, but that's not true. Every summer at around this time, the monsoons come rushing out of nowhere like sudden drunk party guests.'') A middle-age man walks slowly toward that house and kneels in front of it.
A middle-aged woman inside the house is sorting her laundry. An elderly man in his pajamas sits at the table staring blankly out. She is lost in domestic routine; he is lost in Alzheimer's.
When the middle-age man enters the house, their relations take shape. He is Greg (Victor Slezak), and he left his family without warning eight years ago. She is Catherine, his wife (Mia Katigbak). They have two children, both grown now, and Greg wants desperately to see them; they are what drew him back. (Her numbness -- part shock, part anger -- is very well done, as is the way he goes from eager apology to self-justification.) And he wants desperately to see them. Their elder child, their daughter Carmie, works as a guide in the Desert Museum. David, the younger child, is missing; he disappeared not long after his father left.
Now we are inside the structure that has survived Greg's desertion. We will be guided through each room; study the details of each life over those eight years.
Loss builds up over many years. How could it not go back to Catherine's parents; her white father, an alcoholic martinet, and her Korean mother, who spoke little English and rarely left the house? After the mother died, the father and daughter were stuck with each other. They threw themselves into quarrels over who had hurt her more: the husband who bullied and beat her or the daughter who was ashamed of her and left home as fast as she could? These scenes are very strong; they run deep.
Ms. Cho is scrupulous and never florid as she moves back and forth in time. So is the director, Chay Yew. We see Carmie (Angel Desai), struggle through her senior year of high school, tired of being the perfect student and trying to learn something about sex. We even see Greg on the road, sealed off from his family. What we don't see, though he tells us, is that he spent most of those years as a drunk who was desperately trying to get sober.
We know that the old maxim that playwrights should show, not tell, is too simple. It's a question of figuring out the proportions. I didn't need to see Greg in a drunken frenzy. But when I kept seeing him on the road with a young hitchhiker (played with breezy charm by Jason Lew), I began to think the symbolism of two lost boys promised more than it could deliver.
It is hard to give a group of characters equal depth, and this play has seven. Some are mutlidimensional, some are deftly sketched. At times I wanted to say: ''Please, go back to Catherine and Richard, or to Catherine and Greg. Give me more about them.'' All playwrights struggle with these questions. Ms. Cho is both talented and young, and ''The Architecture of Loss'' will stay with you.
THE ARCHITECTURE OF LOSS
By Julia Cho; directed by Chay Yew; sets by Riccardo Hernandez; costumes by Linda Cho; lighting by Mary Louise Geiger; sound by Jill B. C. Du Boff; production stage management, Timothy R. Semon; assistant stage management, Matthew Melchiorre. Presented by New York Theater Workshop. At 79 East Fourth Street, East Village.
WITH: Angel Desai (Carmie), Mia Katigbak (Catherine), Jason Lew (Jay), Will Marchetti (Richard), Matthew Saldivar (Tim), Victor Slezak (Greg) and Eric Wippo (Rob, the Boy).
THEATER REVIEW
