The political advertising war, relatively tame until now, turned contentious on Tuesday when Howard Dean, Representative Richard A. Gephardt and Representative Dennis J. Kucinich broadcast new campaign commercials critical of their rivals.
Signaling a new level of intensity and a shifting dynamic in the campaign in the final days before the first votes here and in New Hampshire, the advertising wave included the first commercials to mention Senators John Kerry, John Edwards and Joseph I. Lieberman and Gen. Wesley K. Clark critically by name.
Political analysts said Dr. Dean's advertisement, taking on Mr. Gephardt, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards for their initial support of the Iraq war, underscored his concern as several competitors have tried to cut into his lead in the polls. But they said the move had some risk with undecided voters because Democrats here complained that the campaign has grown too negative in recent weeks. Several experts and rival campaign strategists said Dr. Dean could alienate voters with the new spot.
Still, its tone surprised his rivals and experts in Iowa politics. In the last week, the other campaigns competing here have predicted that no one would transfer criticisms on the stump and in the mail to Iowa television, where they are more likely to seem unduly harsh to viewers.
The spot opens with an announcer intoning, ''Where did the Washington Democrats stand on the war?'' before laying out his opponents' support for the Congressional war resolution and Dr. Dean's opposition to it.
Another advertisement introduced by Mr. Gephardt's campaign on Tuesday singles out General Clark, Dr. Dean and Mr. Kerry for their support of free-trade agreements unpopular with many workers. But it is running only in New Hampshire, where voters are believed to be more accustomed to rough-and-tumble advertisements. In Iowa, the Gephardt campaign released a sunny commercial on Tuesday in which he declares, ''When I'm president, I'm going to try to figure out how every person in this country fulfills his God-given potential.''
That advertisement was more in keeping with the general tone of the other candidate commercials that have run here in the closing weeks. The more direct hits have come in the mail while the candidates have used the majority of their television spots to outline their positions on middle-class tax cuts, universal health care and corporate hog lots.
Speaking with reporters on Tuesday, Mr. Edwards said Dr. Dean's new advertisement meant the campaign saw him as a threat. ''We got a lot of excitement and energy around this campaign,'' Mr. Edwards said. ''There is a lot of movement going on. I'm sure he sees that, and that's the response. Unfortunately, it's just typical of what people have come to expect.''
Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, who has recently become more of a presence here with his own heavy advertising campaign -- second only to Dr. Dean's -- took it as an opportunity to sound a high note. ''Last week, Howard Dean, who said he's running on straight talk, promised a positive campaign,'' he said in a statement. ''Now Howard Dean is ending his Iowa campaign with the old style negative attack politics.''
Mr. Kerry indicated he would not respond in kind, adding later, ''I intend to continue to talk about my vision for America, my vision for Iowa.''
Although Mr. Gephardt's campaign has said it will avoid confrontational advertising in Iowa, it might have to change its plans, Mr. Gephardt said.
''We will do what we think is important to do to try to get our message across and make sure people understand all the issues in this campaign,'' Mr. Gephardt said.
Mr. Gephardt also defended his new television advertisement in the Boston and New Hampshire markets, his first in New Hampshire in some time. The commercial notes that Dr. Dean, General Clark and Senators Kerry and Lieberman of Connecticut all supported the North American Free Trade Agreement, which has been blamed for severe job losses. Mr. Gephardt led the fight against the pact in Congress.
''This is the dialogue that goes on in campaigns,'' Mr. Gephardt said on Monday. ''I've been talking about our differences on trade for the entire time. There's nothing new here.''
Dr. Dean's campaign officials made a similar argument about his new advertisement running in Iowa, saying it was simply laying out policy differences with rivals.
Just the same, the spot seemed to be in keeping with Dr. Dean's decision to return to his more combative instincts and fight back. One adviser said last night that his already sizable advertising campaign would grow even larger in the next few days.
He even came under a televised attack by Representative Kucinich on Tuesday who presented a new advertisement that points out that Dr. Dean, among the other candidates, has said United States troops will likely have to stay in Iraq for years. Mr. Kucinich has advocated replacing United States troops in Iraq with United Nations peacekeepers.
Still, ''it is a risk,'' Arthur Sanders, a professor of political science at Drake University, said. ''People who are beginning to get fed up with the attacks and are tired of the campaign and have questions about what kind of person Howard Dean is could decide even if he's right on the war issue, I'm not sure I want him to be my president.''
But, Professor Sanders said, Dr. Dean's team seemed to be doing the right thing to address the possible backlash from the advertisement. One risk of confrontational advertising in a crowded field, he added, is that it will repel viewers from both the target and the campaign running it.
''Even if you don't like the negative ad,'' Professor Sanders said, ''he's got them all together.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: ADVERTISMENTS
