In an isolated corridor at the Connecticut Juvenile Training School here last June, a boy threw a staff member to the ground, grabbed her breasts and jumped on top of her before she fought him off. That attack prompted workers to file a federal civil rights complaint that is now under investigation.
According to teachers and staff, the institution -- for male juvenile offenders 12 to 18 -- is a hazardous work environment because of a culture of poor management that plays down violent incidents.
The staff member who was attacked, Ms. Johnston, a 29-year-old youth services officer who spoke on the condition that only her surname be used, said she was the second woman attacked by the boy. ''I'm terrified to go back since the kids know I was a victim,'' she said.
The attack caused three of her colleagues to file a complaint last summer against the school's operator, the State Department of Children and Families, with the Office for Civil Rights of the federal Department of Education. Last week, the federal agency initiated an investigation, said Carlin Hertz, a spokesman.
The complaint charges the state child welfare agency with failing to adequately protect staff at the institution from sexual harassment and discrimination. It also claims that the state has discriminated against incarcerated girls since the closing of the co-ed Long Lane School in September 2002 by not providing them with the same educational and vocational services as boys.
The juvenile detention center is one of many problem areas for the state agency, which has a $650 million budget. A federal court monitor has been given ultimate management authority over the agency because the agency has failed at least a dozen times to comply with improvements stipulated by a 1991 legal settlement.
In a group interview on Tuesday, the three colleagues of Ms. Johnston who filed the federal complaint cited dozens of instances in which boys spat at teachers, hurled sexual and racial epithets and physically threatened them. The women said the administration's response has been ineffectual.
''One teacher filed a report that a kid grabbed her crotch,'' said Carol Winiski, a teacher. ''Her direct supervisor told her 'boys will be boys.' ''
Since last summer, the state child welfare agency has held biweekly meetings on issues like staff sexual harassment, said Gary Kleeblatt, a spokesman for the agency. ''It's a challenging environment for staff, and they deserve our full support.''
But the women said the task lists and memos that emerge from the meetings lead to few changes; more than two years after the school opened, it does not have a policy manual, staff members said. Seminars on sexual harassment, for instance, do not include how to file complaints with administrators or the police.
The state spends $325,215 a year for each of the 150 boys at the Connecticut Juvenile Training School, said Jeanne Milstein, the state child advocate, whose office issued a report highly critical of conditions at the school in 2002, citing a host of problems including inconsistent therapy for the boys and lack of staff training.
Staff members say the school needs more latitude to confine boys whose behavior requires seclusion, and programs to deal with the root causes of the behavior.
