The last time Ted Koppel traveled across the Iraqi desert, it was at the start of the United States-led invasion in March, accompanying the tanks of the Third Infantry Division.
This week Mr. Koppel is on the road again with an ABC News crew, retracing his steps from the Kuwaiti border to Baghdad for ''Nightline.''
Ten months ago, the only way into battle was alongside United States troops as a so-called embedded reporter. Mr. Koppel distinguished himself with calm, analytic reporting and a cool demeanor. By choosing the constraint of following the same route, he left himself at the mercy of fate, and little of note happened on Monday night's program, about the trip from the border to the Baghdad airport.
Once he reached Baghdad and could make contact with different military units, Mr. Koppel found more newsworthy events. For last night's program he and his crew went along on a raid conducted by the 82nd Airborne Division, which led to the capture of two suspects sought by American forces, said Leroy Sievers, a ''Nightline'' executive producer.
The next day, Mr. Sievers said by telephone from Baghdad, Mr. Koppel visited an Iraqi youth center that the American military was building as a peace offering to the local population; it came under attack by rocket-propelled grenades when Mr. Koppel and his crew were in a nearby building.
Not everything was as journalistically fruitful. The road trip, the subject of the one-hour special ''Nightline'' on Monday, consisted mostly of insipid interviews with local Iraqis and time-consuming car trouble. Hearing about television journalists' logistical difficulties in a war zone is akin to listening to a friend describe her strange dream of the night before: it never is as gratifying for the listener. Some of the best moments were flashbacks to March, when Mr. Koppel was reporting in an oversize helmet and combat fatigues, sounding as calm and composed under fire as a tennis expert commenting on a Wimbledon match.
As the week progresses, Mr. Koppel is likely to find other interview subjects and images more worthy of his analytic skills. But even on Monday, there was some information to be gleaned from what Mr. Koppel's cameras were not allowed to show. In April, when Mr. Koppel arrived at the Baghdad airport, he reported that officers expressed surprise at how little resistance they met. And he had carte blanche to report on what he saw.
This time American military officials would not allow him to film any of the concrete barriers or other security measures set up to guard the airport from attack. Mr. Koppel asked an officer why everyone on the base seemed so ''uptight.'' The officer corrected him politely, saying that the soldiers were not overly tense, just ''vigilant.''
As the noise of helicopters forced the interview to a close, the officer smiled defensively and yelled that the racket was ''the sound of freedom.''
NIGHTLINE  ABC, weeknights at 11:35 Eastern and Pacific times; 10:35, Central time
THE TV WATCH
