Three football players from a Long Island high school who admitted sexually abusing younger teammates at a football training camp in August are to be sentenced this afternoon in juvenile court in Wayne County, Pa., court officials said yesterday.
As the case against the three teenagers draws to a close, one person involved in the case said yesterday that another player from the Mepham high school team was expected to be charged in February, a sign that the larger investigation was not over.
According to the person, who insisted on anonymity, the Pennsylvania State Police had recommended that a fourth Mepham player be charged -- something that might occur after probation officials meet with the player. The person also said that an grand jury investigating the case was examining whether the five football coaches who supervised the team at camp, in Preston Park, Pa., could be charged.
This afternoon, the three Mepham varsity players who have been charged and admitted their roles in the abuse will attend a closed-door hearing in Honesdale, Pa., where President Judge Robert Conway of Wayne County Common Pleas Court will decide what treatment they deserve. The three -- two 16-year-olds and one 17-year-old -- face sentences ranging from probation to juvenile detention until they turn 21, according to Pennsylvania lawyers who handle juvenile cases.
In November, the three players admitted attacking three freshman teammates during a weeklong preseason training camp at Camp Wayne for Girls. The three freshmen were sodomized multiple times with a broomstick, pine cones and golf balls, prosecutors have said.
Family members of the victims lobbied to see the three defendants prosecuted in adult court, but on Nov. 12, Judge Conway ruled the cases would remain in the juvenile system.
Since then, two of the defendants have been confined to diagnostic centers in Pennsylvania, undergoing psychiatric tests and other examinations and attending classes as they await judgment, said people involved in the case, who insisted they not be named, citing a gag order issued by Judge Conway. The third, and youngest, defendant had a smaller role in the attacks, and has been living at home, family members of the victims said.
At the closed-door hearing this afternoon, the teenagers will again appear before Judge Conway. The judge will hear reports and rehabilitation recommendations from probation officials and consider impact statements from the victims before handing down dispositions, people involved in case said.
