Ernie Els had heard about Michelle Wie's talent, but watching her display it impressed him even more.
Els and Wie played an 18-hole practice round together at Waialae Country Club on Tuesday morning in preparation for the Sony Open, which begins Thursday. Wie, a 14-year-old prodigy from Honolulu, will make her PGA Tour debut in the tournament on a sponsor's exemption, bringing both curiosity and anticipation to this early-season event.
Wie will be the third female golfer to play on the PGA Tour since last May, joining Annika Sorenstam and Suzy Whaley. And after watching Wie's swing for 18 holes Tuesday, Els can understand why she is nicknamed the Big Wiesy, a takeoff on Els's nickname, the Big Easy.
''To be honest with you, I don't think I've ever seen a lady golfer swing the club as good as Michelle does,'' Els, the Sony defending champion, said during a news conference with Wie on Tuesday. ''Annika, obviously, swings it great, but I think when Michelle gets down into her stride, she's going to be hitting the ball as long as any woman has ever hit it before.
''You hear so many good things about Michelle. You know, I was lucky enough to be around when Tiger Woods came out. I saw Tiger before he turned pro, when he was an amateur. I think Michelle, a lot of what she did today, reminds me a lot of what Tiger used to do.''
Starting at No. 10, neither Els nor Wie played for a score on the par-70, 7,068-yard course, hitting many practice shots and putts around the green. But Els estimated that Wie shot three under on the back nine, and two under for the round, on a calm day that was perfect for scoring. Highlights for Wie included her tee shot at the par-4, 203-yard No. 4 that stopped 15 feet from the pin, and her final putt at the 510-yard No. 9, a 25-footer that she rolled in for birdie.
Last year, the cut here was even par, and Wie believes she can make it. She has been playing at Waialae about five times a week since November, so a lack of familiarity with the course will not be an excuse.
''I've been everywhere on the golf course, left, right, over, short,'' Wie said. ''So I know where to go and where not to go. I think I'm pretty much ready. I want my irons to be a little more straighter. But playing the way I am right now, I think I have a good chance.''
A gallery that reached about 200 at its largest followed Wie, Els and Ron Castillo Jr., who joined them on the back nine. But a much larger gallery is expected on Thursday, when Wie tees off at 8:59 a.m. with Craig Bowden, who played on the Nationwide Tour last year, and Kevin Hayashi, a pro from Hilo, Hawaii.
Handling the atmosphere, the attention and her nerves may be even tougher for Wie than handling the golf course. But she did not sound intimidated.
''I know I've worked really hard,'' she said. ''So I don't think I'm going to get really that nervous.''
Els spent much of Tuesday's practice round giving Wie tips, particularly on chip shots around the green. Els believes that Wie's chances to make the cut will increase if the wind blows about 15 to 20 miles an hour, as it often does on this course.
''When it's really calm like today, the guys will probably shoot lights out,'' Els said. ''I think in some ways, it will be tough for Michelle to maybe keep up with that. So if the wind really blows, even par is a good score. I think she can do that around here.''
Wie has talked about playing regularly on the L.P.G.A. and the PGA Tour, and Els did not rule out that dream. ''I think it just shows you how the world is changing,'' Els said. ''Ten years ago, you would have never thought that, would you, that a girl, or a woman, would ever have the opportunity, or even the talent, to play with us.''
GOLF
