Brazil on Tuesday ratcheted up its campaign to be exempted from a new American program that requires those foreign visitors who need visas to be fingerprinted and photographed on arrival in the United States. The effort followed a meeting late Monday night in which President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva personally appealed to President Bush to suspend the measure.
''If there are already 27 countries, then why not 28?'' Mr. da Silva was reported by Brazilian officials to have said to Mr. Bush during the meeting, which occurred at a conference of Western Hemisphere heads of government in Monterrey, Mexico. The Brazilian president, a left-leaning former factory worker and labor leader, was referring to a group of mostly European nations whose citizens are largely exempted from the new security measures.
In response to Washington's new policy, Brazil began Jan. 1 to fingerprint and photograph all American citizens arriving here. A judge in the remote state of Mato Grosso said the action was necessary because American policy was ''xenophobic and worthy of the worst horrors of the Nazis,'' and the Foreign Ministry endorsed his order, arguing that ''reciprocity is a basic element of foreign relations.''
On Monday, an appeals court allowed the suspension of the fingerprinting and photographing procedures here in this resort city. Later, just hours before Mr. da Silva's conversation with Mr. Bush, Brazil's national government ordered the federal police not to enforce the appeals court ruling. According to Brazilian news reports, Mr. da Silva intends to use the cumbersome procedures imposed on Americans in order to press Washington to lift its restrictions on Brazilians.
In a statement issued this afternoon, the Brazilian Foreign Ministry said that relations between the Western Hemisphere's two largest countries were ''intense and dynamic'' but implied that ties could cool if the dispute continued. ''Recent episodes, such as the new system of identification of travelers, create a negative climate in public opinion with inevitable political implications, which is not in the interest of the two countries,'' the statement said.
On the face of it, Mr. da Silva's efforts to press the United States to exempt Brazil from the registration program seem doomed, even if Mr. Bush were to show sympathy. Aside from establishing a precedent that other nations would presumably ask for, too, Brazil meets almost none of the standards set by the State Department for inclusion in the group of 27 exempted countries.
For a nation to qualify, the refusal rate on requests for nonimmigrant visas to the United States must be below 3 percent; Brazil's rate is ''up in the double digits, nowhere in that ballpark at all,'' an American consular official said Tuesday. In addition, Brazil does not issue passports that can be scanned by machine, another American requirement.
The American regulations also require nations to ''demonstrate that adequate safeguards against fraudulent use of their passports are in place.'' Skilled forgers here produce both Brazilian and American documents, and American officials said Brazil was second only to Mexico in so-called expedited removals because of false documentation or misrepresentation at United States ports of entry.
Worried that the national government's continued tough line may discourage tourism from the United States in advance of Carnival, the city government here is looking for ways to reduce any loss of business. On Tuesday, visitors began receiving a ''welcome kit'' that includes a T-shirt reading ''Rio Loves You.''
