The robbers who strode into the little downtown jewelry shop seemed in no great rush to get started. They allowed the store owner to wrap up a phone conversation, the police said, before they pulled out a gun, tied everyone up and started smashing glass cases on Monday afternoon.
Perhaps they would have done better not to wait. By pure chance, the owner of Concord Jewelers had been on the phone with the village police commissioner that afternoon. The men were discussing the Nassau County legal system when two men walked into the store and a third positioned himself outside as a lookout. The owner got nervous.
''We were having a nice conversation,'' said John P. McKeon, the Rockville Centre police commissioner, ''when he says: 'Oh boy, this doesn't look right. I think something's going to happen.' The moment I hung up, they made their move.''
Commissioner McKeon said he dispatched police cars to the shop at 3 North Park Avenue and hung up with the owner.
Moments later, more robbers entered the store and dragged the store's owner, an employee and a customer into the back, broke the employee's nose, and started to scoop diamond necklaces, rings and bracelets from the cabinets.
Within a minute, though, the police arrived, and the robbers ran, flinging the jewelry to the ground, the police said. Officers caught five suspects immediately and a sixth later, but on Tuesday investigators said that several people were still at large.
The robbery began about 4 p.m. on Monday, when a man and woman who were part of the gang of robbers walked into the jewelry store and inspected engagement rings, the police said. Nothing seemed to enchant them, and they walked out, allowing two other men to enter the store before the door could latch shut and lock, the police said.
It was then that the store's owner murmured his telephone S O S and hung up the phone, the police said. One of the two men pulled out a gun and announced the robbery while the other opened the front door and let five other men enter the store.
The six people arrested -- five men and one woman -- were charged with first-degree robbery, the police said.
They were mostly 20-  to 30-year-olds from Brooklyn, but the police said one man identified himself as a resident of Halifax, Nova Scotia. That was later changed to Brooklyn.
On Tuesday, as the police questioned the suspects to determine whether they had committed other robberies, the husband and wife who own Concord Jewelers returned to their store to clean up and to assess their losses, the police said. They stayed behind a locked door and a ''Closed for Annual Inventory'' sign.
Outside the store, downtown Rockville Centre hummed along with the quaint bustle of an old German clock. Monday's robbery was the first of the year in the village, which had 16 robberies in 2003 and 17 in 2002, said Lt. Rich Fantry of the village police.
''Oh gosh, this was aberrant,'' Lieutenant Fantry said. ''It was almost comical. It was like the gang who couldn't shoot straight.''
