SURROUNDED by an indoor wilderness of potted plants received as office-warming gifts, most still dressed in cellophane and ribbon and some as tall as him, Steve Levy, the new Suffolk County executive, ducks out of his penthouse headquarters atop the county's H. Lee Dennison Building to, as he blithely puts it, blow his ''schnozz'' before sitting still, sort of, for a casual interrogation.
Mr. Levy, 44 and content with his label as a maverick Democrat, possesses a mordant wit, often self-directed. He has, he says, ''always had a chiseled face, and not necessarily in a good way.'' And he laments the presence of a formidable proboscis above his lush mustache, playfully warning a photographer against catching him in profile. A toxic sight! Spare his constituents!
But he is clearly unconcerned about presenting a pretty face to the state's Republican leadership. Less than a week after his inauguration, he rushed to Albany with fellow county executives (repairing a flat tire en route after his not-so-trusty 1999 Sable -- no county-issued limo for him -- developed a limp on the frigid Thruway) to condemn Gov. George E. Pataki's $42 billion Medicaid program as a vampire that sucks the lifeblood from local taxpayers and undermines county government's ability to deliver quality-of-life commitments to residents.
''If something isn't done to restructure the Medicaid system, county government is going to cease to exist, except to dole out state-mandated programs and social services,'' he says on his way out to excavate his sinuses. ''This is the first time county executives have asserted themselves as a bloc, because the situation is so desperate that the executives realize if we don't get the state to place Medicaid reform as priority No. 1, it's going to bury the taxpayers.'' And bury county executives like him: a $240 million deficit is approaching, Mr. Levy notes, for Suffolk in 2005.
Part of the reason he ran for this office, against every ally's advice, is that he views himself as perhaps the only public servant in Suffolk with sufficient moxie and experience not just to fix the deficit, but to vanquish the failing grade of ''F'' in management skills Suffolk received last year from the Maxwell study, an independent research project. Mr. Levy succeeds Robert J. Gaffney, a Republican, who did not run again.
Word has it he's pathologically proactive and has assembled a staff with a similar work ethic. For starters, he's taken a pay cut, to $159,000 instead of the available $167,000 or so, and mandated the rest of his executive staff to follow suit. It's all about taking the moral high ground. When he says he views his term as a crusade, his sunken brown eyes convey not an iota of irony. ''I won't tolerate anybody who sees government as their own personal cash register,'' he says. Just the notion gets him huffy.
He returns to the office breathing clearer and bearing two fistfuls of refreshments: county executive as waiter. There is a dish of chocolate kisses -- after 15 years as a county legislator, and three as a state assemblyman, he prides himself on knowing how to ''butter up'' a reporter -- and a plastic cup containing mini-pretzels. Mr. Levy, a diet cola freak who gets his kicks from caffeine rather than alcohol, swigs from a half-empty bottle of Diet Coke and passes the pretzels.
''I usually have people test my food these days,'' he teases, alluding to his political enemies, ''so if you don't keel over, I'll have some of those pretzels.''
RIGHT from his first legislative campaign, at age 25, Mr. Levy took an iconoclastic approach to running for office: knock on every door in the district, and don't be beholden to anyone. Not that that was a problem the first time around, when he quit his law firm job and ran as an unknown.
''If you work so hard to get elected, why would you want to work that hard and then, if you get into office, have somebody else pulling your strings?'' he asks, very rhetorically. ''Why work so hard to get into a position so you can exercise your own good judgment, and then be beholden to somebody else? I mean, what's the worst that can happen? I lose an election? I can always go back to being a lawyer,'' he says, smoothing a mottled gold tie selected from the Sable's backseat stash.
Mr. Levy is not a clotheshorse -- yet. ''I don't go to the Trump school of fashion,'' he says. ''I know just enough about how to dress myself so that I don't get laughed at; I'm a Macy's or Today's Man kind of guy.'' That said, he admits he's getting measured for a couple of custom-made suits. ''I want to look the part.''
Mr. Levy was born in Brooklyn to a Jewish father and an Italian Catholic mother, raised in Queens and schooled by nuns, and he moved to Long Island with his family at age 10. His father ran a furniture and appliance store but was a closet politician; he died three months after Mr. Levy won his first election.
He married Colleen West, gaining two stepchildren, in 1994, but the relationship was soured by his preoccupation with politics. They legally separated, though a reconciliation is far enough along that his house in Holbrook is for sale and he is moving in with her in Bayport. Besides lifting weights -- he still uses the gym he built at his mother's house in Holbrook as a seventh grader -- his only diversions are televised sports and the occasional sitcom, like ''Curb Your Enthusiasm.''
''I really should take a vacation sometime,'' he muses, as his secretary yanks him toward another meeting with his deputies. But not anytime soon.
PUBLIC LIVES
