Lukoil, Russia's second-biggest oil company, rode higher crude oil prices to a 38 percent increase in quarterly earnings, and said Tuesday that it planned to sell even more crude oil outside Russia and less at home to cash in on high global oil prices.
''Oil exports keep growing, and sales in the internal market are going down,'' Leonid Fedun, Lukoil's head of strategic planning and investment analysis, and a company vice president, said at a news conference Tuesday. ''We hope that in 2004 we will practically stop selling oil'' domestically, he added.
Lukoil's sales abroad fetch better prices, and selling less crude oil within Russia ''will increase the incomes of our shareholders,'' he said.
Net income at Lukoil rose 38 percent to $701 million in the third quarter on sales of $6.04 billion, which were up from $4.43 billion. Wall Street had expected Lukoil to earn about $633 million and have revenue of around $5.46 billion. The oil company managed the strong results in spite of a falling dollar and higher transportation costs.
Lukoil was circumspect about the fate of its potentially lucrative West Qurna oil field concessions in Iraq. It received the oil fields under Saddam Hussein's regime in 1997, but the regime abruptly canceled the concessions just before the United States invasion last year.
''It is no secret that company management held talks with the Iraqi government at the end of December. I can say that the situation is progressing optimistically for Lukoil,'' Mr. Fedun said. ''Obviously, we are more than ready to work in Iraq. We can work better and more comfortably than other companies.''
A Lukoil delegation visited Baghdad in late December, and Lukoil's president, Vagit Y. Alekperov, is expected to make an official visit to Iraq to discuss the West Qurna situation with the oil ministry.
Lukoil has often struggled to keep production costs in line with those of other Russian oil companies, and most recently closed 1,400 wells not considered efficient enough to be kept operating. Lukoil also commissioned a new export terminal for refined products in Vysotsk near St. Petersburg.
Mr. Fedun also blamed Transneft, Russia's oil pipeline monopoly, for ''failing to handle the volumes'' of oil the industry needs to export, and complained that Lukoil has had to transport more oil by rail.
Transportation costs ''are high, but we can't regulate the cost of transport,'' Mr. Fedun said.
Lukoil's effective tax rate also rose a bit, to 28 percent from 24 percent, equal to about $1 for each barrel of oil the company produced.
Lukoil's export duties also increased, by about $2 a barrel, and Mr. Fedun conceded that ''the state continues to increase the tax burden, and that affects our performance.''
Lukoil for years reluctantly followed in the footsteps of Yukos, Russia's largest oil producer and the first Russian company to report full financial results using Western accounting standards.
Today, however, Yukos is fending off attacks from Russian prosecutors and regulators; its former chief executive Mikhail B. Khodorkovsky, Russia's richest man, is in jail, facing charges of fraud and tax evasion that his supporters say are politically motivated.
In light of this, many investors have swapped out of Yukos stock and into Lukoil, which reported its third-quarter results using the generally accepted accounting principles of the United States.
Also, investors perceive Lukoil as being close to the Kremlin and free of the political baggage that appears to have sandbagged Yukos. Recently Lukoil's president, Mr. Alekperov, and President Vladimir V. Putin traveled to Kazakhstan to sign new oil exploration agreements.
Last fall, Mr. Putin helped Lukoil rename a chain of gas stations in Manhattan that it bought from Getty in 2000. Mr. Alekperov wanted Americans to understand that they need Russian oil and that companies like his are ready to provide it.
