Yesterday morning, Mike Dunham insisted that his mastery over the Islanders was ''just coincidence.'' And he did not change his tune last night despite matching the longest unbeaten streak by a goaltender in the 31-year-old rivalry between the Islanders and the Rangers at eight games.
''Still a coincidence,'' he said, after a comfortable 4-1 victory at Madison Square Garden that enabled the Rangers to leapfrog the Islanders and climb into eighth place in the Eastern Conference.
Maybe it is a coincidence, as Dunham says. But the Rangers, who had not been as high as eighth since Nov. 30, have not lost to the Islanders since they obtained Dunham from the Nashville Predators on Dec. 12, 2002.
Dunham made 18 saves as he and the Rangers improved to 6-0-2 against the Islanders in their last eight meetings. During that span, Dunham has allowed 1.35 goals a game and has a .952 save percentage.
The Rangers have won all four games against the Islanders this season. Dating from his days in Nashville, Dunham is 8-0-2 in his last 10 decisions against the Islanders. Last night was the first time since Nov. 1 that Dunham allowed fewer than two goals in a game.
The Elias Sports Bureau said Dunham joined John Vanbiesbrouck and Billy Smith as the only goaltenders to record eight-game unbeaten streaks in the series, which the Rangers lead, 87-84-19. Vanbiesbrouck went 5-0-3 for the Rangers from December 1987 to January 1989, and Smith went 7-0-1 for the Islanders from February 1984 to January 1987.
As a team, according to Elias, the Rangers tied their longest unbeaten streak ever against the Islanders. The Islanders' longest unbeaten streak in the series is five games.
''We talked about it over and over and over,'' Michael Peca, the Islanders' captain, said. ''They were behind us in the standings. We talked about how we could beat these guys. We took too many penalties. There was no rhythm to the game.''
The Rangers scored a season high three power-play goals, in eight opportunities. After the Islanders' Jason Blake opened the scoring with a short-handed goal at 9 minutes 54 seconds of the first period, the Rangers received power-play goals from Eric Lindros (at 11:08 of the first), Tom Poti (at 8:59 of the second) and Vladimir Malakhov (at 16:53 of the third).
Aleksei Kovalev scored an even-strength goal at 6:14 of the third period to give the Rangers a 3-1 lead.
Lindros and Kovalev have nine goals apiece this season, and each has three in the past four games. Both played physical games last night, and both have had a lot of success against the Islanders.
''I think Eric's our emotional leader,'' Mark Messier, the Rangers' captain, said of Lindros, who has two goals and four assists against the Islanders this season. Lindros's 62 career points against the Islanders are the most he has against any opponent.
''He's playing the best he's played in a long time and the guys are getting swept up in it,'' Messier said. ''He's a big load to handle when he's playing the way he is.''
Lindros scored on a deflection last night. Against the Islanders this season, the Rangers are 8 for 22 on the power play, a success rate of 36.4 percent. Against the rest of the N.H.L., the Rangers are 18 for 151, or 11.9 percent.
The Islanders went 0 for 6 on the power play last night and are 2 for 18 against the Rangers this season, or not exactly clicking at a rate of 11.1 percent.
When asked about his team's recent mastery of the Islanders, Rangers defenseman Brian Leetch, who had two assists last night, said: ''Dunham has probably been the biggest reason. Most times when we've been successful, I point back to the goaltending and the special teams.''
SLAP SHOTS
Rangers left wing CHRIS SIMON said that he was standing up for MARK MESSIER when he attacked Tampa Bay's RUSLAN FEDOTENKO late in the first period Sunday. ''I took a slash on my hands from him, and there were a few things I didn't appreciate,'' said Simon, who began a two-game suspension last night. Simon said he was referring to a cross-check that Fedotenko delivered against Messier earlier in the period. ''I can't do those things,'' he said. ''I know I was wrong.'' Of his suspension, Simon said: ''It's not my first time in there. I hope it's my last.'' CHAD WISEMAN dressed in Simon's place and skated with Messier and JED ORTMEYER. . . . CLIFF RONNING, the playmaking 38-year-old center the Islanders signed last week, made his debut last night. . . . Rangers left wing DAN LACOUTURE (concussion) and defenseman JOEL BOUCHARD (hamstring) took part in the morning skate.
HOCKEY
