Bernard Rands's new string quartet, played for the first time at Symphony Space on Friday, is further evidence that the madness that fell upon a good part of 20th-century music has lifted. In an odd evening that featured the Ying Quartet, a performance of Debussy's G-minor Quartet and a magician named Torkova, Mr. Rands's piece looked at first to be facing the wrong way: turning its back on heady exploration and retreating toward Debussy.
Yet this strong and deeply sincere piece makes the retreat not only honorable but a cause for celebration. Mr. Rands, near 70, was reared in a culture still overwhelmed by the inheritance of Romanticism and desperate to escape its influence. Art, aping politics, decided that old cultures required obliteration. A new order assembled from the rubble would give method precedent over content. Newness was a defense against tradition: new systems of agreements between notes, new ways of putting pieces together, new ways to avoid the uses of the past.
I don't know if Mr. Rands had a hand in putting the Debussy on this program, but his own piece reaches out to it 110 years later. There is the same baritonal melancholy, albeit with a stabbing sense of violence in the newer music that the older one does not have. Mr. Rands's harmonic language is not the same as Debussy's, but the strong tonal pull within individual phrases alludes to it. Historical progressions from old to new are re-established; the ruptures are repaired in music like this. When an art has outrun its line of supply, it must go backward before it can go forward again.
Speculate all you want about the presence of Torkova and his standard repertory of scarves, conjoining rings, reassembled ropes and disappearing balls. Maybe the audience at Symphony Space's old Thalia Theater annex was being told that string quartets are entertainment and show business just like everything else.
The more serious observer might have noticed that Torkova's tricks (at least the better ones) functioned in silence and wandered along with the clock on the wall, while Rands and Debussy spoke to the ears and invented their own little worlds of time. Observers of those observers might find that pretentious; intellectualism does have a way of outsmarting itself.
If the juxtaposition of music and magician made no sense, perhaps making no sense was just what the Yings intended. This single-family and very successful ensemble commissioned the Rands quartet, his third, and played it with great eagerness. The adjective ''young'' might best describe the Debussy performance: ardent, impatient, precipitous, technically agile and at some distance from the original.
Debussy was also young when he wrote his quartet and to a point would have understood the surging Ying style. Missing on Friday was Debussy's motionless quality, a paradoxical sense of repose, especially in the heavenly slow movement. The Yings have learned much in their young lives, but not how to sit still.
MUSIC REVIEW
