He is no firebrand preacher, but more and more Senator John Kerry is seeing audiences that sound like revival meetings.
''Amen! Aaaaamen!'' Barry Cheeney, 44, a father of two, screamed when Mr. Kerry promised on Saturday in Davenport never to make American ''sons and daughters'' fight overseas to defend America's dependence on Mideast oil.
In Dover, N.H., on Thursday, Mr. Kerry, of Massachusetts, was riffing on health care and how he had been cured of cancer. ''I had the best health care in the world,'' he said, setting up his promise to give everyone access to the same health plan that senators enjoy. ''Why?''
A woman yelled, ''Because God's got a plan for you!'' The audience of 500 thundered approval.
On Wednesday, Mr. Kerry tripped over people on the floor of a packed Veterans of Foreign Wars post. Even Republicans raised their hands and announced conversions on the spot.
''I'll be very honest with you,'' Shirley Cohen of Hollis, N.H., said. ''I was a Republican. I changed to become independent two months ago. I was very strongly leading toward another candidate. But you've very thoroughly convinced me tonight.''
Other candidates may be talking about religion, but at almost every stop in Iowa, Mr. Kerry is making believers of large numbers of Democrats and others who say they are unimpressed by Howard Dean, unsure of John Edwards's experience and uninspired by Richard A. Gephardt in the race for the Democratic presidential nomination.
After hearing Mr. Kerry on Monday in Muscatine, Ray and Sharon Kapteina, who caucused for George W. Bush in 2000, said they were re-registering as independents to caucus for Mr. Kerry.
''He makes me feel like he's a leader,'' Mr. Kapteina, 56, a contract analyst, said.
If this is a revival, it could not have arrived at a more crucial time. With six days until the caucuses, Mr. Kerry is battling from well behind in the polls. An unexpectedly strong showing could send him back to New Hampshire with buzz and momentum, and anything but a strong showing could end his candidacy.
On Tuesday, Mr. Kerry campaigned across eastern Iowa with fellow military veterans, whom his advisers say could prove a stealth weapon of sorts. Steve Warnstadt, a state senator from Sioux City who was in the Persian Gulf war, said that 3,000 Iowa veterans had signed up as supporters and that thousands more had informally agreed to caucus for Mr. Kerry.
There is little way to know whether there is a surge for Mr. Kerry, let alone how strong it may be. Polls of Iowa Democrats, which are notoriously unreliable, show him third, well behind Dr. Dean but within six percentage points of Mr. Gephardt.
Mr. Kerry is still inconsistent on the trail, particularly when he is tired. On Friday in Altoona, he barked at a voter who questioned him on Iraq. In Cedar Rapids on Saturday, Em Merulla, who said she was leaning for Dr. Dean, watched Mr. Kerry for the second time in a week and said he had improved.
''It was a touch of desperation that night,'' Ms. Merulla said. ''You just felt he was slipping.''
But those are exceptions now, and one of Mr. Kerry's strengths here is his field organization, which is turning out hundreds of people to see him, even in small towns like Fort Madison.
''I think people have doubts,'' Mr. Kerry said in an interview on Tuesday. ''They're still looking, and some are switching.''
Joan Groh is one of those.
''The more I hear, the more I like,'' Ms. Groh, a retired teacher, said after hearing Mr. Kerry take questions on Monday in Fort Madison.
Dorothy O'Malley, a retired insurance agent, said, ''I've been waffling between him and Edwards.''
But Mr. Kerry's warmth won her over. ''In person, it comes across,'' she said. ''And my son was in Vietnam, too. I think I feel a real kinship, without a doubt.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE MASSACHUSETTS SENATOR
