Monroe College, a for-profit school founded in 1933, faced a sticky problem in the early 1980's. Its Bronx neighborhood was going downhill, and the administration felt it had to act. In search of a hedge, the college opened a second campus in New Rochelle, an urban pocket in affluent Westchester County.
But within a decade, the original Bronx neighborhood had revived, and New Rochelle had begun to suffer the effects of a troubled retail environment. Enrollment there was falling. Rather than open a third campus, the college decided to look for a new pool of students, not in local high schools but in the Caribbean.
The strategy has been a resounding, if unlikely, success.
Beginning with a handful of students a decade ago, the New Rochelle campus, with a budget of about $14 million, now attracts about one-third of its 1,600 students from the Caribbean. Most of them choose Monroe sight unseen. Tuition and fees at the college, which was accredited in 1990, are $4,485 a semester. Including its Bronx campus, Monroe has almost 6,000 students, but most of the foreign students go to New Rochelle, because that is where most of the housing is.
The success in recruiting Caribbean-based students was not seamless.
Initially, said Marc M. Jerome, vice president of the college and a member of its founding family, the school was flying blind in trying to recruit students from places like Jamaica and Trinidad.
''We just didn't know the lay of the land,'' added Gersom Lopez, the director of international student programs. What they knew was this: Students in the Caribbean did not have many choices, and Monroe always marketed itself to students who had few options. Moreover, Monroe's specialty was business, and in the Caribbean, with tourism such a big industry, a business education was valued.
In 1993, the school set its sights on Jamaica. Monroe hired a former Jamaican teacher as a consultant, and learned a lot at the outset.
''We found out, first of all,'' Mr. Lopez said, ''that a lot of people in Jamaica called high school 'college.' They thought of colleges as universities. When we first came in, they were saying: 'Why is Monroe college doing a presentation? Why would a high school recruit at a high school?'''
Since Jamaican students knew little about Monroe, the administration started recruiting trips by high-level officials like Mr. Lopez; Anthony Allen, the dean of the New Rochelle campus; and Mr. Jerome. ''I saw Mr. Jerome at a college fair, plus a vice president visited my high school,'' said Tenavel Thomas, 17, who came to Monroe from St. Thomas. She said her parents were impressed when the vice president she met at her high school later approached them at a dinner. ''On St. Thomas everyone knows everyone, and here they do things the parents don't know,'' Ms. Thomas said, ''so the contact was important.''
Crystal Singh, a Trinidad native who graduated in 2003 and is now employed at the college, said that Monroe began an affiliation with her college back home. This made her aware of the college. The fact that courses were aligned to transfer easily was another lure, and like most other Caribbean students at Monroe, she can name top administrators she became familiar with during their recruiting visits: Jason Soto, the assistant director of international programs, and Mr. Allen, whom she now works for.
The attention of Monroe recruiters won over not just Lynisse Jordan, 19, a business major from Trinidad, but also her father. ''My father told me, 'They focus on our people, which means that they believe in our people,''' she said.
Word-of-mouth began to work to the benefit of Monroe. Leonie Dixon, a senior, said she originally heard of the college from friends.
But Daniel Forbes, 30, was part of that first class of seven Jamaican students, so there was no word-of-mouth to be had. Mr. Forbes said personal attention was the key, and it did not end at the point of recruitment. On Mr. Forbes's first night in America, Mr. Jerome picked him up at the airport.
Mr. Forbes had been working a manufacturing job for a company that made jams and juices, but to move his career forward, he wanted a college education. He said he saw an advertisement for Monroe in a newspaper and, soon afterward, saw a presentation by Mr. Lopez. Before long, Mr. Forbes said, he was being interviewed by Mr. Allen -- in Jamaica. ''I'll never forget his words,'' Mr. Forbes said. ''He said, 'I look at you and see a great leader.'''
Mr. Forbes completed the application process, with Monroe providing guidance on obtaining his student visa. Administrators say such help is another reason for their recruitment success, one that has become even more essential since security precautions after 9/11 have made obtaining visas more cumbersome.
Mr. Jerome said that though it costs more to recruit Caribbean students, retention rates are much higher than they are for Americans. Caribbean students are also disproportionately represented on the dean's lists.
By 1997, Mr. Forbes had received his associate's degree in computer science and went back home. Within a few years, though, he realized he needed his bachelor's and returned to Monroe, where he is finishing up.
Building on its success in the Caribbean, Monroe is expanding its recruitment. Ian Fong, 28, who is from Malaysia, said he was first attracted to Monroe when an administrator visited a college he was attending there last spring.
Though he had been thinking of transferring to the City University of New York, he was told how easy credits were to transfer to Monroe and how much help he would get with his student visa. Mr. Fong said he was sold and has no regrets about coming to New Rochelle.
