COL LEGNO turns 14 this year, which in restaurant years is getting up there. Though a handful of places can measure their age in decades, most restaurants, especially of the neighborhood variety, do not last until 10. What makes Col Legno remarkable is that it survives in an area of continual upheaval.
In 1990, when Col Legno opened, the East Village was notorious for its bars, clubs, after-hours dens and general outrageousness, but was not particularly known for its selection of restaurants. Nowadays, by my unscientific count, the East Village has more Italian restaurants than unemployed guitarists, surely a sign that the balance has changed. And yet Col Legno soldiers on, offering essentially the same Tuscan trattoria menu as it did when it was new, at prices that are not much different.
In many ways, Col Legno is a time capsule, circa 1990. That's not so long ago, perhaps, but remember, these are restaurant years. Back then, New York's fascination with Tuscany was still near its peak. Food critics were marveling over the rising appeal of trattorias in previously Francophile New York. Words like ''rosemary'' and ''wood-burning oven'' exerted a romantic pull, and every inexpensive Italian restaurant seemed to have the same rusty red floor tiles and mottled yellow walls. Even tiramisù was considered new and unusual.
Col Legno's interior was appealingly simple, almost stark. Even today, though a series of watercolors has been added, the visual focus is the wood-burning oven in the rear, which also perfumes the air with the warm, appetizing scent of smoke. The individual pizzas ($8.95 to $10.95) are mostly excellent. The crust is smooth and elastic, burnished brown around the circumference. Toppings like sweet sausage and mushrooms are fine, and the tomato sauce is nicely spicy.
The exception is the plain pizza margherita, a dreary package made with slices of fresh tomato, predictably tasteless and rubbery in January. Without the spicy tomato sauce, the lack of salt in the crust stands out as well.
Instead of one of the modest antipasti to start, I suggest some of the side dishes, like a platter of classic Tuscan white beans ($6.95), richly flavored with sage, garlic and olive oil, or fried baby artichokes ($7.95), as crisp as autumn leaves.
Ten years ago, the best dish I had at Col Legno was pappardelle in a robust sauce made with ground wild boar. Today, it is still the best dish, the fat noodles just right in the savory, spicy ragù, the nutlike flavors of the meat a sturdy match for the rosemary seasoning ($13.95). I also remember the tagliatelle in a peppery mushroom sauce ($12.95), and it too holds up well. One pasta I don't remember is the lively spaghetti alla fiaccheraia ($12.95), a spicy tomato sauce with little chunks of pancetta and roasted peppers embedded within. If you are a rosemary fanatic, you will love tagliatelle al porri ($12.95), made with tomatoes, leeks and lots and lots of rosemary. For me, though, it's a cautionary reminder that rosemary is far preferable as a supporting player rather than the dominant flavor.
Col Legno's meat courses are simply prepared and satisfying. The best is a meaty, slightly gamy grilled quail ($16.95), subtly flavored with sage and a judicious touch of truffle oil, served with firm grilled polenta. Pork chops flavored with fennel ($14.95) and a decent grilled steak ($16.95) round out the top choices. I would skip dessert, however. The gelati selection ($5.50) can include four different flavors, which all taste the same, while tiramisù ($5.50) has long since lost its sense of freshness.
It would be wrong to think that Col Legno's survival hasn't been a struggle. The owner, Chris Trilivas, resists changing the menu, despite the seemingly endless procession of trattorias, osterias and wine bars showing different sides of Italy all over the neighborhood. Instead, Mr. Trilivas, who used to cook but now waits tables most nights, has streamlined his operation as much as possible, doing as much as he can himself.
Strangely, as so much of the rest of the East Village embraces Italy, Col Legno's block, once a hodgepodge of different sorts of restaurants and businesses, is now largely Japanese, full of noodle shops, sake lounges, sushi bars and herb-and-shiatsu parlors. In a way, Col Legno has come full circle. In 1990, the restaurant was a novelty in its neighborhood. Now it's a novelty on its own block.
Col Legno  231 East Ninth Street, East Village, (212) 777-4650.
BEST DISHES -- Pizzas (except margherita), white beans, fried baby artichokes, pappardelle with wild boar, tagliatelle with mushrooms, spaghetti alla fiaccheraia, grilled quail.  PRICE RANGE -- Appetizers, $4.95 to $7.95; main courses, $8.95 to $16.95.  CREDIT CARDS -- American Express.  HOURS -- Tuesday through Sunday, 6 to 11:30 p.m.  WHEELCHAIR ACCESS -- One step at entrance (ramp available); narrow entrances to restrooms.
$25 AND UNDER
