Dealing a potentially severe blow to Prime Minister Silvio Berlusconi, Italy's highest court on Tuesday overturned a recently enacted law that had shielded him from criminal prosecution while in office.
The Constitutional Court's decision allows the resumption of a bribery trial against Mr. Berlusconi that was halted when the law took effect last June and represents more bad news during an especially difficult period for Italy's often embattled leader.
It was the second time in a month that watchdog officials in the Italian government essentially slapped his hand for overreaching, lending force to critics' complaints that he has tried to amass too much power.
In mid-December, President Carlo Azeglio Ciampi, who usually performs a ceremonial role, took the unusual step of declining to sign into law a bill regarding media ownership that Mr. Berlusconi's allies had fashioned and supported.
That bill would have given Mr. Berlusconi, already a media magnate, an opportunity to expand his media empire.
''Berlusconi is appearing weaker and weaker,'' Sebastiano Maffettone, a political science professor at Luiss University in Rome, said after the court ruling. Neither Mr. Maffettone nor other political analysts predicted that Mr. Berlusconi's center-right government was in danger of tumbling, as Italian governments so frequently do.
Mr. Berlusconi also does not seem to be in imminent legal danger. Legal experts said that a verdict in his bribery trial was still at least many months away and that he might find new ways to delay it even further.
The trial centers on charges, which the prime minister denies, that he bribed judges in the mid-1980's to influence the sale of a government-owned food conglomerate.
But the ruling on Tuesday elated and emboldened the prime minister's opponents on the center-left, who are sensing and poking at new chinks in his armor.
The immunity law protected the top five officials in the government, including the prime minister.
Mr. Berlusconi and his allies noted at the time that the law resembled measures on the books in some other European countries and recreated in Italy a protection that Italian politicians had enjoyed in the past.
They also said the law was necessary in light of what they characterized as a politically motivated crusade against Mr. Berlusconi by Italian prosecutors and judges.
The law abruptly stopped a trial in Milan that was nearing its conclusion and which compelled Mr. Berlusconi to make several appearances in court late last spring. As he rebutted the bribery charges, he became the first sitting Italian prime minister to testify as a criminal defendant.
In striking down the immunity measure on Tuesday, Italy's highest court said in a written statement that it violated a principle in Italy's Constitution that all Italian citizens should be equal before the law.
Mr. Berlusconi made no immediate public comment. One of his defense lawyers, Niccolò Ghedini, who is also a member of Parliament and of Mr. Berlusconi's Forza Italia party, said the ruling was not a setback.
''It happens that constitutional courts strike down laws,'' Mr. Ghedini said. ''I don't think it is at all embarrassing for Berlusconi.''
But Professor Maffettone and other political experts said Mr. Berlusconi must now deal with a fresh set of concerns as he tries to recover from a string of other problems and embarrassments.
Those setbacks include deepening frictions within his governing coalition, the recent collapse of the Italian dairy giant Parmalat, wildcat strikes by transportation workers and heated debates over proposed pension revisions.
''Italy has big problems,'' said Francesco Rutelli, a leading center-left member of Parliament. ''It's time that its leader deals with Italy's future and abandons once and for all the effort to bend its institutions to his own comfort and interests.''
