The finished design for the World Trade Center memorial site will build on the original concept of twin voids marking the location and outlines of the twin towers, but will add lusher landscaping, create an underground center to house artifacts from the attack and establish a cultural center at the recreated intersection of Fulton and Greenwich Streets.
State and city officials will unveil the design today to a public that has waited anxiously and eagerly for the architectural gesture that might help bind the wounds of Sept. 11, 2001, in the place where they run deepest.
Both the tree-filled landscape and the voids, with pools and cascading water, were crucial elements in winning over the 13-member jury last week, after a nine-month international competition that drew 5,201 entries. But the winning design has since been elaborated upon by Michael Arad, the original architect; Peter Walker, the newly arrived landscape architect; and Daniel Libeskind, the master planner working for the Lower Manhattan Development Corporation.
They have proposed an underground space called the Memorial Center, perhaps two acres or more in extent, according to those who have seen the design. It is there that the twisted, resilient, evocative vestiges of the attack -- fire trucks, steel columns, maybe even Fritz Koenig's sculpture ''Sphere for Plaza Fountain'' -- can finally return.
Visitors to this center will enter by walking down a ramp that will take them past exposed remnants of the slurry wall, almost as if they were departing the bustle of Lower Manhattan and piercing time. This journey into memory would begin where the World Trade Center ended, at the rugged slurry wall that defined and preserved the towers' foundations.
At the end of the long descent will be an underground space some 30 feet high. Forty feet deeper below ground, at the bottom of the building foundation where the north tower stood -- and open to the sky through the void above -- will be a stone container to hold the unidentified remains of victims of the attack.
The effort to refine all the elements and to produce models and renderings that will reflect the final intent of the jurors and the memorial designers has taken the architects from one coast (Mr. Walker's office is in Berkeley, Calif.) to the other (Mr. Libeskind's office is three blocks from ground zero).
Perhaps the most emotional moment in the weeklong redesign occurred on Friday when Mr. Arad arrived at Kennedy International Airport on a flight from San Francisco and was taken to Hangar 17, where trade center artifacts are kept by the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey. Several of the people who accompanied the young architect on this visit said he was deeply moved.
The question of how such objects -- including police cars, fire trucks, steel columns and parts of the television antenna -- might meaningfully be incorporated into a memorial was unresolved in Mr. Arad's original design, which centered on two square voids, 30 feet deep, marking the outline and location of the twin towers.
It remains to be seen whether the public will embrace the solution of an underground Memorial Center of 60,000 to 100,000 square feet at the southwest corner of the memorial site, bounded by West and Liberty Streets. The plan also calls for about 250,000 square feet of additional cultural space above ground, at the northeast corner of the site, Fulton and Greenwich Streets.
Although the development corporation made no announcement yesterday, renderings of the finished design were obtained by news organizations after they were mistakenly sent out by the European Pressphoto Agency, based in Frankfurt, Germany.
The agency's New York bureau chief, Matt Campbell, said an editor in Frankfurt had sent them out in error. An embargo warning clients not to publish the pictures immediately was not contained with the information accompanying the images. He said the agency tried to retract the images but that it was too late to do so once they were in wide circulation.
Among the first people to see the finished design yesterday were members of the jury. ''We do not view our selection of a winner as the end of the memorial,'' they wrote in a statement that is to be distributed today.
''Rather, we see our selection as one more stage of memory,'' they said. '' 'Reflecting Absence' has evolved through months of conversation between the jury and its creators. This is why the jury is confident that whatever further issues this memorial may need to address over time (such as artifacts and the narrative history of that day) will be made part of the underground interpretive center.''
Before the revised memorial was completed, several members of the memorial program drafting committee that was formed last year by the development corporation expressed concern that Mr. Arad's design did not ''convey historic authenticity,'' as the competition guidelines had specified. They had suggested the possibility of including surviving original elements from the trade center.
The Port Authority has decided to install dehumidification within the next week for certain parts of Hangar 17 at Kennedy Airport, including areas that contain the last column removed from the site.
It also intends to build additional wood and tent containment areas for the vehicles and sensitive, important objects like sections of the tower floors that were compressed and burned into molten, meteor-shaped objects.
Last month, when asked about the condition of some of the objects, the Port Authority said that it would install dehumidification equipment by spring and that there were no immediate plans to create additional containment areas.
''We had additional discussions,'' Steve Coleman, an authority spokesman, said yesterday. ''As a result of those discussions, we decided to get things moving.'' The Port Authority, he said, is also looking for ways to patch the roof in areas where it is leaking.
Mr. Coleman said the authority had decided to form an advisory board of leading conservationists in the United States to advise it on how to protect objects. ''The more advice we can get about what we can do, the better able we will be to protect the artifacts we have out there,'' he said. ''As we get advice from additional experts, we will continue to do more.''
The Port Authority already has an architectural firm and a conservationist advising it, but some conservationists said it was allowing objects to rapidly degrade because of poor humidity and temperature control. ''It is our goal to preserve those things as best as we possibly can,'' Mr. Coleman said.
He also said that while the Port Authority was prepared to consider requests for future use of these items -- which were collected to be possibly displayed in memorials or a museum -- so far it had not received any.
A presentation for 35 relatives of the attack victims was given last night by Mr. Arad at the development corporation.
''We fought really hard for access to the bedrock footprints at both towers, and we are happy that they are incorporating many of the original artifacts,'' said Patricia Reilly, a spokeswoman for the Coalition of 9/11 Families, who attended. Her sister Lorraine Lee died in the south tower. ''We are excited that we were listened to, but we asked him to bring some of those artifacts aboveground, so that passers-by can have a visual connection with the enormity of that day.''
