James E. McGreevey's first two years as New Jersey governor have been nothing if not enigmatic, so it should come as little surprise that Tuesday, at the moment of what is arguably his greatest triumph, he gave his most unassuming major address.
Early Tuesday afternoon, Democrats assumed control of the State Senate, completing a takeover of state government that began two years ago when Mr. McGreevey led them to wrest control of the governor's office and General Assembly from the Republicans. Yet less than two hours later, Mr. McGreevey delivered the kind of humble State of the State speech that might have been expected from an executive who had lost control of the Legislature.
Mr. McGreevey ticked off his accomplishments -- balancing two difficult budgets, strengthening environmental regulations and fixing the state's troubled E-ZPass system -- with little of the feisty partisanship that had characterized many of his previous public appearances. When it came time to chart his vision for the state, he worked like a pointillist painter, offering a panorama of small-scale proposals rather than any bold strokes.
The governor unveiled a plan that would require employers to provide workers with 16 hours of paid ''Family Time'' each year to attend their children's school functions; called for an ''After Three'' program to have schools provide after-school activities between 3 and 6 p.m.; and pledged to begin the arduous process of whittling away at the layers of educational bureaucracy that have helped make New Jersey's property taxes the highest in the nation.
Last year, Mr. McGreevey declared war on suburban sprawl, a battle that earned the governor a handful of victories and several embarrassing, and high-profile, defeats. With the re-election campaign to begin a year from now, Mr. McGreevey this time set the bar at a level that seemed attainable. Many political analysts said that given the state's budget constraints and Mr. McGreevey's low rating in public opinion polls, it was shrewd of him to restrict himself to promises that he will likely be able to deliver.
''His agenda was doable, practical, and certainly it didn't look like it was going to increase his budget problems,'' said Ingrid Reed of the Eagleton Institute of Politics at Rutgers.
Still the very modesty of Mr. McGreevey's goals left some Republicans asking whether Mr. McGreevey had grown gun-shy. Senator Leonard Lance, the state's ranking Republican, said he was disappointed that Mr. McGreevey uttered only three sentences about proposals to tighten the ethics regulations for elected officials. Assemblyman Joseph R. Malone III said he thought many state residents would be insulted that the governor's speech offered little for New Jersey homeowners waiting to see whether Trenton will provide property tax relief.
''These little piddly things aren't going to answer that question,'' said Mr. Malone, of Bordentown.
Part of Mr. McGreevey's caution may be due to the fractiousness of the Democratic majority. Infighting between the governor's office, the party's powerful county bosses and Democratic lawmakers has led to several embarrassments for Mr. McGreevey, and one South Jersey Democrat, Representative Rob Andrews, has said publicly that he may challenge Mr. McGreevey for the gubernatorial nomination next year.
Even as Democrats took control of the State Senate on Tuesday, some members of the black caucus defied party leaders by nominating one of their own for Senate president. The candidate, Senator Nia H. Gill, failed to unseat the party's favored nominee, Senator Richard J. Codey, but the nomination allowed her to use the Senate floor to deliver stinging comments about the party hierarchy.
Mr. McGreevey used the State of the State as an opportunity to position himself as a champion of the daily concerns of middle-class New Jerseyeans. ''This is a very family-friendly agenda,'' said Peter J. Mr. McDonough, a Republican lobbyist who served as communication director to Gov. Christie Whitman. ''And the knee-jerk reaction of Republicans might be to oppose the governor, but if Republicans are smart, they'll support these things.''
Democrats point out that Bill Clinton used a similar tactic to outflank Republicans after losing control of Congress during his first term as president. Political pundits and lobbyists were nonplussed by Mr. Clinton's small-bore proposals for uniforms in public schools and a ''V-chip'' that would allow parents to prevent their children from watching violent or racy programming, but polling later showed that the measures resonated with many voters.
During Mr. McGreevey's address, he received the most enthusiastic applause for one of the most mundane-sounding policy initiatives: weekend hours at the Department of Motor Vehicles. ''Some might describe that as low-hanging fruit,'' said the Assembly's majority leader, Joseph J. Roberts Jr., a Democrat from Camden. ''But people love that stuff.''
News Analysis
