A month after Saddam Hussein was pulled from his spider hole, and with the transfer of sovereignty looming, Iraq staggered through another disturbing day of violence and instability.
Guerrillas shot down an Apache helicopter here on Tuesday morning, while two Iraqi civilians were killed by American soldiers who opened fire during an anti-American protest in a turbulent town east of here, family members said. The Central Command reported that the helicopter's two-man crew were unhurt.
Even in the south, where the largely Shiite Muslim population has been more accepting of American rule, riots over a lack of jobs continued for a fourth day in the town of Kut.
[But in a boost for occupation forces searching for leaders of the insurgency, the United States military said four relatives of Izzat Ibrahim al-Douri, Saddam Hussein's former vice president and the most wanted fugitive in Iraq, were arrested in early morning raids on Wednesday, Reuters reported.
[The four males were detained in Samarra, an area known for insurgent activity. Similar arrests preceded Mr. Hussein's capture. The military declined to identify the men or their relationship to Mr. Douri, one of Mr. Hussein's closest confidants and originally No. 6 on the list of the 55 most wanted Iraqis. U.S. officials placed a $10 million bounty on Mr. Douri, who they say has coordinated many attacks on American troops.]
The precariousness of Shiite support for the occupation forces has been further underscored by opposition from Grand Ayatollah Ali al-Sistani, Iraq's most revered Shiite cleric, to American plans for creating a transitional government by July 1.
Brig. Gen. Mark Kimmitt, a spokesman for the American military, said initial reports showed that the helicopter had been brought down by hostile fire.
The attack took place about 9:30 a.m. near an American military base at Lake Habbaniya, which lies 50 miles west of Baghdad and is surrounded by dusty mesas and electric-green patches of farmland.
Like other parts of the so-called Sunni triangle, this entire area remains virulently anti-American, as was evidenced by a protest that took place at noon in front of city hall in Falluja, 10 miles east of here.
During the protest, American soldiers opened fire -- possibly after being shot at -- and killed a woman and a man in a passing car, said family members including the dead man's younger brother, who had been in the car. The younger brother and his father were injured when the car rammed into a truck, and the father is not likely to survive, said a doctor at Falluja's hospital.
An American military official said commanders of the 82nd Airborne Division, which controls the area, had received no reports of any demonstration or related deaths. He said that a convoy in Falluja had been attacked with three rocket-propelled grenades at midday, and that three Iraqi civilians had been wounded in that attack and taken to the hospital.
All this adds up to a tense situation across Iraq that is keeping allied soldiers on edge. Since American-led forces invaded last March, 495 American soldiers have died, 343 of them from hostile incidents, according to the Defense Department. The number of deaths since the end of major combat operations on May 1 is 357.
General Kimmitt said the average number of daily attacks against allied soldiers had plummeted to 17 from a high of 50 in mid-November. There were just over two attacks daily against Iraqi security forces and one per day against Iraqi civilians, he added.
But several attacks on American soldiers have been spectacular, especially those in this hostile area, in Anbar Province west of Baghdad.
On Jan. 8, a rocket believed to have been fired by insurgents shot down a Black Hawk helicopter near Falluja, killing all nine soldiers on board. That happened just six days after a Kiowa helicopter was shot down in the area, killing the pilot.
Contributing to the tense security situation are claims from Iraqi civilians and police officers that American soldiers have killed innocent civilians. On Monday night, a policeman and victims' relatives said soldiers in Humvees had shot at a family in a station wagon at the site of a roadside bomb explosion in Baghdad, killing two people and wounding four.
But General Kimmitt said in an interview on Tuesday that initial reports based on photographs of the scene showed that bomb shrapnel was responsible for the deaths and injuries. The military is still investigating, he said.
The incident in Falluja took place after a crowd had gathered in front of city hall to protest the detention on Monday night of a local woman by American soldiers during a house raid. The woman was released later that night, but that did not stop a crowd of irate Iraqis from gathering the next morning.
Naji Abid and his two sons, Mahmoud Naji, 20, and Ahmed Naji, 25, happened to be driving near city hall in a minivan when the American soldiers opened fire, hitting the car, said Mahmoud Naji.
''All of a sudden there was shooting on our car,'' Mr. Naji said as he lay in a hospital bed, his left arm wrapped in a thick bandage. ''I couldn't feel my legs anymore. Then I lost consciousness.''
Dr. Omar al-Rawi, a physician at the main hospital in Falluja, said Mr. Naji's brother Ahmed had died from bullet wounds, though he could not identify the bullets as having come from American guns. Mahmoud Naji broke his left shoulder and left leg in the crash.
''They were shooting indiscriminately,'' Qais Naji, 35, an older brother of the victims, said as he fought back tears. ''They even killed a woman who was standing on the balcony of her apartment building.''
That woman was shot in the chest, Dr. Rawi said.
THE STRUGGLE FOR IRAQ: VIOLENCE
