DOWN AND DIRTY PICTURES  Miramax, Sundance, and the Rise of Independent Film  By Peter Biskind  Illustrated. 544 pages. Simon &amp; Schuster. $26.95.
If you are even a casual reader of glossy magazines or gossip pages, you probably don't need Peter Biskind to tell you that Harvey Weinstein, the co-chairman of Miramax Films, is an outsize character: a big guy with big appetites and a temper the size of TriBeCa.
But Mr. Biskind's absurdly entertaining new book, ''Down and Dirty Pictures,'' is here to tell you that you don't know the half of it. Mr. Biskind compares Mr. Weinstein to Nixon, Mussolini, an undercooked pancake, Darth Vadar, the fat guy who projectile vomits in Monty Python's ''Meaning of Life,'' even Lizzie Grubman in reverse-traction mode. And that's all before Chapter 1.
Mr. Biskind piles on anecdotes about Mr. Weinstein, portraying him as cartoonishly thuggish: Watch him throw Nathan Lane against a wall! Watch him reduce Uma Thurman, Todd Haynes and M. Night Shyamalan to tears! Watch him flick lighted cigarettes at people and put a reporter in a headlock! But what's fascinating about ''Down and Dirty Pictures'' is that even as the book does this, it never feels like a surly hit job.
Mr. Biskind is a film fan, sometimes even a Miramax fan, and his tone is buoyant as he skims through the history of the last 15 years of the independent-film movement. If Mr. Weinstein's antics receive disproportionate play, it's hard to blame the author. Good books aren't so different from good movies; they both need awe-inspiring bad guys.
Mr. Biskind is the former Premiere magazine editor (and current Vanity Fair contributor) who wrote ''Easy Riders, Raging Bulls,'' a bouncy rocket ride of a book about the gonzo ''New Hollywood'' generation of the early 1970's. His new book is an even bouncier ride. It's thick with typos, longueurs and woefully misplaced commas; it feels as if it were written at great speed and edited at even greater speed. But Mr. Biskind's voice is so amiable and incisive that you shrug this off and hang on for the briskly guided tour.
''Down and Dirty Pictures'' begins in 1989, the year Steven Soderbergh came out of nowhere with ''sex, lies and videotape.'' It's an arbitrary start date, Mr. Biskind acknowledges. Why not begin with John Cassavetes? Or with ''The Return of the Secaucus 7'' (1980) or ''My Dinner with Andre'' (1981)? But for Mr. Biskind ''sex, lies and videotape'' was ''the big bang of the modern indie film movement,'' the movie that inspired countless other hipster-slackers to get behind the camera and upped the ante for indie films in general. It also happened to be the movie that put both Miramax and Robert Redford's Sundance Film Festival on the map.
Mr. Biskind is an inveterate gossip. This is a good thing and a bad thing. He sometimes seems as interested in talking about, say, Mr. Soderbergh's brutal dental surgery (overbites are the ''Soderbergh family curse'') or this director's ''prominent ears,'' or the dark side of his personality that fed the James Spader character in ''sex, lies and videotape,'' as he is in talking about the movie itself. But there's no denying that Mr. Biskind has world-class dish; he knows how to sprinkle these deep-fried nuggets along the trail to keep you happily moving along.
A vast majority of the nuggets are about Mr. Weinstein, with Mr. Redford in distant second place. ''Sundance and Miramax are the yin and yang of the indie universe, the high road and the low, the sun and the moon,'' Mr. Biskind writes. But if that quotation makes you think that Sundance comes off pretty well in this accounting, think again.
Mr. Biskind admires much of what Sundance has accomplished, notably the way it has nurtured legions of young filmmakers in lab sessions that are distinct from the festival itself. But he is no fan of the earnest ''granola'' cinema that Sundance has often championed, and he's a cool observer of how Sundance has always been ''teetering on the edge of kitsch, an Eddie Bauer theme park, Bobworld.'' Mr. Redford himself comes off as a humorless, passive-aggressive meddler who is more obsessed by things like posters than actual movies.
Next to Mr. Weinstein, however, Mr. Redford is a pipsqueak presence here; he is simply elbowed off the stage. ''Down and Dirty Pictures'' is the best account we're likely to get of how Miramax both jump-started the indie movement and ultimately harmed it with its take-no-prisoners deal-making, aggressive marketing and sometimes, its opponents have charged, ugly Oscar campaigning. But the book is most notable for its portrait of Mr. Weinstein; this is the most kaleidoscopic picture of an egomaniacal bully that's been put on paper since Mario Vargas Llosa's take on Gen. Rafael Trujillo in his novel ''The Feast of the Goat.''
Mr. Weinstein comes off here as a kind of genius of antagonism. He humiliates employees, threatens competitors (''Our missiles are aimed at you! The rockets will be launched!''), overturns loaded breakfast tables and pushes around directors to such an extent that Martin Scorsese, while working on ''Gangs of New York,'' installed mirrors on his video monitors so that he would know when Mr. Weinstein was thundering up from behind.
Mr. Biskind ends his book on an elegiac, auld lang syne-ish note. The era of the true indies is just about over, he writes, the victim more of success than of failure. Miramax, with its addiction to bigger-budget films (''Gangs'') and what he sees as treacle like ''Chocolat'' and ''Shakespeare in Love,'' is not the nimble company it was. Sundance went Hollywood long ago. And now that almost every major studio has its own boutique ''indie'' division, who's to say what an independent film even is anymore?
Mr. Biskind doesn't know the answer to that question. But his implied answer is: with luck, we'll know these movies when we see them.
BOOKS OF THE TIMES  Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  A book review on Wednesday about ''Down and Dirty Pictures'' by Peter Biskind misspelled the surname of the ''Star Wars'' villain to whom the author compares Harvey Weinstein, co-chairman of Miramax Films. It is Darth Vader, not Vadar.
