Four Division I hockey programs were spared an uncertain fate -- perhaps disbandment -- when a vote went in their favor at the National Collegiate Athletic Association's annual convention this week in Nashville.
Clarkson, St. Lawrence, Rensselaer and Colorado College are among eight colleges that compete in most sports at the Division III level but play Division I in some. All four are consistently competitive in Division I and have won a total of four N.C.A.A. hockey titles.
Division III presidents voted Monday to pass a broad reform of Division III athletics that included eliminating athletic scholarships, but they then adopted a resolution that effectively exempted the eight colleges.
Colorado College's acting athletic director, Julie Soriero, said in a telephone call from Nashville: ''I'm very excited about the opportunity that our programs can continue to operate the way they've been operating. And I feel relief for our coaches who can recruit now without having to address this as one of their main concerns.''
Colorado College won the Division I championship in 1950 and 1957, finished second in 1996 and third in 1997.
Clarkson College's president, Anthony G. Collins, said in a telephone interview, ''I think that people listened to our explanation that we've been in these sports, some of us, for over a hundred years -- in Clarkson's instance it's 81 years of hockey at the highest levels -- and it would be a great shame for everybody, not just the student-athletes who would potentially lose opportunities, to lose schools with such a tradition if, over time, our programs became weaker.''
A few hours after the vote, Rensselaer announced that its women's hockey program would be elevated to Division I from Division III.
E.C.A.C.  Replacing Vermont
The departure of Vermont to Hockey East, approved by Hockey East's athletic directors last Thursday, may start a chain reaction among other conferences. The executive committee of the Eastern College Athletic Conference was to discuss this week whether to replace Vermont. Holy Cross, Sacred Heart and Quinnipiac of Atlantic Hockey were said to be among interested colleges. Niagara of College Hockey America was another possible candidate. C.H.A. is already searching for a replacement for Findlay, which is downgrading hockey to a club sport.
WOMEN  Change in Ranking
The national ranking was shuffled slightly after a weekend in which second-ranked Harvard lost to No. 3 Dartmouth and Minnesota-Duluth split a series against No. 1 Minnesota.
At Harvard's Bright Hockey Center, where the paid attendance of 1,921 set a college record for a women's game, Dartmouth (11-1-2, 5-0-1 E.C.A.C.) handed the Crimson its first loss of the season. Sarah Clark, the Big Green's captain, scored both goals as Dartmouth came from behind in the third period to win, 2-1. The game-winning goal resulted from a pass from Clark behind the net. The puck bounced off the shoulder of Harvard goaltender Ali Boe and into the net.
''Games like this, you want to see it happen clean, so a bounce of the puck is a bummer,'' Harvard Coach Katey Stone told reporters after the game. ''But Dartmouth did everything they needed to do to win this game, too.''
Harvard (13-1-1, 5-1 E.C.A.C.) moved down to third in the U.S. College Hockey Online Poll and Dartmouth moved up to second.
In Duluth, the defending national champion Bulldogs (10-7-1, 6-4-0 W.C.H.A.) defeated Minnesota on Friday night, 4-1, but the Golden Gophers bounced back the next evening to tie the score at 3-3 on two third-period goals 42 seconds apart and win on Kelly Stephens's overtime goal.
Minnesota (14-1-1, 10-1-1 W.C.H.A) retained its first-place ranking.
Slap Shots
TAMBELLINI WILL STAY -- Jeff Tambellini turned down an offer from the Spokane Chiefs of the Western Hockey League in favor of staying at the University of Michigan, according to the student newspaper The Michigan Daily. A sophomore forward, who had two goals and three assists for Canada in the recent world junior championships, Tambellini is the Wolverines' third-leading scorer. Michigan has had four high-profile players leave the team early to play professionally in the last four years.
NORTHEAST REGIONAL SOLD OUT -- Tickets for all three games of the 2004 N.C.A.A. Northeast Regional on March 27 and 28 in Manchester, N.H., have sold out. Tickets at the 10,000-seat Verizon Wireless Arena went on sale a little more than three months ago; it is the earliest a men's hockey regional tournament has been declared a sellout, according to the N.C.A.A.
COLLEGE HOCKEY REPORT
