What was that furry creature parked yesterday on a ledge at 135 East 35th Street? A big rat? A cat? A small bear? For nearly eight hours, a quiet corner in Murray Hill was transformed into a kind of temporary zoo, as passers-by stopped to gawk and guess the identity of the long-snouted cat-size animal that paced along a narrow stone ledge about nine feet over a brownstone garden, sniffing, shaking and yawning.
''I was thinking it was a hedgehog, because of the Beatrix Potter books,'' said Jennifer Gould, who may have been the first to spot it, at 7:30 a.m.
''I thought someone had put a giant statue of a rat in front of the building,'' said Lynn Peraza, owner of the topless club Flashdancers, who wore a multicolored fur coat.
The animal was, in fact, an opossum -- and not entirely an alien in Manhattan.
''They, along with raccoons and squirrels, are among the most common small mammals that you would find in cities in the Northeast,'' said Pat Thomas, a curator of mammals at the Bronx Zoo.
But because opossums are nocturnal and generally live in high places like trees, he said, they are not a common sight.
This particular opossum served as a sort of urban Rorschach test. Some were afraid of it; others were afraid for it.
Rose White, a nanny, whisked by, pushing a stroller. ''It looks like a big rat,'' she said, shielding her eyes. ''I can't even look at that,'' she said, and sped off.
Even the Postal Service had to wait. Jay Spatarella, 53, who has been delivering mail in the neighborhood for 11 years, began walking up the stoop but stopped in his tracks when he caught sight of the marsupial. ''I'll go back later,'' he promised. ''Hopefully it will be gone.''
But Susan Wichmann, who lives in the neighborhood, thought the animal was cute and worried about its ability to survive on the streets. ''He needs to be brought back where he belongs -- the woods,'' she said. ''I don't understand why they don't get him.''
In fact, an effort to return the animal to the wilderness had been tried earlier in the day, to no avail. Liz Stevens, who lives next door at No. 137, called 311, where she was directed to New York City Animal Care and Control and told that the opossum should not be removed.
''If the animal appears healthy and not injured, we encourage people to leave it alone,'' said Edward Boks, director of the agency. ''An opossum falls in a category that we call urban wildlife -- wildlife that have adapted to an urban environment.''
Concerned that the animal might be scared by all the attention and run down the stairs into traffic, Ms. Stevens posted a sign on the front door that read: ''Yes it is a Possum -- they are all over the city and he will be fine -- Don't scare him.''
But this opossum was not easily scared. It continued its high-wire act for hours, undaunted by the traffic noise and the gaggles of onlookers who came in waves.
By about noon the animal had bravely made it to the stoop, and seemed about to make a run for it when Emilio Delgado, 33, bounded up the steps with a delivery. The animal caught sight of his three large plastic bags and skittered back onto the ledge. The contents of the bags? Fur coats.
About an hour later, the animal again braved the trip to the stoop, and this time settled in. It cleaned itself, put its head down. Rain fell, people stared and pointed, but the animal would not budge. It looked as if it were playing possum.
Then the sun came out, and a heroine arrived. Holly Staver, a legal secretary and the president of City Critters, a cat rescue and adoption group, pulled up in a car on her lunch break, and emerged with a red net in one hand and a blue-and-white polka-dot towel in the other.
She had never before rescued an opossum, but was undaunted.
She, Ms. Gould and another friend, Ann Baldinucci, assumed their positions around the animal: Ms. Staver with her nets and towel, backed up by Ms. Gould on the stoop and Ms. Baldinucci in the garden below, with another net. The animal resisted, but Ms. Staver cornered it and it fell heavily into Ms. Baldinucci's net. The three women quickly got the animal into a cage and into the back seat of Ms. Staver's car.
Ms. Staver would not disclose her destination, but said, ''We're going to get it to a wildlife rehabilitator -- and then I'm going back to work.''
