The theatrical monologist Spalding Gray was reported missing after he failed to arrive at a friend's home on Saturday evening and then failed to board a flight at La Guardia Airport the next morning, the police said yesterday.
His wife, Kathleen Russo, reported him missing on Sunday night. Yesterday, the police released a description of what he was wearing when he was last seen -- a gray jacket with a blue scarf, a brown sweater, black corduroy pants and brown shoes -- and said they had been checking hospitals in New York City and Long Island.
Mr. Gray, 62, has a history of depression and was badly hurt in a car crash in Ireland in 2001. Mark Russell, the executive artistic director at Performance Space 122 on the Lower East Side, said Mr. Gray appeared there from early October to mid-December in ''Interrupting Life,'' a monologue about the accident and his life since then. (A car in which he and Ms. Russo were riding was hit by a van, and he was taken to Dublin for an operation on his fractured hip.)
''He was a man in transition,'' Mr. Russell said. ''I think he was rehabilitating himself on stage through the act of performing and working on this piece. He had a very, very dark time in the fall of '02. We thought that he might not come out of that. It was energizing to see him pulling himself back up.''
The police in New York and in the Hamptons have been on the lookout for Mr. Gray. Lt. William Armstrong of the Southampton Town police said that Mr. Gray and Ms. Russo have a house near Sag Harbor where his children live with a nanny. But Lieutenant Armstrong said that Mr. Gray had not been there since Christmas.
In Manhattan, a police official said yesterday that Mr. Gray had been scheduled to travel to Aspen, Colo., on Saturday morning for a ski trip. The trip was planned with a group that did not include members of Mr. Gray's immediate family, the official said. Mr. Gray went to La Guardia Airport for a flight on Saturday morning but went back to Manhattan after being told that there would be a problem with a connecting flight from Denver to Aspen, the official said.
This official said that Mr. Gray rescheduled his departure for 11 a.m. Sunday and went back to his apartment, in a loftlike building in SoHo. He went to the movies with his wife and son on Saturday afternoon. Around 6:30 p.m., he told his family that he was going to visit some friends and left by himself, the official said.
His wife reported him missing on Sunday evening after finding out that he had not arrived at the friends' home or taken the Sunday morning flight, the official said. Mr. Gray had left his wallet, driver's license, credit cards and some money in his apartment, the official said.
The police have done little to circulate photographs of Mr. Gray among cabdrivers and others who may have seen him, this official said, because his wife indicated that she wanted the search kept low-key.
