THE arrogance of the man. His solipsistic view of the world.
No, no, no, no, no, I am not talking about Roger Clemens. Roger the Red Sock. Roger the Hessian. Roger the Free Agent.
I am talking here about Pete Rose, that other would-be candidate for the Baseball Hall of Fame. When Clemens is deservedly installed in the Hall wearing the familiar B on his cap, Rose is likely to still be knock-knock-knocking on Cooperstown's door.
At this frenzied stage, Pete would accept any headgear the Hall might assign him, including a dunce's cap. In the past week, however, Pete has dumped a few more tons of toxic rubble in his own path.
Never -- and I do not use this word lightly -- have I seen an athlete (or maybe any public figure) downgrade his public reputation as startlingly fast as Rose did in the last week. He has gone from the image of a lying but vaguely charming rogue with a gambling addiction to a downright unpleasant human being, unmasked in public.
Writing that book and going on television were the worst possible things Rose could have done. There is an old saying that everybody is responsible for his or her face by the age of 40. The country has seen Pete Rose at 62, unrepentant, unaware, unhappy, unsatisfied, unpleasant.
Rose and Clemens are temporarily twinned in the public vision, a couple of hard cases intent on very different comebacks.
Clemens has every right to change his mind. But in deciding to pitch for his hometown Houston Astros this coming season, he has confirmed what every Yankee fan (and probably every Yankee player, too) knew with unerring psychic insight: that he was a freebooter, just passing through.
George Steinbrenner's undervaluation of the decent Andy Pettitte reminded me of the way Steinbrenner pushed out the deceptively strong-willed Dick Howser, his manager in 1980. He claimed that Howser had received an ''unbelievable'' offer in real estate. The offer was so ''unbelievable'' that it did not exist.
Yankee fans should not blame Brian Cashman for Pettitte's departure any more than they would blame Steinbrenner's doorman or driver. George does not accord his general managers enough respect to allow them to operate freely as adults with their own value system.
George, being a big guy himself, likes to dabble in big guys. The Yankees gave Clemens more than he gave them. They gave him the stage where his talent, his drive, his discipline, would be worth something. They gave him his rings.
Clemens said all the right things about being a Yankee. Then his buddy went to the Astros and none of his retirement talk and his Yankee talk meant anything. His cozy relationship with his new owner says he gets to stay home when his boys have a game, but that's hardly why he's coming back. Not totally unlike Pete Rose, Roger Clemens felt the rush.
But why should Clemens be loyal to the Yankees? Were they loyal to Pettitte? Are the Red Sox loyal to Nomar Garciaparra? Was Alex Rodriguez loyal to the Mariners? As Michael Kay says about home runs: See ya.
As for Rose, by exposing his unreconstructed view of his gambling sins -- he should have titled his book ''Get Over It'' -- he has done himself great harm.
Pete's already dicey reputation has gone downhill faster than Senator Joseph McCarthy's did when the Army lawyer Robert Welch deflated his gaseous balloon at the hearings in 1954, or O. J. Simpson's did when he was careering down the freeway (as any normal man would do when his ex-wife had been murdered), or Pee-wee Herman's did when he was arrested in that movie theater, or Charles Van Doren's did after he was handed the answers by the quiz show ''Twenty-One.''
The e-mail from my little circle has been amazingly one-sided:
*''He is clueless about the insidious problems of addiction. He is also angry and makes a miserable impression, 'Poor me' and 'I'm the victim.' '' -- Bettie Magee, Natick, Mass.
*''In baseball history, there is really only one lasting sin. It's not steroids or spitters or corked bats, or, finally, segregation. It's gambling.'' -- Aric Press, New York, editor of The American Lawyer.
*''Put him next to Cobb's plaque if there is a space. They can room together.'' -- Alan Taxerman, New York.
*''Charlie Hustle was so busy hustling that he didn't notice he was shooting himself in both feet.'' -- Ford Reid, Norfolk, Va.
Rose's best shot at the Hall may have flown over the fence of public scorn. Bud Selig was probably getting tired of seeing Rose receive more cheers from the mob than a dying Ted Williams or a dignified Henry Aaron at those greatest-of-the-greatest gimmick celebrations.
Uncle Buddy could have found a way to make Pete the Player eligible for the writers' vote, while still barring Pete the Person from ever working in baseball. Heck, I think I was counseling Selig to do that expedient thing a week ago. But now? As Michael Kay says: See ya.
Sports of The Times  Correction:  January 20, 2004, Tuesday  A Sports of The Times column last Wednesday about Pete Rose's efforts to rebuild his reputation misstated the given name of the lawyer who rebuked Senator Joseph R. McCarthy at the Army-McCarthy hearings in 1954. He was Joseph N. Welch, not Robert.
