ANOTHER customer, perusing the odd items of yet another 99-cent store in this city, selects a synthetic black belt from a rack and wonders aloud whether it is long enough to complete the loop around his formidable girth.
Yes! And with room to spare.
''How much is this belt?'' he asks, his smile suggesting that he already knows.
''Ninety-nine,'' answers the proprietor, Rocko.
Yes! The pleased belt sampler calls two aisles over to his wife, who is admiring some 99-cent socks. ''Baby,'' he says with triumph. ''I got my belt.''
His reaction, in turn, pleases Rocko, who believes in the economic promise of his business, the American 99 store, in the Allerton section of the Bronx. Leave it to others to scoff at the exotic provenance and eclectic selection of his merchandise. He is meeting a community need, he says, and he is doing it straight up.
''This store here is one of the true 99-cent stores,'' he explains. ''When you come here, you know that everything is 99 cents or less. It is what it is. A lot of the others, they sell 99-cent items, but they also sell merchandise that's more than 99 cents. Their signs say 'and up.' '' Rocko spells that last word aloud -- ''U.P.'' -- to punctuate his penny's worth of a point.
The stodgy five-and-dime store of the past has been replaced by the wacky 99-cent store of the present. The essential attraction of discounted stuff is the same, but today's 99-cent stores seduce customers with the added allure of cheap mystery. Where does this stuff come from? What new item that I never knew I needed will appear on the shelves this week? And how do the owners squeeze out enough pennies to make a profit?
Rocko, a stocky man tucked into a University of Kentucky sweatshirt, takes a break from unpacking boxes to provide a 99-cent primer. His real name is Kasho Ramdin, he is 33, he moved here from Guyana in 1990 and he has a wife and two young sons whom he rarely sees. That is because he works seven days a week amid boxes of odd-brand cereals (''Forelli's Frosty Corn Flakes''?), rows of scented candles (''Opium''?) and, and
''Glue traps for mice?'' a woman asks.
''In the back, along the wall,'' he answers.
He says that he used to work in electronics sales, until his older brother explained the potential in discount stores. Now their family operates three stores in the Bronx, including this one on Burke Avenue, a few steps away from an elevated subway line.
Rocko emphasizes that he is not one of those 99-cent magnates who saves pennies by exploiting workers. He is a hands-on boss, he says, one who works every day but New Year's Eve; who believes that ''if you put in now, you get back later.''
Most of the merchandise comes from distributors who sell the excess of stock intended for other countries; those boxes of Close-Up toothpaste, say, which ''verskaf berkerming teen tandbederf'' (provides protection against tooth cavities). Some items, like those six-inch ceramic ducks in sailor outfits, come from cheap-labor operations in China. And some things come from wholesale auctions; those cans of Carpet Wizard, for example.
On average, he pays about 65 cents for what he sells for 99 cents. Some products, like laundry detergent, cost him more, but those essential items draw customers to the store. Once they're inside, he reasons, who knows what might catch their eye? Perhaps those 99-cent men's blazers that somehow made their way to the Bronx from England.
''Hi, Sweetie Pie,'' says a woman, a regular customer. ''You got more bath mats?''
ROCKO says that he works hard to create an inviting environment for his multiethnic clientele, going so far as to rotate the style of music that emanates from the store's sound system. ''In the mornings we play religious music for one hour,'' he says. ''Then Spanish. Then reggae. And in the evening, calypso.''
''I can't play my own stuff,'' he adds. ''Heavy metal and hard rock.''
This attention to customer service paid off during last summer's protracted blackout, he says, which prompted many stores along Burke Avenue to yank down their steel gates. His store remained open, selling flashlights and an inordinate amount of scented candles. ''I had nothing stolen,'' he says. ''Matter of fact, my customers were helping me out.''
A woman asks about brooms. A man cannot find the flashlights. Some delivery people are unloading socks and undergarments. Rocko has to get back to work.
''A lot of my customers say, 'Why don't you go up in price?' '' he says. ''But I maintain, no. I want to be a 99-cent store.''
About New York
