When Aeschylus' ''Eumenides'' had its premiere in Athens in 458 B.C., women reportedly screamed, and some even had miscarriages. When Bobby Simone, Jimmy Smits's character on the television series ''N.Y.P.D. Blue,'' died in an episode in 1998, thousands of viewers were said to have wept before their televisions. Today the catharsis of tragedy, noted since the days of the ancients, can lurch perilously close to soap opera. And Puccini's ''Madama Butterfly,'' which returned to the Metropolitan Opera on Monday night, lies squarely at the intersection of the two.
The soap in this opera is its poignant story about an innocent, trusting Japanese girl betrayed by the American naval officer (Pinkerton) who marries her on a lark and then returns home to find a ''real'' wife. Puccini's shamelessly gorgeous music helps lay on the emotion with a trowel. After a couple of hearings, tears rise in a Pavlovian response to the first hint of the theme of the Act I love duet, and by the time Butterfly takes her life, the air in the auditorium is thick with sniffles.
On Monday the air was a little heavy to begin with. Plácido Domingo conducted; no one can fault his musical feeling, but he was taking on a lot with this score. Sometimes overloud, sometimes struggling to coordinate singers and orchestra, sometimes quite good, he created an effect not unlike that of an Olympic weightlifter struggling under a large load that he ultimately manages to raise.
The leads represented a meeting of two extremes. On one hand there was Marco Berti, an Italian tenor making his company debut as Pinkerton. He was the embodiment of a particular stereotype that might be called the opera jock, as if pumping out a large sound were the entire purpose of the evening. And then there was Veronica Villarroel, who brought Butterfly to life with impressive and nuanced acting, but whose voice lacked the tender beauty and floating, innocent high notes the role demands.
Putting these two together resulted in a rather hollow love duet. Left to their own devices, Mr. Berti happily bellowed (and he does have a healthy voice), and Ms. Villarroel created a deeply thought-out portrait of a young Japanese woman. But never the twain did meet. The two certainly did seem to come from different cultures, which after all is the point of the opera. The results may have been dramatically involving to a point, but musically satisfactory -- indeed, great tragedy -- it was not.
Bruno Caproni made a strong but unfocused sound as Sharpless; Jane Bunnell was an affecting Suzuki; and Joel Sorenson an appropriately wimpy Goro. The cherry blossoms in Michael Scott's set for Act II, by contrast, are clearly losing their pizzazz; for the first time in memory, the audience failed to applaud for them.
MET OPERA REVIEW
