LAST year, after a period of turmoil during which two longtime managers of New York's Greenmarket program were fired, the Council on the Environment of New York City, which oversees the markets, set out to find a new director. Search committee members say they were looking for a director who not only understood farmers' markets but who could also overcome longstanding divisions and make Greenmarket a forward-thinking model of sustainable agriculture.
Their search led them to Nina Planck. Ms. Planck, 32, had grown up on a farm in Virginia that depended entirely on farmers' markets. She had created a system of 13 for-profit farmers' markets in London, and later opened a market in Washington. She was articulate about farmland preservation and had a clear agenda for Greenmarket.
Ms. Planck started her job as director of Greenmarket last July. She was fired on Dec. 23.
To some, her dismissal came as no surprise. ''There was a sense of distress in the community, and I think Nina created it,'' said Eugene Wyatt, the owner of Catskill Merino, a sheep farm, and a Greenmarket farmer. ''It was a relief to have her gone.''
To others it was yet more evidence of troubles that have long stalled Greenmarket's potential. ''They didn't know who they hired: someone who was really ready to make changes,'' said Mary Cleaver, the owner of the Cleaver Company, a caterer that buys from Greenmarket farmers.
For most New Yorkers, Greenmarket, the largest farm-market system in the country, is a beloved institution, a gift of rural life and its bounty to the city. According to Tom Strumolo, the former assistant director who has replaced Ms. Planck, Greenmarket has helped preserve 25,000 acres of farmland in the region.
But for some who have seen more innovative markets, particularly in San Francisco and in Europe, it seems shabby and lacking in variety and quality. Search committee members say they hired Ms. Planck to bring Greenmarket up to speed, as she had done with the markets in London and Washington.
Interviews with more than 20 farmers, search committee members and restaurateurs, some of whom asked not to be named, indicate that Ms. Planck quickly met resistance at every turn. She was, it seems, stonewalled as she encouraged farmers to keep their stalls tidier, and as she tried to rewrite the rules, add to the diversity of products at each market, improve the integrity of farm inspections, have better signs and increase the number of farmers at the smaller markets. Ms. Planck was even criticized for painting the crumbling Greenmarket offices.
But even many of those who supported her said that the problem was not so much her ideas as her style. It was, insiders say, too much, too fast. Ms. Planck has been described as aggressive, slick, imperious, aloof and a poor listener (although she was said to be well liked by her staff). She was certainly not intimidated as she took on an entrenched structure in which a group of farmers hold as much power as the council that runs the market. Ultimately, supporters and opponents say, she antagonized those farmers and lost the council's support.
Ms. Planck would not comment in detail. She said, in a written statement: ''Having sold at many farmers' markets -- a few managed well, most badly -- and created a network of farmers' markets in London, I have many thoughts about what works. Tom and I often talked about the best way to go about it. But that is for Tom to decide, and it's not appropriate for me to comment.''
Greenmarket was founded by Barry Benepe and Bob Lewis in 1976 at 59th Street and Second Avenue. Today, there are 32 market sites and 185 farmers -- 185 independent businesses attempting to coexist in a market environment.
The most desirable market in the system is the one in Union Square, the largest and busiest in the city, with as many as 70 producers on a Saturday.
Greenmarket, a nonprofit organization, has its own management but is a program of the Council on the Environment, which falls under the aegis of the office of the mayor. While the council's executive director, Lys McLaughlin, and the Greenmarket's director ostensibly have the power to make changes, in general, no change is put into place without the approval of the Farmer Consumer Advisory Committee.
The committee is advisory and has no official power. Or so some committee members say. But others present a different picture. Fred Wilklow, a farmer member, said: ''I really believe that in the past few years the decisions have been made through the F.C.A.C., and they've been followed.''
Ms. Planck's dealings with the committee have been the source of most of her troubles.
''Greenmarket has been around for 26 or 27 years, and in my experience it has a diffuse nature of power which flows from the bottom up and from the top down,'' Mr. Wyatt said.
One of the first things Ms. Planck did when she arrived was to rewrite the rules and regulations, adding everything from a table of contents, which the rule book never had, to new and controversial rules like requiring jam makers to use locally grown fruits instead of, for instance, black raspberries from Washington State.
She presented her revision to the committee in August. It was not received with bouquets of flowers. John Gorzynski, an owner of Gorzynski Ornery Farm in Cochecton Center, N.Y., and a member of the search committee, said that while he liked many of her ideas, ''things take time, and she wasn't working that way.''
A search committee member, who spoke on condition of anonymity, said: ''Look, when she had her mind set on something, no one was going to change it. And that was a problem, especially when something was arrived at prematurely.''
At a meeting in October, according to a number of participants, Ms. Planck cried as she disputed anonymous accusations that she did not support small farmers.
''She said, 'The thing that upsets me most is that people are saying I'm for corporate agriculture and not for local foods,' '' Mr. Wyatt said. ''Boohoo. Boohoo.''
But Peter Hoffman, the owner of Savoy Restaurant and a former member of the committee, said: ''I, too, would stand up at a meeting and cry if I couldn't get people to understand that I was looking out for farmers in the long term.''
''So why didn't Lys back her up?'' Mr. Hoffman continued. ''If the waiters are having a hard time with a policy that one of my floor managers thinks is really important, I better back him up. Otherwise, if in any way I undermine him, I have nothing. I have no manager. I have just a man standing at the door.''
Ms. McLaughlin said, ''Well, I did lean over and embrace her in front of everybody.'' ''I worked very closely with Nina,'' she added, ''and I have great admiration for her. She has tremendous ideas and tremendous enthusiasm. I'm really sorry it didn't work out.''
Ms. McLaughlin said that she feels it's important for Greenmarket to be run democratically. ''It's an emergent system,'' she said. ''It's a dynamic creature. And it moves and it changes.''
The Greenmarket director does not seem to have much leverage. For instance, Ms. Planck proposed to several meat producers that they be grouped together so that the shopping experience would be more like that at a grocery store. But Mr. Wyatt said that he told her that putting the lamb farmers together would drive down prices, his prices in particular. Similar responses from others discouraged her from pursuing it further.
The conflicts have a long history. In 1993 Ms. McLaughlin said in a memorandum to Mr. Benepe and Tony Mannetta, then the director, that a ''vocal minority'' of farmers would object to fines for refusing unannounced inspections of their farms. Ms. McLaughlin wrote, ''It would be a shame to invite lawsuits, bring further unrest to Greenmarket by going with the rules and regs as they are here.''
A majority of farmers on the committee have spaces at Union Square (Mr. Strumolo said that he is hoping to broaden the representation). One recurring issue on which the Greenmarket management seems to have taken a firm stand is ''continuity,'' the idea that farmers should be allowed to sell their spaces at Union Square when they sell their farms. The issue has never advanced beyond a discussion.
''On a certain level,'' Mr. Hoffman said, ''it's sad and understandable that their economics are so tight that they make small-minded decisions that are about turf, and fight over tiny market share. And that's where I felt that Nina had a larger vision. And the market needs a larger vision.''
Farmers' markets in other parts of the country appear to be increasingly innovative. At Ferry Plaza Farmers Market in San Francisco, some producers have permanent indoor spaces with running water and electricity. Large, attractive signs describe the farms and their methods of production. Shoppers can check their bags at a stall and then keep shopping.
''The Ferry Building is very well organized,'' Dan Barber, an owner of Blue Hill restaurant in Greenwich Village, said. ''And the city does a lot to support that, not just organizationally, but spiritually. You go there and you feel like you're in 2004.''
In the late 1970's, John McPhee wrote in The New Yorker of his experience as a salesman at the Greenmarket during its second year. The article suggests that discontent at the market is nothing new. The farmers grumbled about the rules as much as they grumbled about one another. Of Bob Lewis, who was running the market with Mr. Benepe, Mr. McPhee wrote, ''If he is ready to rebuke the farmers (for selling West Coast peaches) he is also ready to listen, without limit, to their numerous problems and even more numerous complaints.''
Complaints may have helped push out Ms. Planck, but she remains a Greenmarket supporter. ''I was happy to make a contribution to Greenmarket,'' Ms. Planck said in her statement. ''I'll keep working for small, ecological farms and telling people why local foods are better. If you love to look at farmland, you've got to eat the view -- or lose it.''
