ECONOMISTS and others who should know are saying that the economy's upturn in recent months has bypassed the working class and particularly benefited the country's elite.
Recent sales figures for high-end Champagne and sparkling wines, the traditional celebratory beverages of the economically favored, tend to bear that out. As of October, French Champagne sales for the first nine months of last year were up 15 percent over the same period in 2002, industry analysts say. Top California sparkling wines, made by the traditional Champagne method, were doing even better. Roederer Estate was up 26 percent over 2002, Schramsberg 35 percent and Iron Horse 25 percent, according to The Wine Market Report, a trade publication.
Joy Sterling, a principal at Iron Horse Vineyards, in Sebastopol, said the ''frenzied demand'' from distributors recalled the extraordinary sales of sparkling wine in fall 1999, leading up to the millennium celebrations. After a drop in 2001 and 2002, Iron Horse's sales are moving back to levels near those of 2000, Ms. Sterling said, noting that they were 25 percent higher last November than in November 2002.
Rich Cartiere, publisher of The Wine Market Report, predicted that once the 2003 figures are complete, they could show that California's top producers of premium sparkling wines sold 100,000 to 150,000 more cases of sparkling wine than in 2002. ''If you exclude 1999 and the millennium excesses, 2003 was the best year ever for the super-premium sparkling-wine makers,'' he said.
In that group, he included Schramsberg, Domaine Mumm, Domaine Carneros, Domaine Chandon, Pacific Echo, Gloria Ferrer, Iron Horse, Roederer Estate and Piper Sonoma. (All use the traditional méthode champenoise, in which secondary fermentation takes place in each bottle.) He did not include Korbel, the largest domestic user of the method, because, he said, it is not in the same super-premium price range of $15 to $20 and more.
Overall numbers are more modest. Gomberg-Fredrikson, a California consulting firm that tracks wine prices, said that final figures for sparkling-wine sales in the United States should show an increase of about 5 percent, or 12 million nine-liter cases, in 2003 over 2002. Total California sparkling-wine growth should be up about 2 percent, and imports, which probably slowed some in November and December as a result of unfavorable exchange rates, should be up about 10 percent, said Jon Fredrikson, the firm's principal.
Through September, French Champagne sales in this country totaled about 1.5 million cases, up from 1.3 million for the same period in 2002, Gomberg-Fredrikson figures show. The biggest proportional increases were for German sparkling wines, which were up 50 percent through September, admittedly from a very small base: 34,800 cases, as against 23,200 a year earlier.
It's more than likely that prices of French Champagne will increase appreciably in the next year. A survey of importers and distributors by The Wine Market Report over the last month predicted price rises of 10 to 30 percent for all imported wines if the dollar continues to fall. A euro was worth $1.28 on Monday, and importers said it could reach $1.35 or $1.50 in coming months. The dollar's fall may give domestic winemakers a chance to recover market share lost over the past 18 to 24 months to imports, particularly from Australia and Italy. Imports accounted for 27 percent of the total United States wine market last year and almost 50 percent of all supermarket sales of wines costing $5 to $12.
Some French Champagnes have been selling for less than $20 a bottle in recent months, seriously challenging the domestic sparklers. Whether American sparkling wines can retake some of that market remains to be seen. Champagne is still seen as a luxury product and less subject to market changes. The best American sparkling wines are made by the méthode champenoise, the only process permitted in Champagne. Most inexpensive sparkling wine is made by the Charmat or bulk process, in which the wine is fermented in large steel tanks before bottling.
Charmat process sparkling wines can be produced in a few months. Méthode champenoise wines come along at a more leisurely pace. Most spend several years maturing in the bottle before release. Maison Krug, in Reims, is just getting around to releasing its 1990 brut. The price? Oh, around $200 a bottle.
WINE TALK
