USA Today, which announced yesterday morning that it had concluded a seven-month inquiry into the accuracy of several articles by a former foreign correspondent without resolving whether he had falsified information, said last night that it had ''serious concerns'' about another of his dispatches.
The editor of USA Today, Karen Jurgensen, said she was made aware of an internal complaint yesterday about the similarities between a September 1998 article describing a gun market in Darra, Pakistan, written by the correspondent, Jack Kelley, and an article that had appeared two months earlier in The Washington Post.
''Of course we're going to look into it,'' Ms. Jurgensen said yesterday afternoon. ''We'll look into any stories that arise as we work through this now public process.''
Several hours later, a spokeswoman for USA Today called to read a statement from Ms. Jurgensen. ''Now that we have looked more closely at the story, we have serious concerns,'' the statement said.
A lawyer for Mr. Kelley said the concerns were unwarranted.
In yesterday's issue of USA Today, the newspaper published an article that described how Mr. Kelley, who had worked at the paper since its inception in 1982, resigned last week after being confronted with evidence he had ''repeatedly misled'' the editors conducting the inquiry. As it sought last fall to verify a front-page article that Mr. Kelley filed from Belgrade in 1999, the newspaper said, a security firm that it had retained discovered that a woman claiming to be a translator for the article had not been involved in its preparation.
The newspaper said that after receiving an anonymous complaint about his work last May, it had begun examining the Belgrade article and several others by Mr. Kelley, whose company-supplied biography says he has reported for USA Today from 90 countries. The editors said they had received the complaint around the time The New York Times disclosed the discovery of fabrications or plagiarism in at least three dozen articles by a reporter, Jayson Blair.
In its article yesterday, the newspaper said that none of the articles examined, including the Belgrade article -- in which Mr. Kelley described a ''Yugoslav Army, three-ring notebook'' that contained ''a direct order to a lieutenant to 'cleanse' a village'' -- necessitated a correction.
''The editors either concluded they were accurate or that the passage of time and the difficulty of retracing events in distant war-torn countries made verification impossible,'' Ms. Jurgensen said in a statement yesterday on USA Today's Web site.
In an interview yesterday, Ms. Jurgensen said: ''I think we could go another six months and still not have clarity.''
At the newspaper's newsroom in McLean, Va., several reporters and editors interviewed by telephone yesterday said they were troubled by aspects of the investigation. Most notably, they were concerned that Mr. Kelley, 43, had been allowed to approve the reporter who conducted the inquiry, Mark Memmott, a former deputy managing editor. Mr. Kelley had also been involved in deciding who would be interviewed about his work, the newspaper said.
None of the staff members who were critical of the investigation yesterday would express their concerns by name, saying they feared angering their bosses at USA Today and Gannett, the newspaper's parent. Ms. Jurgensen said Mr. Kelley had been permitted to play an active role in the investigation because ''we had the assumption he was innocent.''
''We were trying to be fair,'' she said. ''We knew he trusted Mark.''
Gina Lubrano, the readers representative of The San Diego Union-Tribune for more than a decade, said Mr. Kelley's involvement might have tainted the process.
''It surprises me that they allowed Kelley to be a participant in determining how the investigation would be conducted,'' Ms. Lubrano said.
In a statement that he issued through a lawyer yesterday, Mr. Kelley said: ''I walk away from USA Today knowing that in my 21-year career, I have never fabricated or plagiarized a story.''
Ms. Jurgensen said that after yesterday's article was printed, she was made aware of the article Mr. Kelley wrote about the market in Pakistan, and the article's similarity to the one by Kevin Sullivan published in July 1998 in The Post.
Mr. Kelley's article contained a half-dozen phrases or sentences that closely tracked those that appeared in Mr. Sullivan's. Mr. Kelley wrote, for example, that when the guns offered for sale were fired in the street, ''the dogs didn't even flinch.'' Mr. Sullivan had written that ''not even the dozing dogs flinch.''
Mr. Kelley wrote that ''an AK-47, captured from the Soviet Army in Afghanistan, sells for $320. But a near-identical Darra copy starts at $50.'' Mr. Sullivan wrote that ''an AK-47 captured from the Soviet Army in Afghanistan goes for about $320, but almost identical copies made in Darra start at about $50.''
Mr. Kelley also wrote of ''small family-owned shops that line the road'' and ''are filled with Russian Kalashnikovs, American M-16s, Italian Berettas, Israeli Uzis,'' and ''guns hidden in walking sticks.''
The Post article mentioned that the market ''is lined with tiny shops and stalls filled with'' the same ''Russian Kalashnikovs, American M-16s, Italian Berettas, Israeli Uzis, even guns hidden in walking sticks.''
Lynne Bernabei, a lawyer representing Mr. Kelley, said she had examined the two articles at the request of The Times. ''The dogs 'don't flinch' in both articles,'' she said. ''Other than that, there is very little similarity.''
Ms. Bernabei said that she had spoken with Mr. Kelley, who did not recall the Post article but did recall being advised to visit Darra by a BBC cameraman. She said that Mr. Kelley also recalled that a number of other news organizations wrote about the market. These included The Independent of London, Life magazine and Newsday. She said that it was not out of the ordinary that the articles by USA Today and The Post contained much of the same information, considering how media-shrewd the denizens of the arms market had become.
''This is a family arms market,'' she said. ''People aren't going to change in two months. It's not surprising the figures are going to be the same.''
THE MEDIA BUSINESS
