The former chief financial officer of Enron and his wife have agreed to plead guilty to crimes after all.
The executive, Andrew S. Fastow, and his wife, Lea, are scheduled to enter their guilty pleas today in separate proceedings in Federal District Court in Houston, just days after their negotiations with the government collapsed, people involved in the case said yesterday.
The terms of the two deals are virtually identical to the tentative agreements reached last week. Under those, Mr. Fastow would be sentenced to at least 10 years in prison and be required to cooperate with the continuing investigation. Mrs. Fastow would serve at least five months in prison.
The two had been expected to enter their guilty pleas on Thursday, when the plans were upended after Judge David Hittner, who was hearing Mrs. Fastow's case, made a series of comments suggesting he was deeply uncomfortable with the length of her prison term. A judge does not have to accept the terms of a plea deal, and Judge Hittner could sentence Mrs. Fastow to as much as 16 months, at which point she would have the right to withdraw her plea.
With Mrs. Fastow merely an asterisk in the Enron case - the government's main interest is the cooperation of her husband - Judge Hittner's comments sent defense lawyers back to the negotiating table, seeking terms that could result in the dismissal of the case against her. They argued that without such a deal, the cooperation of Mr. Fastow might slip away. But the government refused to agree to the terms Mrs. Fastow was seeking, causing the negotiations to collapse on Friday.
The discussions resumed this week, with the Fastows ultimately agreeing to take virtually the original deals, with only small changes in Mrs. Fastow's deal, people involved in the case said. But Mrs. Fastow will still be required to plead guilty to a single felony count, they said; at one point last week, prosecutors raised the possibility of allowing her to plead to a misdemeanor, but that option never turned into a formal offer.
The plea deals clear the way for Mr. Fastow, long considered a central figure in the criminal investigation into the Enron collapse, to provide evidence and testimony against other executives in the case.
As part of his effort to obtain a plea deal, Mr. Fastow has already provided evidence against other former Enron executives. Some of the information he offered was used in writing a criminal complaint that was set to be filed last week against Enron's former chief accounting officer, Richard A. Causey, people involved in the case said. But the collapse of the Fastow negotiations led to a delay in those plans. There was no indication yesterday of when, or if, the government planned to revive that complaint. In his plea negotiations, Mr. Fastow also offered evidence about the involvement of Jeffrey K. Skilling, Enron's former chief executive, in certain accounting issues, people involved in the case said. But it is not clear whether that information would suggest or sustain criminal charges.
Mr. Fastow also plays significant roles in criminal cases involving other defendants who have already been charged. If Mr. Fastow pleads as expected, those other cases are sure to feature him as a primary government witness.
Mr. Fastow -- who was implicated in wrongdoing by a onetime friend and subordinate, Michael J. Kopper -- has long been viewed as a means for prosecutors into the final stages of the Enron investigation. Given the strength of the case against Mr. Fastow, prosecutors had more leverage over him than over any other senior Enron executive. In the end, he was viewed as the man most likely to succumb to pressure to reveal everything he saw in the executive suites.
The criminal charges against Mr. Fastow -- which include fraud, money laundering and conspiracy -- depict him as a facilitator who manipulated accounting and financial techniques to allow Enron to hide its many business failings, even while enriching himself at the company's expense. His wife was charged with conspiracy and tax violations for aiding him in disguising secret income he received as payment from a loan to Mr. Kopper.
