The Rutgers women's basketball team could find excuses for its 8-5 record: everything from an outbreak of shoulder injuries that sidelined four starters at different times this season to one of the toughest schedules in the conference.
Between late November and early December, the Scarlet Knights played four road games against three top-20 opponents, spent 10 of 13 days traveling 8,050 miles to six cities in four states and two time zones. All five losses have come on the road.
Coach C. Vivian Stringer has not had time to unpack her suitcases from the last two trips and did not give her assistant coaches their Christmas gifts until last Sunday. She has suited up 10 players only once this season, used 5 lineups and recruited 4 male student managers to play in practice because she did not have enough players.
The team's trainer told Stringer three days ago that the senior forward Shalicia Hurns, the team's leading rebounder who missed two preseason tournament games with a right shoulder injury, should not shoot, pass or rebound because she has not fully recovered from the injury.
Cappie Pondexter, the team's leading scorer, has an injured right shoulder and forward Mariota Theodoris has yet to suit up for the Scarlet Knights after rehabilitating a torn anterior cruciate ligament in her left knee. Theodoris also recently injured her right shoulder.
To make matters worse, Chelsea Newton, the junior guard and second-leading scorer on the team, reinjured her right shoulder during practice Monday and is not expected to play at Syracuse on Wednesday night. Newton missed the first five games of the season because of a shoulder injury.
Such are the vagaries of life, Stringer tells her players. Injuries and tough schedules are part of the game. Get over it and move on.
On Wednesday night, Rutgers (1-1 Big East) plays another crucial conference game at Syracuse (4-8, 1-1). Then it is No. 4 Connecticut on Monday. Stringer expects the Scarlet Knights to do what it takes to win, with or without Newton.
''Truthfully, there is anxiety here because we are hurt and the schedule is not kind to us,'' Stringer said. ''We've got some monsters coming up, including Connecticut. If we're not strong enough or tough enough, we will fall by the wayside. So our attitude now has got to be to fight.''
Now in her ninth season at Rutgers, Stringer has built the Scarlet Knights into one of the top programs in the nation, leading the team to the N.C.A.A. tournament's Round of 16 in 1998, the Round of 8 in 1999, its first Final Four in 2000 and a fourth consecutive N.C.A.A. berth in 2001.
Last season, Stringer engineered one of the most drastic turnarounds in Division I, improving from a 9-20 finish in 2001-2 to a 21-8 mark and a trip to the second round of the N.C.A.A. tournament.
In more than three decades of coaching, Stringer admits she has never experienced a season quite like this.
''It's mind-boggling,'' she said. ''In 31 years I never had one player injure a shoulder. Now I have four. You'd think we were a rebounding machine with all these shoulder injuries.''
Stringer smiled at that, but she did not let her players to alibi.
''I'm not going to be one to allow us to make excuses as to why we can't get the job done,'' she said. ''We need to be tougher. Our biggest problem is that we're too nice.''
Stringer was still smarting Monday about the team's lethargic performance in a 53-49 loss at Villanova on Friday -- especially after victories in the two previous games, over Ohio State and Virginia Tech, which were both ranked in the top 20 at the time. She was unusually stinging in her criticism during the team's four-hour practice.
''What do you mean, you can't?'' Stringer said to Rebecca Richman, the junior center, a tone of indignation in her voice. ''I hate those words: I can't.''
When forward Michelle Campbell allowed Jarvis Smith, a wiry, 6-4 male practice partner, to drive to the basket, Stringer confronted her.
''Deny,'' she told Campbell. ''What part of D-E-N-Y don't you understand?''
After practice, Richman, Hurns and Pondexter played down the exchanges.
''Coach Stringer's practices are more demanding than the games,'' said Hurns, as her teammates nodded agreement.
The players used to take Stringer's criticism personally. Not anymore.
''My freshman year I would have started crying,'' Richman said. ''She's a hard coach on the court but off the court, it's like having a friend.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
