The WB television network has had a loser of a season so far. That much its executives acknowledge, with a forthrightness unusual in the industry.
But in explaining what happened, as the three top WB executives did at a news conference here yesterday, they blamed several new programs that misfired (most notably ''Tarzan'') as well as what they and other broadcasters have called faulty methodology used by Nielsen Media Research in measuring ratings of younger viewers.
But another possible explanation for the WB slide among its core audience -- viewers aged 12 to 34 -- could be its disdain for the reality television genre. WB, the most youth-oriented of the broadcast networks, has fared well over its nine years with dramas that appeal to younger women and teenagers, like ''Dawson's Creek,'' ''Buffy the Vampire Slayer,'' ''Seventh Heaven'' and ''Gilmore Girls.'' But it is the only broadcast network out of the six (four big, two small) that has yet to have a hit reality show.
As they admitted here, the WB executives are simply not enamored with reality programming despite its lure to young viewers. The chairman of WB, Garth Ancier, called reality shows ''a scheduling tool,'' and emphasized that WB would remain ''primarily a scripted network,'' concentrating on traditional dramas and comedies and introducing new wrinkles like youth-oriented made-for-television movies.
The chief executive of WB, Jordan Levin, said, ''It has never been our goal to aggressively seek out reality tent-pole programs.'' (Tent-pole programs are those that play in time periods that start an hour, say 8 p.m. or 9 p.m.)
Mr. Levin said WB had passed on the NBC hit ''Fear Factor.'' ''We didn't think it was appropriate for our air,'' he said. ''We knew it would get a rating.''
Instead, the network, in deciding what sort of reality was appropriate for its schedule, has relegated the genre to second-tier status. It has added a second run of a show, ''The Surreal Life,'' featuring washed-up celebrities like the former pornography star Ron Jeremy. (The first episode last Sunday reached several rating highs among young viewers, surpassing all the comedies and dramas the network had tried there.)
WB will also introduce a second run of a show called ''High School Reunion'' in March. And Mr. Levin said several other reality shows were in the works.
But in contrast to the attitude at the networks that embraced the genre, he called reality ''spacer programming,'' meaning it fills spaces between scripted shows. ''What I've always been nervous about with reality is that it is very seductive,'' Mr. Levin said. ''It obviously gets you quick ratings but the investment you make in it does not result in long-term reward.''
Executives at other networks made similar points last spring, when they did not want advertisers to think they were gravitating too heavily toward reality programs, which had a stigma of attracting a less-affluent audience. But after a fall where the only new big hits again were reality shows -- from ''Average Joe'' to ''The Simple Life'' -- other networks' once-grudging acceptance of the genre has turned more welcoming.
Not at WB, despite its problems this season. The numbers have not been pretty for the network, which has lost close to 20 percent of its audience this season, a larger percentage than any other network. ''Gilmore Girls,'' in particular, has suffered in the ratings.
Brad Turrell, the network's corporate spokesman, brandished charts that tried to play down the declines. The charts indicated that the wild swings among young viewers this fall -- including sizable drop-offs in overall viewing among WB's core audience of younger women, which got much less attention than the even bigger slide among younger men -- called into question Nielsen's measurements.
The tweaks in the way Nielsen measured ratings ''affected our network more than any other network,'' Mr. Turrell said. And Mr. Levin pointed to the disparity between Nielsen's national survey and its measurement of local cities, where WB is off by only 10 percent. (Nielsen has stood by its methodology.)
Still, by any measure, that is a significant slump. While the executives conceded that programming missteps -- one planned new show, ''Fearless,'' never even got on the air -- played a hand, they did not feel the network's reluctance to jump on the reality train amounted to one of those blunders.
The executives offered several potential new directions to help turn around WB, including scheduling 22 first-run episodes of a program over 22 consecutive weeks with each episode repeated once in the same week.
Mr. Ancier said this might be the only way to make repeat programming viable for most programs.
THE MEDIA BUSINESS: ADVERTISING
