Walter J. Turnbull, the embattled founder and director of the Boys Choir of Harlem, acknowledged yesterday that he had made a mistake in allowing a counselor to remain in contact with students after the man had been banned from the school for molesting a 14-year-old student.
''It happened; I handled it badly,'' Mr. Turnbull said during his first interview since the choir's board asked him to resign. ''And what kinds of things and structures can we put in to make it never happen again?''
Investigators for the New York City schools have urged the dismissal of Mr. Turnbull and his brother, Horace, the choir's executive vice president.
The allegations against the brothers have left the choir, which has performed on many of the world's greatest stages, hanging in the balance, since Mr. Turnbull has been so integral to its identity and success. This week, the New York City Department of Education named an interim principal for the choir's affiliated school.
In the interview at his lawyer's office, Walter Turnbull, 59, conceded that he had made a mistake in not removing the counselor, Frank Jones Jr. ''The trust that I had was misplaced,'' he said.
Mr. Turnbull never reported the abuse, which came to light when the student's mother went to the police in the fall of 2001. Mr. Jones was convicted and sentenced to two years for sexual abuse.
Mr. Turnbull said he thought the board's request that he step down was excessive and could jeopardize the choir. ''I'm heartbroken that such a wonderful opportunity for the development of young people is under attack,'' he said. ''After 35 years of work and 6,000 kids -- based on one incident.''
Lawyers for the abused student, a 14-year-old boy, have also accused Mr. Turnbull of hitting students during rehearsals, which he denied yesterday. ''I don't use physical force -- that is not true,'' he said. ''I was taken aback by that.''
Nevertheless, Mr. Turnbull acknowledged that his standards were high, for his students' performance and behavior. ''I would call myself tough, but no less caring,'' he said.
Mr. Turnbull's lawyer, Alan L. Fuchsberg, has submitted a proposal countering the board's request for his resignation, which the trustees are expected to decide on this afternoon. The proposal would redefine Mr. Turnbull's role, eliminating some of his administrative duties. It also suggests the appointment of an interim independent monitor and an employment search to fill various positions.
''If they raise some money, if we put in the structures that are necessary,'' Mr. Turnbull said, he would be open to redefining his role. ''I don't mind giving up whatever needs to be given up. This position or that position -- I have four or five positions.''
Mr. Turnbull has been the moving force behind the choir since he started it in 1968. He has conducted the group, determined the repertoire, set the disciplined tone, started the choir's academic school of 650 students and founded the girls' choir.
Because he has yet to prepare someone to succeed him, Mr. Turnbull said, he was concerned about the choir's ability to continue after him.
''I feel its survival is at risk because we don't have the structure to be able to move without me at this moment,'' he said. ''One of the things we have to be careful about is that we maintain for the children the concept of caring and nurturing along with making world-class music.''
The choir has struggled financially for the last 20 years, but Mr. Turnbull suggested that the board's lackluster fund-raising was partly to blame. ''The board of directors can do more,'' he said, ''should do more.''
If he is forced to step down, Mr. Turnbull said, he would be willing to help with a transition to his replacement. ''I would want to be a part of the ongoing process to help whomever is working with our children to understand what makes it work,'' he said. ''I'm committed to the children. I'm committed to that community.''
