The Republican leader of the State Senate said on Tuesday that next year's state budget need not include billions of dollars more for schools to satisfy a court mandate to offer children a ''sound basic education.''
At a news conference, the Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, also called for reforms to break the habit of passing late budgets in New York, a practice that has gone on for 19 straight years.
Mr. Bruno said he expected the state to pass a budget this year without addressing a solution to the school equity issues raised by the Campaign for Fiscal Equity on behalf of children in the New York City schools.
''It is not necessary that we address it in this coming budget, but it has to get addressed and resolved before we leave session,'' Mr. Bruno said of the Court of Appeals order.
''Later, in June,'' Mr. Bruno said, ''I think it should get resolved so that we have a plan in place, we have a consensus, so that people know where we are.''
The new budget is supposed to be in place by April 1, though it is chronically late, and the Senate plans to end its session on June 22, he said. The court order says a decision must be in place by July 30.
City officials have been pressing for a resolution of the court order this year, to begin pouring resources immediately into the public schools. Sheldon Silver, the Assembly speaker, said he did not think the court allowed the state to roll the financing issue over to another year.
Mr. Silver, a Democrat, said he thought that Mr. Bruno was ''misinterpreting'' the intent of the court action. Mr. Silver added, ''If the governor does not submit a funding for the C.F.E. decision, he will not have a balanced budget as he's required to submit, because he will have an outstanding liability of the state that is unfunded.''
The court's ruling is prompting intense debate in Albany over how to see that the New York City schools are financed at the same level as others around the state. It is expected to be one of the biggest budget issues lawmakers face this year, at a time when they must also close a shortfall of about $6 billion.
The state's budget of about $90 billion includes more than $14 billion in aid for local school districts. Though the governor and legislative leaders had said they thought fixing the problem would require more spending on schools, Mr. Pataki in his annual address to state lawmakers last week said money alone was not the solution. Rather, he said, the state must enact reforms to the education system as a whole and make sure someone is accountable for how the money is spent.
Further, reassuring upstate and suburban lawmakers who had feared a solution to New York City's problems would mean less money for them, Mr. Pataki said he did not think resources could be taken from one district to meet the needs of another.
Mr. Bruno stressed on Tuesday that New York was already spending about $11,500 per student, more than any other state. He said the first step, as the court ordered, would be to assess the true cost per student of providing a sound basic education.
Part of that assessment, Mr. Bruno said, would be determining whether New York City itself was contributing enough money to the education of its 1.1 million public school students. He pointed out that areas outside New York City pay a significantly greater proportion of taxes, per capita, on education than does the city.
Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said at a City Hall news conference that the city had continued to spend on education the amount it said it would in an agreement the mayor reached with the Legislature when he won control over city schools.
Devising a plan so that every school in the city and other high-needs districts has the necessary resources to ensure a sound basic education could be done by July 30, as the court ordered, Mr. Bruno said.
''I think that there is a cart and there is a horse,'' he said. ''What comes first in my mind is the horse, and that means that you have to know what is the cost of a proper education. Once we know that, then you deal with the dollars. Because it's conceivable the money is already out there to meet that mandate.''
He also called for reforms to the way the state achieves its budget. ''The system to put a budget in place in this state does not work, it's dysfunctional,'' Mr. Bruno said. ''But really, this is the year. This is the year of togetherness, of love, of compassion, O.K., of embracing with the governor, with the Assembly, with the Senate.''
His plan calls for the governor to submit his budget earlier in the year, by Jan. 15, and proposes shifting the start of the state fiscal year from April 1 to May 1.
A spokesman for Mr. Silver, Eileen Larrabee, said the speaker welcomed Mr. Bruno's attempt at budget reform. Noting that the Assembly had passed its own package of bills to change the process last year, she said the Assembly was ''optimistic that we can arrive at an agreement with the Senate.''
