Former President Jimmy Carter plans to appear on Sunday with Howard Dean in his hometown, Plains, Ga., providing a precious photo opportunity for Dr. Dean on the eve of the Iowa caucuses, which propelled Mr. Carter's own presidential bid nearly 30 years ago.
Aides to Dr. Dean said Mr. Carter would praise their candidate but stop short of an official endorsement. Dr. Dean's campaign manager, Joe Trippi, left the possibility of an endorsement open in an appearance on ''Inside Politics'' on CNN, saying, ''I don't think so, but you're going to have to tune in on Sunday in Plains, Georgia.''
Dr. Dean has decided to disrupt an intense five-day bus tour across Iowa to join Mr. Carter for Sunday school and services at Maranatha Baptist Church, followed by a joint appearance at a local high school.
Dr. Dean, the former governor of Vermont, has said he modeled his campaign somewhat on Mr. Carter's 1976 insurgent bid, when he, too, started out as a little-known governor and paved a path to the presidency through Iowa. The two men have chatted intermittently over the past few years, and Dr. Dean said his apology in November for his comments about Southern whites who display Confederate flag decals was based in part on Mr. Carter's advice.
Even if Mr. Carter simply says nice things about Dr. Dean, the image of the two men together could be a powerful one just before the caucuses, which became a prominent step in the nomination process after Mr. Carter's aggressive campaign there in 1976.
''Who better to see than the guy who put the Iowa caucuses on the map and who is still very popular in Iowa,'' said a former Carter adviser who spoke on the condition of anonymity.
Dr. Dean could also benefit in the South, where he faces a strong challenge from Gen. Wesley K. Clark and Senator John Edwards of North Carolina. In an interview with Time magazine last month, Mr. Carter said of Dr. Dean, ''He seems to be doing quite well.'' Asked then whether he supported Dr. Dean's campaign, he said, ''No, I'm going to support whoever I think will have the best chance next November.''
But Mr. Carter's son, Chip, has endorsed Dr. Dean and has stumped on his behalf in Iowa. Tim Kraft, who ran the Carter campaign in Iowa in 1976, returned there this year to work for Dr. Dean.
Mr. Dean has already landed endorsements from prominent Democrats like former Vice President Al Gore; former Senator Bill Bradley of New Jersey, a rival of Mr. Gore in 2000; and Senator Tom Harkin of Iowa.
Former President Bill Clinton has said he would not endorse during the primaries. But two Democratic candidates, Senator Joseph I. Lieberman of Connecticut and General Clark, sought Tuesday to highlight their ties to him.
Mr. Lieberman returned to a political landmark, an Elks Club in Derry, N.H., where Mr. Clinton made an appearance in 1992. Borrowing a line from Mr. Clinton's speech there, Mr. Lieberman promised about 60 people that if they stuck by him, ''I'll stick with you, every day, every way and everywhere, until the last dog dies.''
''This is where Bill Clinton spoke in 1992 and, I believe, turned a corner in his campaign in New Hampshire and for the White House,'' Mr. Lieberman said.
Mr. Lieberman, the Democratic vice presidential nominee in 2000, sought to tie himself to the Clinton legacy, laying out plans to build on 10 Clinton policy initiatives. Campaign aides also distributed a detailed outline of the relationship between Mr. Lieberman and Mr. Clinton, starting in 1970 when Mr. Clinton, as a ''young Yale law student,'' volunteered for Mr. Lieberman's first campaign, for the Connecticut State Senate.
At the same time, the Clark campaign said that a number of Clinton associates, including Mickey Kantor, the former secretary of commerce; Representative Rahm Emanuel of Illinois, a former senior adviser; John H. Dalton, former secretary of the Navy; and Mary Frances Berry, the onetime head of the Civil Rights Commission, all plan to campaign for General Clark in New Hampshire.
''Many people from the Clinton administration and the campaign believe Wes Clark is the best representation of the views, the substance and the style of President Clinton,'' said Eli Segal, chairman of the Clark campaign.
General Clark appeared with the Rev. Jesse Jackson at a jobs fair in New York on Tuesday, but he dismissed a question about a possible endorsement from Mr. Jackson, saying, ''We're not talking about endorsements, we're talking about programs that help America.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE FORMER GOVERNOR  Correction:  January 16, 2004, Friday  An article on Wednesday about plans for Howard Dean to appear in Plains, Ga., with former President Jimmy Carter misstated the position of Dr. Mary Frances Berry, who supports Gen. Wesley K. Clark for the Democratic nomination. She is the present chairwoman of the United States Commission on Civil Rights, not a former one.
