Less than three months after it opened on Broadway, ''Taboo,'' the new musical produced by Rosie O'Donnell that features songs by the 1980's pop star Boy George, will close on Feb. 8, its producer said yesterday. It is estimated to have lost at least $10 million.
The closing was announced to the show's cast at the Plymouth Theater just before last night's performance.
'' 'Taboo' was by far the most fulfilling experience of my career,'' Ms. O'Donnell said in a statement. ''Many lessons were learned, and so it goes.'' She was not available for comment yesterday, a press representative for the show said.
''Taboo'' was the first Broadway show produced by Ms. O'Donnell, who financed it with $10 million of the fortune she had made on her television talk show, which ran from 1996 to 2002. Beyond that original outlay, the production has been losing money week to week, according to figures from the League of American Theaters and Producers.
Ms. O'Donnell had set out to shake up the traditional way of marketing and producing shows on Broadway. Despite hiring one of the most prominent advertising agencies, Serino Coyne, Ms. O'Donnell used her own name and voice and even her own handmade collages to promote the show in print and radio ads.
Ms. O'Donnell, a tireless booster of Broadway on television who appeared in several musicals (''Grease,'' ''Seussical: The Musical'') had seemed confident that her seal of approval was enough to sell tickets.
''For six years I sold everyone else's shows with great success,'' Ms. O'Donnell said in a September interview in The New York Times. ''So I think the fact that I'm producing this and putting my money in it speaks volumes to people who for six years went to see Broadway shows based on my enthusiasm.''
But it soon became apparent that ''Taboo'' was a tougher sell than expected. The musical, which had been a minor hit in London in 2001 and 2002, told a story of fame, drugs and sexual confusion set in the London club scene of the early 1980's. In addition to being a co-composer (with Kevan Frost) and a character in the musical, Boy George also plays the role of Leigh Bowery, the radical fashion designer who died of AIDS in 1994.
It was a story that Ms. O'Donnell found compelling but that ticketbuyers never did. For the week ending Sunday, for example, ''Taboo'' grossed just $281,334, representing a weekly loss of about $200,000.
Even before it opened, the production was dogged by reports of creative infighting and by rumors that it was not artistically sound. It did not help matters that during the show's two weeks of previews -- a relatively brief period for a new Broadway musical -- Ms. O'Donnell was defending herself against a $100 million lawsuit by Gruner &amp; Jahr, the publisher of Rosie, her defunct women's magazine.
The suit, as well as a countersuit by Ms. O'Donnell, was dismissed in court just a day before the musical opened. But the fears about ''Taboo'' proved all too true when the show opened on Nov. 13 amid international news coverage. (The red carpet was more than 100 feet long, crowded by 25 camera crews.) The show promptly received some of the worst reviews of the season.
Still Ms. O'Donnell seemed committed to running the production for as long as it took to find an audience, investing more money in television and print advertising as recently as last week.
By the time the show closes in February, it will have run 100 performances and 16 previews.
Ms. O'Donnell said before the show opened that she was committed to Broadway for the long term and that she was working on a new musical with another 1980's pop star, Cyndi Lauper.
Correction:  January 15, 2004, Thursday  An article yesterday about the closing of the Broadway musical ''Taboo'' next month referred incorrectly to countersuits by Rosie O'Donnell, ''Taboo's'' producer, and Gruner &amp; Jahr USA, which published Rosie magazine. While Justice Ira Gammerman of New York State Supreme Court has suggested that neither side will be awarded significant damages, he has not dismissed the suits.
