Germany announced deep cuts in defense spending yesterday and a sweeping overhaul of its armed forces, part of a continuing effort to modernize its outdated military.
Defense Minister Peter Struck said the country would reduce spending by 26 billion euros, or $33 billion, in the coming years and close as many as 100 military bases. The combined forces will also shave off 32,000 troops to bring the country's military personnel down to 250,000.
''It's about switching military planning from unrealistic projects back to realism,'' Mr. Struck said at a news conference in Berlin.
While most of the plans were widely expected, the reduced budget is likely to displease Washington, which has criticized Germany for not spending enough on defense.
Germany is trying to revamp its military, which was built to fight a tank war with the Soviet Union, into a nimbler fighting force capable of responding to smaller, regional conflicts. Mr. Struck repeated that vision yesterday, saying ''the whole world is a potential area of operations'' for the German military.
But without an obvious enemy threatening Germany, the largely pacifist population will not support the taxes or social spending cuts needed to finance such a modernization. The country is constrained by European Union rules from simply running a larger deficit to finance the military.
Mr. Struck said the spending cuts would not affect Germany's outstanding orders for armored vehicles or combat helicopters, or for 180 Eurofighter aircraft, a four-nation collaboration intended to enhance European military abilities. He said the cuts would instead focus on programs penciled into future spending plans by past defense ministers.
According to the plans announced yesterday, the German military will be restructured into ''intervention forces'' with 35,000 troops for ''high intensity'' multinational operations, ''stabilization forces'' with 70,000 soldiers for ''low to medium intensity'' peacekeeping duties, and ''support forces'' for remaining operations and training.
