HIGHLIGHTS
JAPAN: PUBLISHER SENTENCED -- In a landmark case that raises questions about freedom of expression in Japan, a manga, or comic book, was held to be obscene, and its publisher was sentenced to a year in prison, the BBC reported yesterday. His sentence suspended for three years, the publisher, Monotori Kishi, 54, appealed immediately to the Tokyo High Court. He was found guilty of violating the penal code on the sale and distribution of obscene literature. The proceeding was the first in a trial court to accuse a comic book of obscenity. The presiding judge, Yujiro Nakatani, said the comic book, ''Misshitsu,'' or ''Honey Room,'' was too graphic in its depiction of lifelike bodies and genitalia, making the book pornographic. Reacting to the decision, Mr. Kishi said at a news conference, ''It is an infringement on freedom of expression and deals a great blow to the publishing industry.'' His lawyers had argued that the penal code provision, Article 175, under which he was convicted violates Article 21 of the Constitution, guaranteeing freedom of speech and press. Some 45 percent of all books and periodicals sold in Japan are manga, the BBC reported, adding that they often involve sexual material. Article 175 of the penal code does not clearly define obscenity, the BBC said, but precedent for the manga ruling was set in a 1957 case growing out of a Japanese translation of ''Lady Chatterly's Lover.'' Then the Supreme Court declared obscenity to be anything ''unnecessarily sexually stimulating'' that ''damages the normal sexual sense of shame of ordinary people or is against good sexual moral principles.''
GENEVA: A TOLKIEN TRIUMPH -- In a dispute over rights to the domain name www.jrrtolkien.com, the estate of J. R. R. Tolkien, left, the author of ''The Lord of the Rings,'' has come out a winner. In Geneva the World Intellectual Property Organization, an arm of the United Nations, ruled that the name be surrendered to the company that owns Tolkien's rights, The Associated Press reported yesterday. The Web address had been registered by Alberta Hot Rods of High Prairie, Alberta. An arbitrator, Alistair Payne, ruled that Alberta Hot Rods had no legitimate rights or interests in the Tolkien name. Other notables who have won back Internet rights to their names from Alberta Hot Rods include the best-selling author Michael Crichton and the entertainers Celine Dion and Bruce Springsteen.
HOLLYWOOD: NEW SCREENER CONCERNS -- The Hollywood establishment's antipiracy campaign suffered a setback with the discovery that an Oscar voter's copy of the popular romantic comedy, ''Something's Gotta Give,'' starring Jack Nicholson and Diane Keaton, turned up online last week. The discovery touched off an investigation by the Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, The Associated Press reported. The Motion Picture Association of America, the industry's trade group, had banned the distribution of so-called screener videodisks and tapes to voters, but protests from filmmakers, producers and independent production companies prompted it to relent to the extent of permitting the shipment of encoded videocassettes. The academy required its more than 5,800 eligible voters to sign a promise to protect their tapes. About 80 percent complied, The Associated Press reported. Sony Pictures Entertainment, whose Columbia Pictures division produced and distributed ''Something's Gotta Give,'' said it would determine whether to pursue legal action after the academy's investigation.
ISTANBUL: NO TO 'ARARAT' -- Reversing previous plans, a Turkish film distributor has decided not to release Atom Egoyan's ''Ararat'' for fear that its subject matter, the mass killing of Armenians under the Ottoman Empire, would require a police presence in theaters. Though branding the film ''ridiculous propaganda,'' the government had approved its showing. In a statement reported by Agence France-Presse, the distributor, Belge Film, said, ''But because we deem it unbecoming for a modern society to have people watching a film in the presence of police . . . we have canceled the screening of the film, complying with the wishes of citizens who are against it.''
MOSCOW: CELEBRATING A CHOREOGRAPHER -- Russian newspapers devoted entire pages yesterday to 80th-birthday tributes to the French choreographer Roland Petit, whose ballets include ''The Queen of Spades,'' commissioned by the Bolshoi. President Vladimir Putin hailed him as ''one of the most remarkable choreographers of the 20th century'' and called his works ''brave and innovative'' contributions to the history of ballet, Agence France-Presse reported. In a ceremony last year at the Kremlin, the choreographer became the first foreigner awarded the State Prize reserved for those who make ''remarkable and original contributions to Russian culture.''
FOOTNOTES
Tony Hillerman, left, 78 and the author of popular detective novels about two Navajo tribal police officers, Joe Leaphorn and Jim Chee, has been named this year's Notable New Mexican by the Albuquerque Museum Foundation, The Associated Press reported. . . . With two nights of silent films accompanied by original scores written and performed by the Bill Frissell Trio, the World Financial Center will mark the opening of the 2004 New York Guitar Festival, taking place around the city from tonight through Feb. 3. Tonight and tomorrow at 7, the free screenings include the Georges Méliès shorts ''A Trip to the Moon'' and ''The Eclipse,'' Bill Morrison's ''Mesmerist'' and the United States premiere of Keisuke Sasaki's ''Bombshell Bride.''
