The European Commission, unable to cajole, convince or coerce two of its largest members to abide by its budget restraints, decided on Tuesday to take the dispute to court.
The commission will sue the 15 members of the European Union for voting to suspend rules that would have forced France and Germany to make deep budget cuts to bring their deficits within lawful limits.
France and Germany flouted those rules, which cap deficits to 3 percent of gross domestic product, saying they risked choking off a fragile economic recovery. Despite deep reservations, a majority of European countries backed their position at a meeting in November.
In appealing to the European Court of Justice in Luxembourg, the commission is seeking to overturn that vote. While Brussels regularly sues member countries over a variety of issues, rarely, if ever, has it petitioned the court to take up such a sweeping and politically contentious issue.
Even those who deplored the actions of France and Germany expressed fear that the court battle would inflame tensions in Europe between its budget-minded smaller countries and fiscally profligate giants.
The dispute has already poisoned talks on the draft of a new constitution for the European Union. And it has cast a shadow over the euro, even as the currency has risen to record highs against the dollar.
''My concern is that any legal wrangling does not drain vital political energy away from the reform process at a critical time,'' Pat Cox, the president of the European Parliament, who is from Ireland, said.
Germany, which had pushed for the rules as a prerequisite for the euro, was quick to criticize the decision.
''With a view to the tasks facing the European Union in the near future, it would have been more appropriate to seek cooperation rather than confrontation,'' Germany's finance minister, Hans Eichel, said in a statement.
The commission insisted its lawsuit was ''purely procedural,'' to clarify whether the finance ministers had acted properly in suspending the fiscal rule book, known as the stability and growth pact.
But few people -- in Strasbourg, France, where the commissioners met, or in Europe's capitals -- doubted that a landmark legal battle had been joined, one that could shape the balance of power in Europe.
''Germany and France wanted to make a point, namely that they can't be pushed around by the commission,'' said Thomas Mayer, the chief European economist at Deutsche Bank in London. ''They also demonstrated that they do not feel as bound by the rules as the smaller countries.''
A ruling in favor of the commission would reject this show of political muscle by France and Germany, though it is doubtful that it would force them to rewrite their current budgets, given that the court is not likely to hand down a judgment for months, possibly years.
A defeat would further weaken the commission's position, casting into doubt its ability to coordinate fiscal policy in Europe. That would leave the European Central Bank as the only institution capable of setting policies independent of national political or economic agendas.
The commission asked the court to accelerate the trial, which could yield a decision within six months. It has done that only twice, however, both times in cases involving potential threats to public health.
''They can't undo what they have done, which is effectively to grant France and Germany breathing space to bring their deficits down, but they can change their decision,'' said Jacques Bourgeois, a lawyer in the Brussels office of Akin Gump Strauss Hauer &amp; Feld.
Changing the decision would mean reactivating the long procedure set up to discipline countries with excessive budget deficits. Ultimately, the financial penalties can run into billions of euros.
The threat of heavy fines has scared smaller countries, like Portugal, into cleaning up their books. But it has had little effect on France and Germany, which together account for half the economic output of the 12-nation euro zone and are its political heavyweights.
''The question always is, how do you compel a sovereign state to do something, when they can't be locked up?'' said Alec Burnside, a partner in the Brussels office of the law firm Linklaters.
Whatever the legal crossfire, experts said they expected the commission and the member countries to work together to overhaul the stability and growth pact. People on both sides of the dispute agree that the pact lacks flexibility.
France and Germany are likely to breach the 3 percent deficit cap in 2004 for the third consecutive year. Although both are trimming their budgets, they have resisted the deeper cuts pushed by Brussels because, their leaders say, it could strangle the fledgling economic recovery under way in both countries.
At a decisive meeting on Nov. 25, France and Germany won the support of Italy and other countries to push back the deeper cuts until 2005. Austria, Finland, the Netherlands and Spain voted against the delay.
In a sign of the ambivalence stirred by the lawsuit, however, the finance minister of Austria, Karl-Heinz Grasser, a critic of Germany and France, said on Monday that he opposed going to court.
Among those least ruffled by news of the lawsuit were currency traders, who bid up the euro slightly against the dollar in Europe. The euro, which edged lower in New York trading, has been largely unaffected by the dispute over Europe's fiscal policy -- reacting much more to the public statements of the European Central Bank.
The bank's president, Jean-Claude Trichet, set off a minor flurry on Monday when he said he was concerned about ''brutal moves'' in the exchange rate. But analysts said the bank's policy toward interest rates has acted as a bulwark against the vagaries of Europe's fiscal policy.
The lawsuit's biggest fallout, hence, may be political -- undermining efforts to revive negotiations on a constitution. It may also cast a shadow over the entry of 10 new countries to the union in May.
''We are caught in a typical Greek tragedy,'' said Daniel Gros, the director of the Center for European Policy Studies, a research organization in Brussels. ''The players are performing their set roles according to a script, knowing full well that the outcome will be a disaster.''
