Devils defenseman Scott Stevens had the flu and stayed home Tuesday night. The Devils might as well have played without skates.
They had no one else willing to greet the creative Ottawa Senators with concussive checks at the blue line, and the Senators cruised to a 4-0 victory.
''We didn't give them a game,'' Devils goaltender Martin Brodeur said.
Stevens, the Devils' captain, missed his third straight game. It takes a lot for him not to play. He did not miss more than one game in any of the last three seasons.
He was missed. The Devils (21-11-9-1), who are 2-5-1-0 in their last eight games, took eight shots in the first two periods combined and were booed at Continental Arena.
''You let those guys roam freely, and, boy, you're in trouble,'' Devils Coach Pat Burns said of the Senators (23-11-6-3), who are 10-1-3-0 since Dec. 13 and have passed the Devils in the Eastern Conference.
Right wing Marian Hossa, usually dogged by Stevens when these teams meet, scored his 21st and 22nd goals in the first two periods.
Devils defenseman Scott Niedermayer said of Stevens, ''Maybe when you win a game, you don't miss him.''
The Devils lost on another night when Philadelphia also lost. The Flyers, who have played three more games, still have a 3-point lead in the Atlantic Division.
Senators goaltender Patrick Lalime stopped 26 shots, 18 in a frustrating third period for the Devils. He is the second goaltender to shut out the Devils this season.
Ottawa seemed to collapse in front of almost every shot the Devils took in the first two periods, but Burns said his team made it easy for the Senators.
''When you shoot the puck, you've got to shoot it like you mean it,'' he said. ''Only one guy got hurt when he went down to block a shot.''
The Devils were also passive at their end. Hossa scored 8 minutes 4 seconds into the game because the Devils were too slow getting back on defense.
Senators left wing Radek Bonk beat Niedermayer to a loose puck along the boards and sent it to Petr Schastlivy. Devils defenseman Colin White moved toward Schastlivy, and no one was left to cover Hossa. He took a pass from Schastlivy at the right post and whacked it in.
''We have to stop the odd-man rushes,'' Devils center John Madden said.
When Lalime closed his pads and stopped a shot by right wing Grant Marshall at 8:51 of the second, the crowd gave the Devils a round of mock applause. It was their first shot of the period. The Devils managed only two shots the rest of the period. Ottawa scored two goals in 73 seconds near the end of the second.
''A two-minute letdown, and that was it,'' Devils center Scott Gomez said.
Senators left wing Bryan Smolinski scored his 11th goal at 17:57. At that point, Ottawa had 14 shots and the Devils 7.
The Senators needed 37 seconds of their first power play to score an easy goal. Bonk carried the puck up the right wing and passed it to Martin Havlat on the left side.
Havlat timed his pass to Hossa perfectly, again at the right goal post. Hossa slapped in his second goal with 50 seconds left in the second period.
Ottawa right wing Josh Langfeld scored his first N.H.L. goal at 16:08 of the third. It came, fittingly, on another odd-man rush.
''The habits we have are bad habits right now,'' Niedermayer said.
HOCKEY
