Will It Impurify Our Precious Bodily Fluids?
On the most arctic night of the year, on a bitingly windswept block in Manhattan, 24th Street near 10th Avenue, the talk turned naturally to frozen body parts.
In the vaulted space of the Mary Boone Gallery last week, the new exhibition by MARC QUINN, the London-born artist-provocateur, opened. Dressed all in black, he wore a red-and-white-striped skullcap, his glassy eyes darting about.
Mr. Quinn is known for ''Self,'' the 1991 mold of the artist's head made from his own blood and then frozen, like a frightening ice cube.
His latest exhibition is a version of those freeze-frame corpses of Pompei after they have been smothered in volcanic ash. But Mr. Quinn has kicked it up a notch: each of his 11 marble sculptures is of a person with a limb amputated by accident or by birth defect.
It's the Venus de Milo meets thalidomide, a disorientation that some gallerygoers were unprepared to see.
''Let's get out of here,'' said one man as he hustled his family to the door. ''This is truly disgusting.''
Others were clearly enthralled. So far, eight of the sculptures have been sold, one for $140,000.
What was Mr. Quinn getting at? The idea came to him, he said, as he strolled among Greek and Roman statues in the British Museum. Some of the most admired were missing body parts.
''If someone who looked like that in real life came in the room,'' he said, ''the same people would kind of pretend not to look or avoid their glance.''
Mr. Quinn then compared his limbless sculptures to his earlier work using flowers preserved in liquid silicone. ''They relate to the idea of what perfection is,'' he said.
Which is, our Boldface correspondent pressed?
''The only real perfection is death, isn't it?'' Mr. Quinn intoned, as if he were a character in an INGMAR BERGMAN movie. ''It seems to me perfect is about being out of time and untouched by the world,'' he continued, ''and being alive is about being in time and being involved in the world.''
We waited for Mr. Quinn to circle back to air-traffic control. ''That blood head,'' he said, ''is like a thing out of time, something out of time. It's a moment of me, it's my shape and my blood, at that moment, frozen. It's a sculpture on a life-support system, and if you pull the plug, it disappears, so it's a kind of paranoid perfection.''
Oh, dear.
So what inspired the blood head?
A hangover, Mr. Quinn replied.
And how is the head doing?
''Well,'' he said, ''there are three of them.'' The first blood alter ego is in the Saatchi collection in England, a second is in Dallas, and the third is in Korea, he told us.
Then, referring, we hope, to the sculptures' systems of refrigeration, ''they're all still humming away.''
Like Shouting 'Fired!' In a Crowded Theater
For almost a year the actress ANNABELLE GURWITCH has been obsessing about being canned, axed, booted and cashiered. During rehearsals she was sent packing from a WOODY ALLEN play, ''Writer's Block,'' that starred BEBE NEUWIRTH.
Channeling the hot blood of shame and regret, she and her actor and writer pals told their stories in ''Fired!,'' a one-night-only presentation held on Monday at the Second Stage Theater.
Ms. Gurwitch, FISHER STEVENS (''Uptown Girls''), TONYA PINKINS (''Caroline, or Change'') and CRAIG BIERKO told tales. Mr. Bierko, who was nominated for a Tony for his starring role in ''The Music Man'' on Broadway, told a tale of misfire.
It was the reification of the near-universal actor's fear of Not Recognizing Then Missing The Sure Thing.
He was once under contract at NBC, Mr. Bierko said. In a choice sure to be highlighted one day in a time-travel sitcom, the studio bigwigs asked him whether he wanted a role on ''Friends'' -- or one on ''Best Friends.'' Mr. Bierko, of course, chose the latter.
Later, our Boldface correspondent asked Mr. Bierko which career-changing, life-transforming, wallet-inflating role had he passed over?
''I don't want to say,'' Mr. Bierko said. ''But I will say; God, it would be fun to be married to BRAD PITT.''
with Lily Koppel and Melena Z. Ryzik
Boldface Names
