Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg said yesterday that 10,000 units of new or refurbished housing -- the first of 65,000 units he has promised will be built or rehabilitated over the next five years -- were now under development, and that his administration would offer a loan program in cooperation with four commercial banks to develop thousands more abandoned or decaying properties in the city over the next few years.
Within the next year, about 2,000 units will be ready for occupancy as part of Mr. Bloomberg's housing plan, the most aggressive of its kind since the Koch administration. Just over a year ago, Mr. Bloomberg vowed to build or rehabilitate 65,000 units of housing, much of it for poor or middle-income New Yorkers. Of the first 10,000 units, roughly half will be brand-new units, said a spokeswoman for the city's Department of Housing Preservation and Development.
While Mr. Bloomberg has staked his mayoralty on the success of his education policies, his housing proposals are almost nearly as aggressive and difficult to achieve. ''Clearly we are seeing housing as a top priority for the city,'' said Joseph Weisbord, staff director of Housing First!, a group that advocates for housing for poor and middle-class people. ''The question is, as the city's economic situation begins to improve, how do we build on their commitment?'' Mr. Weisbord and others have called for a larger program, but Mr. Bloomberg said yesterday that he preferred something smaller but attainable.
The Bloomberg administration is trying to encourage private development by changing zoning laws, streamlining the building code and devising plans to attract investors. Under the plan, the city will provide $200 million in low-interest loans for developers to acquire land for housing development, generally on abandoned manufacturing sites and waterfront areas that are being rezoned for housing. Four city banks -- Citibank, Deutsche Bank, HSBC, and JPMorgan Chase -- have committed the first $40 million toward those loans, and the city has put forward $8 million through the Housing Development Corporation to guarantee them.
''Housing is really one of the keys along with jobs and great quality of life that gives New York City a future,'' Mr. Bloomberg said.
Mr. Bloomberg was able to attract major banks to his plan by showing a willingness to get behind projects in which developers have a chance to make money, Seth H. Waugh, the chief executive officer of Deutsche Bank, said yesterday. ''I think the mayor is very commercially minded,'' Mr. Waugh said in an interview. ''And he has cut through a lot of stuff that other people get backed up on because he comes from the corporate world. From our perspective, the willingness has always been there but not the program. To have it be sustainable you have to have it be somewhat commercial. We hope we don't lose money but we might.''
