NOTHING beats a wood fire to bring out a cook's best instincts. At Fore Street, the restaurant in the Old Port district of Portland, Me., where Sam Hayward is an owner and executive chef, the focus of the kitchen is a long wood-fired grill and a wood-burning oven on a 35-square-foot hearth. The kitchen itself is open, warm, and bustling -- in effect, a kind of stage for an audience of diner-spectators.
Here, there are no secrets, no arcane methods of mounting sauces, no mysteries to tantalize the gourmet sleuth. Everything is transparent. Even the restaurant's walk-in cooler has glass walls so you can see the fresh produce inside.
Mr. Hayward always wanted it that way, long before the restaurant opened. In 1996, when it emerged from what had been a furniture showroom and occasional machine shop, his dream became a reality: a wide-open restaurant kitchen and plenty of opportunities to play with fire.
So it was no surprise when he and his wife, Jan, started construction on an addition to their family home here on the shores of Merrymeeting Bay, that he again insisted on a wood-burning oven and fireplace as a focus of the new kitchen.
''We cook outdoors with wood or charcoal all summer long,'' Mr. Hayward said. ''And then with the restaurant fire pits I really wanted to bring burning wood into the home.''
On a chilly afternoon, Mr. Hayward was building up a fire in the brick oven, getting ready to braise a shoulder of lamb. Even as he tossed in another chunky log, however, he was quick to point out that his slow-braising method works just as well in conventional ovens, whether gas or electric.
''You could do this in an oven set at 225 to 250,'' he said. ''Actually, start it on a higher setting, say 350, then put it in the oven and drop it right down to 250.'' At this low temperature the lamb cooks for three to five hours, becoming so tender that it falls apart when you prod it with a fork.
But the tenderizing process had actually begun a day earlier with an overnight marinade of salt and aromatics. Shoulder meat, Mr. Hayward explained, ''is one of those funky, tough, sinewy cuts of flavorful meat that benefits from salting.''
He used coarse Maine sea salt, he said, ''because coarse salt liquefies gradually and actually achieves the effect I want faster.''
''It's a quasi-cure, a kind of osmosis,'' he added, ''with the salt being drawn into the cells and breaking down the tough proteins.'' This shortens the time the shoulder has to braise and gives it additional texture and flavor. Young meat, he said, ''becomes more melting, more yielding.''
He hefted the rough rectangular slab of boned shoulder. ''About three and a half pounds,'' he said. ''I used maybe two and a half tablespoons of salt. This was probably a 45-pound lamb, which is hard to find.''
Locally raised?
''Yeah,'' he said, ''from a farmer who slaughters four lambs a week, not 4,000. That guarantees the health of the lamb, the humaneness with which it's been raised. But because of that, you can't be certain how the muscles will configure or the relationship of fat to lean. When you use food like this, you need to pay attention. That's where the sensory element comes in.''
And the salt. ''People are shy about using salt,'' Mr. Hayward said. ''But knowing how to use it is really a foundation skill for a cook; it exposes the flavors.''
He had salted the shoulder the day before, massaging the salt into the meat, then leaving it for a few minutes to start the melting process, before rubbing in Telicherry peppercorns, cracked in a mortar, along with minced garlic, lemon zest and parsley. ''I left it at room temperature, covered, overnight,'' he said, adding hastily, ''I wouldn't do that in a restaurant of course, but this is my home.''
Over high heat, he seared the lamb on both sides, then set it aside while he gently sweated chopped onions, garlic, carrots and celery in a little olive oil. When the vegetables were soft, back went the lamb and into the pot went yesterday's leftover red wine, which, as it happens, was a Vacqueyras from the Rhone, and some stock. ''I use veal stock from the restaurant,'' he said. ''You could use chicken, though you're not going to get that syrupy texture, though some will come from the lamb.''
When the liquid was barely trembling, not even a real simmer, he slid the pot, with a loose cover of foil, into the wood-burning oven. ''The Zen of braising is all about the courage required by patience,'' Mr. Hayward said. ''You're looking for a breakdown of the connective tissue and a release of collagen to make the meat slippery, rich and moist. You want the tissues to liquefy without melting them away.''
He paused a minute. ''Braising is an art,'' he said.
BRAISED LAMB SHOULDER  Time: 3 1/2 to 5 1/2 hours plus overnight refrigeration
1 boned lamb shoulder, 3 1/2 to 4 1/2 pounds, trimmed of fat and membrane  3 tablespoons coarse sea salt  Zest of 1 lemon, removed in strips
1/4 cup chopped flat-leaf parsley  4 garlic cloves, peeled  1 1/2 tablespoons black peppercorns  1 to 2 tablespoons extra virgin olive oil  1 medium carrot coarsely chopped  1 medium yellow onion or 2 large shallots, peeled and coarsely chopped  1 celery stalk, coarsely chopped  1 cup dry red wine  2 cups beef, veal or chicken stock  Salt and freshly ground black pepper.
1. Rub lamb thoroughly with salt. Set aside. Mince together lemon zest, parsley, and 2 garlic cloves. Crack peppercorns with mortar and pestle, or grind at loosest setting on grinder. Mix peppers and minced mixture, rub over lamb. Place lamb in covered container, refrigerate overnight.  2. The next day, discard liquid from container. Heat oven to 350 degrees. Coarsely chop remaining 2 garlic cloves.  3. Place roasting pan over medium-high heat. Heat oil and brown lamb on all sides. Transfer lamb to plate. Add carrot, onion, celery, and chopped garlic to pan, reduce heat to medium-low. Sauté until the vegetables are tender, then return lamb to pan. Add wine and stock, and bring to a bare simmer.  4. Cover pan loosely with foil, and put in oven. After 15 minutes, reduce heat to 250 degrees. Braise until lamb falls apart easily when a fork is inserted and gently twisted, 3 to 5 hours depending on the age of the lamb. Check pan occasionally during cooking, adding hot water if the pan begins to dry.  5. When meat is done, transfer to platter, and cover with foil. Strain liquid in pan, and set aside to let fat rise. Skim off fat, and reserve, if desired, for sautéeing vegetables. Reheat skimmed gravy, and season to taste with salt and pepper. Slice lamb and serve with gravy. (Small white turnips, peeled and cut into chunks, can be added to the pan for last 25 minutes of cooking, or sautéed in lamb fat.)
Yield: 6 servings.
THE CHEF: SAM HAYWARD
