Senator John Edwards of North Carolina walked into a senior citizen center here on Tuesday and took in yet another packed house: every chair was filled, and an overflow crowd upstairs peered over the balcony at the presidential candidate dressed in a suit and sneakers.
''Do you think they can get any more people in here?'' Mr. Edwards asked.
After six months in which he visited all 99 Iowa counties, as he reminded his audience again on Tuesday, and spent nearly $2 million on television advertisements, Mr. Edwards is roaring toward the end of his battle here.
He is packing halls across Iowa. He is finding what many Democrats say is the stride that eluded him for much of the year. And he was attacked by name in a new television advertisement released Tuesday by Howard Dean, a development that Mr. Edwards's advisers celebrated as a sign that he had arrived.
In the process, Mr. Edwards is forcing opponents who had once paid little mind to his candidacy to factor him into their calculations. He is threatening to siphon away support from candidates like Representative Richard A. Gephardt of Missouri, who appears to be in a fight for first place with Dr. Dean. Mr. Edwards is drawing attention as he contrasts his sunny campaign appeal with what he describes as the sniping of his rivals.
''This is about you and I making Americans proud to be Americans again,'' Mr. Edwards said Tuesday at a stop in West Des Moines. ''My campaign is not built on the politics of putting people down. It's based on the politics of lifting people up.''
His tone was noted by The Des Moines Register in endorsing him on Sunday and is cited by voters as they talk about whom they might vote for next Monday.
''He is not tearing down the other candidates,'' said Karin Wheeler, a 78-year-old retired secretary who heard Mr. Edwards speak Tuesday.
Bob Pederson 41, a parole officer from Des Moines, contrasted Mr. Edwards with Dr. Dean, and said that Mr. Edwards would be a far stronger Democratic candidate next fall. ''In terms of who is the most marketable in terms of getting after Bush, it would be Edwards,'' Mr. Pederson said. ''It's a message of hope, staying positive.''
Even Mr. Edwards's advisers say it seems unlikely that their candidate can win here, since success in the Iowa caucuses is a test of a political organization that can turn out supporters. Mr. Gephardt, Dr. Dean and Senator John Kerry of Massachusetts have all built up, or imported from out of state, formidable get-out-the-vote operations.
''The question is can we organizationally catch up with the momentum that he's generating,'' said David Axelrod, a senior adviser to Mr. Edwards. ''That is a challenge.''
But Democratic leaders say Mr. Edwards could come in third or even second. That could put him in a strong position going into New Hampshire, where Democrats say he is struggling, and down to South Carolina, which he has said he must win to stay in the race.
And perhaps more significant to Mr. Edwards's own political career, he may have polished his profile in these final weeks leading up to the Iowa caucuses in a way that could help him should he wish to run for president in 2008, or to be considered for vice president later this year.
Only a month ago, Mr. Edwards, after deciding not to run for re-election to the Senate, was drifting to the back of the presidential pack, despite a heavy expenditure of money and time.
His rise coincides with a new directness on the campaign trail as well as a tone and spirit that Democrats say is reminiscent of Bill Clinton. ''Cynics did not build this country,'' he said campaigning Tuesday. ''Optimists built this country.''
Mr. Edwards seems to be gaining the attention of undecided voters with such words, and the not-so-implicit contrast he is drawing with Dr. Dean.
John Lazaris, a tutor who heard Mr. Edwards speak Monday in Sioux City, said of the senator that he ''is so eloquent and articulate in the debates and he does not attack the others, which I think is just fodder for President Bush.''
Mr. Edwards, who in his autobiography offers a vivid account of his hardball years as a trial lawyer, has not been exactly retiring as he seeks to engage his rivals without losing the mantle of being the nice guy candidate of 2004.
When Dr. Dean mocked Mr. Edwards's biographical assertion that he is a Washington outsider -- he has spent the past five years in the Senate, and calls Georgetown his home -- Mr. Edwards's advisers were quick to make him available to reporters to offer a retort.
Contrasting his own style with the more aggressive style of his rivals, Mr. Edwards said, ''If Iowa caucus-goers want someone who has been in politics for 20 years and is the best at political sniping, they have other choices.'' Then he quickly added, ''My campaign is about hope, not cynicism.''
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE NORTH CAROLINA SENATOR
