The law firm of Pillsbury Winthrop will move from its quarters at 1 Battery Park Plaza, the latest in a series of downtown Manhattan buildings that has been its home since the 1860's, to slightly larger offices at 1540 Broadway in Midtown.
The company will occupy 180,000 square feet on seven floors at the Times Square building. It also has options for at least 60,000 additional square feet, said Donald G. Kilpatrick, managing partner of the firm's New York office.
Though Pillsbury Winthrop is the only major law firm that chose to move to Midtown from downtown in 2003, its 15-year deal was one of the 141 lease renewals and expansions by law firms that made legal offices the leaders in acquiring space in Manhattan last year.
Over all, the legal industry absorbed nearly 3.9 million square feet of office space in Manhattan in 2003, outpacing for the first time in five years financial services concerns -- typically the most active sector, which took 2.9 million square feet -- according to a report by Jones Lang LaSalle, the real estate services firm.
Of the total amount of space taken by law firms, 1.1 million square feet was expansion, helping to stabilize the market, said Lisa J. Kiell, executive vice president of Jones Lang LaSalle.
Cushman &amp; Wakefield and Newmark, other real estate services firms, agree with that assessment. But Newmark's figure for the space taken by law firms was higher -- 4.5 million square feet -- because it included the deal by Cadwalader, Wickersham &amp; Taft, not yet closed, for 450,000 square feet at 1 World Financial Center.
While law firms absorbed the most space in 2003, they did not overtake financial services firms in the overall space they occupy.
According to Newmark, law firms occupy 29 million square feet of the office space in Manhattan, compared with 74 million for financial services firms.
Michael T. Cohen, president and chief executive of GVA Williams, said the 2003 leasing numbers were ''more reflective of the paucity of activity by other sectors than an increase in activity by law firms.''
Still industry professionals agree that the legal industry will remain active in 2004 and perhaps even retain its lead.
Gary Greenspan, an executive director at Cushman &amp; Wakefield, says that his company estimates that law firms are in the market for about two million square feet of office space.
One indicator of that demand was the announcement last week that Morgan &amp; Finnegan signed a lease to move from 345 Park Avenue to just more than 100,000 square feet at 3 World Trade Center.
In making the move, Morgan &amp; Finnegan becomes the first major law firm to choose to leave Midtown for downtown since the attacks of Sept. 11.
Ms. Kiell attributes law firms' hearty appetite for space in 2003 to ''a lot of pent-up demand'' by companies that finally took advantage of a soft market. She also said firms wanted ''a greater New York presence.''
Barry Gosin, vice chairman and chief executive of Newmark, added that while the legal industry lost jobs over the last few years diversified firms were less affected by the recession than other industries.
Even in ''times of economic turmoil,'' he said, a law firm's practices that deal with bankruptcy and mergers and acquisitions, for instance, remain active.
Mergers, consolidations, lease expirations, expansions, as well as future growth as the economy improves were other factors that prompted law firms to take more or different space.
Ms. Kiell added that firms also wanted to change or make more efficient use of space by, among other things, highlighting public spaces like conference rooms and moving to standardize -- and generally reduce -- the size of individual offices.
Mr. Gosin said more firms chose to stay or expand in their existing buildings rather than move.
Dewey Ballantine, for example, will expand by nearly 100,000 square feet, to just under 500,000, at 1301 Avenue of the Americas, between 52nd and 53rd Streets, and Epstein Becker &amp; Green will expand by 25,000 square feet, to 100,000 square feet, at 250 Park Avenue, between 46th and 47th Streets.
A partner, Jeffrey H. Becker, said that ''being able to get contiguous space was a major factor'' in remaining at the Park Avenue building. Mr. Becker would not disclose the rent, but he did say it would ''be below what we are now paying.''
Mr. Greenspan of Cushman &amp; Wakefield said law firms were the most active in Midtown, despite the generally lower rents and government incentives available downtown. He said they accounted for 27 percent of all leasing activity in transactions over 10,000 square feet, for a total of 1.8 million feet.
Midtown's convenience, Mr. Kilpatrick said, was important to Pillsbury Winthrop's 165 lawyers and clients, half of them based overseas. The firm was created when Winthrop, Stimson, Putnam &amp; Roberts merged three years ago with Pillsbury Madison &amp; Sutro of San Francisco.
Of his firm's rent at 1540 Broadway Mr. Kilpatrick would say only that ''it is less than $50 a square foot, almost the same as we now pay.''
This move, he added, puts his firm, which plans to grow to 210 lawyers, ''in the best position for the next 15 years.''
Regional Market | Manhattan  Correction:  January 21, 2004, Wednesday  An article in Business Day last Wednesday about the leasing of offices by law firms in Manhattan misstated the address of space that is being rented by Morgan &amp; Finnegan. It is at 3 World Financial Center, not 3 World Trade Center.
