Jury selection in the aggravated manslaughter trial of Jayson Williams started Tuesday with about 320 prospective jurors gathered in an ornate former church that is being used as a jury-assembly room.
They listened to the trial judge, Edward M. Coleman of New Jersey Superior Court, stress the need for fair and unbiased jurors who can set aside any prejudicial notions about the charges against the 35-year-old former star of the New Jersey Nets.
Mr. Williams is accused of aggravated manslaughter in the fatal shooting of a 55-year-old chauffeur, Costas Christofi, in the master bedroom at Mr. Williams's country estate in Hunterdon County in February 2002. Mr. Christofi was killed by a single blast from a 12-gauge shotgun.
The prosecutor in the case, Steven C. Lember, has said the gun discharged while Mr. Williams was displaying his proficiency in handling weapons for seven house guests, including four members of the Harlem Globetrotters. The defense team has called the shooting a tragic accident. Mr. Lember has charged that Mr. Williams's actions showed ''extreme indifference to the value of human life,'' the legal standard for aggravated manslaughter.
Mr. Williams is also charged with manslaughter, two weapons counts and four charges, including tampering with witnesses and evidence, related to an attempt to cover up his involvement in the shooting.
The jury selection process is to continue on Wednesday in Judge Coleman's courtroom in the Somerset County Courthouse, which is next to the former church. In this phase of the process, Mr. Lember and two of Mr. Williams's lawyers, Joseph A. Hayden and William R. Martin, will question potential jurors individually about themselves and their view of the case. Then they will argue for dismissal of any they are uncomfortable with.
Judge Coleman said Tuesday that the questioning would continue until all sides agreed on a pool of 60 potential jurors. Then each side is to dismiss some of them with peremptory challenges -- ones that do not require explanation for dismissal -- until 16 are chosen.
To help with jury selection, Mr. Williams's lawyers have retained Jo-Ellan Dimitrius, a jury consultant who helped the defense choose the jury in the O. J. Simpson murder trial.
After court recessed Tuesday afternoon, Ms. Dimitrius said Judge Coleman ''has bent over backward'' to seat impartial jurors.
She and the defense lawyers declined to go into details on their jury-selection strategy, other than to say they want to choose those who are open-minded, despite what they may have read, heard or seen about the case. Mr. Hayden called the jury selection process the judge is using exhaustive, sophisticated and fair. ''We believe we'll get a fair trial, a fair verdict,'' Mr. Hayden said.
Mr. Martin said: ''Jayson's an innocent man. We'll prove that.''
Mr. Lember would not comment after Tuesday's proceedings.
Before Judge Coleman addressed half of the potential jurors this morning and the others after lunch, Mr. Williams walked into the jury room in the former church with his wife, Tanya. He identified himself both times and waved to the potential jurors quickly with his right hand.
The old church was built in 1896, and has stained glass windows; thick, arching ceiling beams; and little else in common with a criminal courtroom. The First Reformed congregation gave it to Somerset County in 1974. In 1987, it became Somerset County's jury assembly room, where all jurors gather each day before they are sent out to various courtrooms in the adjacent county courthouse.
