A proposal to tax businesses that do not provide health insurance to workers got a cool reception on Tuesday. Republican leaders said they would be loath to raise business taxes when the economy is just beginning to recover.
The Senate majority leader, Joseph L. Bruno, said he strongly supported the goal of providing health insurance to everyone, but would not support raising business taxes to do it. And aides to Gov. George E. Pataki said he was worried that the proposed tax, part of which would go to provide insurance to the uninsured, could damage the state's ability to keep companies from moving to neighboring states. In addition, it is hard for fiscal conservatives to vote for a tax increase in an election year.
''We don't believe this is a time to be raising taxes,'' said one senior Pataki aide who spoke on the condition of anonymity. ''The timing makes it difficult.''
Asked about the proposal at a news conference, Mr. Pataki said, ''I just don't know the specifics, but obviously I oppose taxes.''
Even the Assembly speaker, Sheldon Silver, a Democrat who has been a champion of expanding health care for the working poor, said he did not want to raise taxes. At the same time, however, he voiced strong support for forcing employers that do not provide health insurance to pay some of the health costs their employees eventually incur.
''There is merit in the idea of leveling the playing field among competitors, and of providing incentives to employers to provide health insurance to their employees,'' he said. ''Somewhere in that mix we have to come up with something to accomplish both of those goals.''
The proposal was floated by the state's largest health care employees union, known as 1199/S.E.I.U., and the Greater New York Hospital Association, two powerful and well-financed groups that have been enormously successful in pushing their proposals through the Legislature.
In essence, the proposal would shift some of the burden for caring for uninsured people from businesses that provide insurance to businesses that do not. Currently, businesses that provide insurance must pay a surcharge for each employee, which goes into a pool to cover hospital costs for treating the uninsured.
The plan would tax businesses that do not provide health benefits $3,000 for each worker, then use part of that revenue to enroll more people in state-subsidized health plans like Family Health Plus and Healthy New York, as well as Medicaid, the main health insurance plan for the poor. About three million New Yorkers lack health benefits. State bonds would also be sold as part of the plan to provide $1 billion to $2 billion to financially troubled state hospitals.
The Business Council of New York State immediately denounced the plan as another burden on struggling businesses. Matthew Maguire, a spokesman for the group, said a better strategy to encourage more employers to provide coverage would be to reduce the cost of private health insurance by repealing laws that mandate insurers must cover a broad array of costs. The National Federation of Independent Businesses, a small-business group, meanwhile, predicted many small businesses would go bankrupt if they had to pay a tax on uninsured workers.
