Defense Secretary Donald H. Rumsfeld, pulling back one veil shrouding personal discussions among cabinet-level officials, said Tuesday that he twice telephoned former Treasury Secretary Paul H. O'Neill after hearing he was writing a ''sour grapes'' book on the Bush administration.
Mr. Rumsfeld said that he did not urge Mr. O'Neill to refrain from writing or contributing to such a book and that he had not read ''The Price of Loyalty,'' by Ron Suskind.
In a Pentagon news briefing, Mr. Rumsfeld said that when he heard that Mr. O'Neill was writing a book that would be sharply critical of the administration, ''I said I can't believe that; I have known him for 30 years.
''So I picked up the phone and called him,'' Mr. Rumsfeld added, ''and said, 'What is this business? Someone tells me you're going to write a -- you know, one of those, what do you call them? Sour grapes or -- you know, one of those insider things.' '' Mr. O'Neill assured him the book was ''about policy and substance,'' he said.
More recently, before the publication of the Suskind book, which included the accusation that President Bush had been looking for a reason to go to war with Iraq from the start of his administration, Mr. Rumsfeld heard that Mr. O'Neill had indeed cooperated in ''that kind of book.''
''So I called him up and I said, 'You didn't go and do that, did you, Paul? I can't believe that.' And he said, 'Well, there is---- there will be people who feel that way,' or something to that effect,'' Mr. Rumsfeld said.
In the book, Mr. O'Neill describes Mr. Bush during cabinet meetings as a ''blind man in a roomful of deaf people.'' Mr. Rumsfeld defended the president for ''his brain, his engagement, his interest, his probing questions, his constructive and positive approach to issues.''
The defense secretary said the Bush administration, in its first months, was focused on strengthening the ''no-flight'' zones over northern and southern Iraq and closing loopholes in international sanctions and did not come into office ''with a predisposition to invade Iraq.''
Asked Tuesday about an investigation by the Treasury Department's inspector general into the circumstances surrounding a Treasury document marked secret and shown in a segment about the book on the CBS program ''60 Minutes'' on Sunday, Mr. O'Neill denied doing anything improper.
In an interview on ''Today'' on NBC, Mr. O'Neill said that after his dismissal he had asked the department's general counsel to provide him with any documents to which he was entitled. The department sent him CD-ROM's containing 19,000 pages of documents, he said, and he passed them to the book's author, Mr. Suskind, without opening them.
''I don't honestly think there is anything that is classified in those 19,000 sheets,'' Mr. O'Neill said.
Mr. Suskind said Monday that the document shown by CBS was the cover sheet to briefing papers about Iraq. But Mr. Suskind said Mr. O'Neill received only the cover sheet, and not the documents themselves. Mr. O'Neill provided the same explanation to NBC on Tuesday.
