The patrons at a blue-collar trattoria down the road from a Parmalat plant suddenly fell silent one day last week. The television news was broadcasting a clip of a well-known comedian suggesting that Parmalat's debt was so high that the company ought to be bankrupt.
The diners laughed with a twinge of bitterness, but investors in Parmalat probably would not be amused. The clip was taped more than a year before the news broke that the company, a global giant in dairy and food products, apparently had listed billions of dollars in fictitious assets on its books.
The Parmalat scandal erupted on Dec. 19 when the company said it had overstated its assets by about $5 billion; top executives, including the founder and chairman, Calisto Tanzi, resigned and were arrested, and the company was declared insolvent.
But signs of trouble were emerging many months before. Analysts and union officials raised questions about Parmalat's opaque finances, only to be rebuffed. The company asked market regulators last year to investigate whether bankers were spreading harmful rumors about it to depress its stock price, but the inquiry found instead that the company's own actions had provoked the stock slump.
The big questions about Parmalat -- how its balance sheet developed its billion-dollar holes and how the company managed to go on issuing bonds in spite of them -- have yet to be answered. Prosecutors are trying to trace the flow of money through a complex corporate structure, to establish who at the company was responsible for manipulations, and to determine what role Parmalat's banks played.
Even as investigators try to reconstruct what happened, many people have started to ask why no action was taken long before the company imploded in December. Fingers are pointing in many directions.
The Italian government faults the Bank of Italy for not being attentive enough to the fact that some banks had built up vast exposure to the company. The Bank of Italy said the economics ministry had failed to let it know about problems at Parmalat.
Consob, the Italian agency that oversees financial markets, has also been criticized. A change in leadership at the end of 2002, a paucity of staff and a habit of passivity may have contributed to Consob's inaction before December 2003, said Mario Deaglio, a professor of international economics at the University of Turin.
''It hardly has a reputation of starting an inquiry out of the blue if there is nothing significant happening in the market,'' Professor Deaglio said of Consob.
More generally, regulators and investigators may have been lulled by Parmalat's stature. Though notoriously slow in paying its suppliers, Parmalat was, after all, Italy's eighth-largest company, with 36,000 employees worldwide and some of the country's best-known consumer brands. It frequently made acquisitions overseas, so it would not be surprising that it often needed to raise cash. ''They were thought of as modern and aggressive,'' Professor Deaglio said.
Consob officials say that the agency's role is to make sure that companies disclose information, not to verify whether the information is true. Nothing in its powers or procedures would have been likely to spot that Parmalat had, as some company executives have told investigators, forged documentation of a $5 billion bank deposit.
''Today, considering everything that happened, we could have done something more,'' acknowledged one Consob official.
More subtly, the mores of provincial Italian bourgeois society may have helped protect the company. Its controlling family, the Tanzis, kept a low profile in Parma, their hometown, and rarely drew attention to itself the way some more flamboyant Italian industrial families have done. The Tanzis were considered good, dignified people, and ''Parma protected them,'' said an official close to the company's new management.
The mayor of Parma, Elvio Ubaldi, said the community was hardly to blame. ''It was impossible for us to know'' about trouble at Parmalat, Mr. Ubaldi said, ''but clearly it was impossible even for those that had the means to know.''
Further, Mr. Tanzi, the founder, was a churchgoing Catholic who was highly respected and had emerged unscathed from the Tangentopoli scandals that swept Italy in the 1990's, implicating hundreds of leading business people and politicians in systematic corruption. And he was admired for building a multinational company almost from scratch.
''Instead of worrying about the debt, people took comfort from the liquidity,'' the official close to the new management of Parmalat said, referring to what seemed to be ample cash on Parmalat's books. ''People didn't think to ask the questions that, in 20/20 hindsight, would have been obvious questions.''
A trail of red flags about the company reaches back many months. In March 2003, Mr. Tanzi complained to Consob, the market regulator, that financial institutions were spreading rumors about accounting irregularities at Parmalat and causing its stock price to fall sharply. According to Alberto Aghemo, a Consob spokesman, Mr. Tanzi accused Lehman Brothers in particular.
Mr. Aghemo said Consob investigated the complaint, but found instead that Parmalat's stock had fallen because the company had withdrawn a 300 million euro ($382 million) bond issue. ''In reality, nobody had spoken of accounting irregularities,'' he said. ''There was no evidence of manipulation.''
So the investigation was closed, although the Parmalat complaint was forwarded to investigators in Parma last June; what happened to it after that was unclear.
Separately, Consob became concerned last year about Parmalat taking on extensive debt at a time when it seemed to have huge reserves of cash. Mr. Aghemo said the agency asked Parmalat about it and was told the reserves were needed as part of a policy of expansion.
Union representatives at Parmalat's main milk plant in Collecchio, a town near Parma where the company has its headquarters, said that Parmalat executives told them the same thing when they expressed similar concerns around the beginning of 2003.
''The response was pretty dismissive, arrogant,'' said Enrico Barbuti, a delegate from the CGIL labor federation. ''They said the issuing of the bonds served to develop the international part of the group.'' He said that company executives warned the union representatives that they would be risking a lawsuit if they made any public insinuation about financial improprieties.
Mr. Barbuti said that because the company seemed to be doing well, he did not pursue the matter. ''Everything that was possible to do from the union's point of view, we did,'' he said.
The withdrawal of the bond issue in February also attracted the notice of Assogestione, the Italian association of investment fund managers. The group wrote to Parmalat on March 5 asking it to meet with members of the financial community to discuss it. ''Institutional investors, in effect, have been complaining for a long time about a lack of information from senior management,'' the letter said. Several investment banks and ratings agencies issued reports last year that were critical of the company. Merrill Lynch's London office did so in December 2002, downgrading the company to a sell rating and explaining the move in a research report called ''The Straws that Break the Camel's Back.''
One reason the Merrill Lynch analysts cited was ''inefficient balance sheet management,'' referring to the regular recourse to the bond market while reporting high cash balances. ''This need for refinancing raises questions as to the underlying cash generation of the group,'' the report said. Even so, Merrill Lynch was itself taking part in some of Parmalat's complex financial dealings.
Then there was the oddly prescient comedy clip. In September 2002, the Italian satirist Beppe Grillo, performing his one-man show at a theater in Genoa, told of hearing from a Parmalat executive that the group had 13 billion euros in debts and 13 billion euros in assets. ''In a normal country, it would collapse, bankrupt,'' he told the audience. The show was videotaped, and national television broadcast the clip involving Parmalat last week.
In an interview on Monday, Mr. Grillo said that Parmalat had been grist for his satire for a long time, especially its signature product, long-lasting ultrapasteurized milk -- which he called a bid to improve ''the only food that is already perfect by nature.''
Mr. Grillo said his anecdote about the Parmalat officer was true, but he declined to name the officer, saying only that he was a senior executive who had seen his show and was brought by a mutual friend to dinner in a Bologna restaurant.
Looking back, Mr. Grillo said, he wished he had told the story on television three years ago. ''Maybe several thousand people would not have invested in the company,'' he said. As it is, he said, the two words most commonly linked with Parmalat on the Internet these days are ''Italy'' and ''fraud.''
News Analysis  Correction:  January 15, 2004, Thursday  A news analysis article in Business Day yesterday about early signs of trouble at Parmalat, the Italian food giant, referred incorrectly to the timing of its dealings with Merrill Lynch, which underwrote some bond issues. Merrill's last transaction with Parmalat was in 1999; it was not taking part in financial dealings with Parmalat when it issued a critical report on the company in December 2002.
