It was close to midnight, April 1, 1999, and Rebecca Glucksman, 54, had two shopping bags packed with personal belongings. One was for her, the other for her daughter, Chaya Heitler, now 14.
Those bags had been packed, Ms. Glucksman said, in anticipation of the day she would walk out on her husband, Shmuel Heitler. She said that he had abused her, and that she was afraid.
That night, she said, there was more violence, a struggle in which she said she lost six teeth before she and Chaya ran down the street to a neighbor.
But it would be another eight months before Ms. Glucksman would really leave, and a full year before she would contact the police. To start a new life, she had to muster her courage. And she needed the help of The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund and the charities it supports.
Reached by telephone recently, Mr. Heitler denied the episode and said he had not been abusive. The police issued two domestic incident reports against him, he was arrested and a court order of protection was granted to keep him from Ms. Glucksman and their daughter, according to court records. Ms. Glucksman did not press charges.
At the home Ms. Glucksman now shares with her daughter in Borough Park, Brooklyn, she and Chaya sat at an electric piano. Chaya was playing a halting but recognizable version of ''The Entertainer.''
Ms. Glucksman lifted her limp right arm with her left hand. Her right side, particularly her arm, has been rendered weak as a result of a brain hemorrhage caused by a cavernous malformation that she said was aggravated during that 1999 struggle with her husband.
During the 11 years they lived with him, Ms. Glucksman said, she and her daughter bore at least three serious beatings by Mr. Heitler, along with verbal and psychological abuse.
The severity of her physical injuries was not immediately apparent to Ms. Glucksman. She said the situation with her husband had so depleted her reserves that she quit her job as a cafeteria manager at a Yeshiva Shaare Torah school in Brooklyn.
By the fall of 1999, Ms. Glucksman had numbness in her body. She said that when she woke up on Oct. 29, ''all the right side was numb from my arm to my side to my leg.''
The next week she had brain surgery to stop bleeding on her brain.
On New Year's Eve 1999, Ms. Glucksman took her daughter -- and those shopping bags with clothes -- and left her husband. She said that until that point, she could not see how hard her life had become.
''I was in a fog,'' she said. ''And then after I had surgery, I was in a real daze. When someone is drowning, they have to want to live, and they want to be saved.''
But first they had to find housing and support to pull their lives together. They found assistance from the Metropolitan Council on Jewish Poverty, an affiliate of UJA-Federation of New York, one of the seven charities supported by the Neediest Cases.
Over the past three years, the organization has provided $2,398 toward Ms. Glucksman's rent and utilities, supplemented by $515 from the Neediest Cases Fund. The Met Council also helped her to receive a grant for $5,000 toward reduced legal fees. And it assisted with her application for Section 8 housing, which is not only for the homeless, but also for victims of domestic violence, and she was granted housing in May 2002.
Robin Stone Einbinder, a lawyer with Karasik &amp; Einbinder in Manhattan, represented Ms. Glucksman in Family Court for Kings County in February 2002. Ms. Glucksman was granted custody and Mr. Heitler was given rights to visit under supervision. As part of that ruling, an order of protection was granted to keep Mr. Heitler from them. Mr. Heitler made an appeal, but it was denied last October.
Ms. Glucksman has begun part-time administrative work for a cleaning business. And she has become philosophical about her ordeal. ''That was not dying and was not living,'' she said. ''It was like being in quicksand, sinking.''
The one thing that has not ended is the marriage. Under Orthodox Jewish law, a husband must give his wife a bill of divorce known as a ''get,'' which is under the jurisdiction of a Beit Din or religious court. Mr. Heitler has not done that, Ms. Glucksman said.
While she wants this last bond to her husband to be severed, she said she finds relief in her new life. ''I feel so much stronger,'' she said. ''I'm happy.''
HOW TO HELP
Checks payable to The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund should be sent to 4 Chase Metrotech Center, 7th Floor East, Lockbox 5193, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11245, or any of these organizations:
BROOKLYN BUREAU OF COMMUNITY SERVICE  285 Schermerhorn Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11217.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES OF THE ARCHDIOCESE OF NEW YORK  1011 First Avenue, New York, N.Y. 10022.
CATHOLIC CHARITIES, DIOCESE OF BROOKLYN AND QUEENS  191 Joralemon Street, Brooklyn, N.Y. 11201.
CHILDREN'S AID SOCIETY  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
COMMUNITY SERVICE SOCIETY OF NEW YORK  105 East 22d Street, New York, N.Y. 10010.
FEDERATION OF PROTESTANT WELFARE AGENCIES  281 Park Avenue South, New York, N.Y. 10010.
UJA-FEDERATION OF NEW YORK  Church Street Station P.O. Box 4100 New York, N.Y. 10261-4100
Donations may be made with a credit card by phone at (212) 556-5851 (ext. 7) or online, courtesy of CharityWave.com, an Internet donations service, at www.nytimesneediest.charitywave.com. For instructions on how to donate stock to the fund, call (212) 556-1137 or fax (212) 556-4450.
No agents or solicitors are authorized to seek contributions for The New York Times Neediest Cases Fund.
The Times pays the fund's expenses, so all contributions go directly to the charities, which use them to provide services and cash assistance to the poor.
Contributions to the fund are deductible on federal, state and city income taxes to the extent permitted by law.
To delay may mean to forget.
Previously recorded: $6,746,863.64  Recorded Monday: 23,275.00  Total: $6,770,138.64
Last year to date: $7,229,247.55
