The Bush administration introduced proposals on Tuesday to block several corporate tax shelters, taking special aim at deals in which companies reap billions of dollars in tax breaks by buying public works like subways and sewer systems from cities and states and then leasing them back.
The proposals signal a new effort by the administration to try to take the lead on the issue of corporate tax loopholes, which have become a frequent target for Democratic presidential candidates, who also accuse President Bush of having skewed his tax cuts to the rich.
The main proposal could have a significant effect on the finances of cities and states nationwide, including New York, which have engineered tax deals involving billions of dollars' worth of public property.
The idea is part of a package of proposals that President Bush will include in his budget plan, which is due out next month. Other proposals call for a crackdown on the sometimes inflated value of items contributed to charitable groups, like used cars that are valued for donation at far above their true market value. They also include tougher disclosure rules for taxpayers and tax-shelter promoters, as well as a new restriction on tax-exempt casualty insurance companies.
Many of the proposals have already been embraced by Republicans on the Senate Finance Committee, which held hearings last fall on the expansion of abusive tax shelters.
Treasury Department officials estimate that the proposal to block leasing deals would prevent the loss of $34 billion in federal tax revenue over the next 10 years. The proposals would take effect retroactively in January 2004 and would not affect deals in place before then. The New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority has sold and leased back most of its subway cars and fare-card machines, as have transit authorities in Chicago, Boston, Washington and other big cities.
Critics contend that the federal government often loses far more than local municipalities gain from such deals. In a typical case, a city or state sells public property, like subways or sewer lines, and then leases it back from private investors. The investors take advantage of the tax write-offs that come from depreciation of the property.
Corporate beneficiaries have included the Altria Group, the parent of Philip Morris, and Textron Inc. Treasury Department officials said that the deals were designed almost entirely to avoid federal taxes.
''We find very little financial activity going on in these transactions,'' said Pamela F. Olson, assistant secretary of the Treasury in charge of tax policy. ''There is very little to be said in support of these transactions.''
But defenders of the leasing arrangements say they provide much- needed revenue to cities and states that might not otherwise have the cash to keep up with the maintenance and operational costs of their aging systems.
''These are transactions that benefit the municipalities that allow them to raise needed capital for important infrastructure,'' said Michael Geffrard, president of the Liati Group, a company in New York City that has arranged scores of leasing deals in New York, Chicago and other parts of the country. ''It allows them to raise money for capital improvements without raising taxes at the local level.''
Almost all the Democratic presidential candidates have vowed to crack down on corporate tax shelters.
Gen. Wesley K. Clark said last week that he could collect $10 billion a year in revenue now lost to corporate tax avoidance schemes. ''We seem to have created a tax system that's encouraging American businesses to devote resources to avoiding taxes,'' he said while campaigning last week alongside Sherron Watkins, the former Enron executive who became a leading witness against that company's accounting practices.
Several presidential candidates have said they would collect as much as $300 billion over 10 years by eliminating corporate tax loopholes and other forms of ''corporate welfare.''
But Republican lawmakers have also gone on the attack. Senator Charles E. Grassley of Iowa, chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, has held numerous hearings and repeatedly questioned the Internal Revenue Service about tax-leasing deals that benefited municipalities not just in the United States but in Germany, France and other countries as well.
In a typical arrangement, a public agency like the New York Metropolitan Transportation Authority leases its property to a corporation in return for a cash payment, typically 4 percent to 6 percent of the value placed on the property.
The corporation then depreciates the property, which lowers its federal and state corporate income taxes. The North Hudson Sewerage Authority in New Jersey received $12 million in cash for selling its sewer lines to the AmSouth Leasing Corporation, a unit of AmSouth Bancorporation, and Textron. The corporations will get to write off $325 million, the value assigned to the sewer lines, and shield corporate profits from federal and state taxes, according to the deal documents.
The $325 million figure was given by an appraiser and was far in excess of the value placed on the sewer lines in the authority's books. In its 2002 annual report, the authority valued all its sewer plants, sewer lines and equipment like trucks at $258 million; just $48 million was attributed to the main sewer lines.
Richard J. Wolff, the board's chairman, acknowledged in an interview that the tax benefits to AmSouth and Textron were much greater than the payment made to the authority. But he said that was not his concern. ''My responsibility is to my ratepayers,'' Mr. Wolff said.
Defenders of the leasing arrangements said the Treasury Department's proposal would affect not only cities and states but also tax-exempt nonprofit groups like the Red Cross that might use similar strategies to raise cash.
''There are thousands of transaction that are going to be affected by this,'' said Kenneth J. Kies, former chief of staff for the Joint Committee on Taxation and now a tax lobbyist who represents a group that calls itself the Big Ticket Leasing Coalition. ''The real target is the tax-exempt communities -- the Red Cross, the Girl Scouts, tax-exempt hospitals, colleges and universities.''
