For nearly half a century, a pumping station in South Florida has been pouring millions of gallons of storm runoff annually into the Everglades, keeping the farms and backyards of western Broward Country dry but filling the wetlands with water often tainted by pollutants, mainly from phosphorus-rich fertilizers.
The station, known as S-9, is not a filthy factory, leaching mine or toxic dump. It is a large pump in a squat, nondescript building at the intersection of two levees. But its role in raising the level of phosphorus in the Everglades puts it at the center of a Supreme Court battle that could end up changing the reach of the Clean Water Act, the landmark 1972 law that established a federally controlled system for keeping the nation's waterways clean.
The core question is this: Is S-9 a polluter, subject to regulation by the Environmental Protection Agency and state agencies that protect the nation's water supply? Or is it merely a neutral conveyor of water, a cog in a vital infrastructure that, along with thousands of other water systems, keeps flood plains dry and reservoirs full while slaking the thirst of cities, subdivisions and farms?
The court, which will hear arguments on Wednesday in a lawsuit brought by a small Indian tribe against Florida water authorities, will decide whether, legally speaking, the pump is adding pollutants to the Everglades or is simply transferring them between bodies of water that belong to the same large national system of waterways. If the court decides the pump adds pollutants, S-9 and similar pumping equipment could become subject to a stringent system of permits and pollution controls required under the Clean Water Act.
The court is stepping in at a time when the nation's water agencies and developers are engaged in huge efforts to tap and reroute water to quench the thirst of expanding suburban communities.
The lawsuit was filed six years ago by the 500-member Miccosukee tribe, which argued that high levels of phosphorus in the runoff are imperiling the ecosystem of the Everglades, where the tribe has lived since the early 1800's.
The Miccosukee (mik-ko-SUE-kee), whose tribal headquarters sits on the Tamiami Trail in the Everglades in western Dade County, won federal recognition in 1962. In due course, they built a gambling business. This gave them the financial wherewithal, one tribal elder said, to mount a series of legal assaults on the South Florida Water Management District, which operates the pump.
One lawsuit took aim at S-9, whose discharge of phosphorus in recent years has averaged 20 parts per billion, twice the level at which many native plants thrive. In 2002, a federal judge ruled that the pump should be regulated under a section of the Clean Water Act requiring ''point'' sources of pollution -- like factories and mines -- to obtain permits under a program run by states.
The suit, now before the Supreme Court, pits the Bush administration -- which filed a brief in support of the water district -- and a broad array of city water planners, Western water districts and 11 Western states, led by Colorado and New Mexico, against 14 mostly Eastern states, led by New York and Pennsylvania, as well as the Association of State Wetlands Managers and environmental groups like the National Wildlife Federation.
The Eastern and Midwestern states that have sided with the Miccosukee have an abundance of water and of polluting industries, and thus a keen interest in controlling water quality. New York, for example, filed a brief in the case arguing that the states needed to ensure that their ''finely tuned programs to assess, protect and improve the water quality of each surface water body within their borders are not frustrated.''
But in the arid West and Southwest, where states must devise elaborate ways to transport large amounts of water over long distances, merely getting enough water is often the most pressing need. These states have sided with the Water Management District in South Florida, fearing that many structures that bring water to dry ranches and suburbs will be newly regulated.
So has New York City, whose water comes from an intricate network of upstate reservoirs. The city argues that its supplies could be threatened if silt-laden water was subject to quality tests as it moved through tunnels en route to city taps.
Supporters of the Miccosukees argue that if the tribe loses, the regulatory framework that keeps waterways clean would be undone.
The tribe's opponents focus on the need to be nimble in controlling the movement of water. What they fear is not the dismantling of needed regulatory controls but the imposition of what they see as new, superfluous requirements for federal permits that would usurp the states' rights and ability to manage their water resources.
Strict permit rules, they fear, would bring delays, citizen lawsuits and requirements for expensive antipollution equipment.
''Take the worst-case scenario,'' said Robert Bennett, a spokesman for the Central Arizona Project, that state's major water agency. ''All of that is going to slow down and reduce the amount of water we could deliver. The sucking sound you hear would be the people of Phoenix turning on their taps.''
The Miccosukee say their goal is to protect the Everglades by forcing the water district to get a permit for the pump and, eventually, to detoxify its discharge.
For now, the Everglades appear to be healthy along the Tamiami Trail. About 50 miles to the northeast, where sugar cane and sod fields bound the wetlands and the runoff is laced with higher concentrations of phosphorus, the Everglades have become a very different place. Thick, tall stands of cattails, which thrive on phosphorus, have elbowed out the saw grass, and many other kinds of plants and fish have vanished.
''The cattails show the destruction of everything,'' said Ronald D. Jones, an Everglades expert who is a professor of biology at Portland State University.
Gary Goforth, the chief consulting engineer for the Everglades Construction Project, disagrees. The water district is fulfilling the mandates of the state's Everglades Forever Act, Mr. Goforth says, by building containment areas that use a variety of methods to remove phosphorus, including biological allies like underwater plants and surface algae.
In addition to their gambling business, the Miccosukees have a modest tourist operation offering traditional crafts, alligator wrestling and airboat tours of the Everglades.
One airboat outfit bears the name of Buffalo Tiger, an 84-year-old tribal elder. While water managers and environmentalists see the battle over S-9 as a critical test of wills, for Buffalo Tiger cleaning up the Everglades is simply the right thing to do.
But, he added: ''You can't fix it. You can only patch it up. Then in 30 to 50 years, you'll have to do it again.''
