Once a drab stucco structure with a heavy cornice, the Newton Building has a new skin. Now the 1970's building on Northeast Second Avenue, just west of Biscayne Bay, sports a shimmering aluminum cylinder with a turret emerging from the roof. By day, the metal has a moiré pattern. Illuminated at night, it seems almost diaphanous.
The $500,000 makeover, designed by Walter Chatham, a New York architect, is the latest transformation in the Design District, a neighborhood of 18 square blocks that aspires to be Miami's SoHo.
These days, many developers across the country are building open-air shopping malls that seek to simulate an urban neighborhood, with stores spilling onto a sidewalk and apartments perched above the retail spaces. But Craig Robins, a developer who was a catalyst in the revival of South Beach, has a different strategy and objective. He wants to bring back moribund urban areas and make them better than they were originally, and more profitable.
The buildings that Mr. Robins acquired a decade ago for what he says was $20 to $30 a square foot are now worth $120 to $150 a square foot, said Jonathan Kingsley, the managing director for Grubb &amp; Ellis's South Florida office.
In all, Mr. Robins's company, Dacra, has bought 35 properties in the Design District -- bounded by Northeast 41st Street to the north, Northeast 36th Street to the south, Federal Highway to the east, and North Miami Avenue to the west -- and rehabilitated 20 buildings, with 500,000 square feet of space. This makes him by far the neighborhood's largest landlord, with an estimated $50 million investment. Now Dacra plans to construct new buildings, adding another 500,000 square feet at a cost of about $100 million.
The projects will be financed by borrowing against the equity in the Design District and other Dacra projects, he said. Some members of his team of architects and planners are also involved in Dacra's $225 million Aqua project, consisting of 151 houses and apartments on the private Allison Island in Miami Beach.
The son of a Miami developer, Mr. Robins, 40, is also an art collector and local celebrity whose photograph regularly appears in the region's many magazines. Because of his flair for publicity, some real estate specialists have questioned whether the Design District can ever live up to the hype. Indeed, more than a decade after his initial investment, the neighborhood is not exactly bustling with foot traffic, except during special events like the recent Art Basel Miami art fair, and as much as 50 percent of the space in the district is unoccupied, according to John Protomaster, the owner of a furniture store bearing his name, and the president of the local merchants association. (Mr. Robins said his vacancy rate was 20 percent.) At night, the sidewalks are deserted.
Still, the neighborhood has managed to attract about 150 shops, restaurants, art galleries and sleek showrooms, including some of the biggest names in high-end home and office design, including Holly Hunt, Kartell, Knoll, Poliform, Poltrona Frau and Waterworks, and 38 architects' and designers' offices. In May, the Latin Recording Academy of Arts and Sciences, which administers the Latin Grammys, moved into 8,000 square feet in the Buick Building on Northeast Second Avenue.
Pamela Jones, a Knoll vice president, said her company, which specializes in office furniture, took a risk in 1998 when it moved from Coral Gables to a 5,000-square-foot showroom on Northeast Second Avenue, becoming one of the first major retailers in the district. ''You're not going to go down there and see hordes of crowds,'' she said. ''But we have people coming down every day. And our business has picked up tremendously.''
And in keeping with Mr. Robins's goal of making the Design District an extension of South Beach, which is about seven miles away, the neighborhood now has a trendy night spot -- Grass Lounge, where food with Indonesian and Peruvian accents is served under a thatched roof.
Once a thriving wholesale district for home furnishings, the Design District has only a few buildings from the 1920's -- most notably, the Moore Building, a former furniture store that was also restored by Mr. Chatham. In the late 1970's, as crime and other problems intensified in the surrounding Buena Vista neighborhood, the area began a steep decline.
It seemed destined to vanish entirely in 1985, when the Danto Investment Company of Troy, Mich., opened its glossy Design Center of the Americas about 20 miles to the north. Known as Dcota (pronounced dakota) it now has 770,000 square feet of showrooms spread over three marble-tiled buildings, each surrounding an atrium.
In 1997, Miami officials asked Duany Plater-Zyberk, a nationally known urban planning company based in Miami, to draft a master plan for the Design District. ''We understood that the neighborhood had some good bones,'' said Elizabeth Plater-Zyberk, a principal in the firm. ''It had a walkable street grid, and a lot of buildings were in place, and it had a wonderful location.''
The firm suggested creating a street with a public square to break up Northeast 39th and Northeast 40th Streets, both long blocks, and make them more pedestrian-friendly while also giving the district a new center. Construction of the square, to be called Oak Street Plaza, will begin this spring, Mr. Robins said.
The plans also call for a nine-story mixed-use building to be built on a new street between Northeast First Avenue and Northeast Second Avenue, and for four two-story buildings along a curved road that will serve as a new eastern gateway to the district.
About $12.5 million of city and Miami-Dade County money has been earmarked for street improvement projects in the Design District, said Mary Conway, the city's transportation director.
Terence Riley, a partner in Keenen/Riley, the New York firm that designed several of the new projects, characterizes the Design District as a ''place for invention and experimentation'' of the kind that is no longer possible in pricey South Beach.
As he invested in the Design District, Mr. Robins became a critic of the design industry's practices, like the requirement that purchases be made through a professional designer. ''How arcane,'' he said, ''for them to be hiding in fortresslike malls.''
Mr. Robins acknowledges that people outfitting luxury homes are likely to seek professional assistance, but he said that making the stores accessible to shoppers would expand the market for good design. ''The audience for art and design is much smaller than it should be,'' said Mr. Robins, who requires his tenants to admit the public to their showrooms.
The public is also free to browse the Design Center of the Americas showrooms, but Joan Kerns Kauffman, the general manager, defends the ''to the trade'' convention, saying that consumers need professional help to avoid costly mistakes.
She said the revival of the Design District has not affected business at Dcota, which is 97.5 percent leased. At the end of 2002, the center began opening on the second Saturday of the month, when most customers come without decorators, but Ms. Kauffman said this policy was not a response to Mr. Robins's policies at the Design District. ''I give him credit for taking something very rundown and trying to reinvent it,'' she said, ''but I don't think it has anything to do with design.''
Miami officials, however, say that the district is so successful that it is stimulating development nearby. Developers Diversified Realty of Beachwood, Ohio, plans to begin construction this summer on a 600,000-square-foot big-box shopping center on land just south of the Design District that the Port of Miami uses as a container depot, and thousands of new apartments are to be built during the next three years, both to the south and southeast, said Otto Boudet-Murias, a senior adviser on economic development to Mayor Manuel A. Diaz.
''This investment,'' he said, ''came as a result of Craig Robins focusing on the Design District. He definitely was ahead of the curve in finding the potential and capitalizing on it.''
COMMERCIAL REAL ESTATE
