Europe's top trade minister added his voice to the call for reinvigorating global trade talks one day after the United States began its campaign to breathe new life into the stalled negotiations.
Pascal Lamy, the European trade commissioner, said in a speech before the European Parliament on Tuesday that Europe would make several concessions to increase the prospects of new trade talks, adding that he welcomed the new initiative by Robert B. Zoellick, the United States trade representative.
Mr. Lamy said Europe was willing to end its export subsidies on a list of agricultural products that would be negotiated with developing nations, a pledge that falls short of a demand by developing nations that all such subsidies be eliminated.
He also said Europe was prepared to remove as many as four of the issues that were strongly opposed by developing nations. Europe's insistence on including those issues helped cause the collapse of the World Trade Organization's talks in Cancún, Mexico, in September.
''We are now in far better shape than at the end of the Cancún conference,'' Mr. Lamy said.
To promote a resumption of talks, Mr. Lamy said he had already traveled to Brazil and would leave this week for Bangladesh, India and Indonesia.
The European trade commissioner made no direct reference to the demand by Mr. Zoellick that all agricultural export subsidies be eliminated, a proposal that falls heavily on Europe and signals that the United States is dropping its earlier cooperation with Europe.
Instead, Mr. Lamy left the door open to the United States, saying ''for our part, we will obviously be continuing our quest for alliances with the United States, Japan and other key members of the W.T.O.''
Many trade officials had feared that the current global trade talks, known as the Doha round, aimed at helping developing nations, might continue to languish with the United States' attention focused on the 2004 election campaign. The talks, with a 2005 deadline, could have serious repercussions for the global economy.
Several trade economists praised both initiatives.
C. Fred Bergsten, director for the Institute for International Economics in Washington and an expert who has been worried about the course of United States trade policy, said on Tuesday that he strongly supported the move by Mr. Zoellick.
''It does clear the air about U.S. intentions and with Mr. Lamy's statement today, it may mean they will be able to complete the round,'' he said.
In a letter sent to more than 140 trade ministers this week, Mr. Zoellick listed several ideas for moving talks forward but said he was not trying ''to launch breakthrough proposals.''
Mr. Lamy said that the W.T.O. should be able to reach initial agreements on the overall questions, including agriculture, no later than April.
''I am convinced of the possibility of real progress if the W.T.O.'s members want it,'' Mr. Lamy said.
