''NYC2012: Olympic Opportunities,'' now at the Center for Architecture in Greenwich Village, is a small show, but it presages huge architectural ambitions for New York City. The bid to make the city the home of the Olympics in 2012 may seem like a pipe dream, but detailed plans are well under way for some 25 sites spanning all five buroughs, New Jersey and Nassau County.
The projected new construction budget, the bulk of which will be privately financed, is in excess of $3 billion, said Daniel L. Doctoroff, deputy mayor for economic development and rebuilding and the founder of NYC2012, the group leading New York's bid to be host. ''We hope to use the process of bidding for, and hopefully hosting, the Olympics as a way to showcase New York as a center of excellence and path-breaking developments in design,'' Mr. Doctoroff said.
New York is contending against eight other cities, including Paris, London, Moscow, Rio de Janeiro and Havana, making this one of the hottest -- one could say, truly Olympic-class -- races in the modern history of the games. The International Olympic Committee will announce its decision on July 6, 2005.
More than a dozen initial proposals for athletic fields, a stadium and other sites for supporting events have already been designed and are on display through Feb. 7 at the Center for Architecture, at 536 La Guardia Place (north of Bleecker Street). Printed on wide strips of floppy Mylar, clipped to fluorescent tube lights and suspended by wire from the water pipes in a radical-tech installation by J. Meejin Yoon, the exhibition makes it appear that it would be easy enough to slip the mega-structures needed for the games into the already stretched urban fabric of New York.
Half a dozen events would take place in Manhattan alone, including gymnastics (at Madison Square Garden), wrestling (at the Jacob K. Javits Convention Center) and boxing (at the 369th Regiment Armory in Harlem). The Manhattan architectural firm Kohn Pedersen Fox Associates has designed an Olympic stadium that would be constructed on decking over the rail yards on the West Side from 30th to 33rd Streets. (The $800 million stadium is to be paid for by the New York Jets as its new home. But the decking and roof would be built with about $600 million from city and state funds, Mr. Doctoroff said, so that the stadium could be used for conventions and other events.) The stadium has been designed to harvest energy from wind, water and the sun, and, along with its retractable roof, would have walls made of solar thermal tubes and the capacity to collect and recycle rain water.
Alongside the stadium, there would be a lawn designed by Hardy Holzman Pfeiffer, 40 percent larger than Bryant Park but in the same urbane spirit as the midtown park. It would be bisected by a long glass pavilion loaded with restaurants, cafes and shops. With its afterlife as a park in mind, the lawn would include a majestic fountain and a flourishing bosque of trees. Although both the stadium and the lawn would be built over the Long Island Rail Road storage yard, a spokesman for NYC2012 said that thanks to new technology no one would ever feel the trains rumbling below.
Weiss/Manfredi, a relatively young Manhattan firm, was charged with designing locations for rowing and white-water events at Flushing Meadows-Corona Park in Queens, a leftover landscape haunted by glaring remnants of the 1939 and 1964 World's Fairs. The firm's plan -- created to focus, as with all the designs, on post-Olympic uses -- includes a mile-long boardwalk wending through a newly recovered wetland beneath the Piranesian sweep of on- and off-ramps to the Long Island Expressway.
In its proposal, on view at the exhibition, the former reflecting pool of the 1964 Unisphere has been reconfigured into a 20-foot vertical drop for the white-water course.
Margaret Helfand, a Manhattan architect and former president of the American Institute of Archictects, is the curator of the exhibition. Though the show is small, it is packed with a polemic. Beneath the strip of preliminary renderings for New York, she arranged images of some of the greatest hits from past Olympics.
The proposed Olympic stadium by Kohn Pedersen Fox is matched against that by the Swiss architectural firm Herzog &amp; deMeuron for Beijing 2008 and against Pier Luigi Nervi's 1960 Palazzo dello Sport in Rome with its innovative (for that time) web of concrete walls. In another pairing, Cesar Pelli's plan for a sleek but straightforward glass media tower near the proposed West Side stadium is set off against Santiago Calatrava's communications tower that looks like a letter jotted in the sky for the 1992 Barcelona Olympics.
''The proposals to date have been on the unambitious side,'' Ms. Helfand said. ''They are not on the level they should be. This is an opportunity for new ideas. After all, excellence is what the Olympics are all about.''
Ms. Helfand said she hoped that the best -- architecturally speaking -- was yet to come with the design of the Olympic Village, where the 16,000 athletes would live three or four to an apartment for 17 days. An innovative design study is under way to select an architect for the site in Queens West, across the East River from the United Nations.
The Olympic Village selection process attracted 132 architects, both unknown and renowned, from the United States and abroad, who submitted their qualifications in November. An international jury whittled the list down to five architectural firms: Zaha Hadid of London; Morphosis of Santa Monica, Calif.; MVRDV of Rotterdam; Smith-Miller &amp; Hawkinson of New York; and Henning Larsens Tegnestue of Copenhagen. The winning firm and its preliminary design for the $1.5 billion Olympic Village will be announced in March.
''Our agenda is clear,'' Mr. Doctoroff said. ''We want the Olympics to leave a legacy to the city.''
