Senator John Edwards faces what Democratic leaders say could be his last opportunity to derail Senator John Kerry, in a 10-state coast-to-coast block of Democratic contests on Tuesday that has emerged as a critical test of Mr. Edwards's appeal and limited campaign resources.
Going into the final weekend, state Democratic leaders and aides to Mr. Edwards and Mr. Kerry said that Mr. Edwards's best hope for victories was in Ohio, Minnesota, Georgia and perhaps Maryland, based on public and private polls in recent days. Both campaigns were advertising, though not particularly heavily, in Georgia and Ohio, as well as New York, a state where Mr. Edwards hopes at least to win some delegates.
But his campaign showed signs of distress as it struggled to cope with the huge playing field. Mr. Edwards changed his schedule at the last minute on Friday, scrapping a day of campaigning here after polls showed him facing a California drubbing by Mr. Kerry, and he headed for Minnesota in search of a state he could win on Tuesday.
And Democratic leaders across the country, including many who continued to praise his political skills, said Mr. Edwards would have a tough time proceeding if he did not score victories on the biggest day of Democratic primary and caucus voting to date.
''If he does that, he goes on to fight another day,'' said Ike Leggett, the Democratic chairman in Maryland. ''Otherwise, I think the move would be very strongly for him to pack it in: the die is cast and it's time to move forward.''
Mike Erlandson, leader of the Minnesota Democratic Party, who like Mr. Leggett has not endorsed a candidate in the primary races, said: ''Frankly, Edwards has got to win a few states on Tuesday. Otherwise, as much as some people are calling it over now, it really will be over.''
Mr. Kerry now has 562 of the 2,162 delegates needed to win the Democratic presidential nomination, compared with 204 for Mr. Edwards. That disparity has fed optimism among Mr. Kerry's advisers, who say the delegate lead is becoming close to insurmountable, since delegates are apportioned based on the vote each candidate receives, rather than winner-take-all. Though Mr. Edwards's advisers dispute that, this sense in the Kerry campaign has permitted Mr. Kerry to largely ignore his Democratic rival and act as if the Democratic convention in Boston were already behind him.
In the latest indication of just how little a threat Mr. Kerry considers the Edwards challenge to be, he limited his advertising expenditures this week to the markets where Mr. Edwards's campaign bought time.
Here in California this week, Mr. Edwards was at once cheerful and combative as he arrived at what many supporters described as the decisive moment in his candidacy, pledging to move ahead even if he went through yet another Tuesday without winning a single state.
''I'm very much in this for the long haul,'' he said. ''My strategy has been the same all along: Continue to win delegates; continue to move in a serious and substantial way.''
Still, some of the questions that have hung over him from the moment he announced his candidacy are as acute for many Democrats now as they were when Mr. Edwards, a 50-year-old former trial lawyer and first-time senator from North Carolina, appeared on the national scene. That is particularly so now that he has won just one of the first 20 contests.
Is Mr. Edwards, a gifted Southern politician whose style has even drawn some comparisons to Bill Clinton, the future of the Democratic Party, as more than a few Democrats have described him? Or is he the candidate short of both experience and heft, seeking to ride his charm and good looks to victory?
''When you talk to him, you hear him in person, he converts you real fast,'' said Dennis White, the Ohio Democratic leader. But even as he predicted that Mr. Edwards might win his state, Mr. White said it was baffling that he had faltered in so many so far. ''I don't understand it,'' he said.
Mr. Edwards is as genial and courteous as they come in politics, and almost every day he can be observed embracing a voter who shares a heartbreaking story of losing a job or health care.
Yet he will often keep a crowd waiting; he is so frequently late (and often speaks for just 20 minutes once he gets there) that it is not unusual to see his introducers shuffle to fill the time between the introduction and the appearance of the candidate.
''I've got to keep talking because he's not here yet,'' Chris Jones, the head of Acorn, a community activist group in San Francisco, said on Thursday morning as he waited for Mr. Edwards to spring from the wings so he could endorse him. ''O.K., California Acorn is proud to present its endorsement to the senator from North Carolina -- I've got to hold it up? O.K., I'll hold it up.''
His compelling presence and unfailingly positive message make him an impressive figure and articulate advocate in debates and in speeches that often move his audiences. And Mr. Edwards is described by his friends and associates as bright, a fast learner who can quickly command even the most complex issue, as was evident by his many victories as a lawyer in complicated medical malpractice suits.
But since the beginning of the year, with some notable exceptions, Mr. Edwards has delivered a speech that barely varies wherever he is or whoever his audience -- the same words, the precise inflections, even the same facial expressions. It is not unusual to spot Mr. Edwards's aides on the sidelines mouthing his speech along with him. It is a show of absolutely unwavering discipline, and lack of weariness with his own words that stands out even in a business where such consistency is considered, at least by consultants, a mark of a successful politician.
Mr. Edwards's question-and-answer sessions with reporters tend to be brief. And as Mr. Edwards traveled across this state on his chartered jet this week, his aides pinned up a blanket to separate his cabin from the one where reporters were sitting. When he came back for a talk, at the encouragement of his press secretary, he immediately tried to put the conversation off the record, participants said, when they sought to ask him about his views on gay marriage.
When Mr. Edwards went to San Francisco this week, his aides portrayed the visit as an act of political bravery: a visit to ''the belly of the beast'' by a politician who had criticized San Francisco for granting thousands of marriage licenses to same-sex couples in the city.
Mr. Edwards spoke for nearly a half-hour to a group of liberal activists in San Francisco, but he did not once mention the battle that has engulfed the city and the race for president, on the same morning that Rosie O'Donnell was marrying at City Hall, not far from where Mr. Edwards was speaking.
''I came here to talk about the issues that are important to Acorn, who endorsed me today,'' Mr. Edwards told reporters when asked about the omission after his speech. ''A basic message of hope and opportunity for everybody.''
Mr. Edwards has said he opposes gay marriage but supports civil unions, but when a San Francisco television reporter tried to follow up by repeatedly and loudly asking Mr. Edwards to explain ''how do you define marriage,'' Mr. Edwards turned away. Ignoring the question, he instead recognized a German television correspondent and a student journalist before leaving.
Mr. Edwards's aides said they remained confident of his chances, though they admit it will not be easy. He is looking to, in effect, survive the vote on Tuesday so he can stay on through March 9, when four Southern states -- Florida, Texas, Louisiana and Mississippi -- vote in a day that should play to Mr. Edwards's regional strength.
And Mr. Edwards has been aggressively recruiting the backing of Howard Dean and his supporters; in Minnesota, Mr. Erlandson, in describing Mr. Edwards as strong in his state, noted that leaders of the Dean movement had lined up behind Mr. Edwards.
Still, these days would test the spirit even of an optimist like Mr. Edwards. He has enjoyed the flush of importance that comes with the motorcades and the Secret Service protection that engulfed his campaign this week; the kind of experience that gives a candidate a taste of what it would be like to be president.
But he has also awakened more than once in strange hotels after long days on the road to front-page stories and television reports that focused on President Bush and Mr. Kerry, acting as if the race was over and Mr. Edwards had given up.
And when Mr. Kerry comes to a town these days, he is invariably greeted by a pounding round of attacks by Republican governors and members of Congress -- aggressively orchestrated by Mr. Bush's re-election committee. But when Mr. Edwards stopped off to campaign last Wednesday in Houston, right in George Bush's backyard, the White House did not even bother to muster an attack.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE OVERVIEW
