The way they left the floor at Madison Square Garden yesterday said it all. With all eyes on the top names in United States men's and women's gymnastics, the 29-year-old stalwart Blaine Wilson crumpled to the mat in pain. As trainers and coaches formed a nearly endless procession of sympathy, Wilson sat on the floor, his head down, sobbing. A torn left biceps had ended his day at the American Cup and seriously threatened his chances of making it to the Athens Games.
The opposite scene came later, when Carly Patterson, at the age of 16, bounded off the floor exercise mat into a sea of hugs and joyful tears. She had cemented her spot as the American women's best hope in Athens with her convincing all-around victory.
The seesaw of emotions could not have been more jarring. The women's team's hopes soared with the top three finishers -- Patterson followed by the 15-year-olds Courtney McCool and Chellsie Memmel -- while the men's absorbed a huge blow with the injury to Wilson and the mistakes of the United States' other top contender, Paul Hamm.
It was Wilson who had hoped to glue this men's team together by staying in the sport far beyond the normal career expectancy to help the United States win its first men's team Olympic medal since 1984. Heading into yesterday's meet, coaches were calling this the best men's team since then.
In an instant, one seemingly simple move on the rings changed it all.
Wilson had spread his arms to hold himself in position when he simply let go and fell. He grabbed his right arm, pain etched on his face. ''There was no doubt I was going to win this meet,'' Wilson said as he left the arena. ''See you in Greece.''
The injury, though, puts Wilson's bid for his third Olympic appearance in jeopardy.
''He was devastated,'' said his coach, Miles Avery. ''We don't have time for injuries like that with what we're trying to get done. It's devastating for the team.''
In a sport dominated by the preadolescent girls that become its stars every Olympic year, Wilson has stood out for sheer perseverance. He is the first five-time national champion. His dreams for a medal in the Sydney Olympics, when he was in his prime, ended in a disappointing sixth-place finish, prompting his vow to stay in and bring home a United States medal from Athens in 2004.
So Wilson kept training in Columbus, Ohio, married the former volleyball player Makare Desilets, endured the loss of their stillborn son, celebrated the birth of a healthy daughter last fall and, through it all, remained in the sport's top echelon.
Along with the Hamm twins, Paul and Morgan, and Jason Gatson, Wilson would have rounded out a formidable team, one that is now riddled with questions. For the Hamm twins, yesterday was full of disappointment. Paul Hamm, the defending world all-around champion, fell off both the pommel horse and the high bar, the second when he was leading going into the final event. That allowed Gatson, a 23-year-old veteran of four knee operations, to capture first. He was followed by Marian Dragulescu of Romania. Paul Hamm finished third, Morgan fifth.
Patterson, who trains in Allen, Tex., earned the loudest squeals from the teenagers dominating the crowd of 12,394 as she marched through her events with a growing confidence. She had the highest score in each event to run away with the all-around title.
''Carly's performance was absolutely outstanding,'' said Marta Karolyi, the United States team coordinator. ''She proved again she is one of our greatest competitors. In competition she is able to do a little more than in workouts.''
Karolyi was among the coaches that enveloped Patterson on her way off the mat, but the last hug came from Marta's husband, the now-retired Bela, who nonetheless remains the patriarch of women's gymnastics.
That hug said everything that needed saying.
GYMNASTICS
