IN a four-story red brick building across from the Dairy Queen in Winsted, Ralph Nader plans to open a museum about tort law and the little people who have fought back against big corporations. Though some residents wonder who will come to northwest Connecticut to learn about the safety hazards of the Ford Pinto, they generally agree his legacy on that issue is solid. It's the other legacy he is building that has them worried: presidential spoiler.
When Mr. Nader, 70, who now lives in Washington, announced his candidacy for president as an independent last week, Democrats nationwide let out a gasp. Party insiders, and even some of his friends, had urged Mr. Nader not to run, for fear that the consumer advocate will siphon votes from the eventual Democratic nominee.
Although many Winsted residents support him and agreed with his message about the corrupting influence of corporate money on politics, others said they don't think this is the year to run.
''As far as the presidential race, people are not very happy about it,'' said Sheila Sedlack, a Democrat who serves as town clerk. ''I'm very disappointed in him. I don't know what his purpose is. It's making a mockery of our system, in a sense.''
Winsted, with a population of about 7,300, has its own independent party, but it is not supporting the hometown candidate.
''I'm a Winsted independent,'' said Judy D. Pavlak. ''I'm not a Nader independent. Very shortly we're going to put an ad in the paper that we do not support Ralph Nader and we're not involved in him. I just think that he is being selfish by putting himself up again.''
Ms. Pavlak is active in local politics and has opposed Mr. Nader and his family before, most notably in a battle for control of the local health center.
Indeed, Mr. Nader's positions on local issues have won him just as many friends and enemies as his stance on national politics. People here praise him for sponsoring a community lawyer to help residents and an educator to run local programs and work with teachers in this former mill town. But others are tired of hearing about Mr. Nader's plans, which have begun to sound as empty as that dark and dusty red brick building across from the Dairy Queen. Mr. Nader has promised the town an American Museum of Tort Law there for almost a decade. But as the years went by, the former electrical coil factory remained empty, but for two offices and scattered stacks of boxes, its windows cracked and boarded up.
''He promised, in 1996 I think, that it would be done the next year,'' said Michael Marciano, editor of the Winsted Journal. ''Every time he talks about it, it's always next year. Some people think it's a little hard to trust him if he can't get it done in his hometown.''
Supporters in town of President George Bush obviously disagree with Mr. Nader's policies, with Brad Wacholz, a crossing guard, calling his candidacy ''a political joke.'' But Democrats generally had the harshest words for him.
Maryann Welcome, the city's mayor who teaches at the high school Mr. Nader attended, said her main concern is defeating President Bush. Mr. Nader's entry into the race puts that goal in jeopardy, she said.
''As a Democrat I worry, because the last time it was so close and any third party is going to take away from one or the other,'' she said.
Mr. Nader won 11 percent of the vote in his hometown when he ran for president on the Green Party ticket in 2000, as compared to 2.7 percent nationwide, but few expect him to do as well this year.
''I just don't think that this time around people will be throwing their votes just to send a message,'' said Steven V. Angelo, the town manager. ''There's just such strong divisions between the parties this year.''
That said, Mr. Nader has also been an inspiration to many people here. And they said he doesn't take on the airs of a Washington politician when he comes home. His underdog fight-for-the-people message plays well in this blue-collar city.
People here talk about Winsted as two cities: the city that was and the city that is, separated by the disastrous flood of 1955 that wiped out the south side of town.
Now, empty factory buildings stare across the Mad River at some boarded-up storefronts on the other side.
Darin Barber, the owner of Winsted News and Variety on Main Street, likes to talk politics with the presidential candidate.
''In the morning he comes down here to get the paper and he knows everybody by name,'' said Mr. Barber, who compares the social atmosphere in his shop to the TV show ''Cheers.'' Mr. Nader, whose father, Nathra, a Lebanese immigrant, owned a restaurant down the street, is ''real interested in the small-town stuff,'' Mr. Barber added.
''He asks questions about every aspect of our business,'' he said. ''The idea I get from him is he actually cares. The guy is leaps and bounds smarter than us, and he never made us feel like we were less.''
Mr. Barber won't say who he is supporting for president, but he said he thought the town should rally behind Mr. Nader.
''Being a native son, I think it's a great idea,'' Mr. Barber said. ''I think people in town should support him. It's a big thing to know a presidential candidate.''
Penny Owen works out of the Naders' future museum building and is paid by a grant from the Shafeek Nader Trust for the Community Interest, named after Mr. Nader's brother. Until his death in 1986, Shafeek was a major presence in town, helping build an industrial park and bringing a community college here. One of Mr. Nader's two sisters and his mother still live here. Mr. Nader's mother and sister declined to comment for this article. Mr. Nader didn't respond to requests for comment.
Ms. Owen said she is upset that Mr. Nader has been treated like a scapegoat for Al Gore's loss in the 2000 election.
''I think to say that because of a third party, it got someone elected, it is a ridiculous argument,'' she said. ''I don't think it's the right reason to ask someone not to run because you don't want to lose.''
If nothing else, Mr. Nader's entry into the race will give voters another perspective, she said.
''I love Ralph Nader,'' she said. ''I don't even know who I'm voting for yet, but I want voices to be heard and I want people to believe that they don't simply have two choices.''
Ms. Owen runs drama and writing workshops for children and adults in Winsted, ''getting people to perform their perception of life to their community.''
At a play rehearsal in a former church above a social club last Monday, about a dozen children and adults practiced their acting while Ms. Owen gave them orders. Parents who attended said they looked forward to Mr. Nader's candidacy and are grateful to his family's organization for bringing out the creative side in their kids.
''In the school system now, everyone's focused on standardized testing,'' said Karen Hunter, who is frustrated with President Bush's No Child Left Behind Act and plans to vote for Mr. Nader. ''For him to provide this forum is great.''
''Usually people get involved in politics and they forget where they came from,'' she said. ''He's not even here and he's still making a difference in the community.''
Diane Shotwell, a substitute teacher and registered independent who has lived in Winsted since 1996, also said she planned to vote for Mr. Nader.
If he doesn't win, though, she said she would like to see him come home.
''If I was to say anything to him, I would say come back to Winsted and launch something here,'' she said. ''I don't know. He's busy.''
