JAMIE DI MARE has been performing in Sally Gross's delicately wrought minimal dances for the last 17 years. Early on, Ms. Gross made her rehearse while wearing Timberland boots. ''She said I had to learn how to be grounded,'' Ms. Di Mare said, laughing.
While earthy at times, there is nothing unpleasantly heavy about Ms. Gross's poetic dances, which are strongly based on improvisation. They require a sophistication that is guided by the rhythm of breathing. When Ms. Gross's dancers arrive at her Greenwich Village studio, they spend the first few moments walking in unison. ''We leave the outside behind and find a peaceful place to focus on the little details,'' Ms. Di Mare said. ''That way we form one unit and breathe together before we even start to rehearse.''
Ms. Gross, who began her career in the early 60's as a performer and choreographer with the experimental Judson Dance Theater, may not have achieved fame and fortune in the dance world. She has, however, created a loyal group of admirers who attend her annual seasons -- whether they are held at her studio, the intimate Construction Company or the Joyce SoHo, where her latest work will be presented.
Ms. Gross will offer three new pieces: ''Aha,'' a trio that she describes as an investigation of the fine line between the everyday phrases ''Oh no'' and ''Aha''; ''If They Were,'' a duet set to music by the Japanese composer Somei Satoh; and a solo for herself, ''And Here and Here.'' The resonant ''Aha,'' is set to a score by Bruce Gremo and was inspired by Wallace Stevens's poem ''The Well Dressed Man With a Beard,'' which begins: ''After the final no there comes a yes/ And on that yes the future world depends.''
To Ms. Gross, the word aha is the reaction one gives when bad news is followed by good. ''I don't usually talk about the work, because to me the work is the work,'' she said. ''But aha is about that yes that comes after all the oh no's. And it's not that that's what you necessarily see in the piece, but that was the motivation behind it.''
Ms. Gross, who refuses to reveal her age, has a full head of gray hair, but her vivid brown eyes and her lively spirit make her seem so young and energetic that she practically vibrates. She is deeply influenced by the writings of Samuel Beckett, whom she credits as the inspiration for the new duet and solo; just as he uses few words to create a powerful image,, her movement vocabulary is equally economical -- straightforward, precise yet unpredictable. And she knows that her style is not for everyone.
''There are so many people who have never seen my work, and it's O.K. with me,'' she said. ''I'm not politic. I've been here for such a long time, and we're still doing the work. That's all that really matters.''
GIA KOURLAS
Sally Gross and Company  Joyce SoHo, 155 Mercer Street.  Thursday through next Sunday at 8 p.m.
DANCE: THIS WEEK
