THE Horace Greeley High School campus sprawls across a swath of town, surrounded by fields, trees and a sea of parking lots.
But all is not serene here: the lone lane dedicated to visitor parking is often temporarily double-parked with S.U.V.'s and minivans, as parents come to collect children. Meanwhile, a high school staff member patrols the parking lot during the day to make sure no student has appropriated a staff parking space.
Parking for juniors was discontinued two years ago, but even so, space is still tight. ''We have enough parking for all the seniors and all the faculty,'' said Andrew Selesnick, principal at Horace Greeley. ''Kids will try to park in any faculty space. A student will get the boot, which happens about twice a week.''
With the high school's enrollment increased to nearly 1,200 today from about 800 students during the 1990's, it's not surprising that competition for parking spaces is tough. ''There are more faculty, and more students,'' Mr. Selesnick said. ''Some days, if you're not here by 8 a.m., it can be very difficult.''
Parking may well seem to be a frivolous issue, given serious education topics like closing the achievement gap, meeting Regents standards or improving reading results. But nevertheless, parking is an issue that lies near to the heart of the suburban school experience.
Some districts have found answers. When the Rye City school district, for example, built an addition at its joined middle school and high school campus, plans included an extra parking lot. ''We anticipated faculty and staff growth because of enrollments,'' Dr. Edward J. Shine, the district superintendent, said in a telephone interview.
But in most districts, even poor solutions are hard to come by. Land is scarce near schools, and school boards are generally loath to put parking up to a bond issue vote. Limiting student parking to, say, seniors is one possibility, but even at that many lots are jammed.
Parking problems consume many a board meeting and PTA discussion. Parents complain that they can't find a space when they're meeting teachers or picking up a sick child; teachers and students wage turf wars over parking spots. Several factors contribute to the problem, including rising enrollment, which fuels faculty growth. And teenagers often consider it their divine right to drive to school.
''We have seen considerable enrollment increases, which has grown by 70 percent during the last 12 years,'' Dr. John J. Russell, superintendent of the Hastings public schools, said in a telephone interview. ''The staff has increased to accommodate that, so parking is no longer adequate at our nice neighborhood school. It's an intractable problem. Spots are at a premium.''At schools designed for bus drop-offs or walkers, the problem is particularly acute. In those cases, buildings are hemmed in by residential streets that prohibit parking, or restrict it severely.
Even in Bronxville, which doesn't allow student parking, the problem persists. ''As faculty enrollment has increased through the years, parking is very tight,'' John Kehoe, assistant superintendent for the Bronxville school district, said in a telephone interview. ''Parking is on a first come first served basis.'' School starts at 8 a.m., and some teachers arrive as early as 6:45.''In Pelham, there is no designated visitor parking because spaces are so scarce. ''We do not offer parking to students, and never have,'' the superintendent, Charles Wilson, said by telephone. ''We have just enough assigned spaces for staff at current levels. We are a walking district.'' The district even had a parking advisory committee that published a report last year identifying possible solutions, few of which were without concomitant problems.
''You could take away green space, or a section of the playing field,'' said Dr. Wilson, who pointed out that his own designated space is taken by someone else when he leaves the district office. Even in districts that are less dependent on cars, like Yonkers, parking can still be challenging. And those challenges present other problems. Mary Beth Linder, head of the Yonkers Council of PTA's, said the lack of parking places made it difficult for parents to be involved in school life. ''With the exception of the Emerson Middle School, there's no parking,'' she said. ''It's not conducive to developing relationships with teachers or other parents.''
IN THE SCHOOLS E-mail: wested@nytimes.com
