TO get a sense of the absurdity of the Academy Awards' best foreign-language film category, consider the story of ''City of God.'' In 2002, Brazil submitted Fernando Meirelles's urban thriller for the foreign-language Oscar. Academy voters didn't seem too impressed, though, and five other nominees were selected instead. The next year, with a nudge from Miramax, ''City of God'' opened on more than 150 screens across the United States, garnered rapturous reviews and ended up on a number of critics' 10-best lists. When the film was up for Oscar consideration a second time, this time in the general competition, it scooped up four prominent nominations, including best director and best adapted screenplay. So what was not, a year ago, one the best foreign films is now one of the best films, period. One voting member said of ''City of God'': ''That itself is a real insult to our committee. We didn't even nominate 'City of God' for foreign film and now it's got four nominations.''
As tonight's ceremony approaches, the foreign-language category remains Oscar's annual head-scratcher. Ask anyone in the industry about this year's nominees -- which include one critical hit, ''The Barbarian Invasions'' from Canada, and four films that barely register -- and you'll find varying levels of bafflement. ''For the most part, of the films that are selected, I don't think anyone understands why,'' says Ryan Werner, head of distribution at Wellspring, which releases a number of foreign titles each year. Mark Urman, of ThinkFilm, says, ''I can't tell you how many people were shocked by the nominations this year.'' Both were hoping their company's films would be included, but their sentiments are shared by executives and voters alike. Ken Rudolph, a former documentary filmmaker and a voter in the foreign-language film category since 1980, admits: ''I'm not saying I believe these are the best foreign films that exist. I don't think anybody's saying that. It's a very strange category.''
The academy is the first to agree. Mark Johnson, chairman of the foreign-language film selection committee said last week, ''It's a complaint and an observation that has real merit. I'm not sure how to address it right now real successfully.''
To be nominated for best cinematography or costume design, a film has to win a large enough portion of votes. Same goes for best actress or director. But best foreign film contenders are subject to a set of ''special rules'' riddled with vagaries, bizarre mandates and clumsy procedures. The effect has been that, year after year, some of the world's best films are left out of the running.
Take the foreign category's most basic rule: that each nation may submit only one film a year. It was codified in 1957, the year after ''foreign-language film'' became a competitive category, to keep small countries with fledgling film industries from getting lost in the shuffle. But what was intended as a way to level the playing field now seems to have flattened it beyond recognition. It's noble to encourage new talent, but why should France or Japan, which could roll out several Oscar-worthy films in a given year, have to scale down to the output of Peru? These days the academy even encourages quasi states like Palestine and Puerto Rico to enter the fray.
Furthermore, there are no standards for how countries should make their selections. In some places it's rendered by an American-style academy, in other places by an apparatchik in the culture ministry. (The choice isn't always hard, of course: this year's entry from Mongolia was ''The Story of the Weeping Camel,'' in part because it was one of the few narrative films that country produced.) ''Each country that submits a film has its own set of criteria,'' Mr. Urman says. ''So from the start, you're not necessarily dealing with the best foreign films.''
The slights have been legendary. In 1985, Japan bypassed ''Ran,'' one of Akira Kurosawa's classics. Last year, Spain snubbed ''Talk to Her,'' the well-received film by Pedro Almodóvar, in favor of a grimy drama called ''Mondays in the Sun.'' In that case, reason prevailed, and the academy awarded ''Talk to Her'' the Oscar for best original screenplay (and nominated Mr. Almodóvar as best director).
Other academy bylaws make even less sense. The rules stipulate that in almost all cases a foreign nominee must be ''predominantly in an official language of the country submitting the film.'' In 1993, Poland submitted Kryzysztof Kieslowski's ''Blue,'' part of his ''Three Colors'' trilogy. The academy rejected it because it was filmed in French with French actors -- not Polish enough, apparently. The next year, Switzerland tried nominating Kieslowski's ''Red'' -- filmed in French and set in Switzerland -- only to be rejected because this time the film was deemed too Polish. Last year, the British film ''The Warrior'' was rejected because much of it was filmed in Hindi. Britain submitted a Welsh-language film instead, which the academy accepted, even though about a million fewer Britons speak Welsh than Hindi.
Patrick Stockstill, the academy's house historian, says the native-language rule prevents a scenario in which, say, French producers make francophone pictures all over Europe and then submit them as other nations' Oscar contenders. But in the European Union, multinational collaborations like Kieslowski's are becoming more common. (A country like Luxembourg could almost never produce a viable competitor without money and crew from its larger neighbors.) It seems the academy can't decide how federalist it wants to be: it empowers foreign countries to choose their best films, yet it doesn't trust them to divine the nationality of the work.
And those strange prerequisites are just the beginning. This year's 56 foreign entries were divided into three groups; each foreign-category voter had to see 80 percent of the films in his group. (A film was counted as ''viewed'' if the voter stayed for one-third of it.) After the field is reduced to five nominees, any academy members may vote, provided they see all five on the big screen -- no tapes or screeners allowed. Some think making members trudge to the theaters discourages the younger, busier members from voting. ''You have a much older group of people choosing the films,'' Mr. Werner says. ''The edgier films tend to get left out.'' With those constraints, did Palestine's submission, the darkly farcical ''Divine Intervention,'' ever have a chance?
Scoring the ballots presents another set of problems. When academy members vote in categories like best director, they submit their top five choices in order; in most cases, the five directors with the most first-place votes are the nominees. So if a large enough faction of voters loves Fernando Meirelles, then Mr. Meirelles wins a nomination no matter what anyone else thinks of him. In the foreign-language category, however, voters assign each film a numerical score from 10 (highest) to 6 (lowest), and the five nominees are the films with the highest average scores. The academy says it scores the category this way because not everyone has seen all the films, but there's a downside to the methodology. A faction that adored ''City of God'' and gave it the maximum score might be undone by voters who abhorred the film's violence and walked out early. Over time, that might push the academy toward nominating more conventional, less threatening fare.
If there's widespread agreement that the rules governing the best foreign-film nominations are flawed, however, there's little consensus on how to fix them. Some solutions are obvious: Dump the native-language rule. Include films with ambiguous national heritage. Score the foreign ballots like the other Oscar ballots. But even then, you still have the problem of the nominating pool. How do you make sure movies like ''Ran'' aren't left out by the very countries that produced them? Perhaps the answer is to allow the academy to add a dozen more ''at large'' slots.
Here's how it might work: After the foreign nations submit their movies, an academy board could select 12 additional films for the nominating pool -- no matter the country or the language. This year, for instance, the board could have corrected for omissions like ''Purple Butterfly,'' which was bypassed by China, or ''Crimson Gold,'' a prizewinner at the Cannes Film Festival that was banned from Iranian theaters. Or they could have let Harvey Weinstein and company stage a public derby to capture them. Whatever the case, between those and the films the individual countries have backed, you would end up with a field that's both sufficiently international and sufficiently distinguished.
The foreign-language category is the only Oscar division that actively discourages studio lobbying because Miramax or Sony Classics can't push a film the home country has declined to submit. By adding more bids, however, you let the category become a media event -- an occasion to blanket Hollywood with screening tapes and ''for your consideration'' advertisements. It might seem undignified in the case of well-known domestic fare like ''Cold Mountain'' and ''The Lord of the Rings: The Return of the King,'' but sermonizing on behalf of foreign cinema will do nothing but raise its profile. And that's part of the reason the academy began bestowing special honors on foreign films way back in 1947.
The solution isn't perfect, of course. It would almost certainly tilt the game toward foreign pictures with major American distributors. As Mr. Urman points out, ''It should be possible for a film of no pedigree to get the same Oscar consideration as a film that bears the logo of a major American corporation.'' Fair enough, but shouldn't we at least let the best films in the door?
Bryan Curtis is the film editor at Slate.com.
