The Oklahoma judge in the state trial of Terry L. Nichols for the 1995 bombing of the federal building that killed 168 people called yesterday for a hearing in his court on Monday morning.
The judge, Steven Taylor of District Court, gave no reason for his action, which came in the middle of jury selection. But it happened a day after the F.B.I. ordered a review of its files to determine whether evidence possibly implicating others in the bombing had been improperly withheld from defense attorneys.
Lawyers in the case declined to say whether they thought the hearing concerned a possible delay in the trial, citing the judge's order that they not discuss the case publicly.
Only Mr. Nichols and Timothy J. McVeigh, and an associate, Michael Fortier, were ever charged in the bombing, often called the nation's worst incident of domestic-based terrorism. Mr. McVeigh was convicted on federal charges and executed in 2001. Mr. Nichols was convicted of conspiracy in federal court in 1997 and sentenced to life in prison. Mr. Fortier, who signed a plea agreement and became a government witness, is serving 12 years in prison.
Mr. Nichols's state trial concerns the deaths of the 160 people who were not federal employees. He has offered to plead guilty in exchange for another life sentence that would rule out the death penalty. But the district attorney, Wes Lane, has rejected the offer.
The trial is being held in McAlester, Okla., about two hours' drive southeast of Oklahoma City, to find more impartial jurors. Jury selection began Feb. 23.
The number of conspirators has long been a subject of speculation, stoked largely by early F.B.I. accounts of others being sought, particularly a man some witnesses said they saw with Mr. McVeigh and called John Doe No. 2.
Federal officials have always held that no credible evidence ever emerged implicating others. But the F.B.I. review follows an article by The Associated Press last week saying that agents had both destroyed and failed to turn over evidence pointing to possible involvement by white supremacist bank robbers.
In addition, a former television reporter, Jayna Davis, has long maintained that she has uncovered ties between Mr. McVeigh and Mr. Nichols and Iraqi soldiers operating undercover in the United States. She has said she gave the information to the F.B.I. without notable results, calling the reaction a coverup.
David Cid, a retired F.B.I. agent who worked on the case and now serves on the board of the National Memorial Institute for the Prevention of Terrorism in Oklahoma City, called charges of a coverup absurd.
''What possible motive would we have to conceal a Middle Eastern link?'' he said in a telephone interview last week. ''That was our immediate first assumption anyway.''
