After Cory Jones, an amateur welterweight, finishes training at the Crunch gymnasium in Manhattan each day, he goes through a different workout at his home in Crown Heights in Brooklyn.
His four young children -- a girl, Akim, and boys Cory, Unique and Charles -- never tire of wrestling with him and climbing atop his 152-pound frame, ready to play.
The strange marks on Jones's stomach are inevitably points of curiosity to his children. Somewhere, lodged inside, are the remains of a bullet from a .357 Magnum.
''My kids, they play with my stomach a lot,'' Jones said Saturday, minutes after his loss in four rounds to Austin Trout of Las Cruces, N.M., in the Olympic box-offs at the Convention Center at Cleveland State University. Jones came up short of his goal of representing the United States this summer at the Athens Games.
''They say, 'Why is your navel pushed over, Daddy?' '' Jones said.
Although he will not have the chance to win a gold medal, Jones said he planned to turn professional, the route many defeated amateurs take when their path to Olympic stardom runs out.
Standing near a doorway in the arena after his defeat, the 25-year-old Jones lifted his red jersey to reveal a bump on his stomach the size of a small pack of gum. Instead of a navel, there is a six-inch scar dividing his body like a line of longitude. It is where doctors removed two other bullets.
The scars are a reminder of the night of Oct. 14, 2002, when two men approached him on a street in Albany and demanded his $2,000 chain necklace. Jones refused.
A gun fired, and three bullets landed in Jones's stomach. A fourth hit the webbing next to his left thumb; he had raised his hand to try to stop the attack.
''I think about it sometimes,'' Jones said. ''Should I have given my chain up? What if I wasn't there? I try not to let it get to me. God gave me a second chance.''
On Feb. 14, 2003, ailing from an infection in his small intestine related to the shooting, Jones had more surgery. That further sidetracked his career.
Jones said he began training only last month for the Olympic trials in mid-February in Tunica, Miss. ''Last year at this time, I was in a hospital,'' he said.
Jones advanced from the trials to the box-offs, a couple of steps short of a trip to Athens.
The favorites among the welterweights, Juan McPherson and Andre Berto, were suspended Thursday by the American Arbitration Association because of an incident at the trials in which Berto threw McPherson to the canvas. As a result, Jones and the remaining welterweights had to wait for the conclusion of a hearing to learn whether they would fight again. Jones's layoff lasted four days.
''He was peaking last week,'' said Johnny Woluewich, Jones's trainer, adding that Jones also had a bout with food poisoning Thursday. ''It took him out of his stride. I've been with him for 75 to 100 fights and I've never seen him back up.''
Jones and Trout were tied at 6 points apiece through the first round of the scheduled four rounds, but Trout seemed sharper. In the third round, Trout landed a right uppercut that knocked Jones's headgear askew. The referee had to stop the fight temporarily so Jones's corner could readjust it. Trout won a 24-15 decision.
''I was confident that I was scoring more points,'' said Trout, who will fight Vanes Martirosyan on Sunday to determine which 152-pounder will make the United States team. ''He caught me a couple of times, but not as clean. He's a good fighter.''
No boxer is guaranteed success as a pro, but Jones knows he has survived much already. ''I had to make my run for it,'' he said. ''I made it this far.''
BOXING
