SETON HALL 75, GEORGETOWN 48
Seton Hall point guard Andre Barrett was poked in his left eye Saturday, but he said it would not be a problem. He has had strep throat. That did not seem to be a problem, either. ''See how I did today?'' Barrett said, smiling.
Other than a little early foul trouble and the poke in the eye, Barrett's final home game at Seton Hall went flawlessly. The Pirates used staunch defense to blow out Georgetown, 75-48. At the end, 11,302 at Continental Arena chanted Barrett's name.
''That's something, as a kid, you dream about,'' said Barrett, a 5-foot-10 senior from the Bronx.
Despite playing only 27 minutes, more than nine below his average, Barrett scored 25 points for Seton Hall (19-7, 9-5 Big East). He also moved into seventh place on the Seton Hall career scoring list with a layup in the second half.
Barrett, who has 1,795 points, moved past Walter Dukes, who played for Seton Hall from 1950 to 1953. Barrett was also named Saturday to the Seton Hall All-Century Team, joining Dukes, Terry Dehere, Mark Bryant and Richie Regan.
And in a touching pregame ceremony, Barrett presented his No. 12 jersey to Seton Hall. Regan, who was a teammate of Dukes, had worn that number and it had been retired.
But Regan reactivated the number when Barrett enrolled in 2000. Regan died Dec. 24, 2002, and Barrett promised that he would give the number back to Regan's family when he was finished with it.
The Pirates took a 29-9 lead by hounding Georgetown (13-12, 4-10) into missing 17 of its first 18 shots. The Hoyas' point total was a season low, and the margin of defeat was their largest this season.
''I think they did a great job on us defensively in the first half; that's about as bad as we played offensively all year,'' Georgetown Coach Craig Esherick said.
John Allen was assigned to guard Gerald Riley, the Hoyas' top scorer. Riley missed all 11 of his field-goal attempts and finished with 8 points.
''He didn't attack like I thought he was going to,'' Allen said of Riley. ''He wasn't as aggressive as I'd seen on tape.''
Barrett was called for two fouls and played only 12 minutes in the first half. He made his first four shots in the second half. He flashed a smile after stripping the ball from Riley and scoring the basket that put him ahead of Dukes.
It appears likely that Barrett will make his first appearance in the N.C.A.A. tournament, although his teammate Kelly Whitney said ''it's something that's not legitimate yet.'' Whitney said the Pirates would worry about playing ''and leave the rest to the politicians.''
COLLEGE BASKETBALL
