Rangers right wing Aleksei Kovalev has had a reverse Midas touch this season: everything he has come in contact with has fallen apart, much like the Rangers' season.
On Saturday afternoon, 1 minute 2 seconds into overtime, Kovalev's stick hit Nashville's Steve Sullivan in the face hard enough to draw blood. That earned Kovalev a four-minute penalty for high-sticking, giving the Predators a four-on-three power play for the remainder of the five-minute overtime period.
And when Nashville defenseman Andrew Hutchinson blasted a one-timer past Rangers goaltender Jussi Markkanen at 3:50, the Predators came away with a 2-1 victory.
With 58 points in 64 games, the Rangers (23-29-7-5) trail the Islanders by 13 points for the eighth and final Eastern Conference playoff berth. The Rangers, who are tied for 11th place in the conference, have only 18 games remaining. The Rangers have not won two straight games since late December and have not won three straight games all season.
Nashville improved to 32-23-7-2, the first time the Predators have been nine games above .500 in their six-year history. Nashville is one of five teams within 5 points of one another in a battle for the final four Western Conference playoff berths.
''I wish I didn't have that penalty,'' said Kovalev, who has become the leading symbol for what will almost assuredly be the Rangers' seventh consecutive season without a playoff berth. ''I don't know why this keeps happening to me. But there's nothing I can do about it.''
Kovalev is aware that there is nothing he can do about whether he will be traded before the N.H.L.'s trading deadline, March 9. Kovalev, who said Saturday that he did not want to be traded, is the Rangers' biggest underachiever this season, with 13 goals in 64 games. He scored 37 goals last season.
''Who doesn't want to be in New York?'' Kovalev said. ''I definitely don't want to be in the position we are in now. I know people in New York are a little different; they don't want to wait until next year.
''But for me personally, hopefully I get another chance. Hopefully, I don't get traded and next year I can be more successful. But for me, it's out of my control.''
Kovalev was not the only Ranger who hurt the team's chances Saturday. The Rangers, the most penalized team in the league, took 11 penalties. Hutchinson's goal was Nashville's only power-play goal in 10 opportunities. Bobby Holik took three undisciplined penalties, but none cost the Rangers the way Kovalev's did.
Leetch a Trade Target
With the trading deadline approaching, the Philadelphia Flyers are believed to be one of several suitors for Rangers defenseman Brian Leetch. The Boston Bruins, the Toronto Maple Leafs and the Dallas Stars are also said to be interested in Leetch, who has been with the Rangers since the 1987-88 season.
Paul Holmgren, Philadelphia's assistant general manager, was at Nassau Coliseum on Thursday night and watched Leetch play well in the Rangers' 6-3 victory over the Islanders. But Philadelphia's general manager, Bob Clarke, told reporters in Boston on Saturday that he had not talked to Glen Sather, the Rangers' president and general manager.
''I don't know if they are going to trade him,'' Clarke said. ''My personal feelings on it are Leetch is like Mike Richter. He should retire as a Ranger. That is what I hope for. There is some tradition there. But if Glen decides to move him, I assume he'll call everybody and we'll talk.''
If the Rangers and Flyers do talk, the Rangers are sure to ask for Philadelphia's top prospect, Jeff Carter, the 11th overall pick in last summer's draft. But Clarke said: ''We're not going to trade our top prospects; we're not going to trade Carter. One player, even a player of Leetch's stature, certainly makes your team better, but he doesn't guarantee you win the Cup.''
HOCKEY
