BLINDSIDED
Lifting a Life Above Illness:
A Reluctant Memoir.
By Richard M. Cohen.
236 pp. New York:
HarperCollins Publishers. $23.95.
WHY me? -- that's the question nearly all sick people ask. What did I do to deserve this awful state, I who was (am) so full of potential, of hope, of will? Richard M. Cohen, a former television producer and the author of ''Blindsided,'' certainly has a reason to ask it. In his 20's he developed multiple sclerosis and has since had two battles with colon cancer. Today he can barely walk or see and has ''a gut I could not sell at a used car lot.'' This is not how it was supposed to be.
Cohen's story (some of which he has written about in this newspaper) starts with his family. His father, ''an old-fashioned doc,'' had multiple sclerosis. Because M.S. is not supposed to be a genetic disease, this fact did not shadow his son's early consciousness. He seemed fated for a normal life. He wanted to work in television news and started well. He got a job on a show called ''Issues and Answers,'' then joined PBS's ''America '73.'' These were the Watergate years. The public admired journalists, and journalists strove to be worthy of that admiration. Television news was a calling, not a job.
Then came the drop -- Cohen dropped a coffee pot,+while, appropriately enough, he was editing a documentary about disability. And the trip -- the same day, he tripped off a curb in front of the Library of Congress. His father diagnosed him over the telephone. In those pre-M.R.I. days, the only way to confirm M.S. was by testing spinal fluid. Cohen's came back positive. The neurologist calling with the confirmation offered ''neither a word of consolation nor a recommendation of treatment,'' Cohen remembers. ''Diagnose and adios,'' the old saw about neurologists goes. It proved true in Cohen's case. His father wasn't much more yielding. ''Rock-solid and unflappable,'' he advised his 25-year-old son to suck it up and keep going.
Cohen did. ''Admit illness. Control emotion. Limit knowledge'' became his mantra. The tough crowd in network news reinforced his natural tendency to be secretive. Robert MacNeil of PBS told him to tell no one. Cohen had the young man's hope that the experience of illness would be a crucible that refined him, that he would be great because the bar was even higher for him, but when he suggested this to the legendary news producer Fred Friendly, Friendly answered, '' 'I have seen your work. Frankly, you are not that good.' '' In 1979, Cohen cheated on his physical and got a job with ''The CBS Evening News With Walter Cronkite.'' Thus he learned the lesson: ''Deny, deny, deny.''
Cohen doesn't condemn his early self for its tactics. In fact, he remains something of an advocate for denial. Denial, he points out, allowed him to cover some of the great stories of his day: the rise of Solidarity in Poland, the war in Lebanon and another one in El Salvador. It allowed him to balance his ambitions and his fears. But progressive diseases worsen, and eventually Cohen realized he was too blind to see the guns being waved in his face. ''I could die to live a more fulfilling life,'' he thought, and hung up his flak jacket.
The true history of a person with a disease is never just about the disease. Parallel with his battle with M.S., Cohen was fighting the changes in network news. He had begun when giants like Friendly and Cronkite walked the airwaves. Now cost controls and happy talk were ruining what they had built. Cohen fought with his patron, Dan Rather, over how to protect the news from these forces, and, as people sick or well who fight with their patrons do, he wound up out of work.
At this point, Cohen's professional life mostly ends, and his affective life revives. One imagines, reading between the lines of ''Blindsided,'' that Cohen was something of a ladies' man during his network producer days. Then one day in 1982 he saw a young reporter named Meredith Vieira wrapped in a blanket lying on a couch and watching Looney Tunes in her office at a Chicago news station. It was, as he remembers, ''contempt at first sight.'' Why would a First Amendment martyr fall for a woman who would one day, as a co-host of ''The View,'' take up air time discussing whether she wears underwear?
Maybe it was self-preservation. Cohen was lucky to meet a television supermom when he did, because worse was in store for him. From the 80's to the present, he has suffered worsening M.S., cancer of the colon then a return of the cancer, undergone a temporary ileostomy, which was followed by horrific trouble with his bowels and a further advance of the M.S.
There were good things too. During these years he and Vieira had three children. This also has an element of melancholy. ''I will always regret that the kids never saw me as what I was,'' he writes, adding that ''there is no humiliation quite like hearing one of your kids suggest a change of clothing.'' But in the end, he acknowledges, ''parenthood suited me. No disease could touch that.''
TODAY Cohen cannot drive and he can barely see. Sometimes his sphincter fails him. He still goes out, but he falls all the time. No doubt his doctors, his neighbors, the people who see him on the street and think he is drunk, would rather he stayed home, but within him remains that miraculous strength all humans have. A ''diminished man,'' he writes, wakes up every day in his house, but ''a resilient man returns each night.'' The body is a wreck, but ''the fields of my mind are fertile.''
''Blindsided'' is a powerful memoir, tough in the way Cohen's old news bosses would have wanted it to be tough. It doesn't flinch and it doesn't whine. Its tone is more of self-horror than self-pity. Its incredulity matches Job's: ''Hast thou not poured me out as milk, and curdled me like cheese?''
At the same time, it is disjointed and repetitive, as sickness is by its nature. ''Blindsided'' could have used one more draft. And the book tends to approach themes over and over and bounce off them. As a lifelong television producer, Cohen seems never have learned that readers will follow where the writer wants to go. His style is declarative, with hardly a dependent clause. The communicating Cohen seems less at peace than Cohen the patient. That's perhaps the most serious flaw in the book. Coping with a sickness and writing well are similar. They're both a matter of trust.
D. T. Max, a contributing editor for The Paris Review, is at work on ''The Dark Eye,'' a cultural and scientific history of mad cow and other prion diseases.
