The United States and North Korea said Saturday that they were committed to deepening negotiations over the North's nuclear weapons program, ending four days of inconclusive discussions with an unusual show of conciliation.
Senior Bush administration officials and Kim Kye Kwan, North Korea's top negotiator at the six-nation talks here, said that while their main differences remained unresolved, the talks had proved useful. They pledged to meet in smaller working groups soon and hold another formal session before the end of June.
''We had substantive discussions about the nuclear issue with the goal being the denuclearization of the Korean peninsula,'' Mr. Kim said, in a rare news conference at the North Korean Embassy here. ''My delegation has adopted a businesslike attitude with the intention of resolving the issue peacefully through dialogue and negotiations.''
He accused the United States of maintaining a ''hostile policy'' and blamed it for the lack of a breakthrough. Still, his criticism was not as sharp as the message North Korea sent after sessions in April and August, when its negotiators said they planned to abandon talks and expand the nuclear program.
No understanding was reached on how to end North Korea's nuclear program. In some areas, including North Korea's new insistence on retaining a civilian nuclear power program and its firm denials that it has been developing fuel from enriched uranium, the gap appeared wider now than before the talks began.
But representatives of all six nations said the tone of the talks had changed, with many saying that the risk of a rapid deployment of nuclear arms by North Korea, or a pre-emptive attack by the United States, had receded, at least for now.
Also significant, American officials said, is that North Korea committed itself publicly to eventually dismantling its nuclear program, though under terms the American side has rejected.
''The D.P.R.K. did say that they will dismantle their nuclear program, though the devil is in the details,'' said a senior Bush administration official involved with the talks, using the initials of North Korea's formal name, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea.
Echoing the generally positive assessment by American officials here, Richard A. Boucher, the State Department spokesman, issued a statement in Washington welcoming the talks as ''serious discussions on the comprehensive denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.''
But another senior administration official in Washington, taking a tougher view, said, ''It's wrong to say there was much progress at all.'' He asserted that the Chinese were themselves upset that North Korea had not been more forthcoming.
This official said he doubted that the working group or groups mentioned at the end of the Beijing talks would ever get started in the absence of a broader and more explicit commitment by North Korea to end its nuclear program in a ''complete, irreversible, verifiable'' way.
Those mixed assessments reflected many obstacles, including last-minute demands by North Korea that upset China's plans for the six nations to issue a communiqué on goals for future talks. Those participants included South Korea, Japan and Russia.
Intensive discussions between officials from China, the host of the talks, and those from North Korea delayed the closing ceremony for several hours on Saturday. In the end, the parties downgraded their communiqué to a ''chairman's statement.'' All parties said the statement represented their views.
The Chinese foreign minister, Li Zhaoxing, closed the session saying all sides had agreed to work for a settlement. ''Differences, even serious differences, still exist,'' he said. ''The road is long and bumpy. But time is on the side of peace.''
The major advance in the talks came in the form of proposals by both North and South Korea to address what China referred to as the first stage of ending North Korea's nuclear program. The North offered to freeze its program in exchange for aid. South Korea offered to provide energy aid as long as the freeze was a steppingstone to dismantlement. China and Russia agreed to join South Korea in providing aid.
The United States and Japan said they would not give aid at that stage. But the United States said it ''understood and supported'' plans by others to offer energy assistance before the weapons program was completely ended. That represented a softening of the Bush administration's insistence that no aid should be offered before actual dismantlement.
The senior Bush administration official also said North Korea had shown flexibility early in the talks, leading some negotiators to think the North might be persuaded to accept the American formula of ''complete, verifiable, irreversible dismantlement'' of its nuclear program.
In the end, North Korea rejected the formula and declined to discuss details of its offer to dismantle its weapons program. But the administration officials said other parties had adopted the formula.
Complete, verifiable dismantlement ''is firmly on the agenda,'' the official said. ''It has been accepted by everyone except the D.P.R.K.''
On two other major issues, however, the United States and North Korea remained far apart.
The first involved American assertions that North Korea had pursued fissile material by enriching uranium, in addition to its better-known effort to use plutonium.
The United States says its assertions of a uranium program are based on solid intelligence and were bolstered by the confessions of a Pakistani scientist who admitted providing uranium enrichment-related technology to North Korea.
But the administration official said American negotiators did not present any evidence about an enriched uranium program at the talks, implying that it was not complete enough. ''Some of this is still unfolding, and going through analysis,'' the official said. ''Our own work is far from finished on this one.''
Mr. Kim steadfastly denied the North had any such program. He said North Korea has had a long history of cooperation with Pakistan, but that the relationship did not involve the transfer of uranium enrichment technology.
''We have had mutual dealings with Pakistan and earned hard currency by selling missiles to Pakistan,'' he said. ''However, we have no relationship with Pakistan regarding highly enriched uranium.''
