They crossed the heavily trafficked border and have since lived an anonymous existence in the densely populated city of high-rises, holding down jobs, raising children and hoping the authorities would never find them. But now, offered amnesty, they have a chance to become legal and never again fear deportation -- to the other side of the New England Thruway.
Amnesty proposals for illegal immigrants may be caught up in election-year politics in Washington, but amnesty for illegal subletters in Co-op City, the 15,372-unit complex in the northeast Bronx, has arrived.
The illegal subletters -- no one knows how many there are -- exist largely because of economics. Buyers of apartments in Co-op City must meet requirements involving income and other criteria, and they pay reduced prices for their apartments, currently $1,950 a room, or $11,700 for a six-room apartment. So when families move out, they often do so quietly, subletting illegally to relatives, friends or strangers, and sometimes turning a nice profit.
''We're giving them a chance to legitimize,'' Al Shapiro, president of Co-op City's board, said of this population.
For a two-month period that ends in mid-April, illegal residents may apply to buy their apartments from the current owners, allowing them to sidestep the long waiting list.
Afterwards, Co-op City will step up enforcement against illegal subletters, said Herb Freedman of Marion Scott Real Estate, which manages the complex.
According to Mr. Freedman, the amnesty plan had been in the works for several years, but was delayed by such issues as crumbling parking garages, a debate over whether the complex should go private and negotiations over a refinancing arrangement with the state.
In interviews, Co-op City residents said they doubted that too many people would come forward, explaining that many illegal subletters already knew that they were not eligible and would keep quiet. Other residents said they thought it unlikely that subletters would trust management's word or implicate the people they rented from.
''Someone does you a favor and now you're going to turn them in?'' said Alex Brown, 60, who has lived in Co-op City for 32 years.
In the first week of the amnesty, 18 people inquired about the plan anonymously, using names like Hope 132, Silent 420 and Casper 007. Three have submitted applications to buy their apartments. Management hopes that many more will follow before the deadline.
''They crossed into the wilds of the Bronx,'' Mr. Shapiro said, ''and they must be recognized.''
SETH KUGEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: CO-OP CITY
