Things can get heated in Washington Heights when the Yankees battle the Boston Red Sox, who feature Dominican superstars like the local favorite Manny Ramirez and the pitching ace Pedro Martínez. The neighborhood has long had a subversive streak, with a vocal Dominican-American minority forming a fifth column of Red Sox Nation deep in enemy territory.
The arrival of Dominican-American megastar Alex Rodriguez, however, may test their Red Sox loyalty. A-Rod has only tenuous Washington Heights connections -- he was born there, but moved to Florida as a preschooler -- but that may be enough. The Spanish-language newspaper El Diario declared: ''Washington Heights Waits for the Idol,'' described the neighborhood as ''Alex's Barrio,'' and predicted that the building where he lived will become a destination for baseball pilgrims.
Rodriguez, who will play third base for the Yanks, does put up the numbers that create pilgrims. He was the American League's most valuable player last year, and has led the league in homers each of the last three seasons. In interviews, many local Yankees fans claimed they had been devoted Rodriguez fans forever, even as he played out of the limelight for the struggling Texas Rangers.
But they are not all telling the truth, according to Andres Zorrilla, the owner of Audubon Flats Fixed, a tire-repair shop half a block from A-Rod's first home on West 183rd Street. ''Now that he has gone to the Yankees, his fame has expanded,'' Mr. Zorrilla said. ''Before, Manny Ramirez was much more frequently mentioned.''
You practically trip over Ramirez's high school classmates here, while people with connections to A-Rod are rare. ''He doesn't even remember living here too well,'' said Eduardo Gutierrez, a friend of the Rodriguez family.
Still, it is Rodriguez's time, and many have found reasons to love both him and his work ethic. ''People adore A-Rod because Manny has a very bad attitude,'' said Juan Carlos Ramirez, a former baseball player at George Washington High School, Ramirez's alma mater.
On Thursday, even Mayor Bloomberg got into the act, declaring Rodriguez the greatest economic development project ever to come out of Washington Heights.
Will Red Sox cap sightings become more rare? Tomás Peña King, who delivers cigarettes to local bodegas, is one Boston fan who insists he will not be swayed. But Raphael Alvarez, who owns the Alvarez Tax Preparation Center on Audubon Avenue, said: ''A-Rod is going to be part of New York. He's going to be part of us. All Dominicans are proud to have someone like him. He's the best of the best.''
SETH KUGEL
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: WASHINGTON HEIGHTS
