Strategists, independent analysts and House members of both parties say that after a decade out of power, Democrats are unlikely to reclaim control of the House in November.
Many Democrats now concede that their immediate goal is far less ambitious: to narrow the divide so they have a better chance of recapturing the House in 2006.
''Do I think we are going to take it back? No,'' said Representative Rahm Emanuel, Democrat of Illinois. ''But I think we are setting it up not to slide backward, but to move forward.''
Democrats said they were heartened that President Bush had found himself on the defensive recently, and predicted that the record deficit compiled under Republican control could play to their benefit. But Democrats and others cited significant factors working against them, including recruiting failures, fund-raising difficulties and redistricting.
One major reason Democrats are pessimistic about taking back the House can be found in Texas. In redrawing the boundaries of Congressional districts last year in favor of Republicans, the Texas Legislature built a fire wall against potential losses elsewhere in the country. The formerly Democratic-dominated House delegation from Texas is now evenly divided, with 16 members of each party, and Republicans say they hope to end up with a minimum of 20 seats. That number, they say, would better reflect the state's political bent.
The new lines have already persuaded one Texas Democrat to switch parties and created one district where Democrats are not even fielding a candidate. ''We've already picked up two seats and we haven't even had an election,'' observed Tom DeLay of Texas, the House majority leader, who was a main architect of the redistricting.
It is not just Texas that is vexing House Democrats in their quest for the majority. The party does not appear to be putting enough House districts in play to pick up the 12 seats now separating Democrats from the speaker's chair. Some top candidates are trailing their Republican opponents in financial resources. And the House Republican campaign organization is raising more money than its Democratic counterpart.
''I don't believe you can win back the House without candidates or money,'' said Representative Thomas M. Reynolds of New York, chairman of the Republican Congressional Campaign Committee. By his count, he said, 21 of the 40 Republicans he rates as most open to challenge do not yet have Democratic candidates running against them.
Still, Democrats see the political mood swinging their way. They cite a victory this month in a special election for a House seat vacated by a Republican in Kentucky, and they are upbeat about their chances in a special election to be held in South Dakota this summer.
Democratic House leaders say their ability to contend in those states demonstrates that they can compete in places carried by President Bush in 2000 if they have candidates who fit a community's political profile.
''If we continue to develop good candidates and the mood is right, we can win these districts,'' said Representative Robert T. Matsui of California, chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee.
And Democrats have not written Texas off. Five Democratic incumbents there have chosen to compete for seats in districts that now tilt against them. Two of them will square off against Republican incumbents.
''Texans are up to the fight,'' said Representative Martin Frost, a 25-year House veteran who is in a contest in the Dallas area against Representative Pete Sessions, an incumbent Republican. ''All of us are experienced, veteran officeholders who have run tough races over the years and who know what to do.''
Mr. Sessions, first elected in 1996, said he expected a hard-fought race with Mr. Frost, in which both men are talking about spending as much as $3 million. But, he said, he expects to win.
''There are a lot of people who just can't wait to have a chance to make sure this is the last time Martin runs a campaign for Congress,'' Mr. Sessions said.
Elsewhere in the country, Democrats have opportunities, particularly in Democrat-friendly districts in Arizona and Georgia where they thought they would win in 2002, a Colorado district their candidate barely lost that year, and districts in Washington and Louisiana where there are open seats.
But the party failed to find strong candidates to challenge potentially vulnerable Republicans in states like North Carolina, Florida, Nevada and Alabama, meaning that Democrats need to win almost all their targeted races to have any chance of turning out the Republicans.
''We have, we think, some excellent candidates in some of the districts we must win,'' said Representative Steny H. Hoyer of Maryland, the House Democratic whip, who is closely involved in the party's political operations. ''Do we have as many as we'd like? No. Have we raised as much money as we'd like? No. But do we have some very good candidates and are we working on getting more? The answer is emphatically yes.''
Democrats say they hope the excitement surrounding the presidential primaries will help them enlist capable candidates, but filing deadlines have passed in some states and are fast approaching in others.
And Republicans are not standing pat. They are going after Democrats in Republican territory in Utah and Kansas, taking aim at other incumbents, putting resources into open seats and getting behind their own threatened lawmakers. Party officials say they have a distinct financial advantage. Carl Forti, the spokesman for the House campaign committee, says that by his count 25 Republican challengers have raised more than $100,000, while only five Democratic challengers have exceeded that level.
Generating money has become much more difficult for members of Congress, particularly Democrats, since passage of campaign finance legislation in 2002. The new law bans political parties from collecting the large ''soft money'' contributions that made financing campaigns easier, and forces lawmakers and their parties to raise money in far smaller increments. Democrats were hit harder because they were more dependent on soft money.
As a result, House Republicans have maintained a decisive edge. Through January, their organization raised almost $77 million for this year's elections, while the Democratic organization raised about $30 million, according to PoliticalMoneyLine, which tracks campaign finance. The Republicans spent about $69.6 million and had almost $9.7 million on hand Jan. 31, while Democrats spent $24.4 million and had about $6.5 million on hand.
In the Senate, Democrats also remain underdogs in their effort to regain the majority, and geography is a chief reason there as well. Retirements have created vacancies in Democratic seats in five Southern states -- the Carolinas, Georgia, Florida and Louisiana -- and it is going to be difficult to defend them all successfully in a presidential election year, offsetting any gains Democrats can make elsewhere.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: CONGRESS
