THE hounds were eager, the horses on alert, the air chilly and sunny -- perfect for riding. Dressed in scarlet coats with blue velvet collars, the huntsman and masters conferred and made the call: too much ice was on the ground, and so there would be no fox hunting for the Rombout Hunt on this day.
The business of keeping a tradition alive -- especially one as elaborate and anachronistic as fox hunting -- takes both desire and will. There are rigid codes among fox hunters for dress and etiquette. There is a mock military hierarchy in the field of riders, and a lexicon that has been greedily harvested by everyday English.
But keeping a hunt club up and running also requires other things: land, and lots of it; the good graces of the people who own it; the skill of getting everyone to play together politely and, of course, money.
The sport came to America with the British. Gens. George Washington and Francis ''Swampfox'' Marion rode avidly to hounds. Fox hunting in the United States today is ''extremely active,'' according to Dennis Foster, executive director of the Masters of Fox Hounds Association, the sport's governing body, which is based in Millwood, Va.There are 177 hunt clubs in the United States and Canada, which require a pack of at least 30 to 40 hounds and 10,000- to 20,000-acre tracts of land, Mr. Foster said.
There are seven hunt clubs in the New York area. In contrast to larger and older hunt clubs, Rombout, which was founded in 1929 and is based in Clinton Corners, has a reputation of being, in the words of one member, Karen Belove of Rhinebeck, ''a down-to-earth hunt for people who work for a living.'' It has 25 riding members and about 75 social members who pay nominal fees.
''We're a little old country pack,'' said Vincent Tartaglia, the huntsman, whose job it is to hold the pack of hounds together, working it in and out of terrain where a fox might hide. The season runs from Aug. 1 to April 1.
The most difficult thing about keeping even a modest club running is not the continual massaging of the landowners nor the logistics of regularly galloping after a pack of hounds chasing a wild animal. The tough part, some maintain, is internal politics. Lindie N. Scorsone, president of the Windy Hollow Hunt in Port Jervis, said that the tricky part is ''soothing egos and getting people to work together.''
IN the last decade, Rombout has survived two brushes with extinction. The solution to its first crisis sowed the seeds of the second.
It started with I.B.M.'s financial woes in 1993, said Steve Solomon, co-master of Rombout. The club lost a number of members, several of whom worked for Big Blue. With a sudden deficit, Rombout's smaller membership, which paid dues ranging from $550 to $6,200 a year, could not cover the loss. In most clubs, Mr. Foster said, joint masters, senior officers of the club, usually pay more than members to make up deficits.
In Rombout's case even the masters could not make it right. A half-dozen members agreed to bail out the club if it established a board of trustees, giving them a vote equal to the masters'. The structure worked fine for years, Mr. Solomon said. Then in 2001, their huntsman of 23 years, the Glasgow-born Mr. Tartaglia, announced he was retiring and taking a job on a Caribbean island. The hunt for a new huntsman began and the board expected a say, members of the Rombout club said. The masters insisted that such a critical decision should be left to the experts. The trustees, pointing to the wording of the charter, disagreed. The votes deadlocked, the masters' choice for a huntsman was hired, and the trustees took the matter before New York State Supreme Court, which sided with the trustees, said Rombout members and Mr. Foster.
''They went to court, not to us,'' said Mr. Foster, who handles disputes within the sport. ''We don't recommend court because it's bad for fox hunting.''
The masters could not be reached for comment on the court case.
They mapped out new territory in Columbia County (which, according to the Masters of Fox Hounds Association, must not overlap with the land of any other hunt). They also secured the landowners' permission to use it, picked a new name -- Stone Valley -- and applied to the Masters of Fox Hounds Association for permission to form a new hunt, which it was granted in May 2001. They also hired away the new huntsman who had been hired in defiance of the board.
''It was the worst thing that could have happened to fox hunting,'' said Suzi Cannavino, who took the reins of Rombout in the wake of the schism. ''The hunt club was almost destroyed from within.''
Answering a call for help, Mr. Tartaglia came out of retirement and rejoined Rombout as huntsman. ''I had 23 years of my life in Rombout,'' he said. ''I wasn't about to see it go down the tubes.''
In 2002, on opening day in October, the biggest event of the season, Rombout members said, the Rombout Hunt arrived at Horton's Lake, where it had been holding the opening meet for 40 years, only to find that Stone Valley Hunt had set out from there an hour earlier. To show up uninvited and without permission on another hunt's registered territory, according to Mr. Foster, ''is an absolute violation of the rules'' and would lead to a hunt being declared ''unsanctioned'' a term that Mr. Foster said has been softened from its older version -- ''outlaw.'' Mr. Tartaglia described the action as ''in bad form.''
Eventually the two hunts melded together and had a good day. But word of Stone Valley's interloping reached the Masters of Fox Hounds Association, which polices the sport. As Mr. Tartaglia put it, Stone Valley was told to stop. Stone Valley was declared unsanctioned, Mr. Foster said.
One former member of the Stone Valley Hunt, Bob Smith, said the group has re-formed into the Stone Valley Hounds and Trail Riding Association, which is not a registered hunt club under the Masters of Fox Hounds Association jurisdiction.
Meanwhile, Mrs. Cannavino and Mr. Solomon are working to rebuild Rombout. ''We're still struggling,'' Mrs. Cannavino said. ''We had to cut the budget in half.'' She paid for a new tractor and a new truck for the hounds herself, she said.
''We've survived,'' Mr. Tartaglia said, ''but we had to draw in the purse strings a little bit.'' That has meant losing his full-time help and recruiting volunteers from the ranks of the members to help clear trails and build jumps. The care and maintenance of the hounds, he said, is never compromised.
Hunt clubs have different ways of making ends meet. Windy Hollow Hunt charges $1,200 per year for full membership, Ms. Scorsone said, making it one of the lowest dues structures of the seven hunt clubs in the New York area. Dues cover only about half of the $100,000 in annual operating costs. The rest comes from by fund-raisers. While Mrs. Cannavino declined to give exact operating costs, she said that dues are tiered and flexible, in the hope of attracting new people to the sport. ''We want to make the sport as available to as many people as possible,'' she said. ''We don't care if you have money or not.'' Annual fees range from $550 for juniors to $6,300 for families.
Mr. Solomon told the story of how he got into fox hunting 25 years ago. He was living in Briarcliff, taking riding lessons and riding through Sleepy Hollow one day when he met an elderly man who invited him to go fox hunting, with Rombout.
''They do that here?'' Mr. Solomon said. ''I thought that was jolly old England!''
That man recently died and left his red coat to Mr. Solomon. ''We're trying to keep the tradition,'' he said. Mr. Solomon says that the sport is neither growing nor shrinking in the New York area, but rather that it has hit a plateau. One thing has changed, though: the quarry. Mrs. Cannavino says her hounds chase more coyotes than foxes.
IN BUSINESS
