They both consider themselves moderate Democrats. They both serve in the Senate. They both started out as lawyers. They both answer to the name John.
And now the race between John Edwards and John Kerry is presenting voters across the country with a quandary as they try to choose between these leading Democrats in next week's electoral contests here and in nine other states.
Finding few significant policy differences between the candidates, voters say they are having to rely on the same thing politicians sometimes turn to in making a decision: their instincts and hunches.
In dozens of interviews here, the vast majority of these voters said they would vote according to intangibles like personality and likability, while still giving extra points to the candidate they think will run the best race against President Bush. In essence, they say, their decision comes down to style, rather than substance. And therein lies an unusual twist in this contest, as Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards try to distinguish themselves from each other on issues like health care and jobs.
''It's mostly about an impression, a feeling that you get from the two -- since the platforms don't set them apart too much,'' said Suellen Katz, a lifelong Democrat from Roswell, Ga. ''I'll be voting for Kerry, since he's ahead and seems bright and articulate and I think I'll like what he'll do. But Edwards wouldn't be a problem. He seems great too.''
For voters, experience was another factor that played into their decisions, especially at such a complicated moment in world history.
Arman Deganian, a 26-year-old lawyer, said: ''Edwards has the charisma and that's an advantage. But I just don't think he has the weight to be sparring with Chirac or Putin.''
Indeed, though this year a number of candidates sought to portray their outsider status as an advantage, many voters say they are looking for a Washington ''insider.''
''John Kerry is seasoned, noncontroversial, a veteran, and I think he can beat Bush,'' said Cynthia Taratoot, who works in public relations here. ''I like John Edwards. He's articulate and has that Southern charm, but he's not seasoned enough, now.''
Winston King, a furniture maker in Atlanta, agrees: ''It's a really tough decision, but I think John Kerry is what the country needs right now. John Edwards is a populist and I admire that -- he's a breath of fresh air. But I think he's a bit green and still needs to build bridges.''
Mr. Edwards does get points in the South for, voters say, being the more likable and the more personable of the two, and far better at connecting with ordinary people.
But almost all said that Mr. Kerry's greater government experience and his military service would outweigh personality considerations. Although some considered Mr. Kerry a bit uninspiring, they regarded him as reliable and trustworthy.
Regardless of whom they choose, and why, voters say it is simply nice to have a choice this year. A number said they felt more inspired by both Mr. Kerry and Mr. Edwards than they did by Al Gore in 2000.
''They've both become much more presidential in the course of the campaign, and I think they're both terrific candidates now,'' said Rennie James, a business consultant who said he was likely to vote for Mr. Edwards.
Mr. James said it was important to keep a Southerner in the running, and to keep the primaries competitive. ''If it's a slam dunk for Kerry he may not bring all sides to the convention,'' he said.
A number of voters said they would watch debates between the candidates this weekend in hopes of making a choice.
''I haven't decided and I think I'd be O.K. with either,'' said Winnie Hulme, a small-business owner from Atlanta ''I have some sense of the differences in their background, experience and personality, but I need to hear more about their ideas.''
But most still said they would go with their instincts.
''Edwards has a boyish charm that's very appealing,'' said Sandra Johnson, who was baby-sitting her niece in a mall. ''I think he can relate to ordinary people, so I'm with him.''
But Bryan Paden, 37, a police officer, had a very different feel.
''It's about my sense of the candidate as a person,'' Mr. Paden said. ''At first I thought John Edwards had the 'look' of a president. But lately I've just gotten a good feel about John Kerry. He seems approachable, a good listener, someone I can trust.''
Come Tuesday, either Ms. Johnson's or Mr. Paden's instincts will prevail at the polls, possibly allowing one candidate named John to all but clinch the Democratic nomination. Then that candidate may begin the search for someone who will be a compatible running mate.
Based on what voters here are saying, the advertisement could read like this: Wanted. Vice-presidential candidate. Moderate Democrat preferred. Senate experience helpful. Legal background not discouraged. To apply, call John.
THE 2004 CAMPAIGN: THE VOTERS
