For those, like me, who have not seen or heard the 21-year-old Chinese pianist Lang Lang live, here is an experiment. Mr. Lang has received no end of publicity, both praise and damnation, as much, it would seem, for his flamboyant stage manner as for his pianistic prowess. But a new Deutsche Grammophon release of his Carnegie Hall recital debut last November affords listeners an opportunity to try to sort out the music-making from the hype and the antics. The two-CD set is due on Tuesday.
For me, it comes as a surprise. Disliking demonstrative, not to say exhibitionistic, performance styles, I was prepared to find much here to regret. And there is some. In the tour de force ''Reminiscences of 'Don Juan' '' by Liszt, Mr. Lang lets his lavish technical gifts carry him to absurd levels of speed and volume. Of drama there is plenty, but it has less to do with Liszt's work, or the Mozart opera on which it is based, than with Mr. Lang's mad dash to Olympian heights.
But there is also much that is deeply musical and touching. The acid test for me is Schubert's ''Wanderer'' Fantasy. Though I have always wanted to love the piece as much as the best of Schubert's piano sonatas, it can often seem the one time that Schubert succumbed to easy, empty virtuosity. Yet what impresses most in Mr. Lang's performance, virtuosic as it is, is the soulful lyricism of the quieter moments.
Haydn's playful C major Sonata (Hob. XVI:50) more or less invites showmanship, and Mr. Lang predictably indulges more rather than less. He follows Haydn's mercurial wit at every turn, adding a few apt twists of his own.
In addition to short effusions by Schumann and Liszt, Mr. Lang also offers attractive nods to his heritage: Tan Dun's ''Eight Memories in Watercolor'' and a folkish romp with his father, Guo-ren Lang, a virtuoso on the erhu (the Chinese two-string fiddle), ''Competition of the Two Horses.''
Mr. Lang is to perform Beethoven's Fourth Piano Concerto with Christoph Eschenbach and the Philadelphia Orchestra, beginning on Thursday at the Kimmel Center in Philadelphia and on March 9 at Carnegie Hall. At the moment, I'm kindly disposed toward Mr. Lang, a stance that I hope will survive the experience of finally encountering him and his showboating in the flesh.
JAMES R. OESTREICH
MUSIC: HIGH NOTES
