A former transit worker was arrested yesterday and charged in the fatal shootings of two of his supervisors on Friday morning at a railyard in Brooklyn.
Darryl Dinkins, 39, of Apt. 2F, 1720 Bedford Avenue in Crown Heights, was charged with murder. He made an unsuccessful suicide attempt while in police custody.
Mr. Dinkins, a train car cleaner, was a subject of disciplinary reports written by each of the victims and was fired in October after working for New York City Transit for four years. He quickly became the focus of the investigation after the bodies of the victims, Luigi Sedita of Staten Island and Clives Patterson of Far Rockaway, were found early Friday morning by a security guard. Each had been shot twice, and they lay face down in a trailer on the grounds of the railyard, which is patrolled by security guards and surrounded by gates topped with barbed wire.
A transit official said reports of animosity between Mr. Dinkins and his managers date to July, when Mr. Sedita filed a written disciplinary report against Mr. Dinkins, who was his subordinate.
On Sept. 12, Mr. Sedita found Mr. Dinkins playing dominoes during a shift and ordered him back to work, the transit official said. Mr. Dinkins, he said, refused and later that morning, blocked Mr. Sedita's vehicle, called him names and spit at him. Mr. Sedita filed a police complaint, the transit official said, and recommended that Mr. Dinkins be fired.
Mr. Dinkins was suspended on Sept. 22. At a hearing on Oct. 15, Mr. Sedita testified that he and Mr. Dinkins disliked each other. Mr. Dinkins, who is black, said that his dispute with his supervisor, who is white, was based on racial discrimination. A hearing officer found that there were grounds to dismiss Mr. Dinkins, and he was fired on Oct. 24, the transit official said. Mr. Patterson had also written disciplinary reports against Mr. Dinkins, according to the official.
The police questioned about 50 overnight workers on Friday morning and by midday Friday had narrowed their investigation to focus on Mr. Dinkins. Detectives at one point said they expected to extract a quick confession, but the questioning continued into Friday evening, with the police still unwilling to characterize Mr. Dinkins as a suspect.
Mr. Dinkins was placed under arrest early yesterday and held in a cell at the 60th Precinct station house in Coney Island, the police said. He tried to hang himself with his shirt, but a police officer intervened, and Mr. Dinkins was taken to Coney Island Hospital for a psychiatric evaluation, the police said.
Mr. Dinkins was said to be in good condition, and the cable television station New York 1 broadcast footage of him walking to the ambulance, escorted by police officers
Calls to Mr. Dinkins' relatives were not immediately returned. A police officer assigned outside his apartment said that no one was home and stopped a reporter from knocking on the door. Neighbors on his floor would not discuss Mr. Dinkins.
