FOR many a stage director, an engagement at the Metropolitan Opera might represent the culmination of a long career. For Marthe Keller, her production of Mozart's ''Don Giovanni,'' which opens at the Met tomorrow, is an early, if major, step in a new direction.
But little about Ms. Keller's stage career of more than five decades has been conventional. Having segued smoothly from ballet and modeling to classic and modern theater (in German, French and English), she appeared in European art-house films like ''The Devil by the Tail'' and ''Dark Eyes,'' and in Hollywood crowd pleasers like ''Marathon Man'' and ''Black Sunday.''
New Yorkers last saw her in 2001, when she earned a Tony nomination playing Madame Bertholt (the Marlene Dietrich role) in ''Judgment at Nuremberg.'' Unlike many actresses of her generation, Ms. Keller, 59, still works steadily. She recently completed three movies, including ''Par Amour,'' a television film for which she won the best actress award at the 2003 Biarritz International Festival of Audiovisual Programming.
''It's a bit strange, this balance of going deeply to the roots of theater and then -- olé, olé! -- Hollywood, which is not really my thing,'' Ms. Keller said a few days before beginning rehearsals at the Met last month. ''But my life was always a bit of everything.''
Sitting on a sofa in the Met press lounge, she showed why the big screen loves her. Despite her lived-in pink turtleneck, khaki cargo pants and lack of makeup, she exuded a quiet glamour, an effortless charm.
Her operatic ventures of recent years grew out of an unusual sideline she took up two decades ago. In the early 1980's, while she was appearing in Hugo von Hofmannsthal's drama ''Jedermann'' (''Everyman'') at the Salzburg Festival, Seiji Ozawa invited her to perform the spoken lead role in Arthur Honegger's oratorio ''Jeanne d'Arc au Bûcher'' (''Joan of Arc at the Stake'') with the Boston Symphony Orchestra. Since 1984, she has practically owned this part, performing it dozens of times with orchestras around the world and recording it for Deutsche Grammophon.
Ms. Keller's innate musicality and expressive voice soon made her the classical music world's speaker of choice, adding Stravinsky's ''Perséphone'' and Mendelssohn's ''Midsummer Night's Dream'' to her repertory and presenting recital programs of music for speaking voice and piano. In 1994, she performed ''Cassandre'' -- a two-hour monodrama in pitched speech-song, composed for her by Michael Jarrell -- in Paris and Geneva.
''Like everything in my life, all of this was an accident,'' the Swiss-born Ms. Keller said. ''As a child in Basel I was studying ballet, and when I was 16 a ski accident ended that, so I became an actress. In May 1968 I happened to be in Paris and couldn't get back to my job at the Schiller Theater in Berlin because of the anti-Gaullist general strike, so I became a film actress. Then John Schlesinger saw me in a play in Paris, and I ended up in Hollywood for years.''
And it was happenstance that led Ms. Keller to opera. Aware of her musical leanings, the director of the Opéra Nationale du Rhin in Strasbourg asked her to direct Francis Poulenc's ''Dialogues of the Carmelites.'' Though initially hesitant to tackle a work so specifically focused on the distant French Revolution and the Roman Catholic Church (which, as a lapsed Catholic, she finds uncongenial), Ms. Keller was ultimately seized by the piece's resonance for our time.
Her wrenching minimalist production of ''Carmelites'' won the French critics' award for best opera production of 1999 and has been released on DVD by Arthaus Musik. She was soon deluged with directing offers, mostly for standard repertory operas, which interested her less. Her busy stage and film career, and the money it brought, allowed the luxury of turning them down.
Shortly after Sept. 11, 2001, Plácido Domingo, tenor and impresario, offered Ms. Keller a new production of ''Lucia di Lammermoor'' at the Washington Opera, and she accepted.
''I wanted to escape the whole reality of life,'' she said. ''So I said: 'Let's go to Donizetti from this terrorist world. For a year, I'll be protected by music.' ''
Ms. Keller's ''Lucia'' production, seen in a later incarnation at the Los Angeles Opera last November, looked escapist enough. Lush pre-Raphaelite silhouettes populated a moody gothic world of haze, rain and drifting leaves, while the ambient sounds of tides, storms and gulls lent scene changes a cinematic fluidity. A dancer's visceral response to Donizetti's fluid bel canto style embodied the music's plaintive lilt. Yet the clear, detailed character work exposed violence of another kind, as Lucia was beaten down by everyone she loved and trusted, and was allowed by Ms. Keller to be angry about it.
Singular results are often achieved by singular methods, and Ms. Keller's rehearsal technique smacks more of the avant-garde Berliner Ensemble, with which she worked in the 1960's than of, say, the august Deutsche Oper Berlin.
''At my first rehearsal of 'Carmelites,' I knew that the singers playing Blanche, the Marquis and the Chevalier had all done these parts before but had never worked together,'' she said. ''So I said, 'Let's do the first scene, and you do exactly what you did in the other productions.' Of course, Blanche didn't know where this tenor would enter from, so she looked left, but he came from the right. That's what you do in life. It's beautiful.''
Such striving for spontaneity may work in controlled circumstances. But it may not be as easily achieved in today's international opera world, where star singers often jet to and fro, plugging their freeze-dried interpretations into standard repertory roles during tight rehearsal periods.
Unlike some of her colleagues, the soprano Elizabeth Futral, the Washington Opera's Lucia, relished Ms. Keller's style. ''One day, while rehearsing the mad scene, Marthe turned off the lights and told me, 'Do this for yourself, not us,' '' Ms. Futral said. ''Suddenly I wasn't performing or trying to please someone, but being Lucia. With Marthe, it's not necessarily as easy a process, but it's ultimately more freeing, more exciting.''
Ms. Keller understands the problems inherent in her approach. ''You rarely see singers do surprising things onstage, as actors more often do,'' she said. ''I'm not sure they're encouraged to, because the same opera may have a different cast every two months. But I prefer haute couteur, not this prêt-à-porter.''
Yet Ms. Keller's ''Don Giovanni'' will not be radical.
''Just because I'm European, I don't have to be a 'concept' director,'' she said. ''I'm bored with watching people urinate onstage. They want to shock? Nothing can shock me more than the evening news.
''To do 'Giovanni' in a pizzeria or a phone booth would work only until we see the Commendatore in Act II,'' she added, referring to the character who returns from the grave to avenge his murder. ''Then we've gotten away from realism.''
Ms. Keller has therefore set her ''Giovanni'' in freely adapted 18th-century style, and she will observe the opera's classical unities of time, place and action. Michael Yeargan's sets will change fluidly, and Jean Kalman's lighting will, as Ms. Keller puts it, ''create something sensual and southern, and emphasize the yin and yang of the piece -- night and day, feminine and masculine, tragedy and comedy.''
Unlike Ms. Keller's first two directing projects, ''Don Giovanni'' has a male protagonist, and a controversial one.
''I see him, and the piece, through the women's eyes,'' she said. ''I've seen so many productions where the women were victims. The thing I want to bring across is that Giovanni is completely contagious. We know how bad he is, but we know how wonderful he is, too. Everybody becomes more alive through his presence. You get drunk from him, and you know it's bad, and the next day you're sorry. But what is life without wine?
''We women don't want the sex only. That's boring, always the same. But the beginning, the mystery! Giovanni does not only seduce, but he desires, and that desire makes him seductive. Then, once he gets the woman, it's very fast, very bad, very ugly. And it's finished. For a personality like Giovanni, once you possess what you desired, you don't desire anymore. He's like a drug addict. Now he needs something stronger. Now he needs death.''
Like the philosophy student she once was, Ms. Keller has done her homework, reading commentaries on ''Don Giovanni'' by authors including Hoffmann, Kierkegaard, Shaw, Pushkin and Molière in preparation for her assignment. Yet all her research has firmly convinced her that the piece needs a light directorial hand.
''The best production of 'Giovanni' I ever saw was a semistaged one in Israel,'' she said. ''I would love to do something which is very difficult, to have simplicity. We don't need any special effects. The special effect, to me, is Mozart.''
Don Giovanni  Metropolitan Opera, Lincoln Center.  Opens tomorrow at 7:30 p.m.
MUSIC Cori Ellison is the dramaturg at the New York City Opera.
