The grasslands surrounding Harare, the capital, are blessed with rich soil, good drainage and a temperate climate that comes from sitting a half mile above sea level. Amon Zimbudzana raises corn on four acres of it.
Yet on a recent morning, he walked the mile from his thatched hut to a clearing in the bush here to collect sacks of free corn for his family from international relief workers. Mr. Zimbudzana is destitute -- so destitute that the family celebrated the New Year with a 20-cent pack of Zimbabwean Kool Aid; so destitute that two children are unable to attend school for lack of the $6 tuition; so destitute that he cannot buy food to tide his family over until his own harvest, in April.
Soon after the harvest, he will be destitute again. He expects to harvest about 100 pounds of corn, enough to last about two weeks.
''This is prime farmland,'' one relief worker said as Mr. Zimbudzana and 900 others waited to collect their sacks. ''If people are suffering here, imagine what it must be like in other parts of the country.''
One need not imagine. As January ended, the United Nations and other relief agencies here quietly raised their estimate of Zimbabwe's ''food insecure'' population -- essentially, those who have no ready access to a bare-bones daily diet -- from nearly half its 11.6 million citizens to two-thirds.
No other nation in Africa has such a high proportion of hungry citizens, the officials say. It is one more testament to the three years of economic and social disintegration here.
Zimbabwe's farm output -- and in particular, its harvest of corn, the core of every diet -- is plummeting. Last year's April harvest totaled 900,000 tons, nearly a million tons short of what was needed. This year, crippled by inflation and seed shortages, farmers planted barely three-fourths of the corn sown in 2003.
The Famine Early Warning System, an American-financed hunger watchdog, said in mid-February that recent heavier rains could erase some of that deficit. But even the most sanguine harvest forecasts leave Zimbabwe 40 percent short of its needs.
''The harvest is causing us great concern,'' said Makena Walker, a spokeswoman for the United Nations World Food Program in Harare. ''The rains have been very patchy,'' she added, and some of the areas that are worst off are those that produce the food.
Two years of drought are partly to blame for the food shortages. Most experts say, however, that more responsibility rests with President Robert Mugabe's government, whose seizure of commercial farms in recent years has destroyed large-scale agriculture, sent foreign investors fleeing and caused economic panic.
The resulting hyperinflation, pegged lately at 620 percent, has savaged family food budgets. One unpublished survey by relief organizations found that 9 in 10 urban households now survive on the equivalent of less than a dollar per person per day.
The effect is not the kind of famine that Sudan and Ethiopia suffered in the 1980's. Rather, Zimbabweans are slowly wasting away from chronic hunger and the diseases that feed on it.
Half the children under age 5 suffer from chronic malnutrition, the United Nations Children's Fund says, double the percentage of just five years ago. One in four children is stunted. At least 1 woman in 10 is malnourished.
Zimbabwe's AIDS pandemic -- at least one in four people is H.I.V.-positive -- works in synergy with such deprivation, for the weak and underfed are often the first to fall ill. In interviews in Harare and elsewhere, health experts said that as many as 8 in 10 malnourished children brought to clinics and hospitals for emergency nutritional treatment were H.I.V.-positive.
''Normally,'' said one expert, ''if you're treating kids under 5 with a therapeutic feeding program for malnutrition, your mortality is less than 5 percent. In theory, they should walk away with their parents after a couple of weeks. Instead, we're getting mortality rates between 20 and 30 percent.''
The need is evident in Marondera, with about 4,100 people, where Mr. Zimbudzana lives, and its surrounding district 60 miles southeast of Harare. By Zimbabwean standards it is relatively prosperous: fewer than one in three is officially classified as scrambling for the next meal.
But by 10 a.m. on a Thursday morning in January, people were streaming to the corn-distribution center, knots of donkey carts and barefoot pedestrians following a yellow dirt road through the scrub to a grassy clearing where hundreds already patiently waited.
The reward for most, this month, was 10 kilograms -- 22 pounds -- per person of ground corn, to be boiled with water and a few vegetables to make sadza, the national staple. The World Food Program had halved that allotment for December, citing a slowdown in donations from governments apparently wary of appearing to assist Zimbabwe's government. The rations of ground nuts and vegetable oil the needy once also received have been suspended for lack of stocks. The neediest of all get an extra dollop of high-protein corn and soy flour. Mr. Zimbudzana and his wife, Gertrude Chokurongwera, were among them.
Mr. Zimbudzana is unemployed -- hobbled, he says, by a slow-moving prostate cancer that he is too poor to treat. He and his wife nevertheless have taken in four children, two from a relative's broken marriage; two orphaned by a mother's AIDS.
They live in three tiny huts next to his cornfields and a handful of peach trees, surviving on donations from World Vision and the World Food Program, the few bottlefish he catches in a nearby stream and whatever they can earn from begging and selling possessions.
''Sometimes,'' Ms. Chokurongwera said, ''we sell our clothes.'' Sometimes neighbors give the family food, Mr. Zimbudzana said, but not often. ''We're all the same,'' he said during a chat in the hut that serves as the family kitchen. ''There's no food.''
The last two harvests, like the forthcoming one, were tiny. Drought was one problem, but Mr. Zimbudzana is also too poor to buy fertilizer, which has skyrocketed in price as the country's ability to buy raw materials for farming has imploded. He tills his plot with a hoe.
The daily diet for the household is sadza in the morning and again in the evening, mixed occasionally with some okra or one of the 16 scrawny chickens he has raised. There is tea in good times, but no sugar, and there is no cow, so no milk.
Ms. Chokurongwera said the family would be in dire straits without the relief agencies. ''Now, at least, the children's health is improving because of the corn-soya blend.'' she said. ''They were so lean before. Even my husband and myself are gaining some weight now.''
Mr. Mugabe's government blames a conspiracy of what he calls racist Western governments for Zimbabwe's food woes. Yet today, all that separates this nation from starvation is the donated corn, sorghum and high-protein soy flour, 80 percent of it from Europe and the United States, funneled through the United Nations and global charities. It is not enough.
World Food Program officials say their workers and global charities will be able to feed only about 5.5 million Zimbabweans until the harvest comes in. That is 2 million fewer than the number in need.
It was disclosed recently that Zimbabwe, which had restricted those aid programs to the governing party's rural strongholds, was holding more than 300,000 tons of grain. Most of it had been seized from farmers trying to sell it on the black market because government-set prices were too low to recover their costs.
Under international pressure, officials said they would release some of it to address hunger in cities.
