ADOPTING the first element of County Executive Thomas R. Suozzi's plan to consolidate operations and shed unneeded county-owned property, the Nassau Legislature last week unanimously approved a $140 million plan to bring county social services that are currently scattered across five different locations under one roof in a leased building in Uniondale.
The plan, involving a 17-year lease for roughly $8 million a year, is also the first big piece of county business accomplished by the Suozzi administration since it came under a cloud three months ago when accusations of fiscal mismanagement and, later, sexual abuse were leveled against one of Mr. Suozzi's former top deputies.
To win unanimous approval for the plan, which also includes a $12.9 million bond issue to pay for initial costs connected to the relocation, the Suozzi administration negotiated long and hard with Democratic and Republican legislators.
''There was a fair amount of give and take, and up until now that's been very unusual with this administration,'' said Peter J. Schmitt, the Legislature's Republican minority leader. ''But we made clear that we were not going to throw our support behind this unless our concerns were addressed.''
Although the Democrats, who hold a 10-to-9 majority on the Legislature, could have provided enough votes to approve the lease, Mr. Suozzi needed Republican votes to secure the bond issue, which required a minimum of 13 votes to pass.
The Republicans asked and the administration agreed to make the lease for the two-story, white, mirror-windowed building at 60 Charles Lindbergh Boulevard conditional on building and zoning approval from the Town of Hempstead. Republicans also asked for and received written verification that much of the rent for the building would be eligible for state or federal reimbursement.
Mr. Suozzi also reduced the amount of the bond issue from the $14.9 million he originally requested. The money is to be used to pay for new office furniture, a new parking lot, the cost of relocating 1,600 county workers, and other construction and design costs.
The fact that Mr. Suozzi sought approval for just the social services lease and not for a real estate consolidation plan that covered all sectors of county government was also a concession to the Legislature. He agreed to scale back his original, broader goal when it became clear that even Democrats would rather review the plan one piece at a time.
''The Democrats all felt that each piece of the puzzle was in and of itself going to engender interest and in some cases total disagreement,'' said Judy Jacobs, the Legislature's Democratic leader. Mr. Suozzi said in an interview that he believed the social services consolidation won unanimous support ''because the strength of logic for it is very persuasive.'' Appearing before the Legislature last week, he stressed that the social services buildings are some of the county's shabbiest. Repairing the main social services building, at 101 County Seat Drive in Garden City, just to correct building and safety code violations would cost more than $40 million, he said.
Consolidating eight departments into one building would reduce maintenance, security and operational costs, he said. The departments include social services, drug and alcohol, health, office of the physically challenged, mental health, senior citizens, veterans' services and the youth board. They are now in leased and county-owned buildings in Garden City, Plainview and Hempstead.
Eric C. Naughton, director of the Office of Legislative Budget Review, said that even with savings from canceled leases at other buildings and from lower utility, maintenance and security costs, the county will still need an extra $1.4 million to $1.8 million annually to pay for the lease. But he told legislators that the lease was a good idea, particularly since repairing the current buildings would cost the county much more.
Under the lease, the county will pay $24.57 per square foot in base rent, which Mr. Naughton noted was below Long Island's average market rent of $27.01 per square foot. The building's main tenant, MCI Worldcom, vacated last year; the owner, the Reckson Operating Partnership, has said it will arrange for the relocation of the other tenants.
Legislators and county workers said they feared that the 217,226 square feet in the new building would be insufficient, since the eight departments now occupy 364,339 square feet. But Mr. Suozzi assured them that there would be enough space to accommodate all workers.
Mr. Suozzi plans to move the administrative offices of the departments into the second floor of the new building this summer and then move the client intake services into the first floor by the end of the year.
Once the move is complete, Mr. Suozzi will be able to place some prime county-owned real estate on the market. Officials in his office estimated that the county could get $20 million to $30 million for the 20 acres in Garden City where the current social services building sits.
Legislators on both sides of the aisle predicted, though, that the social services consolidation was likely to be the least controversial part of Mr. Suozzi's overall facilities plan, which he hopes to complete in 2007. He also plans to consolidate and move public safety operations into a county-owned warehouse in New Cassel, a move that has already been heavily criticized by police union officials, and to expand the county's main government building in Garden City and build a parking garage to accommodate additional workers brought to the area.
Mr. Suozzi will need zoning approvals from the Village of Garden City and other municipalities to complete much of the future work, but Garden City residents have already strongly opposed his plan to sell the social services property for a townhouse-style development.
