ALICIA KEYS -- Her hit ''You Don't Know My Name'' is a glimmering slow jam, plushly upholstered by the producer Kanye West. Now the same song is also an underground favorite, thanks to a lovely remix that matches her voice to a slightly out-of-tune reggae groove. The original sounded old-fashioned, but the reggae version sounds positively ancient, like some lost classic salvaged from a dusty Kingston record shop. The remix hasn't been officially released, but some radio stations (including Hot 97, WQHT-FM in New York) are already playing it, and bootleg vinyl singles are percolating through D.J.-friendly stores and Web sites.
THE BEATLES -- A few months ago, the emerging hip-hop producer Danger Mouse remixed Jay-Z's ''Black Album'' using beats made from samples of ''The Beatles,'' better known as ''The White Album.'' The result was an impressive experiment, ''The Grey Album,'' followed shortly by a flurry of cease-and-desist orders, which in turn inspired a minirebellion: a Web site, www.greytuesday.com, called for a day of ''coordinated civil disobedience'' -- everyone downloading at once. But another, less well-known hip-hop tribute to ''The White Album'' is even stranger and more inspired. Ghostface Killah's ''My Guitar'' is a left-field hip-hop track based on the jazz guitarist Jimmy Ponder's version of ''While My Guitar Gently Weeps.'' (Visit www  .wutangcorp.com to download a preview.) Ghostface delivers manic rhymes about drug dealing, then switches to an absurd falsetto for the chorus: ''Don't be stupid/ Don't make me use it/ 'Cause you can't sell here anymore.'' It's hilarious, except that, as always, he sounds as if he is about to cry.
MINDY SMITH -- Her excellent debut album, ''One Moment More'' (Vanguard/Welk), begins with a song called ''Come to Jesus,'' and the title is meant as neither a provocation nor a joke. ''Come to Jesus and let him hold you in his arms,'' she pleads, but this is a different kind of evangelism -- the advice is directed at herself. Ms. Smith is a singer-songwriter in love with stillness, and her voice resists the urgent tug of the lyrics. When she sighs, ''I need a hurricane to empty out this place,'' the notes just hang in midair. The album ends with a brave version of ''Jolene'': brave not just because Ms. Smith finds room to play with the vocal line, but because she does it with Dolly Parton right alongside her, singing backup.
JACKI-O -- This Miami rapper had a breakthrough single with ''Nookie,'' a smooth, swaggering tribute to, um, herself, with a beat that echoed the 1983 club classic ''White Horse.'' (Visit www.ifilm.com to watch the video online.) Her latest, ''Slow Down,'' is circulating on hip-hop mixtapes, and it's even better. Over a devastating Timbaland track, she calmly rewrites other rappers' catch phrases and slyly sidesteps radio censors: ''Jacki-O, a gift not a curse/ Think I'm an 'itch now? Well, the rash gets worse.'' Her debut album, ''Poe Little Rich Girl'' (Poe Boy/Warner), is due out on March 9; could it all be this good?
ELECTRELANE -- The second album by this all-female British band is ''The Power Out'' (Too Pure/Beggars), an indie-rock triumph that runs on restlessness. There are lyrics in four different languages, and even the quietest songs are undermined by jitters and eruptions. It works because the band strikes an ingenious balance between playful and furious: the last track is a prickly piano-and-drums duet called ''You Make Me Weak at the Knees,'' which could be either a carefully composed piece or an inspired bit of goofing off.
SHEARWATER -- An Austin, Tex.-based band led by two singer-songwriters, Jonathan Meiburg and Will Sheff, who also play together in Okkervil River. Together, they made ''Winged Life'' (Misra), an uneven but engrossing album that tries to capture the way love feels when it's fading. Mr. Sheff has a knack for delivering startlingly precise lyrics in the world's mopiest voice, but Mr. Meiburg contributes the album's most memorable song, a mysterious, echo-soaked, banjo-driven lament called ''Whipping Boy.'' The album won't be in stores until March 16, but it's available now from www.misrarecords.com.
BEENIE MAN -- This reggae star is still recovering from a January car accident, but he sounds better than ever -- at least on record. He has a hit with ''Dude,'' a steel-drum-driven duet in which he trades pickup lines with Ms. Thing; both resurrect the robot-voice gimmick that Cher wore out a few years ago. He also makes an impressive appearance on ''Dreamweaver'' (www  .vprecords.com), an enthralling ''riddim album'' (one beat, 15 different songs) produced by Steven (Lenky) Marsden. The sound of ''Dreamweaver'' is dense and eerie, with disembodied voices and an angular piano line. Somehow, Beenie Man turns this soundscape into an infectious pop song called ''Greatest Species,'' built around a to-the-point rallying cry: ''More gal!/ You better gimme dem plenty/ More gal!''
MUSIC: PLAYLIST
