IN rush-hour traffic, a minivan glides deftly along Morris County's roads, unhurried by the cars streaming in two directions. At the sight of trees and frozen water, the driver slows, then resumes course before the van again seems to stop at will. The driver, Julia Somers, a purposeful woman who sometimes rides as if she owns the road, has something to say.
''The biggest threat to this environment is always going to be from roads and roofs,'' said Ms. Somers, pointing to an expanse of the Great Swamp National Wildlife Refuge, which holds about 7,500 acres in an oval island that borders some of the most developed areas in Somerset and Morris counties.
The car idled, and Ms. Somers continued: ''We are looking at the beginnings of the Passaic River here. The only breeding pairs of snowy owls anywhere in the world outside of the Arctic Circle are right here. So many parts of New Jersey don't have all these resources. By increasing the number of stewards of the land, we can make it easier to protect what we have.''
Ms. Somers may be leading a tour of sorts, but she is far from a tourist. As executive director of the Great Swamp Watershed Association for the last 12 years, she has in effect redrawn the boundary of the refuge to include Morristown, Madison and eight other towns and in the process made her nonprofit association a significant presence in local politics and zoning decisions. From Bernardsville, on its western edge, to Chatham on its eastern side, the watershed is defined to include all areas that send their rainwater rolling toward the refuge.
By any measure -- and like much of the state -- it has been a landscape under incessant pressure and in need of advocates. In fact, the refuge owes its existence to a local environmental movement that gathered to oppose an airport project planned for the Great Swamp in the 1960's.
After a national campaign saved the site, it was assumed the swamp would remain untouched, with little thought given to damage under way in the larger watershed. Yet under the direction of Ms. Somers, the association has begun to litigate, most famously in an unsuccessful lawsuit filed last year against the Benedictine monks of St. Mary's Abbey in Morris Township. The monks are trying to develop part of their Delbarton School property, on the northern fringes of the watershed.
''They'll be in court for a while,'' Ms. Somers said crisply. ''We have appealed our loss. I really don't think the project will ever go through.''
But even by her own description, Julia Mary Somers, 46, remains an unlikely champion. She is not even a native species, having been born in England and raised in Scotland, in a village outside of Edinburgh. She said that life there on a family farm prepared her for some aspects of conservation, although other skills had to be acquired in the thick of things.
''I got into this line of work accidentally,'' she explained. ''I grew up in this incredibly beautiful part of the world, and we had some arable land. My sister and I both had ponies, and we'd chase the cows around. My father would get very annoyed.''
She paused, and then added: ''It was a wonderful way to grow up. If I stood outside our gate into the garden as we say here in America, into the yard I could look out all the way across Edinburgh.''
Ms. Somers worked as an administrative assistant in the House of Commons before a vacation to the United States changed her life. A week after she arrived, she met Daniel E. Somers on a blind date. Within a year, the two were married. In the 1980's, they moved to Green Village, where Ms. Somers was to first encounter the Great Swamp. Mr. Somers, a Morristown lawyer, sometimes works as a consultant for the watershed association's land-use cases. The couple have four children.
''About six months after we moved to Green Village, an old white Volvo sedan appeared in our driveway,'' Ms. Somers continued. ''This rather large lady with a high-pitched squeaky voice got out. That was Helen Fenske, an early activist for the Great Swamp and a former assistant commissioner of the State Department of Environmental Protection. Before I knew it, I was the chairman of an organization called Save the Great Swamp Again.''
In a short time, that committee was combined with the watershed association, which had been created in 1981. Ms. Somers was appointed the group's first executive director in 1992, and she began her education in how to build a nonprofit organization. Under her direction, membership has grown to 2,500, and the association's annual budget has increased from $30,000 to $450,000. She now leads a staff of eight, who monitor pollution in local streams, arrange conservation easements to maintain open land and conduct seminars on the region's culture, history and environment.
''Really, putting a nonprofit together is putting one foot in front of another,'' she said. ''You learn how to gain members, do mailings. Things happen, and people pop up and offer to do things for you. There's a ripple effect within the watershed.''
Although the Great Swamp Watershed Association is rooted in its region, the group's elastic boundaries stretch even to Trenton, where Ms. Somers has consulted with the state's environmental commissioner, Bradley M. Campbell, on questions of broader policy. She has praise for the water-conservation measures advanced by the McGreevey administration, as well as an opinion about its Big Map plan to control growth. After protests from builders, who said the plan threatened to unsettle the state's construction industry, it was set aside last year.
''Whatever you think of Governor McGreevey,'' she said, ''he has been the best environmental governor since I have lived in New Jersey. His predecessor, Governor Whitman, was a very strong open-space advocate, but the policies she pursued here were the policies she took to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. There was a deliberate undoing of any enforcement. The state was open for business.''
Then, turning to the question of the Big Map, she said: ''It hasn't fallen. It has just gone underground. A lot of people don't understand that. The regulations that were to have implemented the Big Map are still happening, regulations that control the flow of stormwater and how near you are allowed to build to rivers and streams.''
Within the Great Swamp itself, William Koch, the federal refuge manager, said that such opinions and the vigilance of the association had been welcome, and brought a protective shield to the wildlife refuge.
''We've come to see that the refuge is very vulnerable to what is happening around it, and upstream of us,'' said Mr. Koch, who is employed by the federal Fish and Wildlife Service. ''The watershed association has been out there waving the banner, bringing problems to the attention of the decision-makers.''
Mr. Koch added: ''I was here in the years when there was no association. Julia Somers has been a smart and effective leader.''
In an example of recent influence, the watershed association joined with the National Park Service last year in criticizing a plan proposed by the Girl Scouts of America to expand and renovate its camp in the Jockey Hollow district of Mendham Township.
''The property was given to them with the restriction that it remain wild and rustic,'' Ms. Somers said. ''Well, I'm sorry, but what they were planning was not wild and rustic. I salute them, because they changed their plans and are redeveloping their existing site. It was unfortunate that we had to fight, but it was the only way we could be heard.''
When not keeping tabs on zoning meetings in Long Hill and other towns in the watershed, Ms. Somers likes to take long walks overland with the Tewksbury Foot Bassets, a Somerset County society that was formed to hunt hares and rabbits on rural farmlands.
She also sings sacred music -- Bach and Brahms -- as a soprano with the St. Bernard's Episcopal Church Choir in Bernardsville. ''That's like free therapy, twice a week,'' she said.
The Great Swamp Watershed Association's headquarters can be found in offices above a pizzeria in Madison. After a diligent search, said Ms. Somers, that location may be about to change. The group has plans to move later this year to a historic house owned by the National Park Service in Harding Township.
The tour concluded, Ms. Somers strode from her car and back to her desk. ''I'm one of those unfortunate people,'' she said, ''who can't stop themselves from getting involved.''
IN PERSON
