ABOUT a year ago I started an earthworm farm in my pantry. This was not an attempt to get rich selling bait to anglers. Snow was still deep in my New Hampshire garden, and I needed a project to keep me busy.
I knew that earthworm castings -- their manure -- are rich in beneficial bacteria, fungi, nitrogen and minerals in a form readily usable by plants. Worm castings dissolved in water are great for houseplants. A thin sprinkle of fresh castings around the base of a plant will perk it up. For city dwellers, raising earthworms offers the chance to generate plant food while perhaps defying a landlord's ban on pets.
And worms eat kitchen scraps. It sounded worth a try.
To get started, I visited the Dartmouth College Organic Farm in Hanover, N.H., where the farm manager, Scott Stokoe, taught me the basics. We used a heavy plastic bin (20 inches by 15 inches by 12 inches deep) with four three-quarter-inch holes drilled in the bottom. Mr. Stokoe had me fill it with newspaper torn into inch-wide strips. Then, using a watering can, I moistened the strips, tumbling them with my hands until they were damp but not so wet that I could squeeze out water.
A few handfuls of Mr. Stokoe's worms, a species known as red wigglers (Eisenia fetida), went in next. The suggested meal plan -- spent coffee grounds, chopped lettuce and other vegetables (hold the meat) -- would nourish the worms. In time they would produce white cocoons the size of rice grains, and before long, enough of an army to turn garbage into compost.
Earthworms like to wander, especially when exposed to light. To keep a lid on their world, I placed a black plastic trash bag loosely on top. There was no need to worry about climate control as long as the pantry stayed between 65 and 80 degrees.
Soon my wigglers, fed a mix of about a cup of scraps every few days, began increasing. Summer came, and I moved the bin to the barn. Because the population was growing, I increased portions to about two quarts of scraps a week.
In the fall I was scheduled to travel and cold weather was coming, so I brought the bin back inside. I made sure the newspaper mix, lightly refreshed, was moist, and gave my charges some extra food, including orange rinds. I figured they would be fine on their own for a month.
They were fine -- and so were the fruit flies, which materialized out of nowhere, as they always do, colonizing the pantry in my absence and surrounding me once I got back like the cloud that accompanied Fly Face in the old Dick Tracy comics.
I took my wiggly pets -- and their unwanted companions -- out to the deck and dumped them onto a plastic sheet. After plucking out the worms and setting them aside, I changed the newspapers, put the worms back and covered the bin with an old sheet held in place with a bungee cord.
Amazingly, a few fruit flies survived this purge, forcing me to take more drastic action. Dragging the bin outside, I shoveled the snow off the compost pile and buried my worms deep inside.
Red wigglers, though commonly sold for composting purposes, are not soil dwellers like night crawlers and do not survive well when temperatures drop below 50. The temperature at the center of the compost heap was close to freezing, but I couldn't think what else to do. I'm fairly sure they died.
Only later did I call Mary Appelhof, known by many as the Worm Woman. A biologist and teacher by training, she has been a cheerleader for vermiculture since the early 1970's, translating dry scientific findings into popular books like ''Worms Eat My Garbage'' (Flower Press, 1997) and selling vermiculture goods through Flowerfield Enterprises in Kalamazoo, Mich.
Ms. Appelhof suggests that to minimize the problem with fruit flies, raise your red wigglers outside in the summer and in a warm basement in the winter. Because my basement is quite cold in winter, she suggested an alternative against the invaders: a fresh cow patty, buried in the bin, would introduce beetles into the mix, and beetles eat fruit fly larvae.
There was poetic justice to her scheme, but somehow smelly worms in the pantry did not appeal. So I think I'll stick to a no-fruit rule.
Getting Started
How many worms does it take to beget enough for a small compost-making operation? The experts recommend a starter group of about 1,000, feeding them as much as four pounds of garbage a week.
A pound of red wigglers, 600 to 1,000 in all, is available from Flowerfield Enterprises for $24 (269-327-0108 or www.wormwoman.com).
Red wigglers are also available from VermiCo (541-476-9626 or www.vermico.com).
CUTTINGS
