MARINER'S HARBOR has a prime waterfront location along Arthur Kill and Kill Van Kull at the northwest corner of Staten Island, and its fortunes have risen or fallen with a tide of maritime activities.
Sea captains built stately shoreside homes in the area in early 19th century. Later, shipbuilding was an important industry from the days of wooden ships through the construction of destroyers for World War II. ''A couple thousand people worked at the Bethlehem Steel Shipyards during the war,'' said Vincent Pompa, a past president of the Mariner's Harbor Civic Association.
But the area faltered badly in the second half of the 20th century, and some homes fell into disrepair. Lately, however, there have been promising signs of a revival in the neighborhood, whose borders ashore are Morningstar Road on the east and the Staten Island Expressway, Forest Avenue and Wilcox Street on the south.
City Councilman Michael E. McMahon, a Democrat who represents Mariner's Harbor, said the area is experiencing ''a serious economic boom.'' This is reflected in part by an influx of retailers. Wal-Mart is negotiating for a 28-acre site at Forest Avenue and South Avenue, he said. A Lowe's home improvement store opened in December, an 16-screen multiplex opened two years ago and a Home Depot appeared about five years ago. A Charlie Brown's steakhouse is also being constructed.
There has been a similar flurry of activity in the housing market, where there are two distinct sectors. A few old sea captain's houses with widow's walks remain, and a large number of homes date back to the first three decades of the 20th century. Many others have been built within the last 10 years.
MARINER'S HARBOR did not go through the development boom that most of the rest of Staten Island experienced after the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge opened in 1964, in part because there were bigger tracts of undeveloped land elsewhere, explained Robert Kelly, owner of ERA Master Realty. It has only been in recent years that developers turned to the area.
''As land has become scarcer on the Island, developers have been looking for other communities where they can build affordable houses, and Mariner's Harbor fit the bill,'' said Joseph Carroll, district manager of Community Board 1. Even here prices are rising steadily, he added. A starter house in a town house development cost $100,000 as little as three or four ago. ''Today, that house starts at over $200,000, and some are even as high as $300,000 and over,'' he said.
''As you tour the community, you'll see such a dichotomy on each block,'' Mr. Kelly continued. ''You'll see large homes on double and triple lots, and right next to them you'll see multiple houses, brand new or less than 10 years old.'' In some cases older homes are being torn down and replaced by new homes.
Off Harbor Road, for example, Jerry Bivona, president of the Glendale Corporation, a development company, is nearing completion of a court of eight two-family detached homes, which are selling for $379,900.
In general, homes that are three years old or younger are detached one- or two-family homes. Houses built more than three years ago tend to be multiple houses, either town houses or semidetached. Mr. Kelly credited the Civic Association with leading a campaign that resulted in a rezoning to allow only detached homes to be built.
Along Richmond Terrace, welding supply shops, junkyards and iron works dominate because this part of the community is zoned for industrial activities. Forest Avenue is the shopping corridor, with bagel shops and McDonald's and restaurants like Real Madrid and La Riviera.
''It's good to see business thriving,'' said Linda Baran, interim president of the Staten Island Chamber of Commerce. ''The community had taken a huge slide. Properties like a former Major's department store and a former welfare hotel have been sitting empty and deteriorating for years.''
While new development has fostered a community revival, services are not keeping up with growth, residents say. They cite increasing traffic, a shortage of parking and overcrowded schools. ''The area needs more schools,'' Mr. Carroll said.
Edwin Markham Intermediate School 51 at 20 Houston Street will be the recipient in the fall of the prefabricated annex that is currently serving Public School 44, where it is used for fourth and fifth grade classes. ''We're slated for eight new classrooms for our main building to begin construction in spring'' and be finished by the end of the summer, said the principal of P.S. 44, Rhonda Wittfield.
I.S. 51 is expecting the annex in August. The school, with about 1,500 students in Grades 6, 7 and 8, ''was built for 1,100 -- that's the problem,'' said the principal, Emma Della Rocca. Next year the school will be splitting into three academies: for health and sciences, math and engineering, and humanities. ''All students will have an opportunity by the end of the school year to choose which academy they want to attend,'' Mrs. Della Rocca said. ''We believe this will foster community among students throughout all three grades.''
The school has a jazz band, a dance band and a drama club, which is preparing ''The Wiz'' for performance in March. After-school programs that run from 2 to 5 p.m. include basketball, digital photography and help with homework.
P.S. 44 at 80 Maple Parkway, with 915 students, offers prekindergarten through Grade 5. After-school activities include painting and other arts and crafts, working with computers and sports. The chorus, made up of students from Grades 4 and 5, performed earlier this month at St. John's University. At the school, 44 percent of students in Grades 3 and 4 read at or above grade levels, while 74 percent are at or exceed standards for math.
MOST high school students in the neighborhood go to Port Richmond High School. Of the 460 graduates last June, 67 percent headed to four-year colleges, while 28 percent went to two-year schools. For the past six to eight years, Port Richmond has been chosen as a Top 500 school by Newsweek magazine, based on the number of seniors taking Advanced Placement courses, said Robert Graham, the principal.
The high school marching band performed at last year's St. Patrick's Day parade in Manhattan and will do so again this year. ''We have five different bands, including advanced and intermediate concert bands, a jazz ensemble and a guitar ensemble,'' Mr. Graham said. ''We have over 200 students in our music program.''
The school also has 32 different athletic teams. One of its distinctive events is a ''student of the month'' breakfast. ''We host about a dozen students, one from every subject area, and their families in our library at 7 o'clock in the morning,'' said Mr. Graham. ''Our culinary arts students cook and serve.''
A plan for a Mariner's Harbor branch of the New York Public Library was announced last month. R. Randy Lee, a lawyer and developer, said he would donate land he owns at 206 South Avenue for the 11,000-square-feet facility, which is expected to open its doors in 2007. Mariner's Harbor residents have been requesting a library since at least 1938, according to Norman Holman of the New York Public Library.
In fact, it was ''1937,'' corrected Mr. Pompa, 76, the former president of the Civic Association and a retired chemist who teaches science at Port Richmond High as a substitute. ''I wish the site chosen would be closer to the schools.''
In the northwest corner of Mariner's Harbor is Arlington, which has one of the first trailer parks in New York City, Mr. Pompa said. Called Goethals, ''a Garden Homes community,'' it has rows and rows of permanent mobile homes within shouting distance of the Goethals Bridge.
The Mariner's Harbor neighborhood is also home to the Mariner's Harbor Houses, a New York Public Housing complex with 22 buildings, three and six stories high, with 605 apartments housing 1,728 residents. Completed in 1954, the houses sit on a 22-acre site bounded by Brabant Street, Roxbury Street, Continental Place and Grandview Avenue.
The housing stock also includes modest one-family homes that were built to house workers from the shipbuilding times as well as workers from Procter &amp; Gamble's Port Ivory facility, which today is Howland Hook Marine Terminal, home of a container port. ''What they used to make here was Duncan Hines cake mixes, Crisco and soap,'' Mr. Pompa said. ''The whole complex was sold to the Port Authority.''
The P.&amp; G. jobs had an important place in the community. ''Grandfathers, sons and sons' sons worked for the plants,'' he added. ''It was a very family operation.''
THE continuity of the community was also mentioned by Jane Norberg, the current Civic Association president. ''When I first moved here 30 years ago,'' she said, ''married siblings would live on the same block as their parents. Today, the area is still family-oriented, but not as inbred as then.''
Italians and Poles predominated in the past -- ''the Polish butchers and St. Adalbert's Church still serve to remind residents of that history,'' she said. ''Today, we're quite diversified ethnically.'' At P.S. 44, for instance, about 40 percent of the students have Hispanic or Filipino backgrounds.
The neighborhood seems to be attracting a number of immigrants. ''The new construction is some of the most affordable houses on Staten Island,'' said Mr. Kelly of ERA Master Builders. ''What is needed, desperately in my opinion, is for the dormant shipyards and other manufacturing areas along the Terrace, to be rezoned for residential and commercial applications. There's been no shipbuilding industry here for some time, and it's not coming back.''
Still, much is already happening in Mariner's Harbor. Even a new park is planned; it is along Forest Avenue near Simonson Avenue at the Graniteville quarry. ''It's an unusual bit of land because it's a rock quarry, which the state has purchased with the intention of making it a three-and-a-half acre park,'' Mr. McMahon said. The site contains a rare rock formation that is distinctive because of ledges of granite at various levels.
If You're Thinking of Living In | Mariner's Harbor, Staten Island
