THE construction several years ago of a replica of the schooner Amistad by Mystic Seaport shipbuilders has led to a connection between several Connecticut groups and the people of Sierra Leone aimed at improving life in the West African nation.
In December nine people from groups including Amistad America and the Amistad Committee of New Haven, Mystic Seaport, the First Church of Christ Congregational in Farmington and the Connecticut Woodturners, made their fifth trip to Sierra Leone. They met with President Ahmad Tejan Kabbah, his government ministers and villagers to discuss the various efforts, most of which are already under way.
These include the planting of 100 trees for each of the 53 -- symbolizing the number of slaves aboard the original Amistad -- cut down to build the replica boat. The projects also include the development of fish farms adjacent to the tree grove, the creation of an Amistad exhibition for the country and finding markets in the United States for the works of local craftsmen.
The group's major initiative is an effort to preserve the overgrown, crumbling ruins at Bunce Island, a major 18th-century slave trading outpost, and making it an international destination for cultural tourism.
''These are very, very important efforts for my country,'' said Ibrahim Kamara, Sierra Leone's ambassador to the United Nations. ''These people have been tremendous and done much good for my country and my people. They've been warmly received by my people when they have traveled to Sierra Leone, and they deserve it.''
The slaves aboard the original Amistad were from what is now Sierra Leone. While being transported along the coast of Cuba in 1839, one of them, Sengbe Pieh, led an uprising in which the slaves killed the captain and cook and captured the ship. They tried to force the Spanish slave owners on board to sail them back to Africa but the men changed course at night and the ship wandered up the East Coast as rumors spread about a ship of black pirates.
While the ship was anchored off Montauk, N.Y., a government revenue cutter captured it and towed it into New London Harbor. The slaves were jailed in New Haven as both blacks and whites came to their aid. Trials followed and the case ended up before the United States Supreme Court where former President John Quincy Adams argued for the slaves' freedom. The court ruled they had been illegally kidnapped and granted them their freedom more than two decades before the end of the Civil War.
Those who survived the ordeal returned to Sierra Leone in 1842, and Sengbe Pieh remains a national hero. Before they returned, however, they lived and were educated in Farmington by the Congregational church. That effort, along with those of the abolitionists, led to the founding of hundreds of schools for blacks including the country's traditional black colleges.
Mystic Seaport built a replica of the Amistad that was launched during a ceremony in 2000 that attracted government officials from Sierra Leone. The ship is now based out of New Haven and sails to ports around the country telling the Amistad's story of freedom and cooperation among those of different races.
The connection between the people of the United States and Sierra Leone, though, goes much deeper than the Amistad. While the majority of the millions of African slaves shipped to the Americas from African slave castles went to the Caribbean and South America, most of those who went through Bunce Island were taken to Georgia and South Carolina because of their ability to cultivate rice. Today much of their culture and tradition survive among descendants who can trace their roots to what is now Sierra Leone.
''In many ways Sierra Leone is almost a sister country to us,'' Peter Glankoff, the Seaport's director of communications, said after making the most recent trip.
The man most responsible for the relationship is Alfred Marder , who heads the Amistad Committee. When the group dedicated a statue of Sengbe Pieh in 1992, officials from Sierra Leone traveled to New Haven for the ceremony.
Mr. Marder has made all five trips. On the first trip, he and the Seaport's Quentin Snediker, who headed construction of the replica Amistad, helped secure wood from the iroko and kola trees to create a symbolic connection with the homeland of the Amistad captives. On the second trip, Mr. Marder initiated the idea of planting trees to create the Amistad Friendship Grove, which was done in 2001. Because the need for charcoal has caused a deforestation problem in Sierra Leone, the 5,300 fast-growing trees will now provide fuel and jobs while protecting the forest.
On the third trip, Mr. Marder said, he noticed a nearby stream and suggested creating a fish farm that could provide a source of protein for the impoverished villagers. The groups raised $20,000 to start the fish farm. On the latest trip, Mr. Marder said they pledged to raise the additional money needed for a second farm.
Mr. Snediker and John Lorch, the head of the Connecticut Woodturners group, also talked with government officials about gaining access to United States markets for those who create indigenous crafts such as baskets, carvings and textiles. He said the effort would help preserve the craftsmen's skills, provide them with income and support a environmentally sensitive business.
There was also much discussion about the effort to preserve the ruins of the so-called slave castles at Bunce Island and make them a tourist destination. The site could become a popular one for black Americans because most of the slaves who passed through its fort-like stone walls came to the United States. More well-known slave castles, such as Goree Island in Senegal, sent slaves to the Caribbean and South America.
The plan is for the groups to start a nonprofit organization to raise the money needed to update a preservation plan for the slave castle. Sierra Leone would then petition to become a member of the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization and go to the international community for funding.
''For people of African descent in the United States there is so little direct connection with their past. But this is one of them,'' said Mr. Snediker, who discussed the Bunce Island project with Sierra Leonean officials on the December trip.
''It's a treasure, a jewel,'' said Mr. Snediker. ''We're seeking ways to develop it and bring it to the world.''
Mr. Marder said the connection between the two countries is important because of the historical significance of the Amistad story.
''It was the first human rights case to come before the Supreme Court,'' he said. ''It was the first time blacks and whites came to together to struggle against slavery.''
Because so many people from what is now Sierra Leone were brought here as slaves, he said, they made a vast contribution to the economic growth of the United States.
''We owe a tremendous debt to the people of Sierra Leone,'' he said. ''In a way, we're doing this because we owe it to them as a country. These people helped build our country and history has tied the two of us together.''
Mr. Glankoff said the projects are not a typical humanitarian effort in which people bring money and supplies and then go home. The projects begun by the groups will be owned and run by the people of Sierra Leone.
''A real friend is someone who will help you help yourself,'' he said. ''We saw so much of our country in their country. We all have the same hopes, dreams and aspirations.''
