Marty Markowitz, the Brooklyn borough president, is known for his wild ideas, but the latest one came in a roundabout way. Pleased with the ''Welcome to Brooklyn'' signs he posted on city bridges, bearing slogans like ''How Sweet It Is'' and ''Believe the Hype,'' he decided to post similarly quirky signs at the entrance to the upper and lower levels of the Verrazano-Narrows Bridge: ''Leaving Brooklyn/Fuhgeddaboudit!''
Most constituents liked them, Mr. Markowitz said. But one resident called to complain that the signs were anti-Italian.
Mr. Markowitz's response? ''I said, 'Listen, way before 'The Sopranos' were on, we in Brooklyn said 'Fuhgeddaboudit.' The man said: 'You're Jewish, Mr. Markowitz. How would you like a sign that says, 'Leaving Brooklyn, oy vey?' I said: 'What a great idea. Thank you.'''
But when Mr. Markowitz proposed the ''oy vey'' idea for the Manhattan-bound side of the Williamsburg Bridge, the city's Department of Transportation told him the signs were unnecessary and distracting.
''Although we applaud the borough president's creative side, we don't think this is the best use of space on our bridges and roads,'' said Iris Weinshall, the city's transportation commissioner.
Although her agency rules on proposals for signs, it adheres to the policies of the Federal Highway Administration, which oversees most of the city's bridges and roadways. Those policies, Ms. Weinshall said, mandate that roadway signs must offer useful information. '''Oy vey' doesn't give you information,'' she said.
Apparently, the Federal Highway Administration didn't love the cute comments on the ''Welcome to Brooklyn'' signs either. ''They said, 'We're not going to make you take them down now, but please don't put signs like this up again,''' she said.
Because the Verrazano Bridge is overseen by the Metropolitan Transportation Authority, not the federal government, it is not subject to the same restrictions. But Ms. Weinshall said she found the ''Fuhgeddaboudit'' signs distracting there also.
Studies have not yet shown whether accidents have increased since the signs went up, but Mr. Markowitz doesn't think they are dangerous. ''They set a style,'' he said.
''Jews and Christians alike use 'oy vey,''' he added. ''It means, 'Oh, I'm pained that you're leaving, oh!'''
TARA BAHRAMPOUR
NEIGHBORHOOD REPORT: BROOKLYN UP CLOSE
