WHEN ''Starsky and Hutch,'' a stylish buddy-cop romp hatched from the brain of the producer Aaron Spelling, first hit the airwaves in 1975, it marked a change from earlier, more earnest cop shows. Perhaps it was the hunky pair's Travolta-tight pants. Perhaps it was the ''striped tomato,'' Starsky's splashy sports car. It might have been the Dirty Harry-style ultraviolence, or the glorious love between two partners who couldn't help but strip down regularly and wrestle like puppies.
Whatever the magical ingredient, the series quickly became a favorite of anyone who liked to see a suspect thrown against the wall by an angry man in bell bottoms -- which turned out to be a hefty chunk of the television audience. Then in 1977, the show's third season, 'Starsky' became the target of antiviolence activists when a study labeled it the bloodiest series on television. Advertisers pulled out; executives apologized. ''We are going to take the violence out of 'Starsky and Hutch,' '' Mr. Spelling vowed. ''I promise. We're going to stop it. Period. And if the rating slips two points, then the rating slips two points. We're never going to kill anybody unless it's totally essential.'
In the final seasons, the show's vigilante elements were muzzled. But luckily for TV fans, even the powerful Aaron Spelling couldn't turn back time. The show's first season , which will be released on DVD on March 1, preserves the undiluted early episodes in all their musky, bloody, campy glory, the story of surfer-mellow Hutch (David Soul)and jittery Starsky (Paul Michael Glaser), the most flamboyant undercover police operatives in television history. In the show's pilot, Starsky announced to a crowded dive bar, ''You all know we're cops, and we know you know, and we know you don't like us, and that's the way it is.'' Then he proceeded to rough up a suspect in full view of everyone.
The Starsky and Hutch style of interrogation was no more subtle. First there was the powerful ''ask the question again'' technique. (''What time is he going to come? What time?''  ''Midnight!'') But most often, Starsky and Hutch -- especially Starsky -- went right for the fists, guns, knives or broken bottles. The episode ''Shoot-Out'' opens with a classic bit of Starsky and Hutch interrogation. Starsky grills a seeming guru first shouting at him, then shaking him, then, as Hutch tries to pull Starsky off the suspect, assaulting his own partner and throwing him against a wall. As a finale, Starsky attacks an innocent chair. Hutch warns the suspect, ''They almost pulled him off the force, and they would have, too, but at the last moment, the guy pulled through.'' The lowlife drops the fake accent and confesses.
One could view this all as deeply, abidingly creepy: a thrill ride of Internal Affairs violations. But the ambiguously ethical duo somehow came off less like bad cops than like guys who really loved their jobs. And they weren't alone: fictional Bay City was a Wild West of degenerates , from corrupt D.A.'s to thugs shouting, ''You don't get no more chances, big boy!'' Half the show's fun was its absurdly shady milieu, with giggly hussies dressed like Little Orphan Annie, gap-toothed hit men, cross-dressing shoplifters, dwarf wrestlers and a fabulous array of whores, bimbos, pimps, junkies, hustlers and other assorted mooks. (The most famous of these was the informant Huggie Bear, an effeminate pimp and a friend to all cops.)
And then there were the ladies. Starsky and Hutch were forever bantering about their sexual prowess, but no matter how many slinky 70's dames crossed their path, nothing threatened the devotion between the two leather-clad cops. Any serious romantic prospect was promptly shot or shipped out of town. If it seems a little cheap to suggest that cop shows have a gay subtext, this one made it unavoidable: the two California detectives were forever stripping to jogging shorts, unbuttoning disco shirts and, on one notable occasion, entering a sauna clothed in only skimpy yellow towels accessorized with holsters. When Starsky is shot, Hutch cradles him pietà-style, wrapping him tenderly in a red-and-white checked tablecloth. Starsky jokes bravely: ''Don't let me fool you! I played Camille in high school.'' It's the gayest scene outside Middle Earth.
The new ''Starsky and Hutch'' movie, starring Ben Stiller and Owen Wilson and opening on March 5, is a fittingly affectionate homage to the show, nicely replicating the bad pants suits and the wah-wah-pedal soundtrack, the car chases and severe anger management issues. But for the true purist, it's worth checking out the original, that splashy disco ode to police  brutality and a love stronger than any Miranda warning.
TELEVISION: RERUNS
