MICHAEL HARRIS SPECTOR remembers greeting John Adam Kanas, the chairman of North Fork Bank, at the celebration seven years ago for the opening of the bank's gleaming new headquarters in Melville that Mr. Spector's architectural firm had designed. Mr. Kanas, having uprooted North Fork from its small-town beginnings in Mattituck, 50 miles to the east, seemed enthralled by future prospects, especially to the west, Mr. Spector recalled.
As the architect tells the story, Mr. Kanas gestured around him at the bank's spacious new headquarters and proclaimed, ''New York City, here we come!''
The vision of taking Manhattan struck Mr. Spector as an anomaly. ''John came from banking way out east,'' Mr. Spector recalled. ''He was kind of a farmer. Not at all sophisticated.''
With North Fork's merger earlier this month with the GreenPoint Financial Corporation in a $6.3 billion stock deal, Mr. Kanas erased any lingering doubts whether he was sophisticated enough for Park Avenue. After swallowing GreenPoint -- a bank with deep roots in Brooklyn, a strong New York presence and a national mortgage business -- North Fork now tops $50 billion in assets and $30 billion in deposits. The merged bank, with more than 340 branches, puts Mr. Kanas at the helm of the 16th-largest bank holding company in the country and one of the largest consumer banks in New York, New Jersey and Connecticut.
Not bad for a farmer or, to be precise, a banker who grew up on a duck farm in East Moriches. ''I don't fit the mold,'' said Mr. Kanas, who was not sounding at all unhappy about it.
The deal, the 13th bank merger Mr. Kanas has engineered, as well as the largest, firmly establishes him as the pre-eminent Long Island banker of his generation and the first to build a major bank from Long Island roots since Arthur Roth expanded Franklin National Bank into one of the world's biggest financial institutions after World War II.
Unlike many senior banking executives at large banks, heavy with Ivy League pedigrees and country club connections, Mr. Kanas came up as a rural branch manager, opening a series of North Fork branches on the South Fork and expanding the bank's deposit base during the 1970's. The openings helped set the stage for its rapid growth through Suffolk and Nassau in the 1980's and 90's.
That retail experience shapes Mr. Kanas's view today, particularly his strategy of emphasizing customer service rather than engaging in rate wars to pull in deposits. ''North Fork is a bank where if you're overdrawn, the branch manager calls you up at home and says, 'You better come in today and transfer funds, or your check is going to bounce,''' he said.
Salvatore J. DiMartino, a bank industry analyst at Bear Stearns, said Mr. Kanas had managed the company with little taste for extravagance or fad-chasing. Instead, he remained consistently attuned to the needs of small business owners.
There is no baloney in what they do, Mr. DiMartino said, describing not only Mr. Kanas's personal style but also that of the executives he hires.
Mr. Kanas's rise is one of the more colorful stories in banking today. The duck farm where he grew up was built by his grandfather, an Austrian immigrant. In fact, Mr. Kanas, who is 57, still lives there, minus the ducks. He attended a one-room schoolhouse down the road, one of a class of 11. In high school he worked in a delicatessen near the school and at 18, bought the deli himself, with the help of a $3,000 loan from Chase Manhattan Bank. He sliced meat for four years to put himself through Long Island University's then-new Southampton campus.
After graduation in 1968, Mr. Kanas sold the deli and begin teaching sixth grade in Greenport. With the war in Vietnam, teaching promised a draft deferment, he said.
His schoolteacher's salary proved inadequate, and the government soon abolished the deferment for teachers. About that time Mr. Kanas happened to meet Irving Price, a Greenport resident and the chairman of the local North Fork Bank, and Mr. Price offered him a job.
That was 1971. Mr. Kanas left teaching to manage North Fork's branch on Love Lane in Mattituck. At the time the bank had all of 4 branches and 34 employees.
''North Fork Bank in those days was a farmers' bank,'' Mr. Kanas recalled. ''You lent farmers money to buy seed. If the crops came up, you'd get paid. If not, you rolled the loan over.''
Chartered in 1905 as Mattituck Bank, the operation renamed itself the North Fork Bank and Trust Company in 1950. As that decade progressed, it merged with three other East End banks.
Then, for a number of years, growth was slow. ''Things had gotten stagnant,'' recalled Mr. Price, now retired but still living in Greenport. ''We needed to find new markets.''
Mr. Kanas convinced Mr. Price and the bank's directors that it could push ahead of its longtime competitors, the Bank of Bridgehampton and Suffolk County National Bank, by expanding on the South Fork and then eventually into western Suffolk and on into Nassau.
Mr. Kanas opened the bank's fifth branch in East Moriches, across the street from his old deli, and then 25 additional branches.
Mr. Price said that Mr. Kanas struck him as an impressive young executive. Somewhat improbably, in 1977 the bank promoted him to president and chief executive. He was 29 years old, and as he says in his official biography, he was believed to be the youngest bank president in the United States. His youth, Mr. Price said, was no deterrent.
Muriel Siebert, who was state banking superintendent at that time, recalls young Mr. Kanas as ''standing out'' by virtue of being ''very smart and having very ambitious plans.'' Perhaps too ambitious. The bank was expanding faster than its capital reserves seemed to warrant, she recalled.
Ms. Siebert, who is now a stockbroker in Manhattan, said that she handled the problem by introducing Mr. Kanas to C.E. Unterberg, Towbin, the Wall Street firm that underwrote the bank's initial public offering.
''John had the smarts, he knew banking, and he knew the marketplace, but he didn't have the financial acumen he developed later,'' Ms. Siebert said. ''I had been on the Street, I knew bankers, and I felt I should give him a banker. And I did.''
Mr. Kanas confirmed her account. ''I had been going around to different investment bankers and getting nowhere,'' he recalled. The incident ''taught me the power of personal relationships,'' he added.
Mr. Kanas's early experience, competing to win the business of small entrepreneurs and salaried people up and down the East End, helped define his view of banking. But succeeding in Manhattan and New Jersey, he said, is no different than succeeding on Long Island. ''You try to be friendly to people and treat them right,'' he said. ''For some reason, banks often don't do this.''
For Mr. Kanas and North Fork, the scale is now substantially larger. A small commercial account at one of North Fork's Manhattan branches is often larger than all but the biggest accounts on Long Island.
''I'll go to a cocktail party at your $8 million Park Avenue apartment,'' Mr. Kanas said, making it clear he wouldn't do this too often. ''But I'd just as soon be visiting one of our branches, sitting down and talking with a plumber.''
L.I. @ WORK
