IF I have one complaint about our suburban art museums, it is poor labeling and documentation of artwork. From misspelled names of artists and bad translations of foreign titles to incorrect dates and attributions, I have encountered many embarrassing gaffes. This might sound pedantic, but it goes to the role of museums in our culture: aside from showing art, their mission is to provide accurate, reliable information about the works.
It is not just the smaller museums. Last week at the Neuberger Museum of Art here, an otherwise exemplary institution, I stumbled on an egregious example of sloppy documentation. Looking at an etching by Francisco Goya in ''Figuring Women: Works From the Permanent Collection,'' I turned my attention to the wall label. This is what it said: ''Francisco Goya, Spanish 1746-1826, Feminine Folly, no date, etching on paper.''
Returning my eyes to the etching, I noticed a discrepancy. Whereas the label listed the print simply as an etching, clearly the background part of the image was not line etched at all. Rather, it seemed to me, the background area was done in aquatint, a related process using a porous resin resulting in a uniform, granulated effect. I informed museum officials of my suspicions, and they swiftly corrected the mistake.
Had the label been incorrect in this way alone, I would not have given it further thought. But that day, at home, looking over the checklist of works for the exhibition, which included a copy of the wall labels, I noticed another discrepancy. Goya's death date was listed as 1826. That was odd, I thought, for I had recently seen one of his late paintings in the Museo Nacional del Prado, Madrid, dated circa 1827.
I consulted my reference books on Goya, and discovered that he had died in 1828, not 1826. The birth and death dates of historical artists are often revised, but for a famous artist like Goya we have reliable information. According to most sources, including Robert Hughes's recent, authoritative study of the artist, Goya died at 2 a.m. on April 16, 1828, in Bordeaux, France, after suffering a stroke two weeks earlier.
Deciding to investigate the wall label further, I discovered the etching was dated. Not exactly, but it turns out that it belongs to a set of 22 etchings commonly referred to as the ''Disparates'' (''Follies''), which were published posthumously in Madrid in 1864. Art critics and historians are confident the series was done between 1816 and 1823, and illustrations in reference books are usually accompanied by these dates. The dating of historical artists' works is always subject to revision. This is especially the case with undated works, or commissions and projects carried out over a long period of time. As new art historical evidence about artists and their works comes to light, dates are revised to match the new material. Little is known about the ''Follies,'' but the current dates assigned to them seem to be fairly established according to the books I consulted.
So how can a wall label be so wrong? A clue to the mystery appears further down on the label, which omits the work's dimensions (another oversight) but says that it was a gift from Roy Neuberger, the museum's chief benefactor. Mr. Neuberger bought the etching already mislabeled, most probably, and inadvertently passed it and the incorrect documentation to the museum.
Finally, there is the issue of the artist's name. Although many museums worldwide refer to Goya in their wall labels simply as Francisco Goya, his full and correct name is Francisco José Goya y Lucientes. This is the name under which his paintings appear on the walls of the Metropolitan Museum in New York (I checked this myself) and alongside paintings of the artist's works in his native Spain.
To be fair, documenting and labeling artwork is a tricky business that requires an expert staff and resources. Most suburban museums operate on a shoestring, hence their difficulties. I know and understand that. At the same time, these museums, especially a teaching institution like the Neuberger, have a duty to the public to make sure that whatever material they present is accurate and reliable.
Aside from the Goya etching, ''Figuring Women'' includes a diverse if lively selection of artwork ranging from antique and African sculpture to modern and contemporary paintings, drawings and prints. The works are grouped thematically, reflecting some of the ways that women have been represented in Western and non-Western art. Among the themes are ''The Female Figure as Metaphor, Model and Muse''; ''Image and Self-Image: Designing Women and the Fashion System''; and ''Women in the World: Dancers, Workers, Writers.'' The highlight of the exhibition is Amedeo Modigliani's ''Portrait of a Young Girl'' (1916), which has recently returned to the museum after its loan to a national touring exhibition. It is a wonderfully nuanced painting with the power to make even a grumpy art critic swoon.
''Figuring Women: Works From the Permanent Collection'' is at the Neuberger Museum of Art, 735 Anderson Hill Road, Purchase College, through May 16. Information: (914)251-6100.
ART REVIEW
