THERE are two kinds of paranoia, the playwright and actor Tracy Letts says, the healthy and the unhealthy kind. The former, which Mr. Letts admits to having, manifests itself as a sort of sharp-eyed skepticism. ''I'm just mistrustful of institutions -- I don't think they have people's best interests at heart,'' he said by phone from Atlanta, where he is starring as the husband George in a production of Edward Albee's ''Who's Afraid of Virginia Woolf?'' at the Alliance Theater. Peter Evans, the raving conspiracy theorist in Mr. Letts's drama ''Bug,'' which opens today at the Barrow Street Theater, suffers from the second kind.
''He goes off the deep end,'' said Mr. Letts, of the gulf war veteran whom he describes as having ''a mix of deep insecurity and tremendous ego.'' In the play (and the excerpt below), which is set in a motel room on the outskirts of Oklahoma City, Evans tries to convince a lonely drug-addicted waitress, Agnes White, that the government is implanting bugs inside its citizens' bodies. Mr. Letts says he understands this urge toward conspiratorial thought. ''I think people would rather know, even if they're wrong, than not know anything,'' he said.
Mr. Letts is best known for ''Killer Joe,'' his unapologetically vulgar debut about trailer trash that became an unexpected hit in New York in 1999. (His third play, ''Man From Nebraska,'' had its premiere on Nov. 20 at the Steppenwolf Theater Company in Chicago.) Amanda Plummer was to star as Agnes in ''Bug'' but she dropped out a little more than a week ago citing artistic differences. Shannon Cochran, who originated the role of Agnes at the Gate Theater in London in 1996, has replaced her.
JASON ZINOMAN
PETER: You want to know what's going on? All right, then you listen to me, you listen to what I'm going to tell you, because you don't know the . . . enormity of what we're dealing with here----  AGNES: I'm listening----  PETER: May the 29, 1954, a consortium of bankers, industrialists, corporate C.E.O.'s and politicians held a series of meetings over three days at the Bilderberg Hotel in Oosterbeek, Holland. They drew up a plan for maintaining the status quo----  AGNES: What is that?  PETER: It's the way things are. It's the rich get richer, and the poor get poorer. . . .  AGNES: All right.  PETER: They devised a plan to manipulate technology, economics, the media, population control, world religion, to keep things the way they are. They have continued to meet once a year, every year, since that original meeting. Look it up.  AGNES: O.K.----  PETER: Under their orders, the C.I.A. had smuggled Nazi scientists into the States to work with the American military at Calspan, developing an inner-epidermal tracking microchip----  AGNES: Wait----  PETER: A surveillance tool, a computer chip implanted in the skin of every human being born on this planet since 1982. An early test group for the prototype was the People's Temple, and when the Rev. Jim Jones threatened to expose them, he and every member of his church were assassinated. . . . But it wasn't enough just to track people, to spy on them, they wanted control. They created the Intelligence Manned Interface biochip, a subcutaneous transponder, a computer chip imprinted with living brain cells. They needed lab rats to test it, and they found us: me, in the gulf, and another soldier working at Calspan at the time: Tim McVeigh.  AGNES: Oh, no, wait----  PETER: They turned us into . . . zombies, remote control assassins, then picked Tim up, chucked him in a prison factory. But I found my chip and cut it out, so they sent me back to the lab for further testing and a new experiment. . . . They can't get to everybody, people slip through the cracks, or find the chip and remove it, like me, or Ted Kaczynski. They need a chip that will self-perpetuate, that will spread, like a virus, that people can pass to each other, to everyone.
THEATER: EXCERPT
