SINCE November, executives at Goodspeed Musicals in East Haddam have been trying to decide whether to move operations to Middletown, or to remain in the tiny Connecticut River town where the theater has had a venerable history for more than 100 years. In January, selectmen in East Haddam sent the theater a note reaffirming their determination to keep it in town. They would ease the way to permit applications. They would work with the theater's board on parking issues. They would do whatever it took.
But it is not so easy.
A few weeks after the selectmen sent their note, the discussion at a Jan. 29 meeting of the East Haddam inland wetlands commission included the topic of parking at the proposed site for a new and bigger Goodspeed theater. Representatives from Goodspeed, including the executive director, Michael Price, asked whether a parking lot could be built on the wetlands behind the new theater.
The committee chairman offered what he called a better idea: Build the lot across the river in Haddam, he said, and patrons could ride a bus across the East Haddam bridge to see the show.
Theater executives sighed. They wanted to make it easier to get to the theater. Driving to East Haddam, parking across the river in another town, then taking a bus to make the curtain did not sound easier.
Such is the tortured tale of Goodspeed and its efforts to grow. For six years, board members say, they have been trying to bring the company into the future by building a new theater -- with a bigger stage, wider seats, more bathrooms, an air-conditioning system that cools, a heating system that warms and more parking.
Along the way, they have confronted all the problems involved in doing business in a small town, as well as others like the firing of the first architect and the death of the project manager. In November, the situation was complicated further when Middletown's mayor, Domenique Thornton, tantalized the board with a letter detailing an offer to bring the theater there.
Ms. Thornton's letter pointed out that Middletown had a prime location in the middle of the state, with easy access to major highways. She pledged that permit issues would not be a problem. And she promised a $5 million leaseback on either one of two available properties the city was offering for the new theater.
The board considered its historic home of East Haddam, with its charming downtown; it also considered the conflicts it was having with the town. Then it considered Middletown, a growing arts center with Wesleyan University as its backdrop, and a downtown in the midst of a renaissance.
Theater trustees formed a three-member committee to negotiate with Middletown. The board has designated springtime as its deadline for a decision, but members would give no more specific date.
William H. Goodspeed, a shipbuilder, banker and merchant from East Haddam, built Goodspeed because he was passionate about theater and had the money to indulge his hobby in his hometown. His theater, a commanding Victorian edifice standing like a showgirl along the banks of the Connecticut River, opened in the autumn of 1877, the year Reconstruction ended in the South, and railways were sprouting throughout the country.
Passenger and freight service was built on the river level, and steamboat traffic was busy, dropping off both actors and patrons. A store, offices and the theater were built on the upper level.
The theater flourished until Mr. Goodspeed died in 1882. During World War I, it was a militia base. After the war, it became a general store, then a storage space for the state highway department.
In 1963, the Goodspeed Opera House Foundation reopened it as a theater with a commitment to presenting musicals, which is how it made its name in the last century. Of the dozens of musicals revived at Goodspeed in the past 41 years, 15 have traveled to Broadway, including ''Man of La Mancha,'' ''Annie'' and ''Shenandoah.''
Last season, Goodspeed featured ''Me and My Girl,'' ''Very Good Eddie,'' and ''A Tree Grows in Brooklyn.'' This year, ''Call Me Madam'' opens the season.
The theater, with 16,000 subscribers, won a Tony award in 1980 for Outstanding Contribution to Musical Theater. In 1995, it won a Tony as Outstanding Regional Theater.
In 1984, the Norma Terris Theater in Chester was opened as an incubator for new musicals.
Although the theater has had its share of financial struggles over the years, as a nonprofit it is considered solvent. ''We lose money every year,'' said Dan McMahon, a spokesman for the theater. ''But when you look at a lot of arts organizations, they're living month to month. We are not.''
Six years ago, the Goodspeed board came up with a plan for the future in an increasingly crowded and competitive marketplace for cultural offerings. It would build a new theater, somewhere in East Haddam, to be the main Goodspeed. The original theater would open for one show each summer, and the Chester theater would continue to develop new musicals.
The board paid half a million dollars for a seven-acre property near the waterfront area known as Goodspeed Landing, in hopes of building the new theater there. It spent an additional $1.5 million on studies and plans. But the project has not moved forward.
One issue is what to do with the original theater. East Haddam officials worry that a single show will not draw audiences, and that eventually, the theater will be shuttered, leaving the town to cope with the vacancy of its most famous public building. ''It doesn't take a rocket scientist to figure out that one show four months a year is not enough to keep that building running,'' said East Haddam's first selectman, Brad Parker.
But theater executives say the town should have more faith. ''Michael Price and the board have committed that we would always remain active at the Goodspeed Opera House,'' Mr. McMahon said. ''It will not close.''
Still, Mr. McMahon, like many Goodspeed officials, is protective of the town, where the theater has such a long history. ''The process is slow in East Haddam,'' he said. ''But the town didn't purposely drag it along.''
Mr. Parker took a long breath when asked about Goodspeed. ''It's become a major part of my life these days,'' he said. The note the selectmen sent the Goodspeed board in January called the theater East Haddam's ''most valuable resource.''
If Goodspeed moves, East Haddam would lose about $8 million in taxes, revenue and jobs, Mr. Parker said. But he has little to offer Goodspeed financially, and he must abide by town rules regarding permits. ''Quite honestly, it's hard to turn a swamp into a parking lot,'' he said, referring to the riverfront.
Middletown does not have such parking issues. One site offered to the Goodspeed board is the Capitol Liquor store on Main Street. The liquor store's garish facade conceals a past as the Capitol Theater, one of the most popular movie showhouses in town. Street parking is plentiful.
The second site, down the road from the first, is now a parking lot.
Middletown is also in the midst of a struggle to revitalize its downtown. The renaissance, a focus of Ms. Thornton's seven-year-old administration, is far from complete; Main Street is a mile-long mix of both viable businesses and empty storefronts, with a homeless shelter at the north end of the street.
But in recent years, a variety of ethnic restaurants -- Thai, Tibetan and Italian -- have opened and are thriving; a dance hall draws both youth and the young at heart; and Wesleyan is opening an arts center.
''About 65,000 cars a day pass right by the general location of downtown,'' Mayor Thornton said in a telephone interview. ''The Goodspeed could expand its market and visibility just by virtue of the traffic, and it could be convenient to markets in Hartford and New Haven. We're easier access.''
Then the real zing to East Haddam: ''We have a tremendous amount of parking downtown, especially in the off-peak hours,'' she said.
East Haddam may not have parking, but it oozes bucolic charm. The Sierra Club has called the riverfront ''one of the last great places'' in Connecticut. The winding country lane that is East Haddam's main street, Norwich Road, has long attracted tourists. The Bishopsgate Inn, a quintessential New England center hall colonial, is a stroll up the road from Goodspeed.
Closer to the riverfront, the Fish Sisters dress shop, Wallflower by Design gift shop, the Gelston House restaurant and inn, and other quaint spots are all part of Goodspeed Landing.
''My guests have no qualms walking from my inn down the road and over to the river,'' said Jane Kagel, who owns the Bishopsgate. ''I don't want the Goodspeed to go. I would do anything to stop them from going. I want the selectmen to make it easy for them to stay. I love the fact that the artists walk up and down our street singing. Their families stay here. People like to walk in a safe town, and this is such a different environment than what they are looking at in Middletown.''
The theater called about 1,100 of its subscribers when the board decided to consider the Middletown proposal seriously. Mr. McMahon said some were adamant about staying in East Haddam, others were equally fervent about moving to Middletown. ''That was good news for us,'' he said. ''They made it clear they trust us to make whatever decision is best.''
''If we didn't really want our theater to be in East Haddam, we would have looked elsewhere a long time ago,'' Mr. McMahon added. ''We wanted East Haddam because our history is there. But in the end, if it's not going to happen, the Middletown offer is very attractive. To survive for the future, we've got to have a new theater.''
