A CURIOUS smell began wafting across the Soho district here early last year, one that to Americans might have been as familiar and distinctive as the scent of popcorn at a movie theater but which struck the locals as new, foreboding and not a little uncivilized.
It was the smell of hickory smoke and charred hog fat, the unmistakable aroma of an old-fashioned pit barbecue, emanating from the chimney of a new rib joint called Bodean's, which takes its name from the character in ''The Beverly Hillbillies,'' Jethro Bodean.
''They asked, 'How often will it smell like this?' '' Bryan Tyrell, a Kansas City native who manages Bodean's, recalled his neighbors asking. ''We said, 'All the time.' ''
There has been nothing subtle about the arrival of down-home Southern cooking -- soul food -- in London. Thanks to the overpowering smell coming out of Bodean's chimney and a handful of American soul food restaurants that have opened here in the last year, the English -- or at least, a certain trendy subset of British foodies -- have discovered Southern food, and have gone gaga for it.
No strangers to American culinary achievements like Pizza Hut, McDonald's, Krispy Kreme and the occasional 1950's theme restaurant like Johnny Rockets, Londoners have gained a sudden and improbable enthusiasm for food that until recently many here considered vile: ribs, gumbo, collard greens, buttermilk biscuits -- even grits.
''It's wild and it's weird, and it's working-class, blue-collar food -- nothing wrong with that,'' said Michael Smiley, a 41-year-old actor, as he chowed down recently with a plate of ribs at Bodean's, where he said he ate barbecue ''once a fortnight.''
London critics have rushed in to praise the new gastronomy, which some have called ''redneck food'' and ''prison food.'' A. A. Gill, the rapier-penned critic for The Sunday Times, who makes mincemeat of overreaching London chefs, gave four stars out of five to Ashbell's, a soul food joint in trendy Notting Hill, which charges $28 for a plate of pulled pork and grits.
Bodean's was nominated recently for a Carlton Restaurant Award, one of London's premiere culinary prizes, along with the Boxwood Cafe, which is run by London's most established celebrity chef, Gordon Ramsay. New Yorkers who can imagine Daniel Boulud squaring off for a food prize against Dallas BBQ will get an idea of the culinary stakes involved in that matchup.
The timing of soul food chic in England could not be odder. Only a year ago, Giles Coren, a critic for The Times of London, spoke for many Brits when he likened grits to vomit and wrote that American food ''is no different from the food in rural Ukraine in the darkest hours of Stalinism.'' He added: ''It's just brighter colored and there's more of it.''
In November, tens of thousands marched here to protest President Bush's visit to London and to denounce what many view as Mr. Bush's cowboy mentality. So why the fascination with cowboy food, like ribs? William Sitwell, the editor in chief of Waitrose Food Illustrated, a magazine for foodies, said he did not think the issues of Anglo-American politics and food were entirely unrelated. ''I don't think you have to empathize with a man's policies to appreciate what he puts in his mouth,'' he said. ''But maybe in some sort of strange way people are interested in this food because they're interested in what makes him tick. If what Bush is eating creates this crazy gung-ho optimistic view of the world, maybe, you know, it's 'Get me some of that.' ''
Mr. Gill, the critic, said many Brits had formed an opinion of the American South from watching films that portrayed the region as a wild, untamed place. ''We associate different sorts of food with different movies,'' he said. ''Grits, collard greens and fried chicken go with those dark swamp movies like 'Deliverance.' Someone will sit down at a barbecue restaurant here, and they have to say, 'Squeal like a pig.' ''
Like the British interest in Indian or African food, he said, the fascination with food like grits comes from a desire for worldliness. ''Eating Southern food implies you're familiar with more of America than just California and New York,'' he said.
Besides Ashbell's and Bodean's in London, there's Harlem, a soul food restaurant in Notting Hill that was started by an American D.J. and record producer, Arthur Baker, who moved to town eight years ago. A 10-minute walk away, there's Lucky Seven, an American comfort food place started by Tom Conran, the son of the designer and restaurateur Terrance Conran. Ashbell McElveen, a native of Sumter, S.C., and the owner of Ashbell's, is a regular on the UK Food Channel, where he spreads the soul food gospel. Both he and Mr. Baker plan second restaurants. There's a soul food restaurant in Brighton called Momma Cherri's Soul Food Shack. (Its motto is ''You might come in skinny, but you ain't going out that way.'')
The British -- royalty, at least -- were introduced to proper American folk food in 1939, when Franklin and Eleanor Roosevelt served hot dogs (on a silver tray) and beer to King George VI and Queen Elizabeth in Hyde Park, N.Y. More recently, the Chicago Rib Shack was a fixture in London from the mid-80's until 1999, when its owner, Bob Peyton, a Chicago native, died. In the East End, an American named Keir Helberg -- he goes by Bubba -- has run a barbecue stand called the Arkansas Cafe for 12 years. He said the new wave of soul food restaurants was ''just a lot of people here trying to get on the bandwagon.''
Mr. Helberg said his customers thought of the South as a third-world country where ''everyone has three eyes, drives pickup trucks with three AK-47's in the gun rack, and where grandma mashes potatoes with a submachine gun.'' Far from being offended by the stereotype, Mr. Helberg exploits it; a trucker hat over the bar proclaims ''This is Bush Country,'' and a dining room sign reads ''Nice girls don't spit.''
Making proper soul food in England, even for a professional chef, is no easy task. Simply getting a slab of ribs can be difficult because butchers in England do not usually make that particular cut. Getting proper hominy grits -- ground feed corn that has been soaked in lye -- is next to impossible, so restaurants like Ashbell's and Harlem are left to mix their own versions of grits from regular corn meal. The result looks and tastes like polenta, not that most Londoners would know the difference.
Condiments, too, are tricky. Yellow mustard must be shipped in from the States, and Mr. Helberg said he used a ketchup made from Portuguese tomatoes. It is more flavorful than the regular American stuff, and yet not quite the same. He uses charcoal not from South Carolina but from South Africa, and his hot dogs come from the Netherlands.
Mr. Tyrell is surprised at how many vegetarians show up at his barbecue joint -- he estimates that about 20 percent of his customers do not eat meat -- and for them, he said, he had to add a goat cheese ratatouille to the menu. He also said locals hated his corn bread. ''You couldn't give it away,'' he said.
Sometimes British customers have to be educated about how to eat American cuisine, and occasionally their behavior at the table speaks to broader cultural differences between England and America. Mr. Conran said that when he served hamburgers unassembled -- with an open bun and garnishes on the side -- his customers often mistook the lettuce, tomato and onion for a rather odd salad. Building your own burger, he supposed, is democratic and individualistic, and therefore a distinctly American notion. The British, he said, are unfamiliar with the notion of culinary manifest destiny.
But by far the biggest difference between the British and American customers, the soul food purveyors say, is the reluctance of the British to eat their ribs cave-man style -- with their hands -- as Americans do. Mr. Tyrell of Bodean's said he was still not used to it.
''Watching people eat chicken wings and ribs with a knife and fork is pretty weird,'' he said.
FOREIGN REPORT: LONDON
