JOHN KERRY had barely opened his mouth on Tuesday when somebody in a crowd of nearly 1,000 at a community college near Cleveland shouted, ''Mission accomplished!''
Not quite. Senator Kerry had a whole stump speech still to deliver, and the unseen man had just stepped on one of his most popular lines.
One of the pitfalls of being the front-runner is that more people have caught your stump speech in its various forms: sound bites on the local news, a 60-second chunk in debate answers and, lately at least for Mr. Kerry, primary night victory speeches carried live on cable news.
Then again, regardless of how many eyes roll in the traveling press corps, nobody in the Kerry campaign, not least its speechwriters, is complaining if his punchier lines are turning into slogans or chants. Mr. Kerry, after all, is the kind of orator for whom sound bites can become four-course meals, so anything that fits on a bumper sticker, or even a banner, is a blessing.
His stump speech has only a few of those: ''Bring it on,'' his mocking challenge to President Bush to take him on over national security, is his best known -- though he has lately resisted delivering it except at full-blown campaign rallies.
There are other applause lines, the kind that can be dropped in anywhere in a speech. He feeds off a crowd, big or small, and in front of 2,000 people in St. Paul, Minn., on Wednesday he inserted a reference to the ''right to choose'' and got a thunderous reaction. So he threw out another piece of red meat, promising ''an attorney general whose name is not John Ashcroft.''
In fact, Mr. Kerry is improvising and adding or subtracting more and more, largely in response to the news, which as often as not now includes a new thrust from Mr. Bush's campaign.
The constant changing can be confusing. In Toledo, Ohio, last week, he tacked a stump-like ending onto a prepared policy speech on jobs and trade, but found himself discordantly signing off with an oft-heard vow to ''go to the moon right here on Earth'' by pushing for energy independence.
Some riffs have grown dusty from disuse -- the rallying ''stand with me,'' for example, with which he succeeded in whipping some crowds into a frenzy for a big finish. And others have simply been thrown away.
Accused of hypocrisy for taking donations from lobbyists, Mr. Kerry recently dropped his rant against the ''special interests,'' the heart of his message since November. He has also cut the list of issues on which he ''led the fight'' --understandably, perhaps, given that it made him sound as if he was answering critics who wondered what he had to show for his 19-plus years in the Senate. Which, of course, he was.
