With the Nets clinging to a 3-point lead in the final minute on Saturday afternoon, Miami Heat guard Dwyane Wade drove along the right side of the lane with Nets point guard Jason Kidd on his hip. Wade elevated and lofted a shot over Kidd.
Before the ball could get near the rim, Kenyon Martin soared from the other side of the lane, leaping high enough that his waist was even with the top of Wade's head. Rather than blocking the ball into the stands, as he often does, Martin caught it with both hands, came down with it, and immediately passed it ahead.
''The reaction from everybody in the stands, everybody on the court, even their players, was like, 'Wow,' '' Nets center Jason Collins said. ''He's a freak out there. He's able to do things that most people can't do.''
Martin's defense stopped the Heat's final chance, and the Nets' stingy efforts on defense throughout the second half helped them turn a 10-point halftime deficit into a 92-86 victory at Continental Arena.
With it, the Nets (36-21) are back on track after their 14-game winning streak was snapped Wednesday night at Minnesota. The Nets have now won nine straight at home, a streak that will be tested Sunday night when the Nets play host to the Los Angeles Lakers.
With Lakers center Shaquille O'Neal in mind, Lucious Harris called Martin ''Superboy,'' noting, ''Shaq will say, 'I'm Superman.' ''
As the Nets watched Martin rise, they entertained thoughts that he might not come down.
''First of all, that was amazing,'' said Richard Jefferson, who led the Nets with 25 points, 15 from the free-throw line. ''It was one of the most amazing plays that I've seen. But every time he throws the ball into the eighth row, he can do that. But at the end of the game, he understood the situation and went up there and grabbed it.''
Kidd watched the replay and joined his teammates in paying homage. ''He excites people,'' he said. ''That was one of those Bill Russell-type plays, his idol, keeping the ball in play instead of blocking it. That's something he's learned to do.''
Though Coach Lawrence Frank declared that ''Superman was back in the building,'' Martin, who had 18 points and 15 rebounds, shrugged when asked about it.
''It was one play of many, just one play,'' he said. ''It was a big block. We needed the possession. I've done it before.''
When Martin swatted a shot into the seats last week, he joked later with his teammates about how he should have caught it. The idea came to fruition at a most opportune time.
The Heat had been able to slow the Nets' fast-paced offense to a crawl, keeping Kidd without an assist through three quarters. He finished with three, his low as a Net.
The Nets' 38.2 percent shooting and Miami's plan to send the Nets to the free-throw line, where they went 37 of 49, had as much to do with the assist total as anything Kidd did or did not do. Miami (25-34) was not about to let the Nets go to the rim unimpeded and led, 48-38, at halftime.
The Nets left the court griping at the officials and none too pleased with themselves.
But in the second half, the Nets clamped down, holding the Heat scoreless on eight of its first nine possessions and without a field goal until 7 minutes 5 seconds remained in the quarter. The Nets had pulled to 2 points behind.
The Nets built leads of 6 points twice in the closing minutes of the game, but Miami pulled to 86-85 on two Caron Butler free throws with 22.1 seconds left.
Kidd hit two free throws with 21.1 seconds remaining, setting up Martin's block, which proved decisive when Kerry Kittles converted two free throws on the other end.
Martin blocked one more shot with 7.7 seconds left before fouling out and leaving the floor to an ovation and chants for his name.
''That was just the finale,'' Kidd said. ''I think when you look at a movie, you want the finale to be good, and I thought that was a good way to end the game. That shows defense wins ballgames.''
PRO BASKETBALL
