For three long decades, the people of Cyprus have been held hostage to a diplomatic impasse that sliced their island in two, separated families from their homes, poisoned relations between Greece and Turkey and thwarted Turkey's desire to strengthen its links to the West by joining the European Union. Now that impasse has abruptly yielded to hope. There is a very good chance that a compromise could be reached in time for the European Union to admit a reunified Cyprus in May and to authorize negotiations on Turkish membership in December.
Many people contributed to this breakthrough, but the two who deserve the most credit are Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan of Turkey and Secretary General Kofi Annan of the United Nations. Mr. Erdogan ended years of obstructionism on the part of the Turkish Cypriot leader, Rauf Denktash, and his powerful backers in the Turkish military, by making clear that Turkey's paramount national interests require a Cyprus settlement.
Mr. Annan supplied the outlines of an acceptable compromise. More important, he won agreements from all sides that if Greek and Turkish Cypriot negotiators could not agree on the details of a full agreement, even with help from Athens and Ankara, he could step in and fashion a completed plan that would be submitted to voters on both sides of the island.
Under the United Nations plan, Cyprus would be reunified under a federal government. Turkish Cypriots, with less than a fourth of the island's population but currently in control of 37 percent of its land, would have to cede about a fifth of their territory to the Greek-Cypriot-governed area.
It would be best if the two groups of Cypriot negotiators worked out the remaining final details between themselves. That would maximize the chances of a yes vote on both sides of the island. But even if Athens and Ankara, or, as a last resort, Mr. Annan, must provide some of the final language, prospects for voter approval are still good. That is especially so on the Turkish side, where people do not want to find themselves stranded in an isolated and impoverished ministate just beyond the European Union frontier. Greek Cypriot voters should understand that a yes vote this spring is their last chance to end the division of Cyprus and to recover most of their lost homes.
Whatever the final outcome, the bold and constructive leadership shown by the Erdogan government on this issue should clinch Turkey's long-stalled case for European Union membership. Some of those who still hesitate have questioned the depth of Turkey's democratic institutions, expressing doubts over whether the elected civilian government can bring the military into line.
That is just what Mr. Erdogan has now done over Cyprus, one of the most sensitive issues in Turkish politics. His achievement ought to silence the European Union doubters for good.
