IN the often tumultuous battles between development and environment, between Fortune 500 interests and sustainable growth, a compromise has been reached between MBIA, the Armonk-based municipal bond insurer, and a coalition of environmental groups. And the rare cooperative effort has left both sides pleased and neither side in court.
The company had proposed adding office space, parking and athletic areas to its campus on King Street, a few hundred yards from the Kensico Reservoir, the source of unfiltered drinking water for eight million people.
The plans met with some concern from the state attorney general's office, the United States Environmental Protection Agency, a variety of environmental groups and the Town of North Castle, which includes Armonk.
With the help of the environmental groups -- the Natural Resources Defense Council, Riverkeeper, the Bronx Council for Environmental Quality, the Federated Conservationists of Westchester County, Friends of Jerome Park Reservoir, the New York Public Interest Research Group and the Sierra Club Lower Hudson Group -- MBIA developed a new plan, which sets aside seven acres as a conservation easement and provides for reducing the paved surfaces of the project by 11,700 square feet, over a quarter of an acre.
The plan still includes major construction: 165,000 square feet of new office space, a 15,000-square-foot meeting house, an 870-space parking garage, walking trails and athletic areas.
''The plan calls for less impervious surface area, farther removed from the watershed, than the structures that currently exist,'' said Kevin Silva, the chief administrative officer of MBIA.
On paved surfaces like parking lots, pollutants like antifreeze, motor oil and grease mix quickly with rainwater and can be whisked into the nearest storm drains, then straight into the drinking water.
In fact, more than 95 percent of the pollutants that ever enter the New York City watershed come from such storm water runoff, even though more than 100 waste-water treatment plants discharge directly into its streams, said James Tierney, the watershed inspector general with the state attorney general's office.
Mr. Tierney called the revised plan ''a real success.''
''There is no more sensitive place perhaps in North America than the Kensico,'' he said. ''This is the reservoir where we just cannot have inappropriate development. We can't put it at risk.''
The reservoir, which covers 2,147 acres in North Castle, Harrison and Mount Pleasant, holds 90 percent of the drinking water used by New York City, water coming from the Catskill and Delaware watersheds.
''You could have the most aggressive watershed protection throughout the whole system, but if you allow the Kensico to degrade, it doesn't matter what you've been doing upstream,'' said Marc A. Yaggi, a senior lawyer with Riverkeeper, who helped negotiate the compromise.
Its protection has been a high priority for the city's Department of Environmental Protection, in part because additional pollutants in the watershed could prompt a federal mandate requiring the city to filter its water.
The company's original plan encroached on wetlands, added paved surface areas, and aligned the development toward the reservoir.
''It had a storm water pollution prevention plan that was inadequate, and a lot of things that would have raised concerns,'' he said.
A number of factors made the compromise possible: the environmental groups had successfully worked together before in town, on the Department of Transportation's project to revamp Routes 22 and 120 near the Kensico.
MBIA, which logged revenue of $1.15 billion in 2002, could afford to make the suggested changes, including building above existing parking lots, constructing above-ground parking garages, which are more expensive than parking lots, and finding more environmentally friendly pest management and ice-removal techniques for its land.
The company was able to buy 15 neighboring homes, which it plans to raze, then dig up the roads and driveways nearby, reducing overall paved surfaces while eliminating underground storage tanks and septic systems, existing potential polluters.
The players were willing to sit down together, at times bridging significant cultural gaps, to work out a solution that served everyone.
And state and local environmental regulations and regulators were in the wings, ready to ensure that the reservoir was protected, through cooperation or, if necessary, litigation.
The company does not have a specific date for starting construction, but the first phase of the project will be to raze the homes it bought in the Cooney Hill neighborhood, and to restore the properties to their natural state, Mr. Silva said.
''We had to open ourselves up to the highest level of scrutiny, review, critique and discourse, both from governmental agencies and the environmental groups,'' he said. ''But in the end we have been and want to be known as good corporate citizens and stewards of the environment.'' The revised plan does not limit the growth of the company's campus in the foreseeable future, he said, and the cost of the revisions, which he did not specify, was worth it.
''We looked at it as a long-term investment in the county,'' he said.
Eric A. Goldstein, a senior lawyer with the Natural Resources Defense Council, noted that the six months of negotiation required in the compromise was far less expensive than having a project delayed for years by environmental and health questions.
He praised the company for setting aside the seven forested acres in a conservation easement.
''By protecting the landscape in this way it is really safeguarded for future generations,'' he said. ''This is perhaps the most crucial acreage on the parcel, just uphill from the reservoir.
''The end result is the company gets essentially what it's after, and the public interest is protected as well,'' Mr. Goldstein said. ''And that ends up being a benefit for the company.''
Roland A. Baroni, the North Castle town attorney, said the company still needs a special use permit from the town, and will need approval of its plans from the planning board before any construction can begin.
''This shows that for a corporation, if it really wants to be sensitive toward development, there are ways to do what it needs to do and reduce the impervious surfaces, which is what this is all about,'' he said. ''You need a very willing corporation that is devoted to being sensitive to the environment.''
Mr. Tierney, the watershed inspector general, said other companies and developers could benefit from studying the cooperative process that resulted in the revisions to the MBIA plan.
''If we can get people to build it right, they'd probably be able to build more,'' Mr. Tierney said. ''If you can dramatically expand a headquarters project in the Kensico watershed, you can do it anywhere.''
DEVELOPMENT
