As a member of the Writers Guild of America, I am entitled to vote in the annual W.G.A. screenwriting awards. If I have not seen all the nominated films in a category, is it ethical for me to cast a vote for whatever capricious reason? Would my circumstances change if I was friends with one of the nominated screenwriters?
Tim Harrod, Brooklyn
I'm just so tickled to see the word ''ethical'' near the word ''awards'' that I hardly know what to do -- as if these things had some cultural authority. You should of course adhere to the rules of this award and vote only for a script that you genuinely believe is worthy of special commendation. But if you ignored this advice, you'd not be the only person to do so.
While some awards have real credibility (the Pulitzer Prizes for journalism, for example), others follow from such elusive criteria that were you to play fast and loose with your vote for, say, the Golden Globes, you'd be committing a misdemeanor, not a felony.
It is possible to receive an Emmy Award for writing without actually writing anything at all. If you are a staff writer on a winning comedy show, you, too, may receive a gleaming statuette, even if none of your work appeared in the episode. What's more, it used to be that those who nominated a show might simply have heard good things about it, a more efficient selection process than actually watching it. I won my first Emmy for episode No. 491 of ''Late Night With David Letterman,'' to which I'd contributed nothing whatever. An award for a show I didn't write, nominated by people who may not have seen it -- show business! How you could debase that process, I can't imagine.
A bride's friend made her wedding dress. Before that, bride and friend visited retail bridal shops. Without intending to purchase anything, the bride tried on dresses so her friend could inspect their structure and details to get ideas for her own creation. Was this unethical?
Anonymous
It was. In ethics intent counts. Bride and friend intended only to exploit the time and inventory (and central heating and electric lights and staff) of these shops. These places are stores, not libraries. Alternatives? Tell the truth to the store managers or get your fashion ideas from bridal magazines, which, I'm told, you are permitted to browse -- or even buy -- at many bookstores.
Incidentally, there's nothing wrong with getting inspired by other people's frothy concoctions of satin and lace. You're as free to do that as songwriters are to listen to other people's music. What you should not do is literally copy a design, run up a dozen dresses and sell them, the garment industry's tradition of knockoffs notwithstanding. To do this could run you afoul of ethics -- and of the law.
At the birthday party we held for our 7-year-old daughter, some children took off their shoes inside our home. At the end of the party, one pair of shoes could not be found. We searched everywhere and called the parents of the other children, but in vain. Are we expected to replace that child's shoes?
M. G. Sriram, Houston, Tex.
When my daughter was a youngster and attended a party at a friend's, I felt that those parents had done their bit if they returned her at all. Ten kids in, 10 kids out: that's a successful -- and ethical -- party. Everything else is the responsibility of each individual parent upon pickup. (''Where's your jacket? Didn't you have mittens? And a sister?'') Unless you did something negligent -- arranged a shoe-b-cue, induced the kids to play Hide the Sneakers -- you need not buy any replacement footwear.
THE WAY WE LIVE NOW: 2-29-04: THE ETHICIST
