ARE young professional women as assertive as their male colleagues when it comes to salary negotiations? Many of them will at least say they are.
Nearly all the women in their 20's who were interviewed for ''Women Don't Ask: Negotiation and the Gender Divide'' (Princeton University Press, 2003) said that their negotiating skills had set them apart from older generations of working women. ''They all said, 'We identify what we want, we go after it, we ask for as much money as our peers,''' said Sara Laschever, a freelance writer and co-author of the book with Linda Babcock, an economics professor at Carnegie Mellon University.
The book concludes, however, that women of all ages were far less likely than men to initiate salary negotiations and that they were too often willing to accept whatever was offered by their employers or prospective employers. In fact, a year before the book was published, Professor Babcock conducted a study of 37 recent Carnegie Mellon graduates who had master's degrees. Only 7 percent of the women in the survey said they had negotiated their salaries, compared with 57 percent of the men.
''Those who did negotiate were able to raise their salaries by $4,053, on average,'' Ms. Laschever said. ''The average difference between men's and women's starting salaries was about $4,000, which suggests that women might have closed or approached closing the gender gap if they had negotiated.''
A 2003 study of 38 business students by Lisa A. Barron, an assistant professor of organizational behavior at the Graduate School of Management at the University of California at Irvine, yielded similar results. Professor Barron asked both men and women whether they thought they were entitled to salaries that were higher or just equal to those of other applicants for the same jobs. About 70 percent of the men said they believed they were entitled to more money than other applicants. Conversely, 70 percent of the women indicated that they were entitled to a salary equal to that of other candidates. In follow-up interviews, Professor Barron discovered that 85 percent of the men, but only 17 percent of the women, felt that it was up to them to make sure the company paid them what they were worth; the rest felt that their worth would be determined by what the company paid them.
Why the reluctance to ask for more? Ms. Laschever said that women tended to believe ''that hard work and good work will be rewarded'' without asking.
''Women have also been taught not to be too bossy and too aggressive, and that makes them think they need to wait for someone else to tell them if they deserve more rather than thinking they can have some control over it,'' she added.
Some of the women I interviewed seemed to feel that way.
''I think a lot of women are afraid to admit that they're not as good negotiators as men,'' said Lisa Lake, 30, who works in the financial industry in Palo Alto, Calif. She said she was often reluctant to be too forceful when negotiating salary, or anything else for that matter, because ''I don't want to step on anyone's toes, or be too pushy.''
Jocelyn Frank, 22, who works at an independent bookseller in Ann Arbor, Mich., agreed. ''It's uncomfortable to have to say, 'This is what I'm worth,''' she said. Once you are offered a position, she added, you ''don't want to rock the boat.''
Career experts say women can be as successful as men in negotiations. But before any deal can be struck, you have to believe you're worth the amount you seek.
How to determine that market value? Research. Find out what the going rate is for the job you want or already have. Web sites like salary.com can help: simply type in your industry, experience level and ZIP code and you will receive a range of pay for jobs in your region. ''This way, you can feel comfortable asking for X rather than thinking, 'I just need to be grateful for what they give me,''' Ms. Laschever said.
MOLLY SCOTT, 29, a fitness trainer in Seattle, said she learned over the years to prepare for any kind of business deal -- even negotiating with her father about her wedding. ''I had to approach him like it was a business meeting,'' she recalled. ''I made an Excel spreadsheet and researched four different florists, caterers, bands and venues to show him that the prices were real. All of my ducks had to line up in a row before he would even consider listening to me.'' (Her efforts have paid off: she says she is getting the wedding of her dreams this fall.)
Career experts say it is important to be persistent. ''If someone says no, don't say, 'O.K.' Say, 'Well, how close can you come to my offer?''' said Alan Bernstein, a Manhattan psychotherapist who counsels young adults about career changes. '''Can we talk about it to figure out a way for us both to be happy?' That last approach works well for women -- 'let's make this relationship about pleasing both of us.'''
PRELUDES Abby Ellin is a Manhattan writer. Her column on starting out in the world of money appears each month. E-mail: preludes@nytimes.com.
